ADAM OUT OF EDEN, OR, An abstract of diverse excellent Experiments touching the
advancement of Husbandry.

SHOWING, Among very many other things, an Aprovement of Ground by Rabbiss,
from 200 l. annual Rent, to 2000 l. yearly profit, all charges deducted.

By Ad. Speed. Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1659.

A Digression to the usage of diverse Countries concerning the Tillage.
EAch soil has no liking of every Grain,
Nor Barley nor Wheat is for every vain;
Yet know I no Country so barren of soil,
But some kind of coin may be gotten with toil.
Though Husband at home be to count the was what,
Yet Huswife within is as needful as that;
What helps in store, to have never so much
Half lost by ill usage? ill Huswifes and such?
To the Reader.
HOw excellent and how innocent the art of Husbandry is, has been sufficiently
made out by the best of Authors; God himself, who chose out that employment for
the best of the Creatures, Man, whom he placed in Eden, not only to enjoy, but
to labor, without both which no place can be a Paradise. Perpetual enjoyments
without bodily exercise breeding nothing but loathing and diseases; For which
cause the actions of body or mind are called Recreations, as carrying on the
grand design of God himself.

Nor can there be found in Nature a more ingenuous, necessary, delightful, or
honorable employment, than Agriculture; a Calling born with us, and bred in
us, affording matter for the most refined Wits, without which Mankind cannot be
preserved; by which we are both sustained and delighted. An Art wherein
renowned Scholars have employed their parts, and Princes without dishonor
their time and pains.

Yet such is the pride and folly of our Nation, that most aspire to collateral
Vocations, which owe their life and sustenance to the Husbandman, and consist
only in overreaching each other. And scarce any are left to study the
Georgicks, but such as can do nothing else. For which cause our Ancestors have
left the rules and observations by which our skill herein should be improved
only by tradition, except Virgil and some others, who have eternized their
names by transmitting to posterity their knowledge herein.

For the promotion of which great and needful work our ingenuous Author has
exposed his Observations and Experiences to the public view, which have long
been smothered in private hands, till by the good nature of a Publick-spirited
Gentleman, (to whose industry in several other things our Age is obliged) they
have blessed our eyes.

Embrace this opportunity, and reduce these Precepts to practice: England
affords Land enough for the Inhabitants, and if men did but industriously and
skilfully improve and manure it, we need not go to Jamaica for new plantations.
Farewell.

Chap. 1. Of Improvement of ground by Rabbits.
IT is in Husbandry, as in other practical Professions, Art, Industry, and
Experience add every day new supplies to the better, either by contracting the
charge, and then the improvement is in the Method, or by multiplying the
advantage, and then it is in the increase. How many rare secrets are there now
discovered, whereby the Public is enriched, whereof our Forefathers never
dreamed? and some doubtless are as yet concealed from us, being left to
posterity and the next age to find out.

Because amongst many others relating to Husbandry some are of more excellent
use, I have here made a select choice of them, reporting nothing but what
observation and experience, to which my Genius has been long addicted, have
found certainly true.

And first I shall begin with the improvement of ground by Rabbits.

There is to be taken five hundred acres of ground within fifteen miles of
London, for eight shillings the acre, which being stored with twenty Rabbits
per acre, highly bred, sixteen of them being Breeders, cacording to direction,
will in all probability afford either of them twelve Rabbits at three litters.
I have known those so bred, that one Rabbit has brought at one litter
sometimes ten, and commonly eleven, and has brought them up very well, and
fat, and at a Lords ground I have known the like increase, besides those of my
own whereof I have had sufficient experience; admit sixteen Rabbits bring
either of them but ten at three litters, they come to one hundred and sixty
Rabbits, for the which after six weeks of age I know a Poulterer that gives
eight pence the Rabbit, and constantly until Michaelmas, and some Poulterers
more after Michaelmas, which may be sold so then between one shilling and one
shilling eight pence the Rabbit; admit them but at eight pence the Rabbit all
the year, one hundred and sixty Rabbits come to five pound, six shillings, and
eight pence the acre, and I am confident that in grounds not proper for them,
they brought the last unseasonable years before this, four, five, and seven at
three litters. I have been sufficiently resolved in this design by the most of
the Warreners throughout England, though I needed not their judgment.

In five hundred acres at five pound, six shillings, eight pence per acre, to
be considered the herbage for sheep and other cattle at least one hundred pound
per annum, besides the keeping of Poultery, Pheasants, Partridge and other
fowl, with Pigeons, Bees, etc. and places for diverse other plantations at
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty pound an acre profit per annum and upward, with
fish ponds accordingly stored; besides, there is an other profit in this design
very considerable, and of no small consequence, with housekeeping complete for
all occasions, and great convenience for a Dairy, and very conveniently near
London.

Sum total, two thousand, seven hundred, sixty and six pound, rent for the
ground, two hundred pound salaries sixty, five pound food for the Rabbits, in
Hutches one hundred pound, admit though more than needs by far, being there are
now better preventions than formerly, one thousand Rabbits at eight pence the
Rabbit three hundred thirty three pounds, total six hundred ninety eight
pounds, de claro two thousand sixty five pounds. If the number of the Rabbits
be thought too high, and the casualties too low that follows, to make up all,
and to obstruct all objections, the first litter will breed the same year,
being rightly bred and disposed of, allow three of the last litters from every
one of the first breeders (the Buck being first destroyed) bring ten Rabbits,
which come to one hundred and sixty Rabbits per acre, and amount unto five
pounds, six shillings, eight pence per acre, total six hundred sixty and six
pounds as before.

There are two Gentlemen now in London of great ability and repute, that will
justify these proportions, and that they made out of two several five acres of
ground either of them at least ten pounds an acre per annum.

That there is to be taken fifteen hundred acres, for one shilling per acre,
that will after the like proportion, according to the number of acres, bring
many thousand pounds more.

That two thousand acres may be had at the same rate, that will very near
render the same emolument according to the number of the acres, the same I
leave to consideration.

It matters not whether the ground afford any grass at all in a manner, so it
be warm and dry, being there are several ways to feed them, as formerly I have
done, with very little charge, which will preserve them very high, and make
them breed extraordinarily, and maintain more Rabbits by half than any Warren
in England was ever known to do, they having totally neglected, and never
ordered the right ways, Rabbits being of the most profitable creatures of
England rightly used, the several sorts of food that may be provided for them
being not considerable, as may be perceived hereafter, the later they are kept
the better are the Rabbits, and the richer the fur.

I have known five hundred Breeders kept at a time in an house, as may be
within the 500 acres in Hutches, which would bring seven, eight, nine, or ten
at a litter, but accounting only five at a litter one with another, being I
formerly have destroyed the rest, they are completed to two thousand five
hundred Rabbits per Month, and in ten Months per annum twenty five thousand,
which at eight pence a Rabbit comes to about eight hundred thirty and three
pounds, the charge indifferent, and with the same charge doubled, one thousand
Breeders may be kept, and they probably amount to one thousand six hundred
sixty and six, the Rabbits in the house we turn out at liberty to go out and
come in when they please.

At a Months age, and at six weeks of age, when they shall be doubtless
exceeding fat with such food as shall be easily provided for them, they are
then at the dispose of the Poulterer, only such as are preserved especially for
store.

It. A sort of Rabbits to be had, their fur beingworth near 3 s. 4 d. the skin,
and in goodness near Bever, which I am confident may be made very near equal to
Bever.

That upon trial I found the difference between the weight of the ordinary
Rabbits usually in Warrens, and the breed which may be provided otherwise, to
be half in half, besides the great difference in the goodness of them.

If the ground want Covert shelter, or be too naked, they may be made warmer by
sowing French furze seeds, which will grow very spacious and to great flockt
bodies in few years, and will prosper very well here in England, and extend to
great profit yearly; there may be Malt made within the housing belonging to the
five hundred acres, that with other emoluments may sufficiently advance five
hundred pounds per annum, beyond exceptions, by a discreet and provident way of
buying Barley at the best hand, and by the disposing of the Malt, both in
making and selling thereof, there being great plenty of the best fuel
therefore being fearn.

There may be many Swine kept within the compass, and several sorts of food to
preserve and fatten them not considerable.

Item Geese, Turkeys, Ducks that will lay two eggs a day throughout the year,
Pheasants, Partridges, Coots, and all other sorts of Fowl kept with such
several wholesome foods, so easily prepared, and so little charge, the benefit
may be made of them may arise to be exceeding great.

And for Bees, being a place so convenient, the profit of them may be
maintainable under God, one hundred pounds per annum.

Item Pigeons, etc.

And for the too much neglected Creature the Silk vorm, whereas there are
diverse at this time that make a very great profit of them in a very high degree.

I am confidently assured, that by them may be (only in one room) advanced 500
pounds per annum and upwards; whereas the only cause of not keeping them more
plentifully is for want of Mulberry leaves, the Trees whereof may be planted
here with the stocks and branches thereof being brought for the most part
beyond the Seas, which are dear, and most commonly spoiled with bringing.

There is a leaf lately discovered growing here in England, and to be preserved
constantly in every Garden, that does and has maintained them better by far
than the other leaves, which will likewise cost nothing, being that the ground
in the five hundred acres may be justifiably advanced to above twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty pounds an acre, per annum, as may appear by the several
discoveries at large, as follows in the other papers. When you would have
Rabbits fat to the desire, geld the Bucks that you intend to slaughter, which
the Warrener may easily do, turn them out a while longer, and they will exceed
in fatness, and eat more pleasantly by far, than otherwise.

The first breed, charges and contingencies allowed may probably come to as
before specified, two thousand, sixty and eight pounds.

The second breed, allowing some abatement for charges, comes to two thousand
six hundred sixty and six pounds.

Item Rabbits in Hutches, charges to be abated, 1 thousand six hundred sixty
and six pounds.

Malt per annum, five hundred pounds.

Benefit of fearn, furze, and other. fuel, five hundred pounds.

Swine, fowl, etc. two hundred pounds.

Bees, etc. one hundred pounds.

Silk worms, five hundred pounds.

All these I cast in to make up the first design, with two hundred pounds to
advance two thousand pounds per annum.

Chap. 2. An undeniable proportion of Coals to be had from the Pits near
Notingham to the Trents side, and so by Boats to Newark and the Towns adjacent,
with the benefit may apparently accrue thereby beyond contradiction.
FIve double Wagons and five Boats to convey to Newark down the Trent eight
thousand loads per annum, for which they have paid at the pits five shillings
the load: and whereas they pay commonly nine shillings and upwards the hundred
most part of the year, and much under weight, and but sixteen, seventeen, or
eighteen hundred weight to the load, which should be twenty hundred weight,
being a miserable griping to the poorer sort of people, to allow them
constantly at six pence the hundred, being ten shillings the load, will be a
very great public good, and an Act of charity in the undertakers, and will
render much honor to them, together with the prayers of the poor, etc.

The eight thousand loads at five shillings the load benefit, comes to two
thousand pounds carriage, by the return of Boats, at the least three hundred
pounds.

It. five hundred weight overplus which are to he had at the Pits by agreement,
allowing two hundred thereof waste, six hundred pounds, total two thousand,
nine hundred pounds.

That with a reasonable sum deposited to have the Coals delivered at two
shillings six pence per load, the rest amounting to one thousand pound de claro
disbursements for horses, wains, and boats, being the standing stock, upon
considerable computations, five hundred pounds or there abouts.

Charges for horses, servants, etc. per annum under seven hundred pounds, which
will be defrayed by the week, though deducted there remains de claro besides
the one thousand pounds, two thousand two hundred pounds.

If Coals be raised to a higher price at the Pits than formerly, then the
Hundreds and Loads must be sold dearer at Newark, etc. and the same profit will
remain.

There are diverse other benefits to be instanced and added to this design too
tedious to specify, amounting to above one thousand pounds per annum, and
sufficiently maintainable.

Chap. 3. Concerning Turnips.
A Gentleman not far from London having dealt for store of ground, part whereof
being a mere dry sand, and overgrown with moss, that it was not worth two
shillings the acre, I advised him to cause a cutting-Knife to be made according
to a new devised way, wherewith with more convenience than formerly they pare up
such sour rushy ground as they lately farm etc. and call it Devonshire Land and
a Workman set about it he cut this ground some two inches thick, and turned it
up, and laid the inside outward that done, letting the ground dry for the
space of a week, being formerly good neither for corn nor grass, the Workman
with a strong Iron rake raked the ground all over, then cast it over with
Turnip-seeds, and raked it over again, which came up so well, the leaves and
roots did so well rot, cool, mellow, and meliorate the ground, that the year
following and after the crop of Turnips there came very good grass.

The ground being afterward fit for corn or grass, part of which ground he
again sowed with Turnips the same year, and had two very great crops, and made
at least thirty pounds an acre thereof; besides as I came to him he received 10
s. an acre for the leaves only being from the very tops of the bindings, when
they are bound up in bundles, and for the other part of the bindings, he
selling the Turnips by measure, made at the least twenshillings the acre,
wherewith they now feed their milch Cattle, which they having plenty thereof
will cause them to give milk three times a day with full vessels, and
constantly throughout the year, and better milk by far than any other, and
although the roots may be sold in most places as dear, as near London, and with
the same benefit, yet the commodity of them is so exceeding great being known,
they will not be parted with by any, for they are excellent for all sorts of
Cattle, and will feed them very fat in a short time, and will likewise feed
Calves and Lambs very fat, besides, they being boiled will feed Swine to the
height of fatness in a fortnights space, and the liquor wherein they are boiled
will feed them better than the best whey. And I have seen Cows exceedingly
greedy for the liquor and the Turnips boiled, they have eat and drunk of them
continually, and without any other food, have afforded Milk in abundance more
than with any other food whatsoever, and became likewise fat therewith; the
Turnips boiled will feed all sorts of Poultty fat, and cause them to lay their
eggs constantly without any corn at all, whereby may be kept both Geese,
Turkeys, Pheasants, Partridges, Coots, Moor-cocks, in abundance without any
charge, so that it is clear Turnips will grow on the meanest ground with little
labor, and without muck. I have known those that have kept their horses fat by
slicing them and so casting them into the Manger, and of all food whatsoever
there is nothing so wholesome and so healthful as they be for Cattle, etc. for
thereby may be avoided the Murrain and all other dangerous diseases.

There is a Knight row in this City that did preserve and keep all sorts of
Poultry (and Rabbits) by a paste as follows, which was made of Beasts liver,
the coursest last corn ground and bran, with a competent commixture: but I have
formerly left out the Liver, and made a paste with the rest compounded with
Turnips: but I found in conclusion Turnips of themselves is the only food both
for Cattle, Swine, and Poultry. Probatum est.

The Swine being kept in an Orchard constantly bearing, the ground will
fructify the Fruit Trees exceedingly, and make them yield great store of fruit
yearly larger than formerly, and they need no other food than this Liquor,
without the roots, or they may be kept up in a house with it constantly.

There was a Gentleman well known, that would cause his Servants sometimes to
scatter on the ground some small store of Tares, and the Swine by taking pains
to get them would drink the oftener of the Liquor, and be fat the sooner. I have
known milch Cows kept constantly in a Yard, and never fed with any thing but
Turnips, whereby a man might soon enrich himself, and having place convenient
for Poultry, etc. this may appear to be as thriving for them as corn.

Turnips likewise boiled and mingled with bran will feed Hunting dogs very
highly without any other relief. About seven years since I caused a woman here
in London to buy a peck of meal, and to divide it into two parts, in the one, I
advised her to put a peny-worth of Turnips boiled, and work it and knead it by
it self, and the two parcels being baked, the Meal that had the Turuips in,
that proved to be the better bread by far, and whiter, and every way more
pleasant to the eye, and more toothsom; it is in the judgment of most
Physicians very healthful; besides, it cuts far better than the other, and
will last as long again very moist, the parcel that had the Turnips in it was
in weight above five pounds more than the other, and what advantage might
redound hereby to public and private families it may easily result, when they
may keep both Cattle, Swine, and Poultry, with little or no charge.

There is as much difference almost in the roots as is in Apples, therefore
care is to be had in the seed; there are those which are called Hackney
Turnips, which far exceed all other, especially for bread, and that seed may be
had as cheap as the other; a paste likewise might be made with turnips to
continue long, which all Poultry would like very well of, and excellent
Horse-bread might be made of it, being otherwise used thereunto; all sorts of
Cattle and Poultry will take sufficient without further trouble, the paste will
be excellent useful food for Rabbits both in over-stored Warrens, and likewise
when they are preserved with other moist meats, as you may understand hereafter.

Turnips will afford two very good crops in one year, and the crops of them are
worth to be sold thirty pounds an acre, as will be confirmed: besides, some
ground they will in my knowledge afford a 3d. crop the same year, and although
the roots of the last crop come not to full maturity, yet the roots and leaves
being suffered to grow thicker without cutting, or pulling, will be better at
the present than an acre of the best Grass, and compass of ground where a sheaf
of Wheat does grow which yields a small quantity of wheat, it will afford one
hundred of Turnips, near two hundred, so that the profit of two crops thereof
will far transcend the profit of the wheat, and the charge of the wheat far
greater ordinarily.

Turnips may be sown in heathy ground at the first breaking up, and some have
sowed them immediately after rye, flax, and especially after pease.

With their tops, and Rapecakes or Lynt-seed cakes, and grains you may make
Pottage and wholesome food for your Cows, which being warm they will eat
exceeding greedily, and by this means give milk in abundance, and for the same
purpose the Holland Merchants did lately buy up all the Rape-seed here in
England after the oil was pressed out, and made up into great Cakes, which has
been a very great commodity in Holland; The roots and leaves being made very
clean and stamped together, then boiled in water, and then given to the Cows
may make them abound with Milk, and yet grow very fat, if they are kept up all
the year.

A worthy Gentleman does every year sow a very large field with turnips,
according to my directions, and in the midst thereof he causes to be built a
little slight shade or loppel with poles covered with straw or some slight
stuff on the top where he ties up his oxen, and other feeding Cattle, and
gives them the Turnips and the leaves cleanly washed, and with them only
seedeth his Cattle very fat to the Markets, he continues the same course
constantly every year, and preserves all his grass for other uses to his very
great advantage.

Turnips also with some small addition will make very good Syder, and exceeding
good Oil has been made thereof, which may be very advantageous and will prove
no drug. Probatum est.

You may boil Barley chaff in the Liquor of Turnips, together with the Turnips
and their leaves, which makes it as feeding, and as fatning as any foood
whatsoever; Rabbits may be kept with Turnipbread or past of Turnips all the
year, either in the fields or house, and better than with Turnips themselves,
being a most wholesome food for them, and the roots and leaves will feed and
preserve sheep to the highest condition, and the Calves which you shall breed
up by hand with these Turnips, their leaves, with their Liquor, will be
constantly fat, and will much exceed their breed in largeness, and with
increase of Milk. Let your Turnips grow little less than half a foot distance,
and less than ten quarts will sow an acre.

Chap. 4. Of Sow-Thistles.
ONe slight plowing and harrowing, or but raising the round in the least kind
to have two crops in one year proportionably to the fruitfullest grass, and so
constantly every year without any further trouble, or charge at all, which is
so wonderfully fruitful for milch Cows that besides the double increase of
milk, it is better than any other, for it will afford two scimmings of
excellent cream, this exceeds all other for Cheese, and when all the Cream is
taken off, the milk will be as good as any other milk; this seed will cost
nothing, and will sow it felf after the first year, it will afford in seed
above one thousand for one; this is vulgarly called Sow-Thistle, it will yield
great store of seed, the first crop letting it grow a while longer for that
purpose; it will be ripe very timely in the year, you may gather the seeds
which may be sown presently, and will afford a crop within a Month or a little
more, and may be cut every month during Summer, if it be not prejudiced by
cattle; you may sow a small parcel of ground therewith, preserving that for
seed that will serve your turn; it will grow upon any ordinary ground, and the
oftener you cut it the thicker it will be, and be very tender, and excellent
fruitful food; you may feed your Cattle therewith by parcels in Racks or
Houses, and maintain them all the Summer in the highest manner. It has been
observed formerly, that when Sows could not maintain their Pigs for want of
milk, the Country people would find out these Sow-thistles which would
exceedingly advantage them for the increase of their Milk; and I have known the
like performed by Rabbits in a very strange manner: whilst the Thistles are
young they willmaintain Calves, Lambs, Pigs, etc. which you may wean, and raise
to the highest perfection without any other food; when they be come old and
seedy, Cattle will eat only the tops, and therefore the oftener you cut
themthemore useful they are; when the down is upon them ready to fly, then
gather the seeds when the Sun is up, the seed being dry you may find sufficient
of them in Cornfieldsd and upon Ditches where Cattle cannot come at them; the
benefit might be made so great thereof, that the worth cannot be with brevity
expressed.

Sow up sheets of Paper, and gather up the seeds into them, or some other such
way as may keep them from flying from you, and take hold of the knot and pull
the seeds, and put them together, and when you sow them mingle amongst them
mould as they are with the down, because they can hardly be severed; those
Thistles being planted in a barren ground, and given to Rabbits, would maintain
millions of them, all the Summer, for want of grass in the Warrens, Turnips and
the paste thereof all the Winter.

Chap. 5. Of Clover-gras.
ONe Sir Richard Weston, has a think between thirty and forty acres, about ten
acres thereof he sowed this year with Barley, which Barley being in cutting, and
proved so great, adjudged worth ten pound an acre, he feared it might hinder
the Clover-grass, notnotwithstanding we viewing it narrowly did perceive the
grass, much of it, as it were beginning to look out of the ground, the which
leaves were not bigger than an Onion, which yet Sir Richard was glad to see, he
intends that nothing comes in that until Michaelmas, and by that time he hopes
especially with a good shower, soon after the Barley is taken off, it will cover
the ground: the last year he sowed two Fields, each about eight acres, one with
Flanders seed, the other with his own in the Husks, the former was so fair upon
the ground at the felling in mid May last, that he protested he would not have
taken ten pound for the seed only he expected therefrom, nevertheless the
Summers draught especially soon after the cutting, before it could get head
again to shade it self, and the ground so scorchd it together, with his hopes,
at length be resolved to feed his Cattle with, and reserve for seed the Cotton
close being colder and a moyster soil, and thereupon the better enduring the
heat, which otherwise he made far less esteem of, because it came up unevenly
or in Banks like Mr. Houghtons, or rather worse, which I conceive was to be
attributed partly to the wetness, but perhaps chiefly the seeds in the Husks,
which could not be but unequal experience, showing that some of the Husks are
empty, others full; Sir Richard himself told me, that he had found eight score
seeds as I remember he said, or at least eighty I am sure he said, in one head,
and then he resolved to cut it, and because hay is dear in those parts this
year, near three pound a load, Sir Richard told me he sold it near that rate
one hundred and fifty Loads of his extraordinary hay, which his meadows watered
with his new River, and thereby continuing the draught did yield he intends to
get off the head of the grass, as he does those of the Flax, and dry them in
the Sun to get out the seed more easily, and withal to save his hay: for he
says that when once he can get sufficient seed of his own, he shall then, and
not before then be Master of the work, for he suspects sophistication of the
outlandish seed, that it is mixed with old, and some not fully ripe baked in
Ovens, the easier to make it unhusk it self; for the manner of sowing of it he
having experimented diverse ways finds the best piece that ever he had to be
sowed alone without any other grain for the time, the beginning of the mid
April is the best, and therefore he would advice Mr. Houghton not to venture
his Summer fallow at Autumn, unless it be a little quantity to make experiment;
besides, he did much disapprove the laying sheep upon it two or three nights,
as he intended to do last May as soon as it was cut, because it would prove a
hinderance to the next crop, which with a shower would (as he says) in six days
grow half a foot high, for the quantity of the hay it yielded two load and an
half on an acre at a selling rate, for the nature of the ground that is most
proper for it, which will bear little other grass; To conclude, he finds that
the grass improves the ground, for he has this year exceeding great buck Wheat
upon a piece of heathy ground, not one shilling the acre before, which has
been Clove grass three years, for flax, he said, that requires a dry soil, etc.
Lastly, he says that at St. Foyn it is exceeding profitable, and may be cut
seven or eight times in a year, but that it requires a very rich Land, and must
not be fed at all; And now I hope that my faithful desires to relate fully all
that I had learned in this will plead excuse for me.

Concerning Esperate or Clover-grass.
THe Country where Esperate or Clovergrass is most in use at this day is
Daphine toward the quarter of Day; It is a grass very hardy, not much
inferionr to Luceran, it renders abundance of very exquisite hay very great
substantial and much desired, proper to nourish and fatten all sorts of four
footed Beasts, young and old Lambs, and Calves, making their Dams exceedingly
to abound with milk, it also produces seed every year, that serves the Cattle
instead of Oats, and fattens Poultry, it makes them to prove and quickly to lay
eggs, it will grow in a poor sandy Land, and it leaves a certain fatning
virtue in it for the profit of Corn being sown after it, which makes it more in
request, it desires not watering, it fears the biting of the Beasts, the
delicacy of it draws them in such am anner that having once tasted of it they
will go three leagues to feed of it, if it be not well enclosed; the hay of
this grass is little higher than two foot, but it is so much the thicker, it is
cut three times a year, provided that the place agree with it, and that the
grass be noteaten with beasts, the first time is at the end of March, the
second toward July, the last about the middle of September; the hay of the
first cuts not so great as the second, because that in this place it produces
seeds, and by consequence it grows bigger, this being cut, the seed is taken
up like Oats, and then is thrust together with the first, expecting the last,
that these three mingled togemay serve for profitable provision for the beasts
all the year; a Master of a Family may be well advised to use this Husbandry,
considering the notable profit which will come to him thereby in regard of the
Hay, the Oats, and the grass of the Field, he will find the seed of this
exquisite pasture, is a thing one may well send to enquire after in Daphine
although it be as far almost as the utmost of France, without fear of
introducing a novelty, seeing these will so exceedingly countenance his labor,
which principally he does regard, assuring himself that in what part soever of
these three Countries he shall remain, this grass will profit him, for its
faculty, to grow nevertheless in a temperate air than in a hot, and in a land
more light than heavy; and to effect this business (I give you notice) that
this seed of Clover-grass is sold commonly at the double price of Oats; to
plant it must be appointed for some acres of Land; chosen as aforesaid, not
stony, because of cutting of the grass, then it must be in a place commodiously
enclosed, for the reasons aforesaid, and after that he has well, and to the
purpose labored the land during Winter, the Spring approaching, at the end of
February, or the beginning of March, he shall sow the seeds, but very thick, it
being necessary four times more of that than of wheat, that it may grow to
cover all the ground with the grass, without leaving place for any malignant
grass, which may come to grow there, to its detriment; the flower of the land
must be well plowed, like a meadow, so that without hinderance the Sithe may go
up and down freely; the first year, this grass makes no great increase, being
almost wholly employed to take hold and strengthen it self, but the three years
following it recompenceth the slackness, producing abundance of good hay, also
all the time it stays in the ground it imyloys all the mea^s to be profitable
unto it, (which in times past) it comes to nothing, for which cause, the place
where the Clover-grass grows is then converted into tillage, and by that means
the ground being deep plowed produce very fair Winter and Summer corn, for
three or four years. And for that you shall be accommodated with such good
pasture, and fair corn with it, you should manage this Husbandry so, that you
should always have new and old Clover-grass, to make some serve for hay, and
other for corn, whereby you can neither want for one nor the other. Probatum
est.

The second Experiment.
First sow Flax, then a crop of Turnips, and after about April following, you
may sow the ground with Oats, and upon Clover-grass seeds, only harrowing it
with Bushes or bushed harrows, which will come up after the Oats are mowed, and
will yield you a very great pasture till Christmas, and the next year following
you may cut the grass three times, and it will every year bear such burden, and
so good, to feed all the sorts of Cattle, that the best meadows do not yield
the like, so it will continue four or five years together without sowing it.
Probatum est.

One acre of Clover-grass, being made part into hay, and the rest eaten green,
will keep four Cows winter and summer, and one acre laid for seed, might carry
five bushels, and I am confident that here are thousands in England would give
five shillings the pound for such as grow here in this Nation, being indeed the
very best.

The hay of an acre, is about seven loads and one half, no man will sell for
six pound, six shillings, and eight pence the load.

Besides the after pasture in the Summer, mow the Clover-grass, and give it the
Cattle by parcels. One Mr. Bromley a Minister did assure me that he lately knew
a very large field of Clover-grass, which grew naturally in Gloucester shire,
and was yearly very much advantageous to the owner thereof.

When the ground is laid down it will fatten Cattle, and feed them very lusty,
and fit for the Butcher in a short time, especially Sheep; the seed may be
provided and sowed, and will thrive in most grounds being exceeding sweet and
pleasant will very much advantage pasture grounds, and raise to great
improvement.

There is a Gentleman in Essex who makes great store of Soap with the Ashes
thereof, spread upon base baren ground, and has many acres thereof wonderfully
rich with the best and sweetest Tree-soyl, the like was never seen in England
upon any ground, chiefly downs, being commonly reputed most proper for such
grass, the Ashes being formerly of so base an esteem, that they would have
given money for the carrying them away out of the Country.

There is a strange kind of Grass growing in Wilt-shire with which they fat
hogs, being four and twenty foot long, if the seed of this grass were sown in
other rich and fertile meadows, that would thrive and prosper as well as where
I saw it grow, it is of a very great consequence, and may be so well approved
of by those that shall make trial thereof.

Chap. 6. Of Potatoes.
THe like benefit as with Turnips may be made of Potatoes, which usually grow
here in England, they will increase exceedingly, and are excellent food several
ways, they will make very good bread, cakes, paste, and Pyes, and both crust
without and food within; they will hardly be destroyed but increase of
themselves in a very plentiful manner, with very little labor; they will
likewise grow and thrive very well, being cut in slices, and so put into the
earth, and the very threads coming from the roots will increase to great roots.

The like benefit may be made for Poultry and Swine, of Artichoaks Jerusalem.

Chap. 7. Of Pumpions.
THe next are Pumpions, which may be occasioned to grow in the coarsest ground,
even all stone in a manner, as follows.

First make several holes, a foot and a half one from an other, and fill either
hole about the bigness of a peck with mold that you may get from hedge-rows,
mixed with a little good muck purposely prepared, or with Cow Dung, you may cut
up the Mole-hils within the neighboring grounds, sowing the places again with
hay seeds or treefoyl seeds, then plant in one of the holes being well tempered
with muck, mold, or some of the best composed muck, some three Pompion seeds,
you need not care for the seed the first year, for they will afterward be
plentiful enough, and suffer one of the best to continue growing, the rest
pull up and plant them in hedge-rows, or cast them away; And this manner you
may (if you please) dispose of an acre of ground or more at the first, which in
all likelihood may produce some four large Pumpions, on a plant, the rest may
be cut off being newly planted, with the superfinous branches, and the other
will grow the bigger, and in all probability will amount to at vendible rates
30 and 40 pound per acre, and will sell dearer in the Country than near London,
and if not sold they will (with the greater advantage) serve for Poultry,
Swine, and Cattle, being boiled and used as Turnips, which may accordingly be
contrived into paste, as before specified, with more advantage for feeding than
with the best grass or corn, and whereas I have known dry grounds that have
been so barren, that they would bear no grass, at all, in comparison, yet being
laid all the year long used, and no Cattle turned therein, that little grass
that was rotting upon the ground, and the seed shedding thereon has afforded
the years following very good grass, and admitting the ground where the Pompions
grow are very poor, yet the grass being suffered to grow, though but little,
the Pumpion leaves shadowing the ground, and keeping it cool in hot weather,
and warm in cool seasons, a year or two, especially with the help of the Muck
water.

Yet such soyls the ground will afford very good grass, and the seeds of the
Pumpions, being shifted into new holes, will improve the basest ground
whatsoever to great perfection. You may likewise use the Root of the Pumpions,
which will occasion them to be as large again as otherwise.

You may cause a large bed to be made of rich mold, etc. whereby you may plant
great store of Pumpion seeds, and then transplant them according to your
uttermost accommodation, but by all means they must be well watered with the
muck water, of the fattest sort as follows hereafter.

Suffer but two or three main runners, according to discretion, and cut off the
rest of the branches, about the time they begin to flower, carefully preserving
the other main runners from prejudice.

In like manner may be planted Cabbages, which will afford the like profit upon
such kind of ground, and although they may afford a great benefit by the sale
thereof yet they will be less trouble and more advantageous, for feeding of
Cattle, especially those that give milk, which will make them exceedingly
abound therewith, and one acre of ground so planted will be far better than an
acre of hay, and the ground much benefited thereby, after the Cabbages are cut
up, there will be a crop of Coleworts, etc.

Chap. 8. Of the Roman Bean and Liquorish.
THere is a Grain called by some the Roman Bean, which are excellent for
Horses, Dogs, Poultry, and Swine, and will as is made apparent beyond
contradiction afford above one hundred pound per acre benefit, as they may be
ordered.

They are to be set once, and they will continue four years after exceedingly,
without the use of muck, this Grain is indeed the greatest advantage that ever
was heard of, considering the little charge and trouble; I dare not profess the
wonderful increase they will afford, being rightly used, what benefit may be
made thereof, I leave it to judgment, when if five hundred acres were planted
therewith they might be all sold.

There is a Gentleman in London, that has found out a new way for the planting
of Liquorish, which grows naturally in many places of England, and whereas
formerly contrary to judgment of those that planted it, used to dig the ground
very deep, even into the crust of earth, and then planted the Liquorish
downwards, and too deep; This Gentleman has caused his Ground not to be
mucked, nor to be used, therefore had that been mucked formerly, and the roots
placed side-waies, not perpendicularly, but above the crust of the earth, which
by that means will run a very great length, and grow with greater roots by far
than otherwise, insomuch that the Gentleman's Servant has observed, for five
acres of Liquorish to make two hundred pound an acre; Besides there was a crop
of Onions growing upon the five acres of Liquorish, for which there was offered
twenty pound an acre; half thereof being formerly picked out and sold for at
least twenty pound more, and this may be confirmed for a truth at any time, so
that there is but one year of three void of profit; and some benefit may be
made that year.

This with the Roman Bean would be excellent commodities in diverse Countries,
in regard of the convenience by water, they being no Drugg, at all times
vendible, and the ground much advanced thereby for other uses, which may be
done in a mere dry and warm sand, etc. this to be confirmed to an hundred pound
per annum.

Chap. 9. Of Saffron.
THere are grounds (in my knowledge) in most parts of England, where Saffron
will grow, being rightly prepared, as well as in any place, and once having the
roots which may easily be gotten, and as cheap as the other seeds, and plants,
you will ever after abound therewith, and they will render very great profit,
with very little charge, and much enrich the ground for corn after them several
years, for the planting and disposing of them, you may have sufficient
directions at pleasure, and so for the other defects, better Saffron grows
not in the world than here in England, being worth forty pound an acre
skilfully and carefully planted, that will last several years, and afford
diverse crops every year, and must be gathered every morning for a months space.

A worthy Gentleman in whose Garden had been planted some Saffron roots for
ornament sake, and the rather, because the flowers were very sweet, of various
colors, and very pleasant to the eye, they did exceedingly increase on the
ground, that the Gardner could by no means destroy them although with great
diligence they weeded them up constantly when they dressed and renewed their
Garden, yet do what they could they would grow there still; at last as they
drew them up still, set them in some remote places in the Garden, being ground
very much neglected, where they prospered so well, that it is to be admired
what benefit so little ground did afford, which was a mere sand, as is to be
found in most Shires in England, only the ground having been formerly baren, I
advised the Gentleman, he having Commons of such kind of ground hardly worth
one shilling an acre, and several other waste ground, with great convenience,
of water, etc. to compose some kind of soil, as I instance in my discourse
following of muck, and mingled earth, and to lay it a foot thick on the worst
part, of his barren ground he might in the easiest manner concontrive a
thousand loads in a year and thereby questionless have diverse acres of the best
sort of Saffron; and this soil will so fertilize the waste ground under it with
the addition of the muck water in case of dry weather, that the lands will be
fit for any advantageous uses whatsoever, etc. Probatum est.

Observe. 1.
Item French Pease will yield thirty pound per acre, charge little, and much
enrich the ground for corn afterward they have been known afford five hundred
for one.

Observe. 2.
Mustard seed thirty pound an acre de claro, and will afford very good crops,
for several years without replanting upon ordinary ground, and will thrive very
well upon Ditches newly cast up.

Observe. 3.
Tassels for Cloath-workers, about thirty pound an acre de claro, and will
thrive and prove very well here in England, and very useful, being rightly
planted, and with the best seed.

Observe. 4.
Madder for dying for the Apothecary worth 7 d. per pound, and will grow very
thick on the ground and advance five pound an acre and upwards de claro, it
will thrive best in sandy ground as the other, and is constanly vendible at
high rates.

Observe. 5.
Osiars above twenty pound an acre on wet ground, without trouble or charge,
after the first planting, and when there are store of them there will be no
want of Manufactorr, for thither they will questionless resort and inhabit.

Observe. 6.
There is a Tree called the Abel, there being none of the Plants to be had,
unless they be sent for out of France, but in one place in England, thirty
pounds being laid out about these plants will render at the least ten thousand
pound at eighten years, and without any other charge, trouble, or impairing,
the Grass in the field where they grow: This is confirmed by an Honorable
Knight here in London, every Tree of them, so being rightly planted, will
afford in a short time thirty plants, and every one of these thirty will afford
thirty more, and these Trees are at their full growth in twenty years, and
after seven years growth improveth every year twelve pence, until the time is
up, it grows very straight, and is most comely either in the Fields or walks,
this Timber hardly has its parallel, for all sorts of wodden Vessels, as
Trayes, Bowls, etc. and so likewise for Carts, it being exceedingly light, very
tall in growth, and a very white wood.

The manner of the planting them I shall hereafter more at large discover, with
the condition of the soil where they are to be planted, their usual distance
one from another, under ten foot, you may likewise provide French furze seeds,
and sow them amongst these Trees, where there is want of such fuel, they will
grow very fast and big in a short time, with great stocked bodies, and will
soon spread their tops, and become very large and high, far transcending our
English Furze, and these, together with the other Trees, will afford a
considerable profit, and this place may likewise be very much for pleasure, and
very profitable for the sheltering of Pheasants and other Fowls.

Chap. 10. To illustrate the profit of Ground, by planting of Woods.
I Knew a Gentleman that set an Ash-tree before his House, which forty years
after he was offered for it thirty pounds, and it is certainly to be proved,
that a Gentleman in Holland sold five hundred Ashes at fifty years grows at a
far higher rate, and that another man in the same Country planted so much wood
inhis life time for the which he was offered fifty thousand pound.

There is a Gentleman now living in Essex that can lop off his own ground two
thousand Willows every year out of the number he formerly planted. His
improvements of grounds for Orchards twenty pound an acre per annum, twenty
acres four hundred pound.

A Gentleman in Kent, besides the great benefit he converteth the ground to
otherwise, advances to himself yearly for Cherries and other fruit of his own
planting at least five hundred pounds.

Certain Observations.
There is a Knight now living in England that got a thousand pounds per annum
by planting Carrets in a mere sandy ground.

2. There are diverse in London that will give thirty pound an acre to sow
Clove Gilly flowers, and so for many years. I especially by means of the Muck
water, and the muck, the like benefit made per annum of red Roses.

3. There are about London that do make two hundred pound an acre by gardening,
and exceeding great profit may be made thereby in most places of England, which
may be performed, only an experienced Gardner of London told me they usually
fat their Cows and Swine with the offal of Gardeningstuff

Chap. 11. To preserve Horses in a very good Condition without hay.
AN honorable Knight in Kent, and a Doctor there of fifteen hundred pound per
annum, have not given their Horses any hay these twelve years, but only chopped
straw, cut small, with such a Knife as they cut hay withal, they mingle with a
handful of Oats, half a peck of this Straw so cut, and put into the Manger,
several times in the day, and let them drink often, and in this manner they use
all their Horses both that work and travel; you may put in the paste of Turnips
instead of the Oats, which being used thereunto will do as well and better, and
satisfy all expectations with very great success, without any additional food;
cut, chop, and shred all your Furs-tops, and give them to your Horses, and they
will exceedingly thrive therewith, this I received from the greatest Lord of
Scotland, which was the continual custom of his Servants.

Item a Gentleman traveling much, when others gave their Horses that traveled
at the least half a peck of Oats, he gave his Horse but one half penyworth of
Carrets, where he could have them. I have know the like increase with Turnips,
no food exceeding them for health and feeding.

In Kent and Hurtford-shire they usual cut all their Oats and Pease small, and
give them their Horses, with chaff or cut straw; by which means they eat up all
and thrive exceedingly therewith, and feed thereon the more greedily.

Chap. 12. Of Hops.
OUt of a small plot of ground, scarce an acre and an half, a Gentleman got by
Hops in one year at least one hundred and eighty pound.

A worthy Friend of mine, out of less than a quarter of an acre of Ground
received hately for Hops in one year ten pound, and for several years besides;
which ground in my knowledge was very much neglected, otherways would have
returned many more, being they stood much protected from the Nothern winds.

The last year a Gentleman experienced, used Muck-water, by watering his Hops
therewith, only at the very roots, whereby he had a return beyond expectation,
and is resolved thereupon to take in more grounds for that purpose; the
improvement that may happen thereby cannot in any rational man's judgment, but
be exceeding great, being the liquor does exceed your ordinary muck.

He likewise planted upon the Hop-hills diverse seeds of Pumpions, the running
branches thereof being turned into the paths with sticks, and causing the
superfluous branches to be cut off, leaving only about three of them that were
well knotted; he made a double benefit thereby, part whereof was sold at good
rates, the rest were boiled in the manner of Turnips, and he caused his Cattle
and Swine to be sed therewith, to his great advantage, so with these and with
Turnips, he boiled all the Barley chaff he could get, which made the Liquor the
thicker, and proved more commodious to his Cattle, and sometimes when bran was
to be had at reasonable rate, he caused it to be boiled therein, otherwise the
Liquor was only used.

The usual way of keeping the roots of his Pumpion plants, was to get all the
pieces of Pots, Dishes, and old Vessels, that would hold Water, and filling
them with the former Liquor, he caused the end of an old rotten list or rag to
be put into the Vessel, and the other end unto the Pumpion plant; which would
descend unto the root, and the Liquor being thereby dreyned out of the old
Vessels they were seasonably replenished, from which occasion he had the
fairest Pumpions that ever were beheld, and the Hops wonderfully improved
thereby: he had also by virtue of this Liquor white Straw-berries, six inches
compass, which may at any time be attested, and such kind of roots, and
Gardening-stuff, that the like for the generality was never seen before.

Chap. 13. Of Flax.
FLax will yield thirty or forty pound an acre, sandy, baren, and heathy ground
is best for it, and after Flax, Turnips, one acre of good Flax accounted worth
three or four acres of the best Wheat, and the Liquor has much advanced the
goodness thereof.

The best time for the sowing thereof is about the beginning of April, presently
after a shower of rain, which may abundantly be supplied by the Engine, and
Muck-water following; some do usually sow Flax until the end of May, and some
after.

Observe. 1. Of Bees.
There are diverse places in England that would maintain one hundred hives of
Bees, without providing convenience of food for them, and it was an easiy thing
to get five hundred pound per annum by Bees in places convenient.

Observe. 2.
To make trees bear much and excellent fruit, and to advantage them in their
growth half in half, is only by the scasonable application of the Muck-water,
and the water following for worms.

Observe. 3. A way how to recover an old Tree.
When a tree is spent and has done bearing, under-prop it so as that it may be
steadfastly supported that the body may not sink, then take away the earth under
the roots, and add thereunto good rich Mould to the empty places, or your best
mixed earth, with the Muck-water, and you shall perceive the tree to revive
again, flourish, prosper, and bear fruit more plentifully than ever it did, so
may you do with a tree that is fallen down.

Observe. 4. To make barren Trees bear much, and exceeding good fruit.
First split the root of an old tree, and add thereunto Pingeons dung, Lees of
Wine (...) and a little Brimstone, or any such thing, as you shall understand
to be destructive to worms, which composition has been often tried.

Observe. 5.
I have known a Vine planted upon the top of an Oak that did yield abundance
of excellent Grapes, very large, pleasant and full of Juice, and why not many
Oaks so planted. In ground fit to be dug up, to set corn, and thereby to
reap an hundred for one, and all charges born, and less than a peck of wheat
will fat an acre, and with the use of Muck-water, a far greater increase.

That one good digging being it goes deeper than the Plow, and thereby
destructive to all sorts of weeds, and Grass, is as good as three plowings, if
the Land be mellow, and the charge is no more.

This course would employ hundreds and thousands, and the ground be made
convenienter for other crops, which would be far greater. If we set a grain of
Corn, as Wheat, Barley, etc. it usually produces three hundred and four hundred
for one, according to experience, but if you sow Wheat the accustomed way six
for one is accounted a good crop.

If the same quantity of acres of poor, heathy, barren Land, by producing Flax,
Turnips, and Clover-grass will yield more profit than the richest Land that
bears, wheat, Barley, Meadow, and good pasture, then by consequence the poor
Land is better than the rich.

It is also justified that two acres of corn being equally sown, if the
Muck-water be in time cast over the one acre, sufficiently either with the
Engine, or otherwise, that acre shall exceed the other five for one, and
upwards.

You may have six times more Hay, in a Meadow when it is turned up with the
Plow, or a Cutting-knife, and sowed thick with the Ashes, burnt of out the
substance thereof.

But the rain must follow first, otherwise use the Muck-water or ordinary
water, with the Engine, then sow the Meadow with the seed of Trefoyl, and plow
and harrow them, or in some ground you may use a strong Iron rake; let the
first Grass that grows thereon be very ripe that it may fall off it self,
then let some pass over it rakes and cords, and stir it that it may fall out
afterward, let it be mowed off, and carried to a certain place where it may be
conveniently dried, and the Grass will grow again presently, and may be mowed
again in that year.

Observe. 6.
There are ways to make rushy ground bear very good grass, first plow it up,
then Marl it, or plow and burn it, according to the usual custom, and being
wet trench it, and then add a proportion of the muck following thereunto, with
being rightly ordered will exceed the ordinary muck five for one, and upwards.

Obser. 7.
To make Corn-ground, quite out of heart, and worn out, to afford as good a
Crop on the last year of the lease as ever it did before, and this has been
performed by steeping the Corn, and muck Water.

Sow with your Oats, the bottom of a Hay-mow, and although your Land be out o
sheart, and very poor, you may have that year, not only a Crop of Oats, but
also a Crop of Grass likewise, which was spared till the next year, that it
might beget a good sword, etc.

There is a workman that made a Cart to draw as much with one horse as with
five, and is still living at Dedford.

An Honorable person near London, has devised a Plough that with one horse,
and a boy, will perform as much in a day, as his neighbors, only with the
partition of a hedge between them, upon the same sort of ground, can dispatch
with four or five horses, and two men besides; the Gentleman does advance,
twenty for one, in an Acre, more than his neighbors can do, and these people,
when they have been very much cast behind, have been offered the help of this
Plough, but they have refused it, because they would not alter their ancient
course.

The same Gentleman has like, wise a Cart with three wheels, wherewith one
horse will draw, about forty loads of Muck in a day, to a field of some
distance, neither is the horse put to any hardness of labor, for a man may
draw the Cart with his hand, and it will pass with great facility, the horse
does not bear any weight at all, he has likewise a very large Cart with three
wheels, wherewith one horse can draw a full load.

This Gentleman has likewise a Chariot with three wheels being like the
hinder part of a Coach, and has a seat behind the chair, where his footboy
may sit, if the ways prove foul, in which Chariot his wife and himself have
traveled eighty Miles, in two days, with one horse, and although he be
sufficiently provided with horses, yet he commonly uses his Chariot, and
guides the horse, by the reigns himself with much ease and delight.

And therewith he has outgone a Coach and six horses; he constantly uses the
same Chariot upon any occasion from his house to London.

Chap. 11. To make Clay burn as clear as any other fire, and as useful.
TAke one third part of small pit Coal, or sea Coal, and mingle them together
as you would Mortar, then make them up in round balls less than your head, and
lay them upon a place, to dry, then lay them upon the fire one upon another and
observe the conclusion.

There is also a sort of Lome, which is of it self combustible, and will with
the addition of a few Charcoales; burn very clear and prove exceeding useful.
P^^batum est.

Chap. 12. A way to convay Water under ground up to a very high hill and so to
the top of the highest house.
THis must be performed as it may be seeen, at Barkhamsted, in Hartfordshire,
by a wheel, leaving the rest (to avoid prolixity) to be demonstrated by
discourse.

Observe. 1.
Out of two pecks and a half of Rape seeds, sown near York the last year, there
was sold as much of the seed as came to forty pounds.

Observe. 2.
There is a sure way to feed old cattle fat in a short time, and to make the
meat as tender as the youngest.

First make them as poor as you can possible, then turn them to very good
fresh grass, by which means you may enjoy your desire.

Observe. 3.
To make Heifers as large again as their dams, and as formal as the fairest
Oxen, only by spaying them while they are young, and they will sell at the
rates equal with Oxen.

Observe. 4.
I Have known Gentlemen that have caused Tares to be sowed amongsts their
Grass in their Meddowes, which thereby have afforded a double proportion of
fodder for their Cattle, and to very great advantage.

There is a Gentleman who does usually sow several Acres of Fennel, wherewith
he feeds, and fatteneth his Cattle in a very short time, and one Acre
thereof will extend very far, and will afford several Crops in one year,
according to the Sowe-thistle, the oftener you cut it, the thicker it will grow,
and once sown it will continue many years without trouble, you may give it
your Cattle in Racks by bundles as you cut it.

Observe. 5.
Another does usually and privately, every year, sow diverse Bushells of Bay
salt on his Corn ground, and to the admiration of all his neighbors, he has
constantly better Crops of Corn, by far than any of them, they being wholly
ignorant of his ways. This being made known to a Gentleman, he has bought
great store of Bay Salt at two shillings six-penee per bushel, and being a
great husband, and very knowing in husbandry, is confident, to advantage
himself much thereby: for there is no Muck or soil Comparable thereunto, both
for Grass and Corn, as may evidently appear by the Salt Marshes, in several
places of this Nation.

Chap. 13. To make a sufficient fence, of Sallowes, or VVillowes, or both, in a
very short time.
LEt your ditch, be ordered according to the usual manner, and and if it may be
with good Mould, and take small sticks of Willowes, or Sallowes, cut from the
trees, and cut the Bark round with the knife, about three inches distant, the
one from the other, and place two of the sticks sidewaies, one foot distant,
the one from the other, then cover them with earth, and with Mould, and they
will soon shoot forth to very good perfection, and from every place so cut
round will spring forth a branch, which after they are grown about half a yard,
you may cut them off about three inches from the ground, and they will thereby
grow the thicker, and become a very complete fence suddenly, and especially if
you water them with the muck Water.

Chap. 14. Of Muskmelons.
THe way to have as good Muskmelons, as are any in Italy, without the
unwholesome use of the muckbeds here in London, is confirmed by the Earl of
Dorset.

Plant them under a Wall, Pale, or Hedge, on the Sunny side, with very good
mould, purposely prepared, and underneath the Mold, lay a quantity of fresh
Barley straw, and by this easy means, using the seasonable Covertures, and
necessary futherance, you may attain to your uttermost desire, without any
further trouble; but if you do discern the straw to make the earth too hot,
thrust in a stake through the mould to the straw, that the vapor and heat
evaporate, and pass forth, this from the Earl of Tenett.

I shall more copiously enlarge my self herein, with the ready way to ripen
them, and such other fruits, before their season, by planting them in dry
weather, and every third or fourth day, watering them with warm water.

Whereas there has happened an exceeing great destruction of Beans, Pease,
and other corn of late years, by Worms, and other creeping things, both about
the City and in most places of the Country, there being no means imagined by
any for the prevention thereof, you may observe how to avoid them, both in
Fields, Gardens, and at the roots of trees. Take sliced, or bruised Onions, and
steep them in Water, all night or longer; add thereunto a proportion of Salt
and Soot, and Lime (if you please) or Ashes, in your Gardens you may use it
with your watering Pots, especially to the roots of trees. And for the Corn
fields the engine following is most proper, which I refer to my after discourse.

This composition will not leave a Worm in the ground, where it is used,
besides it will strengthen the Land very much for Corn, and bring the Trees to
much fruitfulness, that were formerly decayed at the roots; if there be
Worms, take but a drop or two of the Onion water, and some Salt, put it into a
Worm-hole, and the worm will come out, and dye presently; and the same water,
with Onions and Salt, by drinking a little of it in a morning fasting, at the
full of the Moon, will destroy all Worms in men, women and children; you may
use only the Onions which will be sufficient.

A remedy for the worms in men, women and children, you must three mornings
before the full of the Moon, give them to drink a quantity of new Milk, and
give it them in the morning of the full Moon, and the worms then expecting
breakfast as before, they having then as Physicians say, their mouths open, are
destroyed.

To bring into one place, and destroy all Worms, that are hurtful in a
Gardens, take the belly or panch of a Weather newly killed, and all the filth
and dung that is in it, and bury the same in the place were they be, cover it a
little with the earth, and within two days you may see all the hurtful things
resort thither, which you may destroy, as you please, Centaury, Colloquintida
and Wormewod are good ingredients to add if need were to the former design to
destroy Worms.

You may at the end of March or February make the ground very wet by casting
water thereon, and about eight or nine of the clock, by candle light gather up
all the worms, whereby you may destroy them in Gardens.

Water wherein the leaves and seed of Hemp is sodden, being cast and sprinkled
on the earth, will make the worms come out of the ground, if there be any.

Cabbages pulled up by the roots, and set in sand, in a Cellar or some other
room, may be kept all the Winter, or you may hang them up with strings, and so
may you keep Artichokes, and other plants, and roots, for constant use, as
Carets, Parsnips, and Turnips. In dry weather in October, and November, make a
layr of Sand, and a layr of Carrets, cutting away the tops close to the roots,
with some of the small ends of the Carrets, and about the last of December,
when there is no frost, uncover them, and you may keep them longer if you pare
off the the shootings of the upper end of the root, and then lay them in Sand,
and so Parsnips, and Turnips.

Obser. 1.
In Herefordshire they feed their Swine with Elm-tree-leaves, gathering them in
bags.

There was fifty pound an Acre offered for Tobacco lately in Worcestershire,
and at that rate, for several Acres.

Chap. 14. To get off the Smutt from Wheat.
FIrst lay a lay of Barley Chaff, then a layer of smutty Wheat, then a layer of
Chaff again, then a layer of Wheat, etc. and so thrash it, and it will break
very fair.

Obser. 2.
Bury Hawthorn Berries deep in the ground all the winter, then sow them in
February, and water them with muck-water, as follows, and you shall find
wonderful expedition in the growth.

Observe. 3.
Quicksets are not to be weeded at all after Mich.

Obser. 4.
That Wheat being newly sown upon ground, on a hill side, very poor and not
worth two shillings an Acre, and never mucked, there was Clover Grass sown
amongst the Wheat, which proved to be as rich, and as good a Crop, as ever was
seen in England, or ever was known to grow without muck, and after the Wheat
was cut, the Clover grew up beyond expectation, and served for excellent
pasture, all the year following; A very good crop of Clover Grass was cut in
the same year, which was performed by steeping the Wheat (in Salt Brine) and
Lime, which hindered the prejudice of the Crows, birds, worms, etc. The seed
was steeped in strong Brine, that would bear an Egg, about twenty four hours.

First there was laid a lay of the steeped seed spread upon a floor, then a lay
of Lyme, upon the corn, then a layer of corn again, etc. The like benefit was
made with part of this ground, by sowing of Barley steeped, and mingled with
Clover Grass, which ground has lately afforded three Crops a year of Clover,
as high as has been seen in England, one crop thereof transcending Wheat.

And that after the wheat is steeped, as before with Lyme, A Gentleman cast the
Clover Grasle seeds thereon, often stirring them together with a Shovell, the
seed did so Concorporate with the Wheat, and Lyme, that it made a wonderful
improvement, and does very much enrich the ground, and totally prevent the
Smuttiness of Wheat.

A Gentleman in Kent would usually with Barley, which being cut, and the VVoold
which was left standing, and there was very good pasture that year on the
ground, in June the year following, the seed of diverse acres thereof was sold
for six pound an acre being more commodious than wheat, and without charge,
which has been sold formerly for fifteen and sixteen pound an acre.

Whereas there has been a thousand bushels of corn utterly spoiled that has
been laid up in storehouses, with an ordinary small black creeping worm which
does usually breed in malt, and have been often seen to cover the Malt all
over, and are of that dangerous consequence that part of them will destroy the
Malt, and corrupt the Beer that is made thereof, and make it very unwholesome,
worms which have been often seen in the like manner to breed amongst Wheat,
laid up in great heaps, to the great spoil thereof, the way to destroy them is
to get about a Sack full of horse Auts, which be covered in the fields with
great heaps of dust, and little sticks; Then shovelling the Corn from the sides
of the rooms, and dividing the heaps of corn into several floors, and spaces,
lay about a quart af Ants in several of the bare places, leaving there the full
quantity of them, in like manner, and they will become destructive to the
worms Immediately.

The Malt will be by this means restored and rectified, and the Ants have been
observed to vanish suddenly. Sow Oats, and Tares together, and the Oats will
thereby grow very rank and high, and the Tares will Climb up with the Oats,
and thrive the better, be it far in May, you may cut this Crop, and dispose of
it for fodder, and the same summer you may have another crop which will come up
more advantagiously than the other.

A Gentleman of Richmond, has this year about thirty acres of S. Foyne which
is of exceeding great estimation with him, and with diversothers, not without
sufficient cause, he preserves his seed to be ordered for greater Crops, the
benefit it affords on that sort of ground, being a very dry hard soil is two
Crops in a Summer, and two loads on an acre, and for pasture, it is of most
admirable repute, and equally fruitful for Milchkine, with the other, being
commonly on dry barren ground, not worth twelve pence an Acre.

Virginia wheat will yield here in England five hundred for one, being
discreetly ordered, with muck, and then muck water; A Gentleman not far from
London does usually sow these seeds in the bellies of Sprats, or some other
fish, whereby they come to a more seasonable maturity, and with greater
advantage.

Chap. 15. To recover old Trees.
TAke the quantity of a quarter of a peck of Horse blood, or Ox blood
tempered, with about half a peck of Pigeons dung, make it up into soft paste,
which will be rare to apply to the greater roots, and aged Trees, fastening the
same paste about the roots after they have been lay'n bare, and have taken air
some few days, which course will certainly recover a Tree or Vine that is near
dead, and will make them put forth blossoms and fruits afresh, which must be
done about the middle of February.

Apply it to the Vine about the beginning of March; you may likewise recover
old Trees, by applying to the Roots, before the Sap comes up, and to make your
trees flourish, and prosper very well, round about the body of the Trees make
many holes with a crow of Iron, about six weeks after Michaelmas, and power into
the holes your rich muck water, or Ox blood, and fill them up with good mould,
etc.

Observe. 1.
If you would have Poles, Posts, and Stakes, Pales, whch you drive into water
last long, burn them well at the ends, so far as they are to be in the ground,
and they will continue without decaying many years; this course a Gentleman in
Cheshire used about five years since, and the Posts, and Pales, are still
standing without repair.

Obser. 2.
To help a Chimney that is dangerosly on fire, let two or three persons, take a
Blanket, or Coverlet, and hold it close to the mouth of the Chimney, that no
air may enter, and with a close board, cover the the top of the Chimney, and
the fire for want of air, will soon be extinguished.

A Gentleman of great worth in Hartfordshire, did lately confidently affirm
unto me that at Hutcher in that shire, they did bestow three thousand pound per
Annum in Rags in London, and altough they have been infected with the plague,
very often, they find such benefit by them, that they constantly use them,
which they chop into pieces and then dispose them upon their Corn ground, they
likewise buy all the shaved Rabbets skins they can get for money, and all the
shaved horn, and Sheeps trotters, the last being best of all, excepting Sprats,
which when they are sold at a penny or 2 pence a peck, being often thrown about
streets, upon muckhills, there cannot be a more fruitful Manure than they are,
and every other unsound fish.

Obser. 3.
Chaff will heat and ripen unripe Apples.

The drosseor that which is left after the pressing out of Lyntseeds, is
exceeding profitable for the feeding of Cattle, as the other Rapeseeds, with
turnips.

Hempseeds given to Hens in Winter will make them lay oftener than ordinary
seeds or corn.

Chap. 16. To feed and fatten all sorts of Poultry and Fowl.
Boil Butchers blood, which is easily to be had, with a good qantity of Bran,
mingsed therewith, or grains, which is not so good, until it come to the
manner of a blood pudding, which will feed your Fowl as fat as you will desire
them to be.

Some do use to feed Fowl with Carrets, Turnips, Parsnips and Pumpions sodden
and mingled, with Bran, or coarse Pollard

Turkies will become very fat in a short time, and prosper exceedingly with
bruised Acorns.

You may soak Chippings, and other Crusts of bread in broken beer or fleeten
Milk, and feed your Capons and Hens fat presently.

Obser. 1.
To prevent blasting of Corn under God, is to change the seed, or by soaking it
in the best muck water, or mixing it with Lyme, and water as before, and the
Corn being seasonably steeped, to add thereunto the Lyme, or Ashes, or both,
and being thereby fixed unto them and so sown, has been a special remedy
these many years.

Obser. 2. Concerning muck, and muck water.
Land floods are of gallant improvement, and such as come from the washing down
of rode ways, great towns, the soil of pastures, fertile fields, commons
dunghills, etc. If Marl be good for grass and corn, which is most certain, then
water mingled therewith must necessarily be of the same virtue.

Obser. 3.
And if tainted water, colored water, and water putrified, water thick, and
fat waters in ponds, etc. the riches of all these being allowed to be
unvaluable for steeping of corn etc.

Obser. 4.
And if the sea from the fat and brackish nature of it self do so wonderfully
enrich the lands, and salt mingled with corn has a very good operation because
its brackishnesse is fruitful to the land, and if steeping the corn either in
fat water, Lyme water, Dung water, etc. be of wonderful effect to make strange
things which is most true.

Obser. 5.
The residence of water that comes from Chalkie and Lymestone grounds, or be
colored with land floods, does fatten the ground exceedingly, these being all
confirmed by those of great judgment and experience.

Obser. 6.
By some part of these experiments, a Gentleman which had but five or six
acres of Hay, he had twenty four loads in the same meddow, which may be made
apparent.

Obser. 7.
By Flooding (as Master Plat says) who was a man of the greatest judgment and
experience in Husbandry, who improved lands from three hundred shillings to
three hundred pound per annum. He likewise highly commends Moats, and
standing Pooles, which may yield (as he says) great store of excellent manure,
and that by the blessing of God, most wonderful and miraculous things have
been effected by those means.

Obser. 8.
And farther great virtue, and worth, it is Concluded, there is in Mud of Rivers,
standing Pools, and Ditches, being the soil of pastures, and fields, common
ways, yards, and dunghills.

Shovelling of streets, highwaies, yards, and overswathes, of common land, and
other lands of commons, near hedges, is very good both of themselves, and also
compounded with other soil.

Mingling of grounds is exceedingly advantageous, etc. Which may be conceived
of the muck water following, it is effected in Case of drought in time of Summer,
and in the heat thereof, now and then wetting over the Land, which had it been
known and used this Summer might have done millions of good.

These being Concluded, to be all excellent helps, and exceeding great
advantages, I could wish that those that have great proportions of lands,
should be provided with a convenient Moat or standing Pool, in some part of
their grounds, and if they have not any such pond, rather than to be without
it, to dig one that will contain water, and may be supplied constantly
therewith by a chanel from a river, or from Moats, that are maintained by
springs, and rather than fail from a Pump, or some other devise orconveniencie
with pipes of Lead, Wood, or earth, or with the Engine that follows in the
subsequent papers.

This being Completed, and having water sufficient, let the first ingredient
be a quantity of crumbling Marl, if there be any near, and with a strong Iron
Rake fixed to a long Pose, let the Marle be stirred at some times of leisure to
and from you, to thicken the water, then having store of Poultry Fowl, and
Pigeons, to be very careful to preserve their dung; especially the dung of
Rabbits, if any be to be had, all which, or part thereof, being cast into the
Pond, to stir it sometimes as before, then having sheep, where they sit a nights
in fold, you may get store of their dung, and use as the other,

In the like manner dispose of all your Cow and Horse dung without the straw,
and spare as many of your grains, after brewing as you can, seeing you may
provide sufficient food for your Swine otherwise, and to get as much of these
sorts, as you can conveniently, or if you have any of these following, that you
can conveniently spare, viz. Lyntseed, Oil, Lees of Wine, Ale, Bear, Perry,
Syder, Beef-broth, the Brine of Poudring-tubs, scrapings of (...) or sweepings
thereof, or any liquid brackish fatness, greasy matter, or any thing that
comes from or is of the fleshly matter of the creat^^e, whether by Sea or Land,
that has a secret operation in it to the Earth, likewise to cast into the pond
a proportion of Lyme, fat Chalk that is not stoned, and some bay Salt, and
what blood you can get, and urine, which is most excellent for all sorts of
ground, and whatsoever you shall think in your own judgment to be helpful and
advantageous thereunto.

This work being performed, you are to provide a vessel containing a Tun, or
there abouts, and being placed in a Cart, with broad wheels without Iron, such
as are in London, that they may not Root the ground much, bringing the Cart to
the Pond, fill the vessel with a Tunnell and a Pail at a Staffs end, such as
Brewers use for that purpose, or you may cause a little scaffold to be made,
such as Brewers have at the Thames side, by which means you may soon fill it
and Carry it to the fields, or hill sides, and then to provide an Engine which
I am now finishing, in part like that they use in London, when houses are on
fire, which being placed in the middst of the street, will cast water to the
appermost part of the highest house, and after this manner I have seen them
water sufficiently a great plat of grass: An Engine contrived in manner like
this, will water an Acre compass at one standing, and then being drawn with
low wheels, or otherwise may be removed to any other place.

A reasonable quantity of the Muck water will serve an Acre completely, and
what virtue this commixture may have in it, I leave to all impartial Judgments,
which I confidently have experimented in small parcels, and but with a Gardning
water-pot, I have found that it has exceeded the best sort of muck by many
degrees, which liquor must be applied to the Land, when it is fed as low as may
be, and the hill sides being watered in this Manner the lower grounds will fare
the better, by showers of rain, and the washings from thence.

And for Corn ground, there is an other way to be used with this Engine, being
it may be contrived in manner of a Sedan with four legs, carried empty with two
men, and set down without prejudice at all, the men passing with it only in
the furrows, and then being set down and used there, may afterward be removed
to another place, as occasion requires, the Cart being drawn to some lane and
place in the field, with the vessel of water where it may do no hurt to the
tylled lands: I have concluded in my thoughts, how to convey the water from the
vessel, to the Engine, without treading or soyling the lands at all, which is
so facil, and will be allowable in any man's judgment, and so continuing always
with so little charge, that I am not able at the present to impart it with my
pen, without too much prolixity, and therefore I crave leave otherwise to
finish my discourse.

This Engine being placed in a Center, will cast the Liquor before and behind,
and on both sides, that it will mildely fall down, like a shower of rain with
wonderful success, and may be used with ordinary water very advantageously,
the Compass of an Acre, of ground, at a time, on a dry time in summer both to
growing Corn, and Grass, with very much advantage.

I have known Husbandmen, after they have sown their Corn, they would pray
that it would please God to send a shower of rain, and this Engine, with the
blessing of God, will at any time comply with their desires, and make the earth
so fruitful, that in my knowledge one acre so watered, I mean with the muck
water, will render near, if not fully twenty times more benefit, than any other
acre, being tylled in the same manner, which will be (I am confident) as great
a benefit to this Nation as ever was devised, besides I shall be able to help
any man with an Engine for a small matter that will be very useful to water
grounds in this nature, and exceeding convenient and commodious for Gardens,
which will likewise wash off Caterpillars from all manner of Fruit Trees, and
those that grow against the Walls, and those that will alter the leaves and
fruit beyond belief, experience shall confirm as much unto you.

When your Corn is likewise steeped in the Liquor about some four and twenty
hours, according to my after directions, you may expect a far greater fertility
and profit, which has been seen above one hundred for one in Corn.

When you have emptied your Pond, for these purposes, you are then before you
fill it again to get out the mud, I mean the residence of the commixture, and
to rake it out upon the bank side, which you may perform with the back of an
old Armor; these, or one of them, being strongly fixed upon a Poles end with
Iron, the inward part of the Armor bending toward you, will rake up all the
mud by degrees, with much facility, and thereby you may cleanse any River or
Moat, without diverting the Watercourse going into the water, or let the water
out of Moats, etc.

I have known Rivers about Colebrook, above forty years since, let a yard
lower, besides the great benefit of drawing the Rivers, and the mudd so taken
out of the Rivers, called small Codd was so exceeding rich, that they were
miraculously advantageous otherwise, which I shall hereafter discover.

When you have gotten out this mudd you are before to provide a convenient
place for your Straw, muck from the Stables, and Cow-Houses, etc. which must be
contrived in this manner, or other such way according to the fancy of the
Owner, viz. to incompass the place where you lay your muck with a Brick wall,
about four foot high, only leaving a place for entrance, to fill out the muck
in Carts, and by any means to cause the flooring to be stanch, not to soak, and
drink in the water of the Muck-hill at all, but rather for the prevention
thereof, to make such a pavement of Brick-stone or Freestone if it may be had
near, and the floor to be made with a little descent on both sides to the
middle, that the water may pass out in a Chanel into some wooden Vessel, or
Cestern that may stand in the Ground near, and so low, that the Muck-water may
pass into it, which may be contrived so full of virtue and fertility, that the
worth of it is of high esteem, (being once truly experienced) will transcend
exceedingly, and cannot be bought at too dear a rate.

There are many places where the Ground is so firm it needs not any other
bottom, and the Liquor may be made by the meaner sort in Vessels, without a
Pond, for small parcels of ground, and thereby the other charges might be
saved, but I first conceive it to be more proper to lay in the same quantity.

Then by digging a pit to cast certain Loads of good Sand upon the Straw, and
then loads of other Earth to concorporate with it, which if it were commixed at
the first it were better, but I leave the disposing of that to knowing
Husbandmen, to be ordered according to the condition of the soyls, being
certain that any kind of earth that is moist dug out of pits without stones,
may be so mingle as it may be excellent fruit full soil, as Sand with Clay,
Loam with Chalk, etc. the one very much enriching the other, as gravel ground
Dung'd with Chalk, and Chalk mingled with Gravel for want of Dung; but you may
use if you please only Sand, then the muck out of the Pond or Earth of Commons
near the Ditch-sides, and Hedges, mud of standing Pools, Sea-weeds, which are
excellent soil, shovelings of Streets, Yards, Highways, and leaves of Trees:
as also Sea sand, or any liquid brackish fatness, greasy or oily matter, tarry
stuff, pitchmarks, the blood and offall of Beasts, empty marrow-bones, the
dressing and remainder of Trotters of sheep, which are most excellent, the
cuttings or shavings of Horns, hair, which is best to lay them upon the ground
before the Corn is sown; then fuffer the Swine to musle it up and down.

Pilchers after the oil is taken from them, the garbage of stinking Sprats, or
the best of them when they are plentiful and cheap, they being cried sometimes
for a penny a peck about the Streets in London.

Upon your mudd lay more straw, then more loads of Sand, etc. and as your
judgment shall direct you, some Lyme properly disposed, and some fat Chalk or
Marl in equal wreathes, you may likewise cast it over in the right place with
some Bay salt, and sometimes when the Straw is uppermost, or otherwise you may
spare some of your Pond water, and scatter on all the mass that will occasion
the other to concorporate the better; and afford more, and richer Dungwater.

By this means, and with indifferent charge, you may have manure sufficient to
serve all your Land, and such, that one load being rightly ordered shall
maintain it as well as some ten loads of your common sort of muck, and the
water that comes from it will be so rich for the steeping of your seed, that
the discourse thereof till experimented would be incredible.

A Gentleman did lately assure me, that the brine of powdering Tubs did afford
him as good a crop of Corn, as ever was seen grow; urine of Mankind is of very
great worth to cast upon the Muckhill.

Wood-ashes are best next to Soap ashes, which has a vigorous operation of it
self, and Soot is excellent good also, and likewise for Pasture, being only
strewed over it.

You may sometimes cast the water that drayneth from the Muck, upon the muck
heaps again, which will afford the more vegetative salt, and desend to the
former receptacle more fructiferously, upon which mass and heap of muck, I must
instance the necessary and most beneficial way of a covering or shadow, which I
will not insist upon, but leave the result thereof, to the consideration of
profounder Judgments, only thus much I desire to impart to the apprehensions
of others, that the salt muck heaps being exposed in Winter, to the constant
showers of rain, do lose much of their strength, the uppe part thereof being
hardly worth the carriage, and spreading upon the ground.

There are ordinary muck places that have very stanch bottoms, and will contain
the water without any farther charge, although the virtue and goodness of the
liquor in a short time make restitution to countervail all expenses.

And farther, concerning the steeping of Corn to manifest the benefit of muck
water. In the heat of Summer, when the Sun has exhaled a great part of the
colored water from their moats and Dunghill-pools, and that it grows
thickish and far, then reserve a good pitfull thereof well bottomed with Clay,
that will hold water, and in seed time steep your seed in it, but put the far
water to it by little and little, as it drinkerh it up, that at the last it may
be almost dry, sift a small quantity of Lime amongst it, that so it may grow
dry with the Lyme, then with this seed sow or set your most remote grounds from
your dunghill, and by this means you will save ten times as much labor in
carriage of the Dung.

Hereby excellent crops have been obtained beyond expectation, and not subject,
being new sown, to be devoured with Fowls.

I have sometimes occasioned the splitting of the Corn, as they use to do for
malt, and then have sown it, and it came up speedily, and got the
predomination of the weeds at first, and so kept the same, whereby it became of
better increase than ordinary, and it has been sufficiently experimented, that
when a dry season came upon sowing, that the Corn thus ordered took root far
better than other men's.

It has been an ancient Custom to steep. Beans in salt water, being usual in
Kent to steep the Barley when they sow late, that it might grow the faster, and
also to take away the soil from wild Oats, Cockle, etc. which will swim, also
much of the light Corn, which is necessary to be taken away.

If you put Pigeons dung into the water, and let it steep all night, it will be
as it were half a dunging.

Mr. Platt does highly commend the often macerating and drying of Corn, and it
is an excellent way, according to his observation to steep Corn.

If you cover the ground in Winter which you mean to break up at the Spring
with good store of Fearn, it is and has been a long time generally commended,
that it undoubtedly suppresseth the weeds for springing up in Winter, which
would much confound part of the heart of the Ground, and does also much
fructify the Ground for all man's of Roots and herbs, and very good to spread
about the Allies of Hop-yards, to keep the Ground warm, and to destroy the
weeds and grass that would preindice the fertility of the earth.

Some will burn to Ashes, Roots, and Stubble, the sword and swarth of the
Ground together with Fearn, straw, stubble, thistles, heath, sedge, rushes,
furs, bean stalks, which do very much advance barren Grounds, and make them
most fructiferous.

Wood mingled with Clods, and superfluous earth, and so burnt, and the Ashes
added to some sorts of Clay may be used with no less advantage than Marl.

And to manifest the benefit of steeping Wheat, etc. it may be performed with
less plowing, and without muck, being provided with a convenient Vessel of
Wood, mingle water, Dung, and Corn together, which must be stirred very well
several times, in and about Noon, the next day let the water pass away at the
top as much as may be, then stir the Dung and Corn very well together, and sow
it in a barren soil, and you shall have a very plentiful crop, equal, if not
transcending the Corn that has been fully Husbanded.

And further, to fortify the ways of steeping Corn to be most admirable, I
desire to remember unto you what Mr. Hartlih does illustrate, viz. put into
Quick and unslack'd Lyme as much water as suffices to make it swim four inches
above the Lyme.

And unto ten pound of the said water powered off, mix one pound of Aquavitae,
and in that liquor steep or soak wheat or other Corn four and twenty hours,
which being dried in the Sun or Air, steep it again in the same liquor, four
and twenty hours more; and so likewise the third time, afterward sow them at a
great diffance the one from the other, about a foot between each grain, so you
will find one grain will produce thirty, thirty six, forty two, fifty two ears,
and those very fruitful, with a stalk equalling the stature of a man in height.

Beat off your Wallnuts after they are full ripe, and in the green husks, or
without put them into good ordinary earth in a Barrel or a Basket until the
beginning of mid March following, get as much warm milk from the Cow as will
steep them four and twenty hours, then set them in ground well dug, and
natural for such fruit, with their little ends upwards, about three or four
inches deep, and they will according to experience exceedingly prosper, set
them near one foot asunder, and in a right line to weed them, at four years
growth transplant them, and use the Muck water to the roots, according to
discretion, which will exceedingly advantage them in their growth, and so
likewise all other plants and trees, Quicksets, etc. being well molded, which
will put them forward to such perfection, that you will comfortably admire
thereat, which has sufficiently been tried of late, these are excellent for
Oil, preserves, and conserves, choose the fairest Wallnuts you can get, when
you transplant, do the utmost to preserve the top roots, that being bruised
expect not the tree to thrive, but it will dye and fail at the best.

Chap. 16. A Discovery of the benefit might be made with part of 500 acres
formerly limited; and so accordingly by other parcels.
IMpr. Rape-seed 20 acres. 0400 l. Mustard Seed 20 acres. 0400 Liquorish 20
acres. 1600 Hops and Pumpions 20 acres. 1000 Saffron 20 acres. 0400 Flax 20
acres. 0400 Clover grass 20 acres. 1000 Roman Beans 20 acres. 1060 Tobacco 20
acres. 0600 Improvement of Ground for Orchards, woade. 20 acres. Madder 20
acres. 0400 French Beans 20 acres. 0400 Pumpions and Cabbages 40 acres. 0400
Tassels 2 acres. 0050 Osiers 5 acres. 0125 Clove July Flowers, and red Roses 5
acres. 0100 Milch Kine. 0100 Feeding Cattle. 0100 Rabbits in Hutches. 0500
Malt. Poultery and Fowl. 0020 Pigeons. 0020 Swine. 0020 Bees. 0100 Silk worms.
0500 A Decoy. 0040
Oats has been made 300 l. per acre, the times being still seasonable
therefore, Coriander seed need no Dung, and will grow very well here.

Anniseeds will grow very well in England, and so Commin seed, Fennel-seed, and
Canary seed.

Asparagus once sown will last twelve years.

These before specified, one with another, will afford twenty pound an acre
yearly.

When you have composed good store of muck with earth, as before, you may lay
of the best mould, some thickness upon the basest Ground, and thereon set
wheat, and you may have as good crops as you can desire, or ever was known in
England, the upper sourd of that Ground by means of the mould will be much
improved thereby, and the soil likewise underneath, and you may farther at
pleasure advantage the mould to the greatest height with your Muck water, and
by this means you may have all other commodities in abundance, proper for such
rich soil, or appertaining to Gardening, as Saffron, etc.

Observe. 1.
Graft Apples upon Cherry stocks, and the fruit will be exceeding red.

Observe. 2.
To make Roses by inoculation grow upon Cherry stocks.

Chap. 17. To make Vines grow upon Cherry stocks.
PLant them together, and when the Vines have put out long small branches, bore
a hole in the Cherry stock, that the branch may easily go through; take up the
upper bark, until it come to the Green, and let it grow there, when it is well
grown cut off the Vine below, stroke the Ground according to the ordinary
ways, (...) it well and you will have your (...).

Chap. 18. To make five sorts of Roses grow upon one Stock without inoculation.
WHen they begin to knot, bore with an Aul under the knot, and with a feather
put Green in one, and Yellow in another, Red in the third, and Blew in the
fourth, and close up all the holes handsomely.

Put the blood of Pikes before you put in the Grafts, dip the end of the Graft
in it, and you shall have red Apples; but they will be redder by far, if you
graft them upon Cherrie stocks.

Chap. 19. To make Roses smell strong, and unsavory.
PUt Garlic close to the Root, and so with Lillies, for they have all a
sympathy.

To make a red Rose become white, as it grows, kindle Brimstone, and smoke
the Rose with it at your pleasure, and it will become white presently.

Take the roots of diverse colors of Gillyflowers, bind them together, and set
them in the ground in good mould, and you shall have them various in one stock.

Obser. 1.
Put Rosemary in Juniper, and it will endure the Winter the better, and smell
more fragrantly.

Obser. 2.
To make Parsley spring up in few hours; steep the seed in sweet milk, and straw
your bed you mean to sow with unquenc'd Lime upon it three times, then sow your
feed, and strew once more of your Lime upon it, and upon that earth well
prepared, then water it well with temperat Muck water as follows, and you may
according to discretion enjoy your expectation.

Obser. 3.
Lay Beans and Pease in warm Oil, or in the best Muck water, let them lie nine
days, then dry them, and in the mean time to try them; you may be assured,
that what you set in any man's presence, they shall spring up in few hours, or
in a short time.

Obser. 4.
To make white Lillies become red, you must very neatly open the clifts of the
roots, and fill the same with any red color, then set them in fat dunged earth.

Obser. 5.
Bore holes in Bay Berries, and put into every hole the seed of Artichoaks,
wrap them in dung, and put them into the ground, whence come such sweet and
pleasant Artichoaks, that better were never eaten.

The like may be if you steep seeds three days in sweet smelling water, when
you set your Cabbage Plants wrap them at the roots round about with fresh Cows
muck, and when they are ripe they will smell most delicioufly like Musk, and
thrive exceedingly.

Obser. 6.
If Roses and Lillies be planted nigh together, or that they touch one another,
the flowers of them will smell the more curiously, and thrive the better.

Obser. 7.
Gather green Beans from the stalks, being ripe and fully grown, and ready to
eat, then immediately cut off the stalks, within a handful of the root; and if
the weather be dry, apply unto the roots some of your muck water and more
branches will shortly spring out, whereupon will spring forth new Beans, and
more plentiful, and rather better than before; whereby you may have near
threefold encreafe, and two several gatherings of Beans in one year: but by
any means take heed that the first gathering and cutting away of the stalks be
when the stalks be green, and it is verily believed that Pease will do the like.

Obser. 8.
Gather Roses when they be ripe, and presently cut away the new sprung tops,
and the uppermost branches of that year, and you shall have new fresh Roses
grow again out of the same ear about Michaelmas, and the more plentiful by
applying the Muck water seasonably to the roots.

Graft Roses in the bud upon sweet Bryer, and they will smell most deliciously.

The roots of Roses, with their slips and knots removed and set amongst Broom,
will bring forth yellow Roses.

Chap. 20. To preserve Chestnuts, and keep them sound.
LAy them together with Wallnuts, and they will drink up and consume the
humors, whereby they corrupt, and will not suffer them to be moldy. I remember
about thirty years since, I set at least half a peck of choice Filberts in a
Garden, on dry sandy borders, and finding not one of them to come up, at the
latter end of the year I caused the banks to be dug up again, where I found
all my Filberts fresh, full, and as pleasant to eat as at any time before,
whence you may learn, that burying them in fresh sand, you may preserve them
fresh for your cating all the year, especially being kept in the Ground in an
earthen pot, so may you use Wallnuts and small nuts, and the reason why the
Fillberts came not up, was for want of moisture, therefore the muck water
following will be of excellent use, etc.

Chap. 21
ELm tree chips set in Ditches, will in a short time become young Trees, and
make a very good fence, and the slips that grow from the roots of Elms being
taing off, will grow to great perfection in few years.

Wild Oats destroyed only by wheat fallow.

Chap. 22. To keep Clothes from Moaths.
Sees the Dregs, or mother, or foam of Oil, to the half, and therewith anoint
the bottom corners and feet of any Chest or Press, and the Clothes that you lay
therein will be freefrom any hurt with Moaths, but before you put the Clothes
in the Chest, or Press, it must be dry.

Obser. 1.
Provide store of Wallnut leaves, and hang them upon thread, one distant from
another, when they are thoroughly dry, strip them in the Chest, or amongst the
other Clothes, and beds, and within the folds of every Garment; lay Wormwood or
Lavender amongst the Clothes, and they will be safe from Moaths.

Obser. 2.
The branches of Bay-rres wrapped up, laid amongst Clothes and Books, will keep
them safe from Moaths and other corruption.

Obser. 3.
To keep Apparel, hangings, etc. from moaths, brush them several times in the
year, with a Brush made of Wormwood tops, and you may rub them with Wormwood,
especially when you discern the moaths to haunt amongst Hangings.

Chap. 23. To take out spots of Oil, or Grease.
TAke the bones of Sheeps trotters, and burn them almost to Ashes, then bruise
them to powder, and apply it to the spot, and lay all before the Sun when it
shines very hot, and when the powder appears to be very black, lay on fresh in
the place till it suck out the spots, which may suddenly be effected by the
water wherein Lavender is sod, does take away all spots in Cloth or Hats, if
the place be washed and rubbed therewith.

Chap. 24. To destroy Caterpillars.
BEsmear all the bottom of the Tree with Tar, then get store of Ants, put them
in a bag, and draw the same with a cord unto the Tree, and let it hang there,
so that it touch the body of the Tree, and the Ants being prevented to go from
the Tree by reason of the tar, will for want of food eat, and destroy the
Caterpillars, withour hurting any of the fruit or leaves.

No Pismires will touch the same Tree that shall have the lower part thereof
rubbed round about with Lupines stamped.

Chap. 25. To preserve your Trees and Plants from being barked with Cows or
Hares.
BEsmear the bodies of the Trees round about with Lyme, so far as the Cows can
possible reach, or you may have Vessels made of pan metal, more than two foot
in length, equally round about the compass of a Pottle pot and more, but
divided lengthwise in the middle, and so fet together about the Tree.

Set a Horse head upon a pole in the Garden, and it will banish all Flies that
destroy Cabbages and other tender Herbs.

If you desire to have a white spot, or any part of a Beast turned white, first
shave off the hairs, and make the place bare with the fume of Brimstone, and
white hairs will come thereon.

Observe. 1.
To make a black Star in a white Horses forehead, take an earthen pan, sees it
well with water, and bray it well in a Mortar, bind this to the Horses forehead
a day and a night, and in few days the white will fall off, and black hairs
will grow in place thereof.

There is likewise a water to be made that has many admirable virtues, which I
shall otherwise relate; lay it on a Horse, and it will eat out the hair, and
white hair will grow in the place of it.

Chap. 26. To take Fish.
SEt a Candle in a piece of a Cork as even as may be with the water, which will
stupifie and attract the fishes unto it, so that with a little hoop Net upon
the end of a Cane or Staff you may take them with much facility, or with a
shovelnet, etc. which must be in the night.

Where mudd and water is taken out of the Ponds, if the rain water do after
come into them, there will become multitude of Eels in a short time; and by
this course you many abundantly increase Carps.

In May dig up two Turfs of new grown Grass, when the dew is on them, then tie
the Grassy sides together, and place them in water on the side of a Pond, then
let them remain there unmoved, about ten days, and taking up the Turfs,
untying or loosing them you shall find great store of young Eels within the
Turfs, although there were not an Eel in the Pond before, and by tying the
turfs together again, and placing them in the same water, a greater increase
will come thereof.

Obser. 1.
To get the seed of all sorts of fish, take roots of the weeds that grow on the
water sides, wash the earth clean from them, bind them to a pole, and set them
in a pond, and they will spawn upon them: but observe within a fortnight that
they will be alive, and will go off, therefore when you find that they have
spawned, lift up the pole, with the weeds, and you may carry them twenty miles
to fill other ponds.

Obser. 2.
To bring all the Fish in a pond together, take Plattaria or Dioscorides, lay
either of them in Honey a day and a night, then let them dry in the Sun, bind
them to a string, and cast them into thepond, and all the fish will come to it.

Obser. 3.
Sorts of Fish, especially (...) (...) that have been brought our of Ireland,
by placing them sidewaies in a Basket of wet hay, to carry them in Vessels of
water, they will bruise and spoil themselves.

Chap. 27. To take Moles.
GEt a pot or glass, which may easily be had in London, that is narrow at the
top, and wide at the bottom, and place one of these deep in the ground in the
Fields where the moles are, the top of the pot being even with the ground, and
in the pot or glass put a stinking Crab, which they will eagerly smell after,
and so fall into the pot, and being imprisoned they will call for aid of their
fellows, and so be all taken.

And to bring them all to a place in this manner, fire Brimstone in the like
not so placed.

But first put a live Mole therein, and she will call all the Moles that are
near to come to her release, and so be taken; you may use only a live Mole in
the pot, without the Crab or Brimstone.

And you may destroy them by degrees after this manner with a good Spade, and
watching the places where they work, observing their constant times, strike
upon the Hill with the backside of your Spade, which will amaze them so, that
you may dig them up with your Spades, and find them in a manner dead, but they
will suddenly recover again, and so you may provide them for your pots. I have
seen some taken in that manner with ordinary Clunchions, and some only by
stamping your foot upon the place where they work, and to take them with traps
when they run back, as is commonly known, you may likewise get some light
stocks like arrows, and at the lower end with a white rag on the tops of them,
stick lightly in several places of their walk, and as they pass by, the sticks
will fall down, and then use your Spade as before.

At breeding time dig up there Hills where their young ones are in the places
where their nests are, being as big again as their ordinary Hills, which you
may soon discern, and by that means.

And so you may destroy all their young, and may take their old by watching a
short time for them, after you have made their nests bare.

A Gentleman caused some two penyworth of red Herrings to be bought, and cut
them into several parts, about six pieces of one Herring, and burning those
pieces severally on the Mole hills and other walks about the ground, there was
not a Mole ever after seen in that ground.

Put Garlic, leeks, or an Onion in the mouths of the Mole hills, or in their
entrings into the ground, and you shall see them come and leap out presently
amazed.

To take Foxes. Chap. 28.
TAke off the skin of a Kat, smear the body all over with honey, and roast her at
the fire, powder it with powder of young Frogs, train it with a rope about the
Foxes haunts to the place you desire to bring them, and they will follow the
sent, and may easily be taken.

I have known some that have used a red Herring, and trained it in that manner,
others have used tosted Cheese, and both with very good success.

Chap. 29. To take Fallow or red Dear, that range in other men's Grounds, or in
any other place.
TAke a mellow Apple, or a mellow Crab, and bait it with a hook, without a
beard, in compass of your singer, leaving it in their walk, and fixing it to a
pack thread, or whip cord, fasten the other end unto the root of the hedge, or
some short stake, if it be in the middle of a Field or Park, then strike a
hooked wooden pin into the ground, and the ablest Dear will soon smell the bait
a far off, and with very great greediness will swallow it up, to prevent their
fellows.

In this manner Gentlemen have taken diverse stags in a Forest; if they be
remote from the bait, you may go at a distance from them, and so cause them to
incline that way by degrees, when they have received the bait, they will stand
as quiet as Lambs, and you may do what you please with them.

Opium laid in a place where the Dear do haunt or resort, the best of them will
soon sent it, and swallow it, and instantly fall down as if they were dead, and
yet no harm at all, when you may take them before they recover, and act your
pleasure with them.

If they do not frame their course toward the bait, you may occasion them to
incline that way as before.

I know a Gentleman that took a brace of very fat Bucks in an Afternoon by the
former way.

Chap. 30. To destroy Rooks, Crows, Daws or Magpies.
PRovide little pieces of Flesh, where you may put the powder of Arsnick, or
sublimate, and you will soon be rid of them all, if you lay them in several
places where they resort, but you must be careful your Swine eat none of the
Crows or Flesh, lest they be likewise poisoned, therefore they must be all
either buried or burned.

Observe. 1.
Lay a dead Dog, or any Piece of Carriou in a field where they resort, place
little pieces of Flesh something near, so poisoned as before, and thereby you
may make a sudden dispatch of them all, but keep your Dogs and Swine from that
Field, till you have effected your desire.

Observe. 2.
You may likewise break an Egg into half, and divide the yolk and the white,
and mingle them with a little of the stuff, as before, and placing them in a
Garden, or any field where these do usually prejudice you, and they will be
destroyed suddenly in the place.

Observe. 3.
Or get the Liver of a Beast and cut it in pieces, and put into them the powder
of Nux vomica, which being laid in open places, the vermin that eat thereof,
cannot fly away, and then you may take them easily.

Chap. 31.
TO make Pigeons stay and not stray abroad from their Houses, smear their
holes with Arsafetida, mingled with butter.

Observe. 1.
To cause them to resort and continue at your Pidgeon-Houses, kill a fat Dog,
fley him, and fill his belly full of Cummin-seeds, and roast him dry, then wash
the Pidgeon holes with water, wherein Cummin seed is sodden: but first cleanse
the holes from all filthiness, then lay the roasted Dog upon a broad stone in
the Dove-House, and hang a great Glass in the top of the Lover, and three or
four looking Glasses in the Dove-House, by some of the holes.

Observe. 2.
Also take good Clay, and mingle with the Clay Bay Salt and Cummin-seed, and
make a great lump thereof like unto a Sugar loaf, then bake it hard, and set it
by the dead Dog, and you may have Pigeons enough.

FINIS.
Books printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-Lane.
THe Souls Conflict, being eight Sermons, six whereof were preached in Oxford,
and attested by the late Reverend Doctor Hewyt. Two Essays of Love and Marriage.
The Queens Exchange, a Comedy, by R. Brom. The Life and Trial of James Nayler.
The Souls Turn-key, being a Conference betwixt Mr. Hanum and Mr. Tuke Moderator
of W. Coll. in London. Poems, Epigrams, Satyrs, on several persons, and
occasions, by No Body must know whom, to be had Every Body knows where, and for
Any Body knows what. Doctor Brown of Sepulchral urnes, and his Garden of Cyrus.
Five new Plays by Richard Brom, never before published. Shepherds Duty of
Constables in 8. St. Benaventures Soliloquies, containing Meditations and
Prayers, in 24.
Books now in the Press, which will shortly be extant.
THe Alliance of Holy Offices, by Hamon L' Estrange, Esquire A Learned and long
desired Commentary on the whole Epistle to the Philipians, by Nath. Tucker,
late Preacher of the Gospel at Portsmouth.
Speeds Husbandry.

Horum fabulosorum hominum hoc minus ferenda est impietas, quod Prophetarum
Divinorum and Evangelistarum (...) scripta ad stabiliendas Vanitaets suas
detorquent; and ea Ezekieli, Danieli, and Apocalypseos authori affingunt, quae
Sanctissimis Viris ne in mentum quidem venerunt unquam. Scultetus in 2 Timothy 3.1.

Aureum seculum in Caelis, ferreum in terris expectandum. Idem.


