AN ANSWER To one part of The Lord Protector's SPEECH: OR, A VINDICATION OF THE
Fifth Monarchy-men, In reference to an Accusation of evil charged upon them in
his Speech to the Parliament in the Painted Chamber, the 4 of September, 1654.

Published by John Spittlehouse, To the end all men may see the strong
endeavors that have been used, to obstruct the Kingly interest of Jehovah the
Lord Christ in the world, by blowing the bellows of a Persecution against those
that desire he should reign over all the Nations of the earth, by his holy,
just, and perfect Laws and Ordinances recorded in the sacred Scriptures to that
very end and purpose.

Luke 19. 27. But those mine enemies that would not that I should reign over
them, bring them hither, and slay them before me. Dan. 6. 5. Then said these
men, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find it
against him concerning the law of his God. Printed at London, for Livewel
Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-head-alley. 1654.

The Epistle to the Reader.
INasmuch as Satan, knowing his time is but short, Rev. 12. 12. does now more
then ever transform himself into an Angel of light, to the end he may the more
cunningly and smoothly de^^^e the very elect, if it were possible, Matthew. 24.
24. or otherwise stir up his Instruments to persecute the Manchilde, (in his
Members) who is now about to rule all nations with a rod of iron, Rev. 12. 5.
It therefore nearly concerns the people of God to stand upon their guard, by
contending earnestly for the faith, in hearing testimony to those Prophecies
that tend to the exaltation of the Lord Jesus unto his Kingly office and
interest in the world in these last days. Upon which very account, I have, in
the strength of JEHOVAH, given this following Answer to his Charge of Evil
against the Fifth Monarchy-men. Knowing, that the righteous, in such cases,
ought to be as bold as lions, and not to fear such persons whose power is
permissive, Ioh. 19. 10, 11. and limited, Matthew. 10. 28. as is the power of
Satan, Job 1. 12. and 2. 6. As also, from the encouragement of the Spirit of
God communicated unto us by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, 29. where he
says, God has chosen the FOOLISH things of this world, to confound the WISE;
and God has chosen the WEAK things of this world to confound the MIGHTY; and
the BASE things of this world, and things which are DESPISED, has God CHOSEN;
yea, things which ARE NOT, to bring to naught things WHICH ARE; that no flesh
might glory in his presence. Even so. Amen.

An Answer to part of the L. Protectors Speech.
WE may reckon among those spiritual evils, an EVIL that has more refinedness
in it, more color for it, and has deceived more people of integrity then the
rest have done. For few have been catched with the former mistakes, but such as
have apostatized from their holy profession; such as being corrupt in their
consciences, have been forsaken by God, and left to such noy some Opinions.
But, I say, there are others more refined; many honest people, whose hearts are
sincere, many of them belonging to God: and this is the MISTAKEN NOTION of the
FIFTH MONARCHY.

Levellers, whose principle (he says) is, To make the Tenant of as liberal a
fortune as the Landlord; (...) conceive it meet to speak something thereunto by
way of P(...) And albeit we abominate any wicked action under the no(...) of
Leveling, etc. yet we could tell the Accuser, that there is a Leveling
principle of an higher nature, which it seems he had forgot, viz. such a
leveling as has not only in the notion, but even in action reduced the Tenant
into the condition of the Landlord, and the Landlord into the condition of the
Tenant; the Servant into the condition of the Master, and the Master into the
condition of the Servant: which will clearly appear, by comparing the ranks,
estates, and conditions of diverse at the present, with what they were before
the Wars; and that not in posse, but in esse, visible to all men.

2. As to his charge of disrespect to the Authority of the Nation, as to the
Magistrate, to the ranks and orders of men, whereby England has been known for
hundreds of years; as, A Nobleman, a Gentleman, a Yeoman, (that being a good
interest of the Nation, and a great one:) surely the old Proverb is here
verified, viz. The Priest has forgot that ever he was Clerk: for, was not the
lineal race of Kingship as good and great an interest as any of the other? yea,
far greater: and yet who has been more instrumental to raze out the Kingly
line of the Stewarts in this Nation, root and branch* then himself? as also, to
plant himself in their stead. But this must not be counted any disrespect to
Magistracy; no, the poor Levelers, that have brought a Noble to nine-pence, in
stead of multiplying Nine-pence to a Crown, (as some have done) they must now
bear the blame for all suchlike actions. Albeit there are liars, if he himself
have not said, that the nation would never be at quiet whilst there was a name
of a Lord in the land.

3. Whereas he charge others with a spirit visibly acting those things
foretold by Peter, Jude, and the Apostle Paul to Timothy: sure I am, that
multitudes of godly people in this Nation are verily persuaded that he charge
others with many things which might as properly be fixed to --: And therefore
if such as put the day of Christ far from them, or such as having escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, and are now
again entangled in them, and overcome; or such as are lovers of themselves, or
covetous* or proud, or boasters, or blasphemers, or covenant-breakers, or false
accusers, or fierce, or despisers of those that are good, or traitors, or
heady, or high-minded, or lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, or
speakers of lies in hypocrisy, or turners with the d(...) vomit, or with the
sow that was washed to the wall^wing(...) the mire be the persons he intends
his charge against, we shall desire some would begin to look at home; for the
Apostle Paul does judge persons worthy of reproof, who think themselves to be
guides of the blind, and a light to them that sit in darkness, an instructor
of the foolish, a teacher of babes, etc. if such shall teach or reprove others,
and withal teach not themselves; if they shall preach, A man should not steal,
and yet they to steal themselves, etc. as the Saying is, Thou may not, but I
may.

4. Whereas he charge other persons with laying the ax to the root of the
Ministry, as Antichristian and Babylonish; I desire to know how much short he
himself would have proved of such a Principle, had they not learned to cry up
Oliver in stead of Charles. The time was Vide p. 23 of his speech July 4. 1653.
, when he said, It was not in his heart to speak for a Ministry And what are
the present Clergy of this nation other?
deriving it self through the Papacy, and pretending to that which is so much
insisted upon as succession.

It was also thought, at that time, a fit Querie by him to the old Parliament,
Whether the next Parliament they intended, were Page 15. of that Speech.
not like to consist of all Presbyters? or whether those qualifications (then
making by them) would hinder them or Note Presbyters and neuters joined
together.
Neuters? etc. they having deserted this cause and interest upon the kings
account, and upon that closure with them and the neighbour-nation. And
thereupon professed, that they had as good have delivered up their Cause into
the hands of any, as into the hands of interested and It seems they are not so
now.
biased men: for it is one thing to live friendly, and brotherly to bear with,
and love a person of another judgment in Religion; another thing to have any
so far set in the saddle upon that account, as that it should be in them to
have all the rest of their brethren at I think they have little le^ now.
mercy. But this by the way.

I shall now apply my self wholly to the peculiar Charge against the Fifth
Monarchy-men. In which I shall take notice, 1. What they are not. 2. What they
are. 3. Their notion.

1. He says, They are not such as have been catched with the former mistakes,
viz. those before mentioned by him in his Speech.

2. As to what they are, he also says, 1. that they are people of integrity.
2. Such as have not apostatized from their holy profession. 3. Not such as have
been corrupt in their consciences, having been forsaken by God, (...) to
noisome Opinions. 4. Honest people. 5. Such whose (...)e sincere. 6. Such as
belong unto God. And is there any (...)ese particulars, but what he himself
might very well entertain, without any disparagement to his Greatness? Again,
being such persons, by his own confession, they may the more justly reprove
him, or any other that walk contrary hereunto, and that according to the
Apostles forementioned instance.

3. Whereas he terms their principle the MISTAKEN NOTION of the FIFTH
MONARCHY; I shall speak thereunto, when I come to his Reasons for so saying.

A thing pretending to more spirituality then any thing else: a notion I hope
we all HONOR, WAIT, and HOPE for. That Jesus Christ will have a time to set up
his reign in our hearts, by subduing those corruptions and lusts, and evils
that are there, which reign now more in the world, then I hope in due time they
shall do. And when more fullness of the Spirit is poured forth, to subdue
iniquity, and bring in everlasting righteousness, then will the approach of
that glory be.



1. That our notion pretends to more spirituality then any other. And in this
particular, we think he is not very much mistaken; witness our Declaration,
(which Sa^^. Richardson, one of the Elima^'s Act. 13. 8.
of this Commonwealth, has scandalized as a Libel, notwithstanding those men's
names prefixed to it, with thousands that approve thereof) where we demonstrate
to all the world our desires that God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ would
cast down all those earthly, carnal, cruel, and political combinations of men
of all sorts that would not have him to reign over us but set up themselves and
their corrupt interests in the room of that scepter of righteousness which he
has given into the hands of his dear Son: and that he would give us
Magistrates as at the first, and Rulers as at the beginning, viz. Ministers of
the Unction and Magistrates of the Unction; such as fear God, and hate
covetousness. And we hope there is no evil in all or any of these requests.

2. He says it is such a notion as he himself both honoreth, waits, and
hops for, (viz. the subduing of corruptions, and lusts, and iniquity and to
bring in everlasting righteousness. And what is it more that we desire? If
therefore there be evil in such desires, he has hereby declared himself as
guilty thereof as we.

The carnal divisions and cont^ntions among Christians so common, are not the
symptoms of that kingdom.

signs of the approach of that kingdom or Monarchy of our Lord Jesus upon
earth, then why was it that we levied war against our brethren(...) Scotland,
(so called) and that upon the account of the kingly (...) of Jesus Christ upon
earth, as in the Declaration of the Army to Scotland, p. 36* 37, 38, 39. where
they affirm they were stirred up by the Lord to assist the Parliament against
the King for this end, to bring about the destruction of Antichrist, and the
deliverance of his What were the Scots then in the Armies esteem?
true Church and People. And that upon this simple account it was they engaged
in the wars of the three nations against all opposers of this work of Jesus
Christ; having these things singly in their eye, viz. the destruction of
Antichrist, and the advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and deliverance
and reformation of his Church, and the establishment of CHRIST'S ORDINANCES
ACCORDING TO HIS WORD etc. All which they declare, with the loss of many
precious Saints, p. 38. as also, that they engaged against the late king and
HIS MONARCHY, as As well against his Monarchy (...) himself.
one of the ten horns of the Beast, guilty of the blood of the Saints; which
act they say they are confident God will own against all kingdoms and nations
that will oppose them, and that will not suffer Jesus Christ to be king: as
also, that the Lord had made them instrumental to vex all in his sore
displeasure that take counsel against Christ, whom the Lord has anointed and
decreed king: and that they were not merely the servants of men: and that they
had not only PROCLAIMED Jesus Christ king of Saints to be OUR KING, but that
they would submit to him (alone) upon his OWN TERMS, and admit him (only) to
the exercise of his ROYAL AVTHORITY. As also, in p. 40. where they beseech the
Scots to LOOK ABOUT THEM, for that our Lord Jesus was coming.

2. If this kingdom of Jesus Christ they so cried up and proclaimed, did only
extend to a spiritual notion of Government WITHIN US; what necessity was there
for him and the Army to have been so instrumental as they have, to pluck up
Kingly Government by the roots in this Commonwealth, as also against all
arbitrary or absolute power in any single person whatsoever, as tyrannical, and
vassalizing the Saints and people of God in this Commonwealth: and that they
would not permit the same in any they could most confide in, or could have most
personal assurance of? Could not Jesus Christ, I say, have reigned WITHIN US,
in the hearts of his people in this Commonwealth, if the late King had yet kept
his Crown and Head upon his shoulders? Is it possible that any mortal man
should hinder such a reign? And if not, why was Caesar destroyed without, to
let in Christ within? Could his persecuting the people of God have done it?
Surely no: experience has taught, that the blood of the Martyrs has been the
seed or increase of the Church. And doubtless the Scots knew as well as himself
and the Army. That there was no king but Jesus, as to A SPIRITVAL ACCOUNT or
GOVERNMENT WITHIN US; and therefore doubtless did not contest against such a
Government. Nay, is it not clear from their forementioned exceptions, that
their Quarrel (or rather, the Quarrel of the Lord Jesus, as they at least
pretended) was for the subversion of whatsoever was Antichristian in point of
External Ordinances, and for the establishment of the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ ACCORDING TO HIS WORD?

3. Had not himself and the Army been really convinced that MONARCHY IT SELF
(as it has reference to Dan. 2. 34* 35 44. and 7. 18, 22, 26, 27.) was at its
period, what ground had they to fight against MONARCHY IT SELF, or to revenge
the BLOOD OF THE SAINTS upon the KINGS OF THE EARTH, either from Scripture, or
primitive practio^ of Saints? whose usual custom was, in such cases, aut
fugere, aut pati, to flee or suffer; and not to oppose wicked Princes upon such
an account; knowing that the Lord had permitted them for a time to exercise
such wickedness, Revel. 17. 21, 13. But contrariwise, that they were convinced
of the truth thereof, (or at least, played the part of the greatest hypocrites
that ever were upon the face of the earth) witnessing their stiling themselves
The Army of the Lamb, as also their aforesaid expressions: witness also their
notorious Appeal at Dunbar, where they owned no king but Jesus, and the Scots a
Personal interest of man: as also, the glorious decision of that controversy
on the No king but Jesus his side, and that to the admiration of all men:
witness also his own expression in his Speech made to the (short-lived)
Parliament, July 4. 1653. p. 24, 25. where he says, We know who they are that
shall war with the Lamb against his enemies; they shall be a people called
chosen, and faithful, and has in the Military way, etc. I believe you know it:
he has acted with them, and for them, etc. Indeed I think there is something
at the door I wish we could once see it within-door.
, we are at the threshold: And therefore it becomes us to lift up our heads,
and to encourage our selves in the Lord, etc. And we have some of us thought it
our duty to endeavor this way, not vainly looking on that prophecy of Daniel,
Chap. 1. 44. and that Scripture may be fulfilled now to us.

4. But to stoop a little to his sense of the mistaken notion, as he is now
pleased to term it, (by way of derision, now he has compassed his own ends by
it.) Did this Notion lead him forth to destroy kings for their lusts and
corruptions, and the same lusts and corruptions yet ^eigning in the world, (and
particularly in --?) Certainly we are little bettered by the expense of so much
blood and treasure that has been shed and spent since the Wars began. The Lord
be merciful to such persons, and give them grace to repent, if it be his will;
or otherwise as shall most conduce for his glory, and the good of his people.

But for men to entitle themselves, upon this principle, that they are the
only men to rule Kingdoms, govern Nations, and give Laws to people, to
determine of property and liberty, and every thing else, upon such a pretense
as this; truly they had need to give clear manifestations of Gods presence
with them, before wise men will receive or submit to their conclusions.

etc. were as little thought upon to be so exercised as we. Besides, this
charge against us, is at the very best erroneous, (we might say --) For our
principle does not lead us forth to entitle our selves to such Offices; it
being the Word of God that inrights us thereunto; a donation from God himself,
and not from a few favorites* for carnal ends and interests. And that we are
so, vide one of his Doctors opinions, viz. Mr. Tho. Goodwin, in his Sermon
preached in Crooked-la^e London, upon Rev. 5. 9, 10. touching the very subject
we contest for, viz. The Fifth Monarchy: where (in p. 4.) treating upon verse.
10. Thou have made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall REIGN ON
EARTH; he says, That the lowest interpretation that can be given (of these
words) must be this: We shall have a hand IN GVIDING THE AFFAIRS OF THE EARTH.
Again, p. 15. I say, There is an eminent kingdom for the Saints to have on the
EARTH. Thus much, I say, me thinks should be evident to every man's
understanding. P. 18. So that the plain Doctrine or Observation is but this:
That there is in the end a kingdom to come here for the Saints: That after all
the kingdoms of the world have had their time and their date, by which the
Saints have been all along oppressed and injured, there is, even ON EARTH, a
kingdom to be given unto them; When all Nations shall be converted unto God,
and the Saints in them to be the prevailing party in the world. The Scripture
seems to run much this way. P. 26. And there is all the reason in the world for
it, besides what I have mentioned out of the Scripture: For, in that the Saints
have been oppressed here in this world, it is a righteous thing with God to give
that generation rest and that they should have their turn after all kingdoms
are dissolved: That what Adam lost, should be restored to them again, etc. And
that promise, if you look in Is^, 65. I am sure you will find to be made to
MEN ON EARTH; for he says plainly, They shall build HOUSES, and inhabit them;
and they shall plant vineyards* and eat the fruit of them etc. And this as an
answer to all the prayers that have been put up; as that, Thy will be done on
earth, as it is in heaven. The whole Sermon will far more abundantly satisfy
in this particular, if our adversaries please to peruse it.

And therefore by the same rule that they pretended to be drawn forth to fight
for this MONARCHY OF JESUS CHRIST, we are drawn forth to promote those LAWS and
ORDINANCES which are peculiar thereunto, and which they fought for, and from
which they have now shamefully apostatized; putting that day now afar off, (as
in 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4 5 etc.) which they then declared was even at the door, as
aforesaid; as also, by slighting and contemning those holy, just, and perfect
Laws, which they then acknowledged to be from heaven, as also a rule for all
Rulers; yea such, as that whosoever was not EVER UNDER THEM, owned not his
OBEDIENCE to God. Vide Abridgm. Remonstr. Albans, p. 6, 8. Besides, we have as
plain texts of Scripture for the one, as they could have for the other: yea,
for Ruling and Governing: Vide Dan. 7. 22, 26, 26. Romans 8. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 6. 2.

2. Whereas he taxes us with (an ambitious fancy of) giving Laws to the
world, we conceive it no better then the former. For the Laws are recorded
already by the alone lawmakers and giver, (Jam. 4. 12.) that we desire may be
put in practice, viz. the Laws, Statutes, Judgments, and Ordinances, which our
Lord and Master Jesus Christ has constituted and appointed to govern his
subjects by; and that as well in relation to the outward as inward man. Which
if he HIMSELF will do, (as we once hoped he would have done) we shall have
exceeding great cause to bless God for it, and shall acquiesce in our present
conditions: it being not for our own, but the interest of Jehovah the Lord
Christ, whom we alone desire may be exalted: but otherwise we shall yet say,
and testify, that it is Babylonish, and Antichristian, for any Magistrate, and
especially for such of them as profess Christianity, to make or establish any
other Laws for the Government of Christians, then those that are contained in
the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, whether for State or
Church; they being there recorded for no other end or purpose that we know of.

Besides, what greater dishonor can Magistrates do to Jehovah the Lord Christ
(whom they at least pretend to be their Creator, God, King, Lord, Savior, and
Lawgiver) than to slight and reject his holy, just, and perfect Laws, etc. And
to erect instead thereof (the Statutes of Omri) the L^ws of Heathens,
Antichristians, or their own vain and foolish Imaginations, Traditions, and
inventions? The Lord set it home upon his heart seriously to consider hereof;
for seeing the Lord would not permit his then only peculiar people (who
doubtless had as much REASON or LIGHT OF NATURE as we have) neither to fancy
to themselves Laws either in things Civil or spiritual, or to extract
themselves Laws from any other people then extant; Why should he, or any other
persons whatsoever dare to attempt the making of Laws, whether Civil or
Spiritual? Besides, in so doing, is it not as much as to say in plain terms,
that our Predecessors, and they are wiser than God? And what is that less then
Blasphemy?

Again, what president have we in holy Writ, that any of the people of God
published any command of God in their own name? does not Moses present the
Lawmakers himself to give forth his own Law? Exodus 20. 1. Jehovah spoke these
words saying, etc. And was it not the usual expression of the Prophets to say,
Thus says the Lord? Yea does not Jesus Christ himself say, I speak not of my
self? As also the Apostle Paul? 1 Cor. 11. 23. That which I received of the
Lord deliver I unto you. And does he not will Christians to be followers of him
in such actions?

Again, has not he himself sworn, That the Christian Religion contained in the
Scriptures, shall be held forth, and recommended, as the public profession of
these Nations, vide Government, Art. 25. And what is that Religion other than
to be conformable to the Laws and Ordinances of Jehovah the Lord Christ, as is
clearly evident from these following Scriptures, viz. Deuteronomy. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7 8, 9. and 10, 12 13. Matthew. 22. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. Luke 10. 25, 26,
27, 28. Jam. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 John 2. 3. and 3. 22, 23, 24. and 5. 2, 3. And
is he not then perjured, if he see it not performed?

Besides, is it not the undoubted badge of the Man of sin, and Son of
perdition, to give forth his own Edicts, in his own name; and therefore is said
to oppose and exalt himself above all that is called God, or worshipped, so
that he ^its in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, 2 These. 2.
4. And if so, what are they other than his Puples that imitate him, pretending
to be what they are not, as too many do in these days of Apostasy?

3 Whereas he says, we desire to determine of Liberty and Property, and every
thing else; we answer, That this charge is like the rest; for we desire to
determine no otherwise of any thing, than the alone Lawgiver has commanded to
be done; and that we hope, as we are his professed sons and servants, we may be
bold to do in the presence of God, Angels, and ^en; for by so doing, we shall
act as servants, not as Lords, as some do, both in Civils and spirituals.

4 As to the reception of those holy, just, and perfect Laws and Ordinances of
Jehovah the Lord Christ, we are clearly of his opinion, viz. That the wise men,
and self-interested men of this Commonwealth, will be very a^erse thereunto,
Knowing, that the natural man receives not the things of God, because they are
foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, etc. 1 Cor. 2. 14.

And therefore, we shall not much wonder if the Heathen rage, and the people
imagine vain things, if the Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers take
counsel together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us, KNOWING, that ^e
that sits in heaven laugheth, and that the Lord has them in derision, that
he will speak to them in his WRATH, and vex them in his sore displeasure, that
he will break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters
vessel; And in the close, will in despite of them, set his King upon his holy
hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.

Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth etc.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is
kindled, yea but a little, then let such as presumptu^usly oppose him, look to
themselves.

Speech. Beside certainly, though many of these men have good meanings, as I
hope in my soul they have, yet it will be the wisdom of all knowing and
experienced Christians, to do as Jude says (when he had reckoned up those
horrible This is much like Hild brands etc infernal firebrand p. 9. where they
also innumerate us among Blasphemers, for desiring to promote the pure and
simple Laws and Ordinances of God, and Christ, without the mixture of men's
inventions in State and Church.
things done upon pretenses, and happily by some upon mistakes) Of some, says
he, have compassion, making a difference, others save with fear. I fear they
will give opportunity too often for this exercise, and I hope the same will be
for their good.

Respon. Reader, behold thou have here the same person, that has confessed the
FIFTH MONARCHY MEN to be people of Note the Characters given us by out A^c^s^r.
integrity. (2) Such as have not been catched with his forementioned mistakes.
(3) Such as have not Apostatized from their holy Profession. (4) Such as are
not corrupt in their consciences. (5) Such as are not forsaken by God. (6) Such
as are not left to noisome Opinions. (7) Such as are more refined than others.
(8) Such as are honest people. (9) Such as he conceives in his very soul have
good meanings. (10) Such whose Notion himself honors, waits, and hops
for (at least in pretense) (11) Such whose hearts are sincere. (12) Such as
belong unto God. Now numbering them among the horrible transgressors of the
times, and such as he can freely blow the Bellows of a persecution against, and
that with a pretended zeal for Gods glory.

Well, blessed be the Lord, for we are hereby the more assured that we are the
servants of our professed Lord and Master, who was d^^lt with in the very same
manner, Isa. 53. 12. And the servant is not greater than his Lord, Joh. 15. 20.
And therefore we may well expect to be so used; but yet notwithstanding we
shall desire some particular instances of those Horrible Transgressions, we are
thus cunningly involved into (this is not with Moses and Paul to dye for Gods
people.)

Speech. If men do but pretend for Justice and Righteousness, and be of
peaceable spirits, and will manifest this, let them be the subject of the
Magistrates encouragement. And if the Magistrate by punishing visible
miscarriages, save them by the Discipline (God has ordained for that end) I
hope it will evidence love, and no hatred, to punish where there is cause.

Respon. Indeed some have sufficiently pretended that which we now clearly see
they never intended; and if his endeavor be to devolve us into that
Predicament, he is at a loss; for we are for realities, and not specious
pretenses, to be not only saying, but doing the will of our Master. It is the
Hypocrite that says, and does not. The Scribes and Pharisees of these times,
who bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not touch them with one of their fingers,
Matthew. 23. 2, 3, 4. The Accuser would therefore do well to compare this his
expression with his former actions, and then see whether of us two deserve the
-- Has his pretense for Justice and Righteousness been manifested by a
peaceable spirit? has it not led him through the blood of Kings, and
Potentates, to lay the house of Peers aside, and to winnow and sift the
Representative of the people of England, and to bring them to an handful? vid.
Speech 14. July, etc.

Yea the same Justice and Righteousness that we now desire may be exalted; And
is that worthy of justification in him, and condemnation in us? And if the
Magistrates will faithfully punish visible miscarriages, we know who would not
golong unpunished, and that to some purpose, and yet but mete to them in the
same measure that they would have measured to the guiltless, which we take to
be, a very righteous judgment, Matthew. 7. 2. which if the Magistrate will do,
we hope it will evidence love, and not hatred, to punish where there is cause,
let the person be never so great; for God hates all workers of iniquity, Psalm.
5. 5. And accepts not the person of Princes, nor regards the rich more than
the poor, Job 34. 19. And Reformation had better begin at the Majorities than
the Minorities, And that by his own confession. vid. Ibid. Remon. Albans page
10.

Speech. Indeed this is that which does most declare the danger of that spirit,
for if these were but Notions, I mean the instances I have given you both of
Civil considerations and Spiritual; If, I say, they were but Notions, they were
to be let alone; Notions will hurt none but them that have them.

Respond. Reader, surely we shall now shortly know the meaning of this hudled
Discourse. I fear there is something of self lies at the bottom, if we could
once come to it, but at present I clearly perceive he is content we should with
David, keep our mouths with a bridle, whilst the wicked are before us, that we
may be dumb with silence, and to hold our tongues even from good words, though
it be pain and grief unto us, Psalm. 39. 1, 2. Thus far as it relates to our
hurt, he is well pleased with, thus far he is content we should be the subject
of the Magistrates encouragement, but what follows?

Speech. But when they come to such a practice.

Respon. What practice?

Speech. As to tell US.

Respond. I told you we should find something of self in the bottom; he was
content that we should imitate David as aforesaid, but if we once come to act
him in the third verse of that Psalm, viz. That our hearts begin once to wax
hot within us, whilst we are musing of the Apostate actions of the Army in
these times. And that the fire of zeal to Gods glory, and the Nations good be
kindled so in us, as that we are constrained to speak with our tongue, (What,
to tell US.) This amounts to a Civil Transgression to some purpose, and
worthy to be punished as a visible miscarriage. But what is it that we are so
bold to tell?

Speech. That Liberty and Property, are not the badges of the Kingdom of
Christ.

Respond. This we say is scandalous; for in as much as the Royal Law* of
Jehovah does neither destroy Liberty nor Property; and that being the Law we
stand for, it must therefore unavoidably follow, that we have no such
principle, and consequently that we have used no such expressions. Nay, we are
so far from saying so, as that we have declared our detestation thereof to all
the world. It is likely indeed we might say, that proud, tyrannical,
oppressing, and persecuting Magistrates, neither Lordly, covetou^, or Apostate
Priests, neither griping, squeazing, or devouring Lawyers, are badges of that
Kingdom. And so indeed we might come to touch the freehold of some.

Speech. To tell U S, That instead of regulating Laws, Laws are to be
abrogated, indeed subverted.

Respon. Our blessed Savior tells the Scribes and Pharisees (Hypocrites)
Matthew. 15. 3, 4, 6, 9. that they had transgressed the Royal Law of God, and
made it of none effect by their Traditions.

And hence it was the Apostle Paul querieth, What communion light could have
with darkness, or what concord Christ could have with Belial, And what part he
that believes, could have with an Infidel, or what agreement the Temple of God
could have with Idols, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, etc.

And hence it was we rejected the PRELATICAL HIERARCHY, because it had so near
an Affinity, yea Consanguinity, with the PAPACY. And therefore in as much as
PRESBYTERY is as near of kin to Prelacy, as Prelacy to Popery, it ought as well
to be abrogated root and branch as PRELACY, being both DAUGHTERS to that MOTHER
OF HARLOTS, Rev. 17. 5. to that MYSTERY OF INIQUITY, and ABOMINATION OF THE
EARTH; Yea doubtless, it may confidently be affirmed, that what Church soever
does yet retain the CONSTITUTION of the Church of Rome, since its APOSTASY,
albeit never so much refined in other particulars (as relinquishing its
Ordination, etc. which the Presbyterians, etc. have not done) is still to be
esteemed as Babylonish and Antichristian.

And the like may also be said in point of Regulating the Civil Laws of
Commonwealths derived from the Assirian or BABYLONISH MONARCHY erected by
Nimrod, Genesis 10. 9, 10. which though the Magistrate should refine never so
much, yet it is but a REFINING OF BABEL: for whilst there is any thing in them
that may be termed HVMANE, either in Civil or Ecclesiastical Laws, that may be
said to be added or detracted from the Law of God comprised in the Old and New
Testament, they by so doing bring themselves under the Curse of God, Deuteronomy. 22.
26. Gal. 3. 10.

Therefore we may safely assert, that by how much the present Magistrates of
this Commonwealth do judge themselves to be the members of the body of Christ,
or that the God of Heaven and Earth is their God, or expect to have God dwell
in them, and walk in them, or they to be his people, they ought to come wholly
out of the BABYLONISH and ANTICHRISTIAN ESTATE, whether in reference to CIVIL,
or SPIRITVAL GOVERNMENT, yea to be such SEPARATISTS from them, as not to touch
them in the least, but to pluck them up ROOT and BRANCH; And so wholly conform
themselves to the word of God for their SOLE RVLE and direction therein, which
if they will yet submit unto, the Ap^stle averreth that the Lord Christ has
promised to receive them into his ^ingdom^, and to be a Father unto them, and
that they shall be his children, 2 Cor. 6. 27, 28.

But that this will not easily be assented unto by the present Powers of the
world, is clearly made out unto us by another of his own created Whose
expressions will need no Interpreter.
Doctors, viz. Mr. John Owen, in his Sermon upon Heb. 12. 27. page 25. where he
says, That, that which does, and shall stick upon Potentates to their ruin,
is not so much their own, or any other interest, as the Dregs of the Papal
Antichristian interests thrust into their Oaths and Obligations, for I shall
only propound some Queries.
no other end in the world, BUT TO KEEP THE LORD JESUS OVT OF HIS THRONE,

And hereupon it was (says he in his Sermon upon Ezekiel. 17, 24 page 12.) that
the late King had learned a saying from his Predecessors, No Bishop, no King,
supposing his MAIN INTEREST to lie in holding up PRELACY, a mere INCROACACHMENT
upon the INHERITANCE OF CHRIST, Christ coming to take his OWN, shakes the other
in pieces.

Again (says he) those who would have been our Oppressors Were not those the
Presbyterian Priests? etc.
in Scotland, but that God has crushed the Cockatrice in the shell, and filled
the pit with their dead bodies, which they had dug for us, they also had
prepared a PROCRVSTES BED, a heavy yoke, a Beast that had it grown to
perfection, would have had HORNS and HOOFS, And in maintaining this, they think
their GREAT INTEREST TO LIE. And in holding this fast, are they, after all
their Associations, broken in pieces.

Again, in page 21. of that Sermon, What was the corrupted design of many in
Scotland, that they might set up a SON of Was it corrupt in them then, and not
in your selves now.
TABEAL in England, and THEMSELVES to be GREAT UNDER HIM, and that they and
their Partakers, might IMPOSE on the residue of the Nations, especially in the
things of God? Their great desire that things should be thus, corrupts their
minds, to think that it ought to be so. Hence AMBITION TO RVLE, and to have all
under their power even in conscience, is quickly mistaken for zeal for the
Kingdom of Christ, inthroning of Tyranny is Loyalty, and all according to
Covenant: As if men had sworn to be good to themselves, and to be true to their
own interest all their days, which surely none need to be sworn to. Thus men's
minds and judgments are distempered by their lusts and interests, which makes
them frame a way for God to proceed in.

And this is the reason (says he page 25. of his Sermon Heb. 12. 27.) that the
Lord Jesus by his MIGHTY POWER, at Wherein is it altered since that time.
his bringing in of his VNMOVABLE KINGDOM, will shake the HEAVENS and the EARTH
of the NATIONS, even because in their * PRESENT CONSTITVTION they are DIRECTLY
FRAMED to the INTEREST OF ANTICHRIST, which by notable advantage at their FIRST
MOVLDING, and CONTRIVED INSINVATIONS ever since, has so riveted it self into
the very FVNDAMENTALS of them, that no digging or Mining, without an EARTHQVAKE
will cast up the FOUNDATION What, call you them foundation stones?
stones thereof, because as is their interest, so is their acting, the present
powers of the Nations stands in DIRECT OPPOSITION to the bringing in of the
KINGDOM OF CHRIST.

Again, Page 27. of that Sermon. Are not most Potentates tied by OATH, or OTHER
COMPACT, to maintain either the WHOLE, or some part of the OLD TOWER, under the
Vid. Art. 35. Government. Reader compare these expressions with the late
transactions.
name of RIGHT OF HOLY CHURCH, Prelates, and the like? And can any expect that
such as these should take up the DESPISED QUARREL OF THE SAINTS, against that
FLOURISHING QUEEN? Doubtless NO SUCH FRUIT WILL GROW ON THESE TREES, before
they are THOROUGHLY SHAKEN. All carnal Interests will doubtless be shaken with
that of Babylon. Many of Gods people are not weaned from the things that are
seen. No sooner is one CARNAL FORM SHAKEN OUT, but they are ready to CLEAVE TO
ANOTHER; Yea to warm themselves in the FEATHERED NESTS OF UNCLEAN Is it not so
at this day.
BIRDS. All fl^shly Dominion within doors, and all Civil Dominion that opposes
without doors, shall be shaken.

Now these things are so glued also to men's earthly possessions, the talons of
the birds Who are those birds of prey, unless the soldier, pries^ and lawyer?
of prey having firmly seized on them, that THEY also must be shaken with them.

Reader consider these expressions of Mr. Owens seriously, and then tell me
whether he had not a good ghess of what we have seen since the preaching of
these Sermons, come to pass. I presume Mr. Tho. Goodwin and himself, etc.
little thought then, that their own words should now have been brought in
testimony against them. But, the heart of man is deceitful above all things.

Now that this shaking here spoken of, is not to be taken in Mr. Owen's sense,
p. 14. of that Sermon, (where he says, It is not a destruction, or total
amotion of the great things of the Nations, but a change, translation, or new
molding of them, that is here intimated; they shall (says he) be shuffled
together, Not altogether, it seems.
almost into their primitive confusion, and come out new molded for the
interest of the Lord Jesus. Again, all the present States of the world are
cemented together by Antichristian lime, etc. that unless they be so shaken, as
to have every cranny searched and brushed, they will be no quiet Note the Brush.
habitation for the Lord Christ and his People) I thus answer:

1. In that the holy Ghost speaking of the time wherein these things shall be
accomplished, (as in Isa. 65. 17.) says, Behold, I create new heavens, and a
new earth; (Mark) and the former shall not be remembered nor come into mind. And
Rev. 21. 1. I saw a new heaven, and a new earth; for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away. If then they are so to pass away, as not to be
remembered, nor come into Gods nor his peoples minds, how are they in the least
to be retai^ed? Is it the intent of God in that text, think you, only to pull
down the Titles of Kings, and to set up a Title of Protector in stead thereof;
or to pull down Bishops, and set ^ehold Mr. Owen's new heaven and new earth.
up a Scoteh Synod, or Court of Tryers, in stead thereof? Is that your brush,
whereby the Antichristian lime is to be taken away? I am sure, the holy Ghost
speaking of the destruction of Babylon, Isai. 13. 19 etc. says, that it shall
be as when God over threw Sodom and Gom^rrha, that it shall NEVER be inhabited
nor dwelt in, from generation to generation, etc. as also, that he will not
make use of one stone thereof either for a Foundation-stone, or a Cornerstone,
but to be an everlasting desolation. Jer. 51. 25, 26. And yet it seems he would
have the whole fabric to stand, only the ^rannies thereof to be searched, and
the lyme only to be brushed off. The old Tower (he mentioned) it seems is not
Babylonish; no, it is only the lime or mortar wherewith it is daubed together.
A very Scholastical Exposition!

And thus have I laid down some of the Grounds and Reasons why we desire the
subversion of whatsoever is of Man, either in our Civils or Spirituals, unless
in things circumstantial, as dependencies upon the Statute^. Judgments, and
Ordinances of Jehovah the Lord Christ; and that from the testimony of the holy
Scripture, which we take to be sufficient to persuade all that are real
Christians, to own, embrace, and put in practice: and consequently, that
whosoever pretends that they are Christians, and yet refuse so to do, do
thereby clearly declare themselves notorious hypocrites, as also professed
ex^mies to Jehovah the Lord Christ, and that by his own attestation, Luke 19.
27.

And perhaps would bring in the Judaical Law, in stead of our known laws, and
settled among us.

known unto those that profess themselves Gods people, as any other Laws
whatsoever, yea, above all other Laws whatsoever; and especially by such an one
as accounts himself to be a father to the family of Gods people. I remember,
it was a duty incumbent upon fathers of particular families in the Israel of
God, to teach the Laws, Sta^utes, and Judg^^^ats of Jehovah diligently unto
their children, and to talk of them, when they sat in their houses, and when
they walked by the way, and when they lay down, and when they rose up; and to
bind them for signs upon their hand and as frontlets between their eyes; and
to write them upon the posts of their houses, and on their gates. Deuteronomy. 6. 6,
7, 8, etc. I read, it was also the custom of their Magistrates to instruct the
people in the said Laws; as in Neb. 8. 1, 2, 3, etc. It is also said of godly
David, that the Laws of God were his meditation day and night; and that he
desired them more then gold, yea then much fine gold Then the king of Spain's
gold in the Indi^s.
; yea, that they were sweeter un^^ him then honey, or the honeycomb. And
therefore I admire to hear one so seemingly-eminent, to plead a greater
knowledge to the Laws of Heathens and Antichristians. Yea, I appeal to any
Rational man whatsoever, whether any man would be thought to be in his wits, to
give those Characters to the known Laws of England, (as he is pleased to term
them, though I think they were never yet defined) as David has done to the
Laws of God. And if not, then I desire to know, whether of the two ought to be
best known unto us, and put i^ practice by us; or why the Law of Nature ought
not to be the Rule and Square of natural actions: which that the Judicial Law
is, is clearly proved from Romans 2. 14. For when the Gentiles that knew not the
Law, did by nature the things contained in the Law, these having not the Law,
are a Law unto themselves, which show the works of the Law written in their
hearts, their consciences also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the
mean time acc^sing or excusing one another. And what other Law was this he
speaks of, then the Law of God?

Again, what other Law was the old world judged by, then the aforesaid law of
Nature? Doubtless they were not condemned and executed by the righteous Judge
of all the world, (Genesis 11. 25.) without a Law; and is it to be conceived that
he would judge by any other Law then his own? and was that Law (as to the Civil
part thereof) ever yet repealed by God or Christ? Nay, does not the Lord Christ
tell us himself, that he came not to destroy the Law? Matthew. 5. 17, 18, 19.
Yea, so far was he from so doing, as that contrariwise he affirms, that
whosoever should break the least of them, and teach men so, shall be called
least in the kingdom of heaven.

I would gladly know then, by what authority from God, any that account
themselves Christians do make Laws for their fellow servants and subjects: yea,
is it not clearly evident, that by so doing, they usurp the Authority and Power
of Christ the alone Lawgiver? And if but one, then not two or more. Yea, do
they not, by so doing, d^thro^e and degrade the Lord Jesus of his
Legislatorship and Judicature, which the Father has given unto him? Joh. 5.
22. Isa^. 9. 6. Dan. 7. 13, 34. 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14, 15. Rev. 11. 15. and 17. 14.
and 19. 11, 16.

Indeed, were I at Constantinople, I should not much wonder if the Great ^urk
and his Mohammedan Clergy should question me for what I have said in reference
to the law of God: but to hear a Christian Magistrate, etc. contaminate the
laws of God, and magnify the laws of Heathens and Antichristians above them,
is to admiration. But I hope it will not be so for the future.

And hence it was, that godly David complains of such persons, saying, How
long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked. Selah. Psalm.
82. 2, etc. Again, says he, They know not, neither do they understand; they
walk in darkness. Again, Solomon speaking to the whole pack of those
Magistrates that contaminate the Laws of God, in chap. 6. of his book titled
Wisdom, says, Hear, O Kings, and understand; learn, ye that are Judges of the
earth: give ear, ye that rule the people, and glory in the mult^tude of
nations: for power is given you from the Lord, and sovereignty from the
Highest, who shall try your works, and search your counsels. Because, being
ministers of his kingdom, ye have not judged aright, nor kept the law, nor
walked after the counsel of God; horribly and speedily will he come upon you:
for a sharp judgment shall be to them in high places. For mercy shall pardon
the MEANEST, but MIGHTY MEN shall be MIGHTILY TORMENTED. For he that is Lord
over all, shall fear no man's person, neither shall he stand in awe of any man's
Greatness: for he has made the small and great, and cares for all alike. BUT
A SORE TRIAL SHALL COME UPON THE MIGHTY. Unto you therefore, O Kings (says he)
do I speak, that ye may learn wisdom, and not fall away. For they that keep
holiness holily, shall be judged holy; and they that have learned such things,
shall learn what to answer. Wherefore set your affections upon my words; desire
them, and ye shall be instructed.

And doubtless, the refusal of such Instructions will be the cause of that
HORRIBLE DAY upon the Kings of the earth, and the Great Men, and the Rich Men,
and the Chief Captains, and the Mighty Men, Rev. 6. 15. where they are said to
hide themselves in the dens and rocks of the mountains, and to say to the Rocks
and Mountains, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits upon
the throne, and from the face of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is
come; and who shall be able to stand?

And me thinks there is very much reason for such a judgment to fall upon them.
For are they any more then the Ministers of God, as aforesaid? as also in Romans
13. 4. And is it possible they should be Gods ministers, (as they pretend)
whilst they make and execute their own vain Traditions and Inventions? Surely
no.

And therefore seeing the Judicial Law is that which they are bound in duty and
service to administer, as they account themselves Gods ministers, in reference
to Civil affairs, why ought not all Kings and Laws (Psalm. 7. 10. Zeph. 2. 11.)
bow to it, as the only Rule of right judgment? For, as Mr. Aspinwal upon Dan.
7. well observes, The Laws of men do bind us to be subject to Authority for
conscience sake, either actively, in doing what they command according to
Christ; or else in suffering. And their Law is satisfied, if we suffer the
penalty, to preserve our consciences undefiled: But it is not so with the Law
of God. If God command, we may not say, We will suffer the punishment for
conscience sake: for there can be no conscience, or pretense of conscience,
against any Law of God. And therefore all humane laws ought to be slighted and
contemned, as fancies, in comparison of the foresaid Royal law of Jehovah the
Lord Christ.

Though now by some mis-applied.

Owen speak for us, in his Sermon upon All the rest were Babylonish and
Antichristian.
Ezekiel. 17. 24. page 20, etc. where speaking of mis-applying of things by the
Potentates of the world, he says, That from the corruption of the hearts of
men, squaring the works of God to their fleshly reasonings, corrupt interests
and principles, they are bold with the wisdom of God, and conclude, Thus and
thus things ought to be; ordering their thoughts for the most part according to
their corrupt and carnal advantages, etc. And this (says he) makes them frame
a way for God to proceed in; which when he does not, how are they surprised!
Men take up Principles they will adhere unto, wise principles, forsooth, yea,
and very righteous too: all things whatsoever must be squared according to
their principle; and if any thing be wrought contrary, even by God himself, how
disappointed are they!

The most tremendous judgment of God in this world, is I wish some one be not
now in Pharoahs then Condition.
the hardening the hearts of men: this seals them up, for the most part, for
destruction, etc. As for instance: look on Pharaoh, of whom it is most signally
spoken, that God hardened his heart. How did the Lord accomplish this? Pharaoh
sets himself upon as righteous Principles, as ever any of the sons of men could
do: one is, That it belongs to the chief Ruler of a Nation, to s^e the profit
and glory of the Nation, etc. Hence he conclude, That if it be incumbent on him
to see that the Realm receive no detriment, he must not let the people go. God
confirms his heart in this Principle, which was good in it self, but abominable
When done in opposition to the fifth Monarchy
, when taken up against the mind and will of God; and whence, he and his
perished in their Principles, acting against the appearance of God, etc. Thus
it is with many, they fix on Principles good in general, and in their season:
Old bounds must not be broken up; Order must not be Our known Laws must not be
spoken against, let them be never so contrary to the Law of God and of Christ.
disturbed; let God appear never so eminently, so mightily, they will keep up
their Principles: What is this, but judicial hardness? And this, I say, is one
reason why the actings of God in such a day as this, are so unsuted with the
expectations of men; they square his work to their interests and principles;
which it will not answer.

Now Reader compare the present work of Christ in the world with the present
state of affairs in this Nation, and then judge whether the Fifth Monarchy-men,
or their Accuser, be the misappliers he speaks of: Whether the known laws of
Jehovah the Lord Christ, or the known laws of England, be fittest for the fifth
Monarchy, or Government of the kingdom of Christ, which he himself has so long
contested for, or at least pretended for, as his Declarations and Remonstrances
do clearly evidence.

Especially where every stone is turned to bring in Confusion, this will be
worth every Magistrates consideration.

by whom or how every stone is so turned. If by the Fifth Monarchy-men, let
either himself, or any for him, show in what, that we may make our defense
thereunto; and let us not be accused and condemned upon jealousies and
surmises, or we know not what, through subtilty and cunning suggestions, which
the Lord will one day call to an account.

Thus Reader have thou seen the whole body of his Charge against the Fifth
Monarchy-men, vanish into nothing: which doubtless will be the event of every
weapon that is formed against Jesus Christ, or those that are faithful to his
interest.

Thi^, I say, will be worthy of the Magistrates consideration.

double remembrance. For it is certain, that all the present powers of the
earth are now at the stake; and therefore such of them as are self-ended men,
covetous, proud, etc. had need to look about them; for doubtless the STONE cut
out without hands, is growing into such a Mountain as will fill the whole
earth; and that even to the breaking in pieces and consuming all their
Kingdoms, whether they be Iron, Clay, Brass, Silver, or Gold: yea, so to break
them in pieces, as to make them like unto the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor* yea, the wind of the wrath of the Almighty shall so carry
them away, as that there shall no place be found for them, Dan. 2.

Again, the rest of the Magistrates that are not such, (if there be any) ought
also doubtless to consider seriously hereof, as also to compare the present
Laws of the Nation with the Laws of God. For, as Mr. Aspinwal says, If the
laws of God (contained in the holy Scriptures) be well weighed in the balance
of the Sanctuary, it will appear to be the most safe and wholesome Government
in the world. For what can be imagined to be more safe, then to have Saints,
and such as walk with God, and God with them, to administer judgment and
justice according to those perfect laws? And if the Laws be perfect, and such
as administer them be Saints by calling, and have a promise of divine
assistance, how can it but be more safe, then to embrace imperfect and
undurable Laws, such as some make, and others null, at pleasure, according to
the fancies and humors of those in present Power and Authority, as daily
experience teaches; as also, to have such to execute those Laws, as have not
the like promise of divine assistance.

Besides, the Experiences of many Ages do show, that the want of the laws of
God, and faithful Administrators, has hitherto been the ruin of all the
States and Governments in those four Monarchies, and will shortly be their
eternal desolation. Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 26.

Again, that saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4. 5. is also well worthy their serious
contemplation; where speaking to the then-peculiar people of God, touching the
excellency of the Law of God, their King, which he had received, to administer
unto them, says, Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as
the Lord my God commanded me that ye should do so in the land whither ye go to
possess it. Keep therefore and do them: for this is your w^^dom and your
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear those statutes, and
say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people. For what
Nation is there so great, that has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God
is, in all things that we call upon him for? And what nation is there so great,
that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set
before you this day?

I shall now conclude with Mr. Owen's expressions in p. 39. of his Sermon upon
H^b. 12. 27. O that it were the will of God to put an end to all that pretended
holiness, hypocritical humiliation, self-interested Religion, that have been
among us! whereby we have slattered God with our lips, whilst our hearts have
been far from him. O that it might suffice, that we have had in our Parliament,
and among our Ministers, so much of the form, and so little of the power of
Godliness; that we have called world Christ, and lust Christ, and self Christ;
working indeed for them, when we pretended all for Christ. O that in you might
appear the Reality of the kingdom of the Lord Jesus, which has been so long
pretended by others; that sound righteousness, not a Pharisaical, rigid,
superstitious affectation, nor a careless belief and comportment, the issue of
novel fancies, might be found upon your spirits; that we may be thought meet to
rejoice with the Lord in his kingdom.

Psalm. 107. 43. Whosoever is wise, will ponder these things, and they shall
understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

FINIS.

