A Confutation Of the ASSERTIONS OF Mr. SAMUEL OATS, (In relation to his not
practicing the laying on of hands on all baptized Believers) Which are as
follows, viz.
1. That Laying on of hands is not Gods Ordinance, as it is practiced on the
aforesaid Subjects, viz. on all baptized believers.

2. Neither as to the Manner of performing the same, viz. 1. In that there is
no injunction for more persons then one to lay on hands at once. 2. In that it
is not restrained to the head. 3. In that there is no word of God to enjoin the
kneeling of the Subject in the act of Laying on of hands. 4. Neither to use
words of expression when hands are on the Subject.

3. Neither as to the End, as it is practiced upon all baptized believers; for
that the Laying on of hands was, 1. To heal the sick. 2. For Ordination of
Officers. 3. For giving miraculous gifts of the Spirit, and not otherwise. 4.
That no person ought to have the Laying on of hands, that does not believe that
thereby he shall be healed of some disease, or receive some miraculous gift of
the Spirit.

By John Spittlehouse, Who does contrariwise affirm as follows, V I Z.

I. IN relation to the Subject, That laying on of hands is an Ordinance of
Jesus Christ, as it is practiced upon the aforesaid subjects, (viz.) all
baptized believers.

1. In that the Spirit of God instrumentally by the Apostles of Jesus Christ,
has recorded the same as a Principle and doctrine to all true Hebrews, or
Jews, or baptized Believers; as in Heb. 6. 1, 2. which words are not spoken to
some particular diseased persons, or men in office, or workers of Miracles (as
in Mr. Oats his aforesaid conclusions) but unto all Saints in General (viz.
even unto as many as God has in these last days spoken unto by his Son; as in
Heb. 1. 1, 2. (viz) to all the spiritual seed of Abraham, as in Gal. 3. 7, 9.
And so consequently Hebrews, as in Romans 2. 28.

2. In that it was also such a Principle and doctrine as was practiced by the
Apostles upon whole Churches of baptized Believers; instance, Act. 8. 17. and
19. 6, 7. which two aforesaid places Mr. Oats has lately acknowledged to be
meant of all as aforesaid; so that it will necessarily follow, that the like
practice ought now to be made upon all such like baptized believers, as they
were, as also the aforementioned persons, in Heb. 1. 1, 2. inasmuch as the same
principle and doctrine remains now in force unto us, by which it was so
administered upon them, as in Heb. 6. 1, 2. as aforesaid.

3. In that by the same rule that Mr. Oats* or any of his judgment (as
aforesaid) can single out a particular baptism out of the aforesaid principle
or doctrine of Baptismes, that shall relate to all the faithful in General, it
will as clearly follow, that there is as well a peculiar laying on of hands, to
be extracted out of the principle and doctrine of the laying on of hands, that
belongs to the aforesaid faithful ones being baptized.

4. Inasmuch as no rational man will deny that the Principles and Foundations
of Repentance and Faith toward God, belongs to all believers in general; as
also, the like Principle and doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, and of
eternal judgment; as also, a particular Baptism of water out of the principle
and doctrine of Baptisms, as is both acknowledged and practiced generally upon
all believers, by Mr. Oats himself: what reason then is there in the least,
that Mr. Oats should deny an extract to be made of a particular laying on of
hands, out of the aforesaid principle and doctrine of Laying on of hands, that
may run parallel with the aforesaid General Baptism so practiced by Mr. Oats;
or that even common sense should imagine, that the aforesaid five principles
should concern the generality of believers, and that the sixth should be
restrained to some particular persons and ends as aforesaid?

II. Touching Mr. Oats his assertion touching the Manner of laying on of hands
upon all baptized Believers, viz. that it is not an Ordinance of Jesus Christ,
as it is practiced by such as lay on hands upon all believers;

Object. 1. In that (says Mr. Oats) there is no Injunction for more persons
then one to lay on hands at once.

Resp. In so saying, Mr. Oats has clearly contradicted the following texts of
Scripture, viz. Act. 8. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where it is manifest, that both
Peter and John laid their hands upon the Samaritanes there mentioned; and that
the said Peter and John were enjoined so to do, will also appear from verse. 14.
where they were sent to do what they did by the appointment of all the Apostles
then at Jerusalem, and so consequently by Jesus Christ himself* who had
promised to ratify what they should do in his name; as in Matthew. 18. 18, 19,
20. as also, that the Spirit of truth should lead them into all truth, Joh. 16.
13. All which, if not a sufficient warrant for the aforesaid Peter and John's
acting as aforesaid, I would gladly know of Mr. Oats (or any for him) what
fuller rule they have to practice the Laying on of hands upon any to the
aforesaid purposes mentioned by him, viz. as to the healing of the sick or
diseased, Ordination of Officers, or obtaining miraculous gifts of the Spirit.

Object. 2. In that Mr. Oats says, that Laying on of hands is not to be
restrained to the head;

Resp. 1. I would gladly know what part of the body Mr. Oats would have laying
on of hands restrained unto, in any of the cases aforementioned, if not to the
head; and by what warrant from the Word of God.

2. That laying on of hands, as it is practiced by us upon all baptized
believers, ought to be restrained to the head. I instance from Genesis 48. where
when Jacob blessed Ephraim and Manasseh, the text says, that he laid his hands
upon the heads of the aforesaid persons, as clearly appears from verse. 14. to
21. and therefore inasmuch as we use the aforesaid Laying on of hands upon the
like occasion, viz. as a blessing of the subject by the Church in the name of
Jesus Christ, (who is thereby represented to be the head, not only of the
subject upon whom hands are so laid, but also in like manner of the Church it
self) we think it our duty so to practice the same.

Object. 3. In that M. Oats says, There is no word of God to enjoin the
kneeling of the subject in the act of laying on of hands;

Resp. 1. God has enjoined that every knee shall bow unto him, Isai. 45. 23.
2. Inasmuch as the Name of Jesus (in whose name the subject is to be blessed
with spiritual gifts, administrations, or operations of the Spirit, Lord, or
God, as aforesaid, as Jacob blessed Ephraim and Manasseh with temporal
blessings) is so exalted by God above all names, as that at it every knee shall
bow, both of things in heaven, viz. in the Church; as things in earth, viz. in
the world;

Therefore, say we, it is as well the duty of such subjects to kneel to the
Church, as they represent the body of Jesus Christ, as it is the duty of
natural children to kneel to receive the blessings of their natural parents, as
in the former instance of Ephraim and Manasseh, who doubtless did not stand
upright when Jacob blessed them as aforesaid, they being about 22 or 23 years
old, being born in the years of plenty, some four or five years before Jacob
came down into Egypt, who had then been 17 years in Egypt; as also in that
Jacob did only sit up in his bed when he so blessed them, so that in all
probability the aforesaid Ephraim and Manasseth kneeled when they received
Jacobs blessing, as aforesaid. (3.) Inasmuch as kneeling is the most proper
posture to crave blessings from God, so likewise in the reception of such his
benedictions as are obtained from God instrumentally by his body the Church.
(4.) If any posture, why not kneeling?

Object. 4. In that Mr. Oats says there is no need to use words of expression
when hands are on the subject,

Resp. This Objection does likewise clearly contradict the Scriptures; instance
the text aforementioned, where Jacob, whilst his hands were upon Ephraim and
Manasseh's head, used the words mentioned in v. 15, 16, 20. which doubtless was
also his practice upon his own sons, Chap. 45. where he is likewise said to
bless them.

2. It does likewise as clearly thwart the practice of Jesus Christ himself,
Mat. 19. 13. who when little children were presented to him, to the end he
might put his hands upon them, and pray, is not said to gainsay the same, but
did as well pray for them, as lay his hands on them, Mark 10. 16.

3. It does also in like manner as clearly contradict the practice of the
Apostles, as in the aforementioned places of Act. 8. 14, etc. where it is said
that Peter and John being sent to Samaria, etc. prayed for such of the
Samaritanes as were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, to the end they
might receive the holy Ghost; which doubtless they did whilst their hands were
upon them: for verse. 16. (being merely a parenthesis) does not in the least put
any interim of time betwixt the Apostles praying for the aforesaid Samaritanes,
and their laying their hands upon them, as also the donation of the holy Ghost.

4. No rational man will imagine that the Apostle Paul used a contrary course
in laying his hands on the disciples of Ephesus, Act. 19. then was formerly
practiced by Peter and John; there being but one true way or doing the work of
God, as in point of Baptism.

5. In the example of Ananias to Saul, Act. 9. 17. where being sent to lay his
hand upon Saul, says, whilst his hands were upon him, Brother Saul, the Lord,
even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way as thou came, has sent me,
that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled with the holy Ghost.

Object. If it be objected that Ananias did act alone, as also Paul, in Acts
19. as aforesaid;

I answer, that as for Ananias, he was appointed singlely by God to do the
same, as in Acts 9. 10, etc. and as for Paul, he must of necessity do it alone,
because there were none with him there, that were fit for such an action, as
the whole passage does clearly evidence.

III. As touching the End, whereas Mr. Oats affirms, That Laying on of hands
does only tend to the aforesaid particulars, viz. to heal the sick, to cure
the diseased, to ordain Officers, to give miraculous gifts of the Spirit;

I answer, that Laying on of hands ought not to be restrained only to the
aforesaid particulars, no more then the principle and doctrine of Baptisms
ought to be restrained to the baptism of suffering or blood, mentioned Matthew.
20. 22, 23. Mark 10. 38, 39. Luke 12. 50. or the baptism of the holy Ghost or
fire, mentioned Mark. 1. 8. Mat. 3. 11. Luke 3. 16. Ioh. 1. 26. inasmuch as it
is as general a principle and doctrine as Water Baptism, (which Mr. Oats will
single out from the aforesaid Baptisms, as a general standing Principle and
doctrine, to continue so long as there is need of teaching, unto which it is
joined by Jesus Christ himself, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.) and therefore of as large a
latitude and continuance as Water Baptism or any other of the aforesaid
principles or doctrines.

Again we read that the whole Church of Corinth were endowed with several
gifts, Administrations, or Operations of the aforesaid Spirit, as in 1 Cor. 12.
which Gifts, Manifestations, or Operations, if the said Church of Corinth did
not receive by the laying on of hands as aforesaid, I would gladly know of Mr.
Oats how or by what means they so obtained them; Seeing that the aforesaid
Apostle commenting thereupon, attributes the very expressing or saying, that
Jesus is the Lord, unto the Operation of the holy Ghost, as in ver. 3. as also
in the following verses. Where speaking of the diversities of Gifts of the
aforesaid Spirit or holy Ghost, as also of the differences of the
Administrations thereof, as also of the diversities of the Operations thereof,
says, that they all proceed from the same Spirit, Lord or God, viz. the
diversities of Gifts from the Spirit or holy Ghost, the differences of the
Administrations thereof from the same Lord, and the diversities of the
Operation thereof from the same God, which (says he) works all, in all

After which he treats of the aforesaid Gifts, Administrations, or Operations
apart, as they were given to particular Members of the aforesaid Church of
Corinth, to profit the whole body withal, which he thus distinguishes or
divides (viz.) as to one or some of them the word of wisdom, to another of
them a word of knowledge, to another faith, to another the gift of healing, to
another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to another a discerning
of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of tongues, and to another the
intepretation of tongues, and all by one and the same Spirit, dividing to every
man according as he will.

So that nothing can be more evident, then that the aforesaid Gifts,
Administrations, or Operations of the aforesaid Spirit, Lord, or God, was given
to the aforesaid particular members of the Church of Corinth by the laying on
of hands; for in that they are so clearly manifested to be the Gifts of the
aforesaid Spirit, or holy Ghost, as also that the same Spirit, or holy Ghost
was instrumentally given by the laying on of hands, it cannot in reason be
conceived, that the aforesaid members of the aforesaid Church of Corinth,
should receive the aforesaid gifts of the Spirit, or holy Ghost as aforesaid,
by any other way or means then by laying on of hands* it being then, and still
remains a general principle or doctrine appointed for the aforesaid purpose,
according as the aforesaid Spirit, Lord, or God, in their divine wisdom,
sees occasion.

The meanest of which aforesaid Gifts, Administrations, or Operations, are as
well to be acknowledged to be the donation of the aforesaid Spirit, Lord, or
God, and that jointly and severally, as we do acknowledge the aforesaid Spirit,
Lord* or God to be a Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; as also that by
how much we annihilate or undervalue the seemingly-meanest of the aforesaid
Gifts, Administrations, or operations of the aforesaid Spirit, Lord or God, by
so much we do annihilate the aforesaid Spirit, Lord or God himself.

For, as the Apostle excellently observes, the Church or Body of Christ has
as well need of the foot as of the hand, and of the hand as of the eye; yea, he
affirms, that even such of the seemingly-most-feeble and unnecessary gifts
aforesaid, are expedient, to the end there might be no Schism in the Church or
Body of Christ.

It may therefore safely be concluded, quite contrary to Mr. Oats his aforesaid
assertion, that the Laying on of hands is every way as necessary for* the
obtaining of the aforesaid most seemingly-feeble and unnecessary gifts,
administrations, or operations, as for the greatest endowments whatsoever can
be given thereby. The contradiction of which, does expressly give the Apostle
the Lie, and so consequently the Spirit, Lord, and God, as aforesaid: which I
hope Mr. Oats will not wittingly do, nor any of his present judgment.

Postscript.
SIR,
INasmuch as having these thoughts upon my spirit at our last meeting, and not
having then an opportunity to express the same; I have therefore, out of the
abundance of my heart, manifested my thoughts upon your then Discourse; which
if either your self, or any of your judgment, shall further oppose, I shall be
ready to reply thereunto: knowing that Truth is able to vanquish Error, albeit
in the meanest of its servants,

John Spittlehouse.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1653.


