THE Prince of Orange HIS THIRD DECLARATION.
WE have in the course of our whole Life, and more particularly by the apparent
Hazards both by Sea and Land, to which we have so lately exposed our Person,
given to the whole World so high and undoubted Proofs of our fervent Zeal for
the Protestant Religion, that we are fully confident no true Englishman and
good Protestant can entertain the least Suspicion of our firm Resolution,
rather to spend our dearest Blood and perish in the Attempt, than not carry on
the Blessed and Glorious Design which by the Favor of Heaven we have so
successfully begun, to rescue England, Scotland, and Ireland, from Slavery and
Popery, and in a Free Parliament to establish the Religion, the Laws and the
Liberties of those Kingdoms upon such a sure and lasting Foundation, that it
shall not be in the Power of any Prince for the future to introduce Popery and
Tyranny.

Toward the more easy Compassing this great Design, we have not been hitherto
deceived in the just Expectation we had of the Concurrence of the Nobility,
Gentry, and People of England, with Us for the Security of their Religion, the
Restitution of their Laws, and the Re-establishment of their Liberties and
Properties: Great Numbers of all Ranks and Qualitites, having joined themselves
to us; and others at great Distances from Us, have taken up Arms and declared
for Us. And, which we cannot but particularly mention, in that Army which was
raised to be the Instrument of Slavery and Popery; many (by the special
Providence of God) both Officers and common Soldiers have been touched with
such a feeling sense of Religion and Honor, and of true Affection for their
Native Country, that they have already deserted the Illegal Service they were
engaged in, and have come over to Us, and have given us full Assurance from the
rest of the Army, that they will certainly follow this Example, as soon as with
our Army we shall approach near enough to receive them, without the Hazard of
being prevented and betrayed. To which end, and that we may the sooner execute
this just and necessary Design we are engaged in for the public Safety and
Deliverance of these Nations, We are resolved with all possible Diligence to
advance forward, that a Free Parliament may be forthwith called, and such
Preliminaries adjusted with the King, and all things first settled upon such a
foot according to Law, as may give Us and the whole Nation just Reason to
believe the King is disposed to make such necessary Condescentions on his part,
as will give entire Satisfaction and Security to all, and make both King and
People once more happy.

And that we may effect all this, in the way most agreeable to our Desires, if
it be possible without the Effusion of any Blood, except of those execrable
Criminals who have justly forfeited their Lives for betraying the Religion and
subverting the Laws of their Native Country, We do think fit to declare, that
as we will offer no Violence to any but in our own Necessary Defense; so we
will not suffer any Injury to be done to the Person even of a Papist, provided
he be found in such Place, and in such Condition and Circumstances as the Laws
require. So we are resolved and do declare that all Papists, who shall be found
in open Arms, or with Arms in their Houses, or about their Persons, or in any
Office or Employment Civil or Military upon any Pretense whatsoever contrary to
the known Laws of the Land, shall be treated by Us and our Forces not as
Soldiers and Gentlemen, but as Robbers, Free-Booters and Banditti; they shall
be incapable of Quarter, and entirely delivered up to the Discretion of our
Soldiers. And We do further declare that all Persons who shall be found any
ways aiding and assisting to them, or shall march under their Command, or shall
join with or submit to them in the Discharge or Execution of their Illegal
Commissions or Authority, shall be looked upon as Partakers of their Crimes,
Enemies to the Laws, and to their Country.

And whereas we are certainly informed that great Numbers of armed Papists have
of late resorted to London and Westminster, and parts adjacent, where they
remain, as we have reason to suspect, not so much for their own Security, as
out of a wicked and barbarous Design to make some desperate Attempt upon the
said Cities, and their Inhabitants by Fire, or a sudden Massacre, or both; or
else to be the more ready to join themselves to a Body of French Troops,
designed, if it be possible, to land in England, procured of the French King,
by the Interest and Power of the Jesuits in Pursuance of the Engagements, which
at the Instigation of that pestilent Society, his most Christian Majesty, with
one of his Neighboring Princes of the same Communion, has entered into for the
utter Extirpation of the Protestant Religion out of Europe. Though we hope we
have taken such effectual care to prevent the one, and secure the other, that
by God's Assistance, we cannot doubt but we shall defeat all their wicked
Enterprises and Designs.

We cannot however forbear out of the great and tender Concern We have to
preserve the People of England, and particularly those great and populous
Cities, from the cruel Rage and bloody Revenge of the Papists, to Require and
expect from all the Lord-Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of
Peace, Lord-Mayors, Mayors, Sheriffs, and all other Magistrates and Officers
Civil and Military, of all Counties, Cities and Towns of England, especially of
the County of Middlesex, and Cities of London and Westminster, and Parts
adjacent, that they do immediately disarm and secure, as by Law they may and
ought, within their respective Counties, Cities and Jurisdictions, All Papists
whatsoever, as Persons at all times, but now especially, most dangerous to the
Peace and Safety of the Government, that so not only all Power of doing
mischief may be taken from them; but that the Laws, which are the greatest and
best Security may resume their Force, and be strictly Executed.

And We do hereby likewise Declare that We will Protect and Defend all those
who shall not be afraid to do their Duty in Obedience to these Laws. And that
for those Magistrates and others of what condition soever they be, who shall
refuse to assist Us, and in Obedience to the Laws to Execute vigorously what we
have required of them, and suffer themselves at this Junctuure to be cajoled or
terrified out of their Duty, We will esteem 'em the most Criminal and In famous
of all Men, Betrayers of their Religion, the Laws, and their native Country,
and shall not fail to treat 'em accordingly; resolving to expect and require at
their hands the Life of every single Protestant that shall perish, and every
House that shall be burnt or destroyed by their Treachery and Cowardice.

William Henry Prince of Orange.
Given under Our Hand and Seal at Our Headquarters at Sherburn-Castle, the
28th. day of November, 1688. By his Highness special Command,

C. HUYGENS.




