THE SPEECH OF THEIR Excellencies the Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary.

From the High and Mighty States General of the United Provinces of the
Netherlands, taking their leave of both the Honorable Houses of Parliament
Assembled at Wes^minster. 10. April 1645.

Translated out of French into English: And printed by their Excellencies
Order. Steph. Tailor Secr.

Together with a Moderate Answer by a private Gentleman.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Robert Bostock, at the Kings head in Paul's
Churchyard. 16. April 1645.

The Ambassadors Speech.
Right Honorable,
TWo things have moved Our Lords and Superiors to send Us their ambassadors
Extraordinary into this Kingdom, viz. Their Duty, and Your Service.

The first, consisted in their Power, and in the resenting of the present
Distractions. The other, being altogether in your choice to accept, if You
should like of it.

We have long ago, and Diverse times spoken unto Your Honors of the one, and
the other: as likewise unto the King, who has honored so much Our State, as
to have accepted the offers of Our Interposition. But We are still with Your
Honors upon the same terms* We were at the beginning, without any certitude,
or likelihood to be accepted.

We have already obtained Our leave from the King, and have left His Majesty
full of good will, and disposition for a just and reasonable Accommodation:
Likewise We parted from Him well satisfied, concerning the point of the
Evangelique-Protestant Religion, upon the Offers He has lately permitted us to
make

And as concerning the Royal Rights or Prerogatives, the Liberties, and
Privileges of this Kingdom, and the Parliament, and of all the Subjects, no
doubt when that His Majesty shall be satisfied, His Majesty will also satisfy
every one.

But Sirs, We can stay no longer here, unless Your Honors accept of our
Interposition, without which We are useless: And from hence it is, Our Lords
and Superiors have charged Us, in such a case, to take Our leave, and return
to Our own home. In performance of which last Duty, We are here come before
You; assuring You, We shall never cease to wish unto this heretofore
flourishing Kingdom, an Accommodation and Peace; which is* and ever will be as
profitable, as necessary.

The Answer.
YOur Excellencies came into England to show your selves Christians out of hope
to prevent blood and mischief, and partly to show your selves Friends to
England, out of hope to prevent the utter ruin of this your neighbor Nation.
To accomplish these honorable ends you have addressed your selves both to His
Majesty and the Parliament: But whereas his Majesty has accepted the offers
of your Interposition, you seem to complain that you have no certitude or
likelihood to be accepted by the Parliament. You do not nevertheless declare
what that Interposition is which the King admits or the Parliament denies: For
if the King do wholly refer His Cause to your umpirage, twere necessary that
you plainly make this known to the Parliament; and if the King receives you no
further then as friendly Intercessors to Entreat or Persuade, in this he does
no more then the Parliament does. But you conceive the King offers enough
assurance for the Evangelique-Protestant Religion; and (it may be) you expect
that the Assembled States of England and Scotland having drawn together for
their assistance the best Divines they can from all Protestant Countries,
should attribute more to your judgment herein then to themselves. Truly this
seems to us something too unequal, and we much doubt whether His Majesty be
so fully resolved to resign up himself and all his pretenses in the point of
Religion to your final decision. You further seem confident, That His Majesty
will satisfy others when He is himself satisfied concerning His Prerogative
and our Liberty: but this may be perhaps, because you do not so experimentally
understand what is likely to satisfy the King, as the best and wisest of His
two Protestant Kingdoms do. The Kings Intentions are known either by his
professions or actions; As for his professions we know they are and ever were
very gracious, but whatsoever Expressions He may make to you in your
particular, He cannot promise a greater affection to Religion and Justice then
the Parliament does. And as for the Kings actions we would gladly be instructed
by you, but we cannot apprehend our selves less judicious in them then any
strangers whatsoever. When your State was formerly in distress, our Ancestors
did intercede otherwise then you do now, and yet your Provinces were as
divided as ours are now, and your Cause was as liable to dispute as ours is
now; and what we did tender then was from the entire body of our whole Nation;
and to be clear with you, we do not look so upon your Interpositions now.
For your good wishes to the prosperity of this Kingdom we thank you; and if
you will propose a just and reasonable Accommodation, whatsoever you think of
us, you will find us as full of good will and disposition to it, as you now
believe the King is.

FINIS.

