THE SPEECHES OF THE Lord General Fairfax, And the Officers of the ARMY TO
The Diggers at St. Georges Hill in SURRY, and the Diggers several ANSWERS and
REPLIES thereunto.

ALSO, The manner of Proclaiming the Act against the Kingly Office by the Lord
Mayor, and eight Aldermen at the Royal EXCHANGE, LONDON.

WITH Diverse Letters concerning the Prince to the Queen Together with the
proceedings of Prince Rupert, the Earl of Osmond, and the Lord Inchiquin in
Ireland,

A Fight at Sea, and a fuller relation of the Earl of Montrosse his design for
Scotland.

London Printed for R.W. MDCXLIX.

The Committee at Goldsmiths Hall made report of some obstruction (...) find in
perfecting the compositions of many Delinquents: whereupon the (...) passed
several Votes, viz.
1 That the Clerks of the House shall search and peruse the Journall Books of
both Houses, touching such fines as have bin immediately imposed upon any person
by both or either House, 2 That the same be forthwith certified and transmitted
to the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall. 3 That all persons as have (...) the 20
day of March, 1642 entered upon, or shall hereafter enter upon or posse^
themselves of the estate of any Delinquent, by virtue of any extent, morgag,
for feiture, or otherwise, shall pay into the Treasury at Goldsmiths hall such
sum^ sums of money as the said Delinquents should or ought to have paid for so
much of his estate, as any such person has so entered upon and possessed,
according to the respective rules prescribed by authority of Parl. and upon
payment of the fine for the Delinquent, the Creditor shall enjoy the estate, as
well till the ^ne be ^^paid him, as till his own debt be fully satisfied. 4
That if any Delinquent shall submit to his composition and join in security for
the same to any person, for so much as the fine of such Delinquents shall
amount to, That then every such Delinquent shall be repostest and restored unto
his estate, upon full satisfaction g^^^ to such persons, according to his former
debt and present disbursment to (...) Commonwealth. And in case such
Delinquents shall not join, that then such estate after the said debt and fine
satisfied, shall be confiscated, and revert to the Commonwealth. 5 That in case
any person having such an extent, or being (...) possessed of any Delinquents
estate, shall not before the 1 day of Aug. next deliver in a particular thereof
to the Commis^ a^ Gold^miths Hall, and pay in and (...) the fine and
composition, That then the estate shall be forthwith seized and ^^stred to the
use of the Common wealth, etc.

We have certain intelligence by an express sent of purpose from the Nor^ that
upon Tuesday last at Balvenic, upon Spey side, by a party of a hundred (...)
twenty horse, commanded by Lieut. Genesis Lesly to attend these fields under (...)
conduct of Col. Ker, Lieut. Col. Hacket, Lieu^. Col. Strachen, the Lord has
des^ted the most considerable part if not all the strength of the Rebels in the
Nor^ to the number of twelve hundred taken prisoners, and amongst those, the
no^ L. Rae with his most considerable officers, and many considerable
Gentlement and Officers of the name of Mickinny. Upon this surprizal and
overthrow M^aleto^, Gourdon, and the rest, fled further North, and sent to
David Les^^^ for Treaty, which was harkened to.

Oxford May 20. This morning as the General was going to Church, (...) Moody
brought a Letter from Col. Reynolds, who was sent in pursuit of Thomson,
wherein was signified that Major Butler being sent with a select party of (...)
to fall into Thomsons quarters, he being gone from Northampton to a town (...)
Wellinborough, toward Rutla^dshire, where all his party were surprised, but
Th^^son escaped into a Wood, of which having intelligen^e we pursued him, beset
(...) Wood and sent a party into the Wood where they found him well mounted,
(...) being alone, yet rid up to our par^y, and desperately shot a ^ornet, and
(...) another, and retreated to his Bush, receiving two shots; when they began
(...) to draw near unto him he charged again his pistol, and received another
shot (...) retreated; the third time he came up (for he said he scorned to take
(...) Major Butlers Corporal had Col. Reynold his carbine, which being charged
with seven Bullets gave Thompson his deaths wound.

The Lieutenant of the Oxfordshire Troop who joined with Thompson is likewise
taken who it seems seized on the Magazine at Northampton, and the Excize
money, and with 13 men kept the town in awe.

Tuesday. May 22 LEtters out of Holland certify, That the Scots Commis. are
gone toward their own Country, they very sadly took their leave of their
declared King, praying, that God would turn his heart, and incline his spirit
to hearken to good Council. He bad them return to their duty, or else he
should meet with them another time. The Lord Montrosse is hastening also for
Scotland, with many Officers and Gentlemen, to whom comes such Forces, as
Germany, Denmark, and Sweden do send by way of assistance; it is said they
will in all amount to 1000 Horse, and 4000 Foot, and Montrosse is made Genesis for
the North of Scotland; the Royal English boast much at the coming thither of
7000 Arms from Sweden, and expect great news from Ireland: the Prince is going
for France.

Ordered that the Committee of the Army take care for dispietsing amongst the
several Reg. of the Army the Acts of Parl. for taking off f^ee quarter to the
end the Soldiers may take notice thereof, and not be burdensome to the country.

Ordered that the Council of State do take care, that the sequestered Timber of
Tinmouth and Carlisle, be employed toward the supply and fortifying of those
Garrisons. Mr. Milling^on was ordered to bring in an Act impowring commitees to
oaths in several cases, and particul^rly, that the committee at Haberdashers
have power to give an oath to Witnesses.

There is come forth in Print a paper; called, The Levellers Design discovered,
said to be written by Henry Den, an Actor in this Tragedy, the effect whereof,
take thus:

The first and great occasion of this unexpected Mutiny, was this: Our
Regiments, with some others, were by Lot designed for the service of Ireland.
The service we granted both very honorable, and also necessary, for the
prevention of War, and ^e^^ing of peace in this Nation: Yet did we believe that
there stood between us and Ireland, an engagement made by the Army, at that
famous Rendevouz at Triplo Heath, June 5. 1647 binding us neither to suffer
dividing nor disbanding of this Army: until such satisfaction were given, as
to that engagement required: It was thought essentially conducing to the
satisfaction of the Army, to the reconciliation of disterenco^, to the
procuring of National freedom, and to the relief of Ireland: To require such a
Council, to be set up again in the Army, consisting of two Commission Officers
and two Agirators, chosen by every Reg. of Horse or Foot together with the
concurring general Officers. In this we were bery bold (I do not say wise)
propounding to his Excellency this condition, to be performed before we could
submit unto his Excellencies order: this performed, we were contented to refer
our selves to the ce^sure of this Council. That which gave us boldness
herein, and that which beguiled us, was this: That we did not conceive how the
engagement, could possibly admit of a dispensation.

Such a Council being by that engagement appointed, as a Representative of the
Army, ought (as we did then believe) to be still continued, unless we would
prove perfidious Covenant-breakers. I could not (I confess) unty this knot:
but herein I was entangled and ensnared; and therefore, for that present,
thought my self bound in duty to God and men, to prosecute this e^gagement:
(...) was (many being of the same mind) that 12 Troops of Horse were drawn
together and looking upon superior Commanders, as tyrannical Covenant break^^s,
we marched contrary to his Excellencies expresses, being heightened with the
zeal of the performance of our Engagement. And touching this thing we were
further persuaded that it did hold forth such stength of reason, that the
greatest part of the Army would suddenly have joined with us: and this was the
cause why I joined with that party dividing from the Army, notwithstanding th^^
appeared less safety and greater hazard: and I believe this lord drew on many
^^nest hearted men, who did co^scientiously seek to make good that engagement.
But that the snare may be broken, and no more be entangled, I shall declare
what satisfaction I have received, that so I may give the same satisfaction
unto others.

Such a Council indeed, the engagement required, and such a Council was
constituted in the Army, acting, and transacting of matters pertaining to the
discipline of the Army. And so long was this Council continued, until the
inconveniences thereof was so far manifest; that most of the Regiments of
Horse and foot did petition his Excellency to send back the several Agitators
unto their respective Regiments, until he should be pleased to resummon them:
professing a willingness in themselves, to submit unto his Excellency with his
Council of War, according to the pristine discipline of the Army. His
Excellency having recieved these Petitions did not immediately send back the
Agitators (as requested) But having first summoned a Council, and communicated
the Petitions unto them; it was by them concluded, that according to the
Petitions of the several Regiments, the Council of Agitators should be
disolved, until his Ezcellency should see cause to resummon them. Now this
being so, his Excellency cannot be charged was th^^^lation of that engagement,
neither does there remain any obligation on his Excellency to have continued or
revived any such Council, much loss (...) warrantable in the Soldiery of the
Army; to assume that power to themselves, seeing they suffered a dissolution by
the same power, by which they had their first constitution.

And her complaint ex^sperating the minds of some, is, that one tyrant is (...)
down, and another set up in his room I confess this complaint were of great
weight if it were true. But truly I suppose this ^riseth from the want of
discerning true Government from tyranny, I (...) the difference between the one
and the other, and I desire other men may discern it. A tyrant makes his will
the law, the other makes the law his will.

Another thing that has much disturbed the minds of men, and filled (...) with
discontent is the slow motion of the Parliament, as to the taking away of
oppressions, and easing the grievances of the people. In answer to this, we are
(...) consider the Parliament before, and after the Armies entrance into
London. (...) to the former consideration, before the Armies entrance into
London, I am so (...) from admiring their slow motion, that it is a wonder to
me that they moved at all any other way then backward: And I do admire the
great providence of God, who withheld them from turning all things upside down,
while the House was filled with so many men of corrupt interests. As to the
Parl. in the second consideration, since the Armies approach to London, we have
cause to bless God that they have done so many things for us, which our eyes
have seen, and what is not yet done, is in promise already performed unto us;
with assurance, of such celerity, as matr^rs of so great weight will possibly
admit.

And for answer unto this complaint, there needs not any to a patient spirit,
and the impatient are not capable of an answer.

In conclusion of this I shall declare my thoughts, that although some men do
not cease to cast dust in the faces of Parl and Council of the army, yet has
not that cloud been thick to hinder the appearance of those beams of Justice,
Mercy, Pity, Clemency, Moderation, which shine forth in them, which have drawn
me to so reverend an esteem of both as I cannot conveniently se: forth, lest I
should incur suspicion of falling from one extreme into another.

Wednesday. THe Parliament took into consideration these ensuing Resolves,
concerning Delinquents, and voted as follows: Resolved upon the question by
the Commons assembled in Parl. That the Reports of all such fines as have not
past either House, shall be forthwith drawn up and presented to the
commissioners mentioned in the Act, en^ituled, an Act prescribing certain times
to Delinquents for perfecting their compositions, for their approbation in
order to a final discharge. Resolved, etc. That the said Reports shall be made
to the Commissioners in order of time, as they were set and not otherwise.
Resolved, etc. That such Reports being made, and the fines allowed and
confirmed by the said Commis^ a final discharge shall issue forth to every
such compounder, according to the authority and directions expressed in the
said Act: And if any Compounder shall not pay in his whole Fine within 6 weeks
after his Composition shall be allowed and confirmed as aforesaid, that then he
shall incur the pen^lties expresed in the aforesaid Act. Resolved, etc. That
the Cases of all Delinquents compounders, who have petitioned for mitigation of
their compositions, and all such whose Reports are not yet made to this House,
and are ordered to be specially reported, except all such as are secluded by the
vote made the 19 of May, 1649 shall be and are hereby referred unto the commis.
at Goldsmiths hal, to hear and determine all the said cases, the said commis.
proceeding therein according to therules for composition given them by the
House, and according to such articles as the compounders has just right unto,
the said Articles being allowed and confirmed by both or either House of
Parliament.

H. Scobel, ^ler. Parl.

An Act declaring and constituting the people of England to be a Commonwealth
and free State
BE it declared and enacted by this present Parl. and by the authority of the
same, that the people of England and of all the Dominions and Territories
thereunto belonging are and shall be, and are hereby constituted, made, and
established to be a Commonwealth and free State: and shall from henceforth be
governed as a Common wealth and free State, by the supreme authority of this
nation, the representatives of the people in Parl. and by such as they shall
appoint and constitute as officers and Ministers under them for the good of the
people, and that without any Kng or house of Lords.

Hen. Scobel. Cler, Parl.

The Head Quarters of the Army this night at Odiam, his Excellency ad^^ceth to
morrow to Portsmouth, to prevent the jealousies that the Levelling party intend
to make a head there.
Thursday, May 24.

THe Lord Genesis moved by a Letter to the House, that a Lecture for exposition of
the Holy Scriptures, may be erected at Oxford, This business was referred to
the Commitee for Oxford to consider of maintenance, and able Orthodox Divines
to be Lecturers.

Ordered that it be referred to the Council of State, to take care for the
repairing and fortifying of the Castles in Kent, of Sandowne, Walmer, and Deal.

Many other particular businesses were debated this day, viz. The ease of poor
Widows and Orphans, the further debate referred till Saturday next. 2. The
condition of Reformadoes and other Soldiers who want their arrears. 3. For
such as desired to double their sums of Money lent upon the security of Deanes
and Chapters Lands. 4. Ordered that an Act be brought in for Deligates to
determine matters concerning Marriage. 5. It was Ordered the tuition of the
late Kings Children, should be committed to the Countess of Leicester, and
three thousand pound out of the Revenue allowed for their maintenane.

Friday, May 25.

THe House passed the Act for settling the Militia of the Hamlets of the Tower
of London, which is as follows.

BE it enacted by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That Major Genesis Skippon,
Col: Francis West, Lieut of the Tower of London; Thomas Hubb^tt, Solomon Sm^th,
Maurice Thompson, Hillary Mempris and George Cooper Esquire Col. John Ven, Col.
Francis Zachary, Col William Willoughby, Col. John White, Lieut. Col. Will:
^evet, Michaell Sa^some Gent. Capt. John King capt. ^leftblank; Manur^^ Capt.
John Tailor, Capt. Henry West. Capt. Robert Hackwell, Capt. Robe^t D^nul^^ Mr.
Cook of Stepn^y; Mr. Will. Pennoyer, Mr. George Wilmore, Mr. Edward Au^y Mr.
John Hazel, Mr. Richard Tyler, Mr. John Hoxton, Mr. Robert Crowtry. Mr. Fulk
Wormlayton Mr. Thomas Hall, Mr. Osmond Coppin. Mr. Tho. Fawson. Mr. Tho. Nash,
Mr. Richard Loton, Mr. Abraham Jesso^, Mr. Francis Reynoldson. Mr. Anthony
Grace. Mr. Abraham Clark. and Mr. John Beck Gent. are hereby made and
constituted a Committee; and that they, or any five or more of them, shall have
power and are hereby authorized, to act, settle and order the Militia, with in
the Hamblers of the Tower of London, and by their warrants or other wise, to
reqire the assistance of all Constables, Headboroughs, and other inhabitants
whatsoever, and for the refusing of their or any of their assistance therein,
to (...) prison their persons, as they shall see cause. And be it further
ordained and enacted, that the said committee, or any five or more of them,
shall have power to assemble and call together all the inhabitants within the
said Hamble^s, and them to charge with Horse or foot arms, according to the
respective abilitie^ and capacityes as occasion shall serve. And it is further
ordained, that the said committee, or any five or more of them, shall hereby
have full power and authority to assemble, muster, array, and weapon, or cause
to be assembled, mustered, arrayed and weaponed, all such horse and foot
forces, within the said Hamlets, and to form them into companies. Troops and
Regiments; and to make, nominate and appoint Colonels Lievt. col. Majors,
Captains, and all ^ther Officers of war and to grant commissions unto them,
authorizing them respectively to train, muster, and discipline according to
order of war, the said Horse and foot forces; and to lead, conduct and employ
them for the suppression of all Rebellions, insurrections, Tumults or
invasions. that may happen within the said Hamblets from time to time; and
further to authorize them with the said forces, to oppose, seize, secure,
disarm, kill or slay, all such persons as shall cause or make any rumults,
insurrections or invasions, or levy any force against authority of Parliament
and to lead and conduct them out of the said Hamblets for the purpose
aforesaid, if by Parl. they shall be thereunto ordered or required. And it is
further enacted and ordained, That the said committee, or any five or more of
them shall have hereby full power and authority to impose a fine, not exceeding
forty shillings, on every person that shall be charged to find or serve on
horse, and twenty shillings on every foot Soldier, for every day that they
shall make default of their aforesaid service, and to levy the same respective
fines by distress, and for non-payment thereof, or want of sufficient
distress, to imprison their persons by the space af^en days, and not longer,
for every such default: And also, that the said Committee, or any five or more
of them, shall hereby have full power and authority to disarme all Papists,
Delinquents, and Disaffected persons, and all such as shall raise, or
endeavor to raise any Tumults, Insurrections or Invasions, and to secure and
imprison their persons if they see cause; and to put the Arms of Papists, and
Delinquents, into the hands of such well-^ffected persons as they shall think
fit to serve with the said Arms, and to cause them to pay to such as shall so
serve with their Arms, such reasonable sallary as they shall think fit, not
exceeding two shillings the day and nights duty, and for default of payment
thereof, to levy the same by distress, or to imprison their persons as
aforesaid.

THe Lord Major of London having received the Order of the House before
mentioned, for proclaiming the Act for making null the Kingly Office, His
Lordship issued forth precepts to every Alderman of the respective Wards, to
this effect:

BY virtue of an Order of Parliament, for proclaiming the Act against the
Kingly Office in the City of London; These are to require you p^^sonally to
meet and make your appearance at Guild Hall London, to morrow in the forenoon,
at the hour of ten of the clooke precisely, as you will answer the contrary at
your peril. Dated the 22 of May, 1649.

BY THE MAYOR.

This day about the time, and at the place aforesaid, the Lord Major and seven
Aldermen met, and had some debate of the business: some desired a full Court,
and were unwilling to engage further then the rest of their Brethren: Others
were unsatisfied without an Act authorizing them to do it. So that at last, the
business was referred till another day, and a Committee chosen to satisfy the
House concerning the same.

As his Excellency the Lord General came from (...) to (...) he went to view
the diggers at St. Geo: Hill in Surry, with (...) and attendants, where they
found about 12. of them hard at work (...) ^^ongst them one Wistanley was the
chief Speaker to whom (...) Questions were propounded by the Officers, and the
Lord (...) made a short speech by way of admonition to them, and this (...) ly
returned sober answers, though they gave little satisfaction ((...) at all) in
regard of the strangeness of the action. It was urged (...) Commons were as
justly due to the Lords as any other Lands. (...) answered that these were
Crown Lands, where they dug and (...) the King that possessed them by the
Norman Conquest being dead, (...) were returned again to the Common people of
England, who (...) improve them if they would take the pains, that for those
(...) would come dig with them, they should have the benefit equal (...) them,
and eat of their bread but they would not force any, applying (...) to the
Golden rule, to do to others as we would be done unto, some o^ficers wished they
had no further plot in what they did, and that no (...) was intended then what
they did pretend.

As to the barrenness of the ground, which was objected (...) a
discouragement, the diggers answered, they would (...) their endeavors, and
leave the success to God, who (...) promised to make the barren ground
fruitful. They carry them (...) very civilly and fairly in the country, and
have the report of sobe^ nest men: some Barley is already come up, and other
fruits form^^ but was pulled up by some of the envious Inhabitants thereabout,
(...) are now so far convinced as to promise not to injury them for (...) ture:
the ground will probably in a short time yield them some (...) of their labors,
how contemptible soever they do yet appear to be.

The Act against the Kingly office was this day proclaimed by (...) Lord Mayor
and eight Aldermen of the City of London at the (...) Exchange: they went on
Horseback in great State, with the City (...) carried before them.

FINIS

