A SERMON ON Phil. IV. 11, 12. For I have Learned in whatsoever State I am in
therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; Every where, and in all things, I am instructed both to be full and to
be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.


THese latter Words of the Apostle Paul, do chiefly and immediately relate to
that two fold Condition of Life, Prosperity or Adversity, Plenty or Poverty, in
the one of which all People are in, or in an even middle State between them
both. And therefore, by Gods assistance (which I do humbly and earnestly pray
for, O send out thy Light and thy Truth, let them lead me.) I shall endeavor
to treat of them under this Limitation and Restriction; That we may know how to
demean, behave and carry our selves, either in Prosperity or Adversity, either
in Plenty or under Poverty, or in that even middle State and Condition between
them both. So that, Every where, and in all things we may be instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need.

When I have felt and experienced within my self, some Covetings and Aspirings
above my present condition, I have checked the same again with this thought and
consideration, That if I my self were to be upon a level and an equality with
the rest of Mankind, I should not then have so much, nor yet so good of the
sort of outward things, as I have had throughout all my past Life, and yet I
have right unto. And I both know and have often reasoned within my self, That
the same God who caused me to have been born of such Parents, might have made
me a Beggars Offspring, and have at first placed me in the Lowest and Poorest
State and Condition, that any of his reasonable Creatures are in throughout
this Earth. This following Scripture has run very much in my mind, When the
most High divided to the Nations their Inheritance, when He separated the Sons
of Adam, He set the bounds of the People according to the Number of the
Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. It is here said, According to the Number of
the Children of Israel: So He did at first things near by an Equality; and
accordingly He does now proportion it out both to this and to other Nations and
Countries. Allotting to each such a Number of Inhabitants, as He knows it will
conveniently feed and maintain. And after that, God had in his Infinite
Knowledge and Wisdom so divided to the Nations, and set forth the bounds of the
People according to the Number of its several Inhabitants, Evil came presently
afterward into the World, with Covetousness and Discontent, and the Sons of
Violence and Transgression Sprang up. Wickedness quickly Got head and the
greater part of its side. And then some by Labor and Industry obtained what
others through Negligence and Idleness parted withal, the World going on in the
usual way as it does now. But the Great Landlord of all (Whose is the Earth and
the fullness thereof) has originally given enough for all for the Fruits and
Cattle (Blessed be his Goodness) are abundantly sufficient to maintain all its
Inhabitants: But He has set Limits, Bounds, and Landmarks, that every one
might know what was his own with a severe forbidding, and Curse Annexed to him
that Shall remove his Neighbors Landmark. We may here use such Boldness of
Speech, God, who gives the Beasts their Food, and the young Ravens which cry,
is, if we may so speak, bound, (that is, it is a thing which belongs to him,
and is expected from him) to give necessary Food unto his Living Creatures; and
accordingly He does so stand obliged in Covenant; yea, and He does perform the
same: That is to say, To supply real Wants and not unnecessary Lusts; to give
what is absolutely necessary or sufficient, but not superfluities, or needless
things. Behold the Fowls of the Air for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor
Gather into Barns; Yet your Heavenly Father feeds them. Mat. 6. 26. We may as
it were see with our Eyes his watchful and especial Providence (or providing,
for that is the proper signification of the Word Providence) over all his
Living Creatures. The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their
meat in due season. Thou openest thine hand and satisfiest the desire of every
Living thing. Psalm. 145. 15, 16. Who covereto the Heaven with Clouds, who
prepares rain for the Earth, Who makes Grass to Grow upon the mountains. He
gives to the Beast his Food, and to the young Ravens which cry, Psalm. 147. 8,
9. Are ye not much better then they? Yea, much more Men and Women, the
Principal part of the Creation of God, are under his Care and Provision.

Every least Part, Word and Syllable in Scripture is significative, and when it
is Written, I know that the Lord will maintain the Right of the Poor. Psalm. 140
12. We may hence assuredly Gather and Conclude, That the Poor have as much
Right unto necessary Food and Raiment, as any have to his House, Lands, or
Money. I will go on to add, and I will prove it: That they have more and
greater Right unto that by this Law and true saying of God, then they have a
right unto the other things, only by the Laws and Establishment of Man. Now the
first is of as much greater Force and Authority, as the Law of God is above the
Law of Man, which is as much as God is greater then Man; which again, is as
much as the vast fabric of the World does exceed in bulk, and dimension one
single dust of the Balance, or the least Grain of Sand.

Again, whereas it is Written, When the Poor and Needy seek water and there is
none, and their Tongue fails for Thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God
of Jacob will not forsake them. Isa. 41. 17. How is this fulfilled and found
true? For I my self, have seen a Poor and Needy Creature look with much
Earnestness and Anguish for a meal of Victuals, when He has been hunger
bitten, and for all that, He has been at length forced to go away without it:
Nevertheless this Promise of God stands firm and sure to such as to futurity,
and in the time of the restitution of all things, it will be literally made
Good. But here again it may be surmised, What is this the near, if one shall be
famished in the mean while, as I have heard that in an hard Winter, or in a
Dearth or scarcity of Victuals, some have dyed for want of necessaries. The sin
whereof will be required of that respective Place and Generation, if the
Inhabitants thereof could have possibly prevented and avoided it. Yet still
there is a great deal in this Promise of God, for He that turns Man to
Destruction, will say, Return ye Children of Men, Psalm. 90. 3. He will raise up
and restore that same Life which they lost, and will so order the matter that
it shall never be lost again, by changing it into Life for evermore. But herein
especially, is that promise fulfilled at this present Time, When the Poor and
Needy seek water and there is none, and their Tongue fails for Thirst, I the
Lord will hear them, I the God of Jacob will not forsake them; That is, what is
of God and appears forth in any of his Saints, Servants and Creatures; This
Godlike Nature and Disposition, does actually reach forth Bread and Water to
them that need it. So much as is of God in any Man or Woman, will hear the Poor
and Needy, so as to give what they ask and to grant their Requests, and will
not forsake them: for it is a certain Rule, that where any one is hard hearted,
or close fisted toward the Poor and Needy, there is little of God, or Goodness
in that Man or Woman. As again, on the other hand, where is Compassion or
bounty toward them according to our several Ability, It is not so much we
which do that Good deed, but God and Christ that dwells in us. It is the
Spirit of him does Act in and through us, who has promised and does perform
it, When the Poor and Needy seek Water, and there is none, and their Tongue
fails for Thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Jacob will not
forsake them.

Having Discoursed these Truths, in the General and by way of Introduction to
the following matter, (which same Truths, are necessary and useful to be made
known) Let us come somewhat nearer to our intended Subject in hand.

It has been said, That Nature is content with a little, but certain it is,
that Grace is content with less. We are expressly told, that Godliness with
contentment is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. Which exactly Answers to what has been
aforesaid, how that Paul had so Learned in whatsoever state he was in therewith
to be content, That what would be really and indeed want unto others, was no
want unto him. Even so it is here again; for speaking in the foregoing Verse,
of Men of corrupt Minds and Destitute of the Truth, supposing that gain is
Godliness; That is, they imagine that to get Gain, that is serving God and
Answering the ends of their Creation; and minding their business, that is
Religion. (We have many that talk after the very same manner in these our days)
In Answer to whom comes in this Precious Truth, Godliness with contentment is
great Gain. That is, Godliness with contentment is Equivalent and does contain
in it, and is altogether as Good as real Gain; for it does all one, and as much
(I say, more) help and contribute to the well Being and Happiness of Man as the
other does. But this is a mystery to Wordlings, and an Art which cannot be by
them understood and apprehended, How that a little that a righteous man has,
is better then the riches of many Wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. Better is a little with
Righteousness, then Great Revenues without right, How that the having neither
Poverty nor Riches, but being fed with Food convenient for us, when this is
joined with the knowledge and fear of the Lord, with the Practice of Universal
Christianity, shall make Men and Women to live more sweetly and comfortably,
then ten times the quantity and abundance without it; All this is Parable and
Mystery (tho the thing is true, and experienced by his Saints and Servants) and
as a strange thing to the People of the World; Besides that assured Preparation
and Tendency which it has unto Eternal salvation. Thou have put gladness into
my Heart, more then in the time that their Corn and their Wine increased, Psalm.
4. 7. But how common is it with the People of the World in their Contracts and
such like, to judge and esteem of each Person according to what Money or Lands
they have, more then according to what and Person is. For alas! In this thing
they are Ignorant, that Grace and Goodness, Knowledge and Wisdom in any Man or
Woman, will lay in a better and more sure Foundation for a comfortable
contented and happy Life, even in this World, then Thousands of Gold and
Silver; Besides, that all this is the only means toward the being saved and
blessed in the World to come, into which we are all just entering.

But observe further, with what kind of unanswerable reasoning the Apostle Paul
does back and confirm the aforementioned Truth, Godliness with Contentment is
great Gain. Thereupon He immediately adds and subjoyns, For we brought nothing
into this World, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. Then He takes up
again the same Exhortation, and having aforeshewed the excellency and also the
reason thereof, And having Food and Raiment, let us therewith be content, 1 Timothy 6. 6, 7, 8.

This State of having just Food and Raiment is neither Plenty nor yet Poverty,
but that even middle State between them both. And if we can be content
therewith, as also be content with Plenty, and what is yet harder, Be content
under Poverty, Why then every where, and in all things we are instructed, both
to be full and to be hungry, to abound and suffer need.

There is no such great matter in being content amidst Plenty and Prosperity
may some imagine, but even in them the Lesson of Contentment is to be Learned
and Practiced; for there is a tiresomness and unsatisfactoryness even in Plenty
and Prosperity it self; for the Spirit may be observed to be even then restless
and troubled. Which does partly arise from the insufficiency in the thing it
self, to give real contentment and satisfaction to the Soul and Heart of Man.
For Plenty and Prosperity do chiefly relate to outward things, and these do
pertain only to the Body. So that it is no more to be wondered, that the Soul
should still remain unsatisfied even whilst the Body has them, then that the
Body should suffer hunger, even whilst the Soul is fed with her proper Food,
the Words of Knowledge and Wisdom. As also a discontent does arise even amidst
Plenty and Prosperity, when People do not know fully and thoroughly the Nature
of things, and then they do not subordinate things rightly according to their
several Ends and Objects; Or, they do not suffer the stream of their affections
to fix on those Objects which are most worthy, and that is God and Immortality.
They imagine and place too much good in Temporal and Visible things; and again
they imagine and place too little or less Good, and esteem in Eternal,
Invisible and Spiritual things then really there is in them: Or rather, they do
cross, and act contrary to that Rule and Direction of the Apostle, Set your
Affection on things above, and not on things on the Earth, Colos. 1. 3. For it
is too evident and certain, That most People (even among those who seem to be
Religious also) do set their Affection, or as it is in the marginal reading,
their mind on things on the Earth and not on things above. And thence it comes
to pass, that though they have their full and plenty of the things of this Earth,
yet the Creature being made Subject to Vanity, Romans 8. 20. And there being an
Insufficiency or Inability in it, to give real Peace and Rest, or Contentment
to the Soul of Man, thereupon (that is from this Vanity) does arise Vexation of
Spirit. So that it is too true (for the same is seen and experienced, That
several People have fullness and abundance and yet they have not Contentment:
The want whereof makes them to go out again, and betake themselves to further
Coveteousness and its appendant of injustice and wrong, to the Pleasures of sin
for a season, and to those several kinds of Mad and Frantic Actions which are
done throughout this Earth. Thou art wearied in the Greatness of thy way, yet
said thou not there is no Hope, Isa. 57. 10. And so they are tired and
wearied in looking out and seeking after satisfaction; yet they will go on
still to expect the same and not sit down persuaded, that there is no
satisfaction to be had from the things of this World. And then here is their
fault Now and Vexation, and will be their Punishment and Misery hereafter, that
for all it is so, Nevertheless, they will not turn the current and stream of
their Affection from the things on Earth, and lift up their mind and set their
affection on things above: For if they once did that, then all would go right
again and as it should be; for they should be sought after and Minded and Loved
in the first Place, and all other things should be brought in Subordination,
subserviency and tendency to them.

Now the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ (which the People of the
World have not, or at least do not act by) does all this, and supply what is
wanting and defective in them. For as that does inform and acquaint us of
things present, and things to come, of what things pertain to the Body and what
pertain to the Soul; what does belong to the life that now is, which is as a
Vapor and continues not, and what relates unto future and endless Life. As
hereby we know the Order, Connection and Subordination of things one to another,
and as we give to each thing its proportion and weight, and no more, and so
labor and seek after it accordingly, thus the Grace of God which brings
Salvation; Thus the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ brings
Contentment; And it has appeared unto all Men. For God has showed it unto
them, or it is within them, Teaching them, or in the Phrase of our Text, Every
where, and in all things, instructing them both to be full and to be hungry,
both to abound and to suffer need. This way only, may any one learn to be
content amidst Plenty and Prosperity.

But as says the Proverb, Of all sorrows, a fat sorrow is best: So there seems
to be no such great difficulty to learn to be content when in the Prophets
Phrase, Their Portion is Fat and their Meat Plenteous, Hab. 1. 16. Their Eyes
stand out with Fatness, they have more then heart could wish, Psalm. 73. 7. But
indeed there is greater difficulty to be content under Adversity and Poverty.
Here again, all things are equally possible to an Almighty Power; for the same
Grace and Knowledge of Jesus Christ which does instruct how to be full, will
also instruct how to be hungry, and how to suffer need, all one as how to
abound. I will assure ye, hunger and need are sensible things; for although those
that are full, can speak lightly and disdainfully thereof, yet they are indeed
afflicting and sore Evils. Here again conceive or feel it in its very worst,
yet the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ speaks a Word of
Consolation and Contentment, as it says on this wise.

Let not your heart be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me. So O
Man or Woman, be not troubled if thou art in want here, for that will be ended;
but have together with it Poverty of Spirit, (which shuts out all Murmuring and
Aspiring Thoughts) and then yours is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 3. Which is
Everlasting, and will have no End. And Jesus lifted up his Eyes on his
Disciples and said, Blessed be ye Poor for yours is the Kingdom of God. Blessed
are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled. Blessed are ye that weep now,
for ye shall laugh, Luke 6. 20, 21. Why should People be cumbred and make such
a stir about the things of this Life; for the Rejoicing or Vexation, as to
their abundance or want, expires with the moment before us. Every Revolution of
the Sun, the Night comes and shuts up all. Those who did Cry or Laugh, are in
deep silence. The Laborious or Idle Persons are at rest. And here it is found
true, the sleep of a Laboring Man is sweet, but the laziness, fullness, or
guilt of others makes that it does not become so unto them. The fine Clothes
are laid aside, and so is the vile Raiment The mouth is still, or shut with
Sleep that fed upon Dainties, or common fare. Many are apt to stomach it, and
have Indignation that they are forced to feed upon course Food. But is not the
flesh that feeds upon it, gross and filthy also? And does it not become more
filthy when it is cast our into the drought and goes forth in Excrements. Every
thing that People Eat or Drink, is more fine and clean in its kind, then the
Belly, or those uncomely parts of us, which receives it in and vents it. Be not
offended, for even in the Scriptures we meet with these very same, or such kind
of Expressions; as indeed, sometimes they are necessary to be used in bringing
out the very Truth. And so do People grudge at and are ashamed of their Vile
Raiment, Jam. 2. 2. I would only ask such as think so, Is it not a Vile Body,
Phil. 3. 21. That is to be arrayed therewith? The Goodness, or Excellency of
Man does not consist in these things, which are merely extrinsical unto him.
And as our Savior Jesus Christ did say, sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof. So here it may be conceived, as the same is known and experienced,
that the outward good or evil of each day is determined and finished with the
day, which goes and passes away, and it is as a Dream when one awaketh, For
what much greater difference is there between yesterday's Actions and Doings,
and last nights Dream. As one day and night is to the time of our Sojourning
here, so is the whole as to Eternity and future Life. The things which we have
already done, would not profit, unless we did build on further and finish them:
So it will be of all labor done as to the things here, which will have an end,
and signify nothing; but yet the good or evil of each thing will come into
judgment; For God will bring every secret thing into judgment, with every work,
whether it be good or bad, Eccles. 12. 14. So that each deed done in the Body
(though it is over and past) will tend to our benefit or loss at that day.

Now as it is written, This spoke he signifying by what death he should
glorify God, Joh. 21. 19. So this is the thing to be attended unto, and
endeavored after, by what life we shall glorify God. So that if we can and
also do glorify God in our Adversity and Poverty, it will be better unto us
than to have had Plenty and Prosperity. And as it is elsewhere written, Abraham
was strong in Faith, giving glory unto God, Romans 4. 20 so it is here; he that
is content under Adversity and Poverty, the same Person does give glory unto
God. How so? After the same manner as Abraham did; for he staggered not at the
promise of God through unbelief, and is fully persuaded, that what God has
promised he was able also to perform; how that he will save the poor afflicted
People, and that he will give unto his Creatures yet better things in the
future state, which the contented Christian does firmly believe, and patiently
wait for. For though he might remedy or get out of his present adverse and poor
Condition by sinful or evil means, yet he will not consent unto, nor do them.
Thus while he is under those outward evils and necessities, he does not charge
God foolishly, nor yet suffer his heart to fret against him, nor yet will he
sin to be eased or delivered out of them. In all this he does glorify, or give
glory unto God.

Love not the World, neit^er the things that are in the World, 1 John 2. 15.
One reason of this is added, ver. 17. which though it is expressed in short, is
of mighty force and cogency; and the World passes away and the lust thereof.
This is necessary to persuade and exhort unto, and for People to practice and
observe, in order to Contentment; for almost all discontent does arise from too
much love of and hankering after the things of this World, and imagining more
satisfaction therein than really there is; and thence it is that People are so
vexed and upon the fret to miss of or be disappointed of them. But if there is
no love placed thereon, according as this Divine Command runs, then if we have
the things of this World, we may be thankful and moderate in the use of them,
and also be so much the more patient in Spirit if we have them not. Nothing is
so apt to make us indifferent and unconcerned as to them, as a through knowledge
and consideration of the Transitoriness and Vanity of all the things of this
World. They all pass away, and they are vain. Says God in Jeremiah 8. 13. The
things that I have given them shall pass away from them. Let the Reader call to
mind all the enjoyments that he ever had in all his past Life, and what does
remain out of them at this present moment? He is desired not to make the
reflection in Sickness, or on a Deathbed, but even now, in the day of Health,
and whilst he has and enjoys them. Are they not the very same as if they were
never perceived or had? Thou can think upon such a day that was past in
joviality and merriment, and another which went away in vexation and dullness;
compare them both now together, and what advantage has one over the other?
There is no difference of happiness or misery as to the past.

There is such a do and stir made in the World about Prosperity and Adversity;
how wonderfully careful, diligent and solicitous are People to have the first,
and how wonderfully afraid are they, and how do they seek to avoid the other?
And yet for all, take the Galley-Slave who has for so many days or years
toiled at the Oar, or the vagrant Beggar, or who has led the most miferable,
laborious, and tiresome life. And on the other side, take the World's most
happy Minion, who has had all things at will, and in the greatest plenty; who
has past all his whole foregoing time in all health, mirth and jollity, and
compare both these together; and as to all the past time of their respective
Lives there is no odds between them both. It does seem and appear so now, even
whilst we are in the midst of one or the other; and much more will it seem and
appear so, when we are translated from Time to Eternity, from Earth to Heaven,
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind, Isa. 65. 17. All the
whole business, employment and small variety of this present Life will be as a
Dream when one awaketh, or as the Dream of a Night Vision. And yet
notwithstanding all this Vanity, Transitoriness, and passing away of things,
yet according to the Good or Evil, Duty or Sin we have done and committed in
this vain and transitory Life, it will proportionably tend to our advantage, or
loss, our reward or punishment for all Eternity. For God has so ordained it,
and he will accordingly do and recompense unto Men and Women, the reasonable
Inhabitants of this Earth. So that the right consequence is, Art thou called in
a prosperous and plentiful Condition of Life? Do all the good that ever thou
can, and abstain from all appearance of evil. Stand in awe and sin not, and
leave no Duty whatsoever undone. Thou art to do the very same also if thou art
placed in a poor and adverse Condition; or if thou art in an even and middle
state between them both, there Trust in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou
dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. Delight thy self also in the
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart, Psalm. 37. 3, 4.

And what is the Desires of thine heart? If thou art a Worldling, or
Sensualist, then it is for plenty of Corn and Wine, for a good Estate, and for
a great deal of Money; for Health, and long Life, and such like. I profess
solemnly and seriously this is not the desires of mine heart, for I would not
be so content and put off, if God Almighty should say to me, thou shall have
the desires of thine heart; or if the Lord should appear to me in a Dream by
Night, as he did to Solomon, 1 Kings 3. 5. (see it,) and say Ask what I shall
give thee. I do here make known what in this case I would ask of God, Peace
here, and Salvation hereafter; Contentment here, and afterward that Rest which
remains for the People of God; Grace here, and Glory hereafter. Give
therefore thy Servant an understanding heart, that I may discern between good
and bad, ver. 9. Give me pardon and forgiveness of all my past Sins, in as
full, free and ample manner as God has any where promised in his word; and
give to me grace, strength and power to abstain from Sin for the time to come,
and that I may finish the Work which he has sent me on Earth for to do; and
that I may perform all the mean and preparatory Acts which are necessary, that
my Soul may be committed into the hands of God, and received up into Heaven,
after it shall be dislodged from this Body, or Tenement of Clay, wherein now
for a very little time longer it does inhabit and reside. These are the desires
of mine heart; and I do again truly declare, that I have not the least desire
or coveting whatever, but what comes within or in subordination under these
first and great desires.

If I have any further desires after more Money or Estate than now I have, it
is, not that I may consume it upon my Lusts, James 4. 3. or upon my Pleasures
(according to the Marginal reading there) or the pride of Life, but that I may
hononr the Lord with my substance, and consecrate my gain unto the Lord, and my
substance unto the Lord of the whole Earth, Micah 4. 13. for then I would be
ready to distribute the same toward the outward charge and labor, for the
publishing and propagation of his Eternal Truth. I would to God there was the
same and alike mind in the Rich and substantial People: That they also would be
Rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
and contribute toward it; for the Work of the Lord is common, and should be
the joint endeavor of all his Servants.

The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee, Grant thee according to thine own heart, and fulfill all thy Counsel,
Psalm. 20. 1, 4. But if the Lord grant me according to mine own heart, and
fulfill all my Counsel, then, as it is elsewhere written, the Lord has d ne
great things for us, whereof we are glad, Psalm. 126, 3. So the Lord would do
great things for me; he would do even my all that I am capable of; that is, to
serve him here according to his will, so that I may be accepted of him at the
last, and obtain and be invested with Eternal Salvation.

The same Lord who Created the Soul, Created those Desires also that are in the
same Soul; and it may be observed that these Desires are in relation and
tendency unto, and they reach after somewhat which again is not vain; for the
same God who first implanted in a desire toward it, will afterward give the
thing it self. And this Desire puts us upon using the Means, Labor, Endeavor,
and seeking after it. Now the Complex and whole of the Desire of Man is after
these things (which are also connected together) Life, Happiness, and
Salvation. As the hungry craves after Food, the covetous Riches, the ambitious
Honor, and every one Rest and Satisfaction; and they will use also the common
means in their own Power toward the having them. So likewise there is a desire
ingrafted into Man, after those things which God has promised. And it is but
reasonable he should do so much toward obtaining them, as the Men of the World
do for the things of this World; for otherwise he will come short of them. And
those pertaining to the Kingdom of God, are set forth by the very same things,
in a greater degree then what is so earnestly followed after here. We should do
well to give heed, and attend unto the working of those desires within us,
which way they make, and after what they do point and reach forth. If those
desires be after Temporal and worldly Things; Here the best way is by
contracting and lessening of them; for a Man may sooner draw off those
boundless and unlawful desires, then he can fulfill them. He may be more quickly
contented then great; and he will find it better to have been innocent, then to
have been Rich. But if these Desires do rise up after Heavenly, Spiritual, and
Eternal Things, there let God enlarge thy Heart, and in his Name desire as much
as ever thou will. The more thou desire, if thou do accordingly labor
after it with diligence, and earnestness, the better it will be for thee, and
the more thou will receive; for here the sure word of promise is, Open thy
Mouth wide, and I will fill it, Psalm. 81. 10. the wider it is opened, the more
it will receive. And nothing is a more certain Truth (though we must apprehend
and lay hold upon it by Faith, because it will not be all fulfilled in this
Life, and on this Earth) then that God will at length satisfy those Desires he
has put into us. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him. Psalm. 145.
19. This is expressed in the future tense, and in ver. 16. it is said, He
satisfies the desire of every living thing. That is spoken in the present
tense, because that belongs to the living and unreasonable Creatures; for we
may perceive evidently, that Beasts, Birds, and Fishes, are contented and
satisfied with the things before them; whereas Man is not. It is the same
Creator of all: But hereby is shown forth, that God will do somewhat more for
Man in the future state of things, which he will not do for them. And hereunto
is another Promise, The Lord will perfect that which concerns me. Psalm. 138.
8. And we are to wait his good and appointed Time.

Here this great Expectation from the last end and distribution of things,
should quiet and silence our Spirits every time they begin to rise and be
troubled. Who is much concerned for the pleasantness or dreadfulness of a
Dream, after that it is over and past? For there is no odds, and it is all near
the same as to the good or evil nature thereof. All this may be learnt and
understood as a Man.

But then the Grace and Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ does set before us
such very great, wonderful, and enduring things, that the present is or ought
to be no more minded in comparison to them, then one who is in pursuit and
likelihood to obtain ten thousand Pounds, does value or regard the loss of a
Pin, or of a Farthing. However unconcerned he stands to it now, yet the
reasonable Creature can never be content to miss of Happiness and Salvation;
and so he will manifest and make it appear when this Happiness and Salvation
comes to be present and ^ust before him; for therefore it is, that People do so
little regard it, because (...) seems future, and to be at a distance; and
there (...) this disadvantage against all our Preaching, concerning which they
imagine, He prophesies of Times afar off, Ezeck. 12. 27. Whereas all this
great matter which is cried up so much to be at a distance, and to be afar off,
is no futher off then the death of each Man or Woman; which for ought we know,
may be this Night, to Morrow, within a Week, or a Month, or a Year, as to the
healthiest, youngest, and lustiest of us all; which will most certainly come
upon every one of us, one time or another. And then if there be amongst ye, any
profane Person as Esau, who for one morsel of Meat, sold his Birthright; who,
for the Pleasures of Sin for a season, for the Reward of Iniquity, or the Gains
of Unrighteousness, has forfeited his or her share in that Blessing which the
Lord has commanded, even Life for evermore. Even these very same Persons
either when they come to lie in the point or extremity of Death, or more
certainly, (because many may remain stupid or ignorant, or unbelieving even
then) afterward that their Souls are gone forth into the invisible World, they
would fain inherit the Blessing; and then they will seek for it carefully with
Tears, though it will be to no purpose, for they will find no place for
Repentance, because here he gave them a space for Repentance, and they repented
not. Then (if such a thing were possible, and might be admitted of, which yet
is not) even those very same Persons would give thousands of Rams, and ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, their first born, for their Transgression, and the
fruit of their Body for the sin of their Soul; who now will not make
Restitution for one farthing of ill gotten Goods; nor yet hardly give a
thousand farthings in Alms giving, or toward good Works; or who will not now
give up a Lust, or a sinful profit at all the commandments and Requirings of
God. If any such profane, careless, and indifferent Souls should hear or read
these lines, Behold I have told you before, I do hereby warn and make known
unto such before hand, that their Thoughts and Apprehensions will be thus
mightily altered and changed, as to what they stand so unconcerned and
unaffected now; for as on the one hand it will be the best contentment, and
greatest satisfaction (I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness,
Psalm. 17. 12.) to be possessed of, and make sure of Heaven: So again, there
will be no discontent so bad as that, to miss and come short thereof. This will
be the gnawing of the Worm which shall never die. Of this kind will be that
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, which shall be upon every Soul
of Man that does evil, Romans 2. 8, 9. There shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and
ye your selves thrust out. Though as to these little, vain, and fugitive
things, we may know and be instructed, and also bear with how to be full, or
how to be hungry: But as to that fullness, or Hunger spoken of in Luke 6. 21.
25. Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled. Woe unto you that
are full, for ye shall hunger. Here it is Impossible even for the Tongue of Men
and Angels to instruct the Creatures, or persuade the Souls to be contented and
bear therewith. The reasonable Creature can never be content to lose Heaven,
and fall into Hell, because of the exceeding greatness of the loss, that
complete and absolute Misery this would be to be involved in, as also from the
very long duration, and irreversibleness thereof. If God comes to contend for
ever in the Punishment and Misery of his Creatures, and to be always wroth,
then the Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made.

But on the other better hand, if one is a Child of God, and an Heir of the
Kingdom of Heaven, then he can very well be contented under all the Evils and
Hardships of this present World. All one as an Heir of a good Estate does rub
through some little and trivial Inconveniences in the mean while, out of
Prospect and Expectation of that. Besides the Faith of Great and unseen things
which are Eternal, a through Knowledge of the littleness of all present and
temporal things will soon make us content as to the having or not having them;
or rather work us into that blessed Temper and Disposition of Paul, As having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. His Mind was so qualified with Grace,
and transformed into the Divine Nature, that it was the same as if he possessed
all things.

As to the littleness of all present things, consider within your selves, What
is your Life? It is as a Vapor that appears for a very little time, and then
vanishes away. Remember how short my time is, Wherefore have thou made all Men
in vain? Their Mirth or Divertisements are as the flyings up and down of a
Swallow, during its appointed time. Their heaviness or Misery seems all one as
the mourning of a Dove, which also is ended. Whatever delights or afflicts,
soon passes away, and we are gone. As to our outward sensible good or evil,
though we would fain have the one, and avoid the other; yet there is not much
more in it, then the ticklings of a Feather, or to prevent the scratchings of a
Pin. Our goings up and down each day, appear as the moving of a Shadow, which
is lost in darkness. And so we might run through or over all the several things
of this present Life, they are all little, fugitive, and vain.

As on the one hand, this true consideration is a mighty word of Comfort and
Contentment to the Children of Faith, the Heirs of Life and Immortality; so on
the other, the more knowing People of this World turn it into a matter of
Skepticism; as also the more brutish, ignorant and ungodly sort of People, do
hereby harden and confirm themselves in their old wonted manner of Life of
Brutishness, Ignorance, and Ungodliness; and they will not easily be brought
off from it; for like as there are in the last days, Scoffers walking after
their own ungodly Lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For
since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation. So they imagine and reason within themselves, What
need of any words of Comfort or Contentment at all, seeing that all things here
are so little, fugitive and vain? All things come alike to all. There is one
Event to the Righteous and to the Wicked; to the good, to the clean, and to the
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not; as is the
Good, so is the Sinner. And he that swears, as he that fears an Oath. The
World passes away, and goes on in its course; and we will make a shift to rub
through it as well as other People, and there is an end. Here has been
delivered a Discourse concerning Contentment, and for all that, and all the
words in the World concerning it, we do perceive that those People live
altogether as contented for the Life, who do not hear them, as those who do
hear them: As is the knowing Man, so is the ignorant Person; it seems to come
all to one.

By this Objection Satan works in the Minds of many People, especially of the
common and poorer sort; and hereby he serves the great Ends of his Kingdom of
Darkness, in beating People off from God and good things. But to answer them in
their own familiar way of speaking, All is well that ends well. It is the same
old thredbare Imagination of the People of former Generations, which is come
down amongst us also, and dwells in the Hearts of many People of the present
Generation. Ye have said it is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we
have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of
Hosts. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord
hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was written before him for
them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. And they shall be
mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in the day when I make up my Jewels; and I will
spare them as a Man spares his own Son that serves him. Then shall ye return,
and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked; between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not. Mal. 3. 14, 16, 17, 18. So we refer our Objectors
and Unbelievers, those ignorant and ungodly Persons, that think thus in their
Minds, over unto the day of Death, and of Judgment, when they shall see that
twofold Distribution of things, that is to be made in the after State. True
indeed, the End and Event is to prove all things. But whosoever suspends his Faith
until then, his Condition will be without Remedy. Then shall they return, that
is, to the proper Understanding of Men, and discern, what before they might
have believed; for it was declared and told unto them over and over, that there
should be a diversity made of Happiness to the one, and Misery to the other,
between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not.

As to that great doubt and surmise which is in the Thoughts of the Heart of
almost every one, How that all things happen alike to all, and that there is
one and the same Event to Godly or Ungodly, Righteous or Wicked, I have in a
printed Sermon on Deuteronomy. 8. 2. opened and explained that Mystery, wherein I have
showed and assigned the very Reason thereof, Why God ordained it so to be,
Namely, That it is to prove the Children of Men, To know what is in their
Heart, whether they will keep his Commandments or no. Indeed, if People were
not still puzzled and perplexed; if they did not always err in their Heart, Heb.
3. 10. whereat his Soul is grieved, they would never imagine and talk after
that manner, That it was the same thing, whether they heard or received into
their Knowledge, words of Comfort or Contentment, or not; for they may, yea and
they do think and say the same, as to the other words of Grace and Salvation
al^o. I would ask such vain Imaginers, and foolish Reasoners, Is it the same
thing as to natural ^ife, Whether they do eat and drink, or they do not? No,
here they will say, It is not; for except we eat and drink, we must famish and
dye. Even so it is here in the like manner, though they can be hardly made to
apprehend this; for the natural Man discerns not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolish^ess unto him; neither can he know them, bec^us^ they
are spiritually discerned. As Simeon waited for the Consolation of Israel, so
the Soul cannot be comforted without the words of Consolation. The Soul cannot
possibly be saved and happy, without the words of Salvation and Happiness. As
the Body would die for want of Sustenance, so the Soul may be indeed held in
suspense a little longer time, even all the days it is in the Body; whereas
that cannot be much longer without Food then fourteen days: So without the
words of Knowledge and Salvation, the Soul would die Eternally, and fall down
into Misery. Send Men to Joppa, and call for Simon, whose Surname is Peter, who
shall tell thee words, whereby thou and thy House shall be saved, Acts 11. 13,
14. Even so God has sent unto us Men and Women, the reasonable Inhabitants of
this Earth, Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, who have, and do
tell us words, whereby we, and all such as receive and obey the same words,
shall be saved. Christ in an emphatical manner is called the Word, John 1. 1.
and the word of God. For all the words which God made known through Moses and
the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles do all relate unto, and meet in him,
as lines in their Center. And all things were made by him, (the Word) and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Here the Evangelist has
reference unto John 1. 1. Psalm. 33. 6. So the certain consequence is, That all
Men and Women will be saved by him (the Word) that shall ever be saved. For
there is no other way under Heaven given unto Men, whereby we must be saved.
And as Moses of old time had, even so at this day Christ has those that Preach
him every Sabbath day. Therefore see that ye refuse not him that speaks; for
if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. For
though Christ is long since ascended on high, and sits at the right Hand of
God, yet he speaks to us even now by his Word, and by his Ministers; He that
rejects me, and receives not my Words, has one that jud^eth him; the Word
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him at the last day, John 12. 48. And
if we will not hear that Word, nor yet his Ministers, neither would we be
persuaded, if Christ should come once again into the World after the same
manner as he did: But his next coming is unto Judgment.

I have often mentioned these and the like things, to the froward Inhabitants
of this my Country and Generation, who are Non-Hearers, or Non-Readers of the
Word, wherever it is faithfully and truly Preached, or made known. I have
warned them often, and I do hereby warn them again, and I could almost tell
them weeping, (for my Soul has Grief and Indignation at them for their
stubbornness and refusal herein) That since that his Word is every Sabbath day,
or Week day, purely, truly, and faithfully Preached, or made known, God will
require it of them, and impute it as Sin to them, severally, for as often as
they have neglected to come to hear it.

Hereby also may be seen and perceived, How much this Ordinance of Preaching
the Word does further, and is absolutely necessary unto the Salvation of
Mankind; and how that such Men and Women, who would indeed have their Souls be
saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, ought, and must attend continually upon the
Ministry, and hearing thereof; for this same Preaching of the Word, which does
lead, direct, and help toward obtaining the rest to come, does also instruct,
that others may learn, in whatsoever state they are in, the mean while
therewith to be content; to know how to be full, and how to be hungry.

And tho it be here surmised, nevertheless, That those people also are content
who do very seldom or ever hear the word preached, much less are they
frequenters of it. What advantage then of my preaching, and what profit of your
hearing the word? Much every way, chiefly because it is an Ordinance, and
appointment of God; for those who have the gifts of preaching to preach and
profit therewithal. But the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man
to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7. For what if some do despise and refuse to
attend upon this Ordinance, shall their despising or Refusal make this
Ordinance of God of none effect? or that the word which goes out of his mouth,
shall return vo^? In no wise, God forbid; for so it is, some will be ^aved by
the Ministry of the Word; others will be condemned by it. Some will be more
edified and benefited, others (through their refusal, and turning away their Feet
from the place where it is preached with a lively Voice, will be more hardened,
and rendered yet worse, and more inflexible to the Exhortation thereof.)

But it will be so much the better for every man or woman the more he or she
shall glorify God, and the more good they shall do in their Generation, as also
the more they shall abstain from all appearance of Evil. Now the Word, and the
preaching thereof, does help and assist us in these two points, to eschew Evil,
and do Good Unless these two Ends of Life, eschewing Evil, and doing Good, are
answered and observed, ir would be better not to have been born, or not to have
lived at all. Most people, when they hear or read such a Scripture as this
following, do not attend thtoughly to the full meaning and signification
thereof; For all this they sinned still, and believed not his wondrous works.
Therefore their days did he consume in Vanity, and their Years in trouble,
Psalm. 78. 32, 33. The Life of sinners and ungodly is spent in one of these two
either Vanity or Trouble. Ay but many think that the former of these is no
Curse or Punishment; For, as it is written, O ye sons of men, how long will ye
love Vanity? Psalm. 4. 2. And it is seen and experienced that they take mirth
and delight therein. But to those who have Faith and Knowledge, nothing sounds
so bad as to have their Days consumed in Vanity, and their Years in trouble.
Because that every thing in this life tends to future Account one way or
another. And to this thing of consuming their Days in Vanity, succeeds loss for
all Eternity. Even a loss of that Reward and Blessedness God has promised and
reserved for his Creatures, if such had been found worthy, and had been meet to
have been partakers thereof. Cast the unprofitable Servant into utter darkness;
there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. Now Vanity and Unprofitabless is
near the same thing. And to them who thus consumed their Years in trouble, will
succeed endless Pains. Now to be miserable here, and miserable hereafter also
is a sad thing. For indeed, if they had consumed their Years in trouble, in the
way of Duty, in the Service of God, or in a Good thing, then indeed it might
have been Reasonably expected as to such, the promise that they should have
Rested from their Labors, and they were of the Number of those, who through
Manifold Tribulations should enter into the Kingdom of God; And the return
should have been made upon them when they arrived there, These are they that
have came through Great Tribulation. But whereas contrariwise as it is in the
Words of our Psalmist, They sinned still; then the only consequent which they
will meet withal, is Condemnation and Misery hereafter. As for those who sin
still, or add sin to sin, against whom a Woe is pronounced, They do Treasure up
to themselves wrath against the Day of wrath: It is alike, yea, and the very
same Folly and Madness, as for a Man himself to carry and heap on more fuel on
that fire which shall burn and torment him, but yet never consume him. Many
Sorrows shall be to the Wicked, Psalm 32. 10 for whether his days are consumed
in Vanity (judge by the way, whether or no the consuming ones time in Cards,
Dice, Alehouses, Skettle-pins, Shufflboard, idle Talk, Play, Gaming, or such
like, is not consuming ones days in Vanity, according to the intent of the Holy
Ghost here) he shall suffer so much the more loss throughout all Eternity;
which some think to be the greatest pain of Hell. Or whether their years are
consumed in Trouble; (as they all are in one or the other) to this succeeds
Pain, and Punishment of Sense, even more Misery and Torment still; which shall
as much exceed his Trouble here, as to be thrown into a hot fiery Furnace is
beyond a Flea-biting. Consider of this ye that forget God, or who pretend to
serve him a little in Form or Custom, or outward Manner; but ye do not think
much of him afterward. Whose days are consuming in Vanity, and whose Hearts
are in trouble, or in doubt and fear about what your future State and Condition
will be. Bethink your selves thoroughly, and how can ye be content to go on in
such a kind of Life as that is? Know ye not, or do ye not believe it? However,
ye will find it so that ye must give Account; and such an Account I tell ye
before hand, of your days being consumed in Vanity, ye will be forced to give
up with Grief, and not with Joy, which will be unprofitable for ye. For here to
allude again unto Heb. 13. 17. The right consequence is, and the word of
Instruction to every one of ye is, seeing that we must all give Account, (for
noth^g is so sure and certain as that is) we should so live in the mean while,
that we may give up this same Account with Joy, and not with Grief, for that
will be profitable for us. As was before said, none will be, nor can be
contented hereafter, to lose Heaven, and fall into Hell: So now, in this short
mean while between, though the generality of the World is settled upon their
Lee^, yet none ought, nor yet should be contented with a vain, sinful, or
ungodly Life now, for this will bring them unto the other sad thing.

The sensual blinded World judge very much by Events; and because (it may be)
they have Health and Plenty, and things at will, and things continue as they
were since the days of the Creation, they are apt to think that God is not
angry or displeased with them. So it is in the Sense and Mind of the Spirit,
when a Nation or People commit a great deal of Sin, then God is angry with
them; as again, when they please him, and he smells a sweet savor from the
Earth, then he has Mercy on them. Then the Angel of the Lord answered and
said, O Lord of Hosts, How long will thou not have Mercy on Jerusalem, and on
the Cities of Judah, against which thou have had Indignation these threescore
and ten years. Zech. 1. 12. The words immediately foregoing are, All the Earth
sits still, and is at rest. So that the certain consequence is, that God may
have Indignation against the Inhabitants of the Earth at the very same time,
when all the Earth sits still, and is at rest; or at the very same time when
the Inhabitants thereof are in Prosperity and Impunity, or without Punishment
as yet. If you should hereupon ask me, Whether the Lord God has now
Indignation these threescore years and ten? Or (during the time of this present
Generation.) against the Inhabitants of England, or against the Inhabitants of
such a particular Town or Neighborhood? Or whether he has Indignation against
such a Man or Woman at this very time, pointing them out by their several Names
and respective Persons. The answer hereunto is very critical, as we use to say,
and I will be very careful herein. But as one instructed out of his Word, I do
believe, and tremble thereat, That the Lord God of Heaven has at this very
moment of my writing this, Indignation against the Inhabitants of England, and
the Towns and Villages thereof; and in a word, against all those several Men
and Women, taking them by their Names, or respective Persons, who commit Sin,
Iniquity, Transgression, Hypocrisy, or any manner of Evil whatever.

But some may be apt to say, How does this appear that the Lord God has
Indignation against them? for have we not the appointed Weeks for the Harvest?
Blessed be God for that; and sufficient of Wheat and Barley for Bread, and
Beer, and Cheese, and of all manner of Provision for the Life of man? Yea, was
there not Peace in the midst of our Nation, when the Nations Round about were
weltring in blood? and even now they also, and we live in peace? Is it not
likewise an Healthful time enough in all the Country Round about, so that there
is no Plague, Pestilence, or but scarce a malignant Fever? Blessed be God for
that also. How then does it appear that the Lord has Indignation against
England, and the Cities, Towns and Villages thereof? And then besides, they go
by multitudes to Church, or to such and such Congregations, to worship, atone,
and please God. Thou must not make it worse than it is neither. No, that I
ought not to do in any wise. But yet when there is such a Catalogue of Sins,
Transgressions and Iniquities committed throughout this Nation, by the people
thereof, both High and Low, Rich and Poor, as is rehearsed up particularly in
Isa. 59. when their Lies speak Lies, and their Tongue muttereth Perverseness.
People do not much Regard or heed whether they speak Lies and Falsehood in their
common Talk, and ordinary conversation. None calls for Justice, nor any
pleads for Truth; They trust in Vanity, and speak Lies; they conceive
Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity, V. 4 And then the Prophet goes on to reckon
them up; For our Transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us. What is the Result and Consequent of all we may Read, ver.
15. And the Lord saw it, and it displeased him. I will Repeat the same over
again, that it may be more observed and taken notice of. And the Lord saw it,
and it displeased him. So that certain it is, let either a Nation in general or
the several people in particular, have never so much Peace and Plenty, Health
or Prosperity, or all manner of outward Blessings (For God sends Rain upon
the just and the unjust, and is kind to the unthankful and Evil); Yet as long
as they commit Sin, Iniquity. Transgression, Hypocrisy, Disobedience, or any
manner of Evil whatever, God has at the very same time Indignation and
Displeasure against them: God is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7. 11,
Albeit the wicked do not believe, or rather they are not sensible of his Anger
against them.

Now to apply all this. I shall begin from that Scripture, And as they did eat,
Jesus said to the Twelve Disciples, Verily I say unto you, that One of you
shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them
to say, Lord, is it I? So this which we are now in, being a mixed Assembly of
Saints and sinners, Godly and Ungodly, it is odds but that the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth has indignation and displeasure against some men and women
herein; which is so nevertheless they have health and strength; tho their
strength is firm; They are not in trouble as other men, neither are they
plagued like other men, Psalm. 73. 4, 5. And so he has had most or all the
foregoing days of their Life. Whosoever hears or Reads this, had need to be
exceeding sorrowful, and begin every one of you to be upon the search and
Examination, Is it I against whom the Lord has had Indignation these
threescore years and ten, or so many years as I am old, and have lived? For the
sinner being an hundred years old shall be Accursed. And who can abide, or
stand before his Indignation? No man living, no more than stubble does before
the devouring fire. The Counsel, Advice and Direction which the Scripture gives
herein, is to Agree with thine Adversary quickly; and to forsake those sins
which cause the Indignation of the Lord against any one.

As on the one hand it is very terrible and bad to have the Indignation,
Displeasure and Wrath of God, so on the other it is as good to have the Favor,
Mercy and Loving Kindness of God. To be as Daniel was, Thou art greatly
beloved, Dan. 9. 23. Or a man of Desires. I had rather (though I am clothed
with Rags, or in a Prison) have this character from the Holy Ghost, than to be
the greatest Prince on Earth, sitting on his Throne. And this may be Known the
very same way as the other is; for as when people are given up to their own
Hearts Lusts, and to follow their own counsel, when they sin still, and proceed
from Evil to Evil; from bad to worse; although they have never so much Health,
Plenty and Prosperity; God has nevertheless at the very same time Indignation
and Displeasure against them. So on the other hand, as we walk before him in
Righteousness and Holiness, in all Obedience and Duty, although the Saint or
Servant, may be in a poor, adverse and afflicted condition, as to outward
things; yet God has a Favor, Love and Mercy toward him at the very same
time. This is a Mystery to the people of the World, but yet it is a certain
Truth. It comes to pass through Ignorance, stupidity and strong delusions,
which are annexed to the not receiving the Love of the Truth. That most people,
when they are under the Indignation of the Lord, they do not know as much, or
they are not sensible of it, although they have little Glimpses thereof by
Remorses of conscience, and those Fears and Doubts which sometimes arise in
their mind. So it is on the other side, the Saints and Servants of the Lord are
always a Knowing People. And hereby they Know and Perceive the Love and Favor
of God toward them, by the Answer of a good conscience from within them; when
that speaks Peace, Peace, or Perfect Peace; such as is true and sound, in
opposition and contradistinction to that False and Rotten Peace of ignorant
persons and Hypocrites.

Let us now hear the conclusion of the whole matter. As we began, s^ we End. It
was said in the Entrance of this our Discourse on Phil. 4. 12. That I did
therefore choose it as an help to avoid Evil (Especially those grievous Sins, of
Distrust, Murmuring, or such like) which has been accordingly showed
throughout the whole; that we may know both how to be abased, and how to
abound, every where, and in all things; we may be instructed both to be full
and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need; and in all this to sin
not, nor yet to charge God f^olishly, nor to suffer our hearts to fret against
him. And on the other hand, in this Twofold Condition, or in that Even Middle
state between them both, to dwell in the Land, and do Good; serve God, and
perform all our Duty toward him, our Neighbor or our selves; For he that
would learn in whatsoever state he is in, therewith to be content, or attain
unto contentment (which, as one says, is but another Phrase for Happiness)
must do this. For he that will love Life, aad see Good Days, (is not all our
Desire and Endeavor after this, especially the Life for evermore, and the good
Days of Eternity) let him refrain his Tongue from Evil, and his Lips, that they
speak no Guile. Let him eschew Evil. and do Good. (Here are the Two Ends of the
Compass according to which we are to steer the whole course of our Life) Let
him seek Peace, and ensue it; for the Eyes of the Lord are over the Righteous,
and his Ears are open unto their Prayers; but the Face of the Lord is against
them that do Evil, 1 Pet. 3. 10, 11.

Written by Richard Stafford.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by Ralph Simpson, at the Harp in St.
Paul's Church yard. School.


