A SERMON Preached On 1 Chronicles. 29, 18.

And now Published, because of the Exceeding Usefulness of this Subject, unto
all Christians of every Persuasion or Denomination whatsoever, in Order to
their common Salvation.

Wherein also is showed what it is to Teach for hire, and Divine for Money; and
that Objection is answered, which some do frame from hence against that
maintenance and Liveli-hood which the true Gospel ministers ought to have in
these days under that Dispensation.

By Richard Stafford

Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common Salvation,
it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints Jude,
3.

And so here it is needful for me to write unto you, and Exhort you, that ye
should Pray without ceasing in these, or the like words, O Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac and of Israel our Fathers; keep this for ever in the Imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of thy People, and prepare their hearts unto thee.

Printed, and Sold by Eben. Tracy, at the three Bibles on London Bridge. 1697.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THese are to give Notice, That I have several other Practical Sermons or
Discourses of mine own Composing lying by me in Manuscript. Which if they, who
have the Plen^^ or Competency of this World would thus Consecrate some part of
their Gain and Substance unto the Lord Micah. 4, v. 13. As to be ready to
distribute, and willing to Communicate toward the outward Labor and Charge of
the Printing and Publishing of them, it would be for the Glory of God, (in
making known his Truth. Isa 38. 19.) And for the Edification and benefit o^ his
Church and People; and consequently i^ would be a good Work in such Persons
wh^^ shall be helpful and any ways assistant herein for which they would be
Rewarded by God in the Life that is to come.

Charge them that are Rich in this World, tha^ they do good, that they be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store
for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on Eternal Life. 1 Timothy 6. v. 17, 18, 19. This is a faithful saying, and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works; these things are good and
profitable unto men. Titus.

1 Chronicles. 29, v. 18. O Lord God of Abraham. Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers,
keep this for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their Hearts unto thee.
HAving deeply considered and weighed in my Spirit, how our Condition stands
God ward or toward God; how it is at some times afar off and Estranged from
him, and again at other times it is indifferent well toward him; sometimes we
have a most lively and Spiritual sense of God, and we are all for Obdience,
Honor and Reverence of his Name, again at other times we are apt to deny God
above, go on Frowardly in the way of our heart, setting up for our selves, and
thou have said in thine heart, I am, and none else besides ^e. Isa. 47 v. 11.
Being our own Men, and, Who is Lord over us? As the Weather is sometimes Bright
and clear, and then again dark and cloudy: Even so it Happens successively and
interchangeably as to the Influences and Communications between God and our
Souls, and as to our sense of him, and the things of his Kingdom. There is none
so very Godly and Religious, yea his best Saints and Servants on Earth, but
has sometimes an Eclipse and cloud come over his inward Man, which hinders
from the Shining of the Sun of Righteousness. He has some forsakings;
withdrawings, Departing and hidings of the Face of God from him; so on the
other hand, There is hardly any so very Ungodly, Wicked or Ignorant; There is
none so Vain and frollicksome, but in some little Time or Interval is now and
then in a Serious Godly mood. The Truth of both which Observations ye may know
by conferring and comparing your own Experiences with what I here declare to be
mine. As also from hence ye may easily Gather and apprehend the Reason of my
choosing this Text. Though I will not so arrogantly say and pretend, It seemed
good to the Holy Ghost and us, yet if I have the Real fear of the Lord in my
heart, then the Promise is Not to me only, but to every Private and Faithful
Christian Him shall He Teach in the way that He shall choose. Psalm. 24. v. 12.
So that I may be bold from hence to say, that I am Directed and Taught of God,
as I now pray for his Assistance therein, To Treat and Handle these words unto
ye at this Time and Opportunity, It being an help and Remedy as to both these
failings. That is to say, as to the Godly, Righteous, and Wise, when they are
for the most part in a Right Disposition and Temper of Soul toward God, but
sometimes they are given to Backslidings Hes. 4 2. To forget and loose the
Spiritual lively sense of him, O Lord, why have t^ou made us to err from thy
ways? and hardened our Hearts from thy fear? Isa. 63, 17. This last ought not
to be at any time but when they are Zealous and Devout toward him, then there
is need to Pray and Endeavor also, O Lord Ged of Abraham, Isaac. and of Israel
our Fathers, keep this fer ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the Heart
of thy People, and prepare their hearts unto thee, And so when the other sort
have some fits of Holiness for a season they have now and then a mind and think
it would be better for them, both Living and Dying, to lead a Godly Rel^g^ous,
Strict, Holy and Precise Life. Like Herod who heard ^^hn Baptist Gladly. and
did many things: But these only bring forth Fruit for a very short Season, or
rather they do not so much as bring forth Fruit, but they are blasted or
blighted in the Blossom; for it all Evaporites into fruitless wishes and
wouldings toward God, (...) her then into actual Good it self or, only some
Good Thoughts and In I nations, without coming forth into Act and Performance.
But if it was always so in their Hearts, as it is now and then for a short
space, it would at length come forth into Act and Performance. And since the
beginning of a thing is in Thought and Intent of the Heart toward it; and the
tendencies and beginnings should be cherished and furthered according to that
Divine Method, for who has despised the day of small things? And He does not
break the bruised Reed, nor Quench the smoking Flax. If sinners and those that
are yet Unconverted, are now and then roused and stirred up by a quickening and
soul searching Sermon, If they are almost persuaded to be a Christian, and they
perceive within them (it may be as they By chance drop in to hear the word
Preached with Authority and Life,) an inclination to accept of Gods terms, to
Arise and be Saved Yea whatever least good in their Mind toward the Lord God
at any time does appear forth, Either by Word or Act on, or such like, here
again, as it is said, Take with you Words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto
him H^s. 14, 2, so this very same form of sound Words, may be here fitly and
appositely used, O Lord God of Abraham, Is ac, and of Is ael our Fathers, keep
this for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy People,
and prepare their hearts unto thee. So prepare their heart, that those
Strangers and Unconverted may at length be Actually brought over unto God.

As I have acquainted ye with the Reason of my choosing this Text, so by what
has been hitherto opened and explained concerning the drift and design of our
intended Discourse thereon, ye may know and perceive the usefulness of this
Subject, for in the order and course of my Ministry, I would only insist upon
Useful Subjects which do come within those three Ends of Preaching, or,
Propheysing, 1 Cor. 14 3, The Apostle Paul there Writes of speaking unto Men to
Edification, and Exhortation and Com o t; for in the sequel and connection of
this our Sermon it may appear, that if the things of God and of his Kingdom are
kept for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the heart of thy People,
they will be Edified, yea and Exhorted, to what? Even to what is expressed in
the following Verse, To keep thy Commandments thy Testimonies and thy Statutes,
and to do all these things, 1 Chronicles. 29, v. 19. Which God has made known in
his Revealed Word; and as these things are always kept in the heart, and done
accordingly, there will be comfort to the Man, or Woman who does so; which
comfort if it be true, and sound, and well grounded, as here it is, it is a
precious Sign, Token, and fore runner of Eternal Salvation, Happiness, and
Blessedness.

These Words, O Lord Ged of Abraham, etc. Are part of David's Prayer and
Thanksgiving, when Himself and the People offered willingly toward the
Building of the Temple, as you may find by reading over this whole Chapter of
the 1 Chronicles, 29. which showed forth a Good Mind, and a good Work toward God.
It is saidinthe verse immediately foregoing the Text, I know also my God that
thou triest the heart, and have Pleasure in Vprightness. As for me in the
Vprightness of my heart, (Sirs, this is most excellent Divinity, and carries
along with it excellent matter of Instruction for ye) I have willingly offered
all these things, and now I have seen with joy thy People, which are present
here to offer willingly unto thee. This same Phrase of Offering willingly, is
repeated over no less then five or six times in this chapter. Whereby is shown
forth that exceeding stress the Holy Ghost (which acquaints us with the Mind
and Will of God) does lay thereon, and how it is delighted therewith. Hereby
also we are taught and Instructed, that whatever we do in the worship, Service,
and Work of the Lord, We should be sure to do it all Willingly. In the Worship
of God, or Hearing his Word, or waiting on him in his Ordinances; we are to
perform it willingly. This is contrary to those in Amos, 8, v. 5. Who say When
will the new Moon be gone, that we may sell Corn? and the Sabbath, that we may
set forth Wheat. And who said also, Behold, what a weariness is it, Mal. 1, v.
13. Unto whom the Worship of God is in Nature of a task, or drudgery, and they
complain of the length and tediousness thereof, because themselves find no
delight therein, through their own Unsanctified and Unrenewed Natures. And when
they come to it, it is as it were of necessity, for they think of God as an
hard Master, who has rigorously and peremptorily imposed it, and they use it
to Preserve their Souls) as they imagine) from Hell fire. This is the manner of
the wordly Worshippers, and of the Multitude who go to the Church, or
Congregations according to custom, or just to pacify and satisfy Natural
Conscience. But there is another Mind far different from this in the true
Saints and servants of the Lord. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy
Power, Psalm. 110, v. 3. And so they are willing in the day of his Grace and
forbearance: What they do in Order to God, either in acts of Worship or other
things, They do it not Grudgingly, or of Necessity, and as it were a forced
business, but willingly and with all their heart. My heart is toward the
Governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the People: Bless
ye the Lord, Judges, 5, v. 9. The same Rule holds of all the Duties and things
pertaining to God and Religion, as of Almsgiving, Every Man shall Give as he
is able, according to the Blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given
thee. Deuteronomy. 16. v. 17. Every Man according as he He purposes in his heart, so
let him give, not Grudgingly or of necessity; for God loves a cheerful or
willing Giver. 2. Cor. 9. 7. And so God loves a cheerful Worshipper. God loves
a cheerful and willing Servant. Thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God in
all that thou put thine hand unto. Deuteronomy. 12. v. 18. Thou shall serve the
Lord thy God with joyfulness of heart, for the abundance or Sufficiency of
things which he gives thee. So that not only the Chapter out of which we have
taken the Text, but also the Parallel places of Scripture do confirm the same
Word, that People should offer themselves willingly to the Service of the Lord.
Remember and carry away with you this Adverb, willingly. And so they should
come willingly to the place of Hearing his Word. I have oftentimes thought that
if I had a settled Congregation of mine own in a great and Populous City (the
Lord grant and Effect this my Desire, notwithstanding there are many
Adversaries) I would cause these Words to be written in Great Capital Letters
at the door of the Assembly, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear. Which
does also imply, that he that will not, may stay away. Because that every thing
in Order to God, or pertaining to Religion, should be free and willing; and
people should perform it of their own Accord, of a Voluntary Motion of their
own; for this have I learned and found from out of the Scriptures of Truth,
that with such kind of Sacrifice or Worship God is well pleased, and also he is
Glorified therein.

The Jews did Offer willingly toward the Building of the Temple, but now we
are told under the Gospel, that the most High dwells not in Temples made with
Hands, as says the Prophet Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my Footstool.
Acts. 7. v. 47. For where ever two or three are Gathered together in his Name,
God is the midst of them. and he is served acceptably, equally, and all one
upon the Seashore, or in an open Field, or in the Room of an House as what is
called Churches or Steeple Houses, notwithstanding the contradiction of
Ignorant Zealots herein; who in this retain that relick and remainder of that
Popish Maxim, Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion: for they do not love that
whom they Ignorantly Worship, should be declared unto them; nor what they are
Ignorantly zealous for, That the Truth hereof should be laid open and Manifest
unto them. For as Christ according to the Flesh, was laid in the Manger of a
Stable, so his Word is often more Simply and Purely Preached in places that
seem mean to the outward Eye, then in finer Buildings. Though here to pursue
the like Reasoning with that of David, Lo I dwell in an House of Ceder, but the
Ark of God dwells with in Curtains. 2. Sam. 7. v. 2. So I can in no wise
approve of in my Mind (I speak here after my judgment, and also I think
according to the Spirit of God) That where some of the Substantial and Rich
People have dwelling House and Rooms of their own, altogether or Sufficiently
large for the number of People, that they should save and prefer the^^ it may
be for Entertainments, and making provision for the flesh) and in the mean
while suffer the Word of the Mi^^ High God to be Preached in an Old and Rotten
Barn. (...) profess seriously that when I have seen this, it has been matter
of secret Indignation and vexation to me; for (...) would have nothing done on
this Earth, by the Inhebitants thereof, which should in the least savor, or
make show of Enmity against, or despising of the Great and I^^^sible God, whose
Word is there Preached, and whose Worship is there used. I do again speak after
my Judgment, i^ would seem better if the Members of the Respectve Congregations
did offer willingly to make the place just decen^ without Sumptuousness on the
one hand, or Sordid meaness on the other.

It was a good Mind and Resolution when David said unto Araunah, Nay, but I
will surely it buy of thee at a pria neither will I offer burnt-offerings unto
the Lord my God, (...) that which has cost me nothing. 2. Sam. 24. v. 24. A^
the same should be drawn forth into Example and Imitatio^ by the other Saints
and Servants of God; they should in (...) wise content themselves to serve God
with a Religion which has cost them nothing. I say, and I will prove it (...)
our of the Scriptures of Truth, that even day laborers, (...) Vine-dressers,
yea the poorest and meanest of the People should no wise content themselves to
serve God with a Religion which cost them nothing, Let him that stole, steal no
more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may have to give to him that needs. Ephesians. 4. 28. From hence it
appears that those in the Ordinary and most mean Employments, are to dispose
and Give in Alms what is more then satisfies themselves. Even this Command
extends to those who were so Poor, as they before were forced to steal to serve
their own necessities. And so from the Reason of that General and Indefinite
Command to all People, Thou shall not appear Empty before the Lord thy God; and
in their Offerings every one was to do according to their several Ability, They
that could not go to the Price of a Lamb, were to give a Turtle or two young
Pigeons, and by what is said in the Gospel of her that cast in two mites into
the Treasury, which makes a farthing, from the like and same proportion and
Analogy of things, It may be surely gathered, That the Lord does require and
Expect that All, High and Low, Rich and Poor, who serve him, should Minister
somewhat unto him of their Substance, and should serve him with that which
costs them something, whither it be a farthing, Penny, twelve pence or more,
Each Person according to his Ability. Whatever is more then the necessity and
convenience of his Family, should be cast into the Offerings of God, to be
distributed, or expended toward the Place where his Worship is called on, for
the maintenance of his Ministers, for the relief of his Poor Saints and
Servants; for Good works, as is the Publishing or Propogation of his Eternal
Truth, or such like. It is Observable that though the Apostle Paul did Breach
the Gospel freely in diverse places, and he says himself, He robbed other
Churches, taking wages of them to do you service. 2. Cor. 11. 8. Yet he all a
long speaks and pleads for the lawfulness and justifiableness to accept of, and
receive the free Offerings of Christian People, for his Preaching and Ministry
of the Gospel. Who goes to Warfare any tims at his own charges? Who planteth a
Vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof, or who feeds a Flock and eats
not of the milk of the Flock? If we have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it
a great matter that we shall reap your carnal things? If others be partakers of
this Power oover you, Are we not rather? Nevertheless we have not used this
Power, but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. Do ye
not know that they which Minister about Holy things, live of the things of the
Temple, and they which wait at the Altar are partakers at the Altar, Even so
has the Lord Ordained that they which Preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. But I have used none of these things. 1. Cor. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14. By
which last Speech, and his aforesaying, we have not used this Power, but suffer
all thing lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ, is showed forth his own
good mind, that he sought the furtherance of the Gospel, and the good of souls
more then his own private Ends or Gain. And so where any one will not forbear
Preaching, though nothing be ministered to him for the same; and they that are
taught is the Word, do not communicate unto him that teaches, in all good
things. Gal. 6. 6. Which would be according to the Apostolical Rule,
nevertheless he does not matter or regard, or at least not so much as desist,
refrain, or be less diligent in that God Duty, whither he has any thing for it
or not, this is a certain sign and Evidence, that such a one does not Teach
(...) hire, nor Divine for Money. Micah. 3, 11. That is, he does (...) make it
his Principal Ultimate or only End; for this is the thing here Reproved, it
being no sin as appears from the before quoted place out of the Corinthians, if
it be not necessarily required, but only freely offered, and willingly
contributed by the People.

He that does put a difference, and show a difference Eze^ 22. 26. Or does well
distinguish, he does rightly. Teach i^ the nature of the things of God and
pertaining to his Kingdom. (If I were but Righteously or equally dealt withal
by my Kindred according to the flesh, there would be (...) need for me to make
public an Intimation of this nature. But their doings toward me have
confirmed the Truth (...) that Old Observation, that if any one in a Family do
serv^ God more then Ordinary, he shall be sure to be oppressed Crushed, kept
under hatches, and be destitute, afflicted, and tormented by them.

As to offer willingly is highly acceptable and pleasing in the sight of the
Lord, so to prevent, Anticipate or be before hand, even before any one does ask
or intimate, This an Instance of Offering willingly, and it is God like, for
thou preventest him with the Blessings of Goodness, Psalm. 21. 3 Even before a
Prayer or Desire is Offered for and in behalf of them. And it shall come to
pass that before they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I
will hear. Isa. 65. 24. For as one Rightly Observes, It does resemble the
Deity, and it is God like to do free, ready, and soon acts of Beneficence. When
we read such places of Scripture as this following, they do not stand Recorded
for nothing, but for our Admonition and Instruction, upon whom the Ends of the
World are come. The Inhabitants of the Land of Teman brought Water to him, that
was thirsty, they Prevented with their Bread him that fled Isa. 21. 14. Mark
here again this Word, prevented; for such as was thirsty, or fled here did not
ask for it, but the others did imagine and apprehend that the others might have
need and occasion of it, and so they were ready before hand to meet and supply
them with it. Like as Melchisedech brought forth Bread and Wine to Abraham as
he was returning from the Slaughter of the Kings. And so on the other worse
hand, Amalek is cursed and punished, because he met not the Children of Israel
with Bread and Water as they came through, and from out of the Wilderness. From
what is written, Because that he remembered not to show Mercy Psalm. 109. 16. We
learn, that where we can do any act of Good, Kindness or Compassion to one
another (whither it be to Friend or Enemy) and we do it not, the Lord, when he
comes to enter into judgment, and we are to receive for the deeds done in the
Body, will impute that as sin to that man or woman who refused, neglected, or
omitted it. For though now it be reckoned as a matter indifferent, and it is
commonly said they do him no harm, if they do him or her no good; yet in this
case, The not doing of Kindnesses when it is in our Power for to do them, is
indeed doing hurt or injury; because of the real harm, injury or loss which
such a one Sustains for want of having that Kindness done for him.

As was before mentioned, My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that
Offered themselves willingly among the People, so if we may so speak after the
manner of Men, The Heart of God is toward such of his Servants and Creatures
that Offer themselves willingly to do such and such Things for his Glory,
Worship, and Service, and be doing Good unto Men, or who are for what links
these three together, Glory to God in the Highest, Peace on Earth, and Good
will toward Men; and each one in his Vocation and place does Offer out himself
willingly toward the things that make for the same.

Here again is another Real Act and Instance of Offering willingly, when they
can and do bereave their own Soul of Good, to do good for others: which again
will be a doing Good to their own Soul at long run, for the Merciful Man does
Good to his own Soul. Prove. 11. 17. I mean when People are contented to suffer
Hunger or pinch their own Belly for once or twice to feed and supply that which
has more often wanted it; when for all out of their obedience to the command
of God they will bring that Bread and Water which they do almost want
themselves. Like the Widow of Zarephath, who had but an handful of Meal, and a
little Oil in a Curse. 1. Kings, 17. 12. And yet out of that she was to Sustain
and feed Elijah the Prophet of the Lord, which she did, and had no lack. Sirs,
here is some Trust of God in these things. When thou have but a little, thou
do Give diligence Gladly to Give freely, and Offer willingly of that little;
and thou can not only say so in outward Words, but trust that the Lord will
provide a little more against the time, and when that same little is gone, And
they that know thy Name will put their trust in thee: For thou, Lord, have not
forsaken them that seek thee Psalm. 9. 10. O taste and see that the Lord is
good: Blessed is the Man that trusts in him. O fear the Lord ye his Saints:
for there is no want to them that fear him. The Young Lions do lack, and suffer
hunger: But they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Psalm. 34. 8,
9, 10. And such of his Saints do not fear to be Impoverished or come to want
through the Service of God, but they Offer willingly, and do things not
Grudingly, or of Necessity, even in the Expensive part of Religion, and they
endeavor to save, or trust that the Lord (who teaches to profit) will make it
up as much unto them another way.

So far we have showed of this Excellent Duty, of Offering willingly as we
showed the Coherence of the Text, upon the Residue of the Chapter, for the same
thing of Offering willingly is intended and meant therein all one as what is
said in the following Words, To keep the Commandments, the Testimonies and
Statutes of the Lord for that they should Offer willingly toward the Worship
and Service of God, is also One of his Commandments, and Testimonies and
Statutes. But here it holds true as to both, People are for Offering willingly,
and for keeping the Commandments, the Testimonies and the Statutes of the Lord
sometimes only, and not always. They are for doing it now and then, but not
for ever: and therefore in Opposition unto this Corrupt Nature of theirs, whose
goodness is as the Morning cloud, and as the early dew, it soon passes away:
As also to help and supply this defect and failure of theirs, David here Prays
by the Spirit O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and of Israel our Fathers keep this
for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the hearts of thy People, and
prepare their heart unto thee. There is another Parallel and alike Scripture
unto this in Deuteronomy 5. 29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they
would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always. Observe this Adverb,
always; for it is the same in Signification with that of our Text, keep this
for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy People, that it
might be well with them, and with their Children for ever. This is also brought
in upon a good Mood and Temper of the People; when they were in an Obedient
frame of Spirit unto the Lord God. When they had said unto Moses, Speak thou
unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it,
and do it; and the Lord hereupon answered, They have well said in all that they
have spoken. A very good Commendation of our God unto his Creatures; But the
cream of the matter is; They have well said, if they will hold unto it, and
thereupon God himself Wishes and desires, for it is expressed after the manner
of Men, O that there were such a Heart in them that they would fear me and keep
all my Commandments always. By which kind of Speech and Expression, he does
foresee and mistrust, That that Good Resolution of theirs which was in them,
would be Temporary, sudden, Go off and pass away again, as truly so it did.

And truly it is so whither we Preach or Pray never so much, That all good
things, the Great Truths of God, all Faith and all Knowledge* the sense of his
Name, and Obedience to all the Words of his Law, may be kept for ever in the
Imagination of the Thoughts of our Hearts, that in the day of trial and hour of
temptation, we may have all along at the very same Time, a Divine Overruling
Thought, which may resist the Temptation, and keep and determine unto God and
Duty; Yet still nevertheless it is sensible and Experienced, that these things
are not kept for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of our hearts. I have
often wished and desired for my self (Pray, Let your hearts also go along with
me herein) O that I were always and for ever such toward God, as I am
sometimes in my most Devout and Solemn Approaches unto him in Prayer, or (...)
his Ordinance of Hearing his Word; that I had always the same Reverence, Godly
fear, and Horror and Dre^^ of the Deity, when I am walking about, or sitting
still, a I have sometimes upon my bended knees. That I had the some constant
Gravity, seriousness and trembling of Spirit in the midst of Life, Health and
Prosperity, and when thing go most according to wish, as I have upon the
apprehension of any great danger, or under affliction, or as I shall have when
I come to lie upon the Bed of last sickness and dying. It is Impossible to
recall or vain to wish for, as to what is past. But O that I might, for all the
few and Evil days remaining of my Pilgrimage, throughout all my succeeding
Life, have that constant Universal Obedience, Honor and Preferring of God above
things, as I shall indeed desire that I had had when I come to think my last.
just as when I shall perceive that I am yiedling up the Ghost, and surrendering
up my Spirit to the God that gave it. O that my Spirit may now henceforth and
for ever, so Obey and be give up unto the Father of the Spirits of all flesh,
as she will reflect and wish she had done, when she shall be Summoned to appear
before him, And she is to take her flight into the Invisible World. O that I
did so want on God all (...) day. Psalm. 25. 3. And was in the fear of Lord all
(...) long, Prove, 23. 17. As I have sometimes for two or three Hours together
in a Morning. As it is written in Jude, 19. These be sensual, having not the
Spirit: So I have too often observed and experienced, that after my too full
Meals, I have been damped and for a time lost that sense of God and Spiritual
Things, which before I had. O that I might therefore so Eat and Drink to his
Glory, that I might be near the same in the midst of or immediately after
receiving of my necessary and moderate Food as I was before. And so It should
hold in the other circumstances and Conditions of Life, to keep this for ever
in the Imagination of the Thoughts of our heart, whither Sleeping or Waking, in
labor or Idle, when we sit in our House, or when we walk and journey in the
way, and when we lie down or rise up, in a Word, whatever our hand finds to
do, or whatever we are Employed about; I say again This still is to be kept
for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of our hearts, even to keep the
Commandments, the Testimonies and the Statutes of the Lord God.

David here rightly Prays that the Lord would keep this in the Imagination of
the Thoughts of our hearts; for as it is written, Except the Lord keep the
City, the Watch and watches but in vain. Psalm. 127. (...). So except the Lord
keep our heart, all our keeping of them is in vain, notwithstanding it is
commanded, keep thy heart with all diligence for out of it are the Issues of
Life. The Scripture is no where not in the least inconsistent with it self; but
the Truth of the Matter seems to stand on this wise: we are first to Pray unto
God Immediately to keep our hearts, and having so done, we are to endeavor
after the same as much as ever we can our selves. For we learn evidently from
what is written, We then as Workers together with him, beseech you also, that
yo receive not the Grace of God in vain. 2. Cor. (...). 1. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God which works in you both to
will and to do of his Good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12, 13* Whereunto I also labor,
striving according to his Working, which works in me mightily. Col. 1. 29.
That there is a Power and Ability implanted in, and given unto man by God the
Creator to Work together with his Grace. It should be a constant rule that
whatsoever we are commanded or directed to pray for, or whatever we do pray
for, we should endeavor after it our selves. Whereunto I also labor, striving
according to his working, which works in me mightily, Even so we should
labor and strive after the same thing. And so to our present case, we should
pray unto God in the first place, to keep this still in the Imagination of the
thoughts of our hearts and then endeavor, labor, and strive according to
whatever we can, to do so our selves.

That it is the Particular Province and Prerogative of Almighty God, to keep
the hearts of the children of Men, We have the Scriptures affirming in diverse
places, for the Lords Vineyard is the hearts of Men, For the Vineyard of the
Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel. Isa. 5. 7. And we Read there how he
Fenced it, and Gathered out the Stems thereof, and planted it with the choicest
Vine, and built a Tower in the midst of it, and also made a Wine Press therein.
In that day Sing ye unto her, A Vineyard of Red Wine, I the Lord do keep it, I
will water it every Moment, lest any hurt it, I will keep it Night and Day.
Isa. 27. 2, 3. Here it is affirmed and ratified twice in the same Verse, that
God will keep it lest any hurt it; which nothing can do, but Satan or his
Temptations, as they seduce to sin or evil. Nothing but sin can hurt the heart
of Man. And if we would suffer that the Lord should keep our hearts Night and
Day, and that he Guide us continually, so that our selves here are under
keepers, and stand upon our watch; for thus the Scripture does direct in other
places, so as to prevent and keep out the comings in and Acts of Sin; and then
it is effectually prevented, lest any hurt it. And all thy Children shall be
taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy Children, Isa. 54. 13.
The right consequence here is, that when they are taught of God, they should
learn of him; and when he does instruct and would Guide them, they should
receive the instruction, and follow his Guidance. God does Keep, Guide, and
Teach the hearts of the Children of Men, in an Invisible manner, but yet it is
sensible to the hearts of his faithful People. The Wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence it
comes, and whither it goes; so is every one that is born of the Spirit, John.
3. 8. So likewise is every one that is Taught, Guided, or Instructed by the
Spirit. And so in like manner God does keep the hearts of his People. As the
Distillings of Dew in a clear Night are not perceived; so God moves himself as
it were upon, and Communicates himself to the hearts of his Creatures in the
still voice of his Word and Spirit. For God speaks once, yea twice, yet man
perceives it not. In a dream, in a Vision of the Night when deep sleep falls
upon men, In slumberings upon the Bed. Then he opens the Ears of Men, and
seals their Instruction Jel. 33* 14, 15. 16. And so when we are in the most
still, retired, abstracted and separated manner. When we become the Man whom
thou chos^st and causest to approach unto thee. Psalm, 65. 4. Then it is that
God does reveal and manifest himself unto us. When we are Obedient and Holy,
Sobet and Temperate, when we are Chaste and do not regard the desire of women,
being Purified and Sanctified, these are furtherances and forwardings, or helps
toward God making known his Mind and Will unto us. As again There are
Hindrances and Obstructions. The Principal and I may almost say, the only
hinderance is Sin; for it is that which makes that wide Chasm, or Distance
between God and the creatures, Your Iniquities have separated between you and
your God. Isa. 59. 2. Sin or Iniquity in the General do produce this aceursed
and evil effect.

But they may be clearly Specified, and reduced to these three sorts, Namely,
what does defeat, and render of none, or rather of less effect the Seed sown,
or Choke the Word Preached, the same is the Principal hindrance to Gods keeping
this still in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the hearts of this People, The
cares of this World and the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lusts of other
things entering in Mark. 4. 19. And so where it is written, Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and
drunkenness, and cares of this Life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
Luke. 21. 34. We learn and understand from all this put together, what the
hindrances are. And when we know them what they are, we may avoid and let them
alone, or at least not be let or hindered by them. They are the Cares of this
World, and of this Life, and the deceitfulness of Riches, and the lusts of
other things, or Gluttony and drunkenness and such like. And then the heart
being too much set upon Visible Objects, and Visible things, this does draw off
and alienate from, and make to forget and loose the sense of him that is
Invisible, as also of the Invisible things of his Kingdom. As was before said,
We should Pray unto God to keep this still in the Imagination of the Thoughts
of the hearts of thy People; even that purpose, and Resollution, To keep his
Commandments, his Testimonies and his Statutes; so we should likewise
Endeavor, Strive and Labor after the same. And as we Taste and See, Feel and
Experience, know and perceive what are the Clogs, Interruptions, and
Hindrances, so we should avoid and not give way unto them. The Temper and
State of our Soul is Various and several as it stands toward God. For thou
have lifted me up, and cast me down. Psalm. 102. 10. Now and then it is Good
enough, and then it is bad, dark and cloudy again, according as we commit Sin,
and are plunged into the cares of this Life, or are Interested and concerned in
the lusts of other things. The Servants of God are a discerning and observing
People. They look within the glass of the Word, and also they reflect and look
within their own Souls, and they compare both together. And indeed every one
must observe and practice the like methods, who would make any Growth,
Proficiency, Increase and Advancement in the Christian Life: Here we might well
reason and do, that if we can be and are Godly at one season, why not at
another? and so if our Minds are now fraught with and Furnished, and full of
Reverence and fear of the Divine Majesty, so it may be likewise at another
time, and thus we might go through the several Stages and Periods of Life even
to serve God in Righteousness and true Holiness all the days thereof, and to
fear continually before him: For by the like means* which we do perform it at
one time, we may Endeavor after it at another. There is an unseen Enemy, who
stands at our Elbow, I mean Satan and his Temptations, who prompts us to commit
Sin in each Act or Instance of Trial, even in our very meals, to eat to excess
or commit Gluttony, and so in other things alike; and here we should be upon
our Watch, to Pray and lift up our hearts, Avoid or get behind me Satan, so
that he should not get advantage, nor prevail over us. The Use and Benefit
herehereof will be exceeding Great; for besides that this is th only making our
Calling and Election sure. It is the only way and means to Assertain Salvation
unto our Selves, so the more Good any one does, and the more he abstains from
Sin and from all appearance of evil, It will be proportioned accordingly unto
that Man or Woman in the Future Recompense, and they will receive a more full
and greater Reward. This is the sum and conclusion of the whole mattet, and the
drift and design of all Preaching, That People may cease to do Evil, and learn
to do Well, as much as ever they can. But why is it said in our Text? O Lord
God of Abraham, Isaac Jacob or Israel. The Reason hereof seems to be near to
this effect and purpose. We read how that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or Israel were
precious Saints and servants of God in their day, and in their Generation, and
thereupon God came to be in Covenant with them, and was in a peculiar manner
their God. Now therefore if you will Obey my Voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people: For
all the Earth is mine. Exodus 19, 5. And so God is the God of all Men and Women,
as they are his Creatures, and the Inhabitants of his Earth, but by the way of
Peculiarity, Emphasis or Property or Propriety, he is only the God of his
Saints and servants, The Lord knows them that are his. 1. Tim. 2. 19. But is
He the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob only* No, for he is the God of all
their Children also, even of all those who do the Works of Abraham and of all
those who are faithful as Abraham was, who is styled the Father of the
Faithful. But because that from the Loins of these three Men, who did every one
of them successively fear* and serve the Lord in their time; There Sprang even
of one (for One was his Son, the other was his Grandson) and him as good as
dead, so many as the Stars of the Sky in Multitude, and as the Sand which is
by the Seashore Innumerable, even a very Numerous Posterity, and great People,
who were Elect and Beloved of God before the other Nations of the Earth, for
their Fathers sake. Therefore the Scriptures in sundry and many places Styles
him by the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But whereas it is said in the
close of our Text, And prepare their hearts unto thee. Hereby another Truth
does shine and appear forth, viz. That God has but one way in bringing many
Sons and Daughters unto Glory, or in bringing all the Sons and Daughters of Men
that ever go there, unto Heaven. Even by preparing their heart unto himself.
That is, by bringing them to himself in this world, that he may bring them to
his own home in* the World to come. Moreover Brethren, I would not that ye
should be ignorant how that all our Fathers were under the clouds and all
passed through the Sea: And did all eat the same Spiritual Meat, And did all
Drink the same Spiritual Drink: 1 Cor. 10. 1, 3, 4. And so all the People that
ever went to Heaven* and are now a going in their journey to it, or who shall
be born, and Inherit that Happy Country hereafter, they all Go the very same
way. If you ask me what that way is It is the old Trodden way by the Saints,
And a way, and it shall be called the way of Holiness. Isa. 35. 8. It is the
way of Universal Obedience, and confirming all the words of Gods Law to do them
(and not Observing some, and Neglecting others as the manner of many is) It is
the way of drawing near to God, to which the Promise is James. 4. (...) And he
will draw nigh unto you. Or as it is in the last words of our Text,: by
preparing their heart unto him, Which again is done (as appears by the Context,
and the verse immediately following) By keeping this for ever in the
Imagination of the Thoughts of our hearts, to have a determinate, Obedident,
and Perfect heart and mind to keep constantly, and at all Times the
Commandments, the Testimonies, and the Statutes of the Lord. And also such
Divine Truths, or Knowledge of the things of God and of his Kingdom, should be
for ever kept in the heart, with the Sense and* Remembrance of them, which
should Actually persuade, exhort and incline unto the same good thing.

From this manner of Speech, Prepare their heart unto thee and from what is
elsewhere written, And he shall go before him in the Spirit and Power of
Elias, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient
to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a People prepared for the Lord. Luke.
(...) 17. We see that there are two things which the Ministry and Preaching of
the Word does drive and intend at, the First is To Convert Sinners, and to turn
to Righteousness and then the next thing is in a further Degree and
Proficiency, even to make them a People prepared for the (...) to prepare their
hearts unto thee. Which two things have (...) the only Ends and Intent of all
the Sermons that ever Preached in this Place, or design to Preach throughout
all my Succeeding Life. Remembering still, that as the ^^^de or Hook are in the
hands of the Gardener for digging (...) the Earth, or Pruning of Trees, even so
we Creatures (...) Ministers, are but living Instruments in the Hands of God,
to dig or cultivate our own hearts, or the hearts of other People. For we are
Laborers together with God, ye are Gods Husbandry, ye are Gods Building. 1.
Cor. 3. 9. And (...) as before Observed, How David Prayed immediately to God,
To keep this for ever in the Imagination of the Thoughts of the heart of thy
People, though we are to Endeavor to keep it our selves, so Here again he
lifts up the other Petition unto God Immediately, prepare their hearts unto
thee* Though here again we are to Endeavor to prepare our own hearts. As also
besides this, there is the Word appointed, and the Ministry or Preaching
thereof (who hears are become laborers together with God) It is a Bold and
Great Expression of the Apostle Paul, which he speaks forth by the Spirit, to
make them a people prepared for the Lord, or to prepare their hearts unto him.
So has God provided and Established, and so should Things Cooperate and Work
together for the common Salvation of mankind.

But Beloved that are here present, I hope that most of ye are among the latter
sort; I mean that ye are a-verted from Sin, and Converted to God in the
General, and ye are amongst those, who are preparing for the Lord, or preparing
their hearts to seek him, or preparing for Heaven. For when we Read and
Consider, how that Jesus, our forerunner is gone to prepare a Place for you.
John. 14. 3. To this must answer, some act of your own, that is to prepare your
hearts for that place. Whom (that is Jesus) We preach* warning every man, and
teaching every man in all Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. Col. 1, 28. It is strange for you to conceive hereof, but yet it
is true, that God will judge that the Word Preached in this place, shall be a
warning and Testimony to all the Inhabitants of this Town and Neighborhood,
though not the twentieth* nor yet hardly the hundredth part of them do come to
hear. Remember I told you of it before. I Ground this Affirmation from these
Words of Paul who spoke thus by the Spirit, and yet it is certain, that every
man dwelling in the City of Coloss, and the adjacent Villages did not hear
Paul. Nevertheless seeing that every man thereabout might have heard* him
Preach if they would, and all had a Rumor and Report thereof, though they
would not hear him themselves, therefore according to the method,
Interpretation, and accou^^ of God according to which he will judge and proceed
at the last day; He did Warn and teach every man, that we may present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus. Whereunto I (and so should all ye that hear me this
day) also labor, striving according to his Working, which works in m^
mightily. Col. 1. 29. And so ye also are to labor according to the Working of
God, which works in ye mightily. Do ye not Perceive at my speaking this unto
ye, some Groaning of Spirit, and Intercessions and desires after the same which
cannot be uttered? That ye may be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light. We know sensibly what is the misery and vexation of
worldly disapointments; and there is no disapoinment like that of Heaven, which
indeed is a Thing possible and to be feared, and the utmost care is to be taken
against it all our Life long. Israel has not obtained that which He seeks
for, but the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Romans 11. 7.
Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us of entering into his Rest,
any of you should seem to come short of it. Heb. 4. 1. There is no Preaching
like unto that of Experimental Preaching; and pray, ^et your hearts go along
with me, and confer Notes, and compare Experiences, By Examining and Communing
with your own Spirits, whilst I declare how it is with mine own Soul. As it is
written, For the Lord has called thee as a Woman forsaken and grieved in
Spirit. Isa. 54. 6. This last Thing of grieved in Spirit, is Exactly mine own
condition. I find nothing in me, but I am also showed the Reason thereof. And
this Grief of Spirit in me does not so much arise from wordly or outward
Things, because I know the utmost of them, that they are but little and soon
pass away, and seem afterward just all one as a dream when one awaketh. But as
it is elsewhere written, I Remembered God and was troubled: I complained, and my
Spirit was overwhelmed. Selah. Psalm. 77. 3. So as I think of God and of the
other World (for the Powers of the world to come do shake my Soul) thence does
arise all my Trouble, Grief, and Fear. Why so O Man? It is because I have not
that degree of Assurance and well Grounded Hope which I would have, and do
Press after still. Pray, Think upon, and Observe this. It is a Secret Anguish
and Vexation of Spirit, that I am growing in years, and Gray hairs do here and
there appear upon me; That the Morning of Youth is over and past, and will
never return again in this State; and I haste to that where I seem no more to
be, and yet I have not laid in a Better and more assured Foundation against the
time to come, which I would still seek to make it yet more and more sure. Cause
me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my Soul to thee. Psalm.
143, 8. That doubt and Jealousy, and misgiving of heart, Least I neglect, or am
afraid to do the Will of God, does cause no little Vexation of Spirit in me.
Cause me to hear thy Loving Kindness early in the Morning, for in thee do I
trust etc. Herein I speak of those Extraordnary Works and Trials, which God is
sometimes pleased to call such and such of his Servants out unto* as Abraham to
Offer up his Son Isaac and, to Try that Precious Faith of his own Elect,
whereby like as Zebulun and Naphtali were People that jeparded their lives unto
the death. Judges. 5. 18. And hazarded their Lives for the Word of his
Testimony, for his Truth and Righteousness, as some of his People and Servants
have done in former Generations. But Christian People, Take this Counsel as
from me, who have been somewhat Experienced in the ways of God, whenever ye
perceive fears within you, as those same fears do Relate to God, or your own
Future State and Condition,) for from hence does usually arise all the fear,
and all the Great Thought and Searching of Heart, whither this shall be indeed
Happy or Miserable) There learn to know the true cause of that fear, and then
labor to Remove it. Now all fear does usually arise from Sin and Guilt, and
therefore take away the Sin and Guilt, and the fear also will cease. So that the
Result of the whole is this, If thou Man or, Woman, would be indeed led in
the way Everlasting, thou must be sure that there be no wicked way in thee.
Psalm. 134. Thou must both Pray, Search me, O God, and know my heart* try me,
and know my Thoughts. And thou must Endeavor the same thy self, even to Search
thy self and know thy heart, to try thy self and know thy thoughts, that there
be no wicked way in thee, that thou live in no known Sin, not reserved
Iniquity whatever, and thou leavest no Duty undone. And that thou do not
Omit, or slip any Opp(...)nities of doing good. For to him that knows to do
good, (...) does it not, to him it is Sin, Jam. 4. 17. Finally Breath(...)
Whatsoever Things are True, whatsoever Things are Ho(...)est, whatsoever Things
are Just, whatsoever Things (...) Pure, whatsoever Things are Lovely,
whatsoever Thin^^ are of Good Report, if there be any Virtue, and if there be
any Praise, Think on these Things. O my Fellow Christians, Think often, Yea
think always on the Words of the Text I have Chosen this Day. If you do not
Remember and carry away any thing of the Sermon, besides (...) sure to
Remember, and carry away the Words of (...) present Text, for that will be
enough^nd sufficient.

If when any Good Thought or true Thoughts (...) in your Soul, when you like
the Patriark Jacob, Vo(...) unto him, the Lord shall be my God. Genesis 28. 21.
And P(...) thy Vows unto the most High. Psalm. 50. 14. When any (...) his Truths
comes into thy Mind, which either make the I^visible God more known unto thee,
or the things of h^^ Kingdom or concerning the World to come, even our Futu^^
State and Condition therein; which same truth or truth^ do stir up or Quicken,
Exhort and Actually Persuade* do all the Words of his Law, to keep his
Commandmen^^ his Testimonies, and his Statutes, in all these and such (...)
Things, Be sure to lift up thy heart toward God in (...) Words of my Text, O
Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and (...) Israel our F^thers kept this for ever in
the Imagination of (...) Thoughts of the Heart of thy People, and prepare their
hea(...) unto thee. I say again for thy more Remembrance and O(...) servance
thereof, in all these and such like good cases (...) Instances, Pray without
ceasing, and endeavor the s(...) without ceasing, O Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac, and of (...) rael our Fathers, keep this for ^ver in the Imagination of
(...) Thoughts of the Hearts of thy People, and prepare their (...) unto thee,
Amen, So be it.

FINIS.

