A SERMON Preached unto the Inhabitants of the Town of Thornbury, in
Glocestershire, on March 20. 1697/8.
Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I trust:
Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul unto
thee, Psalm. clxiii. 8.
THE great Thought and Searching of Heart in Man, the Reasonable Creature, is
Godward, or toward God. And this again divides its self two ways, that is to
say, whither God be angry, or in favor with us; and accordingly as we have a
Fear, Sense, and Apprehension of One or the Other, so we are either Troubled,
or else Contented. We are troubled if we believe that the Invisible God over us
has Anger, Wrath, and Displeasure against us; so on the other hand we are
contented as we think that we have his Favor or Loving Kindness.

Although Solomon says truly, No man knows either love or hatred (that is,
of God) by all that is before him; Yet it is an usual thing with Corrupt and
Ignorant Man, as he is Man (a little tincture whereof even David the Servant of
the Lord here had) to judge of the Love or Hatred of God toward them,
according to the delightful or afflicting things which happen unto them in this
World. As sure as Scripture is true, which is as certain as that the Word of
God is true, which again is as certain as that God himself is true; This is a
fallible, yea, it is a mistaken Rule to judge by. For the Scripture says
expressly, Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son which he
receives. Which same chastening for the present seems not joious, but
grievous, Heb. xii. 6, 11. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Rev. iii.
19. And so again it is on the other hand, The men of the world have their
portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: They
are full of Children, and leave the rest of their substance unto their Babes,
Psalm. xvii. 14. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart
could wish, Psalm. 1xxiii. 7. The Tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and they that
provoke God are secure, into whose hand God brings abundantly, Job xii. 7.
Son, remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things, Luke xvi. 25. And yet all this while it is
certain, that they who receive their good things in this Life, the prosperous
Sinners had not the true Favor of God. Again, it is certain, that such who did
fear before him, although they received their evil things here, and were
plagued all the day, and chastened every morning, Psalm. 1xxiii. 14. Yet these
had the favor and loving kindness of God (who, whom he loves, he loves with an
everlasting love) resting upon them all the same while, though perhaps they
were not sensible thereof. For such a thing is possible, yea it is common, that
as many wicked sinful People, who are hardened, ignorant, and unbelievers, and
under the Displeasure; yea, they have the wrath of God abiding on them, John
iii. 36. Although in this Lifetime they are not sensible of as much, for they
do not know and feel it. So again it is on the other hand, there is amongst us
many a Soul that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that
walks in darkness, and has no light, Isa. 1. 10. Although they are really
and indeed beloved of God, yet they have not at the same time a sense of his
Love and Favor, the want whereof makes them to mourn and to be in the Spirit
of Heaviness.

But in the days of the voice of the seventh Angel, the Mystery of God should
be finished, as he has declared to his Servants the Prophets, Rev. x. 7. for
indeed the whole way and method of the Dispensation of his Kingdom toward us
Men, is all Mystery. It is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to them it is not given, Mat. xiii. 11. Amongst other things which
might be named and instanced in, it is one part of this Mystery, That his
Servants and the Righteous should receive evil things from the hands of God;
and yet at the very same time God has a Love toward them. And so again, the
Sinners and Children of Disobedience receive good things from the hands of God,
and yet at the very same time the Lord is displeased with them. God is angry
with the Wicked every day; although at the same time he sends Rain upon the
just and unjust, and is kind to the unthankful and to the evil. This may even
now be somewhat understood in the Sanctuary, and from out of the Book of the
Lord, by those who are spiritually wise and discerning, by such who believe and
know the things of God; but it will yet be more clearly seen at the end of
Time, when the Mystery of God shall be finished.

But in the mean while it is usual with the mixed Multitude and Common sort of
People (who judge by Appearance, and not Righteous Judgment) to esteem such
stricken, smitten of God and forsaken, Isa. 1iii. 4. as if they were forsaken
and hated also by the God who made the World, because the World Frowns upon
them, and because they are in low Estate, and seem outwardly miserable therein.
If I say I will speak thus, behold I should offend against the Generation of
thy Children: No such matter; for as the Friendship of this World is Enmity
with God; so when the World is cross and athwart, and at Enmity with such an
one, it is rather a sign that God is a Friend unto him. Said Jesus Christ, the
first Born amongst many Brethren, the Son of God himself, who was in the World,
and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not: He came unto his
own, and his own received him not. This same Jesus Christ said unto his
Disciples and Followers and Servants of all Generations and Countries, If the
World hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of the
World, the World would love his own; but because ye are not of the World, but I
have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. So that the
Hatred of the World (provided that we be all along followers and doers of the
thing that good is) is rather a sign and evidence of the Love of God toward
us, because herein we are more conformed and likened unto him, who had this
Voice from out of the Cloud, Thou art my beloved Son, this day have I begotten
thee: And yet this same Beloved Son of God (for there was in him also somewhat
which savours of Men, to evince and demonstrate that he was really come in and
made Flesh) when he came to endure the Rage of the Wicked Men of World, and was
Crucified by them, then also he betwrayed forth Human Infirmity and Weakness,
in taking up that saying, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Therein
also thinking after the manner of Men, that because he then came to feel Pain
and Torment, as if thereupon God (who is all Blessedness) had forsaken him.

And so in like manner David, a Man after God's own Heart, who spoke forth the
Words of our Text, as it is written; But they like Men have transgressed the
Covenant, so herein he spoke like a Man. For because of his Enemies which he
mentions three times in this short Psalm, of whom he complains, ver. 3, 4. He
prays for Deliverance from them, ver. 9. and for the utter Cutting off and
Destruction of them, ver. 12. He also thought as if God had withdrawn his
loving kindness, and had none toward him; for if he had, he would not suffer
him to have such Enemies. But in this last David did err, not knowing, or
rather not consisidering the Scriptures and the Power of God, and the way and
method of the Dispensation of his Kingdom toward us Men. God suffers them to
have Enemies to hold his Servants in Warfare and Trial. David was not so much
then destitute of the loving of kindness of God, but he was destitute of the
sense of the loving kindness of God; which is evident from the very manner of
expressing it, Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the Morning. Intimating
thereby, that there was such a thing as the loving kindness of God toward him,
but it was afar off, and out of Hearing. And therefore he Prays unto God to
cause him to hear it, and then it must be brought nearer, and be sensible (for
Hearing is a Sense) unto him. Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the
morning, is a Relative kind of Speech, which does presuppose absence and want
thereof, inasmuch as a Man does not pray for, but rather give thanks for what
he has already. But either David did not at all, or at least not so much hear
the loving kindness of God as he would desire for; and therefore he puts up
this Prayer unto God in this manner.

Why a sense and hearing of the loving kindness of God would be as so much Stay
and Support, as so much Armor and Defense against the Incursion and Assault of
his Enemy. He had some Apprehension of thus much from the following Words
which he drops, for in thee do I trust. Which again presupposes some Fear he
was in, and some Danger he was subject unto; as to both of which he did trust,
That the Invisible God would save, deliver and preserve him from them. Thus
much may be surely gathered and reasoned, That if God has a loving kindness
for any one, he will never suffer him to utterly perish, and tobe wholly
miserable. I do not say, That God will not suffer him so much as to be struck,
but he will not suffer him to be destroyed, that is, not to be made by them
eternally miserable. His Enemies may possibly hunt and seek after him, but they
shall not totally overcome nor prevail against him for ever. David does here
Pray like one who had the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and of Might, the Spirit of Knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa.
xi. 2. For he knew, that if he had once the loving kindness of God, he had all
which could be desired, and what was necessary for Safety and Deliverance from
Men and Devils; and therefore he fitly and properly Prays for that in the first
Place.

Thy loving kindness in the Morning. As Morning thoughts are commonly most
fresh and lively, so then he was most troubled and doubtful, and his Heart did
misgive him and meditate Terror, lest he should miss thereof, and not have it.
As the same David says, When I wake, I am still with thee, Psalm. cxxxix. 8.
And as the Spirit says, The Lords Mercies are new every morning, great is thy
faithfulness, Lam. iii. 23. Because that every Morning God does as it were give
us a new Life; so if when we wake Morning after Morning, (he wakeneth Morning
by Morning) our Heart is still with God, and it is always and altogether with
him; and if we then can perceive and hear his loving Kindness, O Good God! how
sweetly and contendedly might we pass the remaining few and evil Days of our
Pilgrimage here on Earth?

But chiefly therefore it is that we do not hear and perceive this loving
kindness of God in the Morning, yea God withholds and denies his loving
kindness unto us, because of what is intimated in the following part of the
Verse, we do not know the way wherein we should walk; which sometimes is for
want of Understanding thereof, but more commonly for want of Will and Readiness
to do the same. And therefore both these Petitons are fitly and properly
connected together, and they follow and succeed one another; Cause me to hear
thy loving Kindness in the Morning, for in thee do I trust: Cause me to know
the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my Soul unto thee.

For the sake of the latter part of this Verse it is that I have chosen this
Text to discourse on unto ye at this time, and I do intend to apply it as to my
Preaching, and your Hearing, as it has been used in this Place.

It is a seasonable Petition to put in, and use in our Prayers, that God would
direct us in all Difficulties; and when we are in a Strait and Doubt, that He
would cause us to choose the right way, Then the Captains of the Forces, and
all the People said unto Jeremiah the Prophet, Pray for us unto the Lord, that
the Lord thy God may show us the way wherein we should walk, and the thing that
we may do, Jer. 42. 3. Cause me to know the way whorein I should walk, for I
lift up my Soul unto thee. We may lawfully, yea, we ought to pray what we have
a Promise for; and as to this Matter the Word of Promise speaks on this Wise;
What Man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that he
shall choose. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will
show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 12, 14. His secret is with the Righteous,
Prove. 3. 32. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret
unto his Servants the Prophets, Amos 3. 7. If in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, Phil. 3. 15. And all thy Children
shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children.
Which last comes somewhat near unto, and confirms the Doctrine of the Text,
which is this, Then it is that God causes us to hear his loving Kindness, when
he also causes us to know the way wherein we should walk. For here, Isa. 54.
13. is brought in as the effect of being taught of the Lord, Great shall be the
Peace of thy Children. From whence it follows, That we have great Peace when we
are taught of God, and chiefly we have great Peace when we obey and do
according to that Teaching of his. And so we hear his loving Kindness when he
causes us to know the way wherein we should walk. From whence observe again,
That when our Spirits are dissatisfied, restless and troublesome, it is a
certain sign either of some Guilt appearing forth in them, or we are not
conversant about, and employed in what we ought. Again, on the other hand, as
we can prove our own Work, and then find rejoicing in our selves, and not in
another, Gal. 6. 4. This is a Sign and Evidence that it is a Good and Right
Work. The Apostle speaks in this manner unto some to whom he writes, The God of
Hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing. So the same God of Peace
fills People with Peace, in doing his Will; which same Peace he denies them
again, as they neglect the doing of his Will. I have experienced much of this
last my self; and by the Horrors and Accusings of mine own Conscience herein, I
can somewhat guess and apprehend beforehand what will be the pain of Loss at
the great Day of Judgment. The Sun rejoices as a strong Man to run a Race,
Psalm. 19. 5. So there is a Satisfaction in all the created Beings, to move and
act according to the Rule, Law and Will of their Creator. And again, when they
do not, they are out of their Element, and then there is Trouble, Doubt and
Disquiet.

As God asks the Question in reference to the false and idolatrous Worshippers
among the Jews, Should I receive Comfort in these, Isa. 57. 6. So it may be
conceived and judged of beforehand, as to our several Acts of Religion.
According as we find and receive Comfort in them, so it is a foregoing Sign of
God's Acceptance of them. For as the Jewish Worshippers did hereby know that
the Lord received a Burnt-Offering, and a Meat Offering at their Hands, if the
Fire did come down from Heaven, and consume and Sacrifice; and when he did show
us all these things, Judges 13. 23. So even then it might be understood, and
also under the Gospel, that God did Remember all our Offerings, and accept our
Burnt-Sacrifice; and so what we did as pertaining to Religion and Worship, if
thereupon God did immediately give us the chief things of the lasting
Mountains, and the precious things of the lasting Hills, Deuteronomy. 33. 15. that
earnest and glimpse of future Glory; I mean that Peace, and Joy, and Comfort in
the Holy Ghost at the very same time, and afterward also, wherein we were
serving him. This again is to be differenced from that fond Exultancy of
Spirit, and Complacency of Mind, which the false and formal Worshipper may
sometimes have, in that in his own Imagination he has done something for God,
and for his own Soul: Like unto Micah, who said, Now know I that the Lord will
do me Good, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest, Judges 17. 13. which yet was
but a false Conceit of his own; for as may be understood from Verse 5. he was
an Idolater. And let not such a one or any other false Worshipper think that he
shall receive any thing from the Lord, as to the future Recompense which he
has promised to such only, who worship him in Spirit and in Truth. But when we
receive Comfort in our Holy Things, and in our Religious Performances upon some
true and assured Grounds out of God's Word, This is an Evidence and Sign
beforehand of our Salvation, and that our Religion is a Religion to the saving
of the Soul. So again on the other Hand, when we do not receive Comfort in our
Religion, but we perform it in a way of Drudgery and Task, Here we may suspect
our Course, that as such People do not receive true Comfort in the Acts of
their Religion, so the great God, unto whom it does all relate and terminate,
does not receive Comfort in them, neither will they receive Benefit thereof
hereafter. Either such do not worship God in Spirit and in Truth, or there is
Sin and Iniquity in the Worshipper. God hears not Sinners. If I regard
Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. Or they do not turn unto him
with their whole Heart. It is only done out of Custom, or as a Task that is set
them, which they do not mind after it is over. Such will be of the number of
those, who shall say Lord, Lord, Mat. 7. 21. throughout their Life, and yet
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Such do neither pray unto God for
it, neither does God cause them to know the way wherein they should walk; and
so they neither hear his loving Kindness, nor is any due and belonging unto
them; for this is the favor he bears unto his People, and is distinguished,
and peculiar to his Elect only. There is a great Fear, Jealousy and Doubt in
the Heart of Man; especially in those who prepare their Heart to seek, know,
and please him, whither we be in the way of God or not. Besides, the sure Word
of Prophecy, the certain Rule of Scripture, if it be according to that, and
more especially by the Spirit which he has given us, We may very much conceive
and judge thereof beforehand. According to what Peace and Satisfaction of Mind
we have, if the other Signs here mentioned do also concur and agree, then we
are in God's way. But if we are in Doubt, Perplexity and Uncertainty of Soul,
then probably we are out of it. Each Person knows his own Case and Condition
herein better than all the Divines or Preachers of the World can instruct or
put him in mind of. To the Law and the Testimony, and the Light that is in
them, and also within himself; hereby he may know and assure his Heart before
him, viz. That he is in the way wherein he should be, even the way which the
Invinsible God his Creator would have him to be in, and which leads up unto
Heaven, the Habitation of the most High. Behold, I send an Angel before thee,
to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the Place which I have
prepared: Beware of him, and obey his Voice, Exodus 23. 20, 21. This Angel is
Conscience (which also is to be ruled and guided by the written Word) or that
of himself, which God has implanted in Man or Woman. By the Dictates and
Motions whereof we may well guess whither we be in the way or not. It is said,
The Angel before thee to keep thee in the way; so Conscience is a Guide, going
before us, and in our sight (that is, of the Eyes of our Understanding being
enlightened) Which if we follow all along, signified by those Words, Beware of
him, and obey his Voice, it will keep us in the way. And when we are turned
aside, or out of it, this will give Knowledge and Warning thereof; yea, and it
will bring us in again, if we Beware of him, and obey his Voice.

From the last Words of my Text, for I lift up my Soul unto thee, the best
Instruction that may be learnt from thence, is; That ye should always have your
Hearts lifted up, and praying unto God, especially in such like Petitions;
Cause me to hear thy loving Kindness in the Morning: cause me to know the way
wherein I should walk; and then seek out of the Book of the Lord, and read; and
in Subordination to that, and as guided thereby, follow and obey the Dictates
of thine own Conscience.

We live in an Ignorant and Men-pleasing World, wherein they Excuse the Rich,
and Condemn the Poor in his Cause. But admist all the manifold kind of sayings,
and talk of others; amidst the Strife of Tongues, Psalm. 31. 10. or that Advice
and Reproach, even from the Religious also, every and each Person is to guide
and steer his own Actions by the Word of God, and the Dictates of his own
Conscience. According to what that teaches and manifests from within, and not
according to what others say, so we are to move and act. There is but little in
the Opinions and Talk of People, but every Man's Judgment comes from the Lord.
That which is highly esteemed among Men is an Abomination in the sight of the
Lord; and so contrariwise it runs, that which is lessened and despised amongst
Men (provided it be agreeable to the Word of his Holiness) is highly esteemed
in the sight of God. The Reason whereof is, because the common Multitude of
Men, even of the outward Worshippers, Religious, and Professors also, (for that
of Luke 16. 15. was spoken in Reference to the Jewish Nation, who were all of
them Worshippers of the Father) are not, nor have they been as yet brought in
Conformity to the great and perfect Rule of Righteousness in Scripture, and
they do not understand the Things of God, as his Saints and Servants did of old
time, or as themselves shall yet do, when they are let slip from out of this
Flesh. But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy Life time receivedst
thy good things; and so the departed Soul will remember the several Steps and
Passages of this Life, And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy
God led thee these forty years in the Wilderness, Deuteronomy, 8. 2. And so we shall
remember all the way which the Lord led us these Threescore Years and Ten, or
so many Years as we lived in this Wilderness of the Earth; as also we shall
then remember and discern when we were in the way of God, which was the way
wherein we should walk, and when we were not. If we could know as much in this
Life as we shall know in the next Life, we should never do amiss, or miscarry
as to futurity. If we would so do in all things as we shall wish we had done
when we come to die, and are let slip into Eternity, we should never go much
astray from the way of the Lord.

Our Duty to God in many Places of Scripture, is called the way, and the way of
the Lord, which here in the Text is called the way wherein we should walk. From
whence this plain Inference necessarily arises, That to obey and serve God is
to do as we should do. It is a Walking in the way wherein we should walk. For a
Creature to do as he should do, is to obey and serve the Lord. But besides this
general Explication and Assertion, there being diversities of Gifts, and
differences of Administrations, and diversities of Operations, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5,
6. given to the several Creatures. And the Son of Man has given to every Man
his Work, and commanded the Porter to watch, Mark 13. 34. So that besides the
general Service of God, and keeping his Commandments, there is some distinct
and particular Work according to the Gifts given them, and according to their
condition and manner of Life, wherein the several Men and Women are to glorify
and serve the Lord according to their several Trade, Degree or Rank People
stand in the World. Whosoever shall hear or read this, may somewhat conceive what
is his particular Work which God has set him to do; and I do in part know and
apprehend what is mine. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I
lift up my Soul unto thee.

Now to apply all this to my Preaching and your Hearing.

After that Paul had seen the Vision, immediately he endeavored to go into
Macedonia, assuredly gathering that the Lord had called us for to preach the
Gospel unto them. So I reflecting and looking back upon my manner of Life from
my Youth up, which know some of my Neighbors, and by my Preaching unto some of
my Father's Servants, at Eleven or Twelve Years of age, and in the hearing of
the then Godly Schoolmaster of this Town; as also by the whole Drift, Bent and
Tendency of my Mind ever since, which the Lord has made to be seriously given
and inclined; from all this I assuredly gather, that the Lord who created my
Soul thus, had called me (that is, by his having enabled me so to do) to preach
the Gospel; that is, to preach and publish the Truths thereof unto the People
of this my Generation. And when my Parent had designed me for the Study and
Practice of the common Law, I remember and observed many times, that as the
Law Books lay open before me; and whilst I was outwardly reading in them, my
Mind at the very same time would be so intent, and running upon Divine and
Spiritual Things, even the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, that I
could not mind, and be fixedly intent on the Law. Whereupon I did several times
think, Do not I strive against the very Bent and Call of God in me? which would
have been, if I had applied my self to the Study of the Law of Man, when I
should have given up my self unto the Study of God's Statutes. It would seem
Arrogance and Boldness of Speech if I should apply unto my self what God said
to Jeremiah, Before I formed thee in the Belly I knew thee: and before thou
came forth out of the Womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a Prophet
unto the Nations. Yet the Lord himself, who shall rehearse all things from the
beginning of the World, and calls all his Creatures by Name in the Day that
He shall write up the People, He will make known how much there was in this of
my having been sanctified from the Womb. But when after that Thought of Heart,
Do I strive against the Bent and Call of God in me? yet I did not obey this
same Call, so as like unto Timothy, To give up my self wholly, and only unto
Reading and Study of the Scripture, until as when Absalom sent for Joab, he
would not come; therefore he said unto his Servants, see, Joab's Field is near
mine, and he has Barley there, go and set it on Fire. Then Joab arose and came
unto Absalom unto his House. So tho God sent unto me by his Spirit, reasoning
within me once and again, Come, do thou approach unto me, and give up thy self
only and immediately unto the Work of the Ministry which I had created thee
for, and set thee apart for it; this He did once and again, but I would not
come for fear of displeasing my Kindred according to the Flesh. But at length
God sent a fit of Sickness on my Body, which might have cut it down, and
destroyed it, whereas Commission was then given to shake only the Tree of my
Life. Whereupon I lying upon a sick Bed, and liable unto Death every Hour,
although my Sense and Understanding were preserved entire; and then considering
yet more thoroughly of this matter, I vowed unto the Lord, which I desire to
remember, and observe the longest Day I have to live; that if it pleased him to
grant me a Recovery and Reprieve, I would set aside such and such Hours in each
Day for the searching out, and Contemplation of his Eternal Truths, which
should be all unto that end, according to what is written; Restore unto me the
Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit. Then will I teach
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee, Psalm. 51. 12,
13. Some of which have made up and composed those several Books I have written,
and published unto the World. The only drift and design whereof is, according
to that Covenant and Direction which was given to the true Levitical
Priesthood, To turn many away from Iniquity, Mal. 2. 6. and to turn many unto
Righteousness, Dan. 12. 3. which also are the two only Principal Ends of all
our Speaking or Preaching by word of Mouth.

But here I have observed a Gradation, or going on by steps; for my first
beginning herein was to testify unto my Father's House, lest they come to the
Place of Torment; for which I received evil Entreaty, and unkind Usage from
them, for no other Reason, but because that I did from the Word of the Lord,
and not out of mine own Head, Rebuke sharply those that sinned; but there did
arise in the Hearts of some a Rancour and Indignation against it; they being
then of the like Temper and Disposition with those of whom it is written, They
hate him that rebukes in the Gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly,
Amos 5. 10. and at length they would not hear the word of the Lord from my
Mouth any more.

Then I preached to this Town and Neighborhood in the House of one who is now
a Widow, where at first my Ministry was well accepted with the greater part. I
then commending my self to the Hearts and Consciences of my Hearers;
nevertheless, for this things sake I was above Eight Years since removed from
my Father's House. Who, at my going forth, thrusted me out of his Gate, and at
the very same time tauntingly said, That God would be as much Glorified by my
going away, as if I stayed. Whereby was that Scripture literally fulfilled;
Your Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, Let
the Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your Joy, and they shall be
ashamed, Isa. 66. 5.

And then the Lord called me from seeking to convert a Family and a Parish,
into the way of his Commandments, if I could (not as of my self, for we are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to do any thing, but our
sufficiency is of God) by the Words of his Grace and Truth be instrumental
toward the turning a whole Nation from Iniquity unto Righteousness. But alas!
the Devil and the Spirit of Disobedience has worked, and does yet so strongly
work in the Children of Men, that I have hitherto been worsted and foiled in
all these. For ye are in no wise to think, that because the most and greater
part have not been obedient to the Word; therefore it was not the Word or Work
of the Lord, in the Ministration whereof I was employed; for this would be to
contradict the Scripture, and what has in like manner happened to the other
Ministers and Prophets of the Lord in former Generations and Countries. Says
Jeremiah, From the thirteenth year of Josiah, the Son of Amos, King of Judah,
even unto this day, that is, the three and twentieth year the word of the Lord
has come unto me, and I have spoken unto you; rising early, and speaking, but
ye have not hearkened. And the Lord has sent unto you all his Servants and
Prophets, rising early, and sending them, but ye have not hearkened, nor
inclined your Ear to hear, Jer. 25. 3, 4. Then I said, I have labored in vain,
I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; yet surely my judgment is
with the Lord, and my work with my God. And now says the Lord that formed me
from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him: tho Israel be not
gathered, yet I shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be
my strength, Isa. 49. 4, 5. Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles,
and all the faithful Ministers and Preachers, both in that, and in all the
several successive Generations ever since, have labored in this Work of the
Lord, to bring Jacob again unto him, to bring Mankind into the way of his
Commandments, and that they might have Respect unto all his Statutes, Psalm.
119. 6. and not keep some, and neglect others, as the manner of many is. Which
though they have effected of some few, yea, very few peculiar People, about one
in an hundred in the several sorts and denominations of Christianity; yet it
has not as yet been so accomplished since the Days of the Creation, as to the
Multitude and Generality of People. These indeed have been brought over so far,
as to outward Worship (for all People will walk every one in the name of his
God) or it may be some more have come further to a partial Observation of the
Law, but not unto universal and constant Obedience unto all the Words of the
Law and Gospel, without turning aside to the Right Hand, on to the left.

Says another Servant of God, who was by him employed also in this same Work
of teaching Transgressors thy ways, and that Sinners may be converted unto
thee; but because of contrary Success therein he cries out, Let not those that
wait on thee, O Lord God of Hosts, be ashamed for my sake. Let not those that
seek thee be confounded for my sake, O God of Israel, because for thy sake I
have born Reproach, shame has covered my Face. I am become a stranger unto my
Brethren; and an Aliant unto my Mothers Children; for the zeal of thine House
has eaten me up; and the Reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen
upon me, Psalm. 69. 6, 7, 8, 9. By which last may be perceived the exceeding
sinfulness of Reproach; for to Reproach any one who does handle the word of God
faithfully and truly, only upon the account of that, this is to Reproach God
himself, and to Reply against God, Romans 9. 20. or as the Marginal Reading there
is, An answering again, and disputing with God; which is a sign of a saucy and
disobedient Servant. This place of Psalm. 69. is interpreted of Christ in Romans
15. 3. and John 2. 17. But all the Reproach, Shame and Strangeness, which David
sustained in his own Person, was, because those Transgressors he had to deal
withal would not be taught thy ways, and the Sinners would not be converted
unto God. The like has been also fulfilled in me; for herein I speak the
Truth, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, as I
will a verr the same at the Judgment Seat of God, what Shame, Strangeness, and
Reproach, I my self (whose Mouth now speaks unto ye, and whose Name is
hereafter written) have sustained either in this Nation, or in this Parish,
Neighborhood and County, when (I was a Reproach among all mine Enemies, but
especially (mark that Adverb especially) among my Neighbors, and a fear to
mine acquaintance, Psalm. 31. 11.) it has all been, because the People of this
Nation have not obeyed that Word of the Lord which I have set before them.
Those in Haggai 1. 12. and in Ezra 10. did obey it; but we read more often in
Scripture, that the Multitude, and the Rich and Mighty People would not. And so
neither have the People of the House of my Nativity and Habitation obeyed that
Word which I have formerly spoken unto them; neither have the Generality and
Multitude of the People of this Town and Neighborhood obeyed the Word which I
more lately preached unto them; for if they had, they would have heard the Word
of the Lord at my Mouth, but they refused to hearken. This evil people have
refused to hear Gods words, Jer. 13. 10. Behold, this is the Return, which in
the Presence of two or three of his Servants, (and where two or three are
gathered together in his Name, he is in the midst of them) which I make unto
the Lord God of Israel for him to judge thereof, when the great Day of his
Judgment is come. It may be seen in the Gospel what we are to do when our
Ministry is not received, but rejected in such a place. Then Paul and Barnabas
waxed bold and said, it was necessary that the Word of the Lord should first
have been spoken unto you; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of Everlasting Life, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord
commanded us, Acts 13. 46, 47. And so my Countrymen and Neighbors (I would I
were the same in common Conversation, so as to stand in God's Counsel, Jer. 23.
22. and on his side in like manner, as I am when I am either writing or
preaching his Word) it was necessary that the Word of the Lord should have been
spoken to ye by me his Creature, who was born in this Parish. For God, who does
nothing in vain, does not set a Light on an Hill, or in such a place, and give
Gifts unto Men for no purpose, but rather to give Light unto those round about,
and near unto it. But seeing that the Inhabitants of this Town and
Neighborhood are herein like the Pharisees and Lawyers, who rejected the
Counsel of God against themselves; and seeing that the Scripture herein is
fulfilled, A Prophet is not without Honor, but in his own Country, and amongst
his own kin, and in his own House, Mark 6. 4.

By the way, think not therefore that ye shall escape without Sin herein,
because your Refusal, and Neglect, and Contempt of the Ministration of the
Word, as it has been by me used, does fulfill the Scriptures: For Judas
fulfilled the Scriptures, yet the same Word of Truth says, It would be good
for him if he had never been born) And ye put away my Preaching the Word from
ye, wherein the Words of Eternal Life are declared; little do ye think that by
Conseqence, which the Holy Ghost knows: Herein ye judge your selves unworthy of
Everlasting Life. Lo, we turn to some other place where it may be better
received, for so has the Lord commanded me; Go and preach the Gospel to other
Cities, Towns and Villages, for thither also I am sent. But into whatsoever
City ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways out into the Streets of
the same, and say, even the very Dust of your City which cleaves on us we do
wipe off against you: Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the Kingdom of
God is come nigh unto you, Luke 10. 10, 11. Although I am to take heed of any
thing of Self intermixing, for the wrath of Man works not the Righteousness
of God, yet when I have seen so few come to the House where I then preached the
Word, I have been moved with secret Indignation thereat; so that I was
thereupon put in mind (yea, I am yet afraid that I am herein secretly
Rebellious and Disobedient, because I do it not) to despise the Shame, and
venture the Reproach, so as to go forth into the very Heart and midst of the
Town, and there speak forth, preach and proclaim what Words I have to deliver
and make known unto them that dwell therein. For there is a twofold Reason of
Teaching in our Streets, Luke 13. 26. (which would be according to the Method
of God, and the Scriptures of Truth) that is, when either People would not
admit such Preachers of the Gospel into their Houses for to preach therein; or
they made choice of it of set purpose, for a more public Notification of the
same Word, and that it may turn to you for a Testimony, Luke 21. 13. If I had,
already, or should yet do so (which I may probably, unless more do come to this
place of Hearing the Word then now do) it would render the stubborn Inhabitants
of this Town and Neighborhood, that Disobedient and Gainsaying People, who
are now Reproachers and Blasphemers of my Ministry more inexcusable, and make
their Sin of not Hearing his Word more sinful at the Judgment Seat of God. A
Son honors his Father, and a Servant his Master. If then I be a Father,
where is mine Honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear says the Lord of
Hosts unto you? O Priests that despise my Name, and ye say wherein have we
despised thy Name? Mal. 1. 6. So if I should go to the several Inhabitants of
this Town and Neighborhood, and tell them that they despise God, and they
despise his Name: They will be apt to answer, God forbid, Wherein do we despise
God, and despise his Name? To which my Reply again is, That herein they despise
God, and they despise his Name, by their despising his Word, and the
Ministration thereof, as it has been here truly and faithfully used and held
forth.

By the way, it is a fearful thing to despise God: For says he, They that
despise me, shall be lightly esteemed, I Sam. 2. 30. And it is just with God
that after the same manner a Man sins, after the same he shall be punished;
So such may be of the Number of those, who after they have for a while slept in
the Dust, shall awake to Shame and Everlasting Contempt, Dan. 12. 3. and their
Carcasses shall be an abhorring unto all Flesh, Isa. 66. 24. At that time says
the Lord they shall bring out the Bones of the Kings of Judah, and the Bones of
his Princes, and the Bones of the Priests, and the Bones of the Prophets, and
the Bones of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem out of their Graves. And they shall
spread them before the Sun and the Moon, and all the Host of Heaven, whom they
have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they have walked, and
whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped, Jer. 8. 2. So at that
time it may be said and pronounced, Lo, these are the Bones of such People, who
in the Days of their Flesh despised God, in their despising the Ministration of
his Word.

It has often been my Thought and Searching of Heart whilst I have been here
in my Native Country, whither I have been in the place where it is the Will and
Good Pleasure of God to have me in; and whither by Preaching to this little
Assemble (fear not little Flock, it is your Fathers good Pleasure to give you
the Kingdom; so it may be Christ's Flock, notwithstanding the Littleness
thereof) I have indeed walked in the way wherein I should. Indeed it does
appear to me to be a good and right Work, as I examine the same in the Sight of
God, and also I have received Comfort and Satisfaction of Mind in so doing. But
still there has arose in me a great Fear and Accusing of Conscience, fest
herein I neglect much greater things; even for several Years last past, to be
an Ambassador of Peace unto the Nations, Isa. 33. 7.

Here again I remember my Fault this Day; for whereas according to the
Intimation and Phrase of the Prophet I should have wept bitterly, because that
same Message of mine was not received; I did rather (to my Shame be it spoken)
betake my self to a sensual and vain kind of Life; the report perhaps of which
last has hindered some from coming to hear my preaching; which as it becomes
hereby in me a yet greater Sin (Be ye clean that bear the Vessels of the Lord,
Isa. 52. 11.) and this also may be some Reason why God did not altogether so
much succeed my Ministry, as it were to be desired, which makes my Sin yet more
exceeding sinful. Consider this thoroughly, O my Soul, and amend thy Ways and
thy Doings; but notwithstanding all this, other People should not refrain from
coming to hear the Word. For a Man may preach unto others, and yet himself be a
Castaway: And Christ seems to command and intimate that we should hear even
them, Who say. and do not, Mat. 23. 3.

It was my Desire before my coming down into the Country, That I might come in
the Spirit, Power and Fullness of the Gospel; of all which I have there failed
and come short: And so it is my Desire again that I may return up to the chief
City of this Nation, in the Spirit and Power of Elias, and as it becomes a
Minister of the Gospel; but I fear and doubt beforehand, that I shall also
fail and come short of that. However, through Christ that strengthens me, I hope
to practice also, as well as approve the things more excellent, and to take
heed unto my Doctrine, and continue therein, that in so doing I may save my
self and them that hear me. As also to try them yet again, whither the People
who have been hitherto Disobedient and Rebellious, will obey God's Word, and
tremble at his Commandment, and do according to his Law, Ezra 10. 3. I am to
exhort them unto it, though I fear this will be the Return which I shall make at
last as to them; But unto Israel (who were the outward Worshippers) he says,
all the Day long I have stretched forth my Hands unto a Disobedient and
Gainsaying People.

This is a greater Work (and the greater is to be preferred before the less)
than to preach weekly unto Twenty or Thirty Hearers. And also there is a much
more lasting Preaching of Truth, by writing, and by multiplying and publishing
the Copies thereof, than what is only spoken by word of Mouth, which goes off
as a flash, and is soon forgotten both by Speaker and Hearer. It has been my
continued Prayer unto God all along. Take not the Word of thy Truth utterly out
of my Mouth, Psalm. 119. 43. O continue thy loving kindness to them that know
thee, and thy Righteousness to the Upright in Heart, Let not the foot of Pride
come against me, and let not the Hand of the Wicked remove me, Psalm. 36. 10,
11. which Prayer, if God is pleased to grant, then also may be fulfilled what
is said in the Verse immediately following, There are the Workers of Iniquity
fallen; they are cast down, and shall not be able to rise.

But again, there has arose some doubtful Thoughts in my Mind, about trusting
God with my Life, Liberty and Livelihood; which three are great and near things
unto me; and the last of all does most vex and perplex me, because that I am
forced to lose so much of my precious Time, to seek out for the Necessaries of
Life, which a Minister of the Gospel ought in no wise to do, but those things
should be before ministered, and brought ready to his Hand. This is a very
troublesome thing, (which arises because of the Opposition of Satan the Enemy)
and consideration to me especially, who know so well concerning the
preciousness of Time, the gliding away of Time, and the Irrecoverableness of
Time. And it is not Reason that we should leave the word of God, and serve
Tables, Acts 6. 2. It is not Reason that we (Ministers or Men, whom God has
endued with Gifts for the Ministry) should neglect the Ministration of that
Word, which is alike requisite to come unto Eternal Life, to serve the mean
Necessities of this present Life, as I am forced to do. For when I once go out
of my Fathers House, I do thereupon forth with cast my self upon the Providence
of God, and the Charity of the People, who are so backwardly and slow in
Ministering to my Necessities, and toward the publishing of his Eternal Truth;
that I lose too much of my precious Time, in seeking unto them therein. It is a
Gospel Command, to Distribute to the necessity of Saints, Romans 12. 13.

See and read a printed Half Sheet of mine, superscribed and directed to such
Christian, Men and Women, as inhabit the Cities of London and Westminster, and
the Places adjacent, and bearing date August 27. 1694.

There are many other particulars in reference to mine own Case, which may seem
too trivial to relate; and perhaps ye would think not altogether so profitable,
and edifying for ye to hear. But herein Use might be made unto your selves, as
ye know such kind of Experiences, Trials, and Exercises of a Servant of God,
and how ye could go through therewith, if it was your own Case, Moreover, these
and such like Things are absolutely necessary to build up and exercise a Trust
on God according to those Words of our Text, for in thee do I trust: For Trust
in God is a relative Term, and pre-supposes Danger and Difficulty for God to
carry us through the one, and to preserve from the other. And as the God of David
our Father did therefore suffer his Servant David to have Enemies, to keep him
in Warfare, and that he might exercise his Trust on his Invisible Creator, so
the same God, according to his Method and Workings of old, does now also in
this Generation and Country of ours, suffer several of his Servants to meet
with Enemies, Imprisonments, (as his Servant Paul was frequent in Prisons, 2
Cor. 11. 23.) sore Troubles and Afflictions. By all these to Try, Prove, and
Exercise their Trust on him; and whither notwithstanding, All this is come upon
us, yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy way. Though thou
have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of
Death, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19.

But to proceed yet further in what I have to declare unto ye. I did refer it
to this Issue, That when it was the Will of God to call me away again from
hence, he would make it known unto me by some Sign, and this should be the
Sign, viz. That if I did once perceive how that in the Course of my Ministry
here among ye, God did once begin to stop the Current of his Eternal Truths
from coming into my Knowledge; or if the Number of my Hearers did diminish and
lessen, then I should assuredly gather, that God called me away. Both which I
have seen fulfilled for I do but almost preach the same things over and over
unto ye (which is not improper for a Gospel Minister to do; for said the
greatest Preacher thereof for these several Hundred Years last past, To write
the same things to me is not grievous, but to you it is safe. And the Gentiles
besought that those Words might be preached to them the next Sabbath, Acts 13.
42. So that it is lawful, yea, sometimes convenient and necessary to preach the
same Sermon, or read the same Book, or publish the same things over and over
again) and I have no new thing to declare unto ye: For I have found within my
self a withdrawing and stopping the Hand, as to God his affording me more, and
further Communication of his Eternal Truths; partly occasioned through what was
afore-mentioned of my worldly and vain Conversation, which did Grieve and
Quench the Spirit for the Time; partly because I once said I would leave off
preaching upon such a Consideration and Temptation which Expression of mine I
believe was offensive unto his Holiness, who knows all things. For whosoever
once puts, his Hand to this Plough, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom
of God. And the other I believe was the Reason here mentioned. And then the
number of my Hearers has visibly diminished and lessened, as such of ye are my
Witnesses, who came to hear me from the very first; which has not therefore so
happened, because of much more Inability and Insufficiency in my self over
others. For the Word which has been here preached is as Quick and Powerful, as
Lively and Affecting the Heart and Conscience as rational and true, and
altogether as faithfully handled, as what is preached in other Congregations
round about. It is a Vexation to see Men of Understanding not set by, nor yet
to have their due Worth and Esteem from the World. I returned, and saw under
the Sun that the race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong,
neither yet Bread to the Wise, nor yet Riches to Men of Understanding, Eccles.
9. 11. But it commonly so happens, that the more Eminent Instruments of the
Glory of God to their respective Generations and Countries, are not understood
by the People thereof. For he supposed his Brethren would have underderstood
how that God by his Hand would deliver them; but they understood not, Acts 7.
25. Our Fathers understood not thy Wonders in Egypt. Psalm. 106. 7. Of whom the
World was not worthy: they wandered in Deserts, in Mountains, and in Dens, and
Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11. 38.

But there have to many went about in this Town and Neighborhood, like Elymas
the Sorcerer, to persuade People off from Hearing my Preaching the Word,
whereof they shall give account before him that is ready to judge both the
Quick and Dead, and I shall implead them there, for their prating against us
with malicious Words. The like did Diotrephes to the Apostle John; and not
content themselves to refuse to hear the Word preached by me, they dissuade
them who would. There are many in this Town and Neighborhood, who, like
Alexander the Coppersmith, have done me much harm; I mean chiefly as to my
Ministry: Besides, as to what has fallen in Subordination as to my outward
Condition and Circumstances in my intended Settlement of Life in this Country;
which according to the Flesh, I did once desire, but now I suppose it will not
be. As to the Harm they have done to my Ministry, let them know as much
beforehand, and tremble thereat; They shall hear of it again at the
Judgment Seat of God. All this is chiefly occasioned, because of the matter of
the Popish King, because I had written, not out of mine own Head, but only from
the Book of the Law and Commandment of God; That it was not lawful to turn
aside a Papist from his right Quatenus, or merely because he was a Papist,
especially when his People had sworn a solemn Oath, kissing the Bible, of
Subjection and Faithfulness unto him. And so the Prophet of the Lord in Ezekiel.
17, 18, 19. does reprove the King of Jerusalem for despising the Oath which he
had taken to the King of Babylon, who was an Heathen, and so an Oath does bind
to such an one, or a Papist; when lo he had given his Hand: For when a Lawful
Oath is once taken, by invocating and sealing the same with the name of God (as
that is so for Subjects to swear Subjection, which is their Duty, unto their
King and Ruler) there is none can go off, or recede from the same, and be
guiltless or blameless. There is not an Instance hereof to be given throughout
the whole Bible. So that the aforesaid Proposition may be truly grounded upon
this plain Declaration of the Law and Revealed Will of God, I will be a swift
Witness against false Swearers (such are they who despise or do not keep the
Oath of God, which is contrary unto what the Spirit says in Eccles. 8. 2.) and
against them that turn aside the stranger from his right, Mal. 3. 5, Now the
Stranger there meant was either an Heathen, who also was an Idolater, or a
Proselyte of the Gate; and here God speaks against turning him aside from his
right, in like manner it may be truly reasoned and applied against turning
aside a Papist from his Right. As the Prophet Malachy was no Heathen nor
Stranger only, because he did by the Spirit deliver and make known the
Commandment of God to be on this wise; so I am no Papist, although I make known
also, and affirm the Will and Commandment of God to be on this wise, as I have
here received and learned it from his own Word of Truth. I shall not here
mention many more Particulars to illustrate and confirm the Truth of what I
have written about these things: But as it is written, The foolishness of Man
perverteth his way, and his Heart fretteth against the Lord. So I would just
observe, That the Disobedience of many People, because they have acted contrary
thereunto; yea, of the Religious and Professors also have fretted against the
Lord, because he has given such Declarations of his Will, and such kind of
Commandments, as in Mal. 3. 5. afore-mentioned, and these following; To turn
aside the Right of a Man before the Face of the most High, to subvert a Man in
his cause the Lord approves not, Lam. 3, 35, 36. From whence again it may be
truly reasoned and inferred, That the more like any Man is unto the Mind of
God, the supreme and only Good (thou art of purer Eyes then to behold Evil, and
can not look on Iniquity) the better that Man is; so by Consequence we are
the better Men, and more like unto God, and God does better love and approve of
us, if we do not approve of such kind of Doings neither, as the Lord approves
not; for indeed it is according to the Law of God, and the Laws of this Realm,
as also to Right Reason (for this is necessarily tending unto the Welfare,
Peace and Order of all Communities and Societies of People, living in a Nation
or Country together) that every one should have and enjoy his civil Right and
respective Property, both in his Lands or Goods, of whatever Opinion,
Persuasion, or way of Worship in Matters of Religion he or they be of Thou
shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God shall choose:
one from among thy Brethren shall thou set King over thee: thou may not set a
Stranger over thee which is not thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. In all this we have
not dealt falsely in thy Covenant, neither have our Steps declined from thy way.

So it stands at this day, I have at sundry Times, in several Years, preached
the Word amongst ye, and stretched forth my Hands unto a Disobedient and a
Gainsaying People. Ye know that I have kept back nothing that was profitable
unto you, but have showed you, and taught you publicly in this place (and I
would have done it from House to House, but that my time was taken up in
writing the Truths of God) though herein again I have been guilty of many
Omissions and Neglects; for I might have more discoursed on that Subject, as
touching their not hearing the Word to those whom I have occasionally made
Visits unto or been in Company with. I have testified both to the Jews, and
also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
I have preached both to the Godly, and to the Ungodly, to the Nominal, and also
to the real Christians, Repentance from dead Works; and that they should turn
to God, and bring forth fruits meet for Repentance. I have also preached Faith
in Jesus Christ, as ye are my Witnesses.

And so ye are likewise, That I have inculcated over and over the Doctrine of
Universal Obedience: That is, To have respect unto all God's Statutes, Psalm.
119. 6. And to have all his Judgments before us, and not to put away his
Statutes from us, Psalm. 18. 22. nor yet any of them: Yea, I have more than once
or twice set my Seal, and in this place delivered my Testimony against Partial
Obedience; that is, when either Priests or People are Partial in the Law,
(which in Mal. 2. 9. God finds fault with, and reproves them for) and they keep
some of the Commandments of God, and neglect others, as the manner of many is,
who call themselves Christians, although it is a dangerous and Soul-destroying
Deceit. Herein I have been peculiar and distinct from other Congregations; for
this same Doctrine of confirming all the Words of God's Law to do them, Deuteronomy.
27. 26. Is not so much preached therein as it should be. I am sure it is not so
much practiced by the Hearers and Members thereof as it ought to be.

And now behold I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, (I mean to the chief
City of this Nation) not knowing the things that shall befall me there: save
that the Holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying that Bonds and Afflictions
abide me, (I speak this by way of surmise, because those things have heretofore
befaln me in that place) But none of these things move me, neither count I my
Life dear unto my self; so that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the
Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus to testify the Gospel of the
Grace of God. I must at length unavoidably taste of Death one way or another.
At first indeed I have a melancholy Prospect before me, namely, of Poverty, and
further Imprisonments, for I believe this before the Scene will yet turn with
me. I believe God, that it shall be even so as it was told me, howbeit we must
be cast upon a certain Island, Acts 27. 25, 26. I believe God that it shall be
even so, as has been showed to me beforehand in my Mind, how that it should
be with me also, as it was with his Servant Job, and the latter end of my Life
should be more than my beginning; howbeit, according to his Method and Workings
of old, I must undergo greater and sorer Troubles than I have as yet endured,
Before He does quicken me again, and bring me up again from the depths of the
Earth, Psalm. 71. 20. But I trust in the living God that he will proportion his
Invisible Protection unto the Danger I may be subject unto, and his Deliverance
according to the Trouble and Suffering, I may be involved in, and his Relief
suitable to what my Need shall be. As old Hilarion did say when he was tempted
to deny Christ; These eighty six years I have served him, and found no harm in
him, and shall I deny him now? No, I will not do it. So for some Years last
past I have trusted on God hitherto, and it was then well enough with me,
(blessed be his Name for it) and shall I distrust him now? No, I hope I shall
never do it: But I desire to remember and always bear in mind, so that I may
follow his Example in this Duty of trusting on God, that Character which is
recorded of Hezekiah, He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him
there was none like unto him among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were
before him, 2 Kin. 18. 5. What, could Paul finish his Course with Joy when
Bonds and Afflictions in every City did abide him? Yes, he did by the
Influences and Comforts of the Holy Ghost within him at the same time. For as
God was with Joseph in the Prison, so he is equally, or rather more with his
Servants in trouble, when they are suffering according to his Will in well
doing: So I declare truly unto ye this Day (behold what a good God it is whom
we serve) I have experienced more Sweetness and Joy, (which arises from the
Sense of the loving Kindness and Favor of God toward us, and from the Belief
and Assurance of a greater Reward); when I have been in Prison, then when I
have been out of it: For then I have had a troubled Spirit, (and a wounded
Spirit who can bear?) for my neglect of doing the Will of God, and for my
accepting of Deliverance upon sinful Terms, and out of fear of the future
Displeasure of God against me for the same. I am of the same Mind still, and I
desire ever to continue so. I had rather meet with what is commonly called
Trouble and Suffering (which even in the midst thereof is very much sweetened by
the Holy Ghost the Comforter) in the way of serving God, and doing my Duty
toward him, by testifying the Gospel of God, and by asserting his Commandments
in the very same manner as they lie, and were by him given, than avoid
Suffering or Trouble, in omitting or neglecting of it. Your own several
Understandings can conceive and tell ye that if one can finish his Course with
Joy, when Bonds and Afflictions every where abide him (which is as certain as
Scripture is true, and that God has any Care over his Servants and People)
then he is altogether as happy as those at full Liberty. And so those who take
joyfully the spoiling of their Goods (from whence does that Joy arise? even
from that Knowledge that they have in Heaven a better and more enduring
Substance) as some have done, then these also are in the same, or rather a
better Condition than those who have kept them; for they have not that degree
of rejoicing.

I will not here apply that next Verse of Paul's Farewell Sermon to the
Ephesians; And now behold, I know that ye all, amongst whom I have preached the
Kingdom of God shall see my Face no more; for besides, that Humane Temper of
mine,

Romae rus opto, absentem Rusticus Vrbem. There is a like Disposition in me, as
was in one of the Patriarks, of longing fore after my Father's House. There is
a Lothness and Unwillingness in me, according to the Flesh, to leave or throw
my self out of it, because of having there the Necessaries and Conveniences of
outward Life, and of dwelling at ease. But if I should always continue there,
how should the Work of God be done by me, and woe be unto me if I do it not, and
I would not have it taken out of my Hands, and given to another; and so I shall
lose the things that I have wrought, and not receive a full Reward, nor yet
obtain a better Resurrection than my other Fellow Creatures, who are for being
at Ease, (the Lord declares himself, I am very sorely displeased with the
Heathen that are at ease, Zech. 1. 15. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion,
Amos 6. 1.) and sleeping in a whole Skin, as we commonly phrase it. It is a
Resemblance to Moses's Faith, Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a season. Esteeming the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt; for he had
Respect unto the Recompense of Reward. And so if I rather choose only Bread to
eat, and Raiment to put on, Genesis 28. 20. as I hope he will give me that as he
did unto Jacob in the way wherein I am to go, which he has chalked, and showed
unto me beforehand, rather than to enjoy still the Comforts of a full Table,
or the sweet delightsome Relish of Sensuality (which is like the Israelites
longing after the Onyons, Leeks, and Garlic of Egypt) or better Raiment, or
what is commonly called a more creditable kind of Life; and all this I do only
for the sake of God, and of publishing yet more his Word and Truth. The having
Respect unto the Recompense of Reward does swallow up all other wordly and
carnal Considerations.

Life is uncertain, and it is more sickly in great and populous Cities, and
there be other Casualties. Moreover, the Sons of Violence are there; so that
God only knows whither ye shall see my Face any more. But if I can enjoy
Health, Liberty, and have continued Relief proportionable to my Need and I have
a contented Mind so to abide, and be doing; I would willingly by the Grace and
Truth of God (not as of my self, who can do nothing) so effect things, that ye
shall see me no more till ye shall say, Blessed be he that comes in the name
of the Lord. This is my Desire according to the Spirit, though the Flesh perhaps
may incline me to go to and fro. That my Ministry shall not be altogether so
much rejected amongst ye as formerly. We have been with Child, we have been in
pain, we have as it were brought forth Wind, we have not wrought any
Deliverance in the Earth, neither have the Inhabitants of the World fallen,
Isa. 26. 18. which hitherto has been fulfilled in my Ministry, as to the
People of this my Generation and Country: Nevertheless it is of God, as that
here mentioned is, although it had not its utmost effect.

There is an irksomeness and unwillingness according to the Flesh, for even
common Friends to part; especially, if we are to see one another Face no more,
and we know of it beforehand. But there is yet a much greater sounding of the
Bowels, and deep thought of Heart between the true Preachers of the Gospel, and
their People and Hearers: Especially if they are knit together in Heart and
Affection, as appears by this Instance and Example of Paul. And they all wept
sore, and fell on Paul's Neck, and kissed him. Sorrowing most of all for the
Words which he spoke, that they should see his Face no more. And they
accompanied him unto the Ship. True Christianity where it is lively and real,
does draw out the Affections and Passions in the most eminent manner that can
be. God knows whither my Ministry here used amongst ye, has so far reached the
Hearts of any, that it has been reported of me in like manner, as was of the
Author and Finisher of our Faith. Some say, that he is a good Man, and others
have said, nay, but he deceives the People. This last Reproach has been
handed about, or otherwise they would never have dissuaded People from coming
to hear me. So far it is true, some do secretly wish that I was gone out of the
Country, yea, many in this Island had rather I was gone out of the World. By
the way, if their Spirits now are so impatient and restless, that they cannot
endure a single Troubler of Israel, how then will they endure when their Souls
fly out of their Bodies; (it is but a short Respite and Reprieve between) if
they should be with the whole Company of Prophets and Apostles, who were so to
their Age and Country, what I am accused of now. Neither they nor my self have
troubled Israel, but those Men only have troubled it, who have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord. Some very few others in this Neighborhood had rather
perhaps that I stay longer among them for their Souls Good, and Edification, by
their attending on my Ministry in this place.

But beloved, of whom I hope Salvation, to speak a short Word unto ye; I have
no greater Joy than to hear that my Children walk in Truth, John 3. 4. For what
is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? are not even ye in the presence of
our Lord Jesus Christ, for ye are our Glory and Joy, 1 These. 2. 19, 20, This is
my Hope, my Comfort, my Joy, and my Crown, that every one of you are not
gainsaying, and disobedient, Despisers and non-hearers, although far the
greater Multitude of the Inhabitants of this Town and Neighborhood are. Ye
might convince them in the mean while, as ye will be Witness against the others
at the last Day. Furthermore then we beseech you Brethren, and exbort you by
the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk and please
God, even according to all the words of the Gospel, without adding one Word, or
diminishing from it, so ye would abound more and more. The same Paul says on
this wise concerning another Minister of the Gospel; Receive him, for he also
works the work of the Lord as I work. So my dear and beloved
Fellow Christians, I would have ye to know, that whenever I go from hence,
notwithstanding the contrary Reproaches of many People, I do work the same Work
of the Lord, which I do here in this place. Namely, by the words of God's Grace
and Truth, which are committed to my Ministration to endeavor to convert
Sinners, and to make them a People prepared for the Lord. But there I do it
more by writing and publishing the Copies thereof, which is the more lasting
and remaining Good. Here it is by a living Voice, and by Word of Mouth. Again,
of this ye are not ignorant, that in other Cities, Towns, and Villages there
are the like Creatures of the same God, as ye your selves are, and alike Sheep
of the one and everlasting Shepherd, who has us Ministers for his
under-Shepherds; and these Sheep are to be fed, instructed and exhorted in the
Words of Eternal Life. So that ye may be contented and satisfied (for they also
are Children of the Stock of Abraham, and Flesh, of your Flesh, and Bone of
your Bone) although one who was a Burning and Shining Light in his Generation
(and some of ye were willing to rejoice in his Light for a season) should be
removed to another place, for the much yet greater ends of the Gospel, and for
the yet more Universal and lasting Publishing and Propagation of the Eternal
Truths of God. For the Souls of such of ye as shall be saved, will be saved
nevertheless whither I go away or stay, if ye remember and continue mindful of
the things that have been spoken, and particularly if ye obey and observe the
very last Direction, which I Intend to leave with ye. As also in the latter
Days when ye shall consider it more perfectly than I can now declare it unto
ye, then ye will glorify God on my behalf, and also be well pleased therewith,
and have good Will toward me in my making the better Choice, as to obey the
Call of God, and prefer the greater things pertaining to his Kingdom before the
less. This common thing of good Will is a thing that the Ministers of the
Gospel do very often want, signified by that relative kind of Speech, Glory to
God on the highest, on Earth Peace, and good Will toward Men. But as to the
Souls of them in this Town and Neighborhood who shall perish, they would still
continue Despisers and Non-hearers, Reproachers and Blasphemers, stubborn and
perverse, be Blinded, Romans 11. 7. and Snared, Isa. 8. 14. at the Word of my
Ministry, and there would be a stumbling Block hindering them from coming to
hear it, although I should continue here all the remaining evil Days of my
Pilgrimage, which I intend not to do.

As Robert Bolton called for his six Children up when he lay upon his
Deathbed, and uttered this his last Saying unto them, Take heed that none of
ye do meet me at the Judgment Seat of God in an un-regenerate Heart; so in this
my Farewel-Sermon I warn and testify unto all the Inhabitants of this Town and
Neighborhood (let those that hear carry out this Word to them that do not
hear) take heed that none of ye do meet me at the Judgment Seat of God in an
un-regenerate Heart, nor yet in the Spirit of despisal and refusal to hear the
Word of the Lord, nor yet in the Spirit of Reproach, Stubbornness, and
Perverseness, nor yet in the Darkness of Ignorance, which most People are now
in, And which shows (for these are the Fruits and Effects thereof) that your
Hearts as yet are Un-regenerate, Unsanctified, and Unrenewed, and your foolish
Hearts are darkened. Which perhaps, although they are not in every part, yet it is
so in some part thereof; for ye are not as yet turned unto the Lord your God
with all your Heart, and with all your Souls, and with all your Mind, without
the Exception or Reserve of any Lust, Humor or Will of your own, And ye are
not as yet given up to follow the Lamb, (who is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, and consequently the Conducts and Leadings of Divine Truth) whither
soever it goes; but such do turn unto the Lord with some of their Heart, but
not with their whole Heart. This Word is proper, and belongs unto those of the
several Professions, Sorts, Sects and Names of Religion, inhabiting among us,
as they are commonly called or distinguished by Church-People, Presbyterians,
Quakers. The name of it, nor yet your listing your selves in either of the
Parties, nor yet your confining your selves only unto it. will not save ye, nor
any of ye: But it must be pure and undefiled Religion before God, through his
Gracious Acceptance thereof; it must be by true Primitive and Universal
Christianity (the way wherein our Fathers walked, who now are at Peace) through
which as a Means ye are to hope that your Spirits may be saved in the Day of
the Lord. Jesus. A confirming all the Words of the Law and Gospel by your doing
of them. But whosoever shall do and teach them (even the least Commandments)
the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19. And it is
through this thing, even that mentioned in the foregoing Verse, The setting your
Hearts unto all the Words, which Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles have testified unto Mankind unto this Day, which ye shall command your
Children to do, all the Words of this Law. And then it follows, through this
thing ye shall prolong your Days, even so to a blessed Eternity in the Land,
(even the new Heavens, and the new Earth, where Righteousness dwells) whither
and when ye go over the Jordan of this Life to possess it. There is no other
way, or name given under Heaven, whereby they must be saved, than that of
Christ Jesus, and the Observance of all things whatsoever he has commanded us.

Whatever Reproaches and false Sayings have been uttered against my Person or
Ministry, though here it may be expected I should take up such a kind or form of
Speech; Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. I pray God lay not
this Sin to their Charge. But since Christ and his Apostles spoke after this
manner, so much Light and Grace, so much Knowledge and Revelation have came
into the World, that People now may know what they do herein, namely, that
themselves who reproach and speak falsely, are as so many Instruments in the
Hands of the Devil for to resist, let and hinder, to defeat, spoil or render of
less Effect the Ministry of such a Servant of the most High God, who does only
Teach the way of Salvation. So that if we should still pray and ejaculate after
this manner, it may seem to encourage others in a like course of sinning, and
Teaching Rebellion against the Lord, (for so did Shemaiah the Nehelamite, in
giving out as if Jeremiah his Prophet was mad, as ye may read in Jer. 29. 26.
32.) so that instead of my praying, Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. I pray God, lay not this Sin to their charge; I shall here use and
apply as to them other Words of Christ and his Apostle. But I say unto you that
every idle Word (which there signifies false or reproachful Words, as appears
by the Verses immediately foregoing) that Men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the Day of Judgment, Mat, 12. 36. Who shall give an account
to him that is ready to judge both the Quick and Dead, 1 Pet. 4. 5. We are not
allowed to pray, nor will God hear but according to Truth. How then can I pray,
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, when the Times of that
Ignorance which God winked at are long since past. But now in this Gospel-day
more Grace and Knowledge have appeared unto the World: So that either People do
know, or may know (which is near one and the same thing) what they do, and whom
they have Reproached and Blasphemed, and against whom they have exalted their
Voice, even against the Holy One of Israel, when with their Mouth they have
reproached, and spoken falsely of his Minister and Servant, especially as he was
in the Ministration of his Word; and when their lying Lips did speak grievous
things proudly and contemptuously against the Righteous.

Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report, if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these things. Those things which ye have learned
and received, and heard, and seen in me, do, and the God of Peace shall be with
you, Phil. 4. 8, 9. Wherefore I take you to record this Day that I am pure from
the Blood of all Men, for I have not shunned to declare unto ye all the Counsel
of God. For as may be reasoned from Joshua 8. 35. there should not be a Word of
all that God has commanded in the Scriptures; which his true Ministers should
shun, or refuse to declare and make known unto the People. I am not he that is
set over ye after the Law of a Carnal Commandment, or according to the
established manner of the Country. But as God has set some in the Church,
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, after that Miracles,
then Gifts of Healing, Helps, 1 Cor. 12. 28. so by the Gifts given and
committed unto me, I may come in for an Helper in the Work of the Ministry. And
by my constant Warning of the Inhabitants of this Town and Neighborhood
against all manner of Sin and Transgression, and by laying open the
Unreasonableness and Danger thereof, I shall somewhat ease that Account which
he is to give for the Souls more immediately, and especially committed unto his
Charge. Notwithstanding all the Labors that are used in this Parish, and the
Parts adjacent to prevent it, whosoever for all that shall perish at last yet I
take you to record again, that I am pure from the Blood of all Men, because I
have not refused to declare unto them all the Counsel of God that came into my
Mind, and which was against their Sin, Iniquity, Transgression, Hypocrisy,
Disobedience and Ignorance; all which and the like, do drown Men in Destruction
and Perdition.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance amongst all them which are
sanctified. I commend you especially to the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, and to its Teaching us that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World. So that
whosoever of you shall deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and shall live
Soberly and Righteously and Godly in this present World, he or she and such
only shall obtain and inherit Salvation in the next World. I commend you also
to the Teaching of the Spirit of God (there is no Teaching like the Teaching of
the Spirit, and Lord evermore give us this Bread, Lord evermore give us the
Teaching of thy Spirit) and there be sure to obey its Voice, and to do always
according to those Dictates of Duty and Motions of Good, the Spirit shall from
Time to Time, suggest and put into your several Minds. Remember to observe this
Rule, even to do and put in Practice all the Good that ye shall ever think of,
or what shall be in the Power of your Hands for to do. But the anointing which
ye have received of him abides in you; and ye need not that any Man teach you;
but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is no Lie, and even
as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him. And now little Children abide in
him; that when he shall appear, we may have Confidence, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming, 1 John 2. 27, 28.

As ye and my self do constantly to our Lives end, observe these last Rules and
Directions here delivered; however we shall be divided and separated one from
another on this Earth in matter of Place; But we Brethren being taken from you
for a short time, in Presence, not in Heart, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 17. for such of us as
are obedient unto the Word, in Heart and Affection we shall be together still,
(for Godly Hearers will remember a Godly Teacher after he is removed from them;
as also he will remember such Hearers as were attendant on, and obedient unto
the Word of his Ministry in such a Place) yet such of us as do these things (If
ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them; and blessed are those
Servants whom when the Lord comes, he shall find so doing) shall meet again at
a blessed Resurrection. Amen, so be it, says my Soul,

Richard Stafford.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed in the Year School. and are to be Sold unto such who will
receive the Truth in the Love thereof.

Advertisement.
THese are to give notice, That I have several other Practical Sermons or
Discourses of mine own composing, lying by me in Manuscript; which if they who
have the Plenty or Competency of this Worlds Goods, would (according to their
several Ability) thus Consecrate some part of their Gain and Substance unto the
Lord, Micah 4, 13. so as to be ready to Distribute, and willing to Communicate
toward the outward Labor and Charge of the Printing. and Publishing of them,
it would be for the Glory of God (in making known his Truth, Isa. 38. 19.) and
for the Edification and Benefit of his Church and People; and consequently it
would be a good Work in such Persons, who shall be helpful, and any ways
assistant herein, for which they would be rewarded by God in the Life that is
to come.

Charge them that are rich in this World, that they do Good; that they be rich
in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up in store
for themselves a good Foundation against the Time to come, that they may lay
bold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. This is a Faithful Saying, and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in God, might be careful to maintain good Works; these things are good and
profitable unto Men, Titus 3. 8.


