The Mystery of Iniquity somewhat laid open: In a Letter to the Present
Governor; wherein is also contained an History and Recital and Proposal of
Sundry Things to be made known and remembered, and to be done accordingly.
In that Letter which I carried to thine House at Kensington on November 3.
1691. which was there burnt (as near as I can remember) the words contained
therein was to this following Effect, viz.
THAT I having published my Book, Entitled, Things Plain and Weigh^^, etc.
There was an observable Marginal Note in Page 12. That God would remove the
Government off from thy Shoulders, and yet not hurt thy Person: It was my Duty
to make this known unto you as soon as ever this was printed and published;
which was before thy last Expedition into Flanders. But I neglected to do it
then for fear thou should Imprison me, which now thou have done. Yet I was
again troubled at this my neglect, least thou going into the Wars, it should
happen otherwise with thee than I had there written, and so the things which
belong to thy Peace had been passed away and gone from thee for all Eternity:
Which was very likely to have come to pass, when thou satest under a Tree, and
soon after thou wast arose from thence, a cannon bullet did strike the very
place whereon thou satest; if the public Gazette be true that relates it after
this manner. Herein thou love thine Enemies and hate thy Friends; for thou
have declared this day in Imprisoning me (who do really and unfeignedly desire
thy Temporal Preservation, and See my printed Letter directed to thee at the
Hague.
that thou may live out all those days which God has appointed to the Life
of Man upon Earth; and therefore I would admonish thee to cease from and not
venture thy self, nor send others into these dangerous Wars) for I do perceive,
according to the Mind that then and now thou art in, if according to the
Dictates and Insinuations of thy Foolish Flatterers and Admirers. Thou had
descended into Battle and perished there, they would cry it up for Brave and
Honorable; and the Thoughts of this vain Glory and Praise does please thee well
and spur thee on; though if it had so happened, thy mind would have been
changed for all Eternity; for thy Soul would still remember, and remain full of
Indignation and Wrath. Tribulation and Anguish, for what thou soughtest to be
commended here on this Earth. But now I do well come and congratulate thy ^^e
coming here again into England: And I do Pray and Hope that it will be exactly
so done with thee according to that Word which God showed unto me upon one of
your appointed public days of Fasting and Humiliation (which I did then
observe, not for the Reasons mentioned in thy Proclamation for it, but for the
Sins and Hypocrisy of this People, and that I might seek and Pray for their
Good) This same Word which then sprung up in my Heart, and remained within me
for several Months (the Lord pardon my sinful Fear and Distrust, in hiding
within my Heart and concealing this Truth (...) 4^. 10. so long, for this ought
not so to have been, I did at length write it down and publish it to the Great
Congregation, for so it would be, if now all were gathered together who have
read or heard of this Word. And I came on November ^. (...) put to thy dwelling
place at Kensington, for to signify and make known this (with many other
things) unto thee. But instead of thy receiving and observing the Law and Word
of God, thy Servants did burn that Book wherein it was written, and they did
Imprison me for some little time in a place where they keep Coals. This was
somewhat like (...) and (...) in the days of Old, But what came upon him for so
doing? Therefore (...) says the Lord of Jeho^^^^ King of Judah, He shall have
none to sit upon the Throne of David, and his dead Body (...) be cast out in
the day to the heat, and in the night ^o t^^ Fro^^. And I will punish (...) and
his Seed, and his Servants for their Iniquity. And I will bring upon them, and
upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the Men of Judah, all the Evil that
I pronounced against them, but they hearkened not, Jer. 36. 3^, 31. Now what
thy Servants (O thou that art called King William) do by thy Command or
Approbation, God interprets i^ to be thine own Act. And here the former words
are visibly true of thee* thou shall have none (that is, Issue of thy Body) to
sit upon the Throne of thy Father in Law. As the Lord lives, and as sure as
now thou live, thy day shall come to dye; And though thy dead Body should be
interred in the Royal Chapel at W^stm^^ster ^^b^y among the Ancient Kings of
this Nation yet things may so alter and turn, that it may be taken up again,
and be removed or exposed to Shame. But most ce^^^i^ly it shall rise up at the
last day, and then it may be t^rown into devouring Fire and everlasting
Burnings, and it may become subject unto Gnashing of Teeth; which is ten
thousand times worse than to be cast out in the day to the Heat* and in the
night to the Frost.

According to the Proverb (...) must be ver^ ^ad to be worse th^n a Turk; But I
tell thee Truly and Pla^nly that the Turks shall rise up in Judgment against
thee, and condemn thee; for they out of Reverence to the Great God of Heaven
and Earth, will take up any Paper wherein but so much as the Name of God is
written, and lay it up very carefully, and they will not put it to any common
or undecent use: So far are they from tearing it, or throwing it upon the
Ground or b^rning it; for the S^n or Provocation there, see^s to be of ^he same
nature; as that is o^ se^ purpose to cut, deface or burn the King's Picture;
which is esteemed as a great A^^ront unto him, In like manner, to do so unto
his Truth (which though clothed and expressed in a dead Letter, it does bear
the Image and Superscription of him that is Invisible) is a most heinous
Off^nce, such as words cannot well express the utmost Aggravation thereof. God
will answer that Man or Woman in a like Punishment; for the same Word which
goes ^orth from him, will be a consuming Fire to devour its Adversaries. He
shall speak and it shall be done accordingly; He shall give forth the Sentence,
by virtue whereof they shall go to Hell: So that the same manner as a Man
sinned, by the same he shall be punished. God will punish thee and thy Servants
(He will bring them out by their Names and by their Persons whosoever they be)
for this their Iniquity; and he will bring upon you and upon the Inhabitants of
England, all the Evils which He pronounced against Ye, but ye hearkened not. It
is so in the Mind and Purpose of God before it is made known upon Earth; and so
it remains notwithstanding they should forget or lose the knowledge thereof.
And it shall be done with thy ^el^ and People, and the Officers under thee,
according to the real Significations, and true Meaning of those words which God
has published by me his Servant. And though ye have burnt that Book, yet I
have by me more Copies of the same Book; one whereof for thy own reading and
p^^usal. thou may have whenever thou will: And besides what is there
printed, God does keep the same in my Memory, and I am ready to write again
according to the same words which I wrote down there: and now ye have given
occasion to add many like words.

As p^rti^ularly I did show some of them (the last Month) in a letter to the
Earl of Nottingham, which I suppose either came not to his hands, or he
despised or concealed it* So that if I would Honor thee in the sight of ^^y
People, and only signify the same in a written Copy, this will not answer the
End for I would have it made known unto thee. So that I am forced to publish
even some more trivial Matters, which do not deserve to be made public. But I
am willing that several Copies should go out, if perhaps one may come unto thee
or to thy hearing thereof. And also when it is printed, thou can more easily
read it, than my handwriting, which is bad and difficult

But then further, it is agreeable to the Method and Will of God, that what Sin
or Evil his Creature does secretly, He will both reprove and punish before all
^^r^el, and before the S^^, 2 Samuel 12. 12. Nothing is secret but that it should
be made manifest; and nothing is hidden but that it should come abroad. So that
even for secret private and hidden Sins, open Reproof is proper, that others
may fear, and take heed of the like things. But much more for the things thou
do openly, the same may in like manner be reproved from the Word of the All
seeing God (notwithstanding He now keeps silence) and set in order before you.
I am certain, that things of a thousand times less Moment are printed and
published.

If I could not get Admission to deliver my Books in Person unto thy self and
thy Wi^e (as I was before showed that I should not) then the Lord directed me
to leave them however some way or other; for that would turn for a Witness
against you. Which also ye are sensible and apprehensible of And therefore
perhaps that was one reason why ye did act this kind of Revenge and Spite
against me, as to send me rather unto a w^rse place than that of Dragons to be
covered with the shadow of Death; but this is among the Ravings of D^^racted
Persons which has some Representation of Hell, and the Howlings of Damned
Spirits But ye did not know, o^ at least not thoroughly consider, that this will
make it turn for a yet greater Witness and Testimony against your selves. So
that to excuse the Sin hereof, ye will one day wish that the Lord would impute
M^^ness to you; for as the Wise Man says, The Heart of the Son^ of M^n ^^
(...) of evil, and Ma^ness i^ in their Heart while they ^^ve, and after that
they go to the (...), Eccles. 9. 3. So the more W^se and discerning of them,
would be glad if the Lord would reckon their former Sin and Evil as Madness, so
that they might either esc^pe, or have their Punishment mitigated after Death.
But the All wise and All knowing is not as Man that He should be deceived: He
will minister true Judgment unto the People in Uprightness. And He will ^^pute
this Act of yours not as Madness but as Malice. Yea to be Rebellion as the Sin
of Witc^craft, and such Stubbornness, which is as Iniquity and Idolatry,
because ye have rejected the Word of the Lord, 2 Samuel 15 23 He will adjudge it
to be an higher degree of Rebellion, and a worse sort of Stubbornness than that
here spoken of; In that ye were not only contented to reject his Word* but ye
did Imprison his Servant who came in the Message and Ministration thereof. But
here ye may be apt to say, Why then thou should have carried away thy Books
again when thou were b^d so to do; and then perhaps this Con^inement had not
happened unto thee But I did not dare neglect what the Lord commanded me* lea^
I should have been Disobedient to the Voice of God within me. And accordingly
then I sp^ke in as silent and friendly manner as one Man talks to another,
that I might deliver my Books in Person; but they would not admit me nor suffer
me to leave them any where in the House, but they turned me out of D^^rs And as
I was going out I did not cry nor lif^ up nor cause my Voice to be heard in the
Horse nor did I show the least sign of Madness (...) E^^r^vagancy in my
Deportment; but only as I was ju^t gone without the Doors I dropped them upon
the Ground in a silent and peaceable manner there to remain. And this was all
my troubling of the Court (according to their Phrase) for they call it so,
though I did not speak one word of what was contained in my Books

But here somewhat may be observed of the Work and Moving of God; for like as
when the Lord looked unto the Host of the Egyptians, through (...) Pillar of
Fire and of the Cloud, He troubled the Host of ^he Egyptians. Exodus 14. 24. And
as is signified by what is written 1 Samuel 16. 5. The Elders of the Town trembled
at his coming and said, Co^est thou Peaceable? So at the co^ing of Christ (^^o
was the Word, and the Word ^as God* John 1. 1) into the World, (...) Herod ^he
King (...) these things, he was troubled and all Jerusalem with him, M^t^. ^.3
In like manner each Manifestation or Rumor or Report of the true Wo^d o^ God
does cause a Motion or Trouble in (...) Hearts of the Inhabitants of the Earth;
though they do only apprehend or guess somewhat; but they do not know
distinctly what it is So that, let not People think, as if any strange or new
thing happened. That Richard (...) coming with the Word of God and his
Righteousness the outward Testimony whereof being Written and Printed, was the
very same by Interpretation and his Re^l Int^^tion, as if he spoke out every
Sentence, Word and Syllable into their Ears; but he did not open his Lips, as
to utter any thing audibly contained in it; Yet by doing so far only he did
trouble (whom ye call, King William and Queen Ma^^, and all their O^^icers and
Servants with them. But I do hereby tell them f^rther. That this Troubling is a
short and little Earnest of a worse thing that shall befall them and ^^at worse
(...).

Likeas the Fi^e at Kensington-House was a Sign or Warning of that should come
upon his or their own Hea^s; for as the Lord s^^th, (...) Mal. 3. 5. So in this
Life God does not usually P^^ish but (...) she^^ a Token ^^^t he will p^^ish,
or rather he does only b^g^n t^ pu^^sh And so in whatever Affliction he does
lay upon M^nd, Body or E^ate, or if it be Sudden Temporal Death the or^^er
^eems to be Correction or Chastisement, which is in^erior or less than
Punishment And as for Temporal Death (...) And so the Wrath of God, which did
and does yet hover over Whitehall and Kensington-(...) T^^s word was showed to
me in my Heart, even before that Fire also happened at (...) in the beginning
of this Year.) was lately a little kindled, and did break forth upon the latter
place into devouring Fire. The former part of this Exp^e^sion I should have
proclaimed out aloud when I was at Kensington-House, but I neglected so to do,
for fear, (the Lord Pardon thy Servant in this thing) but I did proclaim this
word on the eighth of (...) which was two days before the Fire happened there.
And then I did through the (...) of the Prison I was in, utter it with a loud
audible distinct Voice, to the intent (whereof I did think at the very time)
that it might be of greater Effect and Confirmation, and that it mig^t be more
rati^^ed and recorded before God. And it was then answered in a still Voice to
my Heart, that it would be so accordingly; for a Law is of greater Force and
Energy when it is proclaimed; and so the word is more established by is being
spoken out. This Fire did not hurt the Person of the two chief Inhabitants of
that House, nor (I suppose) singe the Hem of their Garment, for probably they
did arise up and get away from it which is the common and ordinary way to do in
such danger. But did it not terri^ie and affect their Minds for the present
time* Behold, in all this is to be discerned the Riches of his Goodness, and
forbearance and long-suffering; and they are to know that the Goodness of God
should lead them to Repentance.

But the^ according to the Doctrine of D^ John Ti^^^son, in case of Injuries or
Wrong to the outward Estate of another there can be no R^pentance without
Restitution; for in order to Repentance it is necessary to undo the Fault as
much as it can be; and if it were to do again* we would not do it. This he
spoke not of himself (as now he is) but it was before his late Apo^^acy or
falling away, when he was only a Preacher of Gods Word, he did rightly deliver
this from the very Nature o^ true Repentance; as any one may assuredly know
that it is so, who understands what (...) signifies which is the proper and
right word in the Greek Language ^o^ it. And notwithstanding what the
abovementioned Person may now flurt or speak outwardly with fair words
deceiving the Hearts of the Simple; or whatever strong Delu^^ons he may ^i^gle
among^^ those who are Part^cipes Criminis, who would fain believe a Lie; Fac^^^
^^^dimus q^od vo^umus; yet he cannot now gainsay the same, least he should by
speaking contrary to the Spirit of his own mind, and so in the Prophets Phrase
belly the Lord; if it may be supposed that there does any thing of God now
remain in him. I do not love to Quote Authors, because it is Parrot like to
repeat another words, and we should apprehend Truth as Distinct from Men But
yet it was not altogether improper to cit^ him by Name, that the Poor Wretch
(for so he is no^withstanding he is enclosed in his own Fat, and has great
Revenues without Right) may tremble and fear least he be condemned out of his
own words; and he may be hereby p^t in mind to come to that thorough work of
Repentance, to the Acknowledgment (which implies outward Confession and
Declaration) of the Truth

And seeing that the two Princes have chosen him to be their Instructor and
Teacher, I shall here lay before them some other of his words to the following
Purport. I do not deliver that abovementioned nor yet this (...) because I have
not now ^^s bound Book of Printed Sermons by me (out of which both these
Sentences are taken) at this ^^^e; but there I have read so, and it is near to
the following Sense and Meaning viz. That People under the Judgments of God,
are like Lead melded with Fire; (...) after they are g^ne and (...) other is
removed, they ^o like (...) retur^ again to their ^ormer Hardness. In like
manner, whatever secret Thoughts, Fears or Apprehensions did arise in the Heart
of the two Princes, just as they had (...) Knowledge thereof ^or at that very
time they di^ see their own House Burning, when perhaps their Heart was melted
like Wax in the (...) of their Bowels; if herein they would give Glory unto
Go^, by (...) o^^ and telling op^^ly their Courtiers and Clergy who might tell
others the same) (...) had at that very time. But if they ^r^ Sall^n (...) will
not discov^^ (...) of them, lea^ by some of their thoughts then their S^^
should (...) what appear, and ^hey should hereby confess then own (...): Hear
ye give Ear be not Proud ^or (...) Lord has spoken thus i^ his Word; and he
does now command and require ye to give Glory unto the Lord God of Israe^, and
make Confession unto (...), tell us (...) ye did think a^ that very time: Hide
it not from us, give Glory unto the Lord your God before he cause Darkness, and
before your Feet stumble upon the dark Mountains; if ye will not, this is
Disobedience, and God shall nevertheless bring out and rehearse those innermost
Thoughts, that they shall be made known whither ye now for a very little while
choose, or whither ye do refuse. But now it is some while since over, ye have
almost forgotten it, or ye do cease to be affected therewith; and ye are now
again shut up and closed like the Lead or Wax before spoken of. When this
Judgment was just flaming before your Eyes, then ye could learn and understand
Righteousness; but now the Fire is quenched, ye will not practice and do it.
But after your Hardness and Impenitent Heart, ye Treasure up unto your selves
Wrath against the day of Wrath and Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God,
who will render unto every Man according to his Deeds: Unto them that are
Contentious and do not obey the Truth but obey Unrighteousness (as that is
exactly your case and of those who side with ye) Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man that does Evil.

What ye call my Troubling of you, it is only to prevent all that; for it is
not I, but the Word and Truth which appears forth through me; and your being
troubled thereat, does arise from the Multitude of thine Iniquity and the Great
Hatred; for Sin when it is committed, does leave Guilt behind. Now when the Sin
comes to be Reproved and manifested, then also the Guilt is stirred up; and
from hence does arise Conviction, Shame, Anguish of Spirit (all which are very
troublesome) and fearful Expectation of what all the present Trouble is but a
little Earnest and Transient Forerunner of that Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish, which shall for ever abide and remain upon your
Immortal Spirits; which shall be in worse Pains than that of Dying, and yet
they shall never Dye. Consider, It is good for ye now to be troubled, in order
to the Saving of your Souls. And ye had better be warned of it, that ye may
flee from the Wrath to come, than to be kept Ignorant, unmindful, or holden
under strong Delusions unto your Dying Day, and so fall Eternally under it.
These strong Delusions are sent unto those who receive not the Love of the
Truth; and they are outwardly administered by your Mealy* mouthed Priests; who
do deliver in these smooth things and Deceits both in their ordinary Preaching,
and Personal Conversation, to the Intent that they may Please and not Offend;
and they call this Falseness and Per^idiousness to their Holy Ministry, Good
Humor and Breeding. But as to speaking the things which become ^ound Doctrine,
they are in the Language of the Spirit, Dumb Dogs; for so they are through
Fear, Corruption and Sloth. And because of the Multitude of them who do
neglect, and leave undone those things which they ought to do, I am Persecuted
as one Singular; and am as a speckled Bird, the Birds round about are against
me, Jer. 12. 9. and they do Chatter or put forth the Bill. And whereas I do,
like another John Baptist, warn the People of this my Generation to flee from
the Wrath to come; and I do mention the Law of God, which says, that such and
such things are not Lawful, that is, they ar^ not consistent with, but
contrary, or otherwise than such a Law Commands or Requires. But ye are more to
be blamed, and ye are worthy of soarer Punishment who do offend this Law, than
I am thought an Offender only for making mention of this Law; for I do
according to what is commanded, Lev. 19. 17. Rebuke ye, and I would not suffer
Sin upon you But for this doing only, ye do put and shut me up in Prison; for
which doing to me his Servant, God will answer ye again as to thrust ye down to
the lowermost Hell.

For a common Swearer, Drunkard or Whore-monger, will receive a Reproof, and he
will acknowledge his Fault and make excuses for it; but he will not strike him
in the Face who shall give the Admonition. There does indeed rise up a greater
degree of Rancor, Malice and Hatred against him that Rebukes for the Sins of
Fraud and Injustice. But when a who^e Nation do despise and falsify an Oath
when they establish Iniquity by a Law; When by a pretended Law of their own
making, they would make void God's Law, Psa^m 119. 126. and his Fifth
Commandment of none effect, Mat. 15. 6. by their sayings, Tradition and
Practice; for as the Pharis^es did of old, so do both our Rulers and Pharisees
at this day, when the Nations would Reign only themselves and would not have
God Reign over them, ^or his Law and Word mentioned among them if it should
contradict their doings and Actions, Then they do imprison, punish and p^t to
death him who s^^ll do it. But the very (...) Wickedness and Rebellion would
also imprison, punish, put to death (if either was in their power) the Living,
Almighty and Eternal God. They would lift him off from his Throne (which is
established of old, Psalm 93. 2.) if they could reach up and do it, for the
Floods have lifted up, that is, they do think; and lift up their Voice, that
is, speak against God; yea, there is yet a third ascending step of Rebellion,
they do li^t up their Waves, that is, they act against God to the utmost of
their power, as high and as far as they can reach. The Lord on h^gh is mightier
than the noise of many Waters; yea, than the (...) Waves of the Sea, Psalm. 93.
4. He is above all the Thoughts, Words and Actions of Mortal and Rebellious
Creatures. And he is not as the Idols of the Heathen to be taken Captive, slain
or thrown down. Nevertheless herein he does prove the Wickedness and Rebellion
of Men against him, for he sends his Servants into whom he instills his Truth
and Goodness; and what is done against them he does interpret and receive it as
done immediately against himself. And so when he sent his only begotten Son
into the World: who was the Word and the Word was God, yet they did slay him
the Prince of Life. And as Christ said, He that hates me, ^ateth my Father
also, John 15. 23. so if such a thing may be supposed with Reverence, the same
Wickedness that did slay his Christ, would (if possible) have killed God
himself. And so for the Governors whom he has set over us and calls his
Anointed, the very same Rebellion that does depose and remove the Government
off from their Shoulders, because it is in Men's power so to do, would likewise
pull down God from Heaven and remove the Government off from his Shoulders if
that was in their power also: For in all these Cases the Murmurings and
Speeches, the Actions and Doings are not against the Creature, but against the
Lord, our Creator and our Governor, our Lawgiver and our King. Ye should
quarrel not with me his Servant, but with him, because he has given such Laws
to Mankind; but indeed he is displeased with you, and will punish you for not
Obeying, keeping and observing them, or will ye Arraign his Justice and
Goodness in givings Laws to Mankind, to which are annexed such exceeding great
Rewards and Penalties of Eternal Life and Death; and ye say that they are
penned so dark, intricate and obscure, that ye know not when ye do observe them
or not: But this is to utter Error against the Lord, Isa. 32. 6. which is
naturally Consequent when your heart does work Iniquity and practice
Hypocrisy; for all this hardness or doubtfulness does only come to pass
through the Perplexity and Confusion of Disobedience or Transgression. It is
because ye do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise
shall understand, 12. 10. whereas if ye would turn from your Iniquities, ye
might understand his truth, Dan. 9. 13. which ye do not ^are, but ye are
unwilling to do, and therefore like the Slothful and Wicked Servant to excuse
your selves ye would think God to be unrighteous, or an hard Master, which he
is neither, but ye are Perverse and Disobedient. The Fool has said in his
heart there is no God, Psalm 14. 1. But they which are corrupt and have done
abominable Works, the Wicked, Disobedient and Hypocrite, do wish and desire
that there was no God, and they would not have God Reign over them. In the
Language of Moses, David and Isaiah, they are called Rebels: which is a very
fit and proper term for them. So Samuel told Saul the King, That Rebellion is
as the sin of Witchcraft, and Stubbornness is as Iniquity and Idolatry, 1 Samuel
15. 23. and this is Rebellion against God, the very Sin of those called our
Kings and Rulers at this day; And because these have also rejected the Word of
the Lord, I pray God to fulfill the other part of the Sentence upon them, the
Lord will reject and cast off the same Persons from being Kings or Rulers over
us: for they that would have others do according to their Laws, Commands and
Orders, themselves should also do according to the Laws, Precepts and
Commandments of the most High God.

Here it is to be observed, that though God had rejected Saul from that day
forward in which Samuel speak thus, yet he afterward continued King over all
Israel until he was slain in the Battle against the Philistines. In like
manner, Those at this day may as yet remain upon the outward Thro^e, though
they are disallowed of God; and it is his Mind and Purpose that they should not
be settled and established here.

All this forementioned is no Enthusia^^ic or strange Conceit, which may be
tauntingly said to be proper for the Notions of Bethle^em Hospital; But it
brings out the very nature of Sin, that it may appear exceeding sinful,
according as it is also expressed in the Books and Sermons of Sober and
Understanding Divines. And hereby may be somewhat perceived of the Justice of
God in inflicting an exceeding and Eternal Punishment for what is called light
and transitory Offenses. But to return to our Subject and intended Matter, I
did in that Letter superscribed to the E. of N. Chief Secretary of State, but
within directed to the present King William, put him in mind, and also desire
him, that I might be brought down before him to speak or read many more words
unto him. And if he was fearful or apprehensive least I should do them any
hurt, then let him order my Hands to be bound and my Feet to be put into
Fetters But as the Lord lives, who gave to him and my self Life and Being, I
would not so much as injure his outward Skin, the Hairs of his Head, neither
would I touch the Skirt of his Clothing; For Truth breaks no Bones, it does
only trouble in order to the saving of the Soul. I suppose that this my
Proposal and Desire, was either not made known unto him, or he would not
consent unto it; knowing that if I did speak words into his Ears I should
torment him before his time. For as the Devil said so unto Christ, who was the
Word of God; so at this Day the Word of God has the same and like effect upon
the Hearts of the Disobedient, which are possessed with the Spirit of the Evil
One, for this makes them Disobedient and Wicked, for the Word of God is quick
and powerful, and sharper than a two edged Sword, p^ercing even to the dividing
a sunder of Soul and Spirit, and is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of
the Heart: So that it will vex and torture the Man, or else actually bring him
to Repentance. It has constantly this Effect where it is truly and powerfully
Preached (as that is seldom in these days) for it does work an holy Violence
upon Men and Women, as to cause them to give up their ill* gotten Goods. Many
also of them which used curious Arts, brought their Books together, and burnt
them before all Men. So mightily gre^^ the Word of God and prevailed, Acts 19.
19, 20. So as to them which use sinful, evil and indirect Arts in other things,
where the Word of God is thoroughly made known unto such, and Prevails over
their Consciences, it does make them forsake all those sinful and wrong ways
and means: And it works them into such a Condition, that they come trembling to
know what they must do to be saved.

In like Manner where a common Person gets Riches and not by Right, the Spirit
says expressly, He shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his End
shall be a Fool, Jer. 17. 11. That is in the midst of Possession and Enjoyment,
He shall have no true comfort of them, and at last he shall lose Heaven. Now
there is no Folly to be compared to the losing of Heaven, though it be for some
hundreds or thousands of Pounds, which then are Slipped away from him again,
where a great Person (whom the corrupt World does Respect, and has in
Admiration because of Advantage, but God will not excuse him who comes to great
Revenues without Right, seems to be a reaching out the Hand, and taking and
grasping of it by Violence, when they should not do it, but yet they do it,
Because it is in the power of their hand, Micah 2. 1. (I had a more lively
Representation of this in my Mind, than I can now express it forth in words
when I heard that the Who is so because He is in Administration of the Regal
Authority.
King had seized the Seven Bishops Revenues: So they oppress (or defraud) a Man
and his House, even a Man and his Heritage, Micah 2. 2.) And where is it done
by a color of Law and Authority; this indeed does deceive the Ignorant, when
wise and knowing Men do more abominate and loath it; much more will the
All-wise God hate and proceed against it, for the Lord is a God of knowledge,
and by him Actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3. And when they are weighed in the
Ba^lance of the Sanctuary, and considered out of the Book of the Lord, and also
from the Nature and last end of things, with that abundant Reasoning which
arises and flows from these several Topics: All this will make it plain and
evidently appear to the Heart of Man, that Better is a little with
Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right: So that the Man will choose
it accordingly; for by so doing He will be more Happy now and hereafter.

After the very same manner you may conceive of that which is called Government
or Authority without Right; it is not properly Government but Usurpation, when
another takes that upon him which does not belong or appertain to him, and then
He does lift up himself above the Congregation of the Lord, Numbers 16. 3.
above his Brethren and Fellow Creatures. And so even a Lawful Governor may
Vsurp, when He takes too much upon him, v. 7. for both these kinds of
Usurpation we learn from this twofold Saying of Korah and his Rebellious
Accomplices, had that b^^n true which they falsely object unto Moses. So again,
this is not Authority, for this suppose^ what is Lawful, but if it is not, th^^
it may ^e more properly styled Power or Public Force; which is kept up by the
Administration and Exercise thereof; and it Grows stronger and stronger where
it does Oppress and Crush, and it be sure to prevail. But if it be once
contradicted with true Assertions, and this is made known and stands its
Ground, then it is foiled (several whereof make a ^all) and it grows weaker and
weaker, and successive Acts hereof will so ^^und i^ by the Words of Gods Truth
and Rig^teousn^ss, that it shall no^ b^ able to rise but fall und^^ our feet,
Psalm. 18. 38. But where this Power and Force does keep the upper hand, an^
things are so done, whereof no better Reason can well be given, but only
because they actually are, and can so be done, this may be ^itly resembled to a
company of R^bbe^s or armed Men. (And so where we read of a^ Army going into
another's Country to gather Contributions, it is it: Truth a great Robbe^, and
a multitude of Men that do St^^l; which is against the express Command of God;
but so far does Transgression prevail an^ reign over the Face of the whole
Earth, that the Relation thereof is made public and it seems allowable, of
good Report and honorable Achievement) who can take away what they will from
weak and desenceless Creatures. This the first do by Force and Compulsion which
they must yield unto, least further they be made Captives, Slaves or Prisoners,
and so be girt or killed. Now because this State and kind of Acting is not
loved or approved by the Reason of Mankind, therefore to impose upon and delude
(...) there are chosen out the more knowing Men (who are acted by Reward, for
this is somewhat more than Hire) and these do lay aside the Habiliments of War
and Force, and they do Ap^ things in a way of Law and Judiciary Proceeding Here
again like Ambitious Absalom, in Matters that are G^od and Right, in a private
Cause between Man and Man, wherein the Public (for so they call themselves by
reason of their Multitude) is nothing interested or concerned, they will indeed
do true Justice; for hereby they do the more cover and get Reputation for their
unjust and unlawful Deeds; and so they gloss and smooth the thing over by some
pl^^sible Saying or Expressions, which though they are not true, yet they are
Very(...)a, they have a likeness to Truth; and so (like bitter Gilded Pills)
are swallowed down whole for Truth by the Ignorant and Credulous Multitude,
whose Nature is, greedily and hastily to catch in and receive the thing. The
Multitude has been ^itly termed Bellua Multorum Capitum, and it is of that
kind of Beasts which does neither chew the Cud nor divide the Hoof; for they
neither consider thoroughly the Nature of things, nor do they put a difference
between Good and Evil, Truth and Falsehood, Right and Wrong And so it here comes
to pass, that the Simple believes every Word, when a Man of understanding
searches out the Matter. And ^^ he be a Good Man also, he does conceive the
more Zeal and Indignation against it, as the more Sin and Evil is wrapped up
interwoven and cunningly conceals therein As much as God does exceed the
Goodness, Knowledge and Wisdom of the Creature, which is more than the whole
Ocean to a single drop of Water; so he has a proportionable Displeasure
against Secr^^ Sins and Iniquities: Which as he does now set in the light of
his Countenan^^, Psalm. 90. 8. So in his appointed time He will manifest the
Counsels of the Heart, and bring o^^ the hidden ^^^ngs of Dishonesty, and the
most close Acts of Hypocrisy; and then they shall have Punishment accordingly.

But this Punishment is not presently executed; for, who has ever felt it? And
who does understand what it is? Yet there are Terrors and Remorses of
Conscience, and a fearful Expectation of worse things to come, all which are in
deed sensible. We do believe that which is revealed, a^^ when a Conviction
(which implies a knowledge of these things, and an Assent of the Mind that it
is so) is wrought, then the Word of God has its due Effect. Who knows the
Power of thine (...) even according to thy Fear so is thy Wrath, Psalm 90. 11.
People do harden and shut themselves ^p against the Sense thereof; but when it
shall once enter within them, when the Powers of the World to (...) shall break
into their Minds (which the Devil hinders as much as he can) all this will make
them afraid, and enforce them to do any thing to be reconciled with an Angry
and Displeased God* And so because that Wrath which ^overs over the dw^lling
^^^ce of ^^e Unrighteous, yea, over the very H^^d (...), Psalm 63. 11. is not
altogether so vi^ib^e as a (...) Sw^^d or (...) ^ow p^inted at them (which also
do no hurt at present, until it is laid on or discharged) and so is God
prepared for Punishment, which he can as easily inflict as we can (...) Moth;
for he takes away their Breath and they die, and then his Sentence is executed
upon the Evil Doers. And therefore it may be observed throughout the whole
Scripture, the Punishment of God is spoken of in the future, He will or shall
punish nevertheless because his Wrath is not seen, it is not so sensible even
to the Children and Vessels of Wrath: Still it is real and intelligible, that
is, to be understood, as they shall know and feel upon a dying Bed, when all
the Methods of hardening do fail, then it is sensible and perceived from
within.: Then Conscience does accuse of Sin, and foreshew of (...) meant to
come. Now it would do the same in the midst of Health and Life as upon a
Deathbed; but heretofore Stupe^actions, Delusions and Hindrances were sought
after which fail at the last time; and also they approach nearer unto God, so
that they dare not quench his Spirit as in times past. Then they would not
receive God and the Truth of his Word into their Knowledge; but what they did
apprehend of God, was in a general and confused way; and what they did know
concerning his word, that was a wresting of the Scriptures to their own
Destruction; Or rather like the Jews and Rulers of old, Acts 13. 27. Because
they know not God* nor the V^^ce of his Word read every Sabbath and Weekday.
They have by sinning against God fulfilled his Word to their own Condemnation.
But if his Wrath did once enter within the vail of their Heart (which Va^l is
made up of Sin and Ignorance) then is that also fulfilled, By thy Wrath we are
troubled, Ps. ^0. 7. even at the Manifestation and Revelation thereof, so that
they would not be at Rest and Quiet until they did cease from that
Unrighteousness to which this Wrath is annexed. And what Knowledge thereof God
has been pleased to show unto me his Servant, if I had been or might yet be
suffered to speak and declare it audibly, distinctly and deliberately before
and unto him, it would turn the Governor to the Faith and Belief thereof,
which would work so far, that he would actually and indeed come to Repentance
and Restitution. By the Words of Gods Truth I should actually persuade him to
give up that Kingdom (which contains Riches, Honor and Power) unto him whose
Right it is; which he unduly took away by Force, Subtlety, Wrong and Falsehood.

But here again the Pride of Heart does struggle, That it would not be for his
Honor and Credit to be so easily persuaded out of Three Kingdoms (one whereof
he got by the Sword) by a Cripple, Beggar, Mad Person, a strange looked Fellow
(whose Visage is marred more than other Men) and in a word, by him who has
undergone almost all the Indecencies and Shame that are incidental to Humane
Nature, Whereas it is not I, but the Grace and Truth of God which appear forth
through me, which is able, and also will (if trial be but once had) do all this
here spoken of. And how know we, but in very deed for this cause has God
raised him up for to show in him the Power of his Word and Truth, which can and
also will bring this Stranger down, Isa. 25. 5. and 26. 5. from that State
(into which he is as yet exalted) into that Station he was in before; and that
the Name of God may be declared throughout all Europe, and that his Truth may
be manifested and cleared throughout all the Reformed Churches thereof, as it
has been delivered, and all along asserted by me his unworthy Instrument. The
Devil did at first tempt him to this Sin and Transgression, by promising him
more Happiness, Good and Pleasure, but now having had experience of it, He is
wearied in the greatness of his way, and he knows and is sensible that he did
before live as Happily as now, and that all his Devices which he has brought
to pass, are not worth the exposing himself to so much Sin and Danger as he
has done; and he would as easily give it all up for the real Contentment he
does find it to yield ^ But then the same Tempter does continue him still in
the same Sin and Transgression by such and such Thoughts or Devices. Pleasure
and Pain are the Hinge upon which all our Actions turn; and as with Desire of
the first he was led into this Transgression, so he being now filled, surfeited
and wearied with that, his Soul is now become Restless: Yet he is afraid to
cease, turn from, and to put away the Evil of his doings, for fear of Pain and
Inconvenience, as of Temporal Death or Disgrace: Which last seems to be
somewhat the more, because of the Prosperity of his Arms, and he has such a
vast Multitude of People of all Ranks and Degrees of his side. Which again is
the more increased by reason of such an one his Opposite; whom, if the People
have not altogether hated without a cause, yet sure I am, They have cast
Iniquity upon him, and in Wrath they have hated him, more than there is Truth
and real cause for. There are many li^e Thoughts in the Heart of the Present
Governor, whereunto I or the Reader may give a satisfactory Answer as they do
arise

But as for his being afraid least his Father-in-Law should put him to Death
for Rebellion and Treason, I my self have proposed that way in Page 12. of my
Reprinted Book, Entitled, Things Plain and Weighty, etc. That our Rightful
King be Restored and admitted upon these Terms, That the most General Act of
Oblivion and Indemnity might pass, without any Exception to any manner of
Person whatsoever, and not so much as One Man be put to Death; and I my self
(by reason of whose publishing of Truth he does the more fear) will therefore
stand Hostage or Guarranty for him, or his Friends, to answer Body for Body,
Life for Life, Member for Member, so to procure and effect it, that there shall
not be the least harm done to his outward Person. But only he shall be in Stata
Quo, with all the Advantages he was in before, his Debts and the Charge of his
Expedition paid; either to return into Holland, or to live at Kensington, and
none shall molest or hurt him.

Indeed this thing of Temporal Death is very Terrible unto a Man that has led
a sinful Life, to fall by a violent and shameful way, and then to appear before
God, unto whom he must give account for all the Actions of his past Life; and
then to have a final irreversible Sentence pass upon him of eternal Blessing or
Condemnation. So that Men had rather (though it is with the Addition of more
Sin and Guilt, go on toward the day until they come to die, or descend into
Battle and Perish, not considering that then also there must be the same, yea,
and worse account to be given, by reason of more Sin committed, and longer
Impenitency; which is Treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and
involving themselves into more Stripes and greater Misery: For if it should be
so as here surmised, it is better to truly and un^eignedly Repent of Sin, and
venture the Temporal Danger here supposed, than to live longer only to disobey
and provoke God the more.

But thou (who art as yet called King William) shall be as much assured and
ascertained, as that thou now Live and Breathest, that thy most ^ull Pardon
shall be had. And if thou do further doubt thereof, to make things as sure as
possible, thou may, with the Forces under thy Command, remove into Holland,
or into some distant Parts of this Island, until thou have his Word ratified
into a Law, that all things shall be done according to thy reasonable Desire,
and agreeable to this Great Time which is now drawing on, Of the Reconciliation
of all Things; for Like Prince like People, this is what hinders them also from
returning to their Due Allegiance unto their Rightful King. They have acted so
many things against him, that they are afraid, if he should be again instated
and put into the Actual Administration of the Regal Power, Office and
Authority, that he would be Revenged on them, and pr^ce^d to Punishment which
may extend to Life, Member or Estate; but none of them shall suffer in the
lea^^ and they are Adversaries to the King Who Dicta^e otherwise) which thing
must be included as a great, necessary and essential Term of his (...); and
this must be made as sure, firm an^ rati^^^^ unto them, as any thing in the
World can be.

N^^, it shall be made much more sure than now it is, that they shall not lose
their Lives and Estates in opposing a Powerful Foreign Enemy, whom they have
made to be their Enemy, and they have provoked and drawn him in upon
themselves. It they will now (before the more severe Decree come forth yield
unto and accept of these Terms of Mercy and Reconciliation, it shall be made
more certain unto them that they shall be every one forgiven for whatever they
have done in this Matter; then now they have false reason to think that they
shall escape by Iniquity; that is, by making the Government (as they call it)
as secure and strong as ever they can, by Imprisoning, Oppressing and Caushing
of all its Enemies; of whom many are (...) to God by being Zealous for his law
and for its Superiority over all their Ordinances and Constitutions; and also
they do whatever God and Christ has commanded. But here it comes to pass, that
as the Friendship of the World is Enmity to God; so here whom God vouchsafes to
call his Friends, the Corrupt World does term its Enemies. But the Lord will
enter into Judgment with the Ancients of the People, and with the Princes
thereof (and he does at this day speak the same unto England) What mean ye that
ye beat my People to pie^s, says the Lord God of Hosts, Isa. 3. 14, 15. they
are your Fellow Creatures; but notwithstanding God says so in his Word, ye go
on and continue nevertheless to do it: Which being contrary to his revealed
Will, it does thus become Sin and Transgression unto you, and it draws on more
Displeasure of God upon your selves.

That Question, Shall they escape by Iniquity, Psalm. 56. 7. implies a certain
Negative, that they shall not escape, as may be yet more understood from what
is afterward said and implied, In thine Ang^r ^^st down the People O God. They
do day by day die severally in their Sin, Trespass, Iniquity and Transgression.
And besides, it is imported that God will do according to his Method and
working of Old; whereof he does not speak Plainly, but he does sufficiently
intimate it elsewhere in his Word, how that he will by some sudden unexpected
Stroke, bring down and scatter all these Workers of Iniquity; and all their
Iniquity which they have been so long setting up and endeavoring to stablish,
shall fall to the Ground and come to nothing. There must be some mean time that
their Iniquities may be full and ripe: As also this mean, while the longer it
is, it will the more prove the Faith, Patience and waiting of his Servants: For
the Workers of Iniquity shall soon be cut down like the Grass, and wither as
the green Herb, for evil do^rs shall be cut off, for yet a little while, and
the Wicked shall not be, yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be, Psalm. 3^^ 2, 9.

I remember that some few Years since, when I testified to my Fathers House,
against some particular Sins and Transgressions they did then live in the
Practice of, that immediately after I had done so, he or they did conceive a
greater Degree of Enmity and Hatred (which they did vent forth in Reproach
against me) and a day or two afterward they would more eagerly do the same
whereof I did admonish and reprove them. But in longer process of time I did
observe he did quite leave it off, and he came off by little and hidden
Degrees, not to be outwardly perceived, that it should seem, and perhaps as he
would give out (by reason of the Pride of Life remaining) that it should not be
the effect of my Preaching and or Persuasion (as they did tauntingly object,
when neither then nor now did I speak any thing of my self but from Gods Word
only) but some other Cause or Reason; whereas God will more particularly
rehearse it, how they did at length refrain for fear they should come to that
place of Torment I did warn them of. This Relation may seem somewhat trivial,
but as God was pleased then to bless my Ministry, so he does now give me the
same hope, that in this great matter I am now engaged in, of being called out
from converting a single Family or Parish, to seek and endeavor to (...) a
whole Nation from Iniquity unto Righteousness: And I now contending earnestly
that Gods Law^ should have the Superiority over theirs, and take place before
them, though now by the Force and Assemblies of Violent Men, they have cast me
these four times into Prison; yet I trust still (though perhaps they may come
over by the like Method) that God will deliver me from the Strivings of the
People, and that this Nation will yet obey the Voice of the Word of God, in
Testimony whereof I have hazarded my Life: And now this ^ast time they
detaining me in (...) longer than ever they did yet, this does open unto me
another glimpse of Light to my former Assurance, that this thing will be more
certainly effected, according as I have spoken and exhorted from the Mighty and
Powerful Word of God. And that I shall not all along, as to my self, bring
(...) for trouble, and only to leave our Rulers without Excuse and to aggravate
their Si^. But He that (...) hitherto, shall be at last taken out of the way.
And they will be brought to hearken unto, and comply with those Laws of their
God, which I have set before them; and then both the inward Enmity and outward
Persecution against me will be also done away; and perhaps this last will not
utterly cease, until the other be fully accomplished. Even so God grant it.
Amen. I will cry unto God most High, unto God that performs all things for
me, Psalm 57. 2. The Lord will perfect that which concerns m^: Thy Mercy, O
Lord, endures for ever: Forsak^ not the Work of thine own hands, Psalm 138. 8.

But as to the Men of this World, it is a sad and miserable thing, when they
are once dipped, involved, yea, and plunged all over into Sin; they are as it
were in a Labyrinth or Maze, from which they know not how to get out; they are
entangled in the Wilderness, and though the Thorns do scratch and tear and are
very troublesome, yet they prick farther and clasp more about; just such is the
Condition of Silly People laden with Sins. This Epithet is ^i^ly ad led, for
unless they had been Foolish and Deceived, they had never been (...) with Sins;
for so foolish ugly and hateful is Sin, that when it i^ represented according
to its real Nature, the Words and Discourse (which like a Picture to the Bodily
Senses, so this shows it unto the Eyes of the Understanding) do also seem
Foolish Ugly and Hateful, For he (...) himself in his own Eyes, until his
Iniquity is ^ound to be hateful, Psalm 36. 2. But if you come either to the
several Persons who commit the same, or to the sinful Nation, a People laden
with Iniquity, a S^^d of evil doers Children that are Corrupters; They have
forsaken the Lord; They have provoked the Holy one of Israel to Anger; They are
gone away backwards, Isa. 1. 4. (all this is Eng(...) at this day) and exhort
them to come over again unto God, and to turn from Iniquity unto Righteousness,
endeavor to bring them into Subjection unto his whole Land, and to do all
things exactly according to the Pattern showed in his Word. If thou do once
begin to do all this, Briers and Thorn will be with thee, and thou will dwell
among Scorpio^s, Ezekiel. 2. 6. which will hinder and prick and hurt; so for the
two last Qualities, it is like falling among a Nest of Wasps, for besides the
Mischief and Heart they will do, there is such a Buzzing of these two-footed
Worms, they keep such a Humming and noise with their Words, with their several
Sayings (which is but a Contradiction of Sinners) that it is all but a confused
Imagination or deceitful Falsehood, without one Sentence of clear Reason or
manifest certain Truth. Sin does spread like a Leaprosie, and it does corrupt
the Understanding after it has prevailed over the Will. But when the Will has
committed the Sin, then Conscience does begin to accuse thereof, and there do
arise so many Fears, that the Sinner is become like one walking upon brittle
Ice, who is afraid at every step, so he Trembles and knows not what to do; for
F^^r is the betraying of those Succors which Reason offers. It making the Poor
Man even to suspect and also to refrain from that which indeed would show him
the only Good, True and Right way for his Safety and Preservation.

As for that Great Multitude wherein Man is apt to place so great Confidence,
and to rely so much on, indeed it is somewhat where Force is to be confronted
unto Force, though many times in Battle the greater Number do not get the
Victory. But what signifies his Multitude, where not so much as one Man shall
lift up his Hand against him. I do here from the Word of God forbid all People,
under the Peril of Damnation (which will be to all those who obey not the
Gospel) never to lift up a hand, much less to bear Arms or raise Tumults
against the Present Governor, though he has now taken upon him to Rule this
Nation before the time it did appertain to him; for no other Contention or
Strife ought to be amongst the Creatures of God, and in a Christian Country,
but in Words only, see 2 Samuel 19. 43. for that should govern the World, and
sway and determine the Actions of Men, which is most agreeable to the Word of
God and the very Truth of Things. But then the Present Possessor has the most
to talk for him, even eleven Parts in twelve of the People of this Nation. What
signifies that? for five Men who speak words with Knowledge and Understanding,
will avail more than ten thousand of the Ignorant Multitude, for these like the
gaggling o^ Geese, or chirping of Birds, speak what they have received one from
another, and what themselves do not thoroughly understand; or they speak forth
Falsehood or Folly, which has an outward show of Wisdom and Truth, but in
reality it is neither; or they get their Livelihood, or some Addition to it, by
saying after such a manner, and so they are Blassed and Corrupt. As likewise
they do so speak and do, if they have any Place of Honor or Credit, whereby
they have the more Respect from their Fellow Creatures, and are called of Men
Worshipful, or they speak after such a manner because they hear the most do so;
or to be freed from that Oppression and Persecution whereby a Man is made an
Offender for a word; for indeed it is more for the Ease and Safety of the Flesh
to go in the way of the Multitude, and to do and to walk according to the
cours^ of this World; but only, This is not the Right way to Heaven.

But I would ask the King that now is in Possession; (whose Heart is lifted up
with that vast Multitude which is for him, and he is apt to fancy Security unto
himself in them; whereas he is floated up with Imaginations only, if he does
repose in them a real and certain Safety) can any of them severally, or all put
together, Preserve his Breath from going forth, or hold in one Moment longer,
after the appointed time, his Spirit from flying out into that place where no
Respect is had to what is so highly valued and esteemed here. Let them pretend
what they will to venture their (...) and Fortunes for him, to sight up to the
Ankles and Ears in Blood and Wounds; yet, None of them (...), (...) means,
Redeem his Bro^^^r, (...) give to God a (...) for him; for the Redemption of
their Soul is Precious, and it (...) for ever, Psalm 4^. 7, 8.

The Reasons why People sight for others are these following: Either because
hereby they get their Livelihood, or out of a Mistaken Apprehen^ion of Duty or
Honor; or they are (...) and constrained so to do: But when all these are
taken away, and the pretended Ca^se, Right or Tit^^, is found to be wrong; then
also the Fighting People do slide from him, and each Man desires to be excused.
If the Reader does think this to be a bare Supposition of mine own, yet he may
also perceive there is some Truth intermingled with it; but I am certain that
is nothing but the Truth which I am now going to allege and infer. Put the
case that the ungodly and deceitful M^n (for such he is who will not obey the
Law of God, but he does cover his unlawful Deeds with the Cloak of Hypocrisy)
should not stand in the Judgment, Psalm 1. 5. But i^ he should be condemned
there, and receive the Sentence, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Misery. Is
there now one Man among all his Loving Subjects who were so extraordinarily
Zealous for King William) that will step out and offer unto God to exchange his
Soul for him, that his Soul should be in the others stead, to undergo all that
easeless, endless and remediless Torment for him: Speak now all ye Princes,
Gover^^rs, Captains, Judges, Treas^^rs, Counselors, Justices of Pea^^,
Constables, Bishops, P^^^sts, Chaplains, Officers and Servants, and all ye
Friends to the Present Government (who now are so called, and would be so
thought) which of we all will do this for him? Let him stand forth and answer.
I suppose here that every Man will hold his Peace; or if any should speak out
hastily and boldly, will he yet be as good as his word? or would he have God
take him at his word? I trow, there is not any to be found who will serve King
William thus far; Or if there should, yet God will not accept it. None of them
can by any means (...) his Brother, nor give to God ^^ Ransom f^^ him. And that
it ^s possible for a King to be Damn^d, is as sure as Scripture is true, For
Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the King it is prepared, Isa. 30. 33. and
so you may read Rev. 6. 15. what is written concerning the Kings of the Earth,
and the Great M^^, and the Rich M^n, and the Mighty Men.

By the like Words of Truth (if it would not be too tedious) I could answer
that Objection of Shame Disgrace or Contempt, which as yet do hinder the
Governor from coming to Repentance and Restitution, only by bringing out the
true Nature of things. That the Shame is rather in continuing therein, than in
ceasing to do Evil; and it is Brutish to refuse it, but it is most Reasonable
to learn to do well, and here it is also according to the true Proverb, Better
late than never. It is better to be liable unto a small and short Shame at
present (if it should be so) than to go on in thy own way and Devices till thy
Body drops into the Dust, out of which thou shall awake and rise up to
everlasting Sh^^e and ^^^tempt; one of these two thou must and shall endure.
But I do again testify. That it is better to be sensible of a little Trouble
and Vexation of Mind now (which will also at this present time bring forth
Concerning which see my B^^k of Happiness, P. 166.
Peace and Contentment of Soul) than to groan under the Worm which shall never
die.

Whatever other Thoughts do arise in thy Mind, there be sure to let Knowledge
and Reason have its perfect Work, as to conceive and apprehend the thing
thoroughly and wholly, and then thou shall find an Answer which will be
Satisfactory even to thine Immortal and Restless Spirit. This will give
Quietness and Assurance for ever. Do but make known the Thoughts that trouble
and terrify thee, and God may either by me or some other of his Servants, show
thee a way, or lay Wor^^ before thee, how thou may be Comforted, Delivered
and Saved both Temporally and Eternally.

Wherefore, O thou that are called KING, let my Counsel which I give not of my
self, but the Word and law of God says and commands the same) be acceptable
(...) thee, and break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by
making Restitution to thy Poor Father-in-Law. In the public (...) about four
or five Months ago, there was an Example of one who did Resign up the
Government: As this shows that it is possible, so let what is aforesaid make
thee Inclinable; yea, and actually do the like unto him whose Right ^t is, if
it may be a lengthening of thy Tranquillity, Dan. 4. 27. or (according to the
Marginal Reading) an Healing of thine Error. I do assure thee, in the Name of
God, and from the Truth of his Revealed Word, That if thou will indeed obey,
and go according to all the Commandments and Directions thereof, that it will
most certainly be a lengthening of thy Tranquillity, and an Healing of thine
Error: But then thou must hearken unto and ^omply with the same Word speaking
on this wise, Turn you, Turn you, and then Iniquity shall not be your Ruin.
Obey, and thy Soul shall live;
Do well, and thou shall Fare well,


There is no Man (which I know of) who does more earnestly and un^^ignedly
desire the Good and Salvation of Mankind than my self; for only toward the
Accomplishing of th^s Great End I have written and suffered so much: But if
they do still from time to time (...) and are Stubborn; if they do continually
provoke God and transgress his Law (as th^^ manner o^ ^^me is to do it, the
more the nearer they come to appear before him) then indeed my Compassion does
begin to wear off; for then it is coming toward that, The Righteous shall
rejoice when he sees (...) Vengeance, Psalm. 58. 10. for I know and assuredly
believe, and do thereby give warning, that God, who is Holy and True, will
Judge all the Inhabitants of the Earth; And He will punish the world for their
Evil, and the wicked for their Iniquity.

To God only wise be Glory, through Jesus Christ for ever, Amen.
All the aforementioned Words were written by me Richard Stafford Prisoner in
Bethlehem Hospital,
and finished on December. 11 1691. but Printed on January 7. 1692.
FINIS.

