A SERMON On
2 Cor. 2. XI. Least Satan should get an advantage of us, for we are not
Ignorant of his devices.


FRom whence we assuredly gather, that if St. Paul, an Apostle and Servant of
the Lord, Who would so run, not as at uncertainty; Who did so endeavor, Least
by any means whilst he had Preached unto others, Himself should be a castaway,
Spoke thus by the Spirit of the Lord, this also is written for our Example and
Admonition, that every Servant of the Lord who would so run his Christian race,
not as at uncertainty; Who would so wait upon the Lord in all his Ordinances,
that after all, he should not prove a castaway himself (for such a thing is
possible and to be feared, and care is to be taken against it all our Life
long.) He ought not to be Ignorant of the devices of Satan; for it is certain,
the more we know them, the more we may avoid them, or render them of none
effect.

It is said, Devices in the Plural Number; for they are more then one. And
indeed it is to be thought, that as Jesus asked him what is thy Name, and he
said, Legion, because many Devils were entered into him, Luke 8. 30. So all his
several devices are near upon as many. Now a Legion according to that
Computation which then was, is Six Thousand, Six Hundred and Sixty Six; which
is a great and considerable Number. And if the devices of Satan are so many as
there are Devils, to treat of them severally, and particularly would make a
long and perplex Sermon. I shall endeavor to make known unto ye, what I find
concerning them in the Book of the Lord, and according to that knowledge
himself shall afford me. All the devices of Satan, may be reduced to these two
General Heads, or to these two Principal Intents and Designs which the Enemy of
our Souls has, in using his Temptations or Devices against us.

They are either First, To hinder People from coming into the way of the Lord.

Or Secondly, To turn them aside, or back again, after they are come into the
way of the Lord.

In opposition unto and prevention of all which, the Allwise God has two Ends
in sending forth his Word, and in appointing Ministers for the Ministry
thereof; which are the Converting of Sinners from the Error of their way, or
to bring People over unto God, and then afterward to Persuade them to continue
in the Grace of God, Acts 13. 43. Both which good Ends, do exactly Countermine
those two General Devices of Satan aforementioned: For God our Savior would
as willingly have all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, As Satan the Destroyer walks about as a Roaring Lion, seeking whom he
may devour; And therefore he endeavors what he can to turn aside, or hinder
People from coming to the Knowledge of the Truth.

The first device of Satan, to hinder People from coming into the way of the
Lord and how Contrariwise, the Wisdom of God cries out continually unto them
to come, we shall not here altogether so much insist on, (though abundance of
excellent and useful matter might be drawn from thence.) Because it does not
quite so closely and immediately appertain to the Subject in hand, which is the
second Particular, Viz. The not being Ignorant how one Principal device of
Satan is to turn People aside, or back again, after they are come into the way
of the Lord, is a necessary help toward the making a continuing and
persevering work of it.

It is said in the true Proverb, forewarned, fore-armed. And accordingly,
having received notice before hand of such an Enemy or Adversary; We may expect
accordingly and be better provided to withstand him, or so to order our selves
that his Ends shall not be Answered upon us. The Great Captain of our
salvation, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, even Christ Jesus has this
manner of Speech to his Disciples and Followers, Behold I have told you before,
Mat. 24. 25. This he spoke as to those False Christ's and False Prophets, which
should arise and show Great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that if it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect; Which has been literally
fulfilled as to the False Christ's, and False Prophets of the Roman Church. For
the Priests thereof have pretended to show Great Signs and Wonders by their
forged Miracles, which are recorded in their lying Legends; which have been
just like a Jugler showing his Hocus Pocus Tricks, in order to deceive People
into their Idolatry, Error and Superstition. And all these (although perhaps
themselves knew it not, or at least they did not thoroughly consider thereof)
were but Instruments in the hands of the Devil, to deceive the Nations and the
World. Which devices did so far take effect, as to deceive the simple Multitude
of the several Generations and Countries; and even to this very Day, they have
near upon as many, or rather more in Number, as the Protestants of there formed
Religion are. If these Poor deluded Souls (whom I Pity at my heart) had kept in
mind, or had been acquainted with this Caution of our Savior Jesus Christ,
then they would not have so soon fallen into that Delusion, if they had at all.
But Satan working in them with Greater deceiveablness, kept the Scriptures from
them; for the way to avoid any Delusion, which is as a snare, is to see, or
have knowledge of it before hand. As we have Christ for our Lord and Example
herein, so every Minister of Christ ought to warn the People and tell them
before hand what they will meet with, and what will come upon them in their way
toward Heaven, and advertise them what shall befall them in the latter Days,
Genesis 49. 1. For as it is commonly said, If we did know before what would come
hereafter, we should never do amiss: So it would be much more as to the
invisible and future things pertaining to the Souls of Men, if they were warned
thoroughly and did receive the warning. When the Watchman sees the Enemy
coming, he is to blow the Trumpet and warn the People; according as our God
has commanded and directed us of the Ministry, in Ezekiel. 33. And as we come to
know the devices of Satan, we are to make them known unto ye also.

With the well advised is Wisdom. And People have begun well, when they have
resolved so far as this toward Heaven, as to choose it for their Everlasting
and Final abode, and to desire it for their Habitation. For the Lord has
chosen Sion, He has desired it f^r his Habitation. This is my rest for ever,
here will I dwell for I have desired it, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. Now Sion signifies
his People: And as there is such a choice, mind and desire in God toward his
People: So it is but Natural and Reasonable, yea and his Elect Servants have
such a reciprocal Love, choice, mind and desire toward the Lord their God, to
be with him wherever he is, rather to be with God in Hell, then to be without
him even i^ Heaven it self, which is an utter impossibility but even to
suppose; for wheresoever God is, it must be Heaven and can be no Hell, In whose
presence is fullness o^ Joy, and at whose right hand are Pleasures for
evermore; Like as there must be of necessity, Light and Heat, in the places
next unto where the Sun shines.

I suppose, that most People are bent for God and Heaven in the General, and
that they have their Faces toward Sion. But I am to acquaint ye, that so far
it is well, but this will not bring you thither. I mean, the hope to go to
Heaven, and some Endeavors after it will not give you Footing and Possession
in that High and Lofty Place, the Inhabitation of Eternity, the place where all
Righteousness and Blessedness dwells. For who is there in the General that does
not hope to go to Heaven? And does not use some endeavors after it. Ye shall
hardly find one Man or Woman in Twenty, whom if you ask as much, they will tell
you the same. I do for my part hope to go Heaven, and so does another, yea, and
a third, and each does endeavor somewhat after it. For this makes them go to
Church or Meeting about once a Month, or once a Quarter, and to carry forth an
indifferent outward Moral, Civil and Honest Conversation toward one another;
for they think this enough to bring them to Heaven, and this is their endeavor
after it. As I just Name and observe this unto ye, Cannot ye smell out a device
of Satan herein? Which may by and by a little appear, (...) hereby he delude
and deceives the P^^p^e, that (...) will ^^^ve the turn to bring them to
Heaven, then rea^y (...)

I have much Pondered in my heart, upon Luke 13. 23, 24. Then said one unto
him, Lord, Are there few that be saved? And he said unto them, strive to enter
in at the straight Gate; for many, I say unto you will seek to enter in and
shall not be able. Every sentence, Word and Syllable, ye^, the very Jota's, or
Points in Scripture are observable; for it will be all fulfilled and found true
in its Season. This I warn ye of constantly, and Behold I have told you before.
In the end of time and in the latter days, when ye shall stand again on the
Earth ye shall see it in like manner to be fulfilled, and all things to be so
as is there written. So here it is to be taken notice of, that whereas it is
not said, that many will strive to enter in and shall not be able; for they
that shall strive will indeed enter in, but many will see to enter in and shall
not be able. Which word seek imports lesser degree of endeavor then striving
does. And so God declares himself in Heb. 11. 6. To be a rewarder of them; that
diligently seek him. It is not said of them that seek him, but of them that
diligently seek him. This Point had need to be well and thoroughly understood;
for as to this, is the General deceivableness and miscarriage of the whole
World, as to their doing enough to obtain Heaven and Salvation. There is none
in this Nation of riper Years and Understanding, who has not heard of it, and
there is none who does not desire it, because of its Goodness and Excellency;
and especially, because if they are not received there, they must go into a
worse place. And there is hardly any but does something or other toward it;
for this makes them go to their several Congregations and Places of Worship.
Now a bare course of outward and customary Worship and no more, is not striving
but seeking: But when I see them going by Multitudes, some to one place and
some to another, and all will not be saved who go to Church or Meeting. This is
a thing worth the knowing who the very Persons will be, and to bring it yet
closer to my self. Is it I, that do serve God to the saving of my Soul? And
another should make the same and like application and so a third, That every
one of you, do show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope unto the
End; Till every one of you do use the same diligence which God has promised
that he will Reward; Till every one of you strive to enter in at the straight
Gate. Striving imports in the Original Word to put forth all the strength; for
such shall be able. Let any one but do his utmost and his best for God, and
such God will accept off. But this is the fault and failure, that People do not
their best and their utmost for God: Or, if they do it for a Season, yet they
do not continue it; and so they forfeit their own Share and Portion in the
Promises. The Scripture has told us before, how it will be divided and rendered
to every one at the last day; and this does mention several who run, but one
obtains the Prize. Of four sorts of Hearers of the Word, one only brings
forth Fruit unto Everlasting Life. And the Kingdom of Heaven (which there
signifies the outward Exhibition, holding forth, or Dispensation of the Gospel)
Is like unto a Not that was cast into the Sea and gathered of every kind; which
when it was full, they drew to the shore, and gathered the Good into Vessels,
and cast the bad away; so shall it be at the End of the World. The Angels shall
come forth and sever the wicked from the just, Mat. 13. 47, 48, 49. We read
many such like things there, which declare and set forth, how that all will not
go to Heaven who talk thereof, or somewhat desire it, or slightly endeavor
after it. Although they herd themselves amongst his visible Church, and frequent
his outward Worship all their lives long.

I have often thought as to my self, when I have heard the Good and Eternal
things of God declared and Preached of, What do they all signify and avail if I
should not have an Interest and Propriety in them, and if they should not
belong to me? When all comes to all, nothing less then this will suffice me, To
be a Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. This is the thing my
Soul craves after, and will never be satisfied until it is sure thereof, as it
is continually vexed when she meets with things that cross, or hinder her in
seeking and laboring hereafter. As Philip said to Jesus Christ, Lord show us
the Father and it suffices us, I will be bold here to say, that either for God
to be shown unto us, as we may see him through a Glass darkly, of these Created
things, or as he is showed unto us in the Word Preached, Read, or Heard; This
does not altogether so truly, fully and thoroughly satisfy the Soul of Man,
although it does a little more when in Truth, and in an inward Witnessing it can
say, My Lord, and my God, by way of Propriety and Claiming him to ones self.
And yet here again, because here there may be some doubt and further thought of
Soul, nothing less can satisfy the Soul of Man, then for her to enjoy God in
Heaven. And so it is here aforesaid, That the Lord has chosen Zion, which
signifies his People, This is my rest for ever; here will I dwell for I have
desired it, which implies an Union to him. So the Language of the Creature
speaks again unto him, As the heart pants after the Water Brooks, so pants
my Soul after thee O God. My Soul Thirsts for God, for the living God, when
shall I come and appear before God, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. It is evident, that the
Soul has a Natural desire to know God, not in those who have defaced it with
Sensuality and Brutishness. Not in those who are Alienated and Enemies through
wicked works, but in them who exert the Operations thereof. Who obey and serve
their Creator, even as it is meet and right that his Creatures should do. So
when the Soul comes to be acquainted with him, she is in Peace. It can be
contented for the present, and wait some time for the full Enjoyment of him;
Although in this mean while, the Earnest Expectation of the Creature waits for
the Manifestation of the Sons of God. There are risings in the Souls of Men and
Women (a little imperfect measure whereof, they have in this Life toward
Communion and Union with their God. As also because we are given to understand,
that many will be rejected and cast off from him at the last day, although they
were his Creatures and the work of his hands, hence does arise Great Thought
and Searching of Heart, least we should be of the Number of them.

Well, to help and remedy that, to Encourage People to show the same diligence
unto the full assurance of hope unto the End, I do here make known unto ye,
that the sure way to obtain is to have Faith in God, and to Love him with all
our Heart, and with all our Soul, and with all our Strength, and with all our
Mind. There is all the Reason in the World that he should be so loved and
served. Never any one that did thus believe and love and serve him, did Finally
and Eternally Perish. Moses indeed came on Mount Pisgah. He saw an Earthly
Canaan and never came into it, but now he is in a much better, Viz. The
Heavenly Men may be and are disappointed in their Pursuits after Earthly
things, although they used Diligence and Wisdom, and were ready to lay hold on
them. But none that does so as to Heaven, who has the Hope which enters within
the vail, and such a sight thereof as to overlook present things, who takes up
this firm, constant and continued resoluti^n, for that will I labor and care
all the Days of this Life of Vanity. Whatever I take in hand, or whatever my
hand finds me to do, I will bring it all in tendency, subordination and
subserviency thereto, or otherwise I will never do it: None such who do thus,
shall miss thereof. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord, for as much as ye know, that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.
Here again observe, it is called Labor; for this imports a great deal more
then that careless and customary Religion of the Multitude. But when it is made
a matter of Labor and Striving, and it becomes the constant and only business
of all our Life long; When the Life which we live is by Faith in the Son of
God, That is, when that Faith does so actuate us thoroughly and wholly, all one,
as the Soul does actuate the Body in order to Natural Life, to such the Word
and Promise of God, stands engaged, that they Shall not Labor in vain, nor yet
seek his Face in vain; But they shall obtain that which they seek after, viz.
The Enjoyment of God, and a Mansion in their Fathers House in the highest
Heavens.

It is a great and observable Scripture, Israel has not obtained that which he
seeks for, but the Election has obtained it, and the rest are blinded, Romans
11. 7.

There is many such a thought in Godly and Gracious Souls, like unto that of
David, who after that, he had received the Promise of being King over Israel,
could say, I shall fall one day by the hands of Saul. And so to whom pertains
the Adoption, the Covenants, and the Promises; Yet there is in them a secret
distrust and mis-giving of heart, I shall fall one day into the Paws of the
Roaring Lion, who walks about continually, seeking whom he may devour.
Notwithstanding, I have already done and yet do so much in order to God, I may
be a castaway for all that. Indeed there may be some good use of such kind of
Thoughts, to keep us always on our watch, That we may not be high minded, but
fear; and to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling; and there
being a promise left us o^ entering into his rest, to fear, least any of us
should come short of it. And as when David spoke thus of himself in reference
to Saul, he did all that same time endeavor to flee from, avoid and fortify
himself against Saul. So though we have at some times doubtful thoughts, least he
should prevail and get an advantage over us, at the same time, we do not give
place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 27. We resist the Devil and he will flee from us,
James 4. 7. Then there can be no Great matter of Inconvenience, (but rather
good does arise thereby) in thinking the worst as long as, we act to the best
in avoiding and arming our minds against his Temptations. We had need be upon
our continual Watch and Guard, Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary
the Devil, as a Roaring Lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour, whom
resist steadfast in the faith. He is more cunning then any of us, and holds
almost all Men and Women by one catch or another, either in the allowance of
some sin, or in the Omission of some Duty, or to tempt them to leave off from
their waiting and close adhering unto the Lord. Now the Serpent was more subtle
then any Beast of the Field, which the Lord God had made. Mark that well, and
so he continues at this day to be more subtle then any Man or Woman considered
in their mere Natural condition, abstracted and separated from the assistances
above, the Directions of the Word and Spirit. And so he pursues near the same
methods, still to tempt and deceive all Mankind of all Generations and
Countries, as He seduced our first Parents into the Transgression, as the same
may be read throughout, Genesis 3. Even to tempt and beguile them into the Breach,
of as many of the Commandments as ever he can, with a pretense that less Evil
and more seeming Good, will ensue thereupon then really will. He suggests to do
any thing that may displease and lose the favor of God; and by consequence
fall under his wrath and future Punishment. These and such like things are
obvious and commonly known already. And so where we Read in several places of
Scripture concerning the Serpent, Satan, the Devil, the Adversary, the Evil
one, the Great Dragon; All this is commonly expressed in very plain Words that
any one may understand, that it is all meant and intended of him. For whosoever
has constant Recourse unto the written Word of God and does read diligently
therein, he will not be Ignorant of the Devices of Satan. Thus Paul, and the
Christians of his time came not to be Ignorant of the Devices of Satan, as
indeed there are so many things scattered up and down therein which are spoken
concerning them, that whosoever reads will quickly find them. And the Great
Dragon was cast out, the Old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which
deceives the whole World, he was cast out into the Earth. Therefore rejoice ye
Heavens and ye that dwell in them. Woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth and of
the Sea, because the Devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because
be knows that he has but a short time, Rev. 12. 9, 12. And deceives them
that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 13. 14. And these are they by the way side, where
the word is sown, but when they have heard Satan comes immediately, and takes
away the word that was sown in their hearts, Mark 4. 15. Not to multiply many
more Texts to the same purpose, we may find and feel enough of the workings and
suggestions of Satan within our selves. When at any time we are kept off,
hindered and neglect any good, It is commonly through this Temptation and
Instigation of the Evil one; as also he does miserably perplex and deceive in
the things pertaining to God. Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to sift thee as
Wheat, but I have prayed that thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren. Now this Simon Peter, was a Disciple and Precious
Servant of Jesus Christ; and from thence we see, that Satan is as busy with the
Children and Servants of God, as with other People. Yea, rather more in that,
he has already taken the others Captive at his Will. And hereby also we are
given to understand, that God has reserved to himself the Power over him. He
can go no further then God suffers and permits. Though Satan for these Five or
Six Thousand ^ears, has been let loose among the Inhabitants of the Earth, yet
God can tie him up again whenever he will; and he does walk about with a hook
in his Jaws to be turned back, or about, whither soever does please the Great
Creator of all things. But I know thy abode and thy going out, and thy coming
in, and thy Rage against me; Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult is
come up into my Ears, therefore will I put my Hook in thy Nose, and my Bridle
in thy Lips, and I will turn thee back by the way, by which thou came, Isa.
37. 28, 29. Holds equally true of the infernal accursed Spirit himself, as it
did of Senacherib, or Rabshakeh, through whom he Acted. For every Man is Acted
either by God or the Devil, according as the thing which he does, is Good or
Evil, Lawful and Right, or else sin: And so it is of all the Created things
they have but a stinted and limited Commission and Power given to them by the
Great and Sovereign Creator of all things, whither they do obey, or Act in
Rebellion against him; Both which will tend to the Great Ends of his own Glory.
God has suffered such an Infernal and Invisible Spirit, as the Devil or Satan
is, to prove the Children of Men more perfectly, to know what is in their
heart, whither they will keep his Commandments or no. That according as it is
written, He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is righteous,
let him be righteous still; and He that is Holy, let him be Holy still, Rev.
22. 11. But the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall
understand, but the wise shall understand, Dan. 12. 10. So these things seem to
be suffered, so on set purpose, that they which are good may be better, and so
may have more favor from God, and a greater reward to themselves; and the bad
may be worse, and consequently be beaten with more stripes, and receive yet a
greater Condemnation. This last seems to be an hard saying, but it is according
to the order and decree of God, and according to the Scriptures of Truth. It is
evident by the Example and History of Job, particularly in the first and second
Chapters, that by there being a Devil, and by his being permitted to afflict
the Body and Tempt his Soul; The Good and Righteous are hereby proved, and they
will have yet more favor and a greater Crown from the Lord, who suffered it so
to be, that the Trial of their Faith being much more Precious then of Gold that
Perishes, might be found unto Praise and Honor and Glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ. When this Job was proved, he did approve himself unto God. What
an excellent Character is that left recorded of him? That amidst his very Great
Afflictions and Troubles, In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God
Foolishly. And how comfortable is that after all, And the Lord tu^ned the
Captivity of Job: Also the Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before. So the
Lord blessed the latter end of Job, more then the beginning: Hereby Confirming
what he after^ards spoke by his Apostle James, Behold we count them happy which
endure. Y^ have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the End of the
Lord, that the Lord is very Pitiful and of tender mercy, James 5. 11. Blessed
is the Man that endures Temptation, for when he is tried, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that Love him, James 1. 12.
Happy was it for Job, that ever there was a S^tan to torment him; though
perhaps himself could not think so a^ the very Instant, F^r no Chastening, for
the present seems Joyous but Grievous; Nevertheless, afterward it yeildeth
the Peaceable Fruits of Righteousness unto them which are Exercised thereby,
Heb. 12. 11. For it wa^ made double to him in th^s Life, and much more will be
added unto him in the restitution of all things.

Indeed it must be acknowledged, to speak as a Man, that no one who did
thoroughly consider of things, would choose to bear Afflictions, Trouble, or
Loss in his Youth, or in the foregoing time of his Life, if he was sure to have
toward his latter days, double, or two fold, as much for the loss he
sustained. For Fifty Pounds a Year in Youth, is better then an hundred in
declining Years or Old Age, not only because of what Barvillai said, we cannot
then so well taste what we Eat or Drink But admit that did remain, yet it is
lessened again by having had it over so very often. But the chief Reason is,
because of the nearer, yea, the very near approaches of Death; which then does
cast an Allay, and damp, even upon all the Innocent Pleasures and Lawful
Comforts of Life. Which is one Reason why this Age, unless it is attempered
with Grace and Knowledge, is commonly so fretful, vaspish and froward. But God
having here promised a Crown of Life, to the enduring of Temptation unto such
as Love him (which at this day is made good unto his Servant Job; for as
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, do live unto God, so does his Soul also at this very
moment somewhere exist) this does mightily alter the Case, and make those
Temptations to be willingly submitted unto; Yea, to become a matter of choice
(I had rather meet with trouble in the way of Duty, then to avoid it in the
neglect and omission thereof) when these temptations do tend and work together
for our Endless Good in the latter End; and herein is that saying true, It is
Good for a Man that he bear his Yoke in his Youth, Lam. 3. 27. This is a mighty
Word of Consolation to me, who have born the Yoke to a Witness in my Youth,
whose Life from my Youth up, has been almost a continued train and series of
Afflictions; and I do still labor under Crosses, Oppositions, Disappointments,
Vexations and Oppre^sions. Though withal, (Blessed be his Name for it.) My God
has given me that Knowledge to eye and discern therein, somewhat more then the
first outward hand, or next visible Instrument therein. For as it is Written,
The Prophet is a Snare of the Fowler in his ways, Hos. 9. 8. So I look upon
those Temptations as a S^are of the Great Fowler, for the Souls of Men. And as
it is again written, Our Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowler, the Snare is broken and we are escaped, Psalm. 1 24. 7. So those
Temptations and Snares, may at first be many times seen, and so passed by or
avoided; or if one falls unawares into them, or if like Troops of numerous
Enemies, they do come and beset one round, by the help and Grace of God we may
resolutely break through and not be holden by them. We may work through or
over, or by the rub and hindrance, so as not to be let thereby: Though we may be
somewhat hindered, yet not utterly stopped. It is not so much the Children of
Men, or our Fellow Creatures which do tempt or torment us, but it is the Devil
who Acts through them (from whence, Note by the way, that either to tempt or
occasion another to sin, nothing comes so like unto the Nature of the Devil as
this does; as also it is somewhat like him to Vex, Disquiet, or Torment, only
for Vexation sake as we commonly say.) The Devil is the Great Instrument or
Engine, which sets all the Sin and Evil, all the Temptations and Pain a
working, or in Motion, as it has been and is in the World. Here God does
superintend and overruled all, and disposes, or suffers him to Act according to
his own Will and Pleasure. Behold I have Created the waster to destroy, Isa.
54. 6. Which waster to destroy is the Devil; for he does raise and occasion all
those Destructions, for they do Spring up from him, as the black and corrupt
Fountain that is beneath. Somewhat hereof is signified by what our Savior
Christ says unto the Jews, I am from above, and ye are from beneath. Ye are of
your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do, (Observe how it
is expressed in the Plural Number, Lusts, more then one; as also we hence see
that all Lust comes under, and is some of the Devices of Satan) He was a
Murderer from the beginning, John 8. 44. There are several sorts of Lusts, some
of which do immediately tend to Fighting and Murder; and the others do weaken
and tend to destroy. He has his Name in the Hebrew Tongue, Abaddon, but in the
Greek Tongue has his Name Apollyon, Rev. 9. 11. Which in the Margent of the
Bible there is, That is to say, A Destroyer.

Here it is to be understood, that the Devil was a Creature made by God, as may
be gathered from John 1. 3. Col. 1. 16. Isa. 54. 16. He is the Great waster
that was Created to destroy. Like as the fire was Created to burn as well as to
warm, so that Infernal Spirit was Created to deceive and punish the Children of
the Kingdom and those that does Iniquity, all one, as to prove and try the
Servants of the Lord. He has been suffered to have his Range, going about
seeking whom he may devour, and whom he may destroy; To deceive the Nations and
the whole World, both as taken together and also in their single Individual
Persons. And the Devil said unto Christ, All this Power will I give thee, for
that is delivered unto me, Luke 4. 6. By whom must this be delivered unto him,
but by the Great Creator and Maker of all things, who is God himself? We read
expressly and clearly in the Revelations, how that Power is given unto them to
do so far and no further, as to one of his Angels, to take Peace off from the
Earth, and many such like things. By which it may be easily understood and
conceived, how that even now God is All in All. As he has Created all things
by his Great Power and Wisdom, so He that rides upon the Heavens, by his Name,
Jah, Psalm. 68. 4. Does keep the Reins still in his hands, and let them go, or
stops, or turns them as himself pleases. This was hinted off before, but it is
safe to mention it again, that ye be not Ignorant of the devices of Satan, how
far they go and no further, for even as he has put Bounds to the Sea, Hitherto
shall thou go and no further, and here thy Proud Waves are stayed. So it is as
to the devices of Satan, and what is consequent to them, the Wickedness,
Opposition, or Rebellion of Men.

And after these things, I saw four Angels standing at the four Corners of the
Earth, holding the four Winds of the Earth, that the Wind should not blow on
the Earth, nor on the Sea, nor on any Tree. And I saw another Angel ascending
from the East, having the Seal of the living God; and He cried with a loud
Voice to the four Angels, to whom it was given. (Mark that, for unless, God had
given them the Power, they could no more hurt them, then I sitting here can
hurt the Scaly Leviathan, that is at the bottom of the Sea.) To hurt the Earth
and the Sea, saying, hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the Trees, till
we have Sealed the Servants of God in their ^oreheads, Rev. 7. 1, 2, 3. And it
was Commanded them that they should not hurt the Grass of the Earth, neither
any green thing, neither any Tree; but only those Men which have not the Seal
of God in their Foreheads, Rev. 9. 4. From whence we see, that all the Actings
and Temptations, and Devices of Satan, who is Beelzebub, the Prince of the
Devils; Yea, all the things in the whole World cannot hurt any one, unless God
has before given him Commission and Power, or leave to hurt; as again here we
read, That the Servants of God who have his Seal in their Foreheads, are
privileged and exempted from being hurt. For nothing can truly hurt them, not
Pain, nor Sickness, nor Poverty, nor yet Death it self; for that only brings
them to God whose Seal they before had. This is the Heritage of the Servants of
the Lord, that they carry his Protection always about them; not in their
Pockets, for they may be stripped Naked and then it might be taken from them, but
in their Foreheads, which is not seen by Man's Eye: So that no Power, or Malice
of Men can defeat or annull it. Which. Protection runs in this form of Words.
Behold I give unto you Power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all
the Power of the Enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you, Luke 10. 19.
Nothing throughout the whole Creation, can by any means hurt the Disciples and
Servants of Christ. No not the Devils, nor yet Death it self can hurt them, but
sin only. The Devil can no otherwise hurt any one whatever, but as he does
tempt and deceive them into sin; and then indeed it is, that he gets advantage
over them and his devices take effect. But as long as any one does not defile
his Garments, Rev. 3. 4. Or as long as he stands upon the Watch, Defense, or at
staves End. Avoid, or get behind me Satan, here let Satan do his worst and show
his utmost cunning, it signifies not. It is Good and Prudent counsel never to
stand Parlying, or Discoursing with him, for thus he led our first Parents into
the Transgression. But rather to resist vigorously and he will flee from us,
and break through the Host of these Hellish Enemies. The more he tempts and the
more often we come off Conquerours, the greater will be our Triumph and Crown,
and Joy, in the Day of the Lord. For as before remarked of Job, happy it was
for him, that there was ever a Devil to have tempted him. So the same will be
returned and found true of all the other Servants and Children of God, they
will be pronounced and rendered blessed, that ever they have endured Temptation,
for then they were tried. But now they shall receive the Crown of Life, which
the Lord has promised to them that love him, who in his Gracious, Wonderful
and Overruling Providence (which signifies providing or ordaining of things)
Will make all things work together for Good to them that Love God, to them who
are the called according to his purpose.

And he showed me Joshua the High Priest, standing before the Angel of the
Lord, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3, 1. So Paul
Witnesses, he would have come to some he wrote unto, but Satan hindered him.
Again he expresses it on this wise, Only he who now lets, will let until he
be taken out of the way, 2 These. 2. 7. From all which we gather, that all
resistances, hindrances and lettings in the things that are Good, or for God;
They do come and arise from Satan, and here we should resist the resistance
(which is signified by that Phrase of the Psalmist aforementioned, The Snare
is broken and we are delivered) and so not suffer our selves to be hindered by
the hindrance (for I am pe^swaded and do believe, that if Paul had been
thoroughly bent and resolved on it for all, he might have went that Journey;
Notwithstanding the hindrance of Satan. As a Man may suffer himself to be
holden by a single thread or tow, if he does somewhat yield himself. The Devils
Power is so weak and limited, that if we do resist and not give way, not yet
yield somewhat our selves; he can never have the Mastery, or Prevalency over
us. Give the Devil his due, and let none blame him too much neither, as to say,
he does this or that sin, or mischief, when Men and Women do it by Instigation
of him. For as the Apostle James says, Every Man is tempted when he is led
away of his own lust and enticed: So when any are Tempted, or Instigated by the
Devil to commit a sin, the fault and failure of the reasonable Creatures is
this, that themselves do yield and consent to do what he suggests unto them.
Which last being their own Act and Deed, thereupon the future Punishment of God
upon them for the same is righteously and justly founded. So it will be as to
the final Miscarriage and Condemnation of them at the last. Their Destruction
is of themselves, although they were snared in it as Birds that were caught in
a Snare, Eccles. 9. 12. by that great Fowler which has his Name in the Hebrew
Tongue Abaddon, and in the Greek Tongue Apollyon, which in our English Tongue
signifies a Destroyer. Birds and Fishes have that little Instinct, that if they
see a Snare, Hook, or Net, they will not willingly suffer themselves to be
caught and taken in it. Even so all the Sons of Men have a Rumor of those
Evils of the Invisible World, how, Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare are upon
them, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth! And they might have that Faith, Knowledge
and Reason as to foresee those Evils, and avoid them. But if they put off, and
neglect hearing the Word, whereby Faith comes; if they will not Exercise and
Improve their Knowledge and Reason toward spiritual and future things: When
they are given to understand, and they may perceive from within themselves,
that there is a Devil who tempts and would deceive them, but themselves give
way and consent unto it. All this is their own fault and wilfulness, for which
they will at last smart and be punished, be Destroyed and Perish. O Israel,
thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help, Ho^. 13. 9. And so God is
an effectual help unto his Creatures, against that and other Enemies of their
Souls by his Word. Which if we have recourse unto, we shall not be Ignorant of
his devices, by that Grace, Knowledge and Assistance which he gives, offers and
tenders unto all. There are so many Arguments, Motives and Persuasives, to
bring Mankind to God and Good things, that whosoever does attend unto and consider
of them, they must needs prevail with such a Soul. There is certainly some
secret Enemy of Mankind whom they see not, that keeps them off from God and
Good things, and seduces them to Evil. Men would never do thus of themselves,
but that an unseen Enemy does stir them up. Like as it is recorded, But there
was none like unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight
of the Lord, whom Jesabel his Wife did stir up, 1 Kings 21. 25. In the Margent
it is incited. So though there is a great deal of Wickedness in the heart of Man,
by Reason of Original and Inbred Corruption (For the heart is desperately
wicked, Who can know it?) Yet this Corrupt Nature would never proceed so far,
especially in Rebellion against and despising of God, unless this Infernal
Jesabel, whose right Name is Beelzebub, did stir them up. Here again, People
might choose whether they would; Yea, they might refuse to be stirred up, or
Instigated by him. As the Commandments of God run both ways, Cease to do Evil,
Learn to do well: So the devices of Satan are contrariwise both ways, to tempt
the Sons of Men to all the Evil he can, and that they omit or neglect to do
well, his devices tend either toward the Commission of Sin, or the Omission of
Good. I have several times observed, that at Godly Duties, either Prayer, or
hearing the Word, amidst them there have fallen out Accidents and Casualties,
which then occasion Distraction, Interruption, or Hindrance, more then at other
times. In a Family where has been Infants and little Children, there has been
more unquietness and trouble, when the People have been waiting on the Lord in
Religious Exercises then at other times. (For which reason, when Paul does
speak as a Man throughout, 1 Cor. 7. He rather advises not to Marry, That ye
may attend upon the Lord without Distraction.

As also the same is too often seen and experienced, that there is more Hatred,
Reproach, rancour and opposition against sound Preaching, then there is against
a dead and dull Ministry. There is much more of the Serpentine Nature showed
forth against the Power of Godliness, then is against the form and outside
thereof. Here Satan has Great wrath and shows his Teeth where he cannot Bite,
(for God has limited and chained him) where he sees (as that Infernal Spirit
sees and discerns more then we in the Flesh do) any thing that would destroy or
lessen his Kingdom here on Earth. One said concerning my self, That Satan had a
great Wrath against me, because I had a Zeal for God, and would seek to
overthrow his Kingdom of Darkness. The Truth of which observation I have indeed
felt and experienced; For I have gone through almost all the Shame and
Indecencies which are incidental to Humane Nature, whilst I was in the course
of my Ministry, which was as much carried on by Writing and Publishing, as by
Preaching with a lively Voice. When thou made us a reproach to our
Neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that were round about us. My Confusion
was continually before me, and the shame of my Face did cover me, for the Voice
of him that Reproacheth and Blasphemeth. All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; (But we have
only asserted thy Commandments in the very same manner as thou have given them,
and they stand Written and Recorded for us.) Though thou have sore broken us in
the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of Death, Psalm. 44. 13,
14, 15, 16, 18, 19. When thou have laid me in the lowest Pit, in darkness and
in the deeps: Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all
thy Waves, Psalm. 88. 6, 7. Here the Psalmist ascribes them higher then to Satan
the Engine of Torment and Persecution, who Acts it forth by Incarnate and
Visible Instruments, even to God himself. But as it is elsewhere Written, Both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of Israel were gathered
together, for to do whatever thy hand and thy Counsel determined before to be
done, Acts 4. 27, 28. So the Devil and his Legions, and all those People in the
Flesh, Our Fellow Creatures, they are all but Instruments in the Hand of God,
(for the Devil Acted through Saul in Persecuting David, and through Herod and
Pontius Pilate, in putting Christ to Death) For to do whatever thy hand and thy
Counsel determined before, or suffered to be done. And so I look upon all those
Afflictions, Trials and Temptations, which have befaln me. As in Good things,
It is not such a Man, but Christ which dwells in him, who does the same So in
Evil things the Devil Acts through them who do Evil. And over and above all
things, we may look up unto the Great God. Who overrules and determines all
for the Great Ends of his own Glory. This same Truth is now taken notice of a
third time, that ye may understand it aright, and thoroughly, and bear and
remember it in mind.

We should endeavor and order things that our Prayers be not hindered, which is
done by Roving and Wandering Thoughts in them, as they are suggested by the
tempter, who is then busy to spoil and render them of none effect. I have
several times apprehended and concluded, that this device must be from Satan
the Enemy; and where he would hinder, this must be some good thing, which would
have the favor and acceptance of God if it was not hindered; and thereupon it
must be Godly Discretion and Soul saving Wisdom, to endeavor as much as you
can to the contrary, that your Prayers be not hindered. But attend more
diligently on the some; and see to it well, that it does become an effectual
servent Prayer which avails much. So it is likewise in the hearing of the
Word. Satan tryes and endeavors to hinder your hearing. How many does he
hinder from coming to the place of hearing, by putting this little thing, or
that little thing into their hearts, either by way of excuse, or obstinate
refusal against it? Some vain or false Imagination. And again, those who come
to hear, Do they attend upon the Lord, and upon the Ministry of his Word
without distraction? Do not some other Objects, or Thoughts, or Observations,
take them off at the very time? Do they give the more earnest heed ^o the
things which they have heard, lest at any time they should let them slip? This
is the very reason, why I do not quote the Chapter and Verse of many
Scriptures, le^st, whilst People look after them, they let slip many other
Sentences of Truth which follow in the course of our Preaching. So that either
I should make a stop or Pause hereupon, or I could show ye rather a more
excellent and compendious way, then by turning to it in your Bibles, or folding
down the leaves. Bring rather a Pen, Ink and Paper, or a Pencil Book; And set
down only the Chapter and Verse of every material Proof, and then turn to them
when ye come home, which will refresh and bring it again to your memories, as
ye do Recollect what Truth was spoken of, when such a Text of Scripture was
alleged. But People are ashamed to write after the Preacher, and it is not now
in Fashion; but away with that shame which hinders Godly Edifying. A^ Satan
hinders before hearing and in the midst of hearing, so he does hinder after
hearing, When they have heard, Satan comes immediately and takes away the
Word that was sown in their hearts, Mark 4. 15. As he does by your falling to
worldly talk, or business presently afterward. Which is just like going from a
good fire, into the cold open Air in the Winter time. They do not long retain
the heat of the fire, but they are again as chilly and as cold as ever. And so
when some have been warmed and heated at this ordinance of hearing the word,
they are presently Lukewarm or stark cold again. Satan comes immediately and
takes away the word that was sown in their hearts: When they only pass their
Opinions, Censures and Verdict upon the Preacher, as if there was no more in a
Sermon then to just sit it out, pass their sentiments upon it afterward and
there is an End. How many of the common People will give such a general Report,
that good things were spoken off, and it was all very good and the like; but
they cannot remember and carry away distinctly, not so much as one good thing
which was therein spoken of. Whereas if the very same Persons were at the
hearing a Play, Ballad, News, or Story concerning their Neighbors, they could
bring away the sense of that. The heart of such People is just like a sieve,
which lets through the Pure, Solid and Substantial Grain, and they retain
nothing but a little dust or chaff. And so on the other hand when they find
fault with, or dislike a Sermon; It is general again, I do not like, because I
do not like it. But they cannot assign any particular Reason thereof; or if
they can, it is such a Reason that they are ashamed to own and speak out,
because perhaps their Consciences were touched to the quick by that Word which
is Quick and Powerful sharper then any two Edged Sword, Piercing even to the
dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit and of the Joints and Marrow, and it is a
discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the heart: But Sinners and Hypocrites,
and formal Christians do not like such kind of Sermons.

As Paul says of himself, Since ye seek a Proof of Christ speaking in me, 2
Cor. 13. 3. And so he writes unto Timothy, Make full Proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. 5. So I would to God, that ye my hearers may find the Proof of my
Ministry in your selves, if this same Ministry to you ward is not weak, but
mighty in you: Judge ye in your selves, if at this my speaking and proposing it
unto ye, it has a sensible operation and working upon your Hearts and
Consciences, this is a Proof and an Evidence, and a Demonstration, that I am
inwardly ordained and appointed, and sent by God for the work of the Ministry.
Though some, as though living in the World are Subject unto Ordinances, Col. 2. 20.
Have several times objected to me, that I do not come in regularly, after the
Law of a Carnal Commandment; which does impose and require several things of
Man's devising, which God and Christ have not required in their Gospel. And
therefore it would be sin, or doubt of mind in me to comply therewith. If such
would come to hear, they would perhaps find a Proof of Christ speaking in me;
and that is sufficient to qualify any one for a Minister of the Gospel. But as
we are to give a Proof of our Ministry, so I would willingly seek a Proof of my
Ministry in ye. This shall be the Proof my Ministry which I would seek of ye.
How much do ye remember of the several Sermons I have Preached unto ye? But if
ye have for the time past remembered but little (I am afraid so) I will now put
ye in mind of a way that ye may remember more. When thou come home to thy
Chamber or Closet, then write down as much observable Truth as ever thou can
remember. Truly, this was my manner in my Youth; I did seldom write after
Ministers, but in the time of my Youthly Zeal this I would do (which same
Youthly Zeal should be still retained and practiced.) As when a Man has been
abroad receiving Money, the first thing he does after he comes home is to see
that it be right, and then he goes and locks it up sure. So after I had been
hearing a Sermon. I would forthwith go to my Study and set down the Preachers
Name upon such a Text, such a D^y; and the^e write down all the observable and
useful Truth, I could remember; and particularly and especially such Truth
which was brought new to my mind, whereof I had not heard nor read much before.
And this I esteemed to be as well, or rather a better way then writing down in
the Congregation, least whilst I was writing down some, I should let slip other
things that were then spoken of. But after and amidst all, there is nothing
like unto Writing them in the fleshy Tables of our hearts, and to get them
Engraven into our inward Parts, That it may remain and be remembered even as
long as our selves shall remain, even until words and time shall be no longer.
But his Mother kept all these sayings in her heart, Luke 2. 51. And so if ye
can keep the true sayings of God in your hearts, and not suffer them to pass
through or slip out again: Says Jesus unto his Disciples and Hearers, Let
these sayings sink down into your Ears. The entrance of thy words gives Light
and Understanding to the simple. Now put all this together, where God has
given to any Creature or Minister of his, a Knowledge of his Word and
Assistance of his Spirit; and he accordingly being instructed therein, brings
out of his Treasury things new and old, when these are brought out and Preached
forth, if they have an Entrance, sink down into their Ears, and further, They
are kept and Pondered in the heart, so kept there that it shall not go from
them, here is the comfort of our Laboring in the work of the Ministry, as also
the benefit of your hearing. Can ye remember any good and true sayings, or
Gracious words that proceeded out of such a Ministers mouth? This or that, he
spoke and taught, whilst he was yet among us. I would not require it of ye to
remember my particular and exact words, but it is altogether as well, if ye
carry away the sense and what it was I drived at, or exhorted unto in such a
Sermon; as the drift and design of this my Sermon is, if ye would make a
continuing and persevering work of it, Be not Ignorant of the Devices of Satan,
and do never give way unto them. I say again, If ye would make a continuing and
persevering work of it, Be not Ignorant of the Devices of Satan, and
especially, Be not Ignorant of this one particular device of his. Where the
word is sown, when they have heard Satan comes immediately, and takes away
the word that was sown in their hearts. Now ye are not Ignorant of this device
of his, see well to it, Least Satan get an advantage over you, in this
particular and in this Sermon. Let him not take away the word that was sown in
your hearts at this Season; for ye may prevent and help it if ye will. That is,
if ye keep those sayings in your hearts which ye have heard uttered unto your
Ears. And so it is of all his other Devices, they may be Countermined and
Rendered of none effect.

Whither it was that the Infernal Spirit did see and discern, that I was to lay
open his Devices herein; But I have observed, that I have been more let and
hindered; I have been more untoward and unapt toward the Compiling of this
Sermon then of others; which yet by the Grace and help of God is brought on
thus far: I have observed much hereof, in my Contemplation and Searching out of
Divine Truth, how many Avocations, Interruptions and Turnings aside of my mind
toward other things and little excuses to leave of^, or to go to other
Business, have a^ose and I have too often gave way unto it. Which is my sin and
I am to be blamed herein; and I believe that the Lord will show himself
displeased toward me for the same. When, He that has set our Iniquities
before him, and our secret sins in the Light of his Countenance, Will reprove
and set in order before me, the several seasons of time I have done thus. As
also when I have misspent too much of my Precious time: When I that know the
worth of time, the sliding away of time, the Irrecoverableness of time, do not
improve it better and more then I have done. The Lord knows the Reason of my
neglecting the Word of God to serve Tables, Acts 6. 2. To serve the mean
necessities of this Life, whereas all things relating to that should be brought
ready to my hand, that I should not mis-employ the least Portion of my time,
either for Food or Raiment, or necessary expense. And so indeed it would be, if
I were righteously and equally dealt withal; If of such an Inheritance which
God has set out to such a Famlly, a like Share and Portion was assigned to me,
as is usually unto others. Or if the same was supplied or helped another way.
My Conscience does accuse me, of mis-pending time about wordly things, or even
re^ating to this Body; Though yet I do not altogether so waste and consume it,
neither in Impertinencies or Vanity, or useless things as do others. This is
another Device of Satan, to mis-pend Precious time, which we should not give
way unto, no, not for a Minute. For we should not give Place by Subjection unto
this Enemy of our Souls, no not for a moment, Nor yet for the least matter; But
withstand the wiles of the Devil, Because he is to be blamed, In that it is a
sin and a fa ult, which he would have us consent unto.

And what shall I more say? The time would fail me to tell of all his devices
and wiles: They do terminate and tend to one of these two heads, to commit Sin,
or omit Duty, to Practice Evil, or hinder Good, and by this you may know them.
For whatever is of this Nature, that same is a device or wile of Satan; The
same Rule holds and is to be observed toward them all, Be sure not to give way
unto them. I say again, to confirm and establish this word, Be sure not to give
way unto the Devices of Satan, as each may know and perceive them in the secret
and deep of his own heart. And so when we should always keep close unto the
Lord God in our hearts, and have them always lifted up toward him, and
approach to the Lord in our hearts; Here when the heart Roves and is far from
God, or when it sinks down to the Earth and becomes Earthly or Wordly, or
Savours the things of the Flesh and of Men, this again, and such like is one of
the Devices of Satan, which we are not to give way unto an hands breadth, but
to strive and endeavor against it as much as ever we can.

When Satan stood at the right hand of Joshua to resist him, the Lord said unto
Satan: The Lord Rebuke thee O Satan, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem
Rebuke thee, Is not this a Brand plucked out of the fire, Zech. 3. 1. 2. Even
the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, Rebuke thee; which is as much as to say,
Inasmuch as Jerusalem signisignifies his Church and People, that God will have
his Elect and Servants, Maugre and Notwithstanding all the Temptations or
Devices of Satan, or the Devil. And I give unto them Eternal Life and they
shall never Perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father
which gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to pluck them out of
my Fathers hand, John 10. 29, 30. Not all the Men upon Earth, nor yet the
strongest Devil in Hell. This is a mighty Word of Consolation and Assurance to
all Real and Universal Christians, who are within the Covenant. Satan may
disturb, but he shall never be able to destroy ye. Though David did say through
Ignorance, Infirmity and Distrust, I shall fall one day by the hands of Saul,
but the Lord knows them that are his, and I certify and assure all such from
the Word of Truth, that they shall never be devoured by this Roaring Lion. Though
the Wicked and Ungodly, and Sinners may be Snared and broken, and taken, but
this is the Privilege of the Saints and Servants of the Lord, they shall never
fall so far into the Snare of the Devil, but they shall be retrieved and
recovered out of it again. Though here it will be convenient amidst all his
Assaults, to lift up ones heart in that Ejaculatory Prayer, The Lord Rebuke
thee, O Satan, the Lord Rebuke thee; or get behind me Satan, or such like. I
testify and warn ye again, Be sure never to consent, yield, nor give way unto
his Devices.

Thus having Discoursed of what excellent benefit and use, it is not to be
Ignorant of the Devices of Satan, and having laid down that Caution and Rule,
Be sure not to give way unto them, and then He can never get advantage over us;
It remains to show in few Words, How, the not being Ignorant of the Devices of
Satan helps to make a continuing and persevering work of it. This ye may
quickly perceive and discern, for opposite unto continuing and persevering, is
Apostasy and Falling away. Now the Devil was the first and great Apostate; and
himself having fallen into that Transgression, It has been his continued
business ever since to tempt the Children of Men, to fall off from God in like
manner. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the Morning? Isa.
14. 12. Which though it be spoken there in reference to the King of Babylon, yet
it has allusion unto this fall of the Devil from Heaven. But we Read yet more
clearly concerning that matter in 2 Pet. 2. 4 and Jude 6. God spared not the
Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell (which does suppose that it was
from Heaven) and delivered them to chains of darkness to be reserved unto
Judgment. And the Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own
Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the
Judgment of the Great day. So that there is more Devils then one, although one is
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, and is called the Devil or Satan, by way of
Preeminency, because he is chief among them. Hence we see that their fault was
sinning and not keeping their first Estate. And God having thus punished them
for it, they are of the like Envious and Devilish Nature, as to tempt, seduce
and deceive the Children of Men unto the like things, even to sinning and not
keeping their first Estate, which was Innocence and Uprightness. He that
commits sin is of the Devil; for the Devil sins from the beginning, 1
John 3. 8. And as aforesaid, all his devices tend to this, either in single
Persons, Families or Nations, or Generations of Mankind, where they come short
of what God has required of that pure and undefiled, Sincere and Universal
Religion, the Devil has an hand in it one way or another; and so he has in
all the ungodliness that is in all People, here some of his devices take
effect: So that it is of mighty consequence not to be Ignorant of them.

Every Act of sin is a Part of Apostasy and Falling away, and it is as contrary
to the continuing in the fear of the Lord, as darkness is unto Light. So that
would thou continue in the fear of the Lord, the consequent is, sin not,
neither Give place to the Devil. We understand likewise from hence how
dangerous a thing it is, not to keep ones first Estate. For this was the
miscarriage and utter ruin of those fallen and accursed Spirits; and through
their means and temptation Man had very near split Eternally and Irreversibly
on the same Rock, as appears by our Forefather Adam. But that God was pleased
(more out of his Grace then our deserving) to establish another and second
Covenant, by which he is set up once again, by Christ, to try him once more.
But woe unto him if he shall then fall and break the Terms and Conditions even
of the Gospel Indenture. Let People do never so many good things besides, I
know thy Works and thy Labor, and thy Patience, and how thou can not bear
them which are Evil; and have born, and have Patience, and for my Names sake
have labored and have not fainted. (All this is well, and here is a good
Character; but what succeeds?) Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,
because thou have left thy first Love, Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen and repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee
quickly and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place except thou repent,
Rev. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5. So that it is not a matter of Indifferency, nor of bare
complaining to leave ones first Love, but indeed there is a real ground for
Fear, and there must be labor to attain unto it again, and do the first works;
Otherwise God here declares, that he will remove thy Candlestick out of his
place, That is, his Light and Grace from out of their hearts; and then in plain
Terms there is no going to Heaven, the place of Eternal and Unchangeable Light.
Where any one leaves his first Love, this is one of their devices, and comes
from those formerly Angels but now Devils, who kept not their first Estate, but
left their own Habitation.

I testify again, unto all that shall hear or read this, Be upon your watch and
see well to it, that this device of the Evil one does not take effect upon ye;
But rather thwart and contradict them the more. For this is to bear and to have
Patience, and for my Names sake have Labored and have not fainted. When thou
do so much the more against, or contrary to his Temptations and Devices; for
if thou art resolutely given, it may be, Satan will be weary of tempting, or
devising devices against thee.

There is so much Reason that thou should not leave thy first Love, that
there is all the Reason in the world to the contrary, that thou should keep
unto thy first Love and thy first Estate, and rather increase it more and more.
Because if you throw up a stone, It is observed that it moves quicker and
faster, the nearer it falls down again to the Earth: Which is its Center. So we
being day after day nearer to Death and Immortality, and we draw continually
nearer in time, when we shall appear before God, unto whom all flesh shall
come, who is the father of Spirits and the Center of our Souls, and of all
Created Beings, Therefore our latter and last days, should be our better and
best days; Our latter and last works, should be our better and best works. For
says the Holy Ghost in the place aforementioned, Repent and do the first
works, Rev. 2. 5. I know thy Works and Service, and the last to be more then
the first, ver. 19. But call to remembrance the former Days in which after ye
were Illuminated. Recollect and rub up your memories. At what Age or Season of
Life, ye were in the very best mind and frame of Spirit toward the Lord God.
Where is thy Zeal and thy Strength, and thy former diligence? The perpetual
hills did bow, the liftings up of thy heart continually toward the Lord God,
and thy bowings before him in thy Spirit; and all that good mind and affections
toward God. Are they restrained? Thou must begin again and return back to that
former State, and Labor to add to it yet Sevenfold in each particular, now
toward the very close and shutting up of thy Days. And Jehu gathered all the
People together unto him, and said unto them, Ahab served Baal a little, but
Jehu shall serve him much: But Jehu did it in subtilty to the intent that he
might destroy the Worshippers of Baal, 2 Kings 10. 18, 19. So O thou Man or
Woman, pursue here the like Reasoning, in my Youth, or such a season of Life I
served God a little, but now I will serve him much; and yet more, that I may be
accepted of him at the last. We are confident I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord. Wherefore we Labor,
that whither Present or Absent we may be accepted of him; for we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in the Body, according to that he has done, whither it be good or
bad, 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9, 10. Knowing then, that we approach nearer and nearer to
this, the right Exhortation and Instruction Prompts to do more Good, and to
abstain from all appearance of Evil. And as Jehu did utter that s^ying
aforementioned, In Subtilty to the intent that he might destroy the
Worshippers of Baal. So do thou take up the like resolution in good earnest, in
reference to the God of Israel, hitherto I have served him a little, but now I
will serve him much. And thou may do it in subtilty also to the intent (for
so thou may by the Knowledge and Grace given unto thee) to be more subtle
then the Old Serpent, who is more subtle then any Beast of the Field; Be more
cunning, or rather more wise then the Devil himself, as to render all his
devices of none effect, to destroy and Root out those Lusts and Carnal
Affections in our Members, which hitherto have Worshipped that Infernal Baal,
more then our Members and Body did Worship the God of Israel. For ^here is the
mind that has Wisdom, and it is Soul-saving Discretion to make his own devices
fall back upon himself, that he shall lose more then he thought to get thereby.
It sometimes so falls out, that even from the oppositions and resistances of
Satan we get more Ground; that the Light which he would seek to extinguish and
put out, does shine more Universally, and is thereupon known more abroad, as
when he shuts up the Saints in Prison. And so Paul Witnessed, That the things
which happened unto me, have fallen out rather unto the furtherance of the
Gospel: So that my Bonds in Christ are manifest in all the Palace, and in all
other Places. And many Brethren of the Lord waxing confident in my Bonds, are
much more bold to speak the word without fear, Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14.

And so it is in other Cases, for the Delivery up into Prisons turns for a
greater Testimony, according to Luke 21. 12, 13. if it be for Christ's sake, or
for the Word of God. And so it may be in lesser matters, relating immediately
to the Souls of single persons. Even the Temptations and Devices of Satan may
be overruled and ordered, as to fall out rather unto the furtherance of their
own Salvation. I speak Mysteries and Foolishness, as unto Natural Men, but the
thing is certain and true. As on the one hand, the Spider sucks poison out of
the most wholesome Herbs, and the sweetest Flowers; The wicked, and sinners do
draw Evil from the Scriptures, the Ordinances of Religion, and the best of
things: So on the other hand, the Godly, and the Righteous, and the Wise, can,
and do extract Good even from the poison of Satan, which is his Temptations and
Devices. As it is written of causing the Reproach offered by him to cease, and
to turn his own Reproach upon him, Dan. 11. 18. So they can even answer the
Temptation of Satan, and so even turn that Temptation upon him, as to make the
very same an Argument and Persuasion for God and Duty. A Notable Example and
Instance we have of this in Christ being tempted of the Devil, Luke 4. 3, 4, 5,
6, 8, 9, 10. Whereby Christ did Eminently show himself to be stronger than he;
for when he came upon him, He overcame him, and took away from him all his
Armor, wherein he trusted, Luke 11. 22. For in that he himself has suffered
being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. And as he is able,
so he accordingly does to all his Elect and Chosen Ones, and Faithful Followers
to the World's End. My Grace is sufficient for thee. And he gives them a
proportionable Knowledge to answer and overcome the Temptations of the Evil
One. He continually inspires into the Hearts of his people Thoughts of Good to
defeat the Suggestions of Evil.

There is no Reason why any one should not keep his First Estate, or leave his
first Love. Have a care of that. He that despises small things, shall fall by
little and little. The least sin is like a spark of Fire in a Thatch. We know
not how far it will go, and how great a matter it will kindle. The best and
surest way is to put it clean out, and extingu^^^ it qui^e. To dash the little
ones against the Stones, and to crush the Cockatrice Eggs; Even to mortify
those Beginnings and Tendencies to lust that are in our Members, To come up to
that Estate which may be done, As for our Transgressions thou shall purge them
away, Psalm. 6. 5, 3. As an healthful and sound Body may be Purged from Corrupt
Humors. Stop, and prevent the first beginnings; for as he who makes Conscience
to keep from secret faults and from secret sins, will much more from those
which are more open and manifest. He that in the fear of the Lord abstains from
little sins, he will much more abstain from those that are greater: So by the
like Analogy and Reason of things, (for the same or like Reason runs throughout
all the things of God; He that is not Ignorant of the Devices of Satan, of
whatsoever sort they be great or small; He that does not give way unto them in
the least, nor yet in any Instance whatever (Least Satan get an advantage over
us) as he would if the least were consented unto; In all Probability and
Likelihood, yea, in absolute certain^y and assurance, he will make a continuing
and persevering work of it.

And may the Lord God, who is a Sun and a Shield (in opposition to the darkness
of the Enemy) give us Grace and Glory. (We may and ought to pray unto him in
his own order, according as he has promised) No good thing will. He withold
from him that walks uprightly. May he give us that further Knowledge of the
Devices of Satan the Enemy, and that Grace and Strength, that we may not give
way unto him in the least: So we may be confident of this very thing, that he
which has begun a Good Work in us, will perform it until the Day of Jesus
Christ. Amen.

O Lord of Hosts, Blessed is the Man that trusts in thee.
FINIS.
Written by RICHARD STAFFORD,

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Ralph Simpson, at the Sign of the Harp
in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.


