THE Necessity of Keeping still unto THE Ordinances of Religion, Prayer,
Hearing the Word, Baptism and the Lord's Supper. Set forth in a SERMON Preached
in the Country on Acts VI. 4.

Wherein also is laid open, and manifested the Error of those People (commonly
called Quakers) who do neglect the two latter.

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least Commandments, and teach Men
so, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19.

London, Printed, and are to be sold by Ralph Simpson, at the Harp in St.
Paul's Churchyard. School.

But we will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word, Acts VI. 4.
IN order to serve God unto the saving of the Soul, and to continue and
Persevere in Godliness and well doing unto our Lives End, It is necessary to
keep still unto the Ordinances of Religion; I do mean, the several Acts and
Parts of Worship, as Prayer, Hearing the Word, Baptism and the Lords Supper, as
they are used in the reformed Churches, By the Congregations and Assemblies of
Gods People, Who Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

The necessity of keeping still unto them, In order to make a continuing and
persevering work of it, will hence appear, because it is certain that each of
us, and every one of us shall so long Persevere in the Worship and Service of
the Lord, according as we use the means of Perseverance. Now these Ordinances
are the means of Grace and Perseverance, which last is a well grounded Hope of
Glory.

Suppose a Man who has been many years advancing in the Christian Life,
another Mnason, an Old Disciple, who has come up to the higher seize of
Christianity, and some degrees toward Perfection, (for this is the meaning of
that Commandment of Christ unto his followers, Be ye Perfect, even as your
Father which is in Heaven is Perfect; That we should still endeavor and make
toward Perfection, although it is impossible for Man here in the Body to be so
perfect as God is. Suppose one that were Dead to sin and mortified to wordly
Affections, Who has all faith and all Knowledge of Spiritual things; If this
Person should, as he might if he would, but God forbid that any one should make
the Experiment, Neglect for some while to offer up any Prayer at all, hearing
or reading of the word, he would have no consideration of his ways, nor admit
any thoughts of God, but he leads such a kind of life, as the wicked, sensual,
wordly and ungodly Man does for a Week or a Month together; Even this formerly
Godly and Gracious Soul would become such an one himself, as the other is
hardened, stupid, backward, unaffected, and in a manner Reprobate to every good
word and work.

And my People are bent to back sliding from me, Hos. 11. 7. For there is a
deceitfulness of Heart, and Corruption of Nature from within, and also the
Temptations from without (as all things are full of Temptation) which would
soon betray us into sin and forgetfulness of God, unless prevented by those
Means and Ordinances which himself has instituted. What the Apostle says in
another case may be applicable unto this. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a
burning heat, but it withers the Grass and the Flower thereof fades, and the
Grace of the fashion of it Perishes. So likewise should we be apt to fade
away, even in our Good ways. For the manifold Solicitations and Objects of the
World, that Men pleasing, the Allurements of Company, are all apt to draw or
turn aside from God and the thing that Good is: But the keeping still unto the
Ordinances of Religion, does remind and bring us unto them again, which if we
did not resort unto, our Back slidings would be increased, till they did come
to an utter and final Apostasy, as we may perceive by the Working and
Tendencies of our own fleshy and corrupt Nature, as also from the many
Ensamples of others, who have Forsaken God and Loved this present World.

It can hardly be expressed how averse Man's Nature is unto God, and to the
things of his Kingdom; how hard it is, to cleave unto him with full purpose of
Heart, according as he requires, and how easy it is to fall away and turn
aside. It was just now quoted what God says in Hosea, My People are bent to
Backsliding: He does not there so much mean the sinners and ungodly, but his
Saints and Servants. My People have a Proneness and Liableness unto this thing
of Back sliding. Look within your selves as ye read this, and do ye not
perceive somewhat thereof in your own selves. Which the word of God does
mention and take notice of, in order to Caution and Arm your minds against the
same. For Israel (that is a word, signifying his own People again) Slideth back
as a Backsliding heiser, Hos. 4. 16. But besides those little inclinations
toward Backsliding in us, Man in his Natural condition is altogether addicted
to sin and falling away. But they like Men have transgressed the Covenant, Hos.
6. 7. It was like them, and such as could be expected from them. Now a
Backsliding is as it were a little trip, and is not altogether so bad as a
fall, or a falling back, or a falling away. Or a turning aside, or out of the
way, or a going back. But here is to be observed, that the Word of God takes
notice of every least Back sliding; for it hinders or retards, or they do not
go on so well in the way to Heaven as the Lord would have them, and guide them
and hold them up by his right hand. We say in the Proverb, It is a good Horse
that never stumbles, but it is a very good Horse that never so much as trips;
for there is hardly such an one to be found. And so it will be in the Account
and Estimation of God, that Man or Woman walks well enough in his way, who does
never stumble or fall therein; and if when he falls, he does get up again. Our
Gracious God calls upon Israel, Return for thou have fallen by thine Iniquity.
Yea, if they are gone back or aside, if they will still return again into the
right way, he will accept thereof. Thus says the Lord, shall they fall and not
arise? Shall they turn away and not return? Jer. 8. 4. And so when the Creature
is walking and moving on in the way of his Commandments, when there are
Backslidings, God does in no wise allow thereof, but complains of it. Although
he would not altogether discourage his Poor Creature neither. So that the Law
of God is Perfect, converting the Soul. It does chalk out the highest degrees
and measures of perfection, although Man's Impotency, weakness and feebleness does
not attain unto it. That is a Good Son and Servant indeed, who can say in Truth
unto God our Heavenly Father, and not so much by way of Boasting unto their
fellow Creatures, Lo these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I
at any time thy Commandment, Luke 15. 29. Such a thing perhaps may be possible
as to our Fathers or Masters according to the flesh: But David prays by the
Spirit when he says, And enter not into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy
sight shall no Man living be justified, Psalm. 145. 2. When God comes to enter
into Judgment, and to bring to remembrance all the steps of our course here on
Earth, I believe there will not be found any Man ever living (whatever some
pretend unto or say, but herein they are guilty of falsehood, which is a fall)
except Jesus Christ the righteous who was more then a Man) who was not guilty
of some fall, or at least of a Backsliding; yea, of several and of many. But
they will be pronounced to have been the best Sons and Servants, who in their
course through this Earth, had the fewest Falls and the fewest Backslidings,
and in the least instances. My Business in my Preaching unto ye is, to direct
ye all a long so to walk that ye may please the Lord. Accordingly, I having
warrant and Ground from his Word so to do, I testify against all Backslidings,
yea, and the least Backslidings. O do not that abominable thing which I hate.
Nor yet do ye give way willingly unto the least Backslidings, which the Lord is
displeased with and does not approve of. Though after all your Circumspection,
and taking heed which should be yet more then it is considering how things
stand; ye have fallen into some Backslidings in your Past Life, and it is odds,
but ye will fall into more before ye die. Though in Gods Gods Name and for your
own Souls Good, do whatever ye can to avoid them. This I teach and affirm
constantly, and I do here put ye in mind of the Apostles Exhortation and
command, And having done all to stand. I say again; And having done all to
stand, and let him that stands take heed least he fall. I will go on to add
yet further, if any should be overtaken with a fault, or fall into a sin, let
him cry mightily to God for Pardon and Strengthening Grace: Put forth all thy
Strength and Power to get out of it, and rise up again as soon as ever thou
can. Thus says the Lord, Shall they fall and not arise? Shall they turn away
and not return? Temptations do beset Good and Godly People, as well as the mixed
Multitude of the World. Yea, rather Satan is most busy with the first, and
serves greater ends upon them if his Temptations should take effect, he having
already taken the latter sort Captive at his will. There is a like old corrupt
Nature in all, although it is kept under and subdued in regenerate People,
which does actuate and prevail and rule all in all, in the Children of
Disobedience. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go get thee down, for thy People
which thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt have corrupted themselves. They
have turned aside quickly out of the way which I have commanded them, and made
a Molten Calf and Worshipped it, Exodus 32. 7. And so when the Lord writes up
the People of the several Generations and Countries. He shall count and
rehearse at the last day, how they have turned aside quickly out of the way
which he had commanded them. Not only in making and sacrificing unto other Gods
(which is a most grievous evil and abominable Idolatry) but in the Breach and
Transgression of the other Commandments also. He did set them aright once and
again, but they would and did quickly turn aside out of the way which he had
commanded them. As we read or hear of this in others, we are to remember and
take heed, we are to fear and watch; for we have the same or like hearts; which
if they do not break out quickly into actual turning aside, yet we are subject
unto, and it is possible, we may quickly fall into the same. There is a
Proneness, woulding, and Inclination to the same sin and evil. Know ye not that
the Spirit which dwells in us, (He speaks there in the Person and behalf of
Christians) lusts to envy. Now when one lusts to a thing he would fain be
at it, but he knows not whither it would be best for him. He has some looking
back toward Sodom. Remember Lots Wife. For we are forbidden, even these same
lustings and covetings after worldly things, and secret desires after those
things which are not to be had without the hazard of the seekers thereafter for
all Eternity. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which takes
away the Life of the owners thereof, Prove. 1. 19. Like as David longed, and
said, Oh that One would give me to drink of the Water of the Well of Bethlehem,
which is by the Gate. Now as to all these, the Word of God which is very pure,
does forbid all those Lustings and Covetings, and Concupiscence. It requires to
crush the Cockatrice Egg, that it break not forth into a viper; To dash the
little ones against the Stones; Not only to abstain from all appearance of
Evil, but to nip and destroy it in its rise and beginning, when it does in the
least appear above Ground. O Jerusalem wash thine heart, (there is the Fountain
and Spring, and it is good going to the bottom) from wickedness that thou
may be saved, (By this it appears, that there is more requisite and
necessary to salvation then many People are aware of) How long shall thy vain
Thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. How long shall it be e're they attain
to Innocence? Hos. 8. 5. By which place it appears, that it is the mind of God
that there should be a pressing forwards, and a going toward, and an endeavor
after Innocence; Though if one had the Tongue of Men and Angels: If he had all
knowledge and utterance in the Law of God and Heavenly things, how long do ye
think he might Preach to a Congregation e're They attain to Innocence,
considering Men as they are. I suppose, he might Preach all his own life long,
and to their lives end before they all attain to Innocence. Though withal, if
he is faithful in his ministry, to which the Divine Blessing and Promise is
Annexed, it will be Instrumental toward the making some therein, a People
prepared for the Lord.

But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew all Men, and
needed not that any should testify of Man; for he knew what was in Man, John 2.
23, 24. Now we learn from John 1. 1. That Jesus was the Word of God, and the
Word was God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing
made that was made. Man himself was created and made by the Word. So that by
the rule of consequences, if all Men were Created by the Word, as they were,
then of necessity the Word must know all men, and know what is in man. There
went no more toward the creating the whole World, and all things therein, than
God's saying, Let it be so (which is his Word), and it was so. As the Word of
God did create us at first in a litteral and material sense, so the same Word
is to make us New Creatures; to create us again in a spiritual sense; to make
us live unto God for ever and ever. And in order to that it knows all men, and
knows what is in man; and needs not that any one should testify of him, for it
knows enough of it self. The Commandments, Rules and Directions are given in
that wise, according as Man is Prone Subject and Inclinable unto. There are
more then a Thousand Instances of this, throughout the Book of the Lord. But I
will recite one or two, Only take heed to thy self and keep thy Soul
diligently, least thou forget the things which thine Eyes have seen, Take heed
unto your selves, least ye forget the Covenant of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 4.
9, 23. The Holy Ghost, by giving this double caution in this Chapter does
denote and show forth, what Men are apt and subject unto, even to the
forgetfulness of the Works of God and of the words of his Law, for themselves
to live according unto, and to obey it, and therefore he warns them against it:
Now the several Acts and Parts of Worship are in a manner Visible, and also
they put in continual mind both of the works of God, and of the words of God.
And for this reason, besides his own Command of Enjoining them, they are to be
retained and resorted unto all the days of our Life, whilst we are here in the
Body.

O Ephraim, What shall I do unto thee? O Judah, What shall I do unto thee? For
thy Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as the Earthly Dew it goes away.
Hos. 6. 4. As it is written, Jesus Christ spoke thus unto Philip, Proving him,
for he himself knew what he would do, John 6. 6. Even so God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, does here ask the same Question doubly over, proving his
People, or putting them to it; for he himself knows what he has to do and
would do herein; How, that when their Goodness is as the morning Cloud, and as
the Early Dew it passes away; He has provided that it should be renewed and
come and succeed again, even by the Ordinances of Religion, which himself has
ordained and instituted. I have several times thought, how that in the long
days in the hot and sultry weather, when is the scorching Sun, How the wisdom
of God does then provide for the Earth. For whereas, at this time of the Year,
there is little or no Rain for several weeks together; If it were not for that
Dew which God does then send every Night and Early in the Morning, what would
the Earth come unto? The most fruitful Ground would become like the Barren
Mountains, and the Waste howling Wilderness. The Heaven that is over our head
would be Brass, and the Earth that is under us, would be Iron, Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
There would be little or no Grass to be seen. But the Sun in its full might and
strength would scorch and burn it up. But now, (blessed, and ever blessed be
our God for it) by means of the Dew which commonly tarries on the Earth, until
the Ninth or Tenth hour in the morning, It is refreshed instead of Rain; and
thus it comes to pass, that it is neither barren nor unfruitful. The
observation is common, that in Cloudy weather, or when it will Rain that day,
there is usually less or no foregoing Dew. The Knowledge and Wisdom of God,
seeing that there will not be altogether so much need of it then, and
accordingly he does so proportion it out, who does all things in Number, Weight
and Measure. O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in wisdom have thou made them
all. And so even now Thou, who upholdest all things by the Word of thy Power,
In wisdom do thou govern and dispose of all things throughout the whole
World. O that when People walk out early in the morning, and see the Dew lie as
the Small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as Showers upon the Grass, (Every
little drop whereof does more Good, and therein is more valuable then so many
Pearls) would eye and see the Lord therein, and Praise the Lord for his
Goodness, and declare his wonders unto the Children of Men. That they would
further make known a Spiritual use and improvement hereof, as the whole Face of
the Earth unless for this Dew, would be like unto a Path or Road which Man or
Beast continually goes on, or at least it would be barren and unfruitful. Even
so in like manner Mine own heart, and the other hearts of the reasonable
Inhabitants of this Earth, unless it were for the Dew of the Word and of
Prayer, would become barren and unfruitful in the work of the Lord, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But on the other and better hand, the
constant Dew of the Word and of Prayer (if we do not put them from us but have
recourse thereunto) for the Lord does hold them forth and Command the
Inhabitants of the Earth to use them, and receive the benefit of them; If these
be sought and had daily; If this Knowledge and Godliness (which last includes
both the Word and Prayer, and these things be in you and abound (there is Great
Emphasis in that Word, full measure and running over, which teaches us that we
should do it still more and more. Every Branch that bears Fruit, he purges
that it may bring forth more Fruit, John 15. 2. They make you that ye shall
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. 1. 8. Who says, Herein is my Father Glorified that ye bear much Fruit, so
shall ye be my Disciples, John 15. 8. But as without the Dew or Rain, there
would be no Fruit or Grass, so without hearing or reading the Word and Prayer,
there would be no Fruit brought forth unto God. And if God is Glorified when
his reasonable Creatures bring forth Fruit, then by the Rule of Contraries he
is dishonored when they bring forth no Fruit, or when he fails and is
disappointed in his Expectation; When I looked that it should bring forth
Grapes, and it brought forth Wild Grapes. And what is the consequent of all?
Poor Creatures, the greatest loss will redound to themselves at the last,
although now they do not thoroughly consider thereof. And now go to, I will tell
you what I will do to my Vineyard, it shall be trodden down, it shall not be
Pruned nor dug, but there shall come up Briars and Thorns. I will also
command the Clouds, that they Rain no Rain upon it. For the Earth which
drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth Herbs, meet
for them by whom it is dressed, receives Blessing from God; But that which
bears Thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is
to be burned, Heb. 6. 7, 8. As the Earth drinks in the Rain, so Almighty God
does require of the Inhabitants thereof, that they should drink in, hear, and
receive his word Preached.

And he having in his Eternal Providence opened a Door in this place where we
now are, he does require of the Inhabitants of this Town and Neighborhood to
come for to hear the same. And I declare to them all that he will call them to
an Account for their refusal, or neglect to do the same. I warn them
beforehand, that then the false Surmises and Reproaches of some concerning the
Minister, nor yet will the vain and frivolous excuses of others avail, as to
that God with whom we have all do. As to those false Surmises and Reproaches,
they might do as He did in reference to Hannah, whom he first supposed drunken,
and afterward enquired further, and then he understood and said, The Lord
grant thy Petition: So they might come to my self immediately, to be thoroughly
satisfied of their present mis-understandings. And let their own Consciences
try, bear Witness and Judge, by hearing of the same; whither the Way of God, is
not taught here in Truth.

There is a very near resemblance and similitude to the Word preached unto the
reasonable Inhabitants thereof, and to the Rain or Dew descending upon the
Earth; for as the Rain makes the Earth fruitful, so the Word preached, if it is
drinked in, as the Earth drinks in the Rain, if it is mixed with Faith in
them that hear it, will make men and women meet and prepared for God, and meet
to receive a Blessing from God. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Speech
shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as the
Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Otherwise the manifold Solicitations and
Objects of this World, would be apt to scorch, and make us fade away, even in
our good ways. But that the Doctrine, and Speech of the Word (like Rain, Dew,
small Rain and Showers), whereby also is to be seen, that the Word should not
be only preached once and away, but day after day, and Sabbath after Sabbath;
for there is a daily succession of Dew, or of Rain, small Rain or Showers, to
do most good: and then it is when the Word is constantly preached, and
constantly attended unto, and received in; then it renders the Vineyard meet
for our God. If his Word falls upon the Dust of the Wilderness, (it is
Jaremiah's Phrase) or upon stony and dry places, Mat. 13. 5, 6. (I wish that
the hearts of none who shall hear or read this be that Dust of the Wilderness,
or stony and dry places) then it may seem lost and ineffectual, not for want of
Worth and Excellency in it self (for it is the same Rain that falls there, as
that which falls upon good ground), but the Incapacity is in the Subject. It
does not profit, not being mixed with Faith in them that hear it: Or they
suffer it to run off again, as Useless Water. They do not drink it in, as the
Earth drinks in the Rain. O that some of ye here present, would drink in this
Sermon. Take my word for it, if ye would drink it in, it would abide longer
with ye, and do ye more good than that drink which perishes in the Draught; or
that strong drink which if immoderately taken in, shall be bitter to them that
drink it. Not so much as to those Qualms of Conscience, or Headache, which do
quickly ensue thereupon. But the worst Bitterness will be in the End, when they
must taste the Bitterness of Death, and thence be called to Judgment to receive
a due Reward for the Sin and Evil of their Drunkenness in the days of their
flesh. I would have ye drink that in not one drop further then barely for
Thirst and necessary Refreshment. But if ye would taste, and drink in some of
those words as are written, by God's blessing, and improvement thereon, it may
become in ye a well of water springing up unto Eternal Life, John 4. 14.

In a dry Summer, that is good and convenient ground which lies next to a River
or Brook, or Fountains which are perpetually running and springing; and when
there are apt Floodgates and Instruments, to let the water over the ground and
drain it again; This supplies and makes up from beneath, for the Dew and Rain
which comes from above. And so it is convenient in dwelling houses, to keep
water always by one. Even so we should be always furnished, (unto which the
word Preached does help us) with the like Spiritual Water, as it descends from
above, in the Dew and Rain of the Ordinances. And when we have drank it in, we
should not let it run through but stop and keep it there, that it may be turned
and converted into our own Moisture. For the word is nigh thee, even in thine
heart. See to it well, that by Pondering and Remembrance of what thou hear
or read, These words that I Command thee, thou shall lay up in thy heart;
That it may become as it were a repository of gracious Words and Divine Truths.
Which like Pools or Rivers of Water will refresh and supply thy need at any
time. For they drank of that Spiritual Rock that followed them (in the Margent
there it is, went with them) and that Rock was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. So that it
is to have Christ, who is the word, formed within them; that he may follow and
go with them whithersoever they go, or wheresoever they are. This will be yet a
more lasting and abiding thing then the Early Dew or the descending Rain, for
that is not always. But to have the Spiritual Rock following us, or going with
us, this is at Midday and Afternoon, and at those times when there will be no
Rain. The word is not, nor can be well Preached always; but this supplies and
helps for that in the Intervals and spaces of time between it, even to have a
Spiritual drink always within us, and to have a Spiritual Rock following and
going with us, which Rock is Christ, out of which we may draw and drink at any
time, whenever w^ will.

As one of the Ancients said, Nothing is so worthy of God as the Salvation of
Mankind; So it is a most wonderful thing to consider, how he has consulted,
contrived and provided all things for it. In his word) especially, and also in
his other doings and dispensations toward the Children of Men. Happy, thrice
happy, and only happy are those his Servants and Creatures, who know (that is
not all) but also comply therewith. That as deep calls unto deep at the noise
of thy Water Spouts, Psalm. 42. 7. So one ordinance does follow another, and one
thing is appendant, connected and succeeds another; and all to that great end,
to bring about the common Salvation of Mankind, as if God would never let us
alone until he has brought us unto Heaven. On the one hand he is wanting in no
means to set us forward; and then again, he is not wanting in any thing to keep
us on continually a-going. Yea, he has ordained further, that we should here
on Earth live the life of Heaven before we come to Heaven. Blessed are they
that dwell in thy House, they will be still praising thee, Psalm. 84. 4. And he
has ordered things in that manner, that we may be always a doing the work of
God.

And whereas here some would be apt to think that this would breed Tiresomness,
he has again so ordered the matter, by those Ordinances of Religion and
Worship, which he has instituted, that they who herein wait on the Lord,
should renew their strength, they shall mount with wings, as Eagles: they shall
run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint, Isa. 40. 31. For
whereas a scoffing Ishmael, and the men of this world, do imagine, or say, We
do not like this kind of work, which is never done; but our God, through his
most gracious and bountiful Nature, and Doings, has so provided, that his
Servants shall not be weary in his Work, and have a good will therein,
signified by that Phrase of Running. And if at any time there should be any
weariness, because they are here in the Body, and in this Flesh, then they
shall renew their strength; for He gives Power to the faint; and to them that
have no might he increases strength. As he does that, so where he sees any
thing is wanting, or necessary, he makes it up, and supplies it. So it is in
the ^forecited place of Hosea, where he sees beforehand their failing and
Declination, that their Goodness is as the Morning Cloud, and as as the Early
Dew it passes away: How is this to be remedied, O Ephraim, what shall I do
unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? Here God asks Questions of his
Creatures, as if Himself were at a Loss, or a stand. God here speaks after the
manner of men. It is much Lord that thou should ask such a Question; for
thou thy self know better than Ephraim or Judah, or all the Reasonable
Inhabitants of the Earth, what thou shall do unto them, and what is proper unto
them in such a case or condition. Seeing that their Goodness is as the Morning
Cloud, and as the Early Dew it passes away, God has provided an help meet and
Remedy for that, for a Repair of that Breach, even the Preaching and Hearing of
his Word (which is one Principal Ordinance of Religion) Hereby intimating, that
if that will will not do, nothing will do; but it will do. And that this was in
the mind of God, and that it was the very thing which he would do unto them,
and he thought of when he asked the foregoing Question, is manifest by the
words immediately following; Therefore (here comes the Reason and Cause for it)
have I hewed them by my Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth,
and thy Judgments are as the Light that goes forth, Hos. 6. 5. Where, by the
way, Judgments may be understood for his Commandments, according as David does
so call them in the 119th Psalm; or rather for his Temporal Judgments on the
Earth; and then the sense is to this purpose, That to help, remedy, and provide
against their Goodness being as the Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew it
passes away, God has adapted the Preaching of his Word, signified by his
hewing them by his Prophets, who were the Persons and Instruments employed
therein; and also his Judgments abroad in the Earth, that the Inhabitants
thereof may learn Righteousness. For God would have, and so would do any thing,
that the Goodness of his people might continue, and not pass away. Though here
again, that Goodness which is as the Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew it
goes away, is better than no Goodness at all, as some Dew is better than none;
for this Dew, if it is repeated, and succeeds daily, will do good.

Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets, I have slain them by the words of
my mouth. Here observe the manner of the Holy Ghost expressing it. God has
made a thorough Work of it, I have hewed, I have slain: For there is a manifest
Diversity between that Authoritative and Powerful Preaching of those Prophets,
and the flat and insipid Discourses of our modern Scribes and Declaimers, or of
Ignorant and Unfaithful Teachers. Christ taught as one having Authority, and
not as the Scribes. As to this, the Rule is certain, That amongst all that
great deal of Preaching which is now abroad in this Nation, that is the best
Preaching, and most from God, which has in it most Authority, Power and
Liveliness; for his Word is a Lively Word, and so it will approve it self to
the Consciences of the Hearers, where it is understood and managed aright.

In the work of Man's Conversion and Salvation, the Word, and the Preaching
thereof are before Prayer. For how shall they Pray, for what they have not
known, or for what they have not heard? Now in order to bring God and the
things pertaining to his Kingdom, to their Knowledge, as to which hearing or
reading is an outward Gate letting in thereto, both the Word and the Preaching
or speaking thereof, is not only requisite, but absolutely and simply
necessary. And therefore by the way, it would be a good method in the Education
of Children, to instruct them with some Principles of the Knowledge of God and
of the Doctrine of Christ, and of the things contained in the Scripture
according as their tender Years will bear, as the small Rain upon the tender
Grass: Before they are taught to say Prayers merely by rote, or at least to
ingraft into them some inward sense and understanding of their own, what they
say therein. In those of Riper Years, Knowledge and Understanding should go
before Action, or otherwise it will be blind and signify nothing, or not much:
Some having constanly used a Course of Devotion, confine themselves barely to
that, as such is all the Religion, or more properly superstition of the
Papists, as also of many Formalists of the National Church. Which Devotion, or
Prayer, is but a means to somewhat more, even for Grace and Strength to the
keeping the Commandments of God, and to confirm all the words of his Law to do
them, (as to which Preaching does instruct and exhort) unto which they should
still press forward. But in no wise, as the manner of them is to neglect the
needful thing, and principal End of that, only for adhering to a parcel of
outward and customary Prayers; for so I phrase it; not to vilify or contemn the
Ordinance of Prayer; in no wise; far be it from me. But only to express it
according as it is by them used and made. As also to let ye see on one hand,
how the Wisdom of God has appointed these two Ordinances of Preaching and
Prayer, toward the help and furtherance of the Salvation of Mankind; and what
God has Joined together, set no Man put asunder; for he has commanded them
both, and they may be successively used one after another. So on the other
hand, when froward and disobedient Man would notwithstanding put them asunder,
and neglect the one and hold to the other, then comes in Satan, and strangely
befools and deceives people therein. As the Apostle James argues, For as the
Body without the Spirit is dead, so Faith without Works is dead also; even so
here it is. If one should use a Course of Prayer every Evening, Morning and
Noonday, whether it be private, Family, or public Worship, without keeping
the Commandments of God, or having regard to them in all things, and at all
times; This would be as Ridiculous, Foolish, and Nonsensical, as if a Servant
should as often come to thee for aid and assistance, or for Tools and
Instruments to do such a Work, and yet never set about the doing of it. So
again, it is a like Folly, Ignorance and Deceivableness, to be Hearers of the
Word, and not doers of it. The Foolish shall not stand in thy sight, Psalm. 5.
5. From which Scripture of undoubted Truth we are given to understand, that
they who are foolish in matters of Religion shall not stand in Gods sight; That
is, they shall not go to Heaven. And besides that just now here mentioned, they
come also among the Number of the Foolish who remember the Covenant in Baptism,
and yet they do not observe it; or only with slight and transient Purposes and
Resolutions at that present time, when the words thereof are to Obediently keep
Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our Life.
God hears not sinners, John 9. 31. And here in like manner it is alleged out
of the Scriptures of Truth, that God is not pleased with the Sacrifice of
Fools, neither will He accept thereof. In the Scripture Notion and
Apprehension, Fools and Sinners are near the same; for all Sinners are Fools,
and also all Fools of their own making, as we commonly say, who were not born
Ideors of mere Natural Impotency, are sinners: In that they being in Honor and
Understanding, they abide not. They do not improve, but rather lose that
Knowledge and Reason in which God had Created them; This is a sin and fault of
their own in these Creatures, when they do not Trade with their Talent, but
become unprofitable. And so when they lose Good and Subject themselves to Evil,
as to the future State and Distribution of things, this is properly folly, yea,
and folly in the abstract; and in this sense sin and folly are convertible
terms. All Sinners are Fools, and all such Fools are Sinners. So Ignorance in
Worship, or in the things pertaining to God, this is folly; For let not such an
one think that he shall receive any thing from the Lord.

Another abuse of a thing does not take away my rightful use thereof. Because
another Person drinks and is drunken, this is no Argument or Reason that I
should not drink at all; for I may drink Nevertheless, to quench Thirst or
refresh Nature. Yea, I must drink, or I Perish. So it is as to the Ordinances
of Religion, though some abuse them, yet Nevertheless, we may rightly use them;
yea, they are as absolutely necessary to carry us through this barren and dry
Wilderness of the Earth, unto the Heavenly Canaan, as drink is to the Body.
Because the Prayers of some People do become Sin, Psalm. 109. 7. This is no
Argument why we should not pray at all. But rather we are thence taught not to
regard Iniquity in our hearts, to lift up Holy Hands, to purity our hearts, to
sanctify our selves when we draw near to God, and such like. Because too many
are hearers of the Word and not doers of it, shall we therefore like the mixed
and ungodly Multitude turn aside our foot from going to the place of hearing?
but rather let us hear and do it. According to what our Forefathers Covenanted
and Promised to God, for themselves and us, in Deuteronomy. 5. 27. And if we would
inherit the promises, we must of necessity be Children of the Covenant. Because
some do not know and mind much more therein then the sprinkling or dipping in
Water, or do it in General for customs sake, or to make the child or Person a
Christian as they say; we may and ought nevertheless to fulfill all
Righteousness, and to comply with that Commandment of Jesus Christ, Go and
teach all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Retaining the thing, but withal giving most heed to the
thing signified thereby. The like figure whereunto even Baptism does now save
us, not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the Answer of a Good
Conscience toward God, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21. If
one is Baptized with outward water, this hinders not, but he may at the very
same time and afterward also be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire; by
which last is denoted warmth, servency and zeal in the Service of God. For as
Peter Answered, Can any Man sorbid Water, that these should not be baptized,
which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? and he commanded them to be
baptized in the Name of the Lord. Acts 10. 47, 48. This Text does as plainly
imply as two and three make Five, even according to the common sense and
understanding of the same Words, without any forced meaning, or even any
Interpretation at all, that the having received the Holy Ghost or the Holy
Spirit, is no sufficient reason and excuse why they should not at all use Water
Baptism; but it is rather a reason that they should use it. For Peter and Paul,
and other Ministers and Servants of God of Old time, who had the Spirit in more
measure then any now adays (Notwithstanding all Boasting and Pretensions) did
baptize with water. I would to God, this were thoroughly understood and
considered of, by those People commonly called Quakers. But they also have that
humor and disposition, as to be stiff-necked and perverse, and refuse to hear
and hearken unto that part of the Word of God, which make against their own
Imaginations.

The Ordinances are a Part of the Commandments of God, and they are to be used
out of Obedience and Homage unto him. God commands us to hear his Word, to call
on his Name. Christ commanded his Disciples and Followers to baptize and to do
this in remembrance of him. These two last, Baptism and the Lords Supper seem
to come in the place of the two Jewish Ceremonies, or Ordinances of
Circumcission and the Passover; both of which were of Gods immediate Command
and Institution. As to the first of which, the Apostle Paul averreth,
Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing but the keeping of the
Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. Of which words the meaning seems to be to
this purpose and effect, that is, there is nothing, or no great matter, whither
the foreskin of ones flesh is cut off, or not. There is no great Good or Evil
in the thing abstractedly, whither it be done, or not done. So it would have
been, if God had given no Commandment at all concerning it; But God having
Superadded and Annexed a Commandment concerning it, The Soul that is not
Circumcised, shall be cut off from his People; Here it ought to be observed and
done by the Jews, as long as that Dispensation did remain among them. Not so
much for the thing it self, but to fulfill all Righteousness, and therein to
keep the Commandment of God; which same Commandment is now done away and
abolished in Christ. And therefore it was become indifferent under the Gospel,
as appears by the foregoing verse and from the Practice of Paul, who although he
was not for bringing them back again to Bondage and to Jewish Observances; yet
to please the Jews, as also to bring over more Jewish Converts; who did retain
a Tincture of, and Zeal for the Mosaical Institutions, did Circumcise Timothy,
but would not do so as to the Gentiles which should receive the Faith. Now the
reason is alike and eternally the same, as to those two Ordinances of Christ,
Baptism and the Lords Supper. As to sprinkling or dipping in water, and in
Eating and Drinking a little Bread and Wine, there is nothing or no great
matter in them taken abstractedly. The Reason of Man is apt to despise them,
because it presently sees no Intrinsic Goodness in using them, and no Evil in
letting them alone. And so far it would have been true, if Christ had given no
Commandment concerning them. But Christ and his Apostles having given
Commandment for the once observance of the one, and the often observance of the
other, they ought accordingly to be so observed by his Disciples and Followers,
to fulfill all Gospel Righteousness, and out of obedience unto, and for keeping
the Commandments of Christ. Moses therefore gave unto you Circumcision (not
because it is of Moses, but of the Fathers) and ye on the Sabbath Day
Circumcise a Man, that the Law of Moses shall not be broken, John 7. 22, 23.
This is plain and obvious enough, and accordinly they have been retained all
along down in the Christian, yea, and the Reformed Churches. Though we cannot
here presently assign how Baptism and the Lords Supper are means of Grace, as
Preaching the Word and Prayer manifestly and sensibly are. For we know
feelingly and experimentally, that Preaching the Word and Prayer are as two
Conduit Pipes, through which Good and Perfect Gifts do come down from above,
from the Father of Lights into our Souls. And we very well conceive how these
help to make a People prepared for the Lord. But we cannot altogether give so
clear an Account concerning Baptism and the Lords Supper, how they do this,
although here we can somewhat apprehend as to the things signified by them, which
has been aforementioned. Nevertheless, because Christ has Commanded and
Instituted them in his Gospel, it is not only the safer way to use them, but I
will go on to add, there can be no sasety in neglecting them, or in the
omission of them, because of what himself says, Whosoever shall break one of
these least Commandments and teach Men so, He shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5. 19. Which there signifies the Dispensation of his
Gospel. For we are not sure, that such will ever be admitted into his Kingdom
above at the end of time. Having aforementioned what Grounds we have for the
same in the Scriptures of Truth; and therefore these things, keep still unto
the Ordinances of Religion, We teach and affirm constantly.

We read in Isa. 58. 2. Of the Ordinances of Justice, but in our present and
intended Discourse, we wave and let alone all that, it being not altogether so
pertinent to the matter in Hand, which is the keeping constantly unto the
Ordinances of Worship. For it is a great Gospel Command, Worship God, Rev. 22.
9. And to allude unto Heb. 9. 1. This Second Covenant has Ordinances of Divine
Service, and a Spiritual or Heavenly Sanctuary, Which may be performed in a
true and right manner. So that it is meet, requisite and necessary, That the
Children of thy Servants should continue therein, Psalm. 102. 28. Or otherwise,
they are no longer Servants of God. For his Servants shall serve him, Rev. 22.
3. And as another abuse of a thing should not take away my Good and Right use
thereof. So here again it is, the Controversies and Questions which are among
the Servants of God, concerning the manner or Circumstantials of his Worship,
or of those positive Ordinances, as whither Baptism should be observed in
Infancy or Riper Years, with dipping, or sprinkling, with the sign of the
Cross, or without it, and of the Lords Supper, whither it should be received,
sitting, standing, or kneeling, or whither in the Morning, or Afternoon, although
these are somewhat apt to perplex and trouble the Minds of Christians, and are
the occasion of different and distinct Congregations; Yet we should in no wise
so far stumble, as to surcease the use of them at all. God forbid.

By the way, though we ought to assert the Truth and Confute Error, yet it is no
Christianity to Reproach, or Malign any Sect or Party. For the Servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, in Meekness Instructing those
that oppose themselves, if Peradventure God will give them Repentance to the
acknowledgment of the Truth.

The much greater Part of those Churches, which are reformed from the Idolatry
and Superstition of Rome, both in these and also in Foreign Countries, do all
unanimously agree, that these Ordinances ought by all means to be retained, and
that the neglect, or omission of them is Sin. Certain it is, that the best and
wisest way for every one is, To keep unto and observe them, as near according
to the Rule and Direction of Scripture as ever they can, and abstracted from
all will Worship and Institution, or Precept of Man.

I am now going to speak after my Judgment, and by Permission and not of
Commandment; And therefore ye may weigh in your Minds, but not rely on this
Affirmation, or rather Opinion, Viz. That as the Early Dew which goes away, is
better then no Dew at all. So the observance of the ordinances any of the ways
aforementioned, seems according to my sentiment of things, to be better and
safer then the not observance of them at all. Because there is a Commandment of
God and of Christ, for the actual observance of them. Though here I charge ye all
in the Name of God and of Christ (and here ye are to take notice of it, that I
speak again by Commandment) seeing that these positive ordinances serve also
unto the example and shadow of Heavenly things, see well to it, that ye do
observe and use them, according to the Pattern showed unto ye in the Gospel:
For that is most pleasing unto the Lord, as may be understood from Heb. 8. 5.

Colos. 2. 20. is commonly objected against the use of ordinances at all.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why as
though living in the World are ye subject to ordinances? But it is manifest from
what goes before, and follows after that Text in this very same Chapter, the
Apostle Paul there means only Jewish Ordinances, and such Ordinances as Perish
in the using after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, But have no Ground or
Warrant from the Gospel of Christ. But the being buried with him in Baptism, or
the keeping the Feast in Remembrance of him till he comes, do not Perish in the
using; for they have a Relation to some what further, neither are they after
the Commandments and Doctrines of Men, but after the Commandments and Doctrines
of Jesus Christ our Lord.

Thus ye have been taught, and ye have heard the Truth as it is in Jesus.
Remember this Rule and Direction which I Richard Stafford, whilst a Preacher
among ye, did make known and press and inculcate unto ye over and over, That ye
may observe it continually when I am gone, Viz. For Gods sake, and for your own
Souls sake, If ye would make a continuing and persevering work of it, keep
still and constantly unto the ordinances of Religion. I say and testify again,
keep still and constantly unto the Ordinances of Religion.

By the way, Do not think this reciting my Name to you to be odd and
unbecoming; for as the Apostle does several times mention himself by Name in
his Epistles, I Paul do testify, I Paul the Aged. In like manner I do imitate
the same Example, I such an one, a Lame Person (which will be a further sign
and token) do so express it on purpose to make a greater and more lasting
Impression in your Memories. Remember and obey this saying, keep still unto the
Ordinances of Religion.

But as it is written, We will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to
the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6. 4. So here take this further advice and
direction, be sure especially to keep still and constantly unto these two
ordinances of Religion, Give your selves continually unto Prayer. And because
all are not Apostles, and all are not Ministers, do ye also continually attend
upon the hearing of the Ministry of the Word. Whatever ye neglect, do not
neglect these two; for these are confessed, acknowledged and agreed unto by all
that Name the Name of Jesus Christ in every place, both theirs and ours. Even
they who pretend to be above ordinances, and to cast off ordinances (that they
do err and are deceived herein, has been made known from the Scriptures of
Truth; as God himself will yet more clearly Judge and Decermine at the last
day) do still keep amongst them in their Congregations, the Ministry of the
Word and Prayer. It is possible to Pray without ceasing, and to continue in
Prayer, and to give your selves continually unto Prayer (Good God! How much
do thou delight that thy Servants should continue, see James 1. 25. As
appears from mentioning it so very often in thy Word) by secret and mental
Prayer, by having your Souls always in a frame and disposition to Pray, by
praying in the Assembly of the upright, where only Christians are gathered
together, and by Praying in the Congregation. Where though there may be a mixed
Multitude of Saints and Sinners, yet thy Prayers of Faith, and thy lifting up
holy hands, will find acceptance with God for all that. Give your selves
continually to attend upon the hearing of the Ministry of the Word. Go unto,
and frequent constantly the place when and where it is Preached.

Lose no opportunity. Ye can hardly conceive how much I have been vexed and
troubled in mind at my doing things by halves, or by my losing opportunities in
Temporal and Wordly concerns. For these opportunities slip by, and often cannot
be retrieved. But where they may be retrieved, it is always with expense of
more time and labor; all which had been saved, if the thing had been thoroughly
done the first time. And I somewhat knowing the worth of time, the gliding away
of time, and the Irrecoverableness of time, there is nothing which I so much
grudge at, as the loss of time. It is a Maxim and Rule of Prudence and Wisdom
in things pertaining to this present Life, To lose no opportunities. But be
sure to lay hold on, and make the most of every opportunity. Much more it is
Godly discretion and soul saving wisdom to lose no opportunity, but to lay hold
of, and make the most of every opportunity in Spiritual and Eternal concerns.
As we have opportunity, let us do Good unto all Men.

People should not grudge and think much when they see a Poor Man, or as Jobs
Phrase is, Not turn away their Eyes from a Poor Man. But rather be glad and
give God thanks for putting an opportunity into their hands, that they may do
good unto him, and lay in more Foundation for their own future reward. For as
the Lord Jesus said, It is more Blessed to give then to receive. So it is a
certain Truth, they that give Alms, have more reason to give God thanks then
they that receive Alms, for a twofold Reason, because God has placed them in
such a condition, whereby they are enabled to give Alms; and also because he
has promised a future Recompense for the same and he will repay it. In which
last respect they are more beholden to the Poor Man, or Beggar in receiving it
from them, then he is beholden unto them for giving to him; which should teach
thee to prevent him in thy Almsgiving, even before he asks for it, for this is
the best sort, as also to lose no opportunity for the same according to thine
ability.

Lose no opportunity in any Godly or Christian Duty I charge thee before God
and before the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of
season, 2 Timothy 4. 1. Under this is included a charge to the People, to hear the
word also in season and out of season. It is altogether as proper to hear or
Preach the Word upon a Week Day, as well as on a Sabbath Day. It is equally
your Duty to redeem two or three hours, from the work of your calling for to
attend on the same. Country People will rise at one or two a Clock in a
Morning to go to Markets, to remote and distant places, to get a Shilling or
Eighteen Pence more then Ordinary. This same is a Lesson and Instruction, and
God does expect a like of his Creatures, that ye should rise up a little
Earlier in the Morning, and sit down later at Night, and only be a little more
Temperate in your Eating and Drinking, for too much Eating makes People
sluggish and sleepy. Thus People might redeem time for hearing his word on a
Week Day; and yet they would not diminish ought from their accustomed Work, and
Labor in their wordly calling.

Sirs, ye know not what it is to lose opportunities in Spiritual and Eternal
concerns. For these opportunities can never be retrieved again. As
Nebuchadnezzar said concerning his Dream, The thing is gone from me, Dan. 2. 5.
So these opportunities of hearing his word are gone from them for all Eternity.
There is no recalling of it back again. I have Preached Ten Sermons to the
Inhabitants of a certain Town and Neighborhood; But if those People, who
refused or neglected to hear the same, would now give Ten Thousand Pounds (and
if there were Ten Divine Truths in them, they would not be thus overrated, for
each Divine Truth is of more worth then a World) for to have heard them on
those Ten past Lords Days, this can no more be, then any of them can make the
Sun stand still, or go back ten degrees in the Dial of Ahaz. It passes over
into a thing to be Judged off, at the Judgment of the Great Day. As God
commanded Moses to make a return, how he had discharged his message, and Moses
did accordingly return back the Word of the People unto the Lord. So when his
Ministers come to give in an Account of their Ministry, it will be a sad
reckoning to the People, They are turned back to the iniquity of their
Forefathers, which refused to hear my Words, Jer. 11. 11. Lo, these ten
opportunities together, such and such People hereabouts have refused to hear
thy Words, O God; and if I should live or stay among them so long, I do really
believe that some of my Countrymen and Neighbors will, for seventy times seven
opportunities more refuse to hear thy Words O Lord, according as I have
received the same from the lively Oracles, the Book of the Lord, and what he
makes known to my heart by his Spirit.

As Herod made a sudden Oath for the sake of which, he cut off John Baprists
Head. And as the Jews bound themselves with a Curse, not to Eat or Drink until
they had killed Paul: So I believe that some have made such an hasty Vow and
Resolution (which is the usual forerunner of foolish and sinful doings) that
they will never go to hear such an one. In speaking after that manner they take
the wrong end of the Staff by the hand (which kind of speaking, is one method
or devise whereby Satan upholds his Kingdom, by fixing on Persons and not on
things) for it is not so much the Person of this or that Man, we being Creatures
of alike Flesh and Blood and of the same Passions. For they should speak more
properly and understandingly, they vow and resolve never to hear the Word of
the Lord which comes out of such an ones Mouth (for by the way, if a Great
Truth of God could and did come out of Caiaphas his Mouth, (as it did in John
11. 51, 52.) Who had given wicked Counsel, so may some Truths of God proceed
through him, who is harmless and inoffensive in his Conversation, and whom
neither his adversaries can charge with, nor yet himself is conscious of any
known and allowed sin. But here the children of God should separate the
Precious from the Vile. I would ask such who think that they must keep to their
Vows. Suppose that a man should Vow, that he would never worship God, such an
Unlawful Vow or Promise, is better broken than kept; and so it is near the
same, not to go to hear the Word; for thou should here Repent of making such
a Vow or Resolution, the Observance whereof being unlawful serves only a design
of the Devil, to keep thee in the breach and neglect of a Commandment of God,
to hear his Word; as also it hinders thy Soul from good things. If any should
stay at home to Read the Sctiptures, or for Family Prayer, or to catechize and
instruct their Children, this they might do at other times, and they might
bring their Children here to sit down and hear Words Preached according to
their Capacities; which perhaps by Reason of their fresh Memories, and tender
Years, they would retain longer than their Parents. It may be asked them
another day, Why abodest thou among thy Family, or in thy house, when thou
might have gone out to Hear the word of the Lord? Hearken unto me ye that
know Righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law; fear ye not the
Reproach of Men, neither be ye afraid of their Revilings, Isa. 51. 7.

Ye may all know and be assured, that the works of God are never in vain. I
have several times thought as to my outward Lameness, tho I do halt like unto
the Patriarch Jacob, nevertheless this hinders not from my running the way of
Gods Commandments. And so where God has furnished any man with Knowledge,
Ability, Inward Indowments, and Qualifications, and has put good words and
true words into his heart, all this, and such like must be for some end; even
for him to speak out and make known the same, and for others to hear and
receive them. The Lord will rehearse all this, and much more in the day when he
writes up his people, How every least and most contemptible Creature, did
serve the Great Ends of his Glory. But much more the Ministers of the Word do
so in their several Generations, Countries and Places. It is indeed matter of
Anguish and Vexation to us, because we see the Devils working and Delusion
herein, and we can not help it so thoroughly and universally as we would. It is
a day of trouble, the Children are come to the birth, and there is not strength
to bring forth. Although there are too many Loyterers in the Ministry, yet there
are not Laborers enough in the Harvest; and they also are not knowing, or not
laborious enough. But yet, however people carry it toward us, yet that place
of Ezck. 2. 5, 7. will take hold of them; And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear (for they are a rebellious House), yet shall know
that there has been a Prophet among them. And thou shall speak my words unto
them, whether they will hear or whether they will forbear, for they are most
Rebellious. And so accordingly, as long as I have health and opportunity, I
will speak the word of God unto the people of my Generation and Nation, whether
they will hear, or whether they will forbear, if no more than two or three only
did come to this particular place where it is declared. But to Israel he says,
All the day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and
gainsaying people, Romans 10. 21. Now Israel were the outward worshippers; but
the same holds true also as to the sinners and ungodly.

But Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things which accompany
Salvation, tho we thus speak. For some of ye will hear, and will not be
disobedient, nor yet gain saying. And we desire that every one of you do show
the same diligence, to the full assurance of Hope unto the end; Seeing that our
selves are determined by his Grace, the longest day we have to live here on the
Earth, to give our selves continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the
Word. See ye to it also, that ye give your selves continually to Prayer
likewise, and to attend upon this Ministry of the Word.

As Agrippa and Bernice did come with great Pomp to the place of hearing, so do
ye lose no opportunity to come with great Reverence, Attention, and a Spirit of
Discerning, unto the place of hearing, wherever it is faithfully and skiilfully
Preached forth and handled. They came with great Pomp. But do not Refuse to
come to any place for the seeming outward meanness and contemptibleness
thereof; for as it is the same Sun which shines upon a Dunghill as upon a
Beautiful Palace; as Christ, according to the flesh, was laid in the Manger of
a Stable, so the word of God, and the words of Eternal Life may be, and are
often more purely and simply declared in ordinary Rooms, than in finer
Buildings. Let it meet with Reception in your hearts. Remember the word which I
have inculcated over and over unto ye, which doing, although some may think
superfluous, yet to ye it is safe. For the Lords sake, and for your own Souls
sake, if ye would indeed make a continuing and persevering work of it, keep
still and constantly unto the Ordinances of Religion. But above all, and
especially, give your selves continually unto Prayer, and to attend upon the
Ministry of the word, that ye lose no opportunity for hearing the same. He that
has my word, let him speak my word faithfully, Jer. 23. 28. And in whatever
place it is faithfully spoken, and faithfully preached, even unto his
Habitation shall thou seek, and thither shall thou come, Deuteronomy. 12. 5.

FINIS.
Another Admonition to the People commonly called QUAKERS.
THere are some in these days, who think and say, that all Sermons and
Exhortations to abstain from sin, whither secret or open, is but a low degree
of the Ministration of the Gospel; and they are apt to Boast that they do Press
further and arrive at higher seize. I wish they did all speak Truth
herein, for there are sundry other sins besides Drunkenness, Adultery, and the
Manifest Works of the Flesh; and it were well if themselves were purified from
all them also, especially from hatred, variance, emulations, strife, heresies,
envyings; and also from all the Perversities and Evils of the Spirit. This I
confess as well as they, that to go on to sin and to confess, confess and sin,
and so to return again to Folly, (I will hear what God the Lord will say, for
he will speak Peace unto his People and to his Saints, but let them not turn
again to Folly, Psalm. 85. 8.) This will never do as to the saving of the Soul,
and that it may be received up into Glory. But this is the manner of such
Wordly outward Worshippers, who are Foolish, Disobedient and Deceived, serving
Diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Titus 3. 3. And so where any Preachers or Ministers
do lead, or allow People in sin, but they do not show the way how they may be
led out of sin, there they do not profit the People at all. For that is the
saving and effectual Ministry, which actually turns People from Darkness unto
Light, from the Power of Satan unto God. Nevertheless where this is done, it is
necessary to make mention of Sin, Evil, Iniquity and Transgression, to warn and
arm the Minds of People against the same also. Accordingly Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and all the Holy Men of God who were moved
by the Holy Ghost, whose Words and Writings are upon record in the Book of the
Lord, did speak of and testify against sin. But some in these days who think of
themselves more highly then they ought to think, Romans 12. 3. Be not wise in
your own Conceits, ver. 16. Do imagine that themselves are more Pure and
Spiritual minded, and have attained further then to make mention of Sin and
Transgression within their Lips. And though David, Ezra, Nehemiah, Job, Daniel,
and Isaiah, in those Prayers of their own, which are left upon record in the
lively Oracles, and had as much, yea, more of the Spirit of the Lord then any
in these days, do all make Confession of, and ask Pardon for their Sin and of
the other Servants of God. It is both a Pattern, and also a standing positive
and express Commandment, which our Lord Jesus Christ, even under the Gospel
dispensation has given unto all his Disciples and Followers; When ye pray,
say, and forgive us our sins, Luke 11. 2, 4. And it is again affirmed in the
same Gospel, If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
Truth is not in us. But if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all umighteousness, 1 John 1. 8, 9.
But I have went several times to the Congregations of those aforenamed, and
beheld their Devotions, Acts 17. 23. And observed them, and I never therein
heard the least Confession of sin to Almighty God, nor yet asking any
forgiveness of him for the same. Whereupon, I can assuredly gather and
conclude, That they do deceive themselves and the Truth is not in them, as to
that matter. And by my Publishing these things to the People of this my
Generation and Country, I would hereby warn and desire them to take heed,
least what God said to the two Friends of Job come upon them also, Viz. Least
he deal with them after their Folly, Job 42. 8. In that whereas he had
commanded and directed all that worship him, to confess and be sorry for, and
forsake their sin (He that confesses and forsakes shall find mercy) and also
to offer up for themselves a Prayer unto God for forgiveness of the same. But
they did not, nor would not (whither it was out of Spiritual Pride or the
Error of their own heart, God knows) and so their sin is not forgiven, nor
blotted out, and then the Lord does not accept them. And if so, then the
Religion of that People is vain, and it signifies and avails not to find
acceptance, or receive any thing from the Lord.

Indeed, herein they have spoken the thing that is right; It avails not to
Worship God, and at the same time to continue in Sin and Transgression; or to
confess Sin, and not forsake it. For this will no more bring to Heaven, than
only to set ones Foot only on the Threshold, and no further, is Actual Entering
into the House. In no wise. But they, and they only are Blesled that do his
Commandments, that they may have Right unto the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates, into the City, Rev. 22. 14. Such do not always stand at, or
in the Gates. Which Doing of his Commandments, speaks and requires on this
wise, Put away the Evil of your Doings from before mine Eyes; Cease to do evil,
learn to do well, Isaiah 1. 16, 17.

FINIS.

