THE TWO LAST PRAYERS OF WILLIAM LATE VISCOUNT STAFFORD, At his Execution on
Tower Hill, Wednesday the 29 th. of Dec. 1680

The one in Latin, the other in English.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1681.

THe last Speech of the late Viscount Stafford having been already made
Public, the true Copy of these last Prayers; The One in Latin, the other in
English, falling into my Hands, I thought the Publication of them would not be
unacceptable to the Curious. I have therefore for their sakes Published them
without any Descant of mine own; having only added the Translation of the Latin
Prayer, for the Satisfaction of those, that understand not that Language.

The Two Last Prayers of William late Viscount STAFFORD, at his Execution on
Tower Hill; Wednesday the 29th. Day of December 1680.

AGnosco (Domine JESU) peccata mea, multa and magna, pro quibus timeo; sed
spero in misericordia and miserationibus tuis, quarum non est numerus: Secundum
igitur magnam misericordiam tuam miserere mei, and secundum multitudinem
miserationum tuarum dele iniquitatem meam. Si Peccata mea magna sunt, major est
misericordia tua: Si multa, infinitae sunt miserationes tuae. Si ego commisi,
unde me possis condemnare, tu non amisisti, unde potes, and soles salvare.
Credenti in potentia tua, and dicenti, Domine, si vis, potes me mundare, tu
statim respondisti, Volo, mundare: Credo, quod ipse speravit, imploro, quod
ipse imploravit. Dic. igitur animae meae, Salus tua ego sum: Sana me, Domine
JESU, and sanabor: Salvum me fac, and salvus ero, and misericordias tuas in
aeternum cantabo. Ne projicias me igitur a facie tua, and Spiritum sanctum tuum
ne auferas a me; Sed read mihi laetitiam falutaris tui, and Spiritu principali
confirma me. Tu dixifti, dulcissime JESU, Convertimini ad me, and ego convertar
ad vos: Ego me ex toto cord meo, ex tota anima mea, ex tota mente mea,
converto ad te; converte te igitur, misericordissime, ad me indignum famulum
tuum, quem pretioso sanguine redemisti. Tu dixisti, Qui me confessus fuerit
coram hominibus, confitebor and ego eum coram patre meo, qui in caelis est. Ego
te and Sanctam tuam Religionem Catholicam vivens confiteor, and moriens,
adjuvante gratia tua, confitebor: dignare me igitur suscipere, and confiteri
coram patre tuo, qui in Coelis est. In tua promissione, non in mea justitia
confido. Vitam, quam dedisti mihi, libenter tibi reddo secundum beneplacitum
tuum: in manus tuas commendo Spiritum meum, qui moriens Spiritum tuum in manus
aeterni Patris commendasti. In pace igitur in id ipsum dormiam and requiescam:
quoniam to, Domine, singulariter in spe constituisti me.

Amen, JESU, Amen.

I Acknowledge (O Lord JESUS) my Sins, Many and Great, for which I fear; But I
hope in thy Mercy and Commiserations, whereof there is no number: Have Mercy
therefore upon Me according to thy Great Mercy, and according to the Multitude
of thy Commiserations, blot out mine Iniquity. If my Sins are great, thy Mercy
is greater; If they are many, thy Commiserations are Infinite: If I have
Committed That, for which thou may Condemn me, thou have not lost that, by
which thou can, and usest to Save. To him, that believing in thy Power said,
Lord, If Thou will, Thou can make me clean; Thou presently answeredst, I
will, be clean: I believe, what he hoped for, I Implore, what He Implored. Say
therefore to my Soul, I am thy Salvation: Heal Me, O Lord JESUS, and I shall be
healed: Save Me, and I shall be saved, and will sing forth thy Mercies for
ever. Cast me not therefore away from thy Face, and take not thy Holy Spirit
from Me; But render me the joy of thy Salvation, and Confirm me with thy
Principal Spirit. Thou, most Sweet JESUS, have said, Turn to Me, and I will
turn to You: I turn to Thee with all my Heart, with all my Soul, with all my
Mind; Turn thou therefore, O most Merciful, unto Me thine unworthy Servant,
whom thou have redeemed with thy most Precious Blood Thou have said, He that
shall confess me before Men, I also will Confess him before my Father which is
in Heaven. I, Living Confess; and Dying, by the help of thy Grace, will Confess
Thee, and thy Holy Catholic Religion: Vouchsafe Therefore to Receive Me, and
Confess Me before thy Father which is in Heaven. I confide in thy Promise, not
in mine own Justice. The Life which Thou have given Me, I willingly render unto
Thee according to thy good Pleasure. Into Thy Hands do I commend m^ Spirit, who
Dying commended thy Spirit into the Hands of thy Eternal Father. In Peace
therefore upon the same will I sleep and take my rest; because thou, O Lord,
have singularly constituted me in hope.

Amen, JESUS, Amen.

THou have said, O Lord, He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me. I acknowledge, most dear Lord, that I love my Wife and Children
as much, as a loving Husband and tender Father can love a most deserving Wife
and most dutiful Children; But to show, that I love thy Divine Majesty more
than them, and mine own Life to boot, I willingly render and forsake both for
the love of thee, and rather than to offend thee, though by the contrary I may
have Life and all Worldly advantages, both for my self and them. Receive
therefore, dear JESUS, this voluntary Oblation of both, take us into thy
Protection, O Helper in Tribulations, in Opportunities. Be thou a Judge and a
Spouse to the Widow, a Father to the Orphans, and Salvation to all our Souls. I
rejoice to have so dear a Pledge, to offer and present thee for all thy
Blessings and Benefits bestowed upon us, and for thy sake, who offeredst thy
self to Death for us, even the most Ignominious Death upon the Cross. Receive
therefore, sweet JESUS, this poor Oblation of mine, though all I am able to
offer thee, in union of all thy Oblations of thy most sacred Life, Death, and
Passion; and of all those divine Oblations, which have been, are, and ever
shall be offered upon thy holy Altar: All which I offer thee, and by thy hands
to thy eternal Father. O Father, look upon the Face of thy CHRIST, and turn
away thy Face from my Sins. O holy MARY, Mother of GOD, all the holy Angels and
Saints of Heaven, vouchsafe to make Intercession for me, that what I deserve
not for my self, may by your Merits and Intercession be bestowed upon me. Amen,
JESU, Amen. Grant and ratify, what I ask, for thy Names sake. Amen.

FINIS.

