A Word to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THERE is a very great Malignity (considering which, see Romans 1.29. for it
arises from all Unrighteousness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, Envy, Murder,
Debate, Deceit, there mentioned) when people will not Obey God, and they refuse
to come into the way of his Commandments. And this is so much the more
provoking, and worthy of sorer Punishment, by much the longer and more
continued it is. So that, Let none hence think that we recede or go aside from
what we have received of God, nor do we hereby make that part of his Word
(which is committed to our Ministration) low and precarious, Nor yet do We use
it as an artifice or trick to get them off sooner from their Rebellion, when we
make that Proposal and Overture of a General Act of Oblivion and Indemnity to
all the Workers of Iniquity (See my Books Entitled, Things Plain and Weighty,
etc. The Mystery of Iniquity somewhat laid open, etc.) That they shall be every
one forgiven for whatever They have done as to Man's Punishment. Which offer
they think that we therefore make, because we have not Power or Numbers to
subdue them. But this is to suppose and talk after the manner of Men; for
strong is the Lord God Almighty who will Judge them. Nevertheless because
Sentence against an evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the Hearts of
the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do evil, and they do in the mean while
take up Proud Pharaohs Method and Resolution, as to lay more Burden and
Oppression on the true Israelites (that they may Suffer if they will not sin,
and cast in their Lot among us) and they think or say, Let us not regard vain
words, Exodus 5.9. But they are not vain Words; for though the Kingdom of God is
in Word, and is called the Weakness of God, 1 Cor. 1.25. It is also in Power
and in the Holy Ghost and in much Assurance that it shall be all found me. For
whatever some would imagine or desire, not one tittle thereof shall fail until
all be fulfilled. Hereby is evident and also seen that God is stronger; for He
does continually send forth his Messenger upon the Pale Horse whose name is
Death; which notwithstanding all their Multitude and Power doth^ ^est them
severally to bring them before his Judgment Seat. Is not this laid up in store
with me (...) sealed up among my treasures? To me belongs Vengeance and
Recompense: their foot shall slide in du^ time (observe that) for the day of
their Calamity is at hand, and the Things that shall come upon them, make
haste, Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35. Dearly beloved, Avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto Wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord, Romans 12.19. In these things Man has nothing to do to take Vengeance or
proceed to Punishment, and yet if any should be so Presumptuous as to
intermeddle with this sealed Treasure and Prerogative of Almighty God, He will
again recompense to such Person or Persons accordingly.

So that whereas the People of this Nation did call their King to Account, and
punish him with Depri^tion for those unlawful things, He is supposed and
charged to have committed (which yet by the La^ God and of this Realm they
ought not to have done) I thought at that very time He was driven a^ from his
Kingdom; That this Act of theirs would somewhat take off and lessen from what
He (...) unto in the Future Account, in that God would so overruled this Malice
and Rebellion of M^ to change it into a Temporal Chastisement and Punishment of
his Iniquity if He has accepted it as such Levit. 26.41. As indeed to live in
outward Mirth and Recreations, or to seek to recover his Kingdom again by
Blood, is not consistent with that state of Humiliation and Waiting on the
Lord, He should have been in all along and He should be in yet. Our God does
once more seem to show forth the shedding of Blood is not his Way and Method of
bringing back his Anointed, as appears somewhat b^ the late Victory had over
the French Fleet. But if still God is pleased to devise other means that h^
banished be not expelled from him, 2 Samuel 14.14. and He cause Judgment to
return to Righteousness And this be done not by Power, nor by Might, but by his
Spirit and the Manifestation of his Truth (which every Son and Daughter of God
ought to strive to the utmost that it go forth continually; and every Soul that
will not yield Obedience unto it, shall be Miserable for ever) Here again great
heed is to be taken that the last Error be not like unto the first, for the
Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, and therefore this has
nothing to do or inflict. And though our Nature, as it is Corrupt, may meditate
of Vengeance, and as it is wise according to the Flesh. It may think some
Punishment necessary as to Future Security and Prevention of the like Things;
yet the Language of Faith and the Spirit of the knowledge and fear of the Lord
says on this wise, that the more We let alone and refrain from these Men, they
will meet a more severe Judgment from the Lord, and there can be no such sure
Establishment for the time to come as by Righteousness, and to Order it with
Judgment and with Justice, according to the Rules and Directions of God's Word.

If any part hereof does seem somewhat strange or unintelligible, so may any
any Truth when it is first brought to our sight and apprehension; or when that
is thoroughly and clearly manifested, which was but imperfectly and confusedly
Thought of before.

A Word to the Members of the Privy Council, as they do Sit to Advise and give
Orders in Matters of War.
It is written, that after Herod killed James, He proceeded further to take
Peter also, Acts 12.2, 3. and of one who strengthened himself in his
Wickedness, Psalm. 52.7. Which is done only by committing the several successive
and repeated Acts thereof, for thus they are the more confirmed and hardened,
yet and encouraged in an evil Matter. There is in Men by Nature an awful
Apprehension of God; and they are at first fearful to offend againg him; But
when they see others provoke him and no harm happen unto them; Yea commonly
These Ungodly do prosper in the World, They increase in Riches, then they take
heart by little and little to Sin against him; especially if they find no hurt
upon themselves, as presently they do not, and when they are some what
habituated and accustomed to it, They go on to Transgress more and more. As it
is said in the Proverb, Over Shoes, over Boots, when once they are thoroughly
in, they think that must and they do go on in the same. When an Army is once
blooded (as we say) then they are more desperate and cruel, and they having
been used to so much Murder already, they do not refrain from any kind of
Slaughter. This seems to be the very Reason why at this day they do not cease
from, but they go on still in the Prosecution of the War, notwithstanding it
has been declared unto them that the Lord will make Inquisition for Blood,
Psalm. 9.12. And He will require at the hands of such (who have the outward
Power to proclaim War or treat of Peace) the life of every man Genesis 9.5. which
has been already, or shall yet be lost in these unnecessary Wars. For so they
are in as much as they might have been avoided at first, and even now, or at
any time an End may be put unto them. Nevertheless Our chief Men and Rulers do
not regard the Word of God, nor what is here truly alleged from thence
concerning the Future Account themselves must give for the same, but they go on
still in their own ways after their own Wisdom and Will, and they think or say,
We will venture the Consequent thereof. Some of them know that their own heart
is disobedient to the Law of God in other things, and so they are as it were
blinded and do not thoroughly understand what this means; Others brave it off
with a high hand of Presumption, Contempt and Disobedience.

It is a sad and mavelous thing to consider, that now The Sword, the Sword is
drawn (the Holy Ghost ^th twice Repeat it, because of the continuance and
succession thereof) for Slaughter it is fourbished, to ^sume because of the
glittering: Whiles they see Vanity unto thee, whiles they Divine a Lie unto
thee, to ^ing thee upon the Necks of them that are slain of the Wicked, whose
day is come, when their Iniquity ^ll have an End, Ezekiel. 21.29. This again is to
be applied to our Bishops, Priests and Deacons, and to the other Writers and
Teachers; for (these exactly like the false Prophets there intended) do suit
and model their Doctrine and Discourse (which they deliver in their Pamphlets,
Sermons and Personal Conversation) according to the Corrupt Will and Doings of
the Rich and Mighty People.

But now be it known unto you all (which yet ye will not believe, though a Man
declare it unto ye) That God has sent forth a Word and published a Truth by
his Servant, Richard Stafford, which if thoroughly understood and universally
received: It would cause the Sword to return into his Sheath, Ezekiel. 21.30. and
preserve Life, Genesis 45.5. according to that Expression of the Patriarch. God
does send out his Truth by some Instrument or other to save the lives, verse. 7.
of those who are not yet killed. Now in that Case if they had Imprisoned Joseph
a second time for Prognosticating evil Things to their Country, and if they had
given no heed to his Words, then all, or most of the Egyptians had perished in
the seven Years of Famine. Mark this well.
But this the Heathen did not do, whereas contrariwise the People of this
Generation and Nation have done both with Me, for when they ought to have
obeyed the Truth of God, which I wrote down and published, They did by the
Instigation of the Dev^ cast me into Prison for the same. And thus, They are of
their Father the Devil, and the Lusts of their Father they will do (Observe
that) He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
because their is no Truth in him: When He speaks a Lie, He speaks of his
own, for He is a Liar, and the Father of it, John 8.44. For the making and
averring of a down right Lie, was the Pretense whereby they held Me almost
Eight Months in Bethlehem-Hospital. During all which time I was for a Stone of
Stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense to both the Houses of England; for a Gin
and a Snare to the Inhabitants of London; God permitting it so to be for a
Proof and Trial, whether They could know and put a difference between the
certainty of the Words of Truth, and the Imaginations of a disordered
Understanding. But it was therefore thus pervertly done with Me of set purpose,
That the Residue of the People who are Men of War might be consumed, because
they Obeyed not the Voice of the Word of the Lord. And then by putting Me down
into a dark lowermost Room, That the Sound and Voice of my Words should not be
heard distinctly and clearly, was that Scripture fulfilled? It cast down the
Truth to the Ground, and it Practiced and Prospered, Dan. 8.12. Which word
Prosper (though it is harped upon so mightily, and in their way of Blasphemy
and evil Speaking ascribed to God's Blessing, wherein they think him to be
altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21.) imports to be further
enabled to shed more Blood. For who gets the Victory, but he that kills most?
and then by committing further Sin and Transgression, They do only heap upon
themselves more Guilt, sad Account and Misery for the last days. Shall the
Sword devour for ever? know We not it will be bitterness in the End?

Now the Sword is as certainly a Judgment of God as the Fire, Plague or Famine.
When a Fire is broken out, People do whatever lies in their power to extinguish
it again as soon as they can. They provide against a Famine, and seek Remedies
for Prevention or Cure of the Plague. But wherefore do they not in like manner
endeavor to stop the People from pursuing to follow their Brethren and
Fellow Creatures, and to cause the drawn Sword to be put up, and that the
Grievousness of War might cease. The Reason of this great Diversity may be
hence conceived and understood, because Satan (the Executioner of God's Wrath
and Judgments) does here make Men themselves the Instruments for carrying on
the Destruction of one another; and in order to that he does instill such and
such things into the Minds of Men to the contrary.

And whereas some say, Let it alone till that day comes, or we will venture the
Consequent thereof; Would ye know ye vain deceivers of your own selves! That
day will as certainly come, as it is certain that ye now live or shall one day
die. There is no great daring in all this; for through their Ignorance and
Unbelief every Persecutor, Oppressor, Murderer, Robber; Yea all the Sinners
and Transgressors thoughout the Earth, do run the venture of their own
Damnation. But I must tell ye all in sober truth and sadness, That this is the
most dreadful Adventure in the World for any one to run, either God must love a
Lier, or those that do such and such things shall go into Hell. They might as
safely throw themselves into the Fire to try if it will not burn; for our God
is a consuming Fire, and so He will at length appear to devour his Adversaries.

A Word to all Soldiers.
There are many People who fulfill the Scriptures when they know not that they
do so; and even whilst they Act perversely against God and disobedient to his
Law; It comes so upon them according as He has ^re spoken of in his Word. As
by those at this day who are employed in carrying on the War, It is found (...)
what is written, And thou Son of Man, thus says the Lord God, speak to every
feathered Fowl and to every Beast of the Field, Assemble your selves and come,
gather your selves on every side to my Sacrifice that I do Sacrifice for you,
even a great Sacrifice upon the Mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and
drink blood: Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the the Blood of
the Princes of the Earth, Ezekiel. 39.17, 18. For thus says the Lord God of
Israel unto me, Take the Wine cup of this fury at my and, and cause all
Nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it. And they shall drink, and be moved,
and be MAD, because of the Sword that I will send among them, 25.15, 16. For
the Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his Fury upon all their
Armies: He has utterly destroyed them, he has delivered them to the
slaughter. Their slain shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up out of
their Carcases, and the Mountains shall be melted with their Blood, Isa. 34. 2,
3. The Kings, Princes, and Rulers of the Earth do not Read and Consider
thoroughly of all this, as they are raising Men, making Pre^tions for War, and
forming out their Camps. Therefore I will number you to the Sword, and ye shall
^w down to the slaughter, Isa. 65.12. For so is the Eternity, Prescience and
Omniscience of Almighty God, that He speaks of as already past what is yet to
come; And He knows before hand those Persons by their Names, with the other
Circumstances of Time, Place and Manner who have been already, and shall yet be
killed in War. And they shall go forth, and look upon the Carcases of the Men
that have transgressed against me: and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh,
Isa. 66.24. The Prophet here seem to allude unto a Field after a pitched Battle
has been Fought therein; where is to be seen a great number of Corpses every
way mangled and defiled with Blood and Excrements, which cause a stink and
noysomeness and then they are but little weak vile Bodies made of dirt and clay
and covered over with that ghastly look Death has cast upon them; All this put
together raises an Abhorring. And this happens unto them of both sides, as to
the Cause and Occasion of their Fighting and Murdering one another, because
they have transgressed against the Lord.

As commonly the Actors herein are trained on, disciplined and led blindly to
this kind of End by gross Ignorance of the Things of God, Vain Swearing,
Whoredom, Drunkenness, Pride, Revenge and Quarrelling: Which do more chiefly
abound in them than in other People. For as throughout the whole Book of the
Lord War is let forth by way of his Indignation. Isa. 34.2. upon the
Inhabitants of the Earth; so his reasonable Creatures would not willingly make
choice of this kind of Employment, unless such as are given up to these or the
like Sins and Abominations.

Another short Warning to him hereafter Named.
Whereas it is said in Page 6 of my Printed Book, Entitled, The Mastery of
Iniquity somewhat l^ Open, etc. That though God had rejected Saul from that day
forward (see 1 Samuel 15.26.28.) in which Samuel spoke after this manner; Yet he
continued King over all Israel until the day in which he was s^ in the Battle
against the Philistines. And therefore from what is there further said and
alleged, (...) Lords and Counselors, if they be his real Friends, should even
weeping beseech (whom ye call) K^ William, Yea, Those near about him should
take hold of the Skirt of his Garment, as not to suffer (...) to go out any
more to Battle, nor adventure himself therein by Sea or Land, least it should
be not (...) with the certain hazard, but yet greater danger of his Life. For
it is said in the Proverb, The Pitcher (...) not go so often to the Well but it
is broken at last; and Himself may learn by the Examples of Schom^ Walker, and
several others of his own Knowledge and Experience (who escaped as many near
immi^ Dangers as ever he did, and yet were at last killed in War,) That the
Sword devoureth one as well as other, and the Bullets fly promiscuously amongst
them all: and therefore he only is safe who does meddle with nor come near
them. And here if it should so happen (whereof He is again hereby wa^ As He
has hitherto lived therein, so He would die in his Sin and Iniquity: But
rather let him co^ Repentance, and seek for Peace only by Righteousness, (See
Psalm. 72.3. the Bible Translation, and (...) 7.2.) for there is no other way
under Heaven, whereby we may come to it.

In this Case it is thought that it is vain to give Warning; For say what we
will, The Destiny wh^ they are Worthy will bring them to their End; and as
Josephus the Historian says, Destiny is such a (...) which the Wisest Man
cannot avoid: But certain I am, it is not so much their Destiny, as their and
their Ignorance, and their (...) Folly, which lead them. For the foregoing
Things are manifestly in^ own Power, as in the present Instance, He (of whom we
speak) may go out to War, or He may go out: He may (...) break off his Sins by
Righteousness, and thus lengthen, yea secure his own Tranq^ if He will.

The Wrong getting and Unjust keeping of an Earthly Kingdom, or of the greatest
Worldly Profit few Months or Years longer, cannot be a sufficient Compensation
for the Loss of Heaven, and falling Hell for all Eternity.

Most of this Testimony was finished March 25. 1692. and if it had then been
made known unto and Obeyed by them whom it does more especially Concern, the
Truth contained herein would have saved those Lives which have been lost in War
this Summer, and it would preserve them for the time to come, if they will do
accordingly.

FINIS.

