Spiritual Infatuation, The Principal Cause of our Past and Present Distempers.
Or a serious CAVEATE to the many Seducers and Seduced, who under the specious
pretenses of Reformation and Conscience endeavor the subversion of Church and
State. In several Sermons on Isa. 9, 10, 11, 12.

By W. Stamp D.D. late Minister of the Word at Stepn^y near London.

LONDON, ^rinted for Tho. Johnson at the Golden Key in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1662.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS EARL OF CLEAVLAND, Baron of NETTLESTEAD, Lord
WENTWORTH, My ever Honored Lord and Patron.
My LORD,
THe ample experience I have had of your Favor and Benignity, both at home and
abroad, commands me to put these Pape^ under the shelter of your Lordships
pro^ection: Which I do not so much to let he world see my gratitude, as to
satis^e ^y self in point of judgment and dis^retion. For were I altogether a
stranger t^ your Person, or to that place which wa^ once my Home by your
Lordships goodness; yet the Rarity of your unblemishe^ Honor in this ignoble
age, and the Eminency of your Heroic Spirit, would in^ vite me to cast my
anchor on the firmes^ bottom. The truth is (as these totteri^ times are) there
are few of your Lord ships Quality, that dare be Patrons, an^ there are fewer
then those that can b^ Patrons. Truth never stood in more need^ never met with
less power to protect i^ The wildness and severity of the Time^ enforce those
of our Coat, and perseverance in our duties to God and the King^ to seek for
Patronage, not to the greates^ Book-man, but to the best Sword-man, For Pens,
Presses, and Pulpits, are now awe^ and governed as the Sword shall pease t^
dictate and determine. So that, what wit^ the terrors of an exorbitant Milita^
Power, and what with the attractives Advantages, arising from the prese^
changes: unwary and ungrounded p^sons of all Ranks and Qualities, deserting
themselves and their own Consciences, have followed their pernicious Leader^
such a Wild-goose chase, as will make posterity at once admire, and blush to
derive from such a degenerate and mercenary Generation. In which general
defection, it cannot but very much correct the severity of your low and exiled
condition, that (however it shall please God to dispose of Public Affairs) you
are yet secured in the felicity of your Memory, in that in the worst of Times
you have obtained Mercy to be found faithful and courageous in the defense of
your Sovereign's power; and in that, the Churches, your own, and all honest
men's Interests.

My Lord, You shall meet with nothing in this Treatise that may preserve it
from contempt and scorn, more then the plainness and sincerity of it; which
being directed to your Tenants (in discharge of my faithfulness to them) owes
it self in the first place unto your Lordship, which I shall follow with my
prayers, that God would make it unto them a Glass wherein they may see the
error of their doings in these rebellious times; and that he would preserve
your Lordship to be yet a more glorious Instrument of his justice, upon a
Blood-thirsty and Dec^itful Generation of Hypocrites. This shall be the
constant and sincere Devotion of

Your Lordships Most humble, faithful, and obliged servant, William Stamp.

To the Master, Wardens, Assistants, and Brothers of the Trinity house in
Ratcliff, and to all other Inhabitants with in the Parish of Stepney.
My Dear Friends and Parishioners.
IT is not for any other Satisfaction so important, as the discharge of my
Conscience toward God and your souls, that puts me upon this dangerous
adventure of writing unto you at this time. Wherein I do apparently hazard
more, as to all secular respects and aims, then any biased advantage can
compensate. But as it was S. Paul's pious care to write Epistles unto those
places where he had formerly Preached; so it shall be mine, choosing rather to
speak unto you by my Pen, then not at all.

It is now almost eight years since I had the freedom of speaking unto you as
your Spiritual Ambassador from Christ. The sufferings, hazards, and extremities
I have undergone since that time, for the preservation of my heart from a
deliberate wound (though it be the matter of much Spiritual joy and
thanksgiving, as the highest honor that poor flesh and blood is capable of in
this vale of misery) yet to waste any of this Paper in a particular Narrative
thereof, would savor more of a mendicant design, then of that sincere advice
I intend unto you. It Is enough ye know, that God has hitherto preserved and
supported me by his unspeakable mercy and goodness; and I hope (in his secret
wisdom) has reserved me for his further service, in the place where he once
set me. In the mean time, I hope a well meaning man, who has been peaceable
and faithful in our Israel, 1 Samuel 20. 19. may have leave to publish those
serious Conceptions which are within his heart, like wine that has no vent,
Job 32. 19. and can no longer with duty and Conscience be suppressed.

To pass by the Controversies of these sad times so unsuccessively disputed
both in Ink and Blood; I shall only represent unto you the Map of your Native
Country in its present blindness, iniquity, and confusion; which is (doubtless)
so much the greater, by how much the less we are sensible of the severe hand of
God upon us. For that which makes our wonnds so desperate (if not incurable) is
our averseness to have them searched by a faithful hand. He that shall enter
into the sad contemplation of Englands present estate and condition, and
compare it with what it was of late years, shall discern a very strange and
visible Eclipse of Gods favor toward it, and (notwithstanding all pretenses
of Reformation, or new lights, or glorious days) shall have reason t^ suspect
that the Candle of the Gospel is either in danger to be quite extinguished, or
at least burns very dimnly amongst us, and does apparently dwindle.

For to begin with that which should be most dear unto a Nation (the
establishm^nt of Religion in its Purity and Luster) who is not sensible how far
the Ark of God (namely our Religion, the glory of our Israel, and the Christian
world) has been surprised by profane and sacrilegiou^ hands, whilst the name
of the Gospel an^ Reformation has been used as a stalking horse, to disguise
and palliate the blackest designs the Sun ever looked upon; insomuch that the
Church of England may complain and cry out, as once the Church of Israel did,,
Isa. 24. 16. My leaness, my leaness, woe unto me; the treacherous dealers have
dealt trecherously; yea the treacherous dealers have dealt very trecherously.
Certainly there is no Devil so improved and complete as the white Devil; the
Prince of Darkness is never so perniciously fortunate in his mischief, as when
he transforms himself into an Angel of light; and our Religion could never have
received so deep a wound from any infernal stratagem as from the plausible
pretensions of refining and securing it unto u^. How welt it is refined and
secured, your selves may judge by the present Complexion of our Dear Mother,
stripped and mangled, and wounded to death by the sons of her own bowels. Her
Government dissolved; Her Feasts (the Religious Commemorations of the great
mystery of salvation) abolished; Her sacred Forms of Prayer (the sweet harmony
and agreement of hearts and voices) vilified and scorned; Her Prophets (the
Ambassadors of Christ for Peace and Reconciliation) imprisoned, impoverished,
and reputed as the filth and offscouring of the world. Her Champions (that
should maintain her Doctrine against the frauds and fallacies of her subtle and
malicious Adversaries) expelled and banished the School of the Prophets. Her
Doctrine (extracted purely from the Fountain of living water) invaded, and
trampled into a muddy puddle. Her Discipline discharged and t^reatned, not
daring to appear against avouched, and professed Heresies and Blasphemies. Her
Temples either defaced and demolished, or else locked up by the Military Power;
Insomuch that in one of her Cities (as I have been credibly informed) viz.
Lincoln, the Sacramental Bread and Wine has not been communicated for three
years together. And lastly the True Protestant Religion (which b^ solemn
Protestation we were obliged t^ maintain) is now squeezed into such ^ narrow
room, that few or none dare ow^ the Prof^ssion of it, unless it be upon the
scaffold, where innocence is secured from any future blow of malice.

So that as when a mirror is broken in pieces, it represents the same object
divided and deformed, which before was entir^ and amiable; so the Bond and
Composur^ of Religion, when it is once broken an^ dissolved, is apt to splinter
it self into ^ thousand Heresies and Schisms, which nothing less then a
miracle can piece and redintegrate. Thus (by sad experience) we see our just
and angry God has forsaken his House, deserted his Heritage, given the dearly
beloved of his soul into the hands of her enemies; Jer. 12. 7. And now, how do
our enemies round about us, the Jesuit abroad, and the Schismatic a^ home, I
and the infernal spirits under us^ clap their malicious hands, saying, There,
There, so would we have it! not knowing, that the severest Persecution is not
the weakest Argument of the Gospels Profession, in its greatest candor and
sincerity.

In the second place, if you shall cast your eyes upon the Civil Government,
you cannot but discern the goodliest Fabric of the Christian world demolished,
and dissolved into nothing else but rubbish and confusion. Certainly God was
not well pleased with your disputing the rights of King and Parliament by
Tumults and Arms, and secret fallacies^; who has suffered you to wade into
that difpute so far, and with such ill success, as to have neither King nor
Parliament left you for your shelter and protection, unless it be such a
Parliament as God in his justice has designed to be the general grievance and
disease of the Kingdom.

Not to expatiate far in describing the excellency of the Regal, beyond all
other kinds of Government whatsoever, as having its foundation first in Nature,
and afterward its establishment over that People, where God himself was the
Legislative Power. 'T will be enough to satisfy all dis-interessed Persons to
know, that it was propounded unto the Israelites not only as the best form of
Government, but as a reward of Vprighteousness and Integrity, and a particular
expression of Gods m^rcy and favor toward them, as appears, Jer. 22. 34. Thus
says the Lord, Execute ye Judgment and righteousness, and deliver the spoiled
out of the hand of the Oppressor, and do no wrong no^ violence to the stranger,
fatherless, and widow; and then shall there enter in by the gates of this
House, Kings sitting upon the Throne of David, riding on Chariots, and Horses,
he and his servants, and his people. And when that people should sin themselves
out of that blessing, See how God threatens them with a contrary punishment,
Isa. 3. 5. The people shall be oppressed every one by another, and every one by
his neighbor; the child shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and
the base against the honorable. And for that Text which is so much insisted on
to prove the evil of this Government, be that shall look upon it with a single
eye, as men ought to look upon those sacred Oracles; shall find, that the
people were not reproved for asking a King (for that kind of Government was
determined unto them long before, as appears, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.) but for rejecting
their God; They have not rejected thee, but me they have rejected. 1 Samuel 8. 7.
Sure I am, the Scripture cannot contradict it self, which says; For the
Transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. Prove. 28. 2. And Balaam
being enlightened from God, and prophesying of the future prosperity of Israel,
contracts the character of a peoples felicity into a very few words; saying,
The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them. Numb. 23.
21. And if these Texts be looked upon as Old Testament, and so of Jewish
concernment only* see that was prophesied many hundred years before, upon the
accession of the Gentiles, wherein we ^uo selves are included. Behold, I will
lift up mine hand unto the Gentiles; and set up my standard to the people, and
they shall bring thy sons in their arms, and thy daughters upon their
shoulders, and king^ shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queen^ thy nursing
Mothers. Isa. 49. 22, 23.

If it be yet objected, that the forecited Text speaks only of some favors
which the Church was to receive from the indulgence and benignity of some
Heathen Kings and Emperors; and that Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, and the
subjects there of discharged of their obedience to any Temporal Monarch: Such
may know, that they have borrowed an Argument from the Jesuits, that savours
more of subtility and ends, then any true solidity, and is sufficiently
answered; 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake; whether it be to the King as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him; etc. and if you would know who they are who are thus
commanded to submit they are described v. 9, to be a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People: Terms of as high sanctity and
privilege, as any can pretend to within the Christian Pale. All which I have
mentioned, only to lay before your eyes that ancient and glorious form of
Government which our blessed Reformers (by your concurrence and engagement)
would pluck up by the roots, and ab^ure for ever; as if it were some monstrous
or accursed thing.

To this may be added, the experience we have had of this Government for so
many generations; and the dismal change we have tasted from the want of it, for
these last seven years; enough to write that counfel of Solomon upon our hearts
with a pen of iron: My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change; for their calamity shall rise suddenly^ and
who knows the ruin of them both? Prove. 24 21, 22. That is (as Deodatus on
that place) who can foresee or avoid these two sudden thunders, of divine
vengeance, and a Kings wrath? And sure, if there were neither of these Terrors
to aw us in to our duty, yet the love of that peace an^ prosperity which is
infallibly annexed to the observation of the fifth Commandment; is inducement
enough, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long; or, as it
is in another place, Deuteronomy. 5. 16. that thou may have many, and good days,
etc. where by Father, the Civil Parent is (by all Expositors) as well included
as the Natural. Now if we shall enquire how it comes to pass that our many and
good days (which heretofore w^ enjoyed in peace and plenty) are changed into
few and evil days; the sacred Oracle will resolve us, because we have had very
little or no respect at all to the observation of this Commandment.

Plutarch tells a story of a Serpent, whose tail was discontented that the head
should have the power to govern, and carry it which way so^ or it pleased; and
therefore p^titioned, that the same Power might reside in the tail another
while; Which being unwarily granted, upon great importunity; the tail (a member
very active, but withal blind) carries the head and body through many holes
and crevises, till at last it brought it self into such streights, that it
could not stir, but head, body, tail and all were destroyed. This story (though
but a Fable in it self) has yet a moral truth in it, which we have seen and
felt by direful experience. To these high injuries and affronts done to our
common Mother (the Church) and to our common Parent (the King) I might remember
ye of our Laws, Liberties, Privileges, Properties, Peace, Prosperity; which ly
trampled under foot before your eyes, as so many heaps of rubbish and
confusion; to proclaim to all the world the impudent and ungodly frauds of
those that pretended to be Guardians of these Common Jewels; and the
infatuation of the to^ credulous world, that would believe them all this while.

But if those m^ have thus notoriously betrayed their trust; you will reply
perhaps (with the chief Priests and Elders) Mat. 27. 4. What is that to us? Let
them look to that: ever man is responsible for his own, but not another guilt.
It Is tru^ indeed, these grand Troublers of our Israel shall bear the guilt of
Principals, i^ the great and general day of account, when Inquisition shall be
made for blood; bu^ every inferior wheel by which they have moved shall bear
the guilt of an Accessory. Judas, and Pilate, and Caiphas, had the chief hands
in the Treason and murder of our blessed Savior; and yet the guilt of that
blood extended to the whole Nation of the Jews, and to their posterity after
them In the case of blood, where the murderer was concealed, so that no man
would acknowledge the fact, the Law commanded the Judges of those times, to
measure unto that City which was nearest unto him that was slain; and the
Elders of that City, though they were innocent, and not so much as privy to
the murder, were yet commanded to Sacrifice an Heifer and to pray in this
form: Be merciful O Lord unto thy People Israel, whom thou ha^t redeemed; and
lay not innocent blood unto thy People Isreal's charge. Deuteronomy. 21. 8. So precious
in those days was the blood of any private person. It would be a sad
contemplation, to lay before your eyes that red sea of blood which has been
shed like water on every side of our Jerusalem, by those who dare not so much
as pretend to have (of themselves) a power over the lives of their fellow
Subjects: But, as if all this were not guilt enough to weigh them down to the
bottomless pit, there has been added to that scarlet sin, the blood of one
Sacred Person, of more value then 10000. of the best of his Subjects, by the
Scriptures own computation, 2 Samuel 18. 3. namely, the light of our eyes, and
the breath of our nostrills. Lam. 4. 20. In whose life and government all the
thousands that reside within his three Kingdoms, are really and nearly
concerned, as in the life of their common Parent. An act so horrid and
prodigious, that as no language can express it, so no history can parallel it.
And yet, tho^ the guilt of this blood be as visible to (...) world, as it is
clamorous in the ears of G^ yet so far are men removed out of the (...) of
their repentance, that no man will (...) it; not so much for the guilts sake,
as f^ the ignominy and merit that belong to s^ transcendent Traitors. And if we
(who (...) to deal impartially with all men) charge t^ guilt of this blood,
where by the law of G^ and man we find it lie; the Council ((...) rather the
Conspiracy) is presently as high enraged against us, as was that of the
Ph^rises against S. Peter, and proclaim us m^lignants and delinquents, that our
design (...) to fill Jerusalem with our Doctrine, a^ intend to bring this man's
blood upon the^ Act. 5. 28. Well, what shall we do then, f^ the clearing our
selves? Why, we will m^ sure to the next City; and see if Ezeki^ w^ belongs not
to it. Woe to the blood City, to the pot whose scum is not gone o^ of it, bring
it out piece by piece, let no l^ fall upon it; for her blood is in the mid^ of
her, she set it upon the top of a rock, (...) which is all one, upon the top of
a Scaffold, she poured it not upon the ground to cover it with dust; that it
might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; therefore says the Lord, I also
have set her blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered, Ezekiel.
24. 6, 7, 8. The meaning of the Prophet is very plain; The bloody City is
Jerusalem, arraigned here by the Prophet, for the bold justification of her
murders and oppressions; and therefore her blood (says God) shall be always
in my sight, as a remembrancer of vengeance, which shall be so certain and
general, that ^o let, no casualty or exemption shall prevent the utter ruin
and destruction of that City.

And truly (my beloved friends) when I enter into a serious contemplation of
the guilty condition of our bloody Jerusalem, for her boldness in murder,
sacrilege, and oppression, I am heartily sorry that you (my Parishioners) are
so ne^rly allied unto her in your neighborhood and relations; but f^ more sorry
you are so nearly allied unto her sins, as I fear you are; for if I am not
m^staken in the history of these sad times; (...) is no slight contribution
that you have given to the miseries we complain of, b^ know not how to remedy.
A man may be accessory to the guilt of bloodshedding, more ways then perhaps
you are aware of: T^ only I shall nam^; first, in contributing assistance to
the fact before it is committed 2ly, by approbation and justification of the
fact after it is committed. For (to borrow (...) resemblance from the learned
Salmasius upon another reflection) what think ye? Suppose a Gentleman who is
peaceably p^ssessed of his house and estate, shall be assaulted and surprised
by a combination of thieves* receiving strength and encouragement from the
neighbors, tenants, and servants of that Gentleman: This man, by this
conspiracy, is robbed, stripped, and dispossessed of his estate, bound hand and
foot, and tied unto a tree, and there left, t^ll a wild beast comes and
destroys him: when inquisition shall be made for the blood of this man, it will
be very easy to determ^ne at whose door the guilt will be found (namely) at
the tenants and servants in some degree, as well as at the grand Conspirators.
Or suppose these thieves shall be so impudent and pleasant in their wickedness,
as in a mockery of justice, to erect a Court among themselves; and execute
their own votes and conclusions in a form of Law, upon pretense the Gentleman
was none of the best husbands of his estate: will this extenuate the murder, or
palliate the violence, or clear the adherents? I trow not; but will prove
rather an high aggravation of the wickedness. I shall leave every man to make
his own application, with this assertion only; That he that is not ashamed to
draw up a charge against himself in this particular, is in the hopefullest way
to obtain his pardon.

It was our Saviors change against the Scribes and Pharisees, that his Fathers
house (which was wont to be called the house of prayer) was by them made a den
of thieves Mat. 21. 13. I would to God it were in the power either of my Pen or
Prayers, to clear those that sit at Westminster (once the house of God) of this
deep guilt; or You of your assistance or a^herence to them in contracting it;
for they who at first (with Absalom) stole away the hearts of our Israel, upon
pretense of a zealous care of Religion and Judicature; have since thrived so
well in their d^sign (by the strong contribution of our sins) as has enabled
them to rob God himself of his truth and honor, the King of his revenue and
life, and the Church of its patrimony, the Kingdom of its peace, and all
peaceable and faithful men of their secular i^terests; and while they please
themselves with the sad execution of some petty robbers (who^ their injuries
have driven into extrem^ want) these sit undaunted and uncon^roul'^ upon the
throne of iniquity; like the great whore upon the many headed Beast, carving to
themselves the satisfactions of their own pride, ambition, and covetousness, b^
virtue of their unjust and biased Ordinances, imposed (as so many snares) upon
the tame, infatuated, and abused people.

But you will say, what we have done hi^ thereto in twisting with these men, we
have done either out of ignorance or compulsion, not suspecting their ways
would have been so bloody and abominable, or their ayms so vast and particular
to themselves. Well, if this plea of yours be as sincere as it is plausible;
you have the less to answer for. But yet give me leave (with an Apostle) to
profess the fears and jealousies I have of you, and to tell you, that when you
went to Whitehal in your long boats, with the mouth of your Canon toward your
Sovereign, instructing the whole Kingdom to follow you in that loud clamor, I
am sure you were not pressed into that strange service. Or admit that unhappy
officiousnes of yours wanted eyes to guide it unto its right object and that you
mistook Whitehal for the black house of Commons, by the direction and
persuasion of those Prophets, who put light for darkness, and darkness for
light, Is. 5. 20. Yet it seems very strange to me, that you, whose judgments
are presumed to be above the ordinary pitch of other men's, by the advantage you
have of foreign observation, you, who have found the high reputation you had
formerly with all Nations, where you were employed, changed into contempt and
scorn, for your unnatural an^ barbarous deportment toward your King You, who
were (many of you) obliged by pa^ticular Trusts and endearments. You, w^ have
bin eaten up to bare bone by the caterpillars of the Land; who have felt the
little finger of your severe masters, heavi^ then the loins of your late pious
Soveraig^ (to the honor and approbation of the ship mony-tax by all posterity)
You that have served an apprentiship of more then 7. yee^ to these Egyptian
Taskmasters, seen the^ juggling Arts, found your selves cheated often in your
expectations, that you (wh^ all the world beside, look upon them as the
prodigious monsters of this age) should be far b^witched with their sorceries,
as to b^ still their servants (or slaves) and no Pilat wife among you to
suggest a Christian ca^tion, is a sad and s^ur fate, which I not (...) much
admire as condole, and which indee^ has commanded this plain dealing Tre^tise
into public view.

So that what before (by the eye of God and man) might be looked upon as a sin
of Ignorance (like that of the 200. men, who by smooth persuasions were induced
to follow Absalom in Reb^llion, in simplicity of heart, not knowing whither
they went, 2 Samuel 15, 11. will now be found (if ye persist longer therein) a
sin of choice and deliberate resolution; wherein ye declare to the world
(pretend what you will) that you highly approve of the unparalleld iniquities
of these men; and not only do the same things your selves, but take pleasure in
them that do them, as well as take pay from them, and contract their guilt unto
your own souls in a deeper measure by your Approbation, then you have done by
Acting with them.

For, give me leave to argue and conclude no otherwise then the Scripture does.
Was Saul found guilty of the blood of the Protomartyr Stephen, only for
consenting to his death, and keeping the raiment of them that slew him? Act. 8.
and are not those men guilty of their Sovereigns blood, who by their clamorous
Petitions cried aloud; first, for no Treaty with him, and afterward no mercy on
him? and since have seized, not his raiment only, but also his revenue; and are
resolved to do as much by the heyr (if God preserve him not) that the
inheritance may be settled in themselves? What difference was there (in point of
guilt) between the hands that drove the nails in our Saviors crucifixion, and
the bold Soldiers that stood by to maintain the execution? What difference
between the Soldiers that were upon the scaffold where our Sovereign was
murdered, and those which stood under the scaffold, and drew their swords in
approbation of that fatal stroke, which at once cut off the head of our King,
and dismantled the Peace and felicity of his three Kingdoms? Or what difference
between those that then drew their swords in approbation of that horrid fact;
and those that now draw their swords in defense of those visible betrayers and
murderers? sure if there be any difference, the last are by much the deeper
delinquents; for Non semper corrupta est men's male operantis, at semper
corrupta est male defendentis. The mind of him that works evil is not always
corrupt, but the mind of him that defends evil, is always corrupt. And the
reason why this sin is so fearful and desparate, is, because when a man
commends and justifies a wickedness (knowing it to be such) its a certain sign
that his judgment and conscience are both corrupted; insomuch, that he has
neither eyes to se^ it, nor heart to be touched with the guilt and horror of it.

But you will say perhaps, our hearts did ever abhor the taking away the last Kings
life, (for I instance in that only as the most notorious addition to all other
evils) and were our hearts legible at present, it would be seen how zealous we
are for settling the present King in his just power and authority. But alas, we
are under the grasp of an Arbytrarie power, and if we were not, what can single
endeavors do?

These, I presume, are the thoughts of some of you, for I have heard them from
your own mouths: Truly, you have great reason to do something extraordinary for
your King, if for no other reason, but to out do what you have done; but I have
great reason to suspect your minds do but faintly incline this way; for quid
verba audiam, cum facta videam? what do you speak of plausible intendments and
desires, wrapped up in smooth words, when your actions look clean another way? If
you have executed the Lords command (says Samuel to Saul) what means the
bleating of sheep, and lowing of oxen in mine ears? If your hearts are as you
pretend, what means the noise of your drums, and thunder of Cannon at Sea, in
opposition and defiance of your Kings Commissions? what means the changing your
Flags, and razing your Sovereigns Arms out of your Sterns, in det^station of
his government? These (to my apprehension) are strange characters of loyalty in
Subjects: And such as speak more devotion to Cesars picture in his Coin, then
to his Person or Power. Adoring that new minted Mammon of your new masters, in
which were the cross (once a mark of the Beast) changed into a pair of Gallows,
or into the Devils cloven foot, would yet (I fear) find too warm a recepti^n in
too many of you. It is thought by many wise men, that had not you been the
first and fiercest of the Kings enemies, the Royal Throne had been established,
and the Kingdom settled long ere this; And I beseech you look well to it; for if
the kingdoms miseries increase for want of its natural Shepherd, which is more
then probable; it is because you have taken away the wooden bridge that should
convey him into his Dominions: and certainly, the guilt of all the sad
consequents which shall arise upon the want of him will one day be laid at your
Cabin doors.

But men must live in that calling wherein God has placed them, and provide
for their families, or be concluded worse then Infidels* 1 Timothy We cannot (with
all our endeavors sail against wind and Tide; the current of the Times is
strong, and he that spits against the wind, spits in his own face.

Well, let all this be granted, and what else can be alleged to this purpose,
and yet that maxim and conclusion of Solomon shall stand in force; He that
justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just, even they both are an
abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15. And that Precept of Moses shall outlive
all the changes of the world, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil,
Exodus 23. 2. It was never good world, since things have been carried all by
Votes; and they that pretend to act what they do by virtue of a Power derived
from the People, do most of all abuse the People; making them speak as the
Devil did the Heathen Oracies, or as Friar Bacons brazen head (i. e.) what is
most serviceable to their own ends. In an Age so miserably corrupted and
depraved, the major part is seldom found to be the melior. And he that designs
himself always to the strongest side, will certainly be involved in the broad
way, which leads to destruction, Mat. 7. When you sail together in a fleet,
your Art instructs you (as you are Sea men) not to sail as others do, at
random, but that every man steer according to his own Compass; and sure, as you
are Christians, and in your voy^ge toward the Haven of eternal happiness,
Religion obliges you to steer, not as others do, but according to the
direction of your own Consciences, guided by the infallible compass of Gods
Word; he that does otherwise, runs an irrecoverable hazard, and it is not by
choice, but by chance, if he get safe to shore.

And as touching the support of your families; as he is worse then an Infidel
that provides not for those of his own house; by his lawful and honest
endeavors; so he is no better then an Insidel, that stands in such aw of the
Devil, as (with the Indians) to worship him, ne noceat, that he may not hurt
him; and out of a secret disbelief of the divine Providence and goodness, puts
himself upon hellish and unwarrantable ways for support and advantage. You know
who it was that said, all these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me; And though the times should prove so severe and particular as
to some men's designs; that S. John's Prediction should be verified among us,
viz. that no man might be allowed to buy or sell (orto have the benefit of the
Law) save he that had the mark of the Beast in his right hand; and that as many
as would not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed, Rev. 13. 15.
etc. yet those who are not irrecoverably sold to their secular respects and
interests, shall do well to remember that serious expostulation of our Savior;
What shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? And therefore the
rule is fixed in the next verse, Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me,
and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father, with his
holy Angels, Mat. 8. 36. Sure I am, that (notwithstanding all our bustling
after the trash of this world) we shall carry nothing beyond the grave but our
Consciences, unless some certain woes and curses, contracted by the voluntary
deser^ion of our dearest friends (our Conscien^es) Among which, those of the
Prophet Habbak^c will certainly have their share; Woe to him that coveteth an
evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may
be delivered from the Power of evil. Thou have consulted shame to thy house, by
cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy soul. For the stone shall
cry out of the wall, and the Beam out of the Timber shall answer it. Woe unto
him that builds a Town with blood, and stablisheth a City by iniquity. They
that will be rich, will as certainly fall into Temptation, and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. 1 Timothy 6. 9. And they that love to fish in troubled waters, or trouble the waters
that they may fish for profit, seldom think of the malignity of those Curses,
that are wrapped up in their ill gotten wealth; The wealth is winged, and will
soon take its flight, Prove. 23. 5. But the curses are of a longer durance, and
stay behind. That which was a snare to the soul in the acquisition, is very
likely to prove a curse to the family in the designation. It is a snare (says
Solomon) to the man, who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make
enquiry. Alas (my dear friends) what comfort can you take on your death beds,
in bequeathing things unto friends or posterity, that stand before your
trembling eyes, but as so many witnesses and remembrancers of guilt and
iniquity? with what comfort or Conscience can you dispose of your Estates, when
you know not what to do with your immortal souls? how is it possible you should
set your house in order, when your better part (your mind, which should do it)
is in the greatest disorder and distraction? when all that you have grasped by
the hand of Power and oppression, shall not be able (in the least measure) to
release you of the horror and amasement wherewith your mercenary souls will be
surprised. Therefore if any accursed gain stick to your fingers, my advice is
very short, but withal safe, and I hope, not unseasonable; Make to your selves
friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye fail, ye may be received
into everlasting habitations. Matthew. 16. 9.

The last objection I foresee, is very general, and very desperate, and runs
parallel with that of Cain and Judas; Mine iniquity is greater then can be
forgiven. It Is true indeed, if you set your selves before the glass of Gods
law, and look upon your selves with an impartial ey (as God looks on you) you
have reason enough to be highly displesed with your ugliness and deformity. Or
if you suffer your actions to be scanned and tried by the Municipal Laws you
were born under, which are the best security you have for any propriety, you
cannot but discern your Persons and Estates (in justice) to lie at the mercy of
Confiscation and Censure. But yet, for you to stand so much in your own light,
as to turn your backs upon all offers of Grace and Mercy, and to prefer your
own guilty fears before your Princes favor, is to add more weight to the
afflictions of your injured Sovereign. To conclude him severe, because you are
pre-resolv'd not to taste of his benignity, is an high breach of Charity and
Gratitude; But to say within your selves, Nolumus hunc regnare, for no other
reason, but because you adhere to those who killed his servants, murdered his
royal Father, and seized on his inheritance, is clearly and undoubtedly to
rebel, not only against his Prerogative (the means of your Protection) but
against the Gospel it self, the means of your salvation; and instead of giving
God and Caesar their due; you do at once d^ny King and your Christ together.

I rather wish and pray, that you may learn of Benhadads servants, a safer way
to peace and reconciliation; Behold (say those heathens) we have heard that the
kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings; and therefore they resolve to
address themselves to the king in a posture of humiliation. And so will you (I
hope) if you are not bewitched into your own ruin. You have a merciful king to
deal withal; one, who is bone of your bone, and flesh of your flesh; One, in
whom the heroic spirit of his Grandfather Henry 4th of France; the peaceable
mind of his Grandfather K. James, and the merciful inclinations of his martyred
father, do all concur to make up an incomparable king: who (when we are tired
and jaded with disputes) must at last be trusted, or can be no king; and is not
in a capacity to show mercy, till he has power to do otherwise. For, where the
word of a King is, there is power says Solomon; and without that power, mercy
is not mercy, but servile and slavish compliance.

So that if there were nothing to be alleged in defense of the Regal power, or
in demand of the Subjects duty, yet judge within your selves whether it is
better for you that all the sons of Jerubbaal (which are more then 70. reign
over you; or else, that the natural head be restored to the body, for the
preservation and rest auration of our languishing gasping Church and State?
Whether it be better to return to our former Laws and Government, or
remainunder a perpetual fluctuation of Arbytrarie Power, which rowls from one
faction to another, and the wisest among us cannot imagine where it will
settle? Whether one form of doctrine and Discipline, or a thousand Heresies and
Schisms be the better Religion? Whether one King or fifty Colonels is like to
produce the more safe and quiet Government?

It is said of some who adhered to Saul (who was none of the best kings) that
they were a band of men whose hearts God had touched; but for those that
despised him, and brought him no presents, they are branded with the name of
children of Belial. And in another place, we read of a fierce contestation
between the men of Israel, and the men of Judah, who should express the
greatest zeal in bringing the king to his royal Throne; oh, that it might
please the God of Peace and Order, to close all our unnatural and bloody
differences in such a sweet emulation and agreement, that the last contestation
among us, might be that of outvying one another in the seasonable expressions
of duty and allegiance; that our Absoloms, and Sheba's, and Achitophels, and
which are worse then these, our sins, being suppressed; we would be as zealous
and active in restoring the Throne of Gods Anointed, as we have been fatal and
unfortunate in the demolishing of it; without which I fear the youngest amongst
us will never live to see the settlement of Truth and Peace upon any firm and
assured foundation. And though his Majesty's present condition will not enable
him to give you fields and vinyards, and to make you Captains of thousands, and
of hundreds; yet the villainy of these times has not stripped him of all power
and capacity to reward; for he has a reward of Pardon, for such as shall
submit themselves, and return to their allegiance; which perhaps, may be worth
the looking after once in seven years, as things may fall out. And he has a
reward of Bounty and Benignity, a reward of Merit, for such as shall act
remarkably in his service; which if any man believe not, I shall suspect him
haunted and pursued into a despair of mercy, by the clamouring horrors of his
own guilty Conscience. And when any of you (my Parishioners) shall desire to
make trial of, I doubt not but I am so well understood at Court, as to procure
you an experiment of the Kings mercy, whenever you shall look after it in the
way of duty and allegiance. But if you shall say, That all is well done which
has been done of late years; that the foundation of those glorious days which
some of you dream of, is well and safely laid in Perjury and Sacrilege, and
the blood of your Sovereign, that you cannot, nor will not deny the right hand
of fellowship and assistance to those whom you take to be the Patriots and
Protectors of your new formed Commonwealth. And that I might very well have
spared my pains in disquieting your thoughts with strange doctrines, hard
sayings, and sad reflections on what is past; being resolved aforehand, not to
be diverted out of the way you are in. To such, I have no more to say, but to
signify my grief and sorrow of heart, for the strong Delusion and Infatuation
wherein they are involved; My soul shall weep in secret for them; and God
forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for them, while they
are on this side the grave; only thus much I would beg of them for charity and
christianity sake; that no prejudice or biased respect whatsoever, may
alienate their hearts from me their Minister, or divert their eyes from looking
upon this following Treatise, which (for the doctrinal part) I dare avouch to
be no other then a sincere extract of sacred Scripture (what black mark soever
may be set upon it by those who now sit at stern) which I have published,
merely out of tenderness to those many thousands in my Parish, who in times of
trial have not known their right hand from their left, nor the right way from
the wrong; and not without some secret hopes (under the mercy of the most high)
to recover some of those many, who I fear, are yet in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity; wherein, if I have been over bold or severe in any
expressions, I have been instructed into this roughness by my Saviors example,
who was never so invective against any, as the Scribes, Pharisees, and
Hypocrites of that age. And truly my reprehensions have not been so sharp and
pr^ssing out ^f any other satisfaction, but to show you your own guilt in order
to your repentance and conversion. Those diseases which fester inwardly,
require a faithful, though rough hand to search them; men that are fallen into
a deep sleep, must have loud cries to awaken them, and a rude band may very
well be born withal, to recover a man that is fallen into a swooning fit. And
for those of my own Coat, if I have dealt unseemly with them, in discovering
the nakedness of the spiritual Parent; let them know, I have borrowed this
sharpness from S. Paul, who, as he was a person of extraordinary meeknes and
condescension where he met with weak brethren, as appears by the Circumcision
of Timothy, and his own character of himself, in being all things unto all men,
that by all means he might save some; So there were three sorts of persons with
whom he would never twist and comply, namely, proud, ambitious, and aspiring
persons, such as loved to have the pre-eminence in all things, of whom he
forewarns Timothy. 2. Covetous persons, who subverted whole houses, teaching
things which they ought not, only for filthy lucres sake. 3. Cowards and
dissemblers in Religion, such as durst not profess Christ for fear of
persecution; Truly, I shall ever declare an ^versness to quarrel with any of my
fellow laborers, neither do I (from my present low condition) envy them in
any of their Promotions; I love their Persons, but I hate from my soul those
foul and scandalous sins of Pride, Cowardice, and Covetousness, which have
rendered them both at home and abroad so odious and unevangelical. I wish they
may ever have before their eyes, the grand consideration of a watchmans charge,
who is to be faithful in his warning, and constant to his station in all
weathers; otherwise the people may perish in their sins (for the merit of their
iniquity) but their blood will be required at their hands.

And now I beseech you, my dear friends, and Parishioners, to entertain these
poor labors of mine, as they are sent to you, from the tender bowels of your
spiritual shepherd, which may be followed with more, according to the candor
and benignity of their reception. What may be the consequent of this my
adventure, as to my self, I know not, I have tasted of the house of Jonadab
(the prison) for your sakes already; which may be prosecuted (for ought I know)
with perpetual banishment out of a ruinated Vinyard, wherein there is sueb a
visible want of faithful laborers, as a suitable addition to the injuries and
extremities I have endured for these last seven years. I have sat down and
considered the extent of human power and malice; and God has made me a fenced
brazen wall, as once he did his Prophet Jeremy, nor shall I think my self a
loser by this piece of devotion, should it be written with my own blood,
provided I may be offered up on the sacrifice and service of your faith and
conversion, accounting it a most fatal and accursed choice, to hazard so many
thousand souls, for the saving of a single fortune, or a bubble life. And if I
never return to my own Country and Cure, to Preach the Gospel, as I ought to
speak, Gods will be done; 'twill be a fixed comfort both in life and death,
that I have discharged my self to you in the fidelity of a spiritual watchman;
so that having nothing else wherein to express my care of you, my friends, and
my charity to my enemies and oppressors; I thought it agreeable to Christian
duty, to recommend these Papers, which I shall follow with my Prayers.

That the God of all grace, and Father of lights, would give you a ^ght o^ the
error of your doings in these irregular and rebellious times; and withaa^ give
you grace to turn away from it, that you may return to him by true repentance;
and to your Sovereign Lord, the King, by true faith and allegiance; that God
may return in mercy to you, and dive^ those heavy judgement^ which seem to
gather like a black cloud over you; and cleanse your souls of all presumptuous
sins, and guide your feet into the way of Peace; Thus Prays

Your affectionate friend and servant in Christ, W Stamp.

Isaiah 6. 9. 10. 11. 12. 9. Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but
understand not: and see ye indeed, but perceive not.

10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

11. Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, until the Cities be wasted
without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate.

12. And the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great forsaking
in the midst of the Land.


GOD, at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in time past unto the
Fathers by the Prophets. Heb. 1. 1. Sometimes viva voce, by his own immediate
audible voice, as Exo. 19. 19. Sometimes by Consultations, by Vrim, according as
was directed Numb 27. 21. Sometimes by manifesting his will and pleasure in a
dream, as to Pharaoh, and to Joseph the Patri^rch Genesis 41. Sometimes by visions,
as here in this Chapter. The whole Prophecy in general, is called the vision
of Isaiah the Son of Amoz. Isa. 1. 1.
and this in the Text is like Ezechiels wheel within a wheel, Eze. 1. 16.
a vision within a vision.

These words of the Prophet are of a very sad and gloomy aspect; as full of
threatening, as these times wherein we live; and let this be observed from them
in general, That there is not in the whole book of God a Text that Christ and
his Apostles made so much use of for the convincement of obstinate and
rebellious Hypocrites, as thi^ of this Prophet Isaiah: So that however it may
seem to be an old, stale, obsolete threatening, directed only u^ the Jews many
hundred years ago yet if we consult the Evangelical History, we shall find it
owned and adop^ by Christ, and by S. Paul, as ^ when he preached to the Saints
(...) Rome, as when he wrote unto t^ Romans from Corinthus: Mat. 13. 14. Mark.
4. 12. Luke 8. 10. Ioh. 12. 41. Acts 28. 26. Romans 11. 8.
nay or^ginally to be the language of Chr^ himself, and dictated unto this
P^phet long before his incarnation, ^ will appear if we look well upon the of
John 12. 41. These things said Es^ias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
That is, spoke of him prophetically; and saw his glory (as S. Stephen did Act.
7. 55.
as the glory of the eternal Son of God. So that I could have taken my Text out
of either of the Evangelists, out of the Acts of the Apostles, or the Epistle
to the Romans, as well as out of this Prophet, (but that I desired to fetch my
water as near the spring head as might be); It is but the language of the same
holy Spirit in all these; and sure, the holy Ghost has fixed a particular mark
of observation upon that Text; which he has so frequently recorded, and
inserted in the Sacred volume.

To this may be added, the near Relation and Correspondency between the Text
and these times; what was then but in minis, is with us in poenis. Isaiahs
threatenings unto Israel, are Gods visible executions in England. (To say
nothing of the admirable State and Majesty, wherein God appeared, when he
delivered this Message to his Prophet; not much inferior to that which was
observed in the promulgation of the Law; as appears v. 1. 2. 3. 4.) it is enough
to startle, and awaken us, that it is.

First, Of Judgment; not of Mercy and Judgment, as once the Psalmist sung.
Psalm. 101. 1.
But solely, and entirely of Judgment, not a syllabe of mercy that I can find
in it; a sad (I confess) but no unsafe Theme, to awe and regulate a man into
obedience and submission; The Gospel it self stands surest upon this foundation
and the seed ofGods word never thrives and prospers so well, as where the
surrows have been made by the terrors of the Law.

Secondly. Of Judgment, not upon the Nations of the earth at large, upon Edom,
or Moab, or Egypt, or Caldea; (which elsewhere have their several burdens
denounced, and by this prophet too) but here the sad message is directed unto
Judah, the most selected Tribe of all his own people, a people that God had
ever dandled upon the lap of his mercy, and distinguished from all the world by
his visible care and protection over them. Go and tell The people, etc. and if
Judgment begin a^ Judah, at the house of God, what shall b^ the end of those
that obey not the Gosp^ of God? 1. Pet. 4. 17.

Thirdly, The Judgment here threatened is not like those which were on^
propounded by God to David's choice; 2. Sam. 24. 13.
a Judgment of a day, or a month, or a year; but a more lasting Judgment,
which was not to be removed, till the Cities were wasted without inhabitant,
and the houses without man, and the Land were utterly desolate. verse. 11.

Fourthly, With the Continuance, we have here a very dangerous Quality in the
Judgment; A Judgment not of blasting, or mildew upon the fields or of murrain
upon the flocks; not upon the goodly pillars of the land, Religion, and
Judicature, by removing them out of their places, not upon the person of their
King, (the joy of their hearts, and the breath of their nostrils) Lam. 4. 20.
all which, are sore and heavy Judgments; but a judgment beyond all these, a
judgment upon the Heart; Infatuation of Mind; A judgment that has no sense
of judgment; Make the heart of his people fat, etc. There is no plague like
unto that of the heart.

Fifthly, This infatuation is made by Prophets, partly by false Prophets;
(namely) by the seduction of their false and biased visions, and partly, by
true Prophets; namely by the hardening power of the divine Oracles, on those,
that rebel against the convincement of that sacred light.

And lastly. We may observe the Time, when this sad message was delivered to
the Prophet, and by him denounced unto the people; and that was, In the same
year that good King Vzziah died, v. 1. A King, that had deserved well of his
people, and of whose government none had cause to complain, unless it were the
Priest in one particular; which is more then our Clergy could complain of in
all the reign of our blessed Hezekiah, who fell not so much the peoples martyr,
as the Priests.

In all which particulars, the Vision of Isaiah is so visible a character of
these times, that any man that is not involved in this Judgment of
Infatuation, may run and read it: Which I mention for no other end, but to
alarm and awake the senseless and secure of our Age and Nation, who never think
themselves in danger, till the^ are surprised past all recovery; and like men
in a Consumption, never think themselves sick, till they find themselves dead.

The Text is a Commission given from the mouth of God himself; Go, and till
this people, etc. wherein we have two general parts. 1. A prepatative to
Judgment, Make the heart of this people fat; A Resemblance borrowed from such
as seed cattle, not for store, or service, but only for the slaughtering
shambles. 2. The Judgment it self, and that is of several kinds. 1.
Devastation and Desolation, and that general, v. 11. 2. Banishment, and
Desertion, v. 12.



All this was threatened many years before it was executed, as a means of grace
held out unto the people, to prevent the dreadful executions of Gods Justice
upon them; And so it is intended by me, to prevent (if possible) the remainder
of Judgment, not yet executed upon our sinful Land and Nation.

But before I proceed to my main intendment, it will not be amiss (by way of
Preface or Introduction) to touch a little upon such general observations as do
naturally arise from these words of the Prophet; wherein we shall find great
variety of considerable matter; as first, from the Prophets Commission [Go, and
tell this people, etc.] we have this clear Truth hinted unto us.

Obs. 1.
1. That Spiritual Ambassadors, are to receive both their business and
instructions how to proceed in their errand and Embassy, only from God. The
Prophets of old time spoke as they were inspired; 2. Pet. 1. 21.
S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians, no other Doctrine, or Tradition, then
what he received of the Lord; 1. Cor. 11 23.
and if he should have done otherwise for any humane itch or satisfaction, he
could not have been the servant of Christ. Gal. 1. 10. So that if any man speak
as from Christ, Let him speak as the Oracles of God. 1. Pet 4. 11.
Divinity is of a sublimer nature then to incorporate with secular and
particular ends and ayms; like Quicksilver, that will not mix with any
inferior nature. Gods Truth must not be formed like Nebuchadnezzars Image,
partly of Iron, and partly of Clay. Din. 2. 33.
It Is a foul scandal to Religion, when Doctrines savor not so much of the
Bible, as the Diurnal; when the pulpit is made the servant, or rather slave to
Policy, and the Preachers Sermon awed into a Narrative or Declaration.

Secondly, The Prophet is commanded both to Go, and speak, etc, though he were
secretly assured before hand from the prevision of God, that his message should
have no other effect upon the people, more then to make them more obstinate and
obdurate. From whence it is evident in the second place, that

Obs. 2.
God will have his Ministers discharge themselves in the duty of their places,
what ever the success be. The obstinacy or malice of the people, must not
hinder or deter the Prophet in the delivery of Gods Message. Son of man (says
God to his Prophet Ezekiel) I send thee to a rebellious Nation, but be not
afraid of them, nor of their words; though briers, and thorns be with thee, and
thou do dwell among Scorpions; and Thou shall speak my words unto them;
whether they will hear, or whether they will for bear; for they are most
rebellious. Ezok. 2. 3. 6. 7. And S Paul, who was not ignorant that the Gospel
of Christ would cer^ainly prove a stumbling block, and a rock of offense to
many in Israel; and that his own sermons, would prove a savor of death unto
death, unto many of his Auditors, does yet declare a dreadful woe to be his
portion, if he did not preach the Gospel of Christ. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
The Ministers of the Gospel, how ever vilified, abused, and reputed as the off
scouring of the world, are equally and indif^erently a sweet Savor of Christ
unto God, as well in those that perish, as in those that are saved. 2. Cor. 2.
15.
God does not proportion the reward of his servants according to success and
event; what ever the harvest prove, whether wheat, or tares, Our labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord. 1. Cor. 15. 58.

Thirdly, Hear ye indeed, but understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive
not. Here was hearing, but no understanding; and seeing, but no perception;
Hearing, and not hearing; Seeing, and not seeing. The sense and meaning whereof
I take to be this. Since by your wilful and constant opposing of my word, you
have most justly provoked me to withdraw my spirit, whereby it might have been
effectual unto your Conversion; hereafter, I will not send my word unto you, to
convert and save you, but to convince and condemn you, the sound whereof
hereafter, shall but astonish you, and the glorious rays of its light shall be
of no other use unto you, but to dazzle your eyes into a greater degree of
Blindness; from whence it is evident in the third place, that.

Obs. 3.
It is not barely the Hearing of Gods word, but the gracious disposition of the
heart, to be guided and governed by it, that makes it effectual unto
regeneration. S. Paul speaks of one that may give all his goods to feed the
poor, and yet have no charity. 1. Cor. 13. 3. S. James makes mention of a great
Hearer, and a small Doer. Iam. 1. 23. A man may have Angelical knowledge,
without Evangelical faith and sincerity. There is a great deal of difference
between Hearing, and Hearing; between S Stephens Hearers, and S Peter's Hearers;
In both. the word was quick, and powerful, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit. Heb. 4. 12.
But with this difference; S. Peter's Hearers were said to be pricked in their
hearts; and the consequent of that, was an humble and entire resignation of
themselves to be governed by the Preacher and his Doctrine: as appears Act 2.
37. Men, and Brethren, what shall we do, etc. S. Stephens Hearers were also cut
to the heart, but they were not penetrated; for the consequent of their
Hearing, was the stoning and mu^thering of their Preacher. First they gnashed
on him with their teeth, and afterward cast him out of the City, and stoned
him; as appears. Act 7. 54. From whence it is evident in the fourth place: that,

Obs. 4.
The means of grace, when they are vilified and opposed, become the greater
means of sin and Condemnation. This is very clear in the ^se and condition of
Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, according to our Saviors own doctrine and
determination. Mat. 11. 22. 24. The great measure of light the Scribes and
Pharisees so confidently boasted of, served for no other purpose, but to be an
aggravat^on of their wilful blindness: If ye were blind (says our Savior of
those Hypocrites) ye should have no sin (not no sin simply, but no sin so
wilful and inexcusable) but now ye say we see: therefore your sin remains;
Ioh. 9. 41. These I take to be the natural doctrines observable in the first
verse of my Text.

The second presents us with three more, the first whereof is this.

Obs. 5.
That Spiritual Infatuation is ordinarily the harbinger and forerunner of
Judgment. It is given sometimes to standers by, to discern not only the
certainty, but the neerness and propinquity of Judgment, from the senslesness
and stupidity of those who are most concerned in it First make the heart of
this people fat, etc. and th^n, let their Cities be desolate, etc. This is Gods
method in punishing, and it concerns us to look to it.

Obs. 7.
The second is this: When God denounces Judgment against a people, if they
were not infatuated, they would ^rtainly repent, and be converted unto God. The
charm of Infatuation is so powerful and bewitching, that could some men know
precisely the time of the Bridegrooms coming, yet they would not be provided of
oil in their lamps; and if Moses, and the Prophets, prevail not with them,
neither will they be persuaded, though one should rise from the dead. Luc. 6.
31.

The third is this That Repentance and Conversion unto God, is a certain and
infallible expedient for the reversing, and removing of his Judgments. This I
gather by that limitation and exception, Lest they should see with their eyes,
and hear, etc. and convert, and be healed. We may guess at the power of a
sincere Conversion unto God, by an Indulgence granted unto Ahab, only for his
f^rmal and external humiliation; which (indeed) would not hold weight in the
balance of sincerity, and yet had power to suspend a Judgment till his sons
days: as appears, 1. King. 21. 29. See thou how Ahab humbles himself?
because he humbles himself; therefore I will not bring the evil in his days,
but in his sons days.

The devastation of Jerusalem by Titus the Roman Emperor, was foretold many
hundred years before it was executed; and yet observe how our Savior bespeaks
that bloody City. If thou had known at least in this thy day, etc. Luc 19.
42. It Is the ey-water of Repentance, that alone has power to extinguish the
flames of Gods wrathful indignation; and see how passionatly God complains when
he cannot gain this reasonable atonement on our part; O that my people would
have harkned unto me, for if Israel would have walked in my ways, I should soon
have put down their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries, etc.
Psalm. 81. 13. 14.

In the third verse, we find the Prophet interposing, and as it were, standing
in the gap between God, and his people, with a question full of tende^ness and
compassion. Vsque quo Domine? Lord how long shall this Calamity be upon thy
people? Where, from the Prophets question, we have this observation.

Obs. 8.
That, in times of Judgment and extreme Calamity, it belongs especially unto
those whose function renders them nearer unto God then other men; to mediate
and intercede between God and his people, as being many times most powerful
with God, when but vile, and contemptible in the cys of men. Thus faithful
Abraham intercedes for wicked Sodom and Gomorrah, not by one question (as here
the Prophet Esaias) but by six several addresses and proposals; by which he had
brought it to this favorable issue, that if but ten righteous persons had been
found therein, the Judgment had been reversed, and those Cities spared. Gen
18. 32. Thus was Moses in the gap, to stop the incursions of Gods wrath upon
his people; In one place, he seems to lay hold on Gods hand, by a holy
Violence, insomuch that God seems to entreat for the use of his arm for the
vindicating of his honor upon a Stubborn and rebellious Generation, in the
language of a Supplicant. Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot; and that I
may consume them, etc. Exodus 32. 10. And in the same chapter, he intercedes for
the people with so great earnestness, as if the zeal sor their preservation had
eaten out the care of his own eternal condition; his language seems to import
no less, v. 32. And now, if thou will, forgive their sin; and if not; blot me I
pray thee out of the book which thou have written.

And the Prophet Samuel, who (to his grief) lived to be a witness of many
daring provocations in his time, would notwithstanding never cease to be their
Advocate; God forbid (says he) that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing
to pray for you. 1. Sam. 12. 23. Nothing but the Prophet Ieremies express
inhibition (pray not for this people) Ier. 7. 16.
ought to abate the strength of a Prophets devotion and intercession for Gods
people in the time of their extremity.

Lastly from Gods answer, we have three remarkables of sad and serious
observation: The first is this.

Obs. 9.
That the patience and long suffering of Gods mercy, does neither abate nor
divert the proceedings of his Justice. God is not as man, that threatens many
times far beyond his intendments; though his hand be lif^ed up, and his sword
brandished a long time before he strike, yet when he does strike, he strikes
home. There be spirits, that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay
on sore strokes, in the time of destruction they pour out their forces, and
appease the wrath of him that made them. Eccles 39. 28. And though that be
Apocryphal, I Am sure this is not, God will wound the head of his Enemies, and
the hairy scalp of every one that goes on still in his wick^dness. Psalm. 68.
21. The longer his bow lies unbent, the stronger will the draught be,
whenever he shall take it into his hand. The deluge upon Genesis 6. 3.
the old world was suspended an hundred and twenty years, but when it came, it
swept clean; but eight persons preserved in that universal destruction. So the
Judgment in the Text was suspended for many Generat^ons, but when the day of
Gods visitation came, it proved a sweeping Judgment; a besom of destruction,
was employed to make clean work. The Cities to be wasted without inhabitant,
and the houses without man, and the Land to be utterly desolate, or as it is in
the original (signified in the margent) Desolate with desolatio^.

Obs. 10.
Secondly, We are here to observe; That Gods Judgments are neither all of a
size, nor all of a sort. Here is Desolation at home, and Banishment abroad, and
Gods ^orsaking, which is worse then either; Fear, and the pit, and the snare
Esa. 24. 17. 18.
are upon thee, O inhabitant of the ^arth, says this Prophet in another place:
and it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of the fear, shall
fall into the pit, and he that comes out of the pit, shall be taken in the
snare. The meaning is, that God will never want a plague to find out those,
that find out ways to provoke the eyes of his glory. But adm^t there be certain
desolation in Judea, may not the Jews take she^ter in Egypt? No, The Prophet
shows them the consequent of that fruitless design, Isa. 30. They shall carry
their riches, and their treasures upon the bunches of Camels, to a people that
shall not profit them; for the Egyptian^ shall help in vain, and to no purpose,
Egypt has been a sufficient instance of Gods prosecuting one Judgment with
another, for the manifestation of his power, and wrath upon that King, and
people.

God has his quiver full of arrows, the magazine of his Judgments is
inexhaustible. What a black roll of Judgments do we read of Levit. 26. and
Deuteronomy. 26. and though we might suppose the spirit of a man able to undergo all
that is there threatened: yet there is Deuteronomy. 28, 61.
mention made of unwritten plagues; So that, what S. Paul speaks of the
preparations of Justice; Ey has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered
into the heart of man, what God has prepar^d, as well of woe, for those that
hate, as of blessedness, for those that love him. There is no avoiding the
Divine wrath, but by patience, and submission, and an humble acceptance of the
punishment of their iniquity. Lev. 26. 43.
So that Coelum, non animum, mutat non vindictam Divinam. For alas, what
comfort can it be unto Cain to have his life allowed him, and to spin it out in
a sugitive condition, with a burden of horror upon him, greater then he is
able to bear? What pleasure can a man take to live upon Earth, with Hell in his
bosom? What satisfaction to be taken, in forsaking our Country, whilst the not
forsaking of our sins, gives us too much cause to suspect we are forsaken of
God? Which leads me to the last general observation of the Text: and it is this.

Obs. 11.
That when a people are so wilfully wedded to their own rebellious ways, that
they are neither warned by Gods word, nor won by his mercies, nor reclaimed by
his Judgments; God will certainly forsake that people; which is the highest
expression of his severity and justice. In the book of the Revelation, we have
represented unto us by way of vision, many dreadful executions of Gods wrath,
intimated unto us by the Sounding of several Trumpets, the opening of several
Sea^s, the pouring out of several Vialls, etc. and then after all this (as a
sad preparative to the grand account, which every man must give at the Tribunal
of Judgment) we read of this fatal and final determination, He that is unjust,
^et him be uujust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still; Rev.
22. 11. (that is) He that will not be reclaimed by any gracious application;
shall be lest impenetrable to his own ruin, and destruction. It was a sore,
and a grievous servitude which the Israelites sustained under the unreasonable,
and (indeed) impossible commands of Pharaoh and his Officers, for 400. years
together; and it is very probable that Jacob understood what would befall his
posterity in Egypt, long before he went down thither, God having communicated
the same to his Grandfather Abraham, as appears Genesis 15 13. Know of a surety,
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a Land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them, and they shall afflict them 400, years. And yet Jacob is commanded to lay
aside all fear of going down into Egypt, notwithstanding this prediction; and
the reason is, because God promised to go along with him; as appears Gen 46.
34. The promise of Gods presence extinguisheth the fear of 400. years certain
Affliction. And when upon an high provocation, God threatened the same people to
withdraw his presence, and to substitute an Angel in his room for their conduct
into Canaan, see with what bitterness of spirit they entertain the message; It Is
said, that when the people heard these tidings; They mourned, and no man did
put on his ornaments, Exodus 33. 4. How far we have forfeited the cond^ct of a
gracious God in our former designs and engagements, I take no pleasure to
remember. It Is well if (together with our possessions and estates, and many
other blessings) we have not lost the favor of the Donor also; Sure I am, The
safety and preservation of a people, of a City, of a soul, consists entirely
and immediately in the gracious presence of Almighty God; And it is most
certain, That God never forsakes a people, till they first forsake him; Isa.
50. 1. and as certain, that when a people forsake their God, God will also
forsake and estrange himself from that people. 2. Chron 15. 2. So that, when it
comes to this fatal Breach and Divorcement; that God begins to withdraw from
his Sanctuary (the place where he had fixed the marks of his favor in his Name
and Worship, when he is so highly provoked, as to hate, where he loved, in so
much that he cannot look upon his people with any pleasing aspect, nor speak
unto them, but in thunder and lightning, nor call them by that ancient name of
favor Israel.
by which he had distinguished them from all the world; But when Israel (that
is) a people prevailing Genesis 32. 28, Hos. 1. 6. 9.
with God, shall be turned into Loa^mi; Not the people of God; into Lor^bamah,
a people that has not obtained mercy When that of the Prophet Ier^my shall be
fulfilled; I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine Heritage, I have given
the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of her Enemies; Ier. 12. 7. Then
every thing shall twist and conspire to the ruin and destruction of that
people.

The Schoolmen distinguishing of poena Sensus, and poena Damni; conclude the
loss of heaven, and the want of Gods presence, a far heavier judgment the^ the
pains of Hell, sustained in everlasting chains of darkness. And the reason is,
because the memory and contemplation of a better, doubleth the misery of a
worse estate, and condition. Sure I am, the Scripture evidently concludes
Apostasy of far nearer relation and alliance to the bottomless pit, then
Atheism: and that it had been better men had never known the way of
righteousness, then after the knowledge, Taste and Experience of that way of 2.
Pet. 2. 21.
life, to turn away, and forsake it, beginning in the Spirit and concluding in
the flesh. For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the
Truth; there remains no more sacrifice for sin; but a certain fearful looking
for of Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.
Heb. 10. 26. 27.

The sum of all these general Considerations, is but this; Whenever God
forsakes a people, he leaves them insatuated and betwitch'd to their own ruin
and destruction; and whenever a people is so far infatuated; their hearts so
fat, their ears so heavy, their eyes so wilfully shut, that they will neither
discern the threatenings of an angry God, not be awakened by the visible
executions of his Judgments; It is an evident token, that God h^th forsaken
them. So that whether we take Spiritual Infatuation for the procuring Cause of
Desolation and misery; or for the Effect of Gods Justice upon the heart of a
people forsaken of him, or for the sign and Symptom of his certain visitation,
we are to look upon it as a fatal Judgment upon the soul, where ere we find
it. Quos perdere vult Deus, dementa^ prius Application.
Not to dismiss these generals without some sh^rt Application. You have heard
your Prophet, and seen his Commission. Only the Scene is changed. What was
threatened unto Judea, has been the dismal Tragedy in England. Desolation and
Devastation at home: Banishment, and I fear, too general a Desertion of (...)
that are abroad. God has spent a whole quiver of his arrows, poured out a
whole volley of his Judgments, neither unlike, nor inferior to the Egyptian
plagues He has smitten us in the increas^ of the earth, by blasting and
mildews; insomuch, that we may take up the Prophet Isaiah's complaint, that
Isai. 5. 10.
an Omer of seed has not (in many places) yielded an Ephah of fruit; (tha^ is)
not the tenth part of what was sown* and our Land, which was wont to be a
lender unto other Nations, has been cursed into a blasted and borrowing
condition: He has smitten us in our flocks and herds, by a strange kind of
murrain and rottenness in all sorts of Catrel. He has smitten us in our
purses, by reducing us unto extreme penury; and smitten us in our posterity, by
cutting off our young men with the sword. How has the storm of war (like an
Egyptian Hail) broken down our goodly Cedar trees? How have the people been
eaten up by Locusts, and Caterpillars, and all manner of Egyptian Vermin? What
swarms of frogs (from the bottomless pit) have crept into our houses, croking
out their own frauds, and pernicious fallacies, to the seduction of 2. Tim. 3.
6.
men, and women, laden with sins, led about with diverse lusts? What palpable
(and more then Egyptian) darkness has followed hereupon in all places? and
sure, if our waters have not been turned into blood; our earth has been
miserably drenched and soaked with Christian, Prot^stant, English, Noble,
Royal blo^d; and (which is beyond all this.) The plague of Pharaohs impenitent
and obdurate Spirit, has so far seized upon our souls, that though we are
brought into the red sea of affliction, and surrounded on every side with
hovering destruction, yet we have not in all this time, returned unto him that
Isa. 9. 13.
has smitten us. Me thinks I hear the God of the Spirits of all flesh complain
of us, as once he did of his own people Israel; Why should ye be stricken any
more? Ye will revolt more, and more; the whole head is fick, and the whole
heart is faint; from the sole of the foot, to the crown of the head, there
(...) no foundness, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores; and
therefore your Country is desolate, and your City burn^ with fire, etc. Isa, 1.
5. 6. 7.

And certainly, our recovery out of this fatal Distemper, belongs alone to the
Redeemer of our Israel; for the wisest of men cannot discern by any humane
perspective, how it should be effected. Psalm. 46. 9.
'Ti^ only the great Generalis^imo of heaven, and earth, that makes wars to
cease in all the world, and makes men in an house to be of one mind; That
breaks down, and builds up; that moves a Land, and divides it; and at
another time, heals the sores, and fastneth the pillars thereof; and
delivere^h Israel out of all his troubles. What secular arm he will use in this
work whenever his mercy shall take it in hand; or who shall live to see our
breaches repaired, and our present rubbish changed into the structure of a
(more then pretended) reformation; I know not. The Scripture tells us, that of
those many thousands to whom the good Land of Canaan was promised, two only
survived ^o be invested in the possession, all the rest were cut off in the
wilderness, by the iniquity of their own sinful provocations. Sure I am, that
God in his own time will bring the way of every wilful transgressor upon his
own head; and the crying reigning sins of our Land, are (many of them) such as
go aforehand to Judgment, 1. Tim. 24.
(that is) such as shall certainly find the severe hand of God in their
punishment on this side the grave: but I am not sure; that God will punish
Hypocrites, by Atheists; or honor those with the glorious employment of
suppressing Rebels and Regicides; who themselves refuse to have him reign over
them, and re-crucifie their Redeemer daily, by a perpetual backssiding. Our
Enemies have thrived and prospered hitherto, no otherwise then Leeks and
Sparagus, by the dung and putrefaction of our sinfulness. Let us but withdraw
this abominable contribution of our superfluity of naughtiness, and I dare be
your Prophet; you shall see your Enemies power wither like grass upon the house
top; and their persons grow as contemptible, as dung upon the earth. To effect
these our greedy desires, the ways of Policy and divided Applications to diverse
parties and factions, is very intricate, unsafe, and hard to hit. The ways of
true Honor, Religion, and Justice, are far more easy, succesful, and assured.
But no expedient (for the healing of a Land wasted with woe, and misery) like
unto that of the Text, (Repentance and a sincere Conversion unto God.) Let this
be done first, and in all our difficulties, God will not b^ wanting to us in
the safe conduct of his Holy Spirit. The truth is, most wounds will heal and
close of themselves, if they may be but kept from filth and putrefaction; and
the main of our Cure lies in Naamans Prescription; and is of no more
difficulty, but to wash, and be clean.

Oh then, let your Prayers, and T^rs, and improved Conversations, be now more
fortunate and successful in the service of your Sovereign: then all your former
riotousness and debauchery has been fruitful only in mischiefs, and
misc^ryings. Who would not discard a Contestation, an animosity, (...) bosom
and beloved sin, to qualif^ himself for so glorious an Employment, as the
restoration of a Glorious Church, and a Flourishing Kingdom, invaded, and
trampled upon by Rebellious Hypocrites? What pity it is to see men so dari^g,
and resolved, as to hazard and forsake their nearest Interests and Relations,
rather th^n deliberately to make Shipwreck of their faith and Allegiance; and
yet to see the same men, as weak and unstable as water in bearing up against a
petty paultry lust, and in denying themselves in their own vicious
sensualities? Which gives occasion to many men to doubt, whether in their
particular engagements, they do not seek themselves more then the common
service.

Our task (I must confess) is not unlike that of the poor oppressed Israelites,
under the severe Egyptian task masters; w^ have much work to do, but little or
no straw wherewithal to do it. Our perils, not unlike those S. Paul met withal
in his great masters service. Perils of waters, perils of robbers, perils in
the sea, perils among false brethren; but the perils of all perils, are the
perils by our own Country men. 2. Cot. 11. 26. Our Condition, not unlike that
which is described by the same Apostle in another place. Troubled we are on 1.
Cor. 4. 8. 9.
every side, yet not distressed; Cast down, but not destroyed; Perplexed, but
not in despair; Persecuted, but (we hope in Christ, not under the Doom in the
Text) not forsaken of our God In these p^rils and perplexities, our securest
way will be, to betake our selves unto his shel^er and Protecton, who is the
Psalm. 65. 5.
confidence of all the end of the earth, and of them, that are a far off upon
the sea.

To thee therefore O merciful and gracious God, do we resign and recommend,
our selves, our souls, and bodies, out Cause, and all our Councels and designs;
beseeching thee to remove our sins as far from us, as they have removed us out
of thy favor; O thou that sparedst Ninive in compassion to those many thousand
innocents that were therein; be pleased out of thine infinite mercy, to spare
those sinful Nations from whence we are, and give not up thine heritage therein
to such Confusion; but turn us O God, at the last, and be gracious unto thy
servants; Oh satisfy us with thy mercies, and that soon, and do not suffer thy
whole displeasure to arise upon us; but do thou arise, and have mercy upon
Sion, build thou the walls of our decayed Jerusalem, and cause thy face again
to shine upon thy Sanctuary among us; So we, that be thy people, and sheep of
thy pasture shall give thee thanks for ever, and declare thy loving kindness
from generation, to generation.

Thus I have showed the several kernels of this Pomgranate; but to have
ins^sted particularly upon every one of them, would have swelled this Treatise
beyond its intended Bulk; The main thing I shall fix upon for my subject, is
the Doctrine of Spiritual Infatuation, the epidemical disease and infection of
these Times; reserving the other considerations, to be inserted, and
interweaved, as subservient handmaids to this grand purpose, or to be used as
so many slight dashes, in the pourtraic^ure of this ugly and deformed monster
of this Age.

Incrassa cor populi hujus. Make the heart of this people fat. The disease we
have to do withal, lies not in the Head; it is not a vertigo, or whimsey in the
brain, an error in opinion; But it is a desperate malignant humor tha^ flies to
the Heart, the seat of the vital Spirits, and the principal part of the whole
body. In that black roll of curses we read of Deuteronomy. 28. the greatest (to my
appr^hension) is that which is set down v. 28. The Lord shall smite thee with
madness, and bli^dness, and astonishment of heart. And Solomon in that
excellent prayer which he made at the Dedication of the Temple, makes the
knowledge and removal of this plague of the heart, to be the characteristick
note of true repentance, and acceptance with God, 1. King 8. 38. It Is this
part that is primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, as well in Grace, as Nature.
And therefore, since the Act of the Spiritual Physician is so much concerned in
the preservation and recovery of this principal part; that I may proceed with
the more hopeful success therein; It will not be amiss to proceed after this
method; namely, to show 1. The disease it self. 2. The Causes of it. 3. The
Symptoms of it. 4. The most hopeful way of Cure of it.


First of the Disease. We say in Physic, that a disease is more then half
cured, when it is certainly known and disovered; and more grand errors are
committed by unwary assurances, then by illiterate applications. This of the
heart is mentioned in Scripture with great variety of expressions. That which
we read so frequently in Scripture of the Sons of Belial, men that lived (in
their generations) Absque jugo, without any yoke of Religion, or Government
upon them. That which the Psalmist speaks of a people, whose hearts were as fat
as grease, (or as brawn, according to the vulgar translation) Psalm. 119. 70.
That which the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of an Impudent, and stif hearted people,
Ezekiel. 2. 4. That, which the Protomartyr Stephen speaks, of a stiffnecked
people, and uncircumcised in heart and ears. Act. 7. 51. That which S. Paul
mentions of some, whose consciences were cauterized and seared, as with an hot
iron. 1. Tim. 4. 2. That, which he calls elsewhere, Blindness of heart, in
those who (being past feeling) have given themselves over unto licentiousness,
to work all uncleaness with greediness, Ephesians. 4. 18. 19. That which he calls a
strong delusion in those who are designed to believe a lie to their own
destruction. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. That which he calls the darkness and defilement
of the mind and Conscience. Tit. 1. 15. The same is the desperate disease of
the fat heart in the Text. All these are but so many expressions of the same
Malignitie in the Soul. So that by the fat heart, we are to understand such a
Brawny, obstinate, and obdurate heart, as no admonitions can reclaim, or
mercies move, or threatenings regulate, or motions mollify; an heart that hates
to Psalm. 30. 17.
be reformed, that is wilfully resolved to subscribe to ^o command, but to
pursue with greediness and delight, the full swinge of its own sensual and
depraved inclinations.

We say in Philosophy; Qualitates intenduntur, and remittuntur. All Qualities
admit of intensions and degrees. For as in Artificial Contrivances, one wheel
insers the motion of another; and one color is a preparative to another; till
the cloth be dyed in Grain; As in Matters Military, a small defeat at first,
may be the occasion of a total Rout: So in Matters Spiritual, per s^elera ad
scelus, one iniquity is ordinarily the door and preparative to another, till at
last the sin becoms of a scarlet dye; and one Judgem^nt (if not entertain^d as
coming from the just hand of God;) becomes a fatal preparative to another, till
at last the soul becoms palseystricken, and has no sense at all of the hand
that smites it. Thus it fares with this Porosis tes Kardias. This Infatuation,
or Obduration of the Heart ^s of several Kinds or Degrees; I shall speak only
of three of them, unto which all man be reduced.

First. There is an obduration which is natural, and common to the whole lump
and mass of mankind. The Proph^t Jeremy sp^aks of a foreskin gro^ing upon the
heart, which must be taken off. Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take
away the foreskins of your hearts. Ier. 4. 4. Of which Spiritual Circum^ision.
the ^egal, in the flesh, was but a Type and figure, the true Circumcision being
that of the heart; in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not of
man, but of God, Romans 2. 29. With this foreskin about the heart, is every man
born into the world; and it is no shame for us to acknowledge the vileness of
our natural pollution, according as Ezechiel describes it. Ezech. 16. 4. 5. 6.
For till we are clen^ed of this filthiness, and this foreskin be taken away,
the heart of man is abominable, and disobedient, and to every good work av^se,
and reproba^e. Of this speaks the same Prophet also in another place, A new
heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take
away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh,
E^ech. 36. 26. So that, when God is said to harden any man's heart, it is not to
be understood of any positive act, or operation upon the heart, making that
hand and impenetrable, which before, was soft and pliable; but (according to
the Co^nsel of h^s most just, and holy will) by way of N^gation, or rath^r
preterition; he passes by the vessels of wrath, and leaves them as he found
them, with their natural hardness and dryness upon them. No otherwise then as
the earth is sometimes parched and made fruitless, (not by any positive curse,
bu^) as it was in Eliahs time, when the clouds were withheld from pouring their
rain upon it. Thus we read of Sihon King of the Amorites, that when the
Israelites would have passed peaceably through his territory, paying not only
for their meat, but for their water, and pawning their Deuteronomy. 2. 2^.
faith only to pass along the high way, without turning e^ther to the right
hand or to the le^t: It is said, that God hardened his Spirit, and made his
heart obstinate, Deuteronomy 2. 30. (that is) he lest him to be ruined by his own
natural peevish, and unfriendly disposition; in opposing that people which he
saw God Almighty owned by his visible power and protection. God hardened his
heart, non indu^endo malitiam, sed propter peccata praecedentia,
subtrahendogratiam; says Aequinas.

2. There is a second kind of Obduration, which is Casual and Vol^ntary, the
work of a man's own wilful and pernicious industry; A kind of poison extracted
out of many venomous and destructive simples; A custom contracted by the
iteration and repetition of many vicious and ungodly actions. Now though
hardness be the quality of all iron in general; yet there is an apparent
difference between the hardness of iron in the Ore, and the hardness of iron in
the Anvil; That in the Ore is hard by nature; That in the Anvil, is hardened by
design, and grows harder every day, by a constant multiplication of strokes
upon it. That in the Ore, is malleable, and easily broken in pieces; That in
the Anvil is so obdurate, that it resists all the strokes that are made upon
it. Just so is it with a man's heart: That, which by nature was but Pollution;
by indu^gence and improvement becomes poison. That, which by nature was but a
skin about the heart; by custom, becoms a stone in the heart. Humors when they
are tough and compacted, are purged out of the body with greater difficulty;
and a complication of sins is not easily dissolved in the soul. For as in the
Natural Constitution, that which is but a slim^ visious humor, in the stomach,
is by the heat of the body compacted into gravel, and (by the continual
acc^ssion of this gr^e substance) is digested into a stone in the reins or in
the bladder, which grows there to such a mag^itude, that it becomes a disease,
which is seldom cured but with extreme pain and hazard of the patient: Just
so is it with the Spiritual Co^stitution; That which by nature was but a
pronesse, and propensitie unto evil; by the strength of Custom, and
encouragement of Delight, becoms a second nature, a Necessity, whereby a man
is so far ensnared and fettered with the cords of his own twisting, that he
becoms prisoner and slave unto himself, and his own corrupt affections; and
without great grace, and m^rcy, is never redeemed into the glorious liberty of
the sons of God. I shall instance only in that cheap and daring provocation,
(the sin of ^rsing and swearing) which makes up a great part of some men's
Language; Were it certainly revealed from heaven to the common swearer, that
the next oath he swore he should incur the sentence of Dathan and Abiram, and
be carried away quick to Hell, I persuade my self he were not able to forbear;
so powerful and predominant is the strength of a depraved custom in the soul.
And truly, though custom in some cases may be a good plea in Law; yet I am
sure, it is a very bad one in Divinity. A man that should be arraigned at the
bar of Justice for taking a purse upon the high wey, or for picking a pocket at
a sermon; and should plead at the bar under this form: My Lord, I pray be good
to me, it is a Custom I have gotten, and would leave, but I cannon; Would not
all the world cry shame on him, away with him to Execution? Certainly the case
is the same between God and us. Are we born down with the strength of custom?
The more our guilt and shame; that (to the high dishonor and provocation of a
merciful God,) could be content to sin over the same sins for ten, twenty,
thirty years together; without ever taking notice that we were in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity. And truly, he that shall favor himself in
any wicked way, and indulge unto any pleasing transgression, with a purpose to
persevere therein: Does apparently strengthen himself in his wickedness;
delivers up the possession of himself to that Devil, whose name is Legion; and
makes Mar. 5 9.
way for a third kind of obduration, which follows in the next place to be
spoken of.

3. There is a third kind of Obduration; and that is Divine, and Judicial; the
just reward of the former obstinacy. For when the Donor of every good and
Ezech. (...). 16. 17.
perfect gift, finds his Tale^ts ab^sed. his silver, and gold, and the fair
jewels of his mercy, made the fuel and matter of more licentious provocation;
his Grace turned into want^nnesse, the motions of his good Spirit, vilified and
rejected; no abatement of sin, no improvement in Grace, notwithstanding all his
stripes and Fatherly Corrections: When he sees the heart of a man so wedded
unto his own way, that with Ahab, he sets 1. King. 21. 25.
himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord; And with Absalom, is not
ashamed to commit a barbarous and horrid wickedness in the sight of 2. Sam.
16. 22.
all Israel, and the Sun; When a man is grown so strangely habituated unto
wickedness, that he can as well forbear to eat, or drink, or sleep, as the
contrivance and prosecution of his malicious designs; And so desperately
resolved, as to make a Covenant with Esaias. 28. 15.
Death; and to be at an agreement with Hell; cannot endure to think of being
reformed, and therefore declines and hates any thing that may tend to his
Conversion: Then (as a just reward and punishment of this wilfulness) God
delivers up such a man unto himself, withdraws the sweet influence of his
grace, suffers him to take his full swinge in wickedness, and to run headlong
(without any restraint) to his own ruin and destruction.

This I take to be the obduration of Pharaohs heart, so frequently mentioned in
the book of Exodus. For it is said Exodus 8. 15. When Pharaoh saw, that there
was respite, he hardened his heart, and harkned not, etc. and v. 32. Pharaoh
hardened his heart this time also; etc. and then Exodus 9. 12. it is said God
hardened the heart of Pharaoh. And it is observable how he is threatened v. 14. I
will at this time; send all my plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants,
and upon thy people, etc. So that first Pharaoh hardens, and then God hardens.
Pharaoh hardens himself, and God leaves him to himself. Pharaoh hardens
wilfully; and God hardens judicially. This I take to be the doom of the
accursed fig tree in the Gospel, under which is comprised every barren
Christian. Le^ no fruit grow on thee henceforward Mat. 21. 19. Jude 12.
for ever. These are the trees Saint Jude speaks of, whose fruit withers,
without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots. Where the Method of Gods
Justice is very observable upon an obstinate and Apostate sinner. First, His
fruit withers, he deserts his station, grows weary of well doing, and puts
off the yoke of Christianity, as if it were an intolerable burden; Then,
without fruit, The sap of grace is withdrawn, and the soul becoms immediately
barren; Then, twice dead, dead naturally, and dead spiritually; For as the soul
is the life of the body, so is the Grace of God the life of the soul. And
lastly, plucked up by the root; not presently cast into the fire; They may
continue in the garden of Gods Church a long time after, may participate of the
dew of heaven, of the holy Ordinances of God, and external communion with his
people. But as never fruit comes of a tree that is plucked up by the r^ots, and
so left; So never any thing capable of Divine acceptance, comes from a man
thus miserably deserted. The ground, and foundation of this doctrine; I
conceive, may be safely laid upon that maxim of our Savior. Habenti dabitur.
To him that has, shall be given, and he shall have more abundance; But
whosoever has not, (that is has not improved his talent) from him shall be
taken away, even that which he Mat. 13. 12.
seems to have. These are the several kinds, or degrees of Obduration; and
this last I take to be the disease in its full height, and malignity.

Secondly, We are in the next place to look upon the cause of this disease, and
what is particularly instrumental unto it. We say in Philosophy, Anim^ sequitur
temperamentum corporis. The soul has its operation according to the temper,
organs, and disposition of the Body. As there is no disease in the body, so
there is no distemper or depravity in the mind, but is the effect and product
of a certain particular cause. So that as Infatuation of mind is a certain
preparative unto judgment: so there are certain preparatives and
predispositions to Infatuation of mind.

Two sorts of evils there are ^n the world, the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment; this of Infatuation is both: it is hard to say whether has the
greater share in the composition. This twisted evil, as it arises from several
causes, so it is compounded of several ingredients.

In the general; God himself may be said to harden, according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 9. 8. Whom he will, he hardneth; Not by any positive operation
upon the mind (as was said before) but by a privative withdrawing or
withholding of Grace. No o^herwise, then as wax being taken from the fire, from
being soft and pliable, returns to its natural hardness, and inflexibility.
And this is the just permission of Almighty God, that such as will not conform
unto him, and walk in his ways; should be left unto themselves, to take their
own precipitate and destructive courses.

For Instrumental Causes, there are many. To instance in some few, for all the
rest. The first Medium unto Obduration I shall propound, is, The
misunderstanding and abuse of secular prosperity and success. Thus Senacharibs
best argument to persuade Jerusalem to revolt from good King Hezechiah, is
drawn from the success of his sword, upon the men and gods of Hamah, Arpad,
and and Sepheruaim; and from thence he 2 King 18. 34. 35.
inferred, that therefore the Lord of hosts should not deliver Jerusalem out of
his hand; And never under^tood the guilt of his Blasphemy, nor the falacy of
his argument, nor the vanity of Nisrock his Idol, till he felt the power of his
maker, and the stroke of Divine vengeance, in the swords of his own Sons,
sheathed in his own bowels, in the very Act and posture of his Idolatrous
worship. When the greatness of Nebuchadnezzars power and conquest lifted him
up so high, that he forgot he was a man; God brought him down and humbled him
into the very nature and condition of a beast.

There was a time when Dan. 4.
Babylon was grown fat, as the heyfer at grass, by eating up the inheritance
of the Lord; but it lasted not long, for within a short time after, Every one
that went by Babylon, Ier. 50. 11.
was astonished, and hissed at the sight of all her plagues. And the same
Prophet takes notice of some of Gods own people, that were waxen fat, and
shined, that overpassed the deeds of the wicked, that did not Judge the cause
of the Fatherless, etc. and yet they prospered until the day of Gods
visitation came Ier. 5. 28. 29.
upon them. Thus was Egypt gro^n as a fair heyfer, and her men in the midst of
her, as so many fatted bullocks, and all to their own destruction; as appears
Ier. 46. 20. Thus was I^surun grown fat, and kicked, he was grown thick, and
covered with fatness; and mark what followed hereupon, he presently forsook
the God that made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. Deuteronomy.
32. 15. And therefore the Divine Omniscience foreseeing this evil consequent
arising from blessings abused, enters a caveat against it: Beware that thou
forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments; lest when thou
have eaten, and art full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; and
when thy herds, and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is
multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied: then thine heart be lifted
up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc. Deuteronomy. 8. 11. 12. 13 14. The Psalmist
speaks very home and close to our purpose, who (describing the wickeds day of
Sunshine) says, Their eyes stand out with fatn^sse, they have more then heart
could wish, they are not in trouble, as other men, neither are they plagued as
other men; pray observe the co^seque^t, Therefore pride compasses them about
like a chain, violence covers them as a garment; thou do set them in
slippery places, thou castest them down to destruction, how are they brought
into desolation in a moment^ They are utterly consumed with t^rrors. Psalm. 73.
5. 6. 7. 18. 19. Impunity is no good evidence to prove Integrity; it is very
often the instrument of sottish and secure stupidity. Because sentence against
an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of the sons of men
is fully se^ in them to do evil. Eccl. 8. 11. Where, though sentence against an
evil work is not executed speedily; yet ('it is worth the observing) every evil
work, (how plausibly soever disgu^sed and palliated) is immediately sentenced.
There is an obligation unto punishment belongs to every worker of Iniqui^y,
which nothing but repentance can r^verse and cancel. Solomon says, There is a
just man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his life in wickedness. Eccl. 7. 15. and S. Paul says, If in this
life only we had hope in Christ, (speaking there of the Saints and servants of
God) we were of all men the most miserable. 1. Cor. 15. 19.

I have produced all these Text^ ^d Instances for no other purpose, but to show
the vanity and imposture of these times, which have built so much upon so false
and rotten a foundation, as if they had borrowed light rather from the Turkish
Alcoro^, then from any Scripture given by Inspiration.

So that, however ignorant and ungrounded men, and sometimes Gods own select and
peculiar servants, (as Job, and David,) may stumble at the prosperity of fools
and wicked men; and look upon their secular advantages, as so many marks of the
Divine ^odnesse and Benignity; yet let them but approach the Sanctuary of God,
and there consult his Sacred Oracles; they shall find, that the stations of
these men are set in dark and slippery places; That their Damnation 2. Pet. 2.
3.
slu^breth not, but is rather so much the nearer, by how much the farther they
think themselves removed out of the reach of it. And for those of our Age and
Nation, who have built their greatness upon the ruins and rubbish of a
glorious Church, and a flourishing Kingdom; that have fatted themselves with
the blood of their brethren, and from the Tail of the people, have advanced
themselves to such a pitch, as to be able to trample upon the head and throne
of Majesty it self, however these men may flatter and applaud themselves in the
success of their own Councels and Contrivances; and by an Hysteron Proteron,
conclude and infer Godliness from Gain, and not Gain from Godliness* Sanctity
from Success, and not Success from Sanctity; I could wish they would be advised
to suspend their Judgment of Gods secret decree upon our Nation, till they
have seen the last Act upon the stage. There is a Tragical Scene will one day
show it self, whenever God shall draw the curtain, it shall then appear to
all the world, that their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they
cover themselves with their works, their works are works of iniquity, and the
act of violence is in their hands. Isa. 59. 6. Then shall be fulfilled that
saying of Eliphaz, A dreadful sound is in their ears; in prosperity, the
destroyer shall come upon them; Job 15. 21. In the mean time, I shall only
recommend unto them two Texts of Scripture, which I wish may be well studied
and digested of Them. The one is Isa. 30. 12. 13. Thus says the holy one of
Israel; Because ye despise my word, and trust in oppression and perverseness,
and stay thereon; therefore this iniquity shall be to you, ^ a breach ready to
fall, swelling out in a^ high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, at an
instant. The other is Isa. 50. 11* Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that
compass about your selves with sparks, walk in the light of your fire, and in
the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall ^e
down in sorrow.

I shall dismiss this point with two Cautions only, the one concerns the right
stating of our Judgment; and that is, That we would not think the worse but
the better of our Religion, for the cruel persecution which the Devil by these
infernal instruments, has raised against it. There were some in the Psalmists
time, that irreligiously demanded, saying, where is now the God of the Hebrews?
And there are, (even of those that have laid the train to our Destruction) that
demand with as much insolence as absurdity; where is now the Protestant
Religion in England? Not, where was it before Luthers time, but where is it
now? To whom we answer, That it is now where it was before Luthers time, that
is, under the Eclipse of Persecution. They may with as much reason demand (with
those useful instruments of theirs, the Sectaries) where is the Kings power now
in England? Since it is not exercised a^ present by any persons deputed by his
Majesty, nor in any part of that Is^and, that I know of, which if they do; In
promptu est responsio; Every true hearted Englishman h^th his answer ready,
(though he dare not speak it out) namely, That the Kings power (however
trampled upon by Rebels and Regicides) lives still, (and long may it) in the
hearts, of all his faithful and loyal subjects. And as for our Religion; I
doubt not but (like the late martyred defender of it) it will improve by
sufferings, and appear more glorious and celestial, when these black clouds and
foggs shall be dissolved and scattered into nothings; we are neither
Millenaries, nor Papists; We pretend not to be members of a glorious visible
triumphant Church; We esteem it mercy eno^gh to be of the despised members of a
Church Militant; to be of the posterity of the woman persecuted by the great
red dragon into the wilderness; who, when he could not reach her person by
those water^ of persecuti^n he cast after her; was wroth with the woman, and
resolves to make war with the remnaut of her seed for ever. Rev. 12. 17.

The other Caution concerns our Conversations; That as we would not think the
worse of our faith: so we would think the worse of our Lives, for the growth of
our enemies power and success: and that our wilful and resolved wickednesses,
are of a more fatal and pernicious influence, then our highest courages, or
most active performances can compensate. Let that Military Caution of Moses be
set seriously before our eyes. When the host goes forth against thine enemies,
then keep thee from every wickned thing. Deuteronomy. 23. 9. For however we sit here,
warm and disingaged; yet how far our friends in other places are About the time
of that merciless slaughter at Drogeda in Ireland.
at this instant, exposed to the cruel mercies of our Enemies; How far our
Sovereign may be endangered by snares, and treacheries, and close conspiracies;
How far we are concerned in the final issue of the war; and how far we may
wound our friends and their designs at any distance, would be seriously thought
on by all that wish us good luck, and that we may prosper in the name of Lord.
That as we are hungry and greedy enquirers after news and transactions; so we
would be as zealous in abstaining from that which will certainly render our
intelligence more welcome and desired. That after a long and sad experience of
the severe hand of God against us; God may at last have the ^onou^, and our
selves the comfort of a final victory over our selves, and sinful enormities,
as well as Enemies.

2. Sometimes God suffers the hearts of such as hate to be reformed, to be
hardened and infatuated per^inisterium Diaboli, by the service and ministry of
our grand enemy the Devil. For the Angels which kept not their first estate,
are not so reserved in chains under darkness; but that they have leave to walk
the world, to promote the Kingdom of darkness. S. John tells us, The great
dragon was cast out of heaven, that old serpent called the Devil, and Satan,
which deceives the whole world, he was cast out into the earth, and his angels
were cast out with him, Rev. 12. 9. And our Savior compares the Kingdom of
heaven, to a man who sowed good seed in his fi^ld, but while men slept, his
enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way; Mat. 13. 24. 25.
Almighty God has four principal fields, Heaven, Paradise, the Church, and man's
heart. In heaven, Lucifer sowed pride; In Paradise, Satan sowed disobedience;
In the Church he sows Schisms and Heresies; and in man's heart he sows all
manner of unlawful sects. And for the great harvest he gains by his unw^aried
industry in sowing, he is called the God of this world, the Ephesians. 2. 2.
prince of the air, who rules in the hearts of the children of disobedience.

It is said of Judas Iscariot, that after he had rec^ived the sop from his
masters hand (which was the signal discovery which of the twelve should prove
the Traitor:) that Satan entr^d into him, Ioh. 13. 27. What advis^ this
infernal tutor dictated unto him, is s^t down V. 2. He put into his heart to
betray his master; which was prophesied long besore, that Satan should stand at
his right hand, Psalm. 109. 6. It was very proper and natural, that the Devil
should have the sole conduct of Judas, who was to be the guide unto them who
were to take Jesus. All Tr^ason, though never so ^peciously gilded and
disguised, we know from whence it comes, it is neither be^ter nor worse then
the Devils whisper. And indeed there is no reconciling Christ and Belial; no
middle path between o^edience and disobedience; no neutrality between God, and
his enemies. They that will not have the one of reign over them, do ipso facto,
subscribe unto the others Government. Saul is no sooner deserted by a good
Spirit, but immediately possessed of an evil one. And this is most agreeable to
the Justice of God, that 1. Sam 16. 14.
such as will not be led by the saving conduct of his good Spirit; should be
left to the mercy of a Spirit so full of malice, that (when he cannot have his
full blow a^ man) receives some satisfaction in the destruction of an herd of
swine; Mar. 3. 12.

We read of Ahab, that being designed (by the Justice of God) to fall at Ramoth
Gilead; a lying Spirit comes and offers his service to be the instrument of his
destruction; and propounding a very plausible way to effect his design (namely
by being a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophers) he gains a Commission
(or rather a Permission) to go and act accordingly: Where we may pause a
little, and enquire, what was the reason the Devil was so active and officious
in this service? Was it to befriend the Syrian army with a glorious victory?
It Is not likely he should be friend to any party, who is the irreconciliable
enemy of all mankind: Or was it for the accomplishment of Eliahs Prophecy
concerning Ahabs fall? Doubtless, the promoting and accomplishing Gods Truth,
(quatenus his Truth) is no very pleasing employment to a lying Spirit: He that
was a Liar from the beginning, and the arch Patron of all imposture, would
certainly change Gods Truth into a lie, if the thing were possible, and his
power proportionable to his malice. No; his malice strikes at the King of
Israel, that in that one blow he might ^ound all the thousands of Is^ael: He
knew well, that if the sheperd were once but smitten, the sheep would
immediately b^ scattered into misery and confusion enough. Which as Micaiah saw
in a vision, so the Devil by the advantage of long experience knew, would be
the certain consequent of the Kings fall. And therefore for this grand purpose
he whers all his endeavors, for this he Councels the King of Assiri^ to issue
out a Command, saying, Fight 1. King 22. 31.
neither with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. For this he
sends his Emissaries among all the Prophets; For this he raises persecution
against single, but faithful Micaiah, because he would not follow his false
suggestions: And at the accomplishment of this design, how do the hellish and
infernal suries cl^p their black hands; in a tryumphant acclamation, saying,
There, there, so would we have it.

I have insisted the longer on this story, for the near affinity and
correspondence it has with these times. For let us but set a good King in the
place of a bad; and sure we have much of Micaiahs vision accomplished in our
Israel. Sure I am, we are scattered on all hands, as sheep that have no
shepherd (at least no shepherd where he should be) and in this our sad
confusion, we are not without good store of Foxes, and Tigers, and wolves in
sheeps clothing preying upon us: And no wonder, for was the lying Spirit so
active and busy in Ahabs time, and has he been less active and busy in
ours? Was he so active and busy in cutting of an Ahab from the Throne of
Israel; and has he been less active and busy in cutting of an Hezechiah from
the Throne of England? Was it the language of the lying Spirit in the Prophets
of those times, Go up and pr^sper: and is it not the language of the same
Spirit in the b'ack mouths of our Prophets, Go on and prosper in the most
prodigious ways that ever ^he Sun beheld? Was Michaiah smitten, and imprisoned,
and reduced to bread and water for speaking in the name of the Lord; And are
not our Micaiahs, our Prophets, as vilely and villanously entreated by our
Pashurs and Zedechias among the Prophets, and by our Ammons and Governors
among the people? I would to God that many of us, (the Lords Prophets) had but
so much as bread and water, that we could call our own, till our Sovereign Lord
the King were settled in his Throne in peace. But alas, what can either Priest
or people expect, whilst the goodly pillars of our Land, Religion, and
Judicature are quite overturned and laid aside? Whilst all Law is resolved into
the bloody sentence of the sword; and all Gospel into the private whisper of a
seducing and destructive spirit? And all power (under the permission of the
supreme wheel) receives its Commission from Ephesians. 2. 2.
the Prince of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience?

He that in the b^ginning seduced the first woman in the form of a Serpent (and
by that imposture introduced a general inundation of iniquity upon the world)
is now grown so wise, as to transform himself into an Angel of light: 2. Cor.
11, 14.
And in this white and Saintlike disguise, has leave from a just God, to
whisper to the Consciences of wilful and unstable men, such strange delusions,
under the pretense of new light^, as fills the Christian world with wonder and
amazement. 'Twere easy to set down a list of these new light^, but that I look
upon them as too many, and indeed too scand^lous to be inserted in a Protestant
Treatise: And therefore to wave a particular Narration of the whimseys and
phrensies which the boldness and madness of these times has thrust out into
the world, together with the absurdities, defects, and haesitations in prayer,
which have been pinned upon the Sacred Spirit of God, and all by virtue of
Excitations, Incitations, and Inspirations extraordinary; as if the same Holy
Ghost declared one thing by his pen, and suggested the clean contrary by his
whisper. He that shall take up his stand in his Sanctuary of God, and from the
pillar of truth (established upon the clear word of God) shall take a survey of
the Doctrines and Principles which have commenced of late years, together with
the general belief and adherence which has been given unto them: The wild and
intemperate Zeal of the promoting them; and the B^nishment (or rather Burial)
of Meekness, Patience, Peace, Charity, and all Evangelical graces, in the
man^gery of their designs so full of gloriou^ pretenses; must either resolve
aforehand to wink and blind himself by partiality and design, or else be
enforced to conclude from the fruits we have reaped, that the seed was never
taken out of Gods granary; but that it has been the Business and Industry of
our envious Adversary, to sow his tares, to the great increase of his peculiar
harvest, whilst we have slept and snorted in our sin and security.

So that, as when God opened the eyes of Elishas servant, he saw then visibly
the protection of that heavenly host, which before he was not able to discern;
so (on the contrary) would the same God be pleased to do the like Spiritual
Cure upon the eyes of our minds; We should soon discern those Legions of
Infernal Spirits, by whose seduction and delus^on we have been cheated of the
favor of God, and abused and ensnared into so much misery and ruin. Thus,
Deus deficit, gratiam detrahendo. Diabolus afficit, maliciam apponendo; homo
seipsum inficit duritiem contrahendo.

Nor is this al, The Devil has not persected his design, when he has instilled
his poison, unless he give his Opium too, and lay the soul asleep upon the
pillow of security; Those diseases of the body are of greatest danger, and of
nearest aff^nity with our dissolut^on, that take away all sense of pain and
anguish; as the Palsy, L^tha^gie, etc. And the fatt^st parts of the body are
ever observed to be the least sensible, as having in them the fewest fibers and
n^rves, which are the instruments of Sensation. So that, when the Devil is said
to make the heart fat; he makes it Secure and senseless of any danger, arising
from our own sin, or Gods Judgments. And indeed, the Devil can never call a
man his own, till he has him at this lock; For so long as there is any sense
of sin, any touches or twitches of Conscience; there is some hopes of recovery,
a possibility there is, he may see with his eyes, and hear with his ears, and
understand with his heart, and convert, and be healed, But when a man has
sinned himself out of all sense of sin; when there is no M^nitor in the school
of the soul, no check of Conscience to remember him of a Quid feci? what have I
done against God, my neighbor, and my o^n soul? sure such a man is in salva
custodia Diaboli; there is very little hope of such a man's recovery. The
Psalmist speaks very parti^ularly to this point, where, speaking of despera^e
rebels and oppr^ssors, he says: They are enclosed in their own fat, and
therefore their mouth speaks great swelling words, Psalm. 17. 10. But more of
this when I shall speak of the Symptoms of Infatuation.

In the mean time, the Consideration of what has been delivered on this point,
may be enough, I hope, to promp^ us unto these lessons.

First, To try and examine all spirits and suggestions whatsoever; especially
in an age so miserably haunted, and infested with evil spirits, as this wherein
we live. There is a spirit that dif^ers very little from flesh and blood in its
corruption, and pravity; and this spirit the Prophet Eze^hiel calls our own
Spirit, a blind guide within us. There is a persuasion which S. Paul gives
Caution against; a persuasion that comes not of him that calls us. There is
a piece of wisdom which S. James calls wisdom mistaken; which is not from
above; for that wisdom is always pure and peaceable, etc. but a wisdom in
contending and quarrelling, in managing strife and bitterness, with most
advantage to our selves; Achitopels wisdom, to put dif^erences our of all
possibility of reconciliation; and this, in whomsoever it is, Iam. 3. 15.
is ear^hly, s^nsual, and di^ellish. It shall be our wisdom to enquire carefully
into all these, and above all these to be always awake to the danger and
deception of our own false heart, which is very prone to entertain and swallow
what is most pallatable unto flesh and blood. Latet anguis in herba; ^he old
Serpent lurkes commonly under the fairest flower.

Secondly, having discovered the impostor; That we would conceive our Christian
reputation very much concerned, in bidding defiance to this Enemy, Most men are
bold only in bragging they have great courage; when indeed they have none at
all in opposing the enemies of God, and their own salvation. And let no man
think the engagement of his Christian warfare, a difficult, tedious, or
unreasonable service; There is Armor of proof provided for us from head to
foot. And the Apostle requires no more of the Christian so^ldier, but only to
keep his station. When Ephesians. 6. Ephesians. 6. 13.
the Israelites (having the Sea before them, and the Egyptian Army behind them)
begin to suspect Moses his Conduct, and Gods protection: Moses requires no more
of them, but only to stand still, and they should see the Salvation of God A
man would th^nk it no Exodus 13 13.
small encouragement to men of Military employment, to be assured before they
went out to battle, that their enemie^ would certainly fly, if they did but
keep their stations. And yet S. James assures us infallibly, that this shall be
the certain issue; If we will but resist, the Iam. 4. 7.
Devil will flee; He does not say if ye overcome, the Devil will flee; but if
ye do but resist, the day is your own; and yet how few are ^o be found of s^
much resolution as belongs to the bare resisting of evil. It i^ not in the
power of Beelzebub, or all the Devils in Hell, to compel a man to subscr^be to
a temptation. And therefore let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of
God, for God cannot be tempted, neither tempts he any man, but every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed. Iam. 1. 13. 14.
What the vis formativa is to the Embrio in the womb; the same is compliance to
the production of that ugly monster sin. Consent forms it, Desire gives it
birth, Delight nurfeth it, and practice and perseverance brings it to its full
grouth and perfection; and when it is finished, ye know what it brings forth;
Death and something worse then death, after death: (namely) a worm that nev^r
die^ but will ly gnawing upon the Conscience unto all eternity.

Thirdly, That since the Devil is so instrumental to our Insatuation, that we
would warily decline whatsoever is instrumental to the Devils purposes, to the
growth of his power either in us, or over us.

That we would look upon Idleness, as the Devils pillow, whereon the soul
sleeps it self into a fatness and indisposition unto any motion tha^ is praise
worthy. He that has nothing to do, is at leisure to do any thing; and he that
will not give himself an employment, shall be sure to have one provided for him
by his severest enemy.

That we would look upon Drunkenness, as a sin, wher^in we degenerate from
men, into the nature and condition of very Beasts, Certainly, did that sin
write its deformities externally in the face, in a Wry mouth, or a Squint Ey;
with what wariness and circumspection would we abstain from it? whereas it
leaves far greater blemishes upon the soul, and yet behold men daily vomiting
out their own shame, and daily returning with greediness to their own drunken
vomit. A sin which as we have learnt of other Nations; So I would to God we had
not learned to go beyond them in it. A sin wherein, we diseard our Reason, our
Religion, and all that is of God in us, and put our selves entirely under the
power, conduct, and possession of the Devil. And how far he will make us act in
his service ere we are sober, we know not (we know not, did I say?) I fear, if
we well recollect our selve^, we know too much; enough to fill our eyes with
tears, and our hearts with sorrow and compunction.

That we would look upon Fornication and Adultery as upon sins that take the
members of Christ, and employ them in the service of an unclean spirit. And
sure if Mary Magdalene for her looseness this way, was possessed with seven
Devils; it may be feared that if Mary Magdelens sin be not washed in Mary
Magdalens tears, the same unclean spirit will reside with the same unclean
works; I and take unto him seven other more wicked then himself, and multiply
at last into a Legion of Devils.

Lastly; That we would look upon Oaths and Blasphemies, and cursed Execrations;
Not only as so many Grievances Ephesians 4. 30.
of the Holy Ghost, (that would fain seal us unto the day of our Redemption:)
But as it is the very language of the Damned Spirits, who the more they
Blaspheme, the more they are tormented, and that to all eternity. Certainly,
this cheap and daring provocation, is not the soft Ventriloquie of some modest
whispering Devil within us; but the language of a bold, daring, roaring Devil;
that takes delight to rave in public, and spits defiance in the face of God.
In the history of our Saviors miraculous Cures, we read of diverse that were
corporally possessed by the Devil; and certainly, the contemplation of his
power and malice, exercised with so much cruelty and Tyranny in those
Demoniaks, cannot but aff^ct us with much pity and Compassion. Who would not
gri^ve to see his Christian brother, that is bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh, vexed and disqu^eted by an Infernal spirit? to see him cast sometimes
into the fire, sometimes into the water, sometimes foming at the mouth, sometimes
cutting his own flesh, at the will, and pleasure of his cruel Master? And yet
how few are there among us that have either eyes to see; or hearts to grieve at
the danger and reality of Spiritual Possession? Do we not daily see our
friends, and acquaintance cast into the fire, and into the water, I, and by the
power and instigation of the Devil ^oo? Are they not cast into the water? The
deep drowning waters of At^eisme, Apostasy, and despair; the extreme cold
waters of senslesnesse, and stupidity? Are they not cast into the fire? The hot
burning fire of Lust and Concupiscence; the wild fire of Sedition and
rebellions, the scorching fire of Anger and Revenge? And yet so far are we from
pitying these men in their deplorable condition, that we make their misery the
matter of our Mirth and Iollity; and play with their destruction, as if the
souls Tragedy were but a Farce, designed only for sport and recreation.

We read of witches, that (in that solemn Covenant, and Contract they make
with the Devil) they do seriously and expressly renounce their Baptism, with
all the interest they have in Christ. Though many are strangely given now a
days, to renounce and revoke the vows and promises they made in Baptism: Yet
I will not conclude so desperately of any auditory; Only this I must say, that
till they bid defiance to these, and the like works of the Devil, though they
are not witches by solemn agreement; yet I have too much reason to suspect they
are bewitched and charmed with the Spiritual Infa^uation in the Text; and I
should suspect my self possessed of a dumb Devil, if I should not let them know
so much.

Thirdly, the soul is sometimes bewitched into infatuation, per Ministerium
pseudoprophetarum. By the ministry and agency of false Prophets; For the devil
does not gain all his ends by the influence of his own immediate suggestions.
As he may have leave to assume the very flesh and bones of a deceased person;
so he may have leave also to employ the brains, and lungs, and organs of a
living agent; and so he has done in all ages (the most notorious Hereti^ks
being not more infamous for their heresy, then eminent for their part^.) And
if any man suspect this truth, I can produce no fewer then 450. Prophets of
Baal, and of the groves, 400. more to witness it; 1 King. 18. 19. These
factors for the kingdom of darkness are so clearly described by the pen of the
holy Ghost, and with such particular marks upon them, for caution and
discovery, that (notwithstanding all their fine spun arts) I should wonder my
self into an astonishment to see (in a Church where the Prophets, Evangelists,
and Apostles are so often read and preached) a people so strangely cosened and
ensnared as we have been; but that I read, that Rebellion is a^ the sin of
witchcraft. These must give me leave (notwithstanding all their power and
influence to do mischief) to enter a little into their discovery; and though
they are very changeable in their shape and complexion; yet by the help of that
light, that searches even between the joints and marrow, I shall show you
these wandering stars, that so all men that would not make shipwreck of faith
and a good conscience; may know their danger, and l^arn at last to fear God,
and honor their King, and to meddle no more with those men, who are thus
wantonly and desperately given to change. Prove. 24, 21.

And this I take to be no digression at all from the Text, since it was the
fate of this people (to whom the Prophet addresses himself) to be ruined by the
frauds of their false Prophets, who by preaching smooth things unto them, laid
them fast asleep in their own security; and would never suffer them to Ier: 14.
15.
hear of sword or f^mine, till they were surprised by these judgments past all
recovery.

We read in Scripture of three sorts of false Prophets; there were some whose
predictions were very true, and yet themselves were false Prophets, because
their hearts and affections were very false and ^nsincere. Such a one was
Balaam, of whose prophes^es we read Number. 24. Its said of him, that he heard the
words of God and saw the visions of the Almighty, v. 4. and by verrue of this
illumination, he prophefied of Edom, Amaleck, and the Kenite, of the future
prosperity of Israel, spoke party ularly of Jacobs star, which was to rise
many hundred y^ers after. And yet we find this unerring Prophet in his visions,
brande^ by two Apostles, S. Jude, and S. Peter, for loving the wages of
unrighteousn^ss, and was rebuked for his iniquity, Jude 2. 2 Pet. 2. 15, 16.
the dumb Ass speaking with man's voice, forbidding the madness of that Prophet.
Thus Caiphas the Jewish high Priest was a Prophet; He prophesied in Ioh. 11.
50, 51.
the general, that it was expedient that one m^n should die for the people; and
particularly, that Jesus should die for that Nation; and this was most true,
otherwise, not ^ha^ Nation only, but all the Nations in the world had perished
everlastingly. And yet the Evangelical history tells us, that Caiaphas was
notorious conspitator against that innocent Lam^ of God, who was slain for the
whole wo^ld. Ba^am and Caiphas spoke both well, but did extremely ill; both
spoke as they were inspired, only with this difference between them, Balaam
knew what he spoke, but Caiphas did not; God opened his mouth as he did the
mouth of Balaams Ass, which spoke true; but (in the mean time) knew not what
she spoke.

There is another sort of false Prophets, who have been ever employed by the
father of lies, for the promoting and dispersing of delusions and impostures.
Thus 400. Prophets are employed and governed by one lying spirit, to seduce
Ahab to fall at Ramoth Gilead, 1 Kin. 22 6. Thus Hananiah prophesied falsely of
the Israelites return out of Babylon, and strengthened his prophecy, by
breaking Ier. 28. 10. 11.
a yoke from off the prophet Ieremiahs neck; and all this, for no other
purpose, but to make the people trust in a ly; Jer. 28. 15. And that these
Prophets might have the greater credit with the people, it was sometimes
permitted unto them (as unto the Egyptian sorcerers to do miracles) to give
signs and wonders; otherwise that caution of Moses had been in vain, Deuteronomy. 13.
1, 2. If there arise among you a propbet, or a dreamer of dreams, and gives
thee a sign, or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, etc. by which
it appear^, that the Prophet might be a false Prophet, and yet the wonder, the
sign, might have an exact accomplishment; only to try the people, whether they
did love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul,
D^ut. 13. 3.

The third sort of false Prophets, were such, as whether they spoke True, or
false, were (out of question) false Prophets, and false in their prophesyings
too, and that on another ground; namely. Because they intruded themselves into
that Sacred employment without Commission, saying thus says the Lord; when the
Lord never spoke at all by them. Of such as these, God himself seems to
complain of; The Prophets prophecy lies in my name, I sent them not, neither
have I commanded them, neither spoke unto them, they prophecy unto ^ou a false
vision, and Divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their heart,
Jer. 14. 14. These were a kind of over active Prophets, that make more have,
then good speed; They were not sent, yet they ran) says another text) they
were not spoken unto; yet they prophesied. Ier. 23. 21. Of this sort especially
are those swarms of Locusts which have so miserably, and perniciously invaded
our Coasts. And therefore to wipe off any scandalous aspersion which may fall
upon our Church or Religion, by reason of these Boutefeus, and fireb^ands; we
must profess with S. ^ohn, E nobis egressi sunt, sed non erant ex nobis. These
n^to^ous Antichrists went out from us, 1 Ioh 2. 19. Math. 12 22.
and have been seen among us, but they were never of us. A man may demand of
these, as of him in the Gospel, friend how ca^nest thou in hither not having a
wedding garment? So friends, how came ye into the Church of England without
Ordination, and Orders? Jesus we know, Act. 19. 15.
and Paul we know, and all their lawful successors we know; but who ye are we
know not. We know you pretend to have a Commission from Jesus Christ, with so
much intemperate boldness, as if you were the only persons employed and
entrusted by him; But, pretend you what you will, we know what Jesus Christ
has concluded of such as you are, Ioh. 10. 1. He that enters not by the door
into the sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief, and a
robber. Our Savior himself was the door to his Apostles, and his Apostles and
their Successors, the door to all that ever were admitted shepherds in a
regular and Aposto'ique manner. The Ministe^s of the Gospel are called
Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1 and Ambassadors, 2. Cor. 5. 20 Now for an Ambassador to
move in an employment witho^t a Commiss^on, is a presumption of so high a
nature, that (I think) the Law makes it Treason. IN me sure Reason declares it
a Contradiction. For an Ambassador is not an Ambassador, till he has his
Commission sealed; nor a steward, a steward, till entrusted by the Master of
the Family; neither may any man assume unto himself the honor and employment
of a Priest, but he that is lawfully and externally called and designed unto
the function, as was Aaron. Heb. 5. 4.

As I shall not think the worse of my own coat, for that these boisterous times
have worn it threadbare, so God forbid I should be so strongly opinionated of
it, as not to believe a secular man may have more gifts, and those more
eminent, then ordinarily reside in an Ecclesiastical person, I know well, that
every Christian (quatenus a Chri^ian) is obliged to pray for, reprove, exhort,
and instruct his Christian brother; and that whosoever shall convert a sinner
from the error of his way (whether he be Laick or Ecclesi^stick) shall hide a
multitude of sins, and shall shine as the stars in Iam. 5. 20. Dan. 12. 3.
the Firmament: and yet, though one star may differ from another in glory,
light, and magnitude; ver every star is confined to its proper Sphere;
otherwise they may fall under the censure of those wandering stars S. lude
speaks of, to who^ is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude 13.
Every man by natural pity is obliged to help a sheep out of a ditch, and yet
every man is not by profession a shepherd. Uriah may be a good King, and yet
but a bad Priest. There is an apparent difference 2. Chro. 26. 19.
between a good man, and a good Citizen, Aristotle.
between a good Christian; and a good Minister of holy things The Apostles rule
is safe and good. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he is
called; 1. Cor. 7. 20.

In an Honorable Economy, there may be diverse servants o^ great eminency for
their parts, and yet the steward (perhaps) may have the greatest Trust. And in
a Court Royal, there is no necessity that he who keeps the Seal, should always
write the fairest Character. The gifts, and administrations of the same holy
Ghost are diverse, and all given to 1. Cor. 12. 29.
profit withal; and yet all are not Apostles, all are not Prophets, Abana, and
Parphar; rivers of Damascus might (questionless) have cured Naamans Leprosy,
as well as lord^n, had the Prophet Elisha sent him thither; It was not the
water, but the Prophets benediction did the Cure; which was not the less
Divine and miraculous, because of no more difficulty, but barely to wash and be
clean. We have many now a dai^s of Naamans blind persuasion, that are highly
oftended if their spiritual cure be not effected their own way; They think
nothing can be well done in the managery or Gods Ordinances, that is not
performed with a great deal of difficulty and straining, which enclines them
very frequently to look more upon the weak instrument, then upon the Supreme
Agent, in the work of Regeneration; and so far admire and door upon the
preachers gifts, that they forget they ever come from any Donor.

Whereas the Honor and Excellency of our Ministry, consists not so much 1.
Cor. 3. 6.
in our gifts and endowments (For Paul may plant, and Apollo may water; and yet
no increase, unless God give it:) as in the mercy of God en^iled upon our
function, by virtue of certain peculiar promises and concessions, as Whatsoever
ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. Mat. 18. 18. And Lo, I am with you always,
even unto the end of the world. Mat. 28. 20. Which promises, do no^ extend to
all Christians at large, but only un^o those whose commission runs in this form
and ^or, Go, and Teach all Nations, and Baptize them, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

So that those shepherds that come not into the sheepfold, those Laborers that
come not into the Vinyard by the door of Ordination, but climb up, or creep in
some other way: May justly be suspected to have ends and aims as private and
particular, as the way they run in is irregular and un Apostolical. And sure
they come within the number of those seducers the Apostle speaks of that creep
into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with
diverse lusts; ever learning, and never ab^e to come to the knowledge of the
Truth. 2. Tim. 3. 6. 7. So that having laid a false foundation, it is no wonder
if their superstructure prove nothing else but ^ottenes, and Hypocris^e.

Nor is my charge brought only against these wandering and irr^gular stars; but
against other waveri^g and Apostate stars: such as (deserting Rev. 8. 11.
their Orb, like that star in the R^velation called wormwood,) have
exceedingly ^bittered our waters of affliction. These I must confess (not
without some bitterness of spirit) came fairly in by the door into the
sheepfold, though afterward they proved hirelings, and cowards. And let no man
wonder at it, for it is our Saviors own prediction, that immediately before his
second coming the stars should fall from heaven, Math. 24. 29.
and the powers of heaven should be shaken, and S. John saw clearly in a
vision, that a time would come when the tail of the dragon should draw the
third part of the stars from heaven, and cast them unto the earth. Rev 12. 4.
The Church will never be without her Dema^-like Apostates, who carry more of
Mammon, then of Christ in their bosoms; 1. Tim. 1. 20.
and with Hymaeneus and Alexander, will sooner make shipwreck of their faith
then their ^ortunes; as if those many Text o^ self Denial, and forsaking all
for Christ's sake, and his Gospel, were mere Apocryphal, or to be expunged at
pleasure, and there were no such thing as persecution in the Church militant.
Certainly, these men never sat down and considered before the^r Ordination,
what that sacred engagement might cost them, as the times might prove; and may
justly be suspected to have wan^ed much of that inward calling, which they
outwardly professed to have; and to have had their eyes more upon the wages,
then upon the work of the Ministry. But as our Savior will one day have a
Nescio Vos, for such as shall plead, ^aying; Lord, have we not prophesied in
thy name? And in thy name have cast our Devils? And in thy name done many
wonderful works? So Math. 7. 22.
will c^r dear (though deserted) mother the Church of England, have a Nescio
Vos sor that viperous brood, who in these Apostate times, have eaten their own
way (or the way to their own ends) through that womb that bare them.

In the mean time, however these men may esteem of themselves, or be esteemed
of by others, they are not like to be reck^ned among the Lords Prophets; their
lot, at best, will fall out to be but among the peoples Prophets; because they
forge and form their visions, (as some men do their prognostications)
according to the humor, palate, and unstedinesse of these times: Now if the
trumpet give an uncertain sound; who shall prepare himself unto the battle? If
the Prophets steer according to the people, 1. Cor. 14. 8.
who shall be the peoples guides? If the blind lead the blind, both must
certainly fall into the ditch. God commanded the Prophet Isaiah, to record it
unto ^ll posterity, That his people were a rebellious people, lying children,
and such as would not hear the law of the Lord; Why; What was the reason?
because they took upon them to prescribe unto the Prophets; saying unto the
Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, speak
unto us smooth things, prophecy deceit. The people were therefore said to be
incorgible, because they were resolved to entertain no Prophets but such as
should varnish over their foul spots with fair pretenses, and scratch the itch
of their rebelliou^ humor. In the Prophet Ieremies time, there was the same
combination and agreement between the Prophets and the people; and that this
was no slight provocation, observe what a black mark the holy Ghost sets upon
it. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the ^and; The Prophet^
prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their Ier. 5. 30. 31.
means, and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in the end
thereof? And as this evil re^gned under the Law, so that it should re^gne also
under the ^ospel, we have S. Paul's express prediction. The time will come
(says he) that men will not endure sound doctrine, but 2. Tim. 4. 3.
after their own lusts will heap unto themselves teachers, having itching ears.
All Scripture is written for our Instruction,

These smooth Prophets are the great Lw^inaries, or rather Idols of our Age and
Nation, adored and magnified by the blind unsteddy multitude, for no other
reason that I can imagine, but for their sympathizing correspondency in
blindness and inconstancy. And truly, if there be any light at all in them,
it is certainly, the light of the glo-worm, or rottenwood; rather seems, then is
so, by reason of the great darkness wherein we are involved; O^ rather, like
those pernicious and misguiding lights, that cause a man to wander out of his
way, which we call Ignis Fatuus, and Ignis Lambens, one of which you may fan
and drive before you which way you please, and the other will follow ^ou which
way soever you part the air: Both are ductible, and pliant unto your will; and
both will lead you out of your way, and carry you you know not where. These I
call the peoples Prophets, whose doctrines are so loose and Independent; that
you know not where to have them, and yet you have them at every turn; That
steer in their prophesyings, sometimes according to the sense and dictate of a
secular Council or Committee; sometimes according to the face and Aspect of a
Cyfer Assembly, sometimes according to the success and achievements of a
traitorous and bloody Military Combination, sometimes according to the Itch and
enclinations of their blind ^ol^owers, by whom they subsist. Thus instead of
squaring the Christians practice by the precepts of Gods word (which every
wise, and regular builder ought to do) they have borrowed a trick from Rome, to
mint their doctrines, and cases of conscience, as may be most serviceable to
their particular designs and Interests.

And I could wish they had borrowed only their fine spun Artifices from that
Conclave; their Sophismes and distinctions from the le^u^te; and not (by their
wild and confused principles) have invited the very persons of Priests and
Jesuits to incorporate and cooperate with them in their pernicious and
destructive designs. For it is most certain, that these subtle and busy
factors, have not only plowed with our heifers in their private Assemblies, bur
with the Calves of the people also; those Bulls of Basan, or rather Bulls of
Belial; whom pride, Ambition, and Covetousness, have rendered impatient of any
yoke of Government, or of being confined to any In^o^ure. The phrase is not
in^ollerable, since it is the Holy Ghosts own Dialect; the one is Sampsons,
Judge. 14 18. The other the Psalmists, Psalm. 68 30. But to return to the Peoples
Prophets.

To say nothing of the unme^surable Cove^eousnesse, and notorious Nonresidence
of those men, who in other times, were the fiercest declamers against these
foul sins: Nor of their bottomless malice against their fellow Laborers;
Making a man a Delinquent for a word, and laying snares for him, that
impartially Isa. 29. 21.
reproves in the gates. I shall pass by their injuries unto men, and only
take notice of their injurious dealing and prevarication with the word of God,
and consequently with God himself; and that in two respects: First, in their
mis^nterpreting of Scripture, and secondly in their misapplying of Scripture;
in both which respects, they have added much to the boldness, and presumption
of the Heretics of old, and the present Church of Rome they so much declame
against.

To produce some few instances of many, and first concerning their,
misinterpreting of Scripture.

If Barack were the supreme Magistrate in Israel and Meroz were Cursed for not
coming in to his assistance, in a day of great extremity and hazard; I wonder
with what fa^e our Prophets could so unanimously concur in making use of that
Text, Judge. 5. 23.
to incite subjects to take arms against their Sovereign? If Peter were
reprehended by Christ for drawing a sword in defense of the most innocent
cause, and person, that ever appeared in the world; it is very strange that (of
all other instances) that should be made use of, to strengt^n the doctrine of
resisting the lawful Magistrate. It was a strange piece of confidence (to my
appreh^nsion) in the Presbyterian party, to turn those Cannons, (or Cannonical
Texts) upon the Army, and their adherents, See the letter subscribed by some of
the London Ministers.
(not long before the Kings murder) which they would never take notice of,
whilst they were planted against themselves. I my self have heard out of the
pulpit a passiona^e Declamation Master Grenhil, at Stepney.
against all Ceremonies whatsoever, and the Textalledged to prove the
damnablenesse of them has been only that Rev. 22 18. For I testify unto every
man that hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man shall add
unto these sayings, God shall a^t unto him the plagues that are written in this
book. As if the institution of a Ceremon^e, ^r Circumstance, (without which, no
external worship can be performed; without which, no Church on earth ever d^d,
or any assembly of men can appear in the Public worship and s^rvice of God)
were an Addition to the prophecy of that Book, or to the Doctrinal part of the
Holy Scriptures.

I wish from my heart, these men were (^n this particular) as innocent, as the
Ceren onies established in the Church of E^land; But he that shall seriously
debate, within his (...) ^rstanding, The un^a^ra^ ^erp^rat^on^, the (...)
glosses, the unreaso^ble I^ferences, which they have forced from ^ome Text^ of
Scripture, only in favor of their own de^gnes, shall have reason to suspect,
they are very nearly allied unto those, who interpret p^sce oves, seed my
sheep, (that is) Depose, and murder Christian Kings And Quod unque solveritis,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, etc. signifies the Popes power to
dispense with all s^rts of Oaths, Vows, Penalties, Censures Laws, even with
the obedience of Subjects, to their Sovereign Lord and King. From such
squeizings, and pressures of the Sacred Oracles, (God help us) I Am sure we
have tasted a bitter potion, and if this be not to add unto Scripture, and
consequ^ntly to incur those plagues, which S John declares to belong to so
bold a sin; I know not what is.

Secondly, for their Misapplying of Scripture, or (rather) prevaricating with
it. And here the field is so large, that I should exspatiate much beyond
myIntendments, should I acquaint you; what horrid, and prodigious suggestions
have been hinted unto the people, from some abused Texts: as particularly from
that, Eccles. 4. 13. Better is a poor and wise child, then an old and foolish
king, who will no more be admonished etc. from that Isa. 30. 31. Tophet is
prepared of old yea for the king it is prepared; from that Psalm. 149 8. To bind
their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in links of iron; from that Ier. 46.
Cursed be he that keeps back his sword from blood. In all which, our prophets
have been as grossly and unsoberly mistaken, as was that gentleman (who
preaching to a great Congregation upon a day of humiliation, for unseasonable
and rainy weather) The summer 1648.
made use of that Text, 1 Samuel 12. 17. Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will
call unto the Lord, and he shall send thunder, and rain, that you may perceive
and see, that your wickedness is great, which you have done in the sight of the
Lord, in asking you a king, And from thence concluded, that that unseasonable
weather, which at that time threatened the wheat harvest, was sent for the
peoples great wickedness in petitioning a Treaty with his Majesty. Quere,
Whether it were not M. Greenhill in Stepny Church?
Sure it might have been a meditation more genuine, and agreeable to the day,
to have remembered his Auditory; That God had justly sent an excessive moisture
upon that earth which (out of Spiritual drunkenness and madness) we had
moistened our selves for some years before, with our own Christian, Protestant,
English blood.

For those that have been th^s notoriously guilty of handling the word of God
deceitsully: I wish them seriously to consider, that these pious frauds (for
such perhaps they may believe them) are not only arguments of great Ignorance
and unsteddinesse in the p^ofession of the Gospel, but of a very deep degree of
hypocrisy and impiety; And that the reward and doom of such desperate
dissembling is certain ruin and destruction, and for the proof of this, I
shall only produce two Texts, the one is 2 Pet. 3. 16. Some things (^n S. Paul's
Epistles) are hard to be understood, which they, that are unlearned, and
unstable, wr^st (as they do also the other Scriptures) unto their own
destruction. The other is 2 Timothy 3. 13. But evil men and seducers, shall wax
worse and worse, deceiving: and being deceived. The frauds of an Impostor (how
ever they may fail of their ends upon other men) shall be sure to return with
mischief enough upon the head of him that practices them, and the final close
of the seducer i^ his own ce^t^in seduction. They shall do well to consider,
that the great red Dragon, and the old serpent, the devil, and the Beast
(Antichrist) and the false Prophet, are all of a piece, and all of a chain,
Rev. 16. 13. The bottomless pit is all their homes, their spirits are all
unclean spirits, and indeed, they have very little reason to pretend to the
spirit of truth and holiness, who thus notoriously abuse his sacred oracles, to
their own particular ends and aims, as if the word of God (which ought to be
the rule of faith, and a good life) were a rule of lead, to be bowed at
pleasure, to our own licentious humors and inclinations.

But all this perhaps, may be thought to be a declamation as full of bitterness
as boldness. The false Prophets will declame against false prophets as fast as
any; and if the appeal be made unto the people, it is more then probable, that
Zedechiah the false prophet, will have 1 Kin 22 Jer. 28.
the better of Micaiah the true; Hananiah the false, will prevail over Jeremiah
the true: The false prophets, as they carry the greatest confidence, so
commonly the greatest plausibility with the people. We read in sacred History,
that a man of God has been mistaken in a man of God; The man of God that was
sent to prophecy against the Altar at Bethel, was deceived and 1 King. 13. 18.
1 Cor. 14 32.
abused by the old prophet that dwelt at Bethel. And although the spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; that is, subject to their examination
and censure; yet we do not in these days, pretend to such a spirit of
discerning, but that one prophet may be easily mistaken in another; And
therefore it will concern us to look out for some kriterion, a character or
mark, whereby we may receive satisfaction in this particular.

And certainly, we cannot have a better, then that which our Savior has left
upon record, Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Propbets, which come to you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravning wolves. Hypocrisy, and cruelty or
covetousness (for both are employed in the wolvish disposition) are shrewd
symptoms of a false prophet; but this description is not concluding enough, and
therefore its added v. 20. By their fruits ye shall know them But it may fall
under a quere, what is here meant by fruits? for if by fruits in this place, we
shall understand men's actions and manners, as they are expressed in the outward
conversation, then this can be no good kriterion: for the lives of many
orthodox and able preachers, may possibly be blemished with diverse frailties,
impurities, and inadvertencies; The truth of our doctrine does not depend upon
the integrity of our conversation: there may be Jacobs voice in the pulpit, and
the rough hands of Esau elsewhere; it is possible men may be exquisite
instrument^ of other men's conversion, and yet when all is done, prove cast
a^ways themselves, like Noah's Carpenters, that labored with him in building of
the Ark and yet had not faith enough to go i^ and be saved. And so on the
contrary the fra^ds and fallacies of false Prophets and seducers, are very
frequentl^ varnished over with alms and austerity^ and exact strictness in the
outwar^ conversa^ion; damnable doctrines man have a saint-like holiness
attending o^ them. The Prophet Zachary tells us ^ some Prophets (not unlike the
Romi^ Ecclesiastics) that wore a rough garment to dec^iv^; and yet in the day
(...) trial, every one of these Prophets should be ashamed of their visions,
Zach 13. 4 The Scribes and ^harisees were n^toriously precise ^n their prayers,
and fastings, and tything of mint, annis, and cumm^n; and yet our Savior ^els
his disciples, that, except their righteousnes^ exceed the righteousness of the
Scribe^ Mat. 5. 20.
and Pharisees, they should not enter into the kingdom of heaven. It Is no
strang^ thing for subtle merchants to put the fairest glosses upon their
falsest wares^ and if we shall take our aim at the outward conversation, the
greatest Artist i^ hypocrisy may pass for the holiest man of God; so that ye
shall know them by their fruits, is not to be understood thus, ye shall know
them by their works, or ye shall judge of their sayings by their doings; but ye
shall know them by their fruits, that is, by their doctrines; ye shall know
them by such fruits as their doctrines shall produce. And indeed, this was the
infallible mark of a false Prophet under the Law, as appears Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. If
there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams and gives thee a sign,
or a wonder, and the sign and the ^onder comes to pass, whereof he spoke unto
thee saying let us go after other gods and let us serve them, etc. where the
s^gn of the fals^ Prophet is not in the s^gn, or the wonder, but in the
persuasion to Idolatry; So that whenever we meet with a Prophet persuading
and enclining a people unto any appa^e^t corruption in Religion or good
manners; or whenever we meet with a doctrine, the design or application
whereof is the promoting of sedition and rebellion, to the prejudice of the
peace and safety of any Church or Kingdom, we shall need no further witness to
conclude the deceit and imposture of that false Prophet.

To come then to the touchstone; do we meet with prophets that take away the
touchstone from us, whereby all doctrines should be tried and concluded? Do
they cloister up the Scripture (the certain rule of faith and a good life) and
put the salvation of our souls upon an implicit faith, and a blind obedience?
Do they assure us, that ignorance is the mother of devotion, and so
consequently open a gap to all sad consequences, which commonly ensue upon the
want of the knowledge of God in a land? Do we meet with prophets, that tell us,
that no faith is to be kept with heretics, and so apparently introduce that
foul sin of perjury and prevarication both with God and man? Do they discharge
children of the duty they ow unto their parents, by virtue of some Corban, or
perhaps some monastic vow, or Romish compliance? Do they discharge subjects of
their duty of allegiance to their Sovereign, by virtue of some popish
dispensation, making the fifth commandment of God of none effect, through their
own Traditions? Do we meet with prophets that dissolve Lawsul Matrimony in some
persons, and forbid it in others; when the Scripture expressly concludes it
honorable in all? Heb. 13. 4.
And do they in the mean time allow and tolerate abominable Stews and Brothels
(those sinks of uncleanness;) not for convenience, or necessity (as is
pretended) but in truth and reality, for filthy lucre sake? We know what those
Prophets are, by the accursed fruit that spring from these and the like
doctrines; it shall be no breach of charity in us, to conclude them in the
number of false prophets; and of these Prophets, we know where there are good
store, tha^ walk the world in sheeps clothing, with no small power and
plausibility.

But to look nearer homewards; Do we meet with Prophets (highly honored in
their own Country) that tell us, we may do evil at some times, that good may
come thereon, in order to a reformation; and so by consequence, resolve all
christian practice into good intendment, wherewith hell it self is said to be
paved? Do they tell us, that God sees no sin in his el^ct; and then (by a
ni^ble and dextrous way they have of Sainting themselves, and their own
prose^ytes) conclude and infer their Fornications and Adulteries to have no
uncleanness in them; their sacrilege and plunder, to be without theft: their
jug^ing and dissembling, pious fra^ds; and their horrid and bloody mu^ers, to
have the sweet smelling savor of acceptable peace o^erings? Do we meet with
Prophets that inform the people, that Kings (as well a^ Bishops) are
antichristian; that the kingdom of Jesus Christ, is a spiritual Government, and
that no temporal monarch has any thing ^o do with it; That Kings instead of
being prayed for (as Defenders of the faith, and protectors of the public
peace) may (without being deposed by the Pop^) be murdered by their own
subjects. That the design of the Gospel is divisio^ and a sword. That the best
Patriots and preserves of the public peace and liberty, are those men who are
dee^est perjured. That treason and rebellion is good service to God and the
Comm^nwea^th. That it ought to be acted upon the public faith of the kingdom,
and when it is acted, that i^ ought to be rewarded with public thank^ and
acknowledgem^nt in print. In a word, do we meet with prophets that tell the
people, that the moral law is of no use or obligation under the Gospel; that
there is an Evangelical necessity of weed^ng up the Tares, before the general
harvest; that themselves are the ^ood wheat, and that all men else are ^ares,
and the seed of the devil, that go about to hinder and obstruct so good a w^rk;
that the liberty of the Gospel may be stretched and extended to the acting of
any dictate arising from any private persuasion of spirit (how blind and
abominable soever) and that the banishment, imprisonm^nt, and murder of Christ's
own Ambassadors, is the best way to promote his service. By these, and the like
doctrines (which I would not have exposed to public view, had not a necessity
e^forced it) we may guess what these prophets are. And that I do not injure
them by traducing their doctrine, their own sermons and discourses, together
with the peoples practice grounded thereupon, is a clear and ample declaration
of their preachers principles. And now let all the world judge by the fruits we
have reaped of late years from these men's Doctrines; whether these are the
servants of Jesus Christ, and the way they have gone, be agreeable to his
Gospel or not. Or rather, whether these are not those wolves in sheeps clothing
he has forewarned us of; whether these are not the peoples prophets, nay the
devils prophets, whose tongues have been set on fire of hell, t^ set the world
all in a conflagration. And it is very observable, how God has brought the way
of ^hese juglers and dissemblers upon their own head; Before, they would not
prea^h, or pray, according to duty and c^nscien^e; but as the current of the
times inclined them; and now they cannot, at least, I Am sure they dare not. For
as it was decreed in our Sa^iours time, That if any man should consess Christ,
^e should be put out of the Synagogue; so if any man shall now preach or pray
for K. Ch^s II. a^ his undoubted lawful Sovera^gn, he shall not b^ put out of
the Synagogue or Assembly, but out of the wo^ld too, if he look not the better
to it. So that ^ur desol^te and decayed Jerusal^ (having drunk at the hand of
the Lord the cup of his fury. and the dregs of the c^p of trembling) may justly
complain wi^h the Prophet Isaiah, That there is none, or at least very few, to
Isa. 51. 17, 18.
guide ^er among all the sons that she has broug^t fort^; neither is there any
tha^ taket^ her by the hand, of all the sons that she has brought up; But
instead of mini^tring any comf^rt or advice in the day of her calamity, the
leaders of the people have caused them to err, and they Isa. 9. 16.
that are led of them are destroyed.

The truth is, the unparall^ld mischief which these blind leaders of the blind
have done; ^he strange boldness wherein they have proceeded; together with the
general belief and adherence of the people, ha^h enforced me to dwell so lon^
upon so ro^ten and corrupted a su^ject. But I shall now leave these prophets to
their repentance, and a sincere detestation of their deep impiety, only I shall
make some short use of it, in reference and relation to our selves.

And now (having given you an ample discovery of the f^lse prophets of these
irregular times) I suppose you are highly enraged and incensed against them,
you look upon them as the firebrands of hell, the causers of all our miseries,
that no punishment can be sever^ enough for such pernicious instruments, and
what would you not do to bring them to condign punishment? but foft Jam. 1. 20.
and fair, The wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, Though I have
not spared them in painting them out in their proper colors, yet so far am I
from incensing the people, or any kind of authority against them, that I shall
desire and conjure both the one and the other, to quarrel with themselves, and
the corruptions of their own bosoms, as with the just and natural cause of the
insincerity and depravity of their prophets.

Two ways God was wont to express his displeasure against his people, in
respect of prophets. Sometimes by sending them no Prophets: This was the ground
of the Psalmists complaint, concerning the desolation of the S^nctuary. They
have burnt up all the houses of God in the land; we see not our tokens, there
is not one Prophet more among us Ps. 74. 8, 9. Sometimes by suffering them to be
abused and deluded by false Prophets: For as (in the Civil Government) in the
multitude of Counselors, and laws, Prove. 11. 14.
there may be peace and safety, so in the multitude of Councellor^ and laws,
there may be a snare, and a curse upon a people; for they may be mercenary
Counselors, such as Ezra speaks of; and Ezr. 4. 5.
they may be St^tuta insalubria, such as Ezekiel speaks of. So is it in the
church Ezekiel. 20. 25.
in respect of her Proph^ts, it is not the number, but the quality of them that
is to be looked after; It was a promise of great mercy which God made unto his
people by the Prophet Jeremy, I will give you Pastors according to mine heart
which shall feed you with knowledge and Jer. 3. 15.
understanding Not Pastors according to to your heart, that had been a
judgment; but Pastors according ^o my heart. As good no Pastors, as no good
Pastors; nay, better no laborers, then pernicious laborers in the Lords
vinyard. The paucity and insincerity of Prophets, are both alike the judgment
of God upon a people.

Now this is to be laid for a gr^und, That the corruption and insincerity of
the Prophets (under the just anger of God) takes it rise from the corruption
and insincerity of the people. So that (to come to the root of our errors and
miscarriages) it is most certain, that before ever the seducer got into the
pulpit, or to the table^ end, there was a more dangerous seducer gotten into
the heart. In one man avarice was a concealed preacher to the soul; in another
ambition, in a third, discontent; in a fourth, revenge; in a fist, pride, and a
desire of government, in a sixth, novelty, and a desire of change of government;
in some one, in some more, in some all of these, in some more then all of these
(like the seven devils in Mary Magdalen) kept the entire possession of the
soul; so that our hearts being seasoned and prepar^d by these and the like
corrupt and vile affections; it was very agreeable to the justice of God, to
give way, that such Prophets should be sent among us, as were most suitable to
these particular itching humors and predispositions.

So that as (in the natural constitution) when the stomach is burdned with any
noxious and offensive humor, that is there predominant over other humors; the
Appetite being governed by that predominancy, declines those meats which are
most wholesome and nutritive, and longs after those which are more unhealthy and
destructive; Just so is it with the spiritual appetite, if that be wanton, or
corrupted by the malignity of any deliberate and resolved wickedness, it does
neither approve nor digest the sincere milk of Gods word, but (loathing that
Divine Manna) it looks out for new devised meats and sauces, that is, in the
Apostles phrase, new fangled doctrines and opinions; such as for their novelty
or compliance, are most palatable and pleasing to our corrupt and licentious
enclinations.

Aeger animus falsa pro ver is videt. This is that dangerous evil which the
S^ripture calls the setting up a stumbling block of iniquity in the heart,
whereof we have a clear and ^ncontroulable instance, Ezekiel. 14. 3 Son of man,
these men have set up their idols in their heart and put the stumbling block of
their iniquity before their faces, should I be enquired of at all by them?
These men, and who were these men? The Elders of Israel, v. 1. Therefore the
rule is set, v. 4. Every man of the house of Israel that sets up his idols
in his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face,
and comes to the Prophet; I the Lord will answer him that comes, according to
the multitude of his Idols. And if the Prophet be deceived (at any time) when
he has spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived that Prophet, v. 9. and
wherefore is all this? see v. 5 That I may take the house of Israel in their
own heart, that is, in the snare of their own heart, because they are all
estranged from me through their Idols.

Let the Saint-like ruling Elders therefore of our Israel look well to it. For
if they resolve before hand, to decree unrighteous decrees, to write
grievousness, Isa. 10. 1.
which themselves have prescribed; and to deal trecherously with God and man
(which I need not speak by supposition) They do but set up a pernicious Idol in
their own bosoms, a fatal stumbling block before their own faces; and
notwithstanding their daily preparatives by prayer and preaching, for
assistance in council (wherein they would seem to the world, to be very careful
to enq^ire at Gods mouth) yet the Prophet Isaiah is positive, if they will
choose their own ways, their own counsels, God will choose their delusions, Isa
66 4.
will bring their fears upon them, and will answer them according to the snares
and prevarications of their own false hearts. And then what will become of all
their pretended sanctity and devotion? Truly, their many Invocations will prove
but as so many provocations, nay as so many abominations in the Isa 66. 3.
sight of God. Their many prayers and sermons will but stand as a cloud of
witnesses one day to condemn them of their secret Atheism and Hypocris^e. So
that if our Prophets have been like foxes in the deserts, as they were in
Ezeki^ls time; it is because our Elders have been like wolves in sheeps
clothing, as were the Scribes and Pharisees in our Saviors time. If the
prophets have kindled the fire, the people have contributed the fuel and
matter, to so great and miserable a conflagration.

And indeed, this rottenness at the core, is that pestilent corruption, which
has so visibly ensnared the Church of Rome into so many gross delusions;
because, notwithstanding all pretenses of infallibility, borrowed from a
mistaken Matthew: 16. 18.
promise of our Savior; notwithstanding all their solemn addresses, and
preparatives by prayer and fasting; the Conclave assemblies, filled with
selected agents, whose business there, is not so much the discovery of divine
Truth, as the Pre-resolved design of minting and venting such adulterate coin
under that stamp of authority, as may be most serviceable to the establishment
and enlargement of the dominion and tyranny of that See.

This insincerity of spirit (the secret breath of antichrist) when it gets into
the representatives of the Church (as it may do, because we are sure it has
done) puts a foul cheat upon God and the world, in that language of Visum est
Spiritui sancto, and n^b is. It seems good Act. 15. 25.
to the holy ^host, and to us, etc. when the truth is, it is Visum est interesse
nostro, and non Spiritui sancto; It seems good to us and not to the holy
Ghost. And for the foul spots and blemishes of particular interest and
advantage, the Councels of after ages never arrived to that reputation and
honor; which the whole Catholic Church acknowledged to be due to the first
four general Councels, for that candor and int^grity which was so visibly
wanting in that famous stratag^m of Rome, the Council of Trent. For the promise
of the holy Ghosts ass^stance, is confined neither to S. Peter's chair in Rome,
nor to any assembly of men whatsoever, any otherwise, then the sincerity of
their hearts in seeking after truth, puts them into a capacity to receive it.
So that that hypocris^e, which is of the finest spinning, and disguised with
the fairest glosses upon it, is ever the most serviceable expedient to the
designs and ayms of our grand Advetsary the Devil: and that glistering piety
which is only plausible in appearance, and designed only to dazzle m^ns eyes; is
ugly and abominab^e in the sight of God.

And because our times are foully suspected to savor strongly of this secret
leven of hypocrisy; I shall present ye with one of the most remarkable piec^s
of a painted Sepulcher, and well colored rottenness, that I find mentioned in
sacred Scripture, and that is Isa. 58. 1, 2. where the Prophet is commanded,
saying, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins; Yet they seek me
daily, says God, and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God; they ask of me the
ordinance of justice and take delight in approaching to God. And yet this goodly
pile of external piety, was laid upon no other, but the rotten foundation of a
dissembling heart; and therefore required the loudest and most Trumpet-like
voice of a Prophet, to reprove it. And as the sin was of a strange complexion,
that so much rottennes should lodge under such a specious disg^ise, so the God
of truth and sincerity, appears against this sin in a very remarkable way of
threatening, as appears Is. 29. 13. Forasmuch as this people draw near to me
with their mouth, and with their lips honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me, and their fear toward me, is taught by the precept of men.
Therefore behold I will proceed to a mavelous work amongst this people, even a
mavelous work, and a wond^r; For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish,
and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid: and then follows, Woe to
them that seek deep to hide their council from the Lord, and their works are in
the dark, and they say, who sees us^ and who knows us? Surely your turning of
things upside down, shall be esteemed as the potters clay, etc. But if these
texts shall be thought only to be of lewish concernment, and to be looked on
only as an Almanac of a year, that is come and gone; we have a parallel to
these in S. Paul's prediction, directed to Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 1. etc. This know
also, that in the last days, perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, un^oly, with out natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good. Traitors,
heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of God; having a form
of godliness, but denying the power thereos, etc. What a world of wickedness
does here march under the garb and disguise of the most saint-like godliness.

So that, if God (out of his just indignation against a st^bborn and
falshearred people) has suffered contempt to be poured out upon his anointed,
and has Job 12. 21.
weakened the strength of the mighty; which was once the condition of a man
after his o^n heart. If he has taken v. 20.
away the understanding of the aged, and removed the speech of the trusty. If
he has taken away from our Jerusalem the mighty men, and the honorable, the
the Judge, and the Prophet the prudent and the ancient, and instead of these,
given children for Princes, and babes to rule Isa. 3. 3, 4, 5.
over us. If he has suffered the child to behave himself proudly against the
ancient, the base against the honorable, and the people to be oppressed every
one by another (which is an accursed condition, as full of torment and vexation
to an ing^niou^ spirit, as of absurdity and confusion. If he has mingled a
perverse spirit in the midst of us, delivered us up to spiritual drunkenness
and madness, and blasted all our Treaties, perhaps for the secret insincerity
of our specious disguises. Isa. 15. 14. Ier. 13. 13.
If he has suffered our people to be eaten up like bread, our blood to be made
as cheap as water, our metropolis to become a portion for sozes, our stately
palaces and Temples, to be a quarter for horses, or a receptacle for thieves
and rebels, and the overflowings of ungodlines to proceed so far, as to quench
the light of our Israel, by taking away the joy of our hearts, and the breath
of our nostrils, in the life of our Sovereign. And notwithstanding all this,
has closed Isa. 29. 10.
the eyes of our Prophets and rulers, with the spirit of a deep sleep of
senslesness and security (which is the map of our present misery and confusion)
sure there is great wrath gone out from the Lord against us, it concerns every
man to enquire after the secret Achan of his own bosom, there is great reason
to suspect we are under the immediate power and enchantment of a general
Infatuation.

And therefore, since the first ground and bottom of infatuation is from a
stumbling block of our own laying, in the secret depravities and reservations
of the heart; Let the people no longer charge the errors and infelicities of
the times on the prophets, nor the prophets on the people; but let all look
well into our selves, and we shall find matter of high provocation, both in the
prophets and in the people. And therefore laying a side all bitterness and
evil speakings against each other; Let us turn our charges and clamours into
prayers for each other; the people sor the prophets, that they may be more
faithful and sincere in the administration and execution of their sacred
function; and the prophets for the people, that they may be more diligent in
knowing, and more conscionable in practicing what is delivered unto them out of
the sacred Oracles; the people for the prophets, that they may be burning and
shining lamps in the sanctuary of God; and the prophets for the people, that
they may be translated from the kingdom of darkness into the glorious light and
liberty of the sons of God. That so both people and prophets may twist and
conc^r in their utmost endeavors, to work out their own salvation with fear
and trembling; Phil. 2. 12.
and both be brought nearer to God, to serve him acceptably, with reverence and
godly fear.

To all these instruments of Infatuation, I shall add but one more, and that I
take to be expressly set down in the Text; namely, The sincere preaching of the
good word of God. Go first, and tell this people; and afterward, make the
heart of this people fat; that is, deliver my message sincerely unto this
people, though I know beforehand they will grow more obstinate and obdurate
upon the hearing of it. The prophet Isaiah compares the word of God to Rain and
Snow; As the rain comes down, and Isa. 55. 10. 11.
the snow from heaven, and returns not thither; but waters the earth, and
makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to
the eater: So shall my word be, that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return
unto me void, etc. And yet, as the same frosty, snowy weather, that is health
to the sound; is a burden to the weak and crazy Constitution, As the same
refreshing shower which brings up the grass and corn, brings up the weeds
and tares also: So the same good word 1. Cor. 15. 15. 1.
of God never returns in vain; our Labor cannot be in vain in the Lord; It may
be in vain, in respect of your conversion; It will not be in vain, in respect
of your Conviction. It may be in vain, in respect of your humiliation; It will
not be in vain, in respect of your Obduration. It may be in vain, in respect of
your Regeneration, and Salvation; It will not be in vain, in respect of your
Judgment and C^ndemnation. Moses was assured beforehand from the mouth of God
himself, that all his embassies and transactions with Pharaoh should produce no
other effect but to render him more obst^nate and resolved not to subscribe to
the command of God, in the dismission of his people; yet Moses is sent unto
him, that the hardness of Pharaohs heart, as well as the greatness of Gods
power, might be known unto the world. There was message upon message, (and if
these were not enough,) there was miracle upon miracle, and (if these concerned
him not,) there was plague upon plague; like wave upon wave, beating upon
himself, his servants, and the whole Nation of the Egyptians; and yet
(notwithstanding all this) we find the heart of Pharaoh hardened into a proverb,
and an instance of an obdurate spirit unto all posterity.

What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God in sending Prophets
to the ruin of a people? Is there mors in olla? Is there death in the Prophets
pot? Is there poison in the sincere milk of Gods word? I showed before, that
corruption in the hearts of the people, might occasion corruption in the
prophets, but can the stench and infection of that corruption, extend it self
so far as to ^aint the good word of God? No certainly; Let God be true, though
every man a Liar; and let his word be ever sacred and immutable, though all the
world should be convicted and condemned by it Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but his word shall not pass away; that is (according as the Rev. 6. 14.
scripture comment else where) The heavens shall pass away as a scroul when it
is rouled together, and the Elements 2. Pet. 3. 10.
shall melt with fervent heat; This goodly Ball of Earth shall be crumbled into
nothing, and all the gaudy vanities we so much dote on) shall pass away like a
smoke: But not one jot or tittle of that word which may save, and must judge
us, shall pass away or be changed. And therefore to prevent any mistake that
may arise in a business of so great concernment; It may not be impertinent to
show, first, the innocent Quality of Gods word in its own nature. Secondly, The
different operation of this word per accidens, in some hearers. Thirdly, The
Reason of this different operation. Fourthly, what Cautions and Counsels may be
needful to prevent its hardening quality in our selves.

First, that we may have no quarrel against the preaching of the word, (what
ever exception lies against the preachers) we must know; The word of Mark. 4.
1. Pet. 22.
God is always good seed; what ever the ground be where in it is sown. The
Doctrine of the scripture is always sin ere Heb. 5. 14.
milk, what ever the stomach be wherein it is received. The mysteries of the
Gospel are always strong meat, what ever the constitution be that should
digest it; and what ever may be inferred, either from the doctrine and practice
of the Church of Rome, to draw contempt upon that Sacred ordinance of
preaching; or from the vilany and infelicity of these times, wherein all
Religion seems to be resolved into hearing, and our English Nation (without the
hands of a Bishop) turned all into Ecclesiastics; Yet I dare affirm, the
natural life may as well be sustained without the supply of our daily bread; as
that Grace (the life of the soul) can (without a miracle) either increase, or
be preserved without the constant nourishment of this Heavenly manna. S. Paul
makes the preaching of the word one of the main hinges whereupon our Salvation
depends; First, he lays this down for a ground (which he derives from the
Prophet Joel. Whosoever shall Call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved: And
from thence he argues thus; How then shall they call on him, i^ whom they have
not believed? and how shall they believe on him, of whom they Joel 2, 32. Rom
10. 13. 14.
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how shall they
preach, except they be sent? (that is) lawfully and Ecclesiastically ordained
and appointed thereunto.

The Gospel of Christ is the great Ephesians. 1. 13.
power of God unto Salvation; The business of our ministry is nothing else but
a spiritual negotiation for your peace and atonement; and the word we preach
(when we speak as we ought to speak) is a word of truth, wherein you cannot be
deceived; in us you may, in it you Ephesians. 1. 13. Act. 14. 3.
cannot: It is a word of Grace, not only Originaliter, as descending unto you
from the fountain of all Grace; but Effective, a fruitful word, in begetting
Grace in the heart: It is a word of promise; Rom 9. 9
wherein you have the rich^s of Gods mercy, like unto a cabinet of invaluable
jewels, laid open and presented to your own choice and acceptance; and it is a
word of faith too; that helps you to an hand, whereby you are able to lay hold
on those precious and soul saving promises. It is a word of Reconciliation, 2.
Cor. 5. 19.
when you are at variance with God; when you have sinned your selves out of his
favor and protection; and want an expedient to take up the difference. It is a
word of Salvation; when Act. 13. 26.
you are ready to sink under the burden of your own guilt and desperation: It
is a word of comfort and assurance of Gods favor in the most tempestuous and
stormy weather of affliction; (...) word of Consolation, in the hour o^ death;
and when this bubble life shall expire, you shall then find it by exp^ ri^n^e,
to be a word of Eternal life.

So that as S Paul reasons in another Ioh. 6. 68
case, concerning the Law; That thoug^ the law might be the Instrument of sin
and of Death, and Condemnation; ye^ God forbid (says he) that I should
conclude any otherwise, but that the law is blameless, and the Commandme^
holy, and just, and good: so, God forbid Romans 7. 12.
we should complain of the good word of God, as of a killing letter; because
some hearts are already dead in trespasses and sins. God forbid we should
complain of the light of the sun, because some men's sore eyes are ofsended at
its brightness and luster, God forbid we should complain of the wholson favor
of this Celestial salt, because some men's wounds and galled Con. sciences
cannot endure the sharp and searching quality of it.

But as it fared with the Christians in some persecutions, when ever the
Heathens were oppressed with any calamity, the general clamor and vogue o^ the
people was presently, Christiano^ ad Leones; away with the Christians to the
Lions; or, as it was the blind and Bedlam clamor of the bewitched multitude at
Westminster, to cry out for Justice and Execution against his Sacred Majesty of
incomparable memory; as if his innocent and pious life, which now too late they
see, was under the Divine goodness, the life of the Kingdoms peace and
felicity; had been the obstruction of it. So, is it very usual with Tom fool,
and Tom a Bedlam, being smitten or angered by another; to strike him that stands
next to him, or like peevish and crazy patients, who are wont to cry out upon
the physician, and medicaments; because they themselves are perverse, and will
not take them; or their stomachs crude and corrupt, that they cannot digest
them. Thus we have seen a wicked and adulterous Generation, (from some errors
in some Bishops) conclude that excellent and Apostolic order to be
Antichristian. Thus we see men daily rave in their mad fits, and cry out (with
the priest and the Jesuit,) ye see what comes of so much preaching; as if the
errors and exorbitancies of some preachers, could with any reason or Justice be
fastened upon that Sacred ordinance of preaching. Certainly, there could be no
religion left remaining in the world if the bare abuse of what is Sacred and
Salubrious, should take away the lawful use of it; then mu^ we discard our
Sacraments, as well (...) Sermons; and our Bible, as well as both for these
(God help us) are day lie much abused by Hypocrites and profane persons. No,
let us ev^r bless God for this and all other means of Grace and spiritual
advantage; and let it be our wisdom and care to make such use of them whilst we
have them, as that we nev^ provoke him to deprive us of them; and how severly
soever the word of God, or his ministers may deal with us, o^ our dearest sins;
yet let us ever give (...) old Elys esteem and entettainment, Goo^ is the word
which the Lord has spoken though it should bring a Curse upon our selves or
families.

We are now in the next place, to look upon the different operation, a^ effect
which the good word of God produces in the hearts of men. We read in Ezra 3.
that when the Jews returned from Babylon, by the favor and permission of
Cyrus, to build again the Temp'e at Jerusalem; it is said, tha^ many of the
standers by, wept with (...) loud voice, when the foundation w^ laid: and many
shouted aloud for joy. The Ezra 3. 12.
act of Building was the same, and the persons were all equally concerned i^
it, as in the restoration of their religion; and yet see what contrary
passions in their extremities are derived from the same object. The Crucifixion
of our blessed Savior was so sad a spectacle, that the Sun in the Firmament
seemed to turn away from beholding it; and yet its observable, what a strange
and different operation this dismal object wrought in the minds of the two
thievs. The one rayls on him, as if he had been a murderer; the other adores
and confesses him to be the strong God of his Salvation. It was the same body
of air that was clear and serene in Goshen, and condensed into palpable
darkness over all the land of Egypt It was the same bulk of water, that was a
wall of protection and preservation unto the Israelites; and a grave and
destruction unto the Egyptians. It was the same Identical fire that warmed
Shadrach Meshak and Abednego, and that burnt up those instruments of Cruelty
that cast them into the furnace. The Truth is, the p^eaching of the word does
not only harden, but declare and discover the despisers of those Sacred
messages to be already hardened. For as it is the same glass that shows
deformities, as well as good features; the same touchstone, that discernes the
pure gold, from what is false and counterfeit; So it is the same peircing word
of God that distinguishes the sound and sincere christian from the hollow,
rotten, and dissembling hypocrite. Herodias might have passed all her life long
for an Eminen^ and glorious professor of the says, had not John the Baptist
declared her matching with Herod to be incestuous and abominable. The Scribes
and Pharisees (what with their long prayers, and what with their specious
pretenses) might have devoured widows house^ to the worlds end, had not our
Savior by his doctrine detected their fine spun frauds an^ Artifices. We read
Act. 13. that imm^diatly after the preaching of the word at Antioch; the Jews
stirred up the devout and honorable women of that ^lace, and raised
persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them o^ of their Coast Act.
13. 50. How? Paul and Barnabas persecuted, and expelled the ^y by devout and
honorable women? It seems the women of those times were as unhappily busy in
meddling with Clergy matters, as they have been in ours. But sure, it was not
hono^, much less devotion, to persecute and expel Christ's own Ambassadors,
who ^ad no other business with them, more then to make their peace and
r^concili^tion with God.

And therefore let no man wonder, if the world rave, and rayl at us, and our
ministry; if they make every blot in our lives, every mistake in our words, the
matter of their mirth, and an encouragement unto licentiousness; nay, if they
slander and traduce us, only to make us vile and contemptible in the eyes of
those we would preserve from the bottomless pit. He that was without the least
spot or defilement of sin in himself, yet when he came to reprove the sins of
the times, was called (...) Glutton, a winebibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners, a Samaritan, a Devil, a Beelzebub Matt. 17. 19.
and Prince of the Devils. He that spoke as never man spoke, (his enemies
themselves b^ing judges,) had a Judas, a Traitor, a Devil trained up in his own
school and family. And he that from a poor fisherman, was made a fisher of men;
and that thrived so well in that sacred employment that he gained 3000. souls
to the Christian faith at Act. 2. 41 Act. 4. 4.
one sermon, and 5000. at another; after all his pains, had his thanks given
him in a threatening, and his payment made him in a prison. Act. 4. 3. So that,
as it is the warmth and influence of the same sun, that cherishes and
produces the good fruits of the Earth; and at the same time, hatcheth the
Cockatrices eggs, and p^oduceth a generation of vipers; as it is the same sun,
that at the same time, melts the wax, and hardens the clay: So the same holy
ordinance of preaching, may at the same time, be a coming together for the
better unto some; and to others a coming togethe^ for the worse. The same
Sacramental bread and wine, which is the spiritual nourishment of one man; may
be the bane and poison of another soul; and the same good word of God, which
is to one man, the savor of life unto life; may be unto another, the savor of
death unto death.

I know this is durus sermo; an hard saying; and may seem very strange to some
men's apprehensions. That the glorious light of the Gospel (instead of being the
medium of Illumination) should become the fatal instrument of the grossest
darkness; and those means of grace, which by the wisdom and goodness of God
are appointed for edification; should become the means of irreco^erable ruin
and destruction; and therefore in the third place, we are to en^e into the
ground and reason os s^ strange and dif^rent an operation arising from the
sacred oracles.

It has b^n laid as a ground already, that we cannot (without apparent injury
and blasphemy) impute any noxious or offensive quality to the good word of God.
The fault is not in the word, that is most certain; if it be any where, it must
be in the hearers. And truly, the Apostle Paul does very clearly set forth the
ground of this doctrine 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid (says he) it is hid
unto those that are lost; In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the image of God, should shine unto them. And this the Apostle knew by his
own experience; for having preached to a congregation in Rome from morning
until evening, it is said, that some believed the things that were spoken, and
some believed them not, Act. 28. 24. And therefore he there urges this very
text of the prophet Isaiah, against the unbelievers of his Congregaon. Well
spoke the holy Ghost by Isaiah the Act. 21. 26.
Prophet unto our fathers, saying, Go unto this people and say, Hearing ye
shall hear, and shall not understand, etc. So that the result is no more but
this; the want of faith excludes hearing; and the God of this world (being
prepossessed of the heart) excludes faith. What the God of this world is, S.
John tells us in express 1 John 2. 1^.
terms. All that is in the world, the lusts of the flesh, and the lusts of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the father, but is of the world. And how
the God of this world may be overcom, he tells us also. Whatsoever is born of
God, overcomes 1 John 5. 4.
the world; and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith
So that if faith be predominant, the God of this world is excluded; and if the
God of this world be predominant in the soul^ faith, and all other saving
grace^ are excluded.

I have said before, that corruption and depravity in the p^oples hearts, had
very srequently an unwholsom influence upon the prophets tongues; but such is
the corruption and perverseness of these times, that were Moses, and Samuel, and
Elijah, and all the unerring prophets of God among us; they would not work some
men's hearts into any reasonable obedience. What Is the reason? because the
hearts are already prepossed. There is mammon, a covetous worldly devil; and
there is B^cchus^a sw^ish drunken devil; and there is Venus, a lalcivi^u^
uncle^n devil; and there is revenge, a raging foming devil. These and many
more, have taken possession of the soul, insomuch that there is no room for any
Evangelical guest; so that would you know the reason why our sermons are duri
sermones, hard sayings? i^ is from dura corda, because your hearts are hard
heart^: Totum durum est, qui^quid imperatur invitis. Every thing is hard and
severe to a man that has no inclination to obey; Quot genera preceptorum, tot
adversariorium. So many precepts as we find in the Decalogue; so many enemies
has the carnal and licentious liver. Such is the power and predominancy of
deliberate and resolved wickedness, that men had rather deny the Gospel it
self, th^n themselves, and their own dest^uctive lusts. Malunt execrari legem,
quam emendari mentem. they had rather the Law it self were abolish^ and
accursed; then their own ungodly minds reformed; and bear a greater hatred to
the clear commands of God, then to their own vileness; so that Cui ani^us
perversus est; nec Moses, nec Prophetae^nec unus e mortuis prodest

Nor is this all the damage or miscariage, That our p^eaching is in vain to
such men, and the good seed lost, because the stony ground will not suffer it
to take root; no, the mischief of all mischiefs is, the good seed is lost and
the stony ground becoms more stony: not hearing, and no und^rstan^ing, as in
the text; but here is hearing turned into hardening; not stones changed in^o
bread (as was once expected from our Savior) but here is bread changed into
stones; the bread of life, and the food of the soul, changed into putrefaction,
and obdur^tenesse of spirit, And now if any man shall ask me, Sir, I pray
resolve me, what do you think is the reason why my heart is so refractory and
impenetrable after the hearing of so many good sermons, after so many solemn
applications to the means of grace, etc. Truly Sir, my answer must be, because
you have heard so much, to so little purpose. Every sermon you have heard,
every convincement you have checked and repulsed, is one blow more upon the
Anvil of your heart; and the oftener or the longer you have been in the furnace
of affliction, without refining and reforming the error of your mind, the the
more you are hardened to your own destruction. And that I do not speak this of
my self, I shall give you authority for it; and I shall make my instance in
those Gentiles S Paul speaks of, Romans 1. who (certainly) were not without the
knowledge of God, sor it is said, v. 21. Because when they knew God, they
glorified him not as God, but held the truth of God in unrighteousness, v. 18.
therefore God gave them up unto uncleanes^, v. 24. and even, as they did not
like to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them over to a reprobate
mind, v. 28. how far their mind was reprobate, we learn v. ult. Who knowing the
judgment of God (that they which commit such things are worthy of death) not
only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them. The Scribes and
Pharisees had so great a prejudice against our Saviors doctrine, and such a
malicious hatred against his person, and the growth of his Gospel; that they
resolved beforehand, if any man should confess him to be the Christ, he should
John 12. 11.
be put out of the Synagogue. And this they execute upon a poor man, who (being
born blind) was guilty of no other crime, but of having the eyes of his body,
and of his mind, both opened together by a miracle. And so far were they from
being converted by his gracious words and miracles; that they resolve to put
Lazarus to death (who had been an instance of his power and mercy) for no other
reason, but that because of him, many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus. I cannot imagine what should be the reason that men are grown so liberal
of their excommunications and executions both in England and Scotland, unless
it be upon some Ie^ish principle, because they either will not, or cannot see
their own blindness and seduction.

Of such as these doubtless our Savior speaks, Ioh 2. 39. for judgment am I
come i^to this world, (...) they which see no^ might see; and they which see,
might be made blind. The^e is a strange s^irit of slumber fallen upon this age;
a deep sle^p from the Lord (I fear) has seized those, who brag of nothing more
then of strange visions and revelations from God. And most justly, for when men
are resolved afo^chand to re^el against the light, as Job speaks, Job 24. 13.
and with the Pharisees and Lawyers, to reject the counsel of God against
themselves, Luke 7^ 30. It is just with God to seal up their eyes, that they
shall never receive the benefit of another convincement, to bow down their
backs always, that they shall never look up to heaven more, with any comfortable
assurance of mercy; and to make that word of his; which is a piercing word,
dividing asunder between the joints and marrow, to be a hardening word, making
the heart of flesh as hard and impene^rable, as the Ad^mant it self. So that a
twofold design there is in the Gospel of Christ; one whereof is proper and
natural, that is, to propound the way of life and salvation, the other is
unnatural and accidental; which is to be the occas^on of greater blindness and
condemnation, by the wilfulness and obstinacy of unbelievers. Thus ye see,
what the god of this world cannot effect by the baits and snares of abused
prosperity; what the tempter cannon bring about by his secret instigations and
illusions; nor Simon Magus and his prophets by their spells and sorceries; is
at last completed by the profani^g of an holy ordinance. This drives the nail
to the head, and without a miracle of mercy, fastens the obstinate and obdurate
hearer, to his eternal lost condition.

And therefore some short counsel and caution in a business of so much
concernment, cannot be thought super fluous or unnecessary. I do not know any
admonition so of en insisted on by our Savior as this, He that has ears to
hear, let him hear But beside this general, two cautions we have from him in
particular concerning hearing. The one Mat. 4, 24. Take heed what ye hear; The
other Luke 8. 18. Take heed how ye hear. Take heed what, for the matter; Take
heed how, for the manner. The first concerns my self as well as you, and all
those of our function. For if ye must take heed what ye hear, we must also take
heed what we preach. But this being beside my Text, I shall no^ insi^t upon it,
only I shall say thus much, That he that shall s^a^t^r (from the Pulpir) chaf
and tar^s, and wild gourds, instead of wheat, may ^e suspected to receive hi^
employ^nt 1 Cor. 3. 12.
from the envious man, mentioned Mat. 13. 28. and he that shall build hay, and
wood, and stubble, upon an Evangelical foundation, shall certainly expose his
work unto the fire; though perhaps his person may be preserved.

For the manner of your hearing, three cantio^s may be necessary, to reinforce
and explain our Saviors counsel; Take heed how ye hear. That is, Take heed 1.
How ye are prepared before ye hear. 2. How ye are disposed when ye hear. 3. How
ye are resolved and reformed when ye hear.


First, How prepared. The word of God is compared to seed; and man's heart to
ground; now the husbandman will tell ye, there goes more to the reaping of an
Harvest, then the bare sowing of the seed. There must be plowing, and dunging,
and fallowing, and gathering our the stones, and much more, b^ore the corn
comes into the barn. And this the prophet Jeremy knew well, when he bespake the
men of Judah and Jerusalem from the Lord, saving; Break up your fallow ground,
and sow not among thorns; that is, as he explains himself in the next verse,
Circumcise your selves to the Lord and take away the soreskin from off your
heart. Ier. 4. 3, 4. And upon this ground John the Baptist was lent to prepare
the way of the Lord, by preaching Mat. 3. 3.
repentance and amendment of life, that so the people might be in a capacity to
receive the benefit of Evangelical grace Elihu tells us, when he expostulated a
business with Iob^ three friends, he had a certain matter within Job 32. 19.
him, which was like wine which has no vent, but is ready to burst the new
bo^tles that contain it; and our Savior tells us for certain, that if men put
new wine into old bottles, they shall quickly have an end of their wine, and
the bottles too; for the wine will be spilled, and the bottles will be marred.
There are ce^tain seasonings of grace, Math 9 17.
which are very necessary to a Christian before the wine of Gods word be
re^eived into the soul. Two things especially the heart must be seasoned withal,

First, it must be seasoned with humility. We have an experiment in I
hylosophy, that from the bottom of a deep well, a man may see the stars at noon
day, which he that walks abroad in the Sunsh^ne cannot do The ground of best
adv^ntage from whence a Christian may look into divine mysteries, is from the
valley of humili^y; namely, from an humble sense of his own wants, and an
humble esteem of his best performances I dwell in the high and holy place,
says God Almighty, and not only there, but with him also that is of a contrite
and humble spirit; to revive the spirit of the humble, and the heart of the
contrit^ ones, Isa. 57. 15. The world is so ^ul of pride and prejudice, that
what between Athenians (that digest no doctrine that savours not of novelty and
strangeness) and Scribes and Pharisees, that reject a^ do^rine that makes
against themselves: there is little hope of any reasonable proportion of fruit
to be reaped from all our pains: what though the preacher be none of the
greatest Rabbis; what if unel^quen^, ^ indiscreet? yet it is Gods word, not
his, ^hen faithfully delivered, and where the cl^er word of God does no^ preva^
without eloquence, I shall very much suspect it will not prevail with it. I
shall close this point with S. Pau^ ca^t, Let no man deceive himself. if any
man among y^u seems to be wise in this world, let him become a 1 ^. ^. 18. ^
^r. 8. 2.
sool that he may be wise. And if any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as be ought to know. Them Psa. 28. 9.
that be meek, God wi^ guide in their judgment; and such as are humble, them
will he learn his way.

Secondly, the heart must be seasoned by prayer. Gods word is spiritual, and we
are carnal; and there is so great a distance between these two, that the carnal
(or natural) man, cannot discern the things 1 Cor. 2. 14.
of the spirit. And we that are spiritual fishermen, may toil all night, and
catch nothing except Christ be with us in the ship. Faith (the great hinge
whereon our salvation does so much depend) is not a flower that grows in our
own garden. We read of Lydia, that as Paul Act. 16. 14.
preached, God opened her heart, that she attended to the things that were
spoken of Paul. God keeps the key of every man's hear^, he opens, and no man
shuts, Rev. 3. 7.
and shuts, and no man opens But let me tell ye, there is no use of a Key.
where the do^e is fast bo^ted and barred within. I grant, Christ can ^nter into
the soul, as he did into the Assembly of h^s disciples (the doors being s^ut,
where they were assembled sor fear of the Jews) John 20. 19.
Or he c^n force those iron doors of our hearts, at his own pleasure. But we
have no assurance that he will do all he can do, for our humor and
satisfaction. He could have commanded stones into bread, or he could have done
a miracle before. H^od, and yet we know he would not. What may be expected from
him, ^e may clearly understand from ^ha^ Text, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at
the door and knock: If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in
to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Christ will never exclude
himself, if we do not exclude him. And therefore, since the way of man is not
in himself; and since the preparations of the heart in man, are clearly and
entirely from the Lord, what we Ier. 10. 20. Prove. 16. 1.
cannot attain unto by hearing, let us endeavor to gain by praying. That as a
man lights a candle to find the snuffers, and then s^s the candle, that it may
^u^ clea^e^; that as my body first warms my clothes, and afterward my clothes
keep warm my body; so let our prayers contribute an advantage to our hea^ing;
and our hearing unto our praying. First, let us so pray, that we may ^ea^; and
a^terwards so hear, as that we may pray, and live, and walk, and serve our God
in truth and sincerity, with reverence and godly fear.

2. As we must be prepared before, ^o we must be rightly disposed when we hear.
To a ^ight disposition, there is something to be disposed of, before we come to
he^; and S. Peter will te^l ye what ^t is, namely the ^a^ng aside all malice,
and all gu^, and Hypocrisies, 1. Pet. 2^ 1. 2.
and envies, and evil spe^king, that so as new born babes, ye may desire the
sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby. To these incongruities and
inconsistences with religious Hearing; give me leave to remember ye of that
irreverence and scandalous deportment which is notoriously visible in some men,
even in the time of Hearing; who by their irreligious glances, their whispering
comments, and their impudent a^ronts to Christ's Ambassadors, even in the
delivery of their sacred messages, do evidently declare, that they do not only
secretly bolt the doors of their hearts against the preaching of Gods word; but
that they set up a Bill of defiance against it, even in their countenances I
know I may be thought by some to be too severe (if not Pedantick) in this
particular; but public scandals, must have public reprehensions. Nor do I
press thi^, out of any design to advance our esteem; but to prevent your ruin.
My Zeal and indi^nation shall ever express it self both ways as well against
those that give scandal out of the pulpit, as against those that take scandal
and exception, where none is given. Non est ludendum cu^ sacris; Holy duties
must be performed after an holy manner; God is very jealous of his honor,
especially in his Name and Worship; And though his patience and longsurtering
be highly provoked every day in other things; yet in this he is quickly stirred
up to an expression of anger; as appears by the sad histories of vzzah; the
Bethshemites; Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron; and the 250. princes that
o^ered incense, Number. 16. God will be sanctified in all those that draw 2. Sam.
6. 7. 1. Sam. 6. 19. Lev. 10. 2
near unto him in his worship, and before all the people will he be glorified.
Lev. 10. 3.

And therefore, keep thy foot, when Eccl. 5 1.
thou go to the house of God (that is) look carefully to thy affections; see
that thy heart be tender, and disposed aright to receive the impressions of
Grace. Two properties there are of a under heart, 1. it is always sensible, and
moved at what is propounded out of the word of God. If any thing be propounded
from the promises of grace and mercy; a Tender heart is presently enflamed, and
warmed with the comfort of it; like the hearts of the two disciples our savior
overtook as they were going to Emaus. Luc. 24 32.
If any thing be propounded from the Threatenings of Gods Justice; there is
presently a sense of terror in the tender heart. This ter^o^ or trembling of
^eart; when it arises from an apprehension of Gods anger and discountenance;
is of great esteem and acceptance in the sight of God. Heaven is my throne
Isa. 66. 1. 2.
(says God) and ear^h my footstool, but to this man will I look (or have
respect) even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles
at my words And we read of good King Josiah, that he received an answer of
peace from Huldah the prophetess upon this very ground. Because thine heart
was tender, and thou did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his
words against this place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst
thy self before me, and did rend thy clothes, etc. Thou shall be gathered to
thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring
upon this place, 4. Chron 34. 27. my heart stands in aw of thy word, said he,
that was a man after Gods, Psalm. 119. 101.
own heart In aw of thy word; because the word of an omniscient God, that
knows every secret cranny and ^revise of my soul. In aw of thy word; because
the word of an omniporent God, who is able in a moment of time, to blast a
thousand worlds with the breath of his displeasure, In aw of thy word; because
the word of a just, and a sin-revenging God; and in aw of thy word; because
that word by which I must be judged at the last day.

Secondly, A tender heart, as it is a sensible; so it is always a pliable and
yiedling heart: Like wax, it may be molded into any form, will receive any
impression. It is said of some Jewish converts, that upon the hearing of Peter's
sermon, they were pricked in their hearts, and they said to Peter, and to the
Act. 2 37
rest of the Apostles; Men, and brethren, what shall we do? They were ready to
do any thing the Apostles would advise them for the recovery and preservation
of their own souls. And the first evidence we have of S. Paul's Conversion, was
in his readiness to be commanded. Domine quid me vis facere? Act 22. 10.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? we are then Auditores idonei, candid, and
Christian-like auditors; when the word of God has a kind of operation on our
souls, when it works such a ready obedience in our hearts, that we throw away
those arms by which we have rebelled against our Lord and maker; dismantle the
strong holds which sin has made in us; when it subdues every reigning and
rebellious lust; and we are contented to resign up our selves, to be governed
and regulated according to its wisdom and direction.

Lastly, we must be reformed, and well resolved after Hearing. First we must
resolve to keep the word, as well as hear it; not receive it in at one ear, and
suffer it to pass out at the other; S. James Iam. 1. 25.
condemns such a one, for a very fruitless and unworthy Hearer; w^o comes to
the word, as to a looking glass, wherein he sees his ugly spots and
deformites; but immediately go^th away, and forgets what manner of person he
was. No, the good seed in good ground is expounded to be those, who in an
honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit
with patience. Thy word have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin
against thee, says David, Psalm. 119. 11. Luc 8. 15.
Better no Hearing at all, then no retaining of what we hear; Habendum and
Tenendum, To have and to hold, is the best title in the law; and to Hear, and
to retain is the best possession of the Gospel

Secondly we must resolve to Apply the word; Gods word is a Rule, and his
Church a spiritual building; There can be no Building or squaring without a
Constant application of the Rule; I like not those scandalous and particular
applications, which s^rike at men's persons from the pulpit (which some unwise
builders make the greatest pan of their ^us^ne^e,) our Savior would not speak
in express terms, no, not to the Traitor Iud^s; but cast the Treason among hi^
Disciples, and lest every man to enquire into himself, to find out the Traitor.
Though we aim at no man^ person from the pulpit, yet we must level at every
man's sins; and he that finds himself guilty of those s^ns we preach against;
shall have my leave to conclude the preacher meant him. Solomon tells us, The
words of the wise, are as goads, and ^ayls fastened by the Eccl. 12. 11.
masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. Not only as goads,
to prick men forward unto Christian duties; but as nayls also to fasten, and
keep them where they should continue; now, though the driving of the nayl
belongs to us, yet the clinching and fastening of the nayl belongs to you; I
grant, that preaching wit^out Application, is like a nayl without a point; but
when we have sharpened and driven our nayl to the head; yet if it be not
clinched on your parts, our p^eaching, and your Hearing, may be both in vain

Thirdly, we must resolve, as to keep and Apply the word; so in the last place,
to obey it. Not to play fast and loose with it, as we please; to respect it
when it serves our turns; and to cross it, when it crosses us; but to
entertain it always as our governor and guide; and to embrace it as our sweet
familiar friend; to make it a lan^horn unto our Psalm. 119. 105.
feet, and a light unto our ^aths; and to give it the sole and entire conduct
of our selves and all our a^airs. We say, the meat is well bes^owed on those,
that not only ea^e it with a good stomach, but such as thrive and increase in
health and strength by it. There were Math 13. 21.
that heard the word with joy (in the parable of the sower) and yet their
hea^ts were no better then stony ground and their f^ui^ (...) away as soon as it
was sprung up. The best commendation of our pains at any time, must be taken
from your practice: A Sermon is well heard, when there follows some abatement
of sin; some improvement of Grace, some increase of spiritual strength and
nourishment in the soul. Such as are truly planted in the house of the Lord;
are said to flourish and Psalm. 92. 13.
spread like a Cedar in Lebanon; to bring forth still more fruit in their old
age, and to be fat and well liking, In Luc, 12, 48.
brief. To whomsoever much is given, of them shall much be required. God
expects our fruit should be proportionable to the seed sown, to his pains and
Husbandry about us; and if it be not so; I tremble to think how unsatisfactory
our account w^ll be at the general Audit. I shall therefore conclude my counsel
with that of S. James; Let every man be swift to heart, slow to speak, slow to
wrath; let us lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness; and
receive with mee^nesse the ingrasted word, which is able to save our souls. And
let us be Doers of the word, and n^ Hearers only, deceiving our own selves.

And thus having showed the nature, and degrees of spiritual I^fatuation,
together wi^h its instrumental causes; I am now to proceed to the Signs and
Symptoms of this dangerous disease. Physicians say, a disease is more then
half cured, when it is certa^n^y known. And sure, of all other, there ought to
be a particular care used in the discovery of this disease; because, the
persons infected with it, have the least sense of it.

Our Savior has long since foretold what shall be the signs of his second
coming to Judgment; and they are set down for our warning and instruction,
Mat. 24. and Luc. 21. And we find him reproving the Pharisees and the Sadduces,
in that they could discover fair or foul weather from the face of the sky; but
were not able to discern the signs of those Times. As there are Signa Mat 16.
13.
Temporum; certain Signs, belonging to certain Times: so there are Signa
Morborum, certain Signs, belonging to certain Diseases. The plague of Leprosy,
under the Law, was discerned by two Signs; Namely, i^ the hayr within the
plague were turned white; and the spot were deeper then the skin. It was
evidence Lev. 13. 3
enough for the priest to conclude it a Leprosy, and to pronounce the person
so infected, to be unclean. The plague of pestilence, (wherewith our land has
been so often visited) has certain spots, and swellings, which the common
people call Gods marks, or Tok^ns; which when ^he Searchers perceive they
presently shut up the house, and make a red cross, or write, Lord have mercy
upon us upon the door. Those Root^ that ly concealed in the earth all the
Winter, are easi^y discerned in the Spring by such sprouts and suckers as arise
from thence. There is a Root of bitterness in the false heart of man, which
though it ly close and concealed from the e^ of the world; yet there are
certain sprout^ and sprigs, that at some season or other show themselves, from
whence a man may conclude, that such a root there is not far from thence. I
shall think it discovery enough on my part, to show such evidence as appears
above ground, leaving every ^an to look farther into himself, ^hen is poss^ble
for me to do; since the power of discerning spirits is long since expired.

So that, as many Lines are drawn from the same Center, and many poisonous
threads concur to make up the same spi^rs webb: so, this Bond of iniquity is ^
chain of diverse links, a Cord of diver twists; and though the Devil appear not
in any ugly, sormidable shape; yet it will be no hard matter to discern the
track of his cloven foot all along the path of spiritual Insatuation.

The first evidence then, which I shall produ^e a^ a Symptom of Infatuation,
is, The strange adherence and belief which is very ordinarily given to
notorious ^and apparent Lies and Delusions. For a^ it is the policy of men
(having to do with wild and resracto^ beast) to make it their first care to
blin^ the^r eyes, that by that means they may ^ne their hearts, and bring them
to th^r be^k and lure; So it is the policy of that grand Artist, the Devil,
first, to c^st a mist before the eyes of those he intends to abuse with his
juggling frauds; that so he may carry them ^oodwinkd to their own destruction.
Was it not a strange Delusion in the Israelites, after so long, and so
remarkable experience of Gods visible power and protection over them to mistake
a Golden Calf, for the Great I^hovah? To Psalm. 107. 20.
change the glory of their invisible and incorruptible Creator; into the
similitude of an ox that eareth Grass? To Apostatize and fall away from the
true God; and to worship and fall down to the stock of a tree? and yet this is
the best account we have of that infatuated people in the prophet Isaiahs time,
who thus complains of them. They have not known, nor understood, for he h^th
shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot
understand. And none considers in his Isa. 44. 18. 19. 20.
heart, ne^her is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burnt part
of my God in the f^re, I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; and shall I
make the r^sidue thereof an Abomination? shall I fall down to the stock of a
tree? He feeds of ashes, a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he
cannot deliver his foul; nor say: Is there no^ a ly in my right hand? And from
hence, the Psalmist makes the Idolmaker, and the Idol-worshipper, and the
blockish Id^l it self, to be all of the same senselessness and stupidity, they
have all e^s alike, and see not; ears, and Ps. 115. 8.
hear not; feet, and walk not; They that make Idols, are like unto them; and so
are all such us put their trust in them.

Had not this charm of Infatuation, a strange power upon the m^nds of the
English Nation, when that notorious cheat of King and Parliament began to
commens^ and walk the world with such gen^ral reception and entertainment? and
did not the juglers of this age belie^e as much? when men did not blush to
^reach, and print; That the opposing the Kings power, was the justest way of
^efending it; That the fyring ofCano^ at his Royal person, was to be underst^
sor his defense and preservation; that an Army was necessary t^ bring him to
his Parliament, when ^e was there before (as was pretended) in his ^est
capacity: and that an Army was as necessary to keep him from his Parlia^ent;
when he would have been there personally, for the just satisfaction of hi^
people? And now, that men have seen how well his power and his person h^th been
defended; now, that they have seen the r^ine of Religion and goo^ laws in the
murder of their Sovereign; and the Liberty of the subject, resolved into the
arbytrarie pleasure of the Soldier; is not the delusion as strong at this day
as ever? Is not our Infatuation (together with our miseries) increased almost
into a miracle? Is there any man almost, that for fear of himself, dares thus
expostulate with himself, what have I been doing now these 7. or 8. years? what
contributions have I given to the present miseries and confu^on of my Nation?
Gods Truth is still the same; but is not my understanding strangely changed
from what it was; Is there not a ly in my right hand? To say there are none in
this hopeful way of recovery, were durus sermo, an hard saying, which I dare
not own: But yet let me tell ye, the paucity of those who own their errors as
they ^ould be owned, that is, with repentance and satissaction, is enough to
proclaim to all the world; that the blindness o^ these times, is not much
unlike to that of Sodom; all, old and young, all Genesis 18. 4
from ev^ry quarter almost involved; and for ought I know, may be as nigh
destruction too, though not by a judgment sent immediately from heaven.

And now I am speaking of Insatuation; it may fall under a question; whether
the most violent and virulent part of the English Rebels, do at this day
discern the error of their way, or not. I know much may be said on the
affirmative, and most men believe, that how. ever they pretend Gods cause, and
the like, yet they have many a secret check within themselves for what they do.
But I am clearly for the Negative, and I think I have Scripture grounds for my
opin^on. I shall easily grant, there was a time when they did see their error;
though now I believe they do not. For men are no longer masters of their own
eyes, when once the hand of God has closed them; such as rebel against the
light of Gods word (knowing it to be so) it is most just with God to obstruct
the way of his truth, and to close up their senses for ever, lest they should
see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and be convert, etc.

And that this is not a private guess of my own, vouched with as little
warrant, as charity; you shall hear S. Paul speak to it. Now the spirit
speak^th expressly, that in the latter times 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2.
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrine of devils; speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their Consciences
seared with an hot iron. Where it is easy to observe the method and progress
of Gods justice upon such as do see, and will not First, they shall depart from
the faith which they have once professed. Secondly, they shall give heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils. Thirdly they shall speak lies in
hypocrisy, speak sor truth what they know to be lies, there is the wilfulness
of their sin; and then sollows (as a just reward) their consciences shall be
seared, and there is the irrecoverablenesse of the judgment. And from the
strength of this delusion it comes to pass, that men shall think they do God
good service, when they shall murder his own Ambassadors, Ioh. 16. 2^
according to our Saviors own predictio^. So that as we read (in the hystory
of Henry 7. of that famous impostor Perkin Warbeck, that he cosened the world
so long by personating a King, that (from his accustomed Majestic garb and
deportment) he began at length to believe himself to be so indeed; till his
high thoughts of himself, were confuted by the base service of the Kings
kitchen: And as it fares with some melancholy constitutions, who by dwelling
over long upon their own thoughts and Phantasmes, have believed themselves to
be beasts, and behaved themselves accordingly; so the inuring of a man's self to
speak lies merely in hypocrisy, to promote imposture; is the high way (at long
running) to believe in earnest that to be a truth, which at first was known to
be but a lie For it is not enough that the intellect be acquainted with Divine
Truth; but that the heart be warmed also with love of that truth; the want of
which, is the cause of the grossest error and deception. This is cleared also
by an express assertion of the same Apostle, Because they received not the love
of the truth, that they might be s^ved, sor this cause God shall send them
strong delusion, that they should believealy, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
that they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure i^
unrighteousness. So that if these men of whom I speak, have adventured upon so
bold a sin, as to hold the truth of God in unrighteousness; that is, by their
own phari^aical malice and perverseness, have manacled and chained up Gods truth
from having any dominion over themselves or acti^ns; if their eyes have bee^
fixed more upon the spoil and advantage that might be gained by a war, then
upon any true Evangelical grounds in commencing a war; if their hearts have
been pre^resolved to exp^nge or abuse any Text of Scripture that might stand in
their way; and to imprison any prophet that shall seasonably admonish them of
the error of it (al which I speak by way of suppositio^, leaving the world to
determine of the truth of my suggestions) I say, it is no wonder at all, if
these men (having sorfeited the benefit of all the fair warnings and
convincements they have had, by their wilfulness and obstinacy) at this time
of day, mistake darkness for light, Belial for Christ, and their own whimseys
and delusions, sor the secret inspiration of the holy Ghost.

But leaving these men (with the Sodomites) to grope at noon day, and to
reflect a little on our selves in this particular I could wish the strong
delusions I speak of, dwelt only on the other side the salt water; I do not
intend to meddle with our Councels, and public Transactions (which by many men
are thought to savor something of insatuation) I shall ever pray for Gods
blessing upon them, but otherwise understand them to be both without^ and above
the sphere of my profession. But let us reflect upon our selves, as we are
christians, and upon our conversations, as they are exposed to every ey^s not
the world strangely cheated and abused by false ghosts, when light is so
ordinarily put for darknes^, and darkness for light? Good for evil, and evil
for good? When that which is highly esteemed among men, is an abomination in
the sig^ of God; and that which is most vile and abominable in the sight of
God, is m^ acceptable and plausible in the ^steem^ men; To give you an instance
or two.

The murder of Abel by Cain his brother, was an act so soul and horrid; that
God thought fit to punish it immediately, with no less then an hell of horror
and trembling. And to prevent the imitation and insection of so soul a crime a
law was present^y enacted, Genesis 96. Who so sheddeth man's blood by man shall his
blood be shed, and the reason is there added, ^or in the image of God made b^
man. The shedding of innocent blood in Manasses, was a sin that the Scripture
declares God would not pardon. And 2 King. 24. 4.
yet the Devil has put so fair a glos^ upon this soul sin; that the world
plead^ a necessity that this scarlet si^ be wo^ with the Buff coat; and that
man that is not preresolved to challenge the field, ^ there attempt the
butchering of his Christian brother, and perhaps, his la^ friend (and in that
stab at God himself in his own image) upon the least drunken or passionate
provocation, is no^ thought fit to associate with any gentleman. Thus by virtue
of a wild notion honor (which is no more honor the the mire in the streets is
gold) m^ are sent away many times to Gods Tribunal of Justice, with their blood
about their ears, and all their murtherous intendments in their hearts, without
the allowance of ^ne hours time to make up their accounts with God Thus are men
hurried away to their eternal ruin, by the power of a strong delu^on, without
ever considering or expostulating with themselves. Have not I put my self out
of the protection of my heavenly father? have not I put my self into the
pofsession of the devil? Am I not going about a most desperate and horrid
employment? am I able to pray, or believe, or perform any act of Christian
duty, as becoms a Christian? Is there not a ly in my right hand? So that
according to this wild principle of honor, That man must lie under the brand
of a Coward, that will not be damned for company; or at least, that will not
run a desparate hazard to dare his own damnation.

Again, The Treason of Judas was so desperate and abominable, that the traitor
himself was thought ^t to be his own Executioner; and without troubling either
Judge or Jury, or witness in his condemnation^ I^das conveys him self to his
own place, Act. 1. 25. and yet this Traitor Devil is now grown so plausible
both in the Court, and in the Camp, that a man is thought a weak brained sool,
that has not so much of Judas in him, as to betray his Lord and Master. Quid
dabitis, and ego tradam? what will ye give me, and I will be^ray a Fort, a
Garrison, an Army into your hands? may well be the motto of this false age, sor
its foul Treasons and Conspiracies. Nay so strong is the delusion grown, that
we begin to disclaim the very principles of Religion, Justice, and Honor; and
think those prophets little less then mad men, that would hold us to those
safe, easy, and unerring rules; as if we were possessed with that profane and
desperate spirit of Jehoram the son of Ahab, who (in the extremity of siege and
famine) rejected the Lord, and the counsel of his prophet, saying, behold this
evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer? 2 Kin. 6.

To come yet closer unto our selves, Have we not reason to suspect we are under
the power of an infatuation, or delusion, when those sins which at first we
committed not without great trembling and h^rror, are now by custom and
acquaintance, grow^ so plausible and familiar, that we can hug them in our
bosoms, and ly down upon our pillows, without the least disturbance arising
from the thought of them? is there not an apparent witchcraft in the pleasures
of sin, when our very judgments become changed and perverted, by the vileness
and looseness of our afsections? and notwithstanding all the curses and
threatenings of Gods word, denounced against our beloved sins, yet we can bless
our selves in our own apprehensions, and say, we shall have peace, though we
walk on in the imaginations of our own deluded sp^rits? is it not a strange
vanity Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
of mind, to believe that God will un-God himself, and lay aside that glorious
attribute of his Justice (which is essential to his nature) to indulge and
comply wi^h us in our sinful enormities? I will not rashly or severely conclude
of any man's condition, I shall rather entreat you all to be your own private
con^essors, and ask your selves, whether these, and such like persuasions are
not lodged in your bo^oms. What? may I not be Christian enough with some few
secret sins reserved? or, ^s there not time enough hereafter to lay them aside,
when the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life have
had their seasonable satissactions; must I account with God for t^ose oaths
that slip from me unawares, as insensibly as my breath passes from me? or for
that deliberate Perjurie, without which I cannot save my Estate, my Wife, and
children from extreme misery? shall I deprive my self of the benefit of my
Saviors death; for living a little, or a little longer to my self? To my proud,
envious, and ambitious self; To my vain, sensual, and vicious self? I am not so
wicked, and debauched, as many others; and there are many that pass for
eminent, and wise men, that are as wicked as my self. These I take, to be the
pleasing dreams, and delusions of our Corrupt and seduced hearts.

In answer where-unto, you must know; that the Generality of iniquity, does not
lessen, or abate the guilt of it. Leprosy, is not less Leprosy, because it
has overspred the whole body, nor is the Pestilence of less danger, and
infection; because every house in the street is infected with it. These
thoughts, if they were searched to the bottom (I believe,) would be found to
arise from no less then secret Atheism. And if men would speak out; their
language would differ little from him that said, Tush, God has forgotten mine
iniquity, he hides away, Psalm. 10. 11.
his face, and will never see it. For let men pretend never so much* to faith,
and a good conscience; whilst their works are opera tenebrarum, the works of
darkness, I cannot believe they do seriously desire to be acquainted with the
light; and whilst men's conversations are so Atheistical and Divellish, I cannot
think they believe either the Justice of God, or the truth of his word, or the
vileness of their sins, or the immortality of their souls. They are certainly
under the power of some strong delusion. And this I take to be one symptom of
infatuation; for the mind to be bewitched with blindness and error. And if the
light that is in us, is Mat. 6. 23.
darkness, oh how great is that darkness?

A second symptom of Infatuation, I take to be a bold and daring kind of
impudence in sinning, when men care neither what they do, nor before whom when
there is not only a want of sight in the understanding to look upon sin in its
ugly nature and complexion, a want of sorrow in the heart, to grieve for it;
but a want of shame in the face, to blush for it. I join both these together,
because an unrelenting heart, and a brazen brow, impudence and impenitence are
birds of the same hatch and feather. I find both charged upon the house of
Israel, by the Prophet Ezekiel, All the Ezekiel. 3. 3. 7.
house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted. We read Number. 5. of a water of a
very strange, but certain operation. In those times it was in the power of the
jealous husband, to bring his wife to a certain trial, whether she had abused
his bed, and trans^ressed the co^enant of her God by adultery, or not. The
manner thus, he summon^d h^s wife before the Priest, and there compelled her to
drink of a bitter water, which if ^he were guiltless, produced no ill effect
at all, but was the occasion of fruitfulnes (which was ever thought a great
honor to that Sex) but if guilty of that foul sin of Adultery, then it would
c^rta^nly make her thigh to rot, and her belly to swell, and that woman became
a proverb, and a curse unto her people.

It was the same water, how came it then to have such a different operation?
certainly, it was not from the water, but from the guilt and delinquency of the
woman; wherein I do not so much admire the foulness of her sin, as the boldness
of her obstinacy; who knowing the dreadful curse that would certainly follo^
that bitter potion, rather then confess her guilt, would stand out in a public
and professed defiance of Gods justice It is no otherwise with bold and
refractory sinners; who (though they h^ar the curses of God denounced against
their dearest sins) ^o yet stand out in an open defiance of their Lord and
Maker, making every sermon they h^ar a witness unto their rebellion, and a
seal unto their Condemnation, So that however men may carry their countenan^es
in the Sanctuary of God, with such a smooth confidence; as if they were no way
conce^ned in those accursed sins w^ pre^ch against; yet God knows, and we know,
and we tremble to think, what secret operation our despised messages have upon
their bold and refractory spirits. There were many fo^l abominations committed
in Israel in the time of the Prophet Jeremy; and yet behold with what impudence
they carried themselves in all their wickedness Were they ashamed when they had
Committed abomination? nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush; Jer. 6. 15. But instead of blushing, see how they beh^ve themselves in
the next chapter; They stole, they murdered, they Committed Adultery, they
swear falsely, they burned incens^ unto Baal, they walked after other Gods, whom
they knew not, Ier. 7. 9. 10.
and yet (not with standing all this) they came, and stood before God, in his
house which was called by his name; I, and said too, that they were delivered
to do all these abominations. But see the doom of his infatuated people; they
had sinned themselves so far out of God^ fa^our; that the Prophet is inhibited
so much as to pray for them. Therefore Ier. 7. 15.
pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry, nor prayer for them,
neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.

It was a foul aggravation of Judas Iscariots treason, in that he had the
impudence to come before his master and kiss him, when he meant to betray him,
Luc. 22. 48.
What Judas? betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Is it not wickedness
enough, that from a disciple thou provest a Traitor; a Traitor to me thy
master; Thy master whom thou know to be innocent; a master, whom thou
know not to be ignorant of this base conspiracy; but must all this
wickedness be disguised amoris pignore? must the seal of Love be made the
signal of thy Treason? betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Was it not
wickedness enough in subjects to betray and falsify the Trust reposed in them,
when they were called to the great Council of England, and from Counselors, to
grow up to be controulers; To persecute with Tongues, and penns, and Armies,
their Royal Lord and master: To strip him of his estate, and the nearest
comforts of his life; To imprison, arraign, condemn, and execute the best of
mortal Monarchs, before his own Royal palace? But must all this be done under
a pretense of Justice, and Law, and the general good of the Kingdom? Certainly,
This was such a transcendent piece of impudence, as fills the world with
amazement; and (which I fear) will never find the way to repentance. And for
this, and the like bold vilanies and insolences; I know not whether I shall
call the present; The iron-hearted or the Brazen foreheaded Generation: for
certainly; all the bold vilanies which have been acted since the world began,
(even among the most barbarous and savage kind of people) may be thought but
petty-Lareenyes, compared with what this Age has produced within our own
Nation. And now, with what confidence do these men triumph in the chains and
snares, they have made for their own unwary souls? How do they brave it upon
those slippery pina^es of advantage, which the madness of the people, the
casua^ties of war, and their own base ^ribery and Corruption have set them?
with what Impudence do they address themselves to fortain Princes, and States?
how do they threaten if they are not assisted? as if all the world were obliged
to strike sail to their present power; or, as if they were masters of the whole
world in their own imaginations.

In 1 King. 20. we have a remarkable story of Benhadad King of Syria; who
(being ifred up with the thoughts of h^s own power, and Ahabs weakn^s^) ends a
peremptory mess^e to the King of Israel, say^ng; T^y silver, and thy gold is
mine; thy wives also, and thy children, even the goodliest, are mine. Verse. 3.
And understanding by his servants that Ahab was cont^n^ to pay him this
H^mage; V^rs. 6.
He sends a second message, saying; I will send my servants unto thee to morrow
about this time; and they shall search thine house, and the houses of thy
servants; and it shall be, that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall
put it in their hand, and take it away. (That is, in short) they must be
admitted, to come into the City, and plunder what they pleased to lay their
hands on. Benhadad being refused in Verse. 10.
this unreasonable demand, breaks out into a rage, saying, The Gods do so unto
me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for h^ndfuls, for all
the Verse. 11.
people that follow me. Well (says Ahab) let not him that girdeth on his
harness, boast himself as he that puts it off. The matter comes to be
disputed by the sword, where in two battles the King of Syria is worsted, and
reduced to so low a condition; that he sends his servants unto Ahab, with
sackcloth upon their loins, and ropes Verse. 3. 2.
about their necks, to beg for life. I have produced this story, only for the
reflection it has upon the Boldness of these Times; in imposing upon Kings
according to their present extremities; And although I do not expect that any
success whatsoever shall ever bring the Kings enemies to him upon their knees,
with ^opes about their necks; and though I dare not (as a Prophet) f^retel the
issues of war: Yet I look upon the Boldness, and Tyranny of those at
Westminster, as more then probable preparatives to the fall of their power; The
wings by which they have flown to this height, I take to be unnatural, like
those of l^arus; Their motion so violent and unsteddy, that their fall, when
ere it comes (I believe) will be as sudden, as irrecoverable.

And I am the rather induced to believe the present power and greatness of
these men not to be long lived; because of their great Boldness in profaning
Gods holy ord^nances; begi^ning at Gods house every day with p^eaching and
Praying, that so they may with the better color and disguise, state and
conclude their Thefts, and Murth^rs, and p^rjuries throughout the Kingdom: Nay,
they do not stick to say too, in express terms, that they are delivered and
prospered to do all their abominations. Certainly, if our sins do not
perpetually obstruct the way of Gods lustice, he is highly concerned in honor,
to put a hook in the nostrils, and a bridle in the mouth of these impudent
sinners; that all the world may know, that the rage and fierceness of man,
shall turn to his own praise? That the Hope of the Hypocr^te Psalm. 76. 10. Job
11. 20. lob 8. 14.
shall pass away like a puff of breath; and all his finespun confidences,
shall be but like a spiders web before the besom of destruction. And truly I
know not in what language to express this daring wickedness, unless I shall
call it professed Atheisine; nor where to find a parallel unto this. Atheism,
unless it be Psalm. 50. 21. There God expostulates with some, who concluded
from his patience and long suffering, that he was even as wicked as themselves;
or themselves as just and upright as himself, These things have thou done
(says God) and I kept silence; and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such
a one as thy self; but I will reproove thee, and set in order before thine eyes
the things that thou have done. Consider this all ye that forget God: lest he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you; Consider this, all ye
that (under gaudy pretenses) flatter your selves in your own wickedness, until
your abominable sin be found out; Consider whether you are brought (at long
running) even to downright Atheism; not only to deny, or disbelieve the
Justice of God; but his Purity and holiness; and to conclude him to be like
one of the Heathen Gods, or (which is worse) to be as unclean and filthy as
your selves. Nor is it any great wonder, that men (having acted all their bold
wickedness against Gods Anoy ted,) if a^ last they appear in Blasphemy and
defiance of God himself And this I take to be another Symptom of Infatuation,
when the soul has sinned it self out of the shame and blushes which belongs to
notorious sins.

A Third symptom of Infatuation, is, when the mind of man is uncounsellable;
When a man is wilfully and incorrigibly resolved to walk contrary unto God; not
only when a man is not reformed; but when he hates to be reformed. It is said
of Ahab, that he sold himself to work wickedness in the sight Lev. 26. 23.
Psalm. 50. 17. 1 King. 21. 20.
of the Lord. That is, his heart was so set upon it, that he takes Elijah for
his enemy, for no other reason, but because he would rep^ove him for his
wickedness; and hates Micajah, sor no other reason, but because he knew he
would speak Truth. This incorrigiblenesse of mind was so heinous and
intolerable under the Law of Moses, that it was punished with death; as appears
Deuteronomy. 21. 18. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son; which will not obey
the voice of his Father, and Mother; and when they have chastned him, will not
hearken unto them; then shall his Father and Mother lay hold on him, and bring
him unto the Elders of his City, and unto the gate of his place; and they shall
say unto the Elders of his City, this our son is stubborn, and rebellious; he
will not obey our voice: he is a glutton, and a drunkard. Then all the men of
the City shall stone him with stones, that he die, etc He was not stoned for his
Glutt^ny and drunkenness (which might be thought but petty venial s^ns,
compared with the licentiousness of these times) but for his
incorrigiblenesse, in that he would not be reclaimed. And indeed, It is not
always the greatness of the sin, but the wilfulness of the sinner that
aggravates the crime, and exposes a man to the severe wrath of God. We read of
one that was stoned to death by Gods own immediate determination, only for
gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath day. Number. 15. 32.
What might be the reason of so much severity toward so slight a transgression?
It was, because God had precisely commanded, Exodus 16. 29.
that no man should go out of his place on the seventh day. And therefore
whether the transgression were great or small; the law of those times was. That
the soul that did ought presu^ptuou^ly, whether he were born in the land, or a
stranger; the same reproched the Lord: and that soul was to be cut off from his
people, a^ appea^s, Number. 15. 30.

This I take to be the only true Evangelical ground of Excommunication and
Censure; as appears by those instructions, given by our Savior Mat. 18. Mat.
18. 15. 16. 17
If thy brother shall make a ^respasse, go and tell him his ault between thee
and him alone; If he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more;
and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church, but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heat^n, etc* And th^n
follows, verily I say unto you; Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be
bound in heaven, etc. The thunder of the Churches censures, was not wont to be
discharged at every disagreement in doctrine, every diss^n^ment in matters
(peth^ps) merely indifferent (I fear our modern reformers have learned of the
Jesuit, to reduce all matters ad Spiritualia, out of particular aym^ and
satisfactions; making their censures as cheap as contemptible, and as
scandalous as themselves.) That ful^nen Ecclesiae was wont to be used only in
cases of extreme necessity, and with great deliberation and candor; as when
the matter was fundamental to the faith; or when the person scandalo is by his
contumacy, and all other me^ins had been used to reclaim him; In such cases,
Tutius est ut pereat unus, qu un unitas; better a Hand or a Leg be cut o^t,
rather then the whole body should be endangered by a Gangrene.

It is said of S. Stephens murderers, Act. 7. 57
That they stopped their ears, and ran upon him all at once, and cast him out
of the City, and stoned him. When men stop their ears against the voice of
their reprovers, it is no wonder if they involve themselves in desperate and
horrid consequences. It was a custom among the H^athens, and afterward (in
imitation of them) among the Israelites; 1 King. 23. 10.
when they sacrificed their children unto M^lock, to make use of drums, and
such like instruments, to deaf the ears, and dull the senses of the spectators,
le^t they should be moved to compassionate the pitiful Cries of the poor
sacrificed children. From whence the valley of Hinnom is thought by some to
receive the name of Tophet; from Toph, which signifies a Dr^n. And we read Mat.
8. 29. Of two Demoniacks, that were exceedingly tormented at our Saviors
presence, and therefore they cry out, Quid nos tecum? what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus, son of the living God? art thou come to torment us before our
time? of the same hellish and infernal constitution, is the stubborn and
incorrigible spirit; He is enraged and disquieted at the thought of any thing
that may tend to his conversion; and therefore he stops his ears against all
pious and sober Councels; He will not go to church, for fear of being awakened
out of his beloved sleep; will not hear such a man preach, for fear of being
pricked in conscience, which will put him to more pain then he is willing to
endure; He is resolved upon his course, from which he will not be diverted by
any seasonable warnings, no, though one should be sent unto him from the dead,
on purpose to reclaim him.

And as is the Sin, so is the punishment; The sin wilful, and the punishment
inevitable. For when men are resolved that nothing shall divert them in their
sin; God is resolved, that nothing shall divert their Judgment. When men stop
their ears from Hearing, God will not only stop the mouths of his Prophets
from reproving; but his own gracious ears from Hearing, They stop their ears at
his calls, and he will stop his ears at their Cries, in the day of their
Extremity. And for this we have a very clear Text, Prove. 1. 24. Because I have
called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; but
ye have et at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my reproof: I also will
laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; when your fear comes
as a desolation, and your destruction as whirlwind, when distress and anguish
comes upon you; then shall ^hey call upon me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. And certainly, it is a s^d
condition to perish, and to have none to pity us. For what pity can we expe^t
from men or Angels; when the father of mercies, and the God of all consolation
will laugh at our destruction? He that at one time wept over Jerusalem, because
she would not repent, Luc. 19. 41.
and foresee the day of her visitatio^ was at another time pleased with the
destruction of that incorrigible City, when there was no way left for
repentance.

So that this desperate wilfulness of mind, as it is the natural effect and
consequent of infatuation; so it is the cer^ain forerunner of ruin and
destruct^on. For the proof of this, I shall only produ^e two instances. The one
is in the sons of Ely, of whom it is said, They harkned not unto the voice of
their father, because the lord would slay them. The other is in Amaziah king of
Judah, who (having gained a victory over the Edomites, and taken their gods to
be his gods) the Lord sent a prophet to reprove him for it; who answered the
prophet, saving, Art thou made of the Kings Counsel* forbear; why should
thou be smitten? Then the prophet forbear, and said, I know that God has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not harkned
unto my counsel. And so it fell out within a short time after

And therefore, Go to now, all ye that despise and reject the seasonable
warnings of your prophets. That da^e the day of your visitation, and say (with
those in the prophet Isaiah) Let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we
may see it; and let the counsel o^ the holy one of Israel draw nigh, that we
may know it Ye, that walk after your own lusts; and yet are of the number of
those scoffers S. Peter speaks of, saying, where is the promise of his coming?
for since the fathers fell asleep; all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the creation. Ye, that glory in your shame, and boast of your
wickedness, and say, our Tongues are our own, we are they that ought to speak;
we will not subject our Consciences to any yoke. Look to it, and be assured,
that there is evil before you, though you discern it not; we can see (from the
sacred oracles) that four star that governs, and that sad fate that attends
you, without calculating your Nativities. And (without the help of a
prognostication) discern at a distance that black cloud of judgment which is
gathering over you, wherein the thunder and lightning of the fierce wrath of
God is reserved for you. And the ground of this confident assertion, we derive
from that of Solomon, Pro. 29. 1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.

Fourthly, This incurable evil of Incorrigibleness, is ever attended with
another evil as desperate and pernicious to the soul. And that is senslesness
and security, especially in the time of the greatest danger. And herein appears
the strength and witchcraft of Infatuation, in that men are never so jo^ly and
unapprehensive of danger, as when they are dancing upon the very brink of the
bo^tomless p^t, and (with Jona^, though a rebel and a fugitive from his Lord
and maker) their sleep is then soundest upon the pillow of security, when they
are in the most eminent danger to be cast away, Of such as these (doubtless)
does the Prophet Isaiah complain In that day, did the Lord God of hosts call to
weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and
behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die. And it was
revealed in mine ears, by the Lord of hosts, surely this inquity shall not be
purged from you till you die. That is, it shall never be purged from you, but
you shall die in it.

And certainly, this cannot but be taken as an high provocation and affront to
Gods justice, when not only his threatenings, but his immediate extensions are
scorned and despised. Shall the Lion roar, and shall not the beasts of the
forest tremble? Shall the most high God thunder out of heaven, and not sinful
guilty man be afraid? Will Zim^i and Cozbi be shameless at their uncleaness,
just at the same time the fierce anger of the Lord breaks out against Israel,
when the Congregation is weeping before the door of the Tabernacle? Certainly,
this is that madness of heart Solomon speaks of, when men have no knowledge or
sense of the time of their vistation, but, as the Fishes that are taken in an
evil net* and as the birds are caught in the s^are, so are the sons of men
snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.

And therefore our Savior foreseeing that his Disciples would be found
sleeping even in that very hour when he was to be betrayed, gives them a
caution, which can never be unseasonable to any Christian. Take heed to your
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with sursetting, and
drankenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
For, as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole
earth. But wherefore as a snare? But because it shall surprise men when they
are unprepared, and unprovided of any thing to resist the evil of that day;
like an armed man, that rushe^h suddenly upon a man that has nothing in his
hand to defend himself. Thus came the Deluge upon the old world, as a snare;
not but that they had an hundred and twenty years warning; in all which time,
the Patriarck Noah was their Chaplain, a preacher of righteousness unto them;
but it came as a snare, because they were spirits shut up in prison (as S.
Peter calls them) that is, captived and ensnared in their own blindness and
security. Would you know the time when the people of Laish were destroyed? It
was then, when they dwelt ca^eless, after the manner of the Zidonians, quiet,
and secure; when there was no Magistrate in the land, that might put them to
shame in any thing. Would you know the time when the Philistines received their
greatest blow from the hand of Sampson? It was then, when they had eaten and
drunken to the full, when their hearts were merry, then they called for Sampson
to make them sport in the house of Dagon their God; Then a sudden destruction
came upon them unawares, and their sport and jollitie ended in their common
ruin, would you know the Time, when the Israelites, were destroyed by the
severe hand of God? It was just then, when the Quails were between their
teeth; when they were not estranged from their lust; Then the wrath of God came
upon them, and slew the fattest of them, and s^o^ down the chosen men that were
in Israel. Would you know the Time, when Ie^usalem was threatn^d to be searched
as with candles and visited? The Prophet Zephany will resolve you; 't was, when
the Inhabitants thereof were settled on their Lees, when they said in their
hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.

So that, if you shall demand of me* when the Time, or when the Day of our
^aviours second coming to judgment shall^ oe: I dare not adventure to resolve
you, ^s some have done, from the mere Dicta^ of their own phrensies, and
delusions; since that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are
in heaven: Bu^ I shall tell you when in the general; it sha^ be in the night,
if not in the natural nighto^ darkness and obscurity; yet in the black n^ght
of persecution and trouble; and it sha^ be in that hour of night, in which
thethie^ uses to come, that is in the dead time of the night, when men are
fast a sleep in sin and security. It shall be in an age when Antichrist shall
be revealed. When the world shall be haunted with many false Christ's, and
sedu^ing spirits. When the Go. spel shall be preached to all the world, and yet
so little credit shall be given unto it, that faith shall scarce be found upon
the earth. It shall ^e in an Age, when men shall be as sensual and sinful, and
as secure in those sins, as they were in Noah's time; and for this I have
express warrant from our Savior. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also
the coming of the Son of man be^, for as in the days that were before the
flood; they were eating, and drinking, marrying, and giving in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the Ark; and knew not until the stood came, and
took them all away; so shall (...) coming of the Son of man be. And if the
sensual and secure oppressor would know the particular time of his visitation,
I can punctually resolve him; namely, at that very time when he think ^h^ least
of it; his evil day is then nearest, when he puts it fardest from him. And for
this to I have warrant out of the forecited chapter; But, and if that evil
servant shall say in his hear^ my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin t^
sinite his fellow servants, and to eat, and drink' with the drunken; the lord
of that servant shall come in a day when he loaketh not for him, and in an hour
he is not aware of, and shall cut^ ^n asunder; and appoint him his partion with
t^ Hypo^rites, etc. So that however the Tabernacles of robbers may prosper for
a time, and they tha^ hate God may seem secure, yet weigh their condition truly
in the balance of the Sanctuary, and you shall clearly understand, that their
prosperity is their greatest cu^se; and their security their greatest Judgment.

To all these, I shall add but one more symptom of the infatuated spirit; and
that is, A resolution to maintain and justify the errors and iniquities of his
evil doings. And truly, as perseverance in the duties of Christian Religion, is
that golden clasp that unites grace with glory; so perseverance in rebellion
and wickedness, is the very portal of hell, the nearest Border I can name to
the bottomless pit. There is a time and state in sin, when the dregs of sin
are frozen and congealed; when sin is out of measure sinful, and the sinner
beyond measure desperate and stupid Thus when Catiline had fired the City of
Rome with his horrid plots and conspiracies, he had nothing else to say for
himself, but this, Inc^ndium meum, ruina extinguam, I will quench the fire I
have kindled, with a final ruin; or (with the help of a Poet) The ills that I
have done cannot be safe, but by attempting greater, I will add worse unto evil,
thirst unto drunkenness, and leave the success of my ungracious actions, to
the extremest adventures.

And certainly, had the Catilines and Machiavels of our age and Nation, steered
in their black des^gns, by any other principle, but that of a necess^ty of
defending themselves, and main^aining their own actions (how horrid and
unconscionable soever) we might have seen their repentance, and our peace and
agreement long ere this day; But the witchcrast o^ R^b^llion is, that it dares
not look backward, and knows not how to retreat from what it has once dared to
attempt. He that once draws his sword in a rebellion, is obliged (by an
Infernal principle) to throw away the scabbard; for, where the doctrine of
repentance is admitted, the rules of policy and self preservation are presently
plucked up by the roots. As I have not so little charity, as to believe these
men at first intended the third part of the wickedness which they have acted,
by falling from one wickedness to another, So I have not so much charity, as
to believe they will be ever reclaimed into the duty of good subjects, but by
the hand of power. And this belief of mine, takes its rise from the bold
defense they make, in maintaining themselves in their abominable vilanies, and
the bold defiance they bid the whole world to bring them unto condign
punishment. Thus have they cast behind their backs, the wholesome rules of,
Religion and Conscience, steering desperately by that divellish principle, Per
scelera ad scelus tutum iter. Making one wickedness, the rise, and advantage,
and battery unto another, and their unblessed prosperity, an affront and
defiance to the Divine vengeance; and will rather put themselves, and the
conduct of their a^airs, into the hands of the Devil, then kneel either to God
or the King for mercy.

A man would think those Romanists in a very sad condition, who having
embarked themselves in some no^orious Treason or conspiracy (perhaps against
the Sea of Rome, as for other Trea^on, here may be a Dispensation) insomuch
that they durst not trust their holy father with their confession; for if they
did confess, they were in danger to be hanged; and if they confessed not (by
the principles of the^r own Religion) they were sure to be damned; and upon
this extremity, should resolve to prosecute their wicked contrivances as far as
power should enable them: In the like straights and extremities have these
wretched men involved themselves (by some of their own confess^ons) They have
waded so far in sacrilege and blood, that they know not how to retire; They
dare not confess their wickedness unto men, for fear of the people; lest that
people which they have so long abused and ensnared, should rise up in a rage,
and stone them. They dare not confess unto God, for then they are immediately
obliged to lay down their Arms and to disclaim their error, by Repentance and
Satisfaction. So far are they removed out of the way of Repentance, that if
they find any of those who have twisted with them, to repent and abhor their
former wickedness, and to des^e to redeem their former reput^tions by any
future services, they presently look upon them as delinquent, and malignants,
and the most dangerous of all their enemies; like the Jewish Lawyers, They shut
up the Kingdom of heaven against men; for they will neither go in themselves,
nor suffer others that would go in; So these, they will neither Repent
themselves, nor suffer others that would repent. They have made their condition
so desperate, that they dare not repent; and followed Achitophels counsel so
long in widening differences, that like Pirates, they will choose rather to
perish at sea, then put themselves to account with any suspected P^tt.

Nay rather then own the guilt of their own ^osoms (which I am sure they cannot
stifle) they will lay all their wickedness upon the shoulders of their pious
Sovereign, and he must be sacrificed and murdered, because their sanctity (for
sooth) must not be blemished. Thus it shall cost them no more but a little
breath, to Vote themselves the Saints of the Kingdom, and all men else
Delinquents, but themselves and their adherents; and the Justification of their
bold mischiefs (by an invincible law of necessity) must be the accusation of
all that oppose or dissent from them.

But that which (beyond all this) adds in^nitely to the weight of their
wickedness i^ this, That (notwithstanding the world has had sufficient
Testimony of their prevarication with God and man, by falsifying their oaths,
and several engagements, by the boldness and bloodiness of their actions, to
promote the English Interest (as they call it, that is, their own) yet they
think it no stale fraud, still to make Piety their pretense, and Reformation
their design; as if they aimed at nothing else, but that the Lords day may be
better observed, the Gospel better planted, the Kingdom better governed. Thus
with the help of their fine spun Arts and Hypocrisies, they have made Christ,
and his Gospel, the Patron of all their horrid undertakings.

And here, I do not so much declaim, as grieve and tremble to think, what a
desperate progress these men have made toward their eternal ruin. We read of
Beltashazzar, that he made a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank
wine before the thousand; and not content with this vainglorious excess; he
send^ (in his drunken humor) for the vessels of Gold and Silver, which
Nebuchadnezzar his Father had taken out of the Sanctuary of God, and makes
those holy Utensils, instrumental to his pride and luxury; and this was so high
a provocation, that God sent a hand out of the inanimate wall, to write in his
presence, his certain Doom and judgment. Is it not wickedness enough in these
men, to feast themselves wi^h the blood and miseries of their fellow subject^,
whom they have made their slaves; To inebriate themselves with p^de and power,
unless they make the Sacred* Oracles of God instrumental to main^ain them in
their luxury? Was it not wickedness enough in cursed Jezabel, to dispatch
Naboth for his Inheritance sake, unless she proclaim a Fast to disguise and
cover that her bloody Design? Is there not guilt enough in the murder of an
incomparable King, in the robbing of a glorious Church, in the deliberat^
breaking of so many sacred Oaths and Engagements, in the ruin of so many
thousand families, in the ^nsnaring so many thousand souls by irreligious
engagements, to maintain these men in their wickedness; but must all this be
disguised with pretensions of piety and reformation? Can they find no other
answer for themselves, when they are pressed with arguments drawn from Reason,
Law, and Scripture, but must they father all their wickedness upon God himself,
^y deriving it from the direction of his sacred Spirit? M^st the Dove of peace
and love be entitled to their ^ erciless and bloody executions? Must the Spirit
of meekness and condescertion be made the Patron of their Tyranny and
Amb^t^on? The spirit that works sorrow and reluctance for sin, be brought to
countenance their justification and perseveran^e in sin? Oh let it never be
told in Gath, nor published in the streets of Ascalon; Let ^ot the unbelieving
Jews, nor the sons of Maho^er, nor the Savage Indians ever come to hear, what a
generation of vipers, and prodigious monsters has been hatched, and fomented
under the sunshine of the Gospel. How will our Enemies abroad reproach and
Blasphem^ our Religion, when these shall be under^ood to be the fruits of it,
in its (fa^sly pretended) purity and Reformation?

Whether that Blasphemy which the scribes that came from Jerusalem were guilty
of, in attributing the dispossession of unclean spirits (which they saw our
Savior did by the finger of God) to be done by Beelzebub, were specifically
that irremis^ible Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, I will not determine. But
this I will say; That to Attribute the works of the most high God, to
Beelzebub; and to attribute the works of Beelzebub, to the most highGod: are
Blasphemies of the same Parallel; if any thing make the difference, its the Quo
animo of the iniquity. For men to say, when they have nothing else to say, (in
defense of their Enormities) that what they do, they do by the dictate and
direction of Gods holy spirit, is so bold and fearful a Blasphemy; that I am
ready to tremble at the naming of it; But whether these pretenses derive from
malice, or obstinacy, or a dissembled Justification, of what they know to be
Guilt of an high nature, I cannot possibly determine. I shall from hence admire
only the power, and prevalency of this charm of Infatuation; that will neither
suffer men to look upwards toward their God nor inwardly upon themselves, nor
backwards upon their guilty actions; but hurries them on, (with Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram,) into a Justification of their Rebellion, against Moses, and Aaron,
and God himself, so long: till they are swallowed up quick of Death and
Despera^ion.

And therefore my advise shall be the same, that Moses gave the rest of the
people that were not of that Conspiracy; Depart I pray you, from the tents of
these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, (or touch not with them) lest
ye be Consumed in their sins. And let every man that would preserve the life
of his Happiness, in the comfort and cleernesse of his conscience, say with
good old Jacob, O m^ soul, come not thou into their secret, mine honor, be not
thou engaged, (or do not subscribe their engagement;) lest thou eat of such
things as please them, and thy mind and thy Conscience be defiled, and ensnared
to thine inevitable ruin. And (this I conceive) may not be propounded
unseasonably unto such, as either have twisted with these men, without
repenting all this time, of the error of their doings; or such, as are at
present their secret friends and Agents; or such as may hereafter be tempted
into a Compliance, either for fear of their present power, or (which is worse)
for filthy Lucre sake.

And for our brethren, and friends of the Scottish Nat^on; I could wish, they
would seriously consider of this one thing. That the best way to satify the
fears and jealousies, which are at present upon them, and their councel^; and
the best assurance they can give his Majesty of their sincerity unto him in all
respects; must be taken from the sight, and the Sorrow, and the humble owning
of those errors wherein they were unfortunatly engaged against his Royal
Father. I shall not hunger after any of their Confessions; whether Public, or
private; nor will I adventure to Censure their intendments. Only I hope, I may
have leave to entertain some fears, that they will not set this King upon his
Fathers Throne, till themselves have set themselves in the stool of repentance,
on another score then what has been lately practiced in Scotland. The best way
I can pro^ound, for them to set a Crown of gold on this Kings head: is to have
their hearts thoroughly pricked with those thorns they platted in his Fathers
Crown; and if they are really ambitious of the honor, of restoring the rights
of the Crown, and revenging the blood of their martyred Sovereign upon his
cruel enemies; they need not be ashamed (in some measure) to begin with
themselves.

But if a professed Recantation, be too severe a penance for men that would be
thought they cannot err, yet let their hearts ^e but affected with such a close
and inward sorrow, as that The searcher of all hearts may accept of it; and let
their resolutions for the time to come be such, as that the God of Truth and
mercy may bless, and prosper them into on ample, ripe harvest of true
Christian Honor; and that the world may read the disavowing of their former
errors, (if in no other character) yet in the sincerity and gallantry of their
future actions, and achievements.

Having showed the Nature, Causes, and Symptoms of Spiritual Infatuation; and
with a faithful, and impartial hand searched this wound unto the bottom: shall
I now (with the Priest and the Levite,) pass by, and leave a soul stripped, and
robbed, and wounded unto death, and take no care, no Compassion upon so sad a
spectacle? What; Is there no Balm in Gilead, for this deadly wound? Is there
no oil of mercy, to be applied to the obstinate and obdurate sinner?
Doubtless, so long as there is life, there is Hope; and so long as the^e is
Hope, the Physician cannot fairly desert his Patient.

And because it is safer erring with too much Charity, then with too little;
Because it is an inconsiderate Temerity, to confine the boundless Ocean of
Gods mercy, to the narrow mouthed bottles, of our own uncertain, and fallible
Conception: I shall open a door of Hope, as far as the unerring Oracles of God
shall authorize me; and the first thing I shall p^opound to the In^atuated
spirit is, That there is a possibility of being Cured.

I know well, there is a Iud^cial kind of Hardness, when God withdrawes the
sweet influence of his Grace, and delivers a man up unto himself, without ever
looking more after him. That there is a sin unto Death; that strikes the
Church, with Dumbness, that s^e cannot pray for it; and strikes the Soul with
Numnesse, that she cannot feel the comfort of Gods mercy There is a Blasphemy
against the Holy Ghost, that shall never be forgiven, because there shall never
any place be sound for repentance. But yet, though we may conclude that such a
s^n there is; yet we cannot without great rashness, and uncharitableness
conclude tha^ This, or That man is that irrecoverable sinner.

It is (for the most part) agreed, that The sin against the Holy Ghost is a
Total Apostasy from the Gospel of Christ formerly acknowledged, and professed;
together with a verbal Calumniating, and a real persecuting of the same; with a
deliberate purpose so to continue, and persevere unto the Death, and then to
pass away in that disposition. But supposing ^his Definition to be rightly
stated; can any man say, that this man's Apostasy is Total; that it is
malicious; that it is Deliberate; and that it shall be final? Saint Peter was a
Blasphemer, but he did not persecute the Church; Saint Paul was a Blasphemer,
and a Persecuter, but he did not persevere; There was a perhaps left for Simon
Magus his recovery, even at the same time, when he was in the Gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity; when his overture was so profane, and
Blasphemous, that he attempted to purchase the gift of the Holy Ghost with
money: Repentance, and prayer were prescribed unto him by Saint Peter. The
schoolmen tell us, that there are six sins, that are dangerous Introductions
into this irrecoverable gulf; namely Presumption, and Desperation; Impenitency,
and Hardness of heart; The resisting of a Truth after Convincement; and the
Envying Gods grace in other men. But no man can conclude a man to be Totally,
and finally surprised with the^e, unless he be perfectly acquainted with the
close of his life.

We read in the History of our Saviors Cures, that he cured one woman that had
an issue of blood running upon her twelve years; another woman, whom Satan had
bound, and bowed together eighteen years; That he cured a Cripple at the pool
of Bethesda that had been there thirty and eight years. And if these were
bodily infirmities only, and so no fit presidents, for any spiritual Cure; we
read of Mary Magdalene, who had been a notorious sinner, and possessed along
time by seven Devils; and yet by the mercy of her Savior, was recovered into a
more Evangelical temper, then many of the Apostles themselves, as appears Luc.
7. 44. We read also of witches^ that (having renounced their Baptism,
contracted with the Devil, and resigned up themselves to his entire possession,
and Command for many years;) have yet been recovered into the Christian faith,
and a Salvable condition. That madmen should be poisoned, because Physicians
know not how to cure them; That menshould take away t^eir lives, because God
has taken away their understanding, is a proceeding, that savours ^ore of
Conveni^nce, then Conscience; for this is to put no dif^erence at all, between
Christians, and Dogs, and Cats in times of Infection. I know it is impossible
in nature, for a Camel to pass through the ey of a needle, and yet we read
that this and all things else are pos^ble unto God; (I say) all things, that
imply not Contradiction, or repugnancy to his nature. We must grant, (says
Augustine) that God is able to do something, which we are not able to find out;
in such works, the whole reason of the doing, is the power of the doer; It is
God that has done them, consider the author, and all doubts will cease. And
since the scripture assures us, that neither The incestuous Corinthian for the
haynousnesse of his sin, nor the These upon the cross, for his perseverance
in sin unto the last hour, were excluded Heaven; There is little Reason, and
less Grace, for any man to conclude himself Damned, on this side the grave.
But let not any m^n mistake me, or deceive himself, by deriving an
Encouragement unto presumption from that, which I intend only for an Antido^e
against Despair. So that, a possibility of Cure being granted, our next
business is, to propound what is most probable, and instrumental to the same.

The fat heart, (I have showed,) is called in scripture a stony heart; if it
were a brazen Heart, it might be melted; or if it were an Iron heart, it might
be malleable; but the furnace has no power over the stone; the Hammer of Gods
Judgment is the fittest instrument to deal with it. Now, as the Stone in the
kidney, or the Blader, is a disease of great pain, and of no small difficulty
in the Cure; so is it with that disease which Divines call the stone in the
Heart, or stoninesse of heart. Some Analogy, or proportion there is in the
Cure of both diseases, which may serve only to illustrate one another.

Two ways Physicians have found out for the Curing of the Stone in the blader,
namely, either by cutting and drawing it out of the blader, which is a work of
pain; or else by dissolving it within the blader, which is a work of Art. Two
ways likewise Divines are directed, in the Cure of the Stone in the Heart,
namely, to Break it, by the terrors of the Law, which is a Cure of pain; or else
to Dissolve it by the mercies of the Gospel, which is a Cure of great Art, and
Excellency. And though for the most part* Plures sunt ques Timor Corrigit, They
are the greater number that are driven home to God by fear: yet meliores sunt
quos Amor dirrigit. They are of a better Constit^tion that are won by Love. We
read in in Scripture, of a Broken Heart, and a Burning Heart. A Broken Heart,
when he watered his Couch with his Tears, when he roared day, and night for
the very disquietnesse of his heart, upon the sad apprehension of Gods anger,
and discountenance; and a Bur^ing Heart in the two disciples that went to
Emmaus, whose hearts are said to burn with^n them, whilst Jesus expounded unto
them the Mysteries of their Salvation. Some men's hardness is like that of the
flint, which is easier broken upon a Cushion, then an Anvil; But most men's
hearts are like cracken bells: they must be broken all in pieces, and new cast
by the Belfounder, ere ever they will be made to ring in Tune.

The first potion then, I would prescribe for the recovery of an Infatuared
Spirit, is an Exceeding bitter one, and yet it must be taken; what it wants in
sweetness, it has in Salubrity. It is compounded of little else but the
Terro^s of the Law; The weight of Gods Justice; The separation of the soul from
the body by the blow of Death, The Separation of both from the presence of God,
by the Doom of Judgment; and the view of those torments, which are Endless,
Easelesse, Remediless. For the disease being Lethargick, and paralitick, (that
is,) a disease that is attended with much drowsiness, and stupidity; It is
necessary the soul be first awakened to its own danger, by the smart, and
anguish of some sever^ application. I have known a very good Physician, that
when he could not cure the palsy any other way, would cast his Patient into a
Burning Fever; and then he knew what he had to do with him. It is necessary,
that the whole man be distempered, and disordered; that the mind may be the
better brought into an Evangelical frame and te^per.

Agreeable to this method, sure was S. Peter's practice in the recovery of the
3000. souls we read of Act 2 41, Ye men of Israel, hear these words. J^s^s of
Nazareth, a man approved of God among ^ou, by miracles, wonders, and signs,
which G^d did by him in the midst of you as ye your selves also know; him ye
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain; whom God has raised
up, etc. Here was a word of no small terror, a word able to break a Jewi^h
heart in pie^es; The blood of the Son of God is brought home unto them, and
laid at their own doors. And see what a kind and piercing operation this bitter
potion had upon their minds; it is said, when they heard this, they were
pricked in their hearts, and they said unto Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, Men, and Brethren, What shall we do? And what ^oes S. Peter prescribe
unto them in such a^ affrighted trembling condition, whilst this Ague fit was
on them? No more but Repentance and Baptism, and then immediately applies an
Evangelical Cordial. Repent and be Baptized, and ye shall receive the gift of
the holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you, and to your children, etc. Thus
the converted Jaylour being first awakened by an Earthquake, that shook the
very foundation of the prison, and being at his wits end, as well as at his
swords point, upon a supposition his prisoners were escaped; he came trembling,
and fell down before Paul and Silas, and brought them out and said. Quid faciam
ad Salutem? Sirs; what must I do to be saved? I refuse not to do any thing that
may bring me into a Salvable Condition.

Certainly, those hearts are wisely, and seasonably broken; that are molded
into a present Compliance with any thing, that may tend to their comfort, and
Conversion; and the way to have a clear, and a Saving Interest in Christ, is to
see our selves irrecoverably lost without him. There are some d^seases in the
body, (contract^d with no less guilt of conscience, then blemish of
reputation;) wherein the patient must be brought as low in his constitution, as
possibly can be, and yet Live; his spirits must be exhausted, his blood
evacuated and changed, and the nearer he is brought to the gates of Death; the
better hopes there is of life, and a safe recovery. And there are some diseases
in the Soul, wherein the unseasonable application of Cordials strengthens the
peccant humor, making it mortal, and irrecoverable, We read of a sort of
Devils, that were not to be cast out but by prayer, and fasting. And there are
sins which (for their long possession in the soul,) are not to be ejected, but
by strong cries, and tears, by much self denial, and great maceration of
Spirit. Cordials are then seasonable, when the malignity of the disease is
killed. Healing plasters are then to be applied, when thy wound has been
thoroughly searched, and cleansed. The Apostles rule is, that the old Leven be so
purged out, that the regenerate man may become a new Lump. There were some in
the Prophet Jeremies time, that thought themselves perfectly cleansed and cured,
when there was no such matter; for God tells them, that though they washed
themselves with nitre, and much Soap, yet their iniquity was marked out before
him, Ier. 2. 22.

Where let us pause a little, and enquire what these spots might be, that were
so hard to be gotten out, and they are expressly set down verse. 34. In thy
skirts is found the blood of the Souls of the poor Innocents, yet thou say,
because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me. Behold I will plead
with thee, because thou say, I have not sinned. Why gaddest thou about so
much to change thy way? So that the Spots which nitre and much Soap will not
get out are these Three (which I sha^ leave our Jerusalem to enquire after
with her own walls.) There is first, the deep scarlet spot of Blood-guiltiness
(especially if it be Sanguis Animarum, the blood of souls that perish for want
of sharp and sincere reproofs) Secondly, there is the white spot of pretended
sanctity and impunity (notwithstanding all their guilt) and Thirdly, there is
the changeable spot of gadding Inconstancy; when men reel too and fro, and
stagger from one extreme into another, and (without fixing upon any certain
principles) Act, and drive on furiously (like Jehu) according as necessity or
advantage shall direct them. And would you know the reason how the disease in
this people came to be thus desperate; the same Prophet will inform ye, Jer. 6.
14. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly, saying,
Peace, peace, when there is no peace. They skinned the wound, without searching
it to the quick, and lest the corruption in the bottom, which made the wound to
fester inwardly, and to grow desperate and incurable. So that, the first step
to the cure of the infatuated spirit, is, to deal impartially with the disease;
The best expedient to bring a man to believe and rely on Christ for life and
salvation; is, to represent clearly his condition out of Christ, to be an
estate of death and damnation, And the more we are ashamed and confounded at
the sight of our own ugly selves, the more amiable and acceptable we shall
appear in the sight of our Redeemer.

God has erected two Tribunals, unto which all men living are summoned to
appear, there to give an account of themselves; The one is within our own walls,
(as I may so speak,) within our own Souls, and that is the Tribunal of
Conscience; In which Tribunal, there is an undoubted power of acquitting, and
condemning, as the Delinquent shall be found more or less guilty. Which I take
to be very clear from that of S. John. If our Heart Condemn us, God is greater
then our heart, and knows all things; (that is) he knows more by us, then
we do, or can know by our selves. But if our Heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence toward God. 1 Ioh 20. 21.

The other is that grand Tribunal of Judgment, whereunto all the world shall
be summ^n^d at the General Resurrection, which shall be in that place which God
shall choose for the manifestation of his mercy and Justice, upon all men
according as their works shall be Now in secular and Judicial Proceedings, for
a man to have leave to make choice of his own Iudicatory, his own Judge, his
own Jury, and witnesses, is so high an Indulgence, and advantage; that it
cannot be expected from any earthly power; and yet the great Judge of Heaven
and Earth, men and Angels, has given this privilege unto m^n; He may take his
choice whether he will be judged Here, or Hereafter: by himself, or by another;
God has made us all Ch^ncelours ^n our own Causes, with this proviso; That if
we will deal truly and impartial^y with our selves, that is, if we will Summon
our selves to ^ppear before our selves, arraign our selves before the Tribunal
of our own Consciences, and there Examine, Indite, convict, and condemn our
selves; we shall not come into any further condemnation. If we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged of the Lord. But if we will not judge our
selves, we must stand or fall according to the Sentence of another. Most
Certain it is, that we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good, or bad. S John in a vision, saw the dead small
and great, stand before God, and the books were opened, and another book was
opened, which was the book of life, and the dead were judged out of those
things which were written in the books. according to their works. They are
Books in the plural, that shall be opened. The Book o^ Nature, The Book of the
scripture, The Book of Conscience. And out of these books several accu^ons will
be framed. The Devil, that Grand ac^use^ will s^and so^th and plead against us,
The abused Creature will accuse us of excess, and luxury; The souls of the
holy martyrs. will (...) us. with oppression and blood gu^i^e, The Sacred
Oracles of God will (...) ^s with infidel^ty, and Contempt; and our own guilty
Consciences, instead of pleading for us, will give up a verdict against us.

The only way th^n to supersede the judgment of that day, is, to call our
selves to an account beforehand, To agree with our adversary quickly, whilst we
are in the way, lest we be delivered up unto the Judge, and the Judge send us
to that prison, from whence there is no Redemption. To ri^le every cranny and
co^ner of our hearts. To bring sorth our murdering lusts, our bosom Traitors;
and to use them as Joshua did the five Kings that were hid in the cave of
Makkedah; that is, set our feet upon their necks, and slay them in the sight of
all the world. And this if we do, we shall not fail of such a part in the first
Resurrection, as will secure us from the blow both of the second death, and
second judgment also. So that it is in our own choice who shall pass sentence
upon us; whether our own selves, or else some other person. And what shall we
be able to say for our selves, in that great and terrible day of the Lord, why
the sentence of eternal death should not pass upon us, when God has given us
the space of 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 years for the performance of so easy a
task, so reasonable a service, and we have not done it.

We see with what malicious dexterity and boldness, blood-thirsty and deceitful
men manage the Trials, and des^gn the executions of persons of the highest
quality and merit, but how cold, how dull, and indisposed in enquiring after
the guilt of their own wretched souls? Certainly, such men as they may be
thought to be strongly infected with this disease of Infatuation; so it may be
feared they are very far removed out of the way of their recovery, who have so
much of other arens, so little of their own guilt before their eyes.

A Cure then (ye see) there is for the Infauated soul, and the first step to
that Bethesda pool which cures all diseases, is by a descent of humiliation,
But do not mistake your selves, It is not every s^gh, or sad look, no, nor
every tear, that concludes a solid humiliation for sin. There is a great
difference between an humble man, and a man that is humbled; there are many of
us (God help us) that are humbled, and driven into great straits and
extremities, persons that have lived in their own Countries with great charity
and hospitality toward others, that have neither what to eat, nor wherewithal
to be clothed themselves. And yet, I fear, were our purses as full of silver,
as our hearts are full of sin, we should soon find the way to our former pride
and luxury. Physicians are wont to cure vomiting by a vomit; and bleeding, by
letting of blood; And truly, the best cure I can prescribe for all our secular
sorrows; is by adding more sorrow and compunction for our sins, then I fear
resides in our dejected spirits.

I have dwelt long enough upon the severe^ part of the Cu^e; and it may be
demanded of me, what? are the messages of the Gospel to be delivered by
Boanerges, the sons of thunder? Sure, the world has ^ore then enough of such,
that take a great deal of pains to bring men unto Hell ga^e^, by representing
unto them the horrors of a damned Condition, and the i^re^overable Estate of
all the world besides themselves, but then their Art fails them in bringing
them back again; They can bring the soul into a deep dejection, but they know
not how to raise it again; They are good at the Corrasive, but to seek in the
application of the Cordial. Like our Refo^mers in England, they are de^erous in
p^l^ing down, but they know not how, or what to build in the place of it. These
are ignorant (if not ^ll natured) Physitians^, that please themselves with
wounding, when they know not how to heal, and make work for their own mercinary
and adulterate Art to practice on; shaping their Cures too often according to
their encouragements, and though they will not sell the gifts, yet they can
find a way to sell the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, for money and advantage.

Now in the Samaritans Cure of the wounded man that fell among h^eves, as he
journied from Jerusalem to Jericho, we find two ingredients; wine, and oil;
not wine alone, or oil alone, but both; first wine to search, and afterward
oil to supple. Thus when S. Peter sound his auditory pricked in their hearts,
he presently applies an Evangelical Cordial, and tells them, that the promise
was made unto them, and unto their children, even as many as the Lord should
call. Thus S. Paul directs the Church at Corinth, to deliver up the incestuous
person to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh; but it was for no other end,
but that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus For the
Churches censure having humbled him, he writes a second Epistle to the same
Church, both to forgive him and to comfort him, lest perhaps he be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow.

And indeed, the more we are broken with sorrow and contrition, the more firm
and compacted shall we find our confidence and assurance in Gods mercy. For
though self-humbling be the certain fruit and effect of faith; yet faith is not
so clear and conspicuous, till repentance has scoured off the rust, but lies
like a coal raked up in an heap of ashes, or like fire in a flint, which is
there before, but is not discernable before the stroke of the steel has made
it so. Without doubt, the light of faith burns cleerest in the dark and
solitary chamber of our saddest retirement, and the believing ey has never so
clear a prospect into heaven^ as when it is full of penitent tears.

An instance whereof we have in the distressed condition of the Church of
Israel in the Prophet^ Mi^ahs time; When good men were perished out of the
earth, and evil and corrupt men were multiplied, and twisted in mischievous
designs, when the best man was as irksom as a briar; and she most upright,
sharper then a thorn-hedge; when a friend might not be trusted, nor confidence
reposed in a guide nor a secret committed to her that lay in the bosom; when
the son dishonored the father, and the daughter rose up against her mother,
and a man's enemies were the men of his own house And yet in this dark and
dismal night of affliction, see with what an humble confidence the Church
addresseth her self to the strong God of her salvation. Therefore will I look
unto the Lord. I will wait ^or the God of my salvation, my God will hear me.
Rejoice not against me, O mine ^nemy, when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me, I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my c^use, and execute
judgment for me; he will bring me forth to light, and I shall behold his
righteousness.

Now though in chastning, or sorrow, or whatsoever, for the present seems
joyous, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yeildeth the peaceable fruit
of righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby The Law (says S. Paul)
is our schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by
faith; but after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster.
Prop* and Supporters we know, are necessary in the building of an Arch, and
scaffolds are necessary in the building of a Spi^e, but when once these
fabrics are finished, these helps and advantages are laid aside; The heyr, as
long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant, though he be lord of
all, but is under Tutors and Governors, until the time appointed of the
father. But when he comes to full age, he understands his Title to his estate,
and is understood to be Sui juris, at his own liberty in the disposing of it.

There is a time when the Christian is discharged from the Terrors of the Law,
from the Bondage of sin and Satan; and restored ^ the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. Which is nor such a liberty as our Anabaprists dream of, a liberty
to live as they list, a liberty to deny all manner of obedience to spiritual
and temporal Governors. As there is an Evangelical liberty, so there is an
Evangelical yoke, and no man can pretend to the one, that does not subject
himself to the other. Omnia sunt libera nob is per fidem, and tamen omnibus
servi sumus per charitatem; ut simul consistat servitus libertatis, and
libertas servitutis.

The Gospel gives me an exemption from the Curse of the Law, For there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, provided always, that they walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. It gives me the liberty of my
person, notwithstanding all my debts, because they have been satisfied by my
surety; but then I must understand my person to be a consecrated Temple, which
I may not defile or dispose of at my pleasure. It gives me liberty and ^ree
access unto my Creat^, a liberty to present my suits unto him, whenever I am
in want or extremity; a liberty to serve him without the bondage of fear; but
it must be according to good old Zachariahs rule in holiness and righteousness
all the days of my life. It gives me a liberty to u^e his good creatures, (a
privilege which was lost in Adam, and is restored by Christ) but then it must
be wisely, soberly, justly, charitably, thankfully, and contentedly.

Nay, I shall ever think it agreeable to Christian wisdom, to have my cancelled
obligations still before mine eyes, that I may know my greater obligat^ons of
duty and gratitude to my Redeemer. And if from a changeling, or brat of hell, I
am regenerated and formed anew, according to the glorious image of my maker,
yet I will still have an humble ey upon my former ugliness and deformity; if
from a crooked, bruised, and decrepid Cripple, I am restored to p^rfect
strength and soundness, I will hang up my crutches in the Temple, not only as
memorials of my gratitude, but as monitors against any future relapse. And
though I know my sins are forgiven and forgott^n of my Redeemer, when I have my
patdon under s^al; yet I will ever retain the memory of them, to aw, and humble
me into an holy fear, into a constant warines and circumspection how I becoin
again entangled in those snares out of which by the mercy of God I have escaped.

Thus ye see, The Law, and the Gospel, Moses and Christ, are not opposite and
divided, but subordinate and serviceable one to the other. The Law was given by
Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. The Law was delivered with
thunders, and lightnings, and earthquakes: The Gospel descends into the soul,
l^ke rain into a fleece of wool; like Elijahs small still voice that succeeded
the whirlwind and the earthquake; like the voice of the Turtle, and the singing
of birds, after the winter is past, and the rain is over and gone. Moses takes
his stand upon mount Ebal, and from thence proclaims the curses of God; Christ
takes his stand upon mount Gerezim, and from thence proclaims his beatitudes,
as appears, Mat 5. 3. etc* The first solemn sermon that ever he p^eached to his
disciples, was a sermon of mercy. The first Text that ever he preached upon,
was a Text of mercy; which he did not light upon by chance (as S. Austin did
upon that of S Paul, Romans 13. 13) but (the book of the Prophet Isaiah being
delivered to him) it is said, that he opened the book, and found (that is
turned to) the place where it was written, The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has Anointed me to Preach the Gospel to the poor, he ^ath sent me
to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recove^ing of sight to the blind* to s^t at liberty them that are bruised, to
preach the acceptable year of the Lord And sure we that are employed as his
Ambassadors for peace and Reconciliation, ought to follow him in this choice;
to understand it our main business to Heal, and to recover, and to set at
liberty, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. And if at any time we
fall upon severer theames, it is but in order unto this end, which is the grand
design of our profession

And therefore, if there be here any drooping or dejected Soul, that groans
and labors under the weight of any burden either of Guilt, or misery; I shall
say unto that Soul, as was said to blind Bar timeus; Be of good Comfort, rise,
Jesus thy Savior calls thee. His invitation is most Gracious and Pathetical
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden^ and I will refresh ye.
Come unto me all ye that have hitherto rejected my messages of peace and Love,
minding your fa^mes, your oxen, your wives, (that is) your pleasure, and your
profit more then my seasonable invitations. Ye, that have forgotten me in the
day of your peace and prosperity; and denied, and abjured me, and my Gospel in
the day of your Trial and persec^tion Come unto me, all ye, that have wearied
me with your Iniquities, and ^de me to serve with your sins, ye that have
peirced, and scourged, and crucified me again afresh by your back^iding and
impenitency; ye that have so often grieved my good spirit, that would have
sealed you unto the day of your Redemption. Come unto me all ye, that have
mangled and torn the seamlesse coat of my Church, to carve unto your selves
your own base ends and advantages; ye that have made my house of prayer a den
of thievs, ye that have persecuted, and wounded me in my poor members; ye
that have imprisoned; and impoverished my Ambassadors; and dethroned, and
murdered mine own Anointed; yet come unto me however, you shall not be
upbraided with the foulness of your sins, only come with broken hearts, with
bleeding Souls, with the sighs, and groans of Laboring and heavy laden
Consciences, and I will refresh you. If you shall still obscure and justify
your sins, you shall not prosper; but if you shall Confess, and for sake them
you shall find mercy.

Are you stung with the guilt you have Contracted by your voluntary,
presumptuous sins? Behold, I am that brazen Serpent that heals all that look
up unto me. He that believes in me, shall not perish; but have life
everlasting. Are your souls full of Leprosy, and uncleaness? your vital spirits
surprised by the plague of the Heart? your Consciences stabbed to death, by
your own deliberate wounds? Behold, I am that Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world. My blood is that fountain which was opened purposly for sin,
and for uncleanesse; That Bethesda pool that cures all disea^es whatsoever.
Are your hearts as hard as the nether millstone, or as the Adamant? It is said
that the Adamant it self is broken ^th goats blood, Behold I am that Escape
Goat, that ^ear on my head alone the iniquites and transgressions of the whole
world. I never did reject any that came to be healed of their bodily
infirmities; and I never will reject any that shall come to me for any
Spiritual Cure.

But the wounded spirit will perhaps reply, Tistrue, I know, I am fairly
Invited by my Savior, but with this proviso, that I bring a true says, a
sincere repentance along with me; And these jewels are not lodged within my
Cabinet; These flowers grow not within the garden of my Soul. I desire to
repent with all my heart, but I cannot; and I would gladly believe, but I find
I am not able.

Well; however be not discouraged. There is some life even in this deadness of
spirit; There is some secret spark of Grace even in this smoking flax, which
has a promise it shall not be quenched. He that has promised to accept of a
willing mind according to what a man has, and not according to what he has
not; will entertain and reward even a cup of cold water given in the name of a
disciple He that had respect unto the short prayer of the poor dejected
Publican, will have respect a^o unto thee, if thou be but as humble as that
Publican. He that raises in the Soul a blessed hunger and thirst after
righteousness, has also (...) sed, that Hunger and Thirst shall not be (...),
but that he will give to him that is a thirst, to drink of the water of life
freely. He that g^veth both to will, and to perform, according to his own good
pleasure; will in his own good time, fulfill the desire of those that fear him.
So that let this be laid for a solid ground, and foundation of Christian
Comfort: That the Desire of mercy, in the want of mercy, is a real mercy, and
the desire of Grace, in the want of Grace, is Grace it self. And if thou do not
quench these inchoations of Grace, and obstruct its operation, and progress;
whenever the spirit of God shall blow upon these little sparks, thou shall
find them grow and increase into a Coal, into a flame, enough to cheer and
warm the soul with Celestial Comfort.

Hence it is that the Kingdom of God is compa^ed to a grain of mustard seed,
which is reputed to be one of the least of all seeds, and yet the Kingdom of
God is entirely contained in this single Grain. Hence it is that Grace is
compared to a little leven in three m^asures of meal, which in time will leven
the whole lump There is a time when Holy purposes are taken and accepted for
good performances; I w^ll go unto my father says the prodigal; and behold his
father comes out to meet his son, I said, I will confess my sin unto the Lord,
(said David,) and so thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. And the same good*
King did but purpose in his heart to build God an House; and it was accepted as
well as if it had been done; and in acknowledgement hereof God promised to
establish his house, and his Kingdom upon his posterity for ever. God accepts
of such payment as we are able to make, though it be in small pieces, or
perhaps in coin that is cracked, or clipped, and wants its full weight; yet if
it be not false and counterfeit, it shall not be turned back upon us. And
truly, he that grieves, and bemoanes himself because he cannot grieve for his
sins, or because he cannot grieve so much as he d^sires; is in a Certain way
unto that repent^nce, which is never to be repented of.

Nay; give me leave to go one degree farther. Do thou find thy soul ensnared
with the Cords, and Customs of thine own twisting, or art thou so much a
stranger to thy self, that thou dare not look into thy dangerous and
suspected Condition? do thou feel the throbs and horrors of a wounded
Conscience, the pangs of Hell and Despair growing upon thy Soul? yet give me
leave to ask thee this one Question Do thou notwithstanding thy present
fear, and horror, Love thy Lord and maker? or if thou can not clearly reply
to that; Can thou but resolve me of thy Love to thy neighbor, not because he
is thy neighbor, or thy friend, or perhaps thy Companion in evil ways; but
because he is a Christian, a Child of God, a member of Christ, one that makes
Conscience of his ways? Do thou love him for the pious and gracious
Enclinations thou find in him? if thou do; Be of good Comfort. Here is a
Comfortable testimony, that God has set his Love upon thee; though thou
discern it not. Hereby (says S. John,) do we know, that we are translated from
death to life; because we love the Brethren. Where, Love is not the cause, but
the Evidence, and reflection of Gods favor, and Benignity toward us.

And Certainly this tribute of Love whether it be to God, or our neighbor, is
but Leve onus facile jugum. There is nothing more easy then Love; nothing more
acceptable then love; nothing more ample and difusive, in its dilating and
spreading Quality then Love. It will obscure and hide, a multitude of sins, from
the severe wrath of God. It is the fulfilling of the Law. It bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, Endures all things. It has a
flame that neither men nor Devils: neither Sin, nor Death, is able to
extinguish. A wicked world may strip me of my Estate; Imprison, and Confine my
person; Take away my Life; It cannot take away my Love. Without Love, were I
furnished with Angelical knowledge, and expression; Had I faith enough to
remove mountains, and Compassion enough to sell all I had to feed the poor,
and Constancy enough to endure the flames of Martyrdom* yet without Love, all
this would profit me nothing. Nay; when other Graces shall expire, and be no
longer serviceable unto me; my Love, shall last and abide with me for ever. For
when my says shall be resolved into vision; my Hope into fruition; my Love
shall follow me beyond the gates of Death, and be my Companion unto all
Eternity.

So that Love being the pulse that represent us spiritually alive or dead; The
Crisis, that determines of our diseases, whether they be Curable or not; let us
ever have a wary eye upon all such things, as eject and destroy Love, and
therefore (as grievances unto the Holy spirit of Love) Let all bitterness, and
wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away with all malice.
Ephesians. 4. 31. For sins of Ignorance, or sins of Infirmity, a pardon of Course may
be easily obtained from the Throne of mercy; but for sins of malice and
perverseness, mercy is restrained, and shut up; God will not ^e merciful unto
such as of^end of malicious wickedness. He that will not pay so easy a
Tribute as that of Love, is an irrecoverable rebel, and not fit to be owned for
a subject of Christ's Kingdom.

Secondly, whilst the soul is upon its recovery from a disease of Senslesnesse,
and stupidity; let us ever have an especial care to avoid those sins which do
Devastare Conscientiam, demolish, dismant^e, and make Shipwreck of Conscience.
For Conscience is both the eye and the Awe of the Soul, the Monitor in the
School of the inward man, the Superintendent, or supervisor of thoughts, words,
and actions, without which the Soul is like a Ship without its Rudder, that
cannot put to Sea without inevi^able loss and hazard; Great sins (like David's
murder, and Adultery) cast a man into a deep sleep, or rather into a Swoon;
They deprive a man of all sense and motion. There is nothing so pe^nicious as a
Relapse, to a m^n that is in a hopeful way of recovery.

Thirdly, being recovered into some reasonable degree of Health and strength;
Let us be sure to have a const^nt recourse and application to those means of
Grace, whereby the inward man receives his daily growth, and nourishment. We
read Mark. 5. That when our Savior had recovered the ruler of the Synagogues
daughter from death to Life he Commanded that something should be given her to
eat. Sure I am, ^he ^oul that is once recovered from the death of sin to the
life of Grace, has great need of Spiritual nourishment of Sermons, and
Sacraments, of Ministerial A^solution, and all Evangelical he^pes, and
comforts, that may promote the assurance o^ our Election, and may enable us to
work out our Salvation with fear and Trembling.

Lastly. To these, give me leave to recommend to your Care and practice, those
grand helps, and assistances of Prayer, and Alms giving, which are as the
props and buttresses whereon the Soul stands firm and unshaken, in the day of
her visitation. It is said of Zacheus the Publican, that he stood forth, and
said unto Christ, Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if
I have taken any thing from any man, by false accusation; I restore him sour
fold A resolution (doublesse) of one that had entertained Christ in his Heart,
as well as in his House. And upon the growth of the Gospel in the Apostles
Times, we read of diverse which formerly used Curious Arts, that brought their
books together, and burned them before all men, to the value of fifty thousand
pieces of Silver, When the Artists of this juggling Age will di^claime before
all men, the Curious and fine spun Arts they have used for the gaining of their
ends, and advantages; I know not. Or when the Publicans and notorious Sinners
of our Nation, will have so much Charity, as to give the half of their goods,
to those poor which themselves have made; or so much Honesty to restore in any
proportion, what they have taken from their brethren by false acousation, I
cannot say. Sure I am, a day will come, when they shall not carry all things by
voting, as they please; when all their usurped power and greatness, will but
increase the stink and nastinesse of their unsavory Memory; when the Spirits
which these Chemists have extracted from Sacrilege, Rapine, and Innocent
blood; will serve only to put them into a Condition to be more Capable, and
sensible of Torment. In the prevention of which all that can be done by them,
or further advised by me is but this. That they would seasonably entertain that
council which the prophet Daniel gave to King Nebuchadnezzar, when a judgment
was gone out against him, namely, To break of their sins by righteousness, and
their Iniquities, by showing mercy to the poor. That they would according to
our Saviors advice, make themselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness.
That they would not think it a piece of Popery, to demonstrate their
Repentance, by Restitution, and Satisfaction, as far as may be. And if a
Compensation cannot be made in Specie, as to particular injuries, and
oppressions; yet they have an object large enough if they please to look upon
it; Indeed, I know not well how they should be able to look of it. Sure they
cannot but understand, their brethren whom they have driven into exilement and
extremities abroad, are ready to starve in the streets of strangers. They
cannot remove themselves (I me sure) from the Cries and Complaints of the
fatherless and widow at home; The Sorrowful sighing of poor prisoners cannot
but come before them. And if all these could he obscured; yet I shall desire
them to believe; That I do not remember them of these objects, and inducements
unto Charity, out of any other respect, more then out of pity, and Charity to
their immortal Souls. Let them therefore render unto Caesar, the things that are
Cesars; and unto God, the things that are Gods; and unto themselves and their
own Consc^ences, the Care that belongs to their eternal p^eservat^on.

I shall Close up this discourse with the observation of a Command which I find
in the Levitical law. And it is the Whatsoever uncleanesse it be that a man is
defiled withal, and it be hid from him when he knows of it, then he shall be
guilty. Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil, or to do
good; whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid
from him; when he knows of (...), th^n he shall be guilty in one of these.
And it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of the things, that he shall
Confess that he has sinned in that thing. What pollution, and defilement of
mi^ and Conscience, the world is guilty (...) in its present General Defection
from the Gospel, or how far, men's souls are ^ain^ed with this Di^a^ of
spiri^ual Infatuation. I know (...)* What O^thes and engage^nts, ^n ha^ ^ke^
(...) God, and their King, and ^ith (...) Conscience and Int^grity, they have
(...) shall (...) all men to know from themselves, into whose ^an^s th^se
papers of mine shall come. Is this Treatise (by the good blessing of God,)
shall be so fortunate, as to show unto any the errors, and iniquities of their
Blind and Bedlam ways: I shall humbly and earnestly desire, that I may reap
the benefit of their prayers, and God the Honor of their Conversion.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.

