Divine Arithmetic Illustrated, In the Right and Exact Numbering of our DAYS.

OR A DISCOURSE OF The Near and Continued Approaches of Death unto every one
whatever.

With the same Inference and Application which the Apostle in 1 Cor. 15. makes
from an alike Subject,

That the Knowledge and Consideration of these things should exhort People to
be Steadfast, Immovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord.

BY RICHARD STAFFORD.

O that they were Wise, That they understood this, That they would consider
their latter End, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. So teach us to number our days, that we may
apply our Hearts unto Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. LONDON: Printed and Sold by E.
Whitlock near Stationers' Hall, 1697.

It is appointed unto Men once to die, Heb. 9. 27.
ALthough Death and Mortality is an easy Subject to discourse on, because
therein so very many things do lie open, common and obvious to the Knowledge of
all People whatsoever, whether Learned or Unlearned, whither they be
Considerate or Ignorant, for The Living know that they shall die, Eccles. 9. 5.
and unless it be to stir up your Pure Minds by way of Remembrance, it may seem
superfluous to write those things which are commonly known already; yet it is
safe. However, I having already published to the World many things concerning
the State of the Wicked and Sinners, Ignorant and Ungodly, in their Death; and
also of the Condition of Good Men in their Death, I shall here endeavor to
make known what further Thoughts do arise in my Mind concerning it, as the same
do spring up from the Book of the Lord the Fountain of Truth, which I have
within me by seeking and drawing out from thence; as also from that common
Knowledge and Understanding, which the Lord has given to me as a Creature.

And that knowing the Time, that now it is High Time to awake out of sleep, for
now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed. The Night is far spent, the
Day is at hand. Knowing that our Days are continually passing on, one after
another, to that State or kind of Being, which shall never pass away, It is
certainly High Time to rouse up and bethink our selves thoroughly; for the
things of which we have been so often foretold and forewarned, I mean the
things contained and spoken of in Scripture, which relate unto that God with
whom all Creatures have to do; and must receive from him Blessing or Cursing,
Happiness or Misery: And also the things concerning the World to come, whereof
the Scripture it self, and those instructed with the Ministry thereof, do all
along speak: All this is nearer than when we first believed, and draws nearer
and nearer day by day, to morrow it will be nearer than to day, and the next
day after that nearer than to morrow, and so on. We do day by day and night
after night approach nearer and nearer to the unseen things, and to the unseen
State, which is Eternal, for the things which are not seen are Eternal. The
Night is far spent: With us severally according as our Years are, it is evident
a great deal of our Life is gone, past and behind.

I liked very well the Expression of a Man which I once heard; when it was told
him, such an one was near about forty Years of Age; He said thereupon, That
forty Years was a large stride toward the Grave: And truly so it is, for it is
a striding half way at the utmost Computation of Man's Life at fourscore Years.
But at the usual reckoning of threescore Years and ten, a Year is three hundred
threescore and five days and six hours; which every fourth Year makes three
hundred threescore and six. So that cast np all this together, it amounts to
near about five and twenty thousand, five hundred and sixty seven days and
twelve hours. Here is the exact number of our days, if one was sure to live
seventy Years. But how many Thousands and Millions do come short of it? who
either pass away as the untimely Fruit of a Woman, or dye in their Infancy,
Childhood, Youth, Manhood, or declining Years, before they come to this old
Age. So that admitting that any one should certainly come to threescore Years
and ten, as a thousand Paces make a Mile, the length of his Journey or
Pilgrimage may be reckoned up at about twenty five Miles and an half; and it is
a going one Pace each day and night; or seeing that two strides make a Pace, it
is a going two strides toward it, one in the day and another in the night. And
thus we who are Inhabitants of Flesh, do continually Journey or Travel on
toward the Land of Eternity. And so it is proportionably according to the
number of the Days, and Weeks, and Months, and the Years, which the Lord of
Life, whose are the Times and Seasons, do lend to every Man here on this Earth.
Do not reckon this to be an odd and an unusual kind of writing, thus to cast up
Numbers, for if ye read in Daniel, and in some places of the Revelations, ye
will there find and meet so much of this nature, as if the Spirit of God did
delight in summing and casting up of Numbers. So that what we have here
mentioned, does not derogate, vary or alter from that true and sound Preaching
by the Spirit, or at least from those common Assistances of the Spirit, which
are given to every Minister of Christ, according as he is Faithful and Diligent
in the Ministration of the Gospel.

After that the Spirit of God by Moses had cast up the Number of our days to be
threescore Years and ten, or fourscore Years, he goes on to add, So teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. One says well, The
numbering of our days is the best kind of Arithmetic. And truly to me, when I
thus cast up and compute it in my Mind, nothing does so much give me a true,
through and lively sense (if I may so express it) even of Mortality it self.
Here is the Use and Instruction of it, To apply our Hearts unto Wisdom. There
is a difference between bare thinking of a thing, and to set ones Heart, or to
apply ones Heart unto it. And so it is as to the Sinners and Godly People, for
even Sinners do think a little in the General concerning Reiigion, that
Heavenly and Spiritual Wisdom; for indeed they cannot help it, and they cannot
do otherwise, inasmuch as the Words thereof, and the Sound thereof is gone out
to the Ends of the Earth; there is so very much Talking and Preaching thereof
in this Island; there is so exceeding much in the Scriptures of Truth, which
almost every Family has in its House, that there is none so much a stranger in
England who has not heard of these things. What things? Concerning God, and
another Life, and the World to come. But as to Sinners and the Ungodly, all
this amounts to no more than to a certain Rumor or Report, or a Sound, without
a through Knowledge and distinct Apprehension of what all these things mean;
they think of them, because they are forced to think of them sometimes, but
they do not set and apply their Hearts unto them. And so it is the very same
concerning the Numbering their Days, their latter End and Death. Who is there,
even amongst the Ignorant and Ungodly Multitude, yea amongst those who are most
Despisers and backward in Nature toward the Ministry of the Word, that does
not know in the General how Old they are; how that time and their Days do pass
away, and how that they must Dye at last. No Body whatever can be Ignorant of
or not know this, because it is Sensible and Evident. But it is too certain
again, that they do not for all this, Apply their Hearts unto the true Wisdom.
That is, To set about it in good Earnest; for they do not Understand what it
is, nor Labor after it: But they are Careless and Negligent, as pertaining
thereto. Whereas Contrariwise the Righteous and Godly do so apply their Heart,
as to Mind nothing in Comparison thereto, but they bring all things in
Subordination to it.

Nothing remains in a Man, but what he does in the Service of God, and for the
Good of his own Soul. All his other Acts and Actions perish in the using, and
if they do not come under that End, they had much better be not done at all;
for whatever is of Sin or Evil, that tends to sad Account, or Loss at the last
Day. And that is Wisdom indeed, and nothing else is so, which procures Good
unto a Man^s self, and avoids Evil: Which nothing does so certainly effect,
according to his own Ordering and Establishment of things (taking in things to
come, all one as things present) as the Service of God, and the keeping of his
Commandments. For if there was nothing else therein (as there is Ten Thousand
times more) it appears much better, and more excellent on this Respect, That
whereas all other things perish and pass away, and so does all the Glory of Man
pass away as the Flower of the Grass: But he that does the Will of God, abides
for ever.

Religion, our Duty to God, is not only throughout the Book of Proverbs, but in
several other places of Scripture, called Wisdom, as particularly in that
saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, Wisdom is Justified of her Children. But also
it may be Proved, Evidenced and Demonstrated to be the only Real and true
Wisdom; and all Despising, Neglect and Variation from it to be the greatest
Folly. To show or treat of this particularly, and at large would be somewhat
besides the present intended Subject. But as certain of the Ancients defined
the sum and whole of Wisdom to be a Meditation of Death, and that upon this or
the like Reason, because it would Influence a Man's whole Life and Conversation
unto Wise and Good things; it being Reasonable to do those things, whilst
Living, which one shall wish he had done when he comes to Die. And also nothing
is so much worthy the Concern and Regard of a Wise Man, as Death is. It is
every ones Prudence to keep off, and provide against all Evils whatsoever; and
if the World calls them Wise, who are so much busied about the getting of
Riches or Honor, about the attaining of every little seeming Good and avoiding
every little Evil that may befall them; much more will he (who is Wise unto
Salvation) be so as to the greatest and most enduring things which are to come
and will quickly be Manifested before us with open Face. If every one is
Concerned, how it goes with him now, much more should a Rational and
Understanding Man look about him, both take thought, and also take care, what
shall become of him, after this vain, short and uncertain Life is Ended.

Truly this was my manner of doing, from my tender Years, and from my Youth up.
As it is written, That Isaac went out to Meditate in the Field at Even-tide: So
I can Remember that when I was but a Schoolboy, and so when I went first to
the University; whereas others of my Fellows and Cotemporaries were all for
Play and Company, I would rather choose to Walk all alone by my self, and in
some Solitary place, Meditate partly upon the Works of God's Creation: All
which being then new and fresh to my Mind, did Seem to me in the Phrase of the
same Isaac, To be as the Smell of a Field which the Lord bath Blessed. For I
did then perceive Sweetness, Beauty and Delight in them, though I do now
confess, that, having beheld them so very often, I have since lost that just
Wonder and Astonishment which I had formerly in beholding them: For it has
Diminished, and I have in a manner Ceased to be Affected therewith. There is so
much in Custom and Repetition, even of the most Marvellons things; that, by
continual seeing them, they cease to be Mavelous, not but that they are so
nevertheless in themselves; But as the Edge grows dull by often cutting, so
through Humane Infirmity and Weakness we become dull of Hearing, and dull of
Seeing, and dull of Understanding, when it is continually upon the same Object.
But as the same Isaac could say, Behold now I am Old, I know not the Day of my
Death Genesis ^7. 2. So when I was but very Young, this was the Subject that I did
most Think and Meditate on, though I was then Young, Yet I did not know the Day
of my Death; for so much was Sensible and Evident to me, and I had so much
Understanding as then to Apprehend, that Young Boys were Liable unto Death, and
several of them did Die, all one as People of Riper or Declining Years, or in
Old Age. I then knew well enough of the suddenness of Death, and that we always
carry the Root of the matter about us, even those Seeds of Mortality and
Corruption; we being but like brittle Glass, which can be dashed or broken in a
Moment. Yea, when I was a Child, I Spoke as a Child, I Understood as a Child, I
Thought as a Child; I could even then Discern that the longest Day would have a
Night, that though this Life (which is as a Vapor, and continues not) should
be extended up to Youth, Manhood (I am now passing this Second Stage of Life)
Declining Years, or Old Age, yet at last an end would come, the end is come,
Ezekiel. 7. 4. And now I can Reason this as a Man, that nothing is long which has
an End: But now I call to Remembrance my Thought, and Searching of Heart, which
was in the Days of Old, the Years of Ancient Times, when I was but a Stripling,
I did then commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit made diligent Search,
What will become of me, after that this Body which now I carry about me, is
laid in the Earth? For I did find even then, that my Spirit would Abide and
Liv^ elsewhere, as truly God has shown this unto me, even from within my self,
ever since I was a Child, and had the least Knowledge of Good and Evil, that
there was another Life, and another State which People should enter upon, and
go into, after that they are departed off from this Earth. I was all along, and
am still as verily Persuaded, and as certained of it, as I am sure, that at the
writing these Lines, I now Live and Breath. And thereupon Revolving and
Pondering many things in my Mind, how that all things here are but vain,
little, and passing away as a Shadow, and do not signify much, fain would I be
happy and safe, as to the Succeeding and Eternal State of things, into which my
Soul must Launched forth out of this Body. So I came at length to be acquainted
with the Ways of God; and I have made it my Business to serve him, although it
has been all along (which I desire to acknowledge in bitterness of Soul)
accompanied with too many Failings and Imperfections, and comings short of what
the Lord has Required of me.

It should be a constant Rule, that whenever I declare and make known my own
Experiences, there the Reader or Hearer should confer Notes, and compare it at
the very same Instant with those Experiences of his own; for there is nothing
like to this Euperimental Kind of Preaching, when a Minister does inwardly feel
what himself does Speak, and Speak out what himself does feel; for we are
Fellow Servants and Fellow Travelers; and God, who Fashioneth the Hearts of
the Inhabitants of the Earth alike, Psalm. 34. 15. does bring all his Sons and
Daughters unto Glory, by near the same way, in all their several Generations
and Countries. All of them that ever did, or shall come to Glory, they were
every one of them, so wise as to Consider their latter End. Says one of them,
Lord make me to know mine End, and the Measure of my Days, what it is, that I
may know how frail I am. And so, when we Read the History of the Saints, and
Servants of God in Hebrews, this general Character is given of them all, They
confessed that they were Strangers and Pilgrims on the Earth, for they that say
such things, declare plainly that they seek a Country, Heb. 11. 13, 14. And if
they seek a Country, they must be mindful of that Entrance or Passage which
lets into that Country, which is Death. A Stranger or Pilgrim, are Relative
Words, and do Relate unto somewhat, to which they should be acquainted, and to
somewhere they should be at home. Now God is the Father of Spirits, to whom
they are Related, and with whom they should be acquainted, according to what is
written, Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at Peace, Job 22. 21. Though a
Stranger is not acquainted and know in such a place; yet others, elsewhere, do
know him. And so God is acquainted with all Men, as they are his Creatures;
Thou art acquainted with all my Ways, Psalm. 139. 3. Though alas too many are
not acquainted with him. And then mention is made in Ecclesiastes. That Man
goes to his long Home, and the Mourners go about the Streets. So that he is a
Pilgrim all the while he is on this Earth. They are all so in Deed and Reality,
but few do confess themselves to be so, that is, Strangers and Pilgrims, and
declare plainly that they seek a Country, so as not to be Mindful of that
Country they now are in, no further than barely to Furnish them with
Necessaries and Accommodations for their intended Passage and Journey; but not
to sit down, or settle any Abode or Dewlling Place herein, for a Stranger or
Pilgrim does denote one who is in a Traveling and Moving Posture, and they are
not long in a place; and also they have a fixed, certain and intended Place or
End, to which they make, or otherwise they are but Wanderers. And again it is
certain, as long as they are Traveling and Moving, if they are set aright,
every Minute they draw nearer and nearer to their home, or ot the place where
they would be. Now whereas many People would willingly stay here always, by
their Good Will, it shall not be so, for an the Soul here is in Prison, so it
is a Moveable Prison, or a Moveable Wagon, and the Wheels thereof are always
going, until the Appointed Time when they shall Cease, and let out the Soul
into the Invisible World. Thus much is sensible and evident that the Pulse is
always beating toward its last stroke.

It is appointed unto Men once to die. This Particle, once. makes it yet more
terrible, and raises in it yet greater Thought and searching of Heart; for we
do more dread, and are more apprehensive of things which we were never sensible
of, nor had experienced before. Of so many Millions since the Creation of Man
upon the Earth, we read or hear of but very few that did return again after
they were passed into the Gates of Death: We read of some, as of Lazarus, and
the Saints that arose at our Savior's Crucifixion and Resurrection, Mat. 27.
52, 53. but none are recorded, who gave an exact account how or what manner of
thing it is to dye, how much Pain they did undergo therein, or how the
Bitterness of Death did taste; and how it was with the Soul in the separated
State; this is left to every one of us to know and feel. It is as natural a
thing to dye as it is to live, for we are appointed to that all one as to be
born, or to pass through a little mean while here: It is only to break that
which was liable to be broken before, or to melt down that which was meltable.

Suppose that any one who shall hear or read this, were to dye at such a day
certain, about a Month, or six Weeks, or a quarter of a Year hence; and it is
likely enough to be some ones Condition, How would such a Message possess that
Soul with fear and surprise? God, who has determined the Times before
appointed, Acts 17. 26. does know exactly the day of the Month, and the Year,
with the Place, and also the manner, with what Sickness, or outward Accident or
Casualty each of us shall dye, for it is certain to God but unknown to us. So
it is of all the Sons and Danghters of Men, although some of them are now
Healthy, Lusty and strong. If death is not most commonly sudden, yet Sickness
or Casualty is always sudden, which in a week or an hours time will cut down
the Tree to the Ground, and fetch out the Soul to give an account for the Deeds
done in the Body. The Lord of Life knows all by our Names; and who would now
think that such a Person and such a Person (according as he appoints and marks
them out in his own order) shall die such a day and in such a place, and of
such a Disease or Accident. This same Tongue which has spoken forth his
Truths, shall one day faulter and be laid flat in my Mouth, and then turn into
Corruption, and next to nothing. These very same Eyes that see at this day,
shall sink into my Head, and behold Man no more with the Inhabitants of the
World. And these Hands which have hitherto handled the Pen of the Writer, shall
either be tied and bound up with Gravecloths; or they will be in that fixed and
unmovable Posture, that there will be no need of tying or binding at all. When
we once come into the place of Skulls or dry Bones: There will be then nothing
to be seen of Personal Deformity or Lameness, or who in the days of their Flesh
were clothed with a beautiful, well-colored, or with a common or ordinary
Skin. We know not particularly when this shall be, but we know certainly that
once it shall be, It is appointed to Men once to die.

It was Melancholy Tidings of Samuel to Saul, Moreover the Lord will also
deliver Israel with thee, and to morrow thou and thy Sons shall be with me
(that is in the State of the Dead, as God says in Ezekiel of others, that he
would bring them down to the People of Old Time) then Saul fell straightway all
along upon the Earth, and was sore afraid, Because of the words of Samuel, and
there was no strength in him, for he had eaten no Bread all the day, nor all
the night. Truly such a Message to any of us, would be apt to turn our Stomach
against Food. It would spoil our Supper, and cause that we should not so well
relish our moderate necessary Eating, if God should say to any of us, This
night thy Soul shall be required of thee, Luke 12. 20. Or if we did hear from
any one for certain, who is now in the State of the Dead, To morrow thou shall
be with me; we also would be sore afraid, and our Souls would as it were
beforehand shiver within us, before they take flight into the invisible World;
as appears by Poor Malefactors when they come to the place of Execution. There
is no need to seek unto familiar Spirits (as Saul did here, which he did not
neither, until God had before departed from him) and unto Wizards that peep and
mutter, Should not a People seek unto their God? for the Living to the Dead?
Isa. 8. 19. Which last does seem to import, as if it was an incongruous thing
to seek to the Dead for the Living. But the other is very Proper and
Reasonable, That a People should seek unto their God. And truly, If People
would seek unto their God, who gives his Answer now out of his written Word,
all one as he did of old Time from his Vrim and Thummim, they may by that, as
also by Prayer, know their End, and the measure of their days, in near upon as
certain and exact a manner, as if they should hear one speaking unto them from
the Dead, a Week, Month, Quarter, half a Year or Twelvemonth hence, or so many
Years hence thou shall be with me, or such a Night of such a Year thy Soul
shall be required of thee. It has been already alleged out of the written
Word, and by that common Knowledge which God has given to every Man, as also
by an exact casting up of Numbers; and so it would be proportionably if it
should come unto more Years; The utmost Period and Term has been set down,
beyond which none does usually pass; and thou may at any time be cut short
thereof. Says one, God therefore kept the precise exact day of our Death to be
uncertain and unknown, because that he would have us think every day to be our
last. And if thou would be certified herein for the Psalmist's Reason That I
may know how frail I am. This last thou may know altogether so well as if
God had told and repeated unto thee the particular day thou should die.
Would thou know how frail thou art? Why? Thou art so frail, that thou art
subject and liable unto Death every day of the Week, yea every hour, and every
minute. The Sinner and Ungodly would know this, Because he would Eat and Drink,
for to morrow we shall die. Because he would proportion out his Pleasure and
Sensuality accordingly, and come in such a time toward the close of the day,
by a Partial, Feigned and Temporary Repentance; for there is hardly any Person
so sinful, but has some little Hopes, and would do somewhat toward the
getting the Favor of God, and to go to Heaven if he may be admitted. Whereas,
as God has now ordered the Matter, such base mercenary and selfish Souls may be
deceived, but God will not be articled with Even Godly and Righteous People
have that which savours of Men, and of the Fleshly and Corrupt Nature, That if
they were sure to live twenty, thirty, forty or fifty Years longer, they would
abate and diminish from their former Zeal and Fervency and Diligence in the
Service of God. But now the Father having kept the Times and Seasons in his own
Power, when he will Summon them to die, and after that to Judgment, the
knowledge and consideration hereof does oblige them continually to be upon
their watch and duty, that whenever he comes he may find them so doing. To
have their Loins be girded about, and their Lights burning. And ye your selves
like unto them that wait for the Lord when he shall return from the Wedding,
That when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately. And if he
shall come in the second watch, or come in the third watch and find them so
doing, Blessed are those Servants (as the four and twenty hours are divided
into four Watches, each six hours making a Watch, so Childhood, Youth, Manhood,
Old Age, are the four Watches of the Term of Man's Life) Be ye therefore ready
also, for the Son of Man comes in an hour when ye think not, Luke 12. 35, 36,
37. We should so live, as if every day was to be our last day, as if we should
die when we go to Bed, or as if we were to be executed and suffer death to
morrow Morning. So live the remaining part of this day and to your lives end,
as if certainly this was thy Condition. For though it may be ten thousand to
one that thou shall not actually die within these twenty four or eight and
forty hours; yet certainly and without all doubt, this is the Case and
Condition of us all, That e're long this earthly House must be dissolved, and
we must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ to receive for the things
done in the Body, whither they be Good or Bad; so that it will be near the same
thing in God's account, and to thine own Imputation and receiving, seeing that
of every day after years of Knowledge and discretion thou shall be called to an
Account, as if thou were to die for certain before another and second
Revolution of the Sun over thine head. How does any Person presume to live in
that Condition in which he is afraid to die? For God will all one enter into
Judgment, and call People to an account for the same, all one as if they did
die in the very Act of such or such sins. And so it is of the several deeds
already done, now in doing, or to be done in the body. Each thing now is just
done, and then it passes into Judgment; for we shall be called in question and
to give account for each days Transactions. And if as Christ says, Sufficient
unto the day is the Evil thereof. So if we would have Boldness and Comfort at
the last and great Tribunal, we should in the mean while look well unto it, and
give heed and use our utmost diligence and endeavor; that to counterpoise for
the Evil of each day, some Good should be done, something for the Glory of God,
and for the Good of his Church and People, as also for the Edification and
Advancement of our own Souls in Righteousness and true Holiness. That it may be
pronounced at last to our endless and unspeakable rejoicing, when all the days
of this Life shall come to be rehearsed as they now pass, though it will be
hardly said as to the best Saints and Servants of the Lord (for all come short
of the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. and of what he has required) sufficient unto
the day is the Good thereof, yet in each day somewhat was the Good thereof.
Every rising of the Sun, and setting of the same sets us somewhat nearer to the
general and final Audit, the great day of Account and Retribution to every one
according to his Works. Yea, so does every minute and second (which is the
least reckoning of Time, for as sixty minutes make an hour, so sixty seconds
make a minute) and this Time is in continued flux and passing on, until it
comes to be determined and swallowed up in that last Period when Time shall be
no longer. Like as a little Brook or River loses it self when it ends and
empties it self into the great and wide Ocean. As the shadow upon the Dial is
always moving (though to us it seems very slow) As the streams of a swift
running River do continually pass by; As the little sands in an Hourglass are
for the most part running; Yea, This whole sublunary Creation is made up of
change and perishing things, the World passes away and the Fashion thereof,
and day after day, and night after night, they haste nearer unto the Eternal
and Irreversible state of things: so our selves, Men and Women, being a part
thereof, we are now in the same transitory and dying Condition, and we do
always approach yet nearer in time unto that state, wherein as to the Earth as
now it is, and as to this Mortal Body and outward Flesh and Blood, as to the
manner of this short present Life, we shall be no more. But exhorting one
another, and so much the more as ye see the day approaching.

Here the Word of Exhortation is not confined to Ministers or Priests only, but
Indefinitely unto all Christians. And so much the more (Mark, give heed unto
and obey that) as ye see the Day Approaching, even the Day of Death and
Immortality of Judgment, and the succeeding Eternity. Whether we Eat or Drink,
Sleep or Play, Labor or are Idle, the things which shall come upon us, make
haste, and do Steal and Approach unto us nearer and nearer.

As it is written, Fools make a Mock at Sin; So there be some who make a jest
of the World to come, whereof the Scripture, and those Instructed with the
Ministry thereof do speak. But it may be Proved and Demonstrated to such who
have but any Sense as to Apprehend that there is a World to come in Reality,
whereinto many Millions of Souls have entered already, and our Selves are just
entering into the same. It is not properly another World, but only another part
of this same World, as a Room of an House. For thus much is manifest, even by
Reason and Perspective Gla^^es, that this Earth where we now in the Body do
Inhabit, is the least part of the World, as a Point is unto the whole Globe.
This may be known as a Man. And so it may be known, because it is seen, That
the Day of Death to each Person is as certain as was the Day of his Birth, and
it will as certainly be, as that once was. And this thing of Death, is the Gate
or Door which lets and opens into what is called the Future and Invisible
World. And then do appear forth the things contained in Scripture, which are
the Objects of our Faith now: But then they also will be Actually Present,
Visible and Manifested before us all one, as the things which we now see,
handle and converse withal. But let such Unbelievers and Scoffers Consider what
is written, To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense, Their Foot shall slide in
due time, for the Day of their Calamity is at Hand, and the things which shall
come upon them make Haste, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. It is commonly-said of Old People,
That they have one Foot in the Grave already. But this is certain and true of
all People, both Young and Old, even Infants before they can stand, or walk on
this Earth, that their and our Feet are continually sliding off from this Stage
or Slippery place of the Earth, even when we sit still, or lie along upon our
Beds, we are always sliding off from this Earth. In due time. God has fixed
out, and appointed the time when we shall be slidden off from this Earth. And
the Day of Calamity to Sinners, and to such as have their Portion in this Life
(for Death to them is the beginning of Sorrows) is at Hand. It is not just
already come, but it is within Call, and the things that shall come upon them
make haste. Looking for, and Hasting unto the coming of the Day of God, 2 Pet.
3. 12. Whether we do think thereof or not, we do certainly run, yea and fly
toward it. But the holy Ghost does Teach and Instruct us by this manner of
Speech, Looking for, and Hasting unto the coming of the Day of God, that though
we do move so fast toward it, yet we should even prevent it in our Thoughts:
So we should think more Continually and Earnestly as we come nearer in time,
and see the Day Approaching.

Conceive the Case, as so it will one time be, that we were upon our Death Bed,
and Gasping for our last Breath, and were Apprehensive every Minute or Quarter
of an Hour, that our Soul would take her Flight out of the Body, we know not
where, What would our Soul (for every Man's Soul is himself) then give if she
had it, or do, if she were able, to be assured of the Peace and Favor of God?
How does the Spirit then contract and gather it self as it were together, and
run and make toward the Father of Spirits? Ones first Born, Ten Thousand
Rivers of Oil: Yea, she would then give the whole World if she had it, and if
such a thing were possible for to obtain his Reconciliation and Loving
Kindness. Then the same Soul that did heretofore Despise and Disobey God, is
all for Honoring of, and Obeying him. But she should have done it before, for
now it is too late. But even from the Thoughts of Dying Persons, we come to
know and discern what would have been good for them, and what the Lord did
require of them in the midst of Life, and Happy would it be, and it would be
well with them if they had then so done. For this is the very top of the
chiefest Wisdom to do those things whilst Living, which one shall wish he had
done when he comes to Die: As also to refrain from those things, such are Sin
and the Pleasures of Life, as we shall indeed wish and desire, that we had
abstained and refrained from, when we come to Die. To approach, draw near, and
stick close unto God. To wait upon him in all his Public Ordinances (not
forsaking the Assembling our selves together, and that so much the more, as ye
see the Day Approaching) as also in all private Duties. To serve him with our
utmost Power, to be a doing of Righteousness and good Works, Alms, Mercy and
Compassion to the very utmost of our Ability.

There is indeed a Bitterness in Death as Agag truly called it. For my part I
am not ashamed to own that I do Vehemently and very much Fear it. This makes me
to do Sundry things Pertaining to God and Religion (which I should not do
otherwise) if hereby I may somewhat take off and lessen from this bitterness of
Death; If hereby I may store up to my self Comfort against my dying Day. For
this Cause I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, nor yet of Preaching it,
in (what is called) a Foolish and Contemptible manner, as I make it known unto
People, in its Simplicity and pureness. For I believe that God has chosen the
Foolish things of the World, and the things which are despised, 1 Cor. 1. 27,
28. I have already Sufficiently Experienced the same, and I have been given to
Understand further that this kind of doing has been, and will be an Occasion
of Loss as to VVorldly Goods: For more might be allotted unto me, if I would
leave off the Preaching and Publishing the Truth of the most High God. But when
I ponder it in my Mind, this same Hope of storing up to my self Comfort against
my dying Day, does with me weigh down all VVorldly Considerations or
Temptations: And I trust in the Everliving God, that this shall be my Guide
unto my dying Day: That I may give up an Account of the Ministry which I have
received with Joy and not with Grief, for this would be unprofitable for you.
The Searcher of all that is in all Hearts, knows that the very Reason why I do
desire a full and greater Assembly of Hearers, and that my Books and Writings
may have a more Universal Reception, is chiefly, that I may let down my Net for
a greater draught of Fishes. For I know, and believe that the more Souls shall
be converted, Edified or built up in their Holy Faith, by my Ministry, it will
tend so much the more to their own, and also my Comfort and Rejoicing, and
Crown in the last Day. But however, whether more or few will receive it, I
shall endeavor, by the Divine Grace, to approve my self Faithful in the
Ministry, as Moses was Faithful in all his House. I mean, not to lead People on
(as the manner of some is) in a mere outward Profession, as if there was no
more than only to come to such a place of Worship; Or in a Partial Obedience of
the Law, Mal. 2. 9 In that deceit so common and universal amongst those who
call themselves Christians, of keeping some of the Commandments of God, and
neglecting others. Or the Naming the Name of Christ, and not departing from
Iniquity. Like those who call him Lord, Lord, and do not the things which he
says: So there be others of a more Religious sort, who mightily harp upon the
word Christ, Christ, and yet themselves in the mean while show forth a ^erverse
Spirit against the Ministration of his Word; and they refuse him that now
Speaks from Heaven through one of his least Members. Against all such I do
here set my Testimony, according as I have received the same from the Word of
Truth. God is most Glorified when his Servant does follow the Conduct and
Leadings of his Truth, whethersoever it goes, for this is to follow the Lamb
whethersoever He goes, inasmuch as the Lamb is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life. And so I am determined by his Grace to go on, although in the continued
Ministration, and Successive Outgoing and Emanations of his Divine Truth, Lover
and Friend have thou put away far from me and mine Acquaintance into Darkness;
whether the Multitude or greater part of People do hear or forbear, receive it
or not; and so we entirely leave and submit it all to his own Divine Majesty
(for God is Judge himself) when every Man shall receive his own Reward,
according to his own Labor, 1 Cor. 3. 8.

When Jesus did, by the Grace of God, taste Death for every Man, Heb. 2. 9. He
thereby took away that exceeding bitterness in it for all those who will comply
with the Ends of his death; which is to die, yea and to be dead unto Sin, and
to rise again unto newness of Life. But this does not belong to the Wicked or
Sinners; for in the Hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is Red, and
it is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same; but the dregs thereof
all the Wicked of the Earth shall wring them out and drink them, Psalm. 75. 8.
so that the same Cup of Death will taste differently unto two sorts of People.
The Righteous and the Wise will taste some little Bitterness therein, wherewith
also Sweetness will be intermingled. Marvel not at this, for I know a Man to
whom Sweetness and a kind of Perfume has arose even from the Apprehension of
Death. But it will be only mixture (wherein the sour and bitter part will make
the greatest Ingredient) and dregs to the wicked of the Earth; for the sting of
Death is Sin, which sting gives the Pain or smart, and it stings more or less,
according as Sin is more or less in the Person who is to undergo it. So that it
must be the wiser and more excellent way to stand in awe and Sin not, and to
cease from our own Works. By which I mean the ceasing from those our Works,
which do proceed and arise from the worldly, fleshly and corrupt Nature; for
all this is our own. The Duty and Obligation hereof, appears from what is
written. There remains therefore a Rest to the People of God; for he that is
entered into his Rest, has ceased from his own Works, as God did from his, Heb.
4. 18. Now Death is the entrance and passage into this Rest; and therefore if
we would by this Death be translated into this Rest, we must before this Death
cease from our own works, that is to say, From all such works which ^avour of
Sin, Vanity, or of this evil World. For says another Scripture, Blessed are
the Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them, Rev. 14. 13.
This is to be understood of good Works: For the doing of good Works, is the
Laying up in store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 18. Such who die in the Lord,
did in their Life time before live unto the Lord. And such the Gospel enjoins
peremptorily, to maintain good Works. This is a faithful saying, and these
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in
God, might be careful to maintain good Works: These things be good and
profitable unto Men, Titus 3. 8. For the Spirit of God in the fore-quoted place
of the Revelations does pronounce them Blessed, because their works do follow
them. This Foundation will then stand them in stead, and they will be Partakers
of the Loving Kindness and Reward of the Lord for the same.

I have heard of a certain Atheist who being asked upon his Deathbed what he
then thought concerning Religion, said on this wise, A Good Life and Good
Deeds, but all the rest was Talk and Prate. In this last part of his sentence
he spoke like an Unbeliever, but as to his foregoing words this may be
conceived, that the best Life and the best Deeds, without the Faith of our Lord
Jesus Christ, will never save any one. The best Works, and the best Deeds, if
they are mingled with any thing of self-Righteousness, or with any Thoughts of
Merit, or deserving for the same, they are marred and spoiled as to God's
present Acceptance and future Recompense. They are become like the Girdle that
was marred and profitable for nothing, Jer. 13. 11. But good and observable
Truth may be gathered from the former part of his saying, A Good Life and Good
Deeds. For let the Knowledge and Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ be mixed with
the same Good Life and Good Deeds. Let this same Good Life and Good Deeds be
all lifted up and terminated toward God; Let all good Works be done in great
Humility, self-abasement and nothingness of the Creature, He desiring that they
may be accepted, clothed over with the Righteousness of Christ, and only in and
through him; Then all this will, yea it does yield sensible Comfort, and real
Support against and in a dying day. For then when the Soul is just going out of
the Body, and most wants help whereon to stay and fix, It may be truly said to
her, there is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven in
thy help, and in his Excellency on the Sky. The Eternal God is thy Refuge, and
underneath are the overlasting Arms (may this Scripture belong to me, when the
shadow of Death sits upon my Eyelids, and I am just breathing out my last: I
had rather have it than all the Kingdoms, Lands and Riches of the whole Earth
for ten thousand Years, if it was possible to enjoy them so long.) These good
words and comfortable words go on to add) And he shall thrust out the Enemy
from before thee (which Enemy is the Devil) and shall say, Destroy them, Israel
shall dwell in safety alone, Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27, 28. Safety and Salvation is all
one in signification; and this is safety to be saved and preserved from all the
Evils of the Invisible World, to get above and all alone from all the
Annoyances of Evil Spirits, as also to be freed from all Sin and Temptation
henceforward: Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last End be
like his. But there is no dying the Death of the Righteous, without living the
Life of the Righteous.

But how much Good Works, or Works of Alms, Mercy and Compassion, especially to
the Ministers and Servants of the Lord, will give and procure unto the doers
thereof Comfort and Support in a dying day, we may gather and understand from
the words of Paul; The Lord give Mercy unto the House of Onesiphorus, for he
often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my Chain, The Lord grant unto him that
he may find Mercy of the Lord in that day, 2 Timothy 1. 16, 18. which is the day
of Death and the day of Judgment, for then it is that any reasonable Creature
most wants the Mercy of God; and the Apostle here wrote these things by the
Spirit, as one that knew the Mind and Will of the Lord; for in what Prayer the
Spirit of Truth does dictate, is included a Promise that so it shall be. And it
is the same thing as if it did run on this wise, That Onesiphorus shall find
Mercy of the Lord in the day of Death and of Judgment, for that his good Deed
which he showed forth unto Paul a Prisoner, Minister and Servant of the Lord.

The Holy Ghost does record of Dorcas, This Woman was full of good Works and
Alms-deeds which she did, And after that she died, the Widows showed the Coats
and Garments (which probably were for the Poor) which Dorcas made, while she
was with them, Acts 9. 36, 39. These things are written for our Admonition,
upon whom the ends of the World are come, so that this should be yet more
drawn forth into Example and Imitation by the Rich People of both Sexes of our
present Age and Generation, for they must severally sicken and die likewise,
and then they will find To what Purpose was this waste? for that same Money
which they expended in fine Clothes, Gaiety and Retinue, or making a Figure in
the World, in Gluttony and Drunkenness, in Pride, Pleasure, Prodigality and
vain things or such like, might have been given to the Poor; and then it would
have done themselves more good, and have stood them in more stead, than that
Mammon of Unrighteousness, or the Riches used to the hurt of the Owners. Or
they might have thus consecrated their Gain unto the Lord, and their Substance
unto the Lord of the whole Earth, Micah 4. 13. In being more willing to
contribute the same yet more plentifully toward the Publishing and Propagation
of his Eternal Truth; which seems to be the Best of Works. For this is a doing
Good unto the Immortal Souls of Men, whereas common and outward Alms is only a
Temporal Kindness unto the dying Body. And also that longer remains; as to
which the Scripture says, If any Man's work abide, he shall receive a Reward, 1
Cor. 3. 14.

To conclude our whole Discourse, This is certain, That we must all (both Good
and Bad) appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Unto thee
shall all Flesh come, Psalm. 65. 2. Seeing the case is so, and there is no
avoiding of it, What can be a more forcible Consideration in the World, since
that we must appear before and come unto a Great God, who is the Great
Lawgiver, able to Save and to Destroy; who does Good, so likewise he can and
will Punish; What manner of Persons ought we to be in this little mean while
between in all Holy Conversation and Godliness? What can we do too much to
please and approve our selves unto him? To agree with him that was our
Adversary whilst we are in the way? To do any thing to get his Reconciliation
and Favor, his Peace and loving Kindness. The only way whereto he has showed
us, is, In beginning, and then continuing and persevering on to the end, to the
day of our several respective deaths, In the true Spiritual Worship and
Service, In the Universal Obedience of all the words of his Law and Gospel, and
fulfilling all Righteousness; In doing his Will, and every good Word and
Work, and to do all this more and more, more diligently and more constantly as
we come nearer in time and see the day approaching.

Furthermore, then we beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus,
that as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please God, so ye
would abound more and more, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
FINIS.

