Jeremiah VI. 4. Woe unto us for the Day goes away, for the shadows of the
Evening are stretched out.
THE word, Woe, is often mentioned in Scripture; especially in the Old
Testament, and is a relative Term, significant of Evil and Misery to come. For
^^at same Woe, which is now denounced against such or ^^ch People, will after
this Life is ended, fall down upon ^^em in Punishment and Misery. Hence does
arise that ^^et Thought and Searching of Heart in the Creature to^ards the
Creator, who is the Lord our God. A doubt ^^d fear does naturally spring up in
our minds, as if God ^ould inflict pain and make us miserable in the future
State, ^^d thereupon from this thing of Death, which is the Inlet ^^d Entrance
thereinto, we expect no Good but Evil. Here a^^in our Spirits may be quiet and
satisfied, for it is evident, ^^^re are several things which we are greatly
afraid of at (...) first apprehension and thoughts concerning them; But ^^^^er
we have experienced the very same thing it self we ^^d no dreadfulness or Evil
at all in it, but rather good ^^d convenience: So that according to the common
say^^^ herein, We are more frightened then hurt, and such may ^ath be. Yea
certainly so it is to the Children of God, ^^o are Heirs of Salvation, which
includes in it self both (...) and Immortality.

There is a visible reason of that natural fear of Death, ^^cause it is
altogether evil and to be abhorred what is seen to befall the Body, as Pain,
Languishing, Weakness distortion of countenance, and then lying in the Grave
and seeing Corruption, and such like. And yet all these Evil (...) Terrible
things do no more touch, nor yet affect the man himself, that is, his Soul,
than when the Angel of the Lord smote Peter on the side, and raised him up, and
his Chains fel^ off from his hands. As all this was no great hurt to the Soul,
nor yet to the Body of Peter: Even so it will be when the Angel of Death shall
knock off these Chain of Flesh wherein and wherewith at present we a^^ holden
and fettered; then also the Soul is Raised up o^ of its earthly Habitation (see
Zech. 2. 13.) and returns an^ ascends up to God that gave it.

Nevertheless still there being a Woe pronounced in the Text indefinitely
against us, which signifies as if it di^ pertain to all Mankind both good and
bad, Saint an^ Sinner; and every one, whither Godly or Ungodl^ finding within
himself some grief and vexation, fe^^ and anguish at this consideration of his
present li^^ going away, and at last it will come quite to an en^ We must not
flatter nor delude our selves as if the^^ was nothing at all to be feared in
it, for this Woe pr^nounced by the Spirit of God, does seem to presuppose a^^
relate unto some future Evil. Again, whatever is Nature General and Universal
in every one, as the fear of Dea^^ is, This same thing can never be in vain,
but there ^^ some reality to which it has Respect.

The Apostle says, As touching Brotherly love ye n^^^ not that I write unto
you, for ye your selves are taught ^^ God to love one another. So here it may
be reason^^ There is no need to be taught out of the Scriptures, H^ that our
present life and time goes away. For by t^^ common knowledge and experience
that God has giv^^ to every Man, they are sensible already: Nay, t^^^ must
know it whither they will or not, that their l^^^ and their Time goes away.
But God willing more bundant to show unto the heirs of promise the Immutab^^ of
his counsel herein. As also, that the common and (...) multitude of Mankind may
be more without exc^^^ if they have not provided for their latter end. I^
concerning this (as here it too commonly happens) that Man also knows not his
time, As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the Birds that are
caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of Men Snared in an evil time when it
falls suddenly upon them. To give yet more repeated warning of all this God
has ordered it to be written also, how that our Life and our Time goes away.
For so it is expressed in the words of our Text, Woe unto us for the Day goes
away, for the shadows of the Evening are stretched out.

The words are Metaphorical and signify the very same as what is
aforementioned, that our life goes away. But the Metaphor seems to be borrowed
from the Sun that greater light, which God Created and placed in the Firmament
to Rule over the Day, and to divide the Light from the Darkness. For as long as
that is above our Horison, than it is Day; but when it moves beneath the
Horison, then the shadows of the Evening are stretched out and the Night comes
on.

Again it is not unknown to any one that is understanding in the Scriptures,
that the time of Man's present Life is often expressed by this manner of speech,
his Day. If thou had known in this thy Day the things that belong to thy
peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. To Day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your heart as in the Day of Provocation, and as in the Day of
temptation in the Wilderness. I have spread out my hands all the Day unto a
Rebellious people. For he says, I have heard thee in an accepted time, and in
the Day of Salvation have I succored thee. Behold now is the accepted time,
Behold now is the Day of Salvation. In all these and alike places the word,
Day, signifies all the time of Man's present life here on Earth. And so it does
in this place of Jer. 6. 4.

I shall not confine my self to the primary intent, or exact coherence of the
words, as they are in the Text, but I shall treat of them in the large and
common signification aforementioned, How that our Life and Time here on Earth
passes away, and because I am given to understand, that several do impute it
as a fault and defect in my preaching, In that I go on altogether in one
continued discourse. But I do not so much make mention of the words, First,
Secondly Thirdly, as other Ministers and Preachers do, which as they say is
more for help of the memory, and for the edification of the hearers. Therefore
I who have thought good to become all things to all Men, that I might gain
Some, have thought good to handle this our present Text in the following method
of these two propositions, and afterward I may draw from thence some Practical
Inferences, which is commonly called the use or Application,

From the words, Woe unto us for the Day goes away, I shall endeavor to show,
together with the Reason or Reasons thereof, that it is a melancholy and
sorrowful consideration in all people, to consider thoroughly, how that our
present Life goes away: And this I gather from the first introductory word, Woe
unto us.

Secondly, Because that all the Wo's or Threatenings denounced in Scripture are
therefore made known to the Inhabitants of the Earth, in order that they may
take warning and avoid that same Woe or Threatening (Thus Says the Lord, Behold
I Frame evil against you, and devise a device against you. Here is the
Threatening, but immediately the way is shown how the same may be avoided,
Return ye now every one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings
good. Jer. 18. 11.) I shall therefore again endeavor to show from the
Scriptures and from the truth of things, how our Life and Conversation may be
so ordered aright, that the Salvation of God may be shown unto us; and then
though our Life goes away, yet we shall avoid the Woe that it will not belong
unto us. Can any matter be more useful and comfortable than this last,
wherefore it is worthy of all acceptance and attention even from the people of
the World, as well as from Believers. For it is not a going after vain things
that cannot profit nor deliver, ^or they are vain. But Christ the Eternal word,
and the words of his truth, do profit and deliver from the evil day, and from
the wrath to come.

As to the first thing proposed to be spoken unto, As Baruch did say, Woe is me
now; for the Lord has added grief to my sorrow, So here some people may be apt
to think, Woe unto us Mortal Creatures. We do not care to hear much of this, for
this will be to add grief to our sorrow. We are so sensible of it already, that
we would not have it yet made more sensible and afflicting by more doleful
words concerning it. There is no need to rub up an old sore, which does Pain
and Ache already. But here to pursue the same similitude, it is good and
sometimes necessary to lance a sore in order to the cure of it. So likewise
the very same stands in the Nature and connection of things, It is good to know
the very worst of things, if we would have them be remedied and made better, As
so is our case and subject in hand, to which the thread of our following
discourse may lead and show,

It may be affirmed, That all the Grief and Sorrow which we have in this World,
does tend or relate unto this ground thereof, how that our life goes away.
Though it be deemed at first to proceed forth from some other outward cause,
yet it may be brought back to this original cause; such or such People are
therefore Melancholy, Sorrowful or Troubled, because the day of their life
goes away. For as life is the first thing loved and desired, because by it we
are rendered capable to relish and enjoy all other things: So it is
proportionable Grief and Vexation in the Creature, to think that at length it
must part there withal.

This is the sting of Poverty (which is esteemed the worst of outward evils for
it is of longest duration and commonly extending throughout ones life) for a
thought of unbelief does arise in the heart, as if this vain fugitive life
which is as a vapor and continues not, was our all. And thereupon is
unexpressible Grief and Vexation that here we should have our evil things and
not our good things also, as well as others. Especially when the language of
unbelief whispers farther, that they are but once to be had for all. But here
again, let the full assurance of Faith once come in concerning that future and
endless life, wherein it shall be said and fulfilled as to this than past life,
Son, remember that thou in thy life time received'st thy good things, and
likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is Comforted and thou art Tormented.
This same consideration and knowledge before hand will make it both tolerable
and easy to receive evil things here, and also to be fearful of receiving good
things; for so it is esteemed and called by the people of the World, the
immoderate use of Corn and Wine.

Again, To go unto other instances, This same is the thing which makes sickly
People, or who are in declining or old Age, so Fretful Waspish and Froward or
Envious. The same is likewise observed of deformed or crooked people, as also
of old Maidens who are not given to Marriage, And so it is of Eunuchs or
insufficient People. For in these and alike cases The eyes of all look unto
thee. The thoughts of the hearts of these Creatures, who find themselves
miserable and defective in some one thing, are toward their invisible Creator
And a reasoning does arise within them, which does terminate in secret
indignation and vexation, Why should thou not make me as happy and complete,
or do the same for me, as for my fellow Creatures?

These thoughts should be silenced again with the consideration of God's
absolute sovereignty, Has not the Potter power of the Clay, to make one vessel
to Honor and another to dishonor? God is glorified in the several variety of
his works. He may do what he will with his own, and who may say unto him, what
do thou? We should show our selves contented and patient, and thus glorify
him however he has formed us. Neither let the Son of the stranger that has
joined himself to the Lord, speak, saying, The Lord has utterly separated me
from his people: Neither let the Eunuch say, Behold I am a dry Tree. In both
these sayings of theirs, there is an inward repining because they are not made
and placed in the same advantages and privileges, and capable to enjoy the
same delights with their other fellow Creatures. But what says the answer of
God their Creator unto them? For thus says the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep
my Sabbaths, and choose the things that please me and take hold of my Covenant,
even unto them will I give in my house a place and a name, better than of Sons
and of Daughters: I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut
off. Also the Sons of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve
him and to love the name of the Lord, to be his Servants, Every one that
keeps the Sabbath from polluting it and takes hold of my Covenant: Even them
will I bring to my Holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of prayer,
Their Burntofferings and their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar,
Isa. 56. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, Here the Blessing and Promise is proportioned; yea it
is more than equivalent to what they complained of and murmured at. But from
hence we may learn, that whatever our failure is of the common accomplishments
and endowments of humane Nature, and in whatsoever we come short of the rest of
our Brethren which they have and we have not; here let us be sure to serve God
and be obedient unto him, which is expressed in all those apt phrases of the
Holy Ghost, That keep my Sabbaths and choose the things that please me, and
take hold of my Covenant and join themselves unto the Lord, and love the name
of the Lord to be his Servants. If we are careful and diligent and constant to
do all this, God will assuredly make up for our imperfection (which we are apt
to suppose our present misery) in the time of the Restitution of all things:
Even what shall answer in kind to that same failure and imperfection, as so is
giving to the Eunuchs a place and a name better than of Sons and Daughters. And
to the Son of the stranger that had said, the Lord has utterly separated me
from his people, him will he bring to his Holy Mountain and make him joyful in
his House of prayer Which is not separating him from his people. for there it
is that his people are gathered and assembled together.

It does indeed seem disingenuous (for it is not altogether so worthy as what
proceeds from the principles of Love Prosperity and Thankfulness) when people
are as it were forced and driven to fear and serve God out of a sense of their
Misery and Affliction. But since there is a degree and tincture of that in the
most healthful and prosperous person, for he also is Subject unto Affliction
and Misery through the fear and approach of Death. And God does accept of such
a service though it is joined with such thoughts of Heart, as may be understood
from Isa. 56. Deuteronomy. 4. 30. 31. Therefore receive and follow this instruction,
All ye that shall hear or read these words, O Man or Woman the more miserable
thou art as to this world: Do thou so much the more serve God and abound in
well doing; and than it will be better for thee at the end and distribution of
all things, then if thou have been the most happy person that ever lived on
this Earth.

When our Soul is vexed and disquieted within us, Either because we have not
good and comfortable things here, or because whatever delights soon passes
away, and we are gone, there commonly at the very same time does spring up a
root of unbelief, as if we were to be no more for ever. And we being told and
apprehensive that there is a good thing set out for the Sons of Men; Hereupon
indignation and anguish does arise that our time here should pass away, and yet
that same good thing is not had by us. Hence also is secret vexation when the
Natural ends of our Creation are not answered. And so pursue the reasoning part
of all Trouble, Melancholy, Sorrow, or such like, and it will at length tend to
this that therefore our Soul is full of troubles because our life draws nigh
unto the Grave, Psalm. 88. 3. Thence does arise more fretfulness of temper when
the sting of Death does put it self forth yet nearer toward us. The reasonable
Creature expected to have good in this life, but the day goes away and the
good is not had; The summer is ended, and we are not saved. And than again,
unbelief does dictate and whisper, that if the good thing be not had here, we
know not when it will be had. When I thought to know this, it was too painful
for me. Thus my heart was grieved and I was pricked in my reins: So foolish was
I and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee, Psalm. 73. 16, 21, 22. This last
is just to be sensible of and groan under the present pain, but not to
apprehend any thing further. And so is every one merely as he is a Man. But
than as a Believer he is carried and advanced higher, even to speak after that
manner as he does in the following verses, Nevertheless I am continually by
thee: Thou have holden me by my right ^and. Here he comes to the knowledge of
his Creator and Preserver, and than afterward he hints forth, how that God
will be the restorer of Mankind, by giving them a Resurrection and future
state. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.
This Faith and Knowledge of futurity, is consolatory to all present Griefs,
Pain or Trouble. As we are reasonable Creatures, so we should use and exert
forth this same reason when we are amidst and under affliction,

Why (It is an Adverb of Interrogation and Reasoning) art thou cast down O my
Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in God, for I shall yet
praise him, who is the health of my countenance and my God. Here the Psalmist
does endeavor to quiet his dissatisfied Spirit with this short thought and
speech, Hope in God. But as it is elsewhere written, I remembered God and was
troubled. Even so here the cure and remedy is to rise the same way, as the
Grief and Malady does. For as God is the Creator and orderer of all things, and
as himself speaks in his word. Shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has
not done it? And it is expressly said, That the Lord does cause grief. So of all
the griefs and evils which poor Mankind do endure in this vale of tears, it is
supposed that God has an hand in it and that he is the Author and Ordainer of
them, which indeed is true; and thence it is, because no chastening for the
present seems joyous but grievous, That hard thoughts do arise in the hearts
of some against his Divine Majesty, who either do not believe, or not know
thoroughly and consider further* that the same chastening does afterward yield
the Peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby,
Heb. 12. 11. For the Lord will not cast off for ever: But though he cause grief
yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. For he
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 31, 32, 33,
To such people who have Faith and Spiritual knowledge, all the griefs and
miseries of this present life, do but lightly affec^ them: Because all things
here are so very little, fugitive and vain, and nothing here is so evil but
what may and can be endured, and the Spirit of Man will bear u^ against it, as
to outward temporal things. But the great thought and searching of heart is
concerning wha^ is said in this same Lamentations, That the Lord w^^^ not cast
off for ever. And so how God will show an^ approve himself unto us throughout
eternity, Henc^ does arise all the fear and doubt. But here again this same
word speaks peace to the Soul, Hope i^ God for I shall yet praise him, for he
is the health of m^ countenance and my God. The object of hope is goo^ things,
or an expectation of good things; and here is speech of assurance, I shall yet
praise him. Indeed ^ will be the business and employment in Heaven of suc^
Souls as shall be saved, to praise God for that exceeding and eternal
Blessedness which he will give un^^ and invest them withal; and make it so
sure un^^ them, that it shall never be taken from them, no^ they from it. There
it is, and there only that we w^^^ rejoice in thy Salvation, and in the name of
our God (...) will set up our banners; even when we have scaled an^ are
ascended up into the Kingdom of Heaven Which from the days of John the Baptist
Suffers vi^lence and the violent take it by force. He that overcomes, I will
his God and he shall be my Son. And y^^ ought in the mean while to praise our
God for givi^^ unto us exceeding great and precious promises: For a^fording us
the means of grace, and for the hope Glory; and for putting us into a
possibility of seekin^ now, and at last of obtaining those great and glori^^^
things that are spoken of thee, O City of God,

Amidst all the castings down and disquietudes Soul, Under all the thoughts
which trouble us, (...) should go on still in the way of Duty, with this Faith
and assurance, I shall yet praise God, Though perhaps the affliction is so
sore, and the disappointment so vexatious, that we are tempted in heart in like
manner as Job's Wife did him, curse God and die. We may beat back and answer
the temptation with a like saying of his, Thou speak as one of the foolish
Women speaks. For this would be the utmost folly that can be, if we should go
the way and do those things to be miserable here, and miserable hereafter also;
as that would be if we should curse him whom we ought to praise. What if we do
now receive evil at the hand of God, nothing ^s so sure as that we shall
receive good at the latter and; provided that like unto his Servant Job we do
not sin in the mean while, nor yet charge God foolishly.

I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God. This
thing, health of my countenance, is a relative term and does answer unto and
presuppose some sickness of Body or Mind, which the Psalmist in probability was
than under. As sickness of Body is a forerunner of dying and Death, the
Subsequent word, My God, contains in it life for evermore. For the same Creator
that gave life at first, will again renew and restore it. Who turns Man to
Destruction, will say, return ye Children of Men. Herein he does take care of
and provide against the evil of Mortality, Corruption and Dissolution. The same
God, who is a very present help in the time of trouble, is also all things
suitable and proportionable to the several needs and requirings of his
Creatures. For thou have been a strength to the poor, a strength to the needy
in his distress, a refuge from the storm, and a shadow from the heat. Now what
is more proper and suitable under scorching neat, than to get into the shade,
and so when a storm beats upon us to get somewhat for refuge from it.

As it is written, And when all things shall be subdued unto him, than shall
also the Son himself be Subject to him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all. So in the future state God will be all in all toward the
making up the persection and happiness of his Creatures; That he shall not be
ashamed to be called their God. By Providing for and securing unto them things
worthy of so great and good a God, and as much as a Creature can receive.
Behold what a mighty word of consolation is here! As also it is a most
quickening Exhortation to enforce that of the Apostle. What manner of persons
ought ye to be in all Holy conversation and Godliness, looking for and hasting
unto the coming of the day of God; that ye may get the favor and love of God
whilst ye are yet in the way.

But if these things are so (as most certainly they are) then some may be apt
to put me in mind of my Text, and ask how it comes to pass that a woe is
pronounced, for the day goes away? Which going away of the day does set us yet
nearer to these happy things, Might it not be more properly said instead of
that Woe pronounced, Blessed and Happy it is for us that the day goes away. And
truly because of that vanity and vexation of Spirit which is in all things
under the Sun Because of that Tediousness and Irksomeness of life because of
that final variety of all the things below; and it is all but almost the same
thing over and over again In my thinking it would be Woe unto us if the day did
not go away. For we should be even weary and not able to abide here for ever if
we might abide so in this state and as things now are.

But the answer to the former part of this objection may be had by discoursing
on our second Proposition, viz. Because that all the Wo's and Threatenings
denounced in Scripture are therefore made known unto the Inhabitants of Earth,
in order that they may take warning, and avoid that same Woe or Threatening, we
are to learn from the Scriptures and from out of the truth o^ things, how our
conversation may be so ordered aright, that the Salvation of God may be shown
unto us. And then though our life goes away, we shall avoid the Woe, that it
will not belong unto us.

This is most certain, that a Woe does belong unto us, and will at last fall
down upon our head to our end^ess confusion and misery, if we do not finish
that work which God our Creator sent us severally on this this Earth for to do.
Said Jesus the forerunner, who is entered before us into the vail. I must work
the works of him that sent me while it is day, the night comes when no man can
work. I have glorified thee on the Earth, I ^ave finished the work which thou
gave me to do. Christ's work was laying the foundation for all to build on:
He finished the Work which God gave him to do. And so every Soul should Work
out that which he has wrought and accomplished for us. Which same Work is to
be done in this life, that being the accepted ^ime for the Night or darkness of
Death draws on, and there is No work, nor devise, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in
the grave whither thou go. And therefore if we neglect to finish that Work,
Woe unto us for the day goes away, for the shadows of the Evening are stretched
out. The Son of Man has given to every Man his work, and commanded the Porter
to watch. So that of necessary consequence there must be a Woe if that time
should slip away, and the same Work is not done for which that same time was
originally set out and intended. There is the same rule of contraries: And
seeing that the Scripture pronounces that Servant blessed whom his Lord when he
comes shall find so doing. Then on the other hand, that Servant or rather idle
Person, is cursed and a Woe is unto him, if the Lord when he comes shall not
find him so doing, but loytering, or doing that which is sinful or evil,

There is a Woe pronounced against, or does belong to every Sin, Iniquity,
Transgression, Disobedience or any manner of evil. As appears both from the old
Testament and the New. In both which we find this word Woe spoken forth against
them; and where it is not spoken forth in express words; Nevertheless it may be
understood that it does appertain thereunto. For the word of God spoken (or
written) is steadfast and every disobedience and transgression receives a just
recompense of reward

As aforesaid, that all trouble, grief or such like dot^ hence arise, because
our life goes away: So likewis^ our sorrow may be reduced and brought back to
thi^ original cause, Because we have sinned. Both these observations agree and
meet together in one. The matter truly is this, We are sorrowful because we
have sinned, and we are sorrowful because our Life goet^ away. For we are
afraid that a Punishment (which wi^^ make miserable) will be inflicted on us
for the sam^ sin, after this present Life (which is now going away shall be
ended.

Now the Decree, Justice and Will of God stands on th^^ wise, Sin committed
must have its Punishment to b^ inflicted unless the same sin is pardoned. Hence
the Soul is in continued fear and doubt until she has the Reconciliation of
God; Until she has his Voice an^ Spirit witnessing from within her self, Son
or Daughter, be of good cheer, Thy sins are forgiven thee.

Again, seeing that we have all sinned and are worth^ of punishment after this
life shall be ended, here w^ should cry mightily unto God and offer up strong
cryin^ with tears in these days of our flesh, that we may be hear^ in that we
fear before him. And like our Father Jaco^ wrestle with God in effectual
fervent and continue^ Prayer until the breaking of the day of immortality And
be yet more earnest and importunate with God by how much the nearer it is to
the day breaking, (...) as the Soul is yet nearer breaking forth out of the
shel^ of the Body into the World to come, the place of ^ternal and unchangeable
light. And we will not let Go^ go except he Bless us, with the Blessing which
the Lord has commanded even life for evermore; Immediatel^ after this life,
which is as a vapor and continuet not, shall be ended.

Says Job to God, I have sinned. What shall I do to th^^ O thou preserver of
Men? Why have thou set me as ^ mark against thee, so that I am a burden to my
self. Cha^ 7. v. 20. This last confirms the truth of what wa^ just now spoken,
That sorrow is because of sin, an^ as a consequent thereunto: for therefore it
was because Job had sinned, he was a burden to himself. The verse immediately
following does show and intimate that there is sorrow and fear in the Soul for
want of forgiveness of sins, as appears from this Pathetical and earnestly
desired question, or rather it is a kind of expostulation in Prayer. And why
do thou not pardon my Transgression and take away mine Iniquity? For now
shall I sleep in the dust and thou shall seek me in the morning and I shall not
be. If we were sure that God would do thus, we could as contentedly and without
fear lie down in the Grave as in a bed of Roses or Violets, or as we take our
common rest by Night, which the Holy Ghost does give us here to understand by
this phrase, I shall sleep in the dust. Now there is nothing of dreadfulness or
evil in sleep.

The Scripture is all along consonant and agreeable to it self in every thing,
especially in this truth, how that the sting of Death is sin. So that it would
be neither dreadful nor evil, if this same sting was plucked out or (what is
equivalenta and tantamount thereunto) if this same sin was pardoned and taken
away. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God. Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem. (In the margent there it is, speak to the heart) And cry unto her
that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 40. 1, 2.
In these words again, the word of consolation is contained, her iniquity is
pardoned. For I do hereby appeal to the conscience of all those who shall hear
or read these words whither this is not speaking comfortably to ye, or speaking
to your heart; that is, what answers to your hearts desire and wish, to have
assurance, that now thine and my warfare here on Earth does draw so very nigh
to be accomplished, that here we have our iniquity pardoned. If the Lord grant
me this my request, as the same is my daily Prayer (I would I could, truly say,
my constant endeavor was so likewise, as is hereafter explained) I know not
what I could desire better on this side of Heaven. For if my iniquity is
pardoned, then that thing is taken away which only hinders any ones entrance
into Heaven.

As touching, whither our iniquity be pardoned or not, is the chiefest fear and
trouble to knowing people and believers, which they have when they do walk
softly all the residue of their years in the bitterness of their Soul. The
Scripture token and evidence whereby we may know vvhither our past iniquity is
pardoned or not, is according as we are cleansed from all unrighteouness, for
the time to come. If he that gives strength and power unto his people Psalm.
68. 35. Does give Strength and Power to abstain from the like for the future.
Thus much is gathered from that of the Apostle, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 9. This Scripture is not to be taken piece meal, but
all together. So that according as any one is cleansed srom all
unrighteousness, That is cleansed from every thing which is contrary unto or
different from that great and complete Rule of Righteousness: This is a sure
token that thy sins are forgiven thee.

And also, when the Prophet Isaiah says, That the iniquity of Jerusalem is
pardoned, for she has received of the Lord's hands double for all her sins.
Hence it may be reasoned and concluded in the like manner. We are chastened of
the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 32. When
we have afflictions and troubles, hereby God does punish us in this World for
our sins, that we may be spared in the World to come. This also is some
comfortable evidence that our iniquity is pardoned. For as the Apostle says,
Some Men's sins are open before hand, going before to Judgment, and some Men's
sins follow after, 1 Tin. 5. 24. So the sins of some people are punished in
this World, that they may not be punished after the day of Judgment. So the
punishment of the sins of other people, is respited and forborne in this Life,
but deferred until and to be executed after the day of Judgment. If we endure
more chastening and trouble than others who are greater sinners than our
selves; The Judge of all the Earth will do right, so that Most certainly we
shall fare better than they in the World that is to come.

From the things that have been spoken, it appears: That the way whereby we may
avoid the Woe denounced against us upon the account of the day of our life going
away, is to do these three things especially.

First, Be sure to finish that Work which God sent thee on this Earth for to do.

Secondly, Stand in aw and sin not, and abstain from all appearance of evil.

Thirdly, Pray without ceasing unto God, and labor earnestly to get all thy
past Sins, Iniquities and Transgressions pardoned.

And take it for a general rule besides to be followed and observed: That
whatever Trouble, sorrow Melancholy, fear, or such like does arise in thy mind,
there endeavor to know the true cause thereof. And then take away the cause,
and the effect cease. Be sure to answer all the requirings of God in thee.
Turn you at my reproof, Prove, 1. 23. That is, at the reproof of God in thy Soul
and Conscience, whither the Lord be upon thee with a still voice, in the gentle
motions and dictates of his Spirit; or if he does Instruct thee with a strong
hand, that thou should not walk in the way of this people; That thou should
not do such a thing or such a thing, In all these or alike cases, Do not turn
away thy Ear, nor yet 'be Rebellious. For this Life is the time of trial and
the day of Temptation in the Wilderness, wherein God does prove thee whither
thou will keep his Commandments or not. There is a Woe pronounced or else
employed if thou should turn away the Ear, or be Rebellious: Which same Woe,
though it is now in word only, yet after the day of this life is gone, will
fall down upon thee in Punishment and Misery.

The Woe or Threatening of God is of the like Nature with that flying roll or
curse that goes forth over the face of ^he whole Earth: For every one that
steals shall be cut off as ^n this side, according to it: and every one that
swears shall ^e cut off, as on that side, according to it, Zech. 5. 2, 3.
Here the flying roll and curse is said to go forth over the face of the whole
Earth, That is, for the present little time between, It does hover somewhat
above them, and it does not pitch. But at length it will light upon the hairy
scalp of the sinner, and it shall be done unto him according to the same flying
roll, curse or threatening, when God shall wound the head of his enemies and the
hairy scalp of such a one as goes on still in his Trespasses.

If we did live in Righteousness and Holiness before him all the days of our
life, we might serve God without fear, as may be understood from Luke 1 74. 75.
But as long as there is Fear, Trouble, Sorrow, and a certain forebode or
fearful expectation of a Woe to come, we should do well to take heed 2 Pet. 1.
19. unto these as they may be Perceivable in our hearts; for all these do give
notice and warning of some real future Evils to which they do relate.

Nay yet further, As says the Apostle, I know nothing by my self, yet I am not
hereby justified. So when we com^ to know nothing of Trouble, Fear or Misery as
to futurity; and our Heart upon the utmost search and examination and enquiring
diligently as to these things to come, does not meditate terror (as very few
do com^ up to this state) yet still even here we should not liv^ securely, nor
over confidently, but according to the counsel of the Spirit of God, who
knows all things Pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. And work o^
our Salvation with fear and trembling. But then here again is a great
difference between a fear which excites caution and care, and another fear
which has Torment an^ gendreth bondage, as is the case of those who ha^^ not a
well grounded hope.

It is the mind of the most high God, that his Se^vants as long as they are on
this Earth, should be ke^^ in a Low, Trembling and Dependant state and
condition. Accordingly we Read in the Scriptures, Th^^ the best Saints have
been most fearful and apprehensive partly of the Judgments, Wrath and
Indignation of Go^ as also what is consequent to that, of their own futu^^
state and condition. When I heard my Belly trembl^ my lips quivered at the
voice, rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in my self, that I might
have rest in the day of trouble: when he comes up unto the people, he will
invade me with his troops, Hab. 3. 16. For if when the Lord appeared on mount
Sinah by his Angel only, so terrible was the sight that Moses (one of his best
Servants and favorites) Said, I exceedingly fear and quake. Much more shall we
exceedingly fear and quake, just as our Soul is taking flight into the
invisible World, where we shall come nearer unto and have a much more sensible
and lasting apprehension of the great God himself, then ever the Israelites had
of the presence of his Angel on Mount Sinah. The Lord shall judge his people.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Which yet we
must all do: Unto thee shall all flesh come. And when the Lord shall Judge his
People, even his own Saints and Servants by reason of the exceeding strictness
thereof, will have fears arising in their hearts also. And enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified,
Psalm. 143. 2.

A Woe being pronounced against us indefinitely in the Text, for the day goes
away; this reaches and extends to the House of God, even his Children and
Servants. For the time is come that Judgment must begin at the House of God;
and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the
Gospel of God? And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18.

The result of the whole is, The Spirit of the Lord does speak, and his word is
gone out indefinitely. Woe unto us, for the day goes away; Therefore all we
dying Creatures, should go softly all our years in the bitterness of our Soul;
We should be in a very low and trembling condition, and wait all the days of
our appointed time till our change come. Watch ye therefore and pray always,
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to
pass, and to stand before the Son of Man, Luke 21. 36. Do your utmost diligence
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape that Woe, which is pronounced: For the
day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.

I shall now wind up the foregoing Discourse with these two practical uses and
inferences.

The first use is of Warning. The second use is of instruction.
As John Baptist said in his Preaching, O generation of vipers: Who has warned
ye to flee from the wrath to come! Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance. So if I could speak to them all (O that the several Copies of these
words might be made known unto them all) I would use a like form of speech. O
ye Inhabitants of the Earth, Who has warned ye to flee from the wrath to come?
If ye say, the written word of God (who thereby warns us of thing not seen as
yet, Heb. 11. 7.) and the preaching of it by others. Ay, But here I would ask
ye again, Have y^ taken the warning? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for
repentance, and such fruits in your Life and Conversation, as are suitable and
agreeable to those that are indeed warned to flee from the wrath to come. Are
ye indeed and truly warned to flee from the wrath to come? What means then
that bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I
hear? What means then throughout the Earth this joy and gladness, slaying
Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and drinking Wine: Let us eat and drink,
for to morrow we shall die. Are ye indeed truly warned to flee from the wrath
to come? What means than thi^ iniquity of thy Sister Sodom (which is almost
in all Cities Towns and Villages, but more especially in the House of rich
People) Pride, fullness of Bread and abundance o^ Idleness was in her, and in
her Daughters; neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. Are
ye indeed thoroughly warned to flee from the wrath to come? Wh^ then do so many
say in their hearts, My Lord delayeth hi^ coming, and they begin to beat the
Men servants and the Mai^ servants, (or what is to the same effect, they
torment and oppress their fellow Creatures) and they eat and the^ drink and are
drunken. Take heed therefore least this b^ literally fulfilled upon ye to your
endless misery and condemnation, And as it was in the days of Noah, so shall i^
be in the days of the Son of Man. They did eat, the^ drank, they married wives,
they were given in marriage unti^ the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and
the flood came and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it was in the days of
Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they
builded. (It is now the very same in these our days) But the same day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven and destroyed them
all: Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man is revealed. If the
reasonable inhabitants of this Earth were like Noah here mentioned, warned of
God of things not seen as yet, or if they did so take the warning of things, as
they are made known in the Scriptures, then they would not seek to an Arm of
flesh, or to Creature comforts and Creature contentments as now they do, to
drive away the griefs and sorrows of a short, but yet a tedious and irksom
life. They would not then so much resort to Ale Houses, Taverns, carnal
company, idle recreations, the continual hurry of Wordly business as now they
do, only to forget and make themselves unmindful of that Woe which hangs over
their heads because the day of their life goes away. How can such Hear or Read
such a Scripture without trembling? Ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, ye
have been wanton, ye have nourished your hearts as in the day of slaughter,
Jam. 5. 5. For though there is as earnest a desire in the reasonable Creature
after happiness and satisfaction as Rachel had after Children, Give it me or
else I die, I had rather not be at all than not be happy; yet here they would
do well to understand and seek after God, and to know the order of his
Dispensation and dealings toward the Children of Men, that is to say, to give
them a being here, and a well being hereafter, to uphold them here, and make
them happy and blessed for ever. They should believe in God and trust in his
Salvation: Have recourse to his word, and pacify themselves with hope and
expectation of better things to come; look back upon the example of Saints
heretofore, who were our Brethren in the flesh, and are now partakers of the
Heavenly calling. Hence would spring up greater and more enduring comfort than
from Wine, strong drink, or from the outward divertisements of Wordly
recreations or company. And be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess, but be ye
filled with the Spirit. For as that same Spirit gives us a knowledge of the
good things of God, which he will give unto those who Love, Fear and serve
him; and as the same Spirit Seals unto us an Interest and Propriety in them,
It takes of from and secures against the Woe for the day goes away, much more
than all the outvvard things of this World.

O that these words might go out unto the ends of the Earth, Why will not Men
(who are made as Angels of God, knovving Good and Evil) know these things
before hand? Especially when they are capable to know these things before
hand, as they stand in the order and determination of our God. Yea, the stork
in the Heaven knows her appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and
the Swallow observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the
Judgment of their God. The Swallow has lately observed the time of her going
away again, bu^ People do not observe, or they do not lay it so thoroughly to
heart as they should, the time of their going out of this World, and their
coming to appear before God. This will be the condemnation of Mankind that
they will not do according to the knowledge and reasons given them, as Beasts
and Birds go and move according to that instinct implanted in them. Hovvever as
God speaks by Ezekiel, Son of Man, I have made thee (...) Watch Man unto the
House of Israel: Therefore hear this word at my mouth, and give them warning
from me. God has made the Ministers and Preachers of his word Watchmen unto
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and accordingly we hear the word at his mouth,
as it is written in the lively Oracles, the Book of the Lord; and out of that
we give them warning as from God. So that let people do as they will; Whither
they will hear or forbear, for they are most Rebellious: Yet still the
Scriptures with the true and faithful Preaching thereof, are a standing and
continued warning unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, that all things are
indeed so as they are therein spoken of.

Be wise therefore O ye Children of Men, Be instructed ye Inhabitants of the
Earth, to order your conversation for the time to come according to the tenor
and requiring of the same words. Blessed is he that reads and they that hear
the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein,
for the time is at hand, Even nearer ^hen ever it was yet. And further,
Blessed is he that does according to all those thoughts of Goodness and Truth
which the Lord does from time to time (when he wakeneth Morning by Morning)
put into our Soul. Again on the other hand, a Woe or Curse belongs unto them
who do not. For the time is at hand, even just before us; or as it is in the
words of our Text, The day goes away, and the shadows of the Evening are
stretched out. It is but a very little while and the day will be quite gone
away, and the shadovv of Death will be upon our eye lids, and each of us
shall say, or we shall find it so, Mine age is departed and is removed from me
as a shepherds tent, I have cut off like a weaver my life: He will cut me off
with ^pining sickness: from Day even to Night will thou make an end of me.
Which as the everliving God does by us poor dying Creatures, We should strive
and work together with his grace, which would work in us mightily if we are
obedient to it, that as our outvvard Man perish, the inward Man is renewed
day by day. Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find
so doing.

FINIS.
Practical Books Written and Published by Richard Stafford.
OF Happiness: Wherein it is fully and particularly manifested, That the
greatest happiness of this Life consists in the fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, in opposition to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
convenience of Disobedience.

Rules and Directions for the preventing of, and Recovery out of Sickness.

A Discourse against Partial Obedience: Or that dangerous deceit so universal
amongst them, who call themselves Christians, of keeping some of the
Commandments of God and neglecting others.

Some Thoughts of the Life to come: With a brief account of the State of
Religion, as it is now in the World.

The great Benefits of Christ to all that believe on and obey him: Being a
Treatise on Hebrews. 2. 15. Wherein it is showed and made known how People may
be freed and delivered from that slavish fear of Death, whereby they are
subject to Bondage throughout their Lifetime: and also how they may be saved
and preserved from the Evil and danger of Death when it shall approach nigh an^
come actually upon them,

An earnest call to all the inhabitants of the Earth, to Turn immediately to
the Lord their God.

An Exhortation unto all Dissenters (however they are distinguished or named)
to return into the Communion of the Church o^ England: So far, as all things
are done therein, according to the Pattern showed to us in the Gospel.

Six several Sermons Preached on Isaiah 38. 1 Wherein that great Duty of
setting our Body and Soul in order, for we shall die, is a^ large opened and
explained.

The doctrine of the Cross, or the Duty of Christian suffering in a Sermon on
Mat, 13. 20, 21.

A Sermon on, 1 Chronicles, 29. 18. And another on Mark 8. 36.

The Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over Men, in a Discourse on Deuteronomy, 8.
2.

Divine Arithmetic Illustrated in the Right and Exact Numbrin^ of our Days, or
a Discourse of the near and continued approache^ of Death unto every one
whatsoever.

The Extensiveness and Comprehensiveness of the future Judgment of God.

A Discourse of the Misery of Hell and Happiness of Heaven, Grounded from Mat.
25. 46.

A Discourse of God's hearing Prayer, Grounded from John 9. 31. The observation
of the three Great Festivals asserted in the Christian Church, and also the
Right manner of the observance of them made known in a Sermon on Col. 3. 1
Preached on Easter Day.

A Sermon Preached unto the Inhabitants of the Town of Thornbury in
Gloucestershire, March 20. 1697. on Psalm. 143. 8.

Two several Sermons on Phil. 4. 11, 12.

The necessity of keeping unto the Ordinances of Religion, Prayer Hearing the
word, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, in a Sermon on Acts. 6. 4. A Sermon of the
devices of Satan on 2 Cor. 2. 11.

The exceeding Great Comfort and Benefit of having walked before God in Truth,
and with a Perfect Heart, and of having done that which is Good in his sight;
Set forth in several Discourses on Isaiah 38. 2, 3.

Another Sermon on Isaiah 38. 4, 5. And another on Jer. 6. 4.

Three several Discourses on Romans 9. 6. Not as though the word of God has
taken none effect: For they are not all Israel which are of Israel.

Two Discourses on Coloss. 3. 1. and another on Acts 2. 11.

The cause and cure of Divisions: Or the way and means for all Christians to
come to Unity.

The Great, Useful and Blessed Duty of a Contentment, Willingness and Desire to
Die: Set forth upon true and assured grounds. Any of which aformentioned Books
may be had at the Author's Hired House in Ewers Street, Southwark.

Advertisement.
THese are to give notice, That I have several other Practical Sermons or
Discourses of mine own Composing lying by me in Manuscript: Which if they who
have the Plenty or Competency of this World's Goods, would (According to their
several Ability, Acts 11. 29.) Thus Consecrate some part of their gain and
substance unto ^he Lord, Micah 4. 13. So as to be ready to distribute, and
willing to Communicate toward the outward Labor and Charge of the Printing
and Publishing of them, it would be for the Glory of God (in making known his
Truth, Isa. 38. 19.) And for the Edification and Benefit of his Church and
People; and consequently it would be a Good work in such Persons who shall be
helpful and any ways assistant herein, for which they would be rewarded by God
in the Life that is to come.

And I say unto you, Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations, Luke 16. 9. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they do
Good, that they be Rich in Good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to
Communicate, laying up in Store for themselves a good Foundation against the
time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 17. 18. 19.
This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly,
that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works;
these things are Good and Profitablsi unto Men, Titus 3. 8.


