The Exceeding Great COMFORT AND BENEFIT Of having walked before GOD in TRUTH,
And with a PERFECT HEART, And of having done that Which is good in his Sight.
Set forth in several Discourses on Isaiah 38. 2, 3.

By Richard Stafford, formerly of Magdalen Hall in OXFORD.

For our Rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience, that in Simplicity
and Godly Sincerity, not with Fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have
had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1. 12. I have Fought a Good Fight, I
have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for
me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me
at that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that Love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. London, Printed, and are to be sold by Ralph
Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIX.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
AS the Apostle did Write to those of his time, so I (according to the
knowledge given me) would willingly do the same as to the People of this my
Generation and Country. Yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this
Tabernacle, to sti^ you up by putting you in Remembrance; Knowing that shortly
I must put off this Tabernacle: Moreover I will Endeavor, that you may be able
after my Decease to have these things always in Remembrance. Which good
Endeavor of St. Peter was so brought to pass, only by his Writing down those
very Words, which are now Printed, and thereby made known unto us. For if Peter
or Paul had only spoken those Words unto the few Christians then present with
them, but had never Written them, they would have been like A Voice Crying in
the Wilderness, which is emphatically remarked concerning John Baptist by
Esaias in Mat. 3. 3. for John spoke four or five Sentences, which are there
Recorded and Written for him by the Evangelist: But he himself Writing nothing
hereof, was as a Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, which we know instantly
perishes in the utterance, and seems as nothing afterward. In the Wilderness,
thereby is signified, the Church or Servants of God, they being fewest in
Number, as that place has fewest Inhabitants.

His Servant Job, (who had the character from God to speak ^f him the thing
that was right) says on this wise, Oh that my Words were now Written, Oh that
they were Printed (...) Book; That they were Graven with an Iron Pen and had in
the Rock for ever. Job 19. 23, 24. Moreover, There is the express Commandment
of God to Isaiah, Now go, Writ^ it before them in a Table, and note it in a
Book, that it ^ay be for the time to come for ever and ever, Isa. 30, 8. A word
spoken or a voice uttered Perishes in the Speaking ^^d Utterance; And though it
never so much affects the Auditory for the present time, yet it goes off as a
Flash and is soon forgottn, both by Speaker and Hearers; But a Word or Sentence
written, that remains, and People may at any time have Recourse and turn unto
it. Hereby also it may be effectually Prevented the People shall not become
forgetful Hearers of the Word, as t^ which the Scripture says, Whosoever is not a
forgetful Heare^ but a doer of the Work, this Man shall be Blessed in his deed.
And accordingly the Prophet having obeyed the aforementioned Commandment of God
herein, so as to have Wrote down his Words, they stand and remain longer then
any Gates of Brass or Bars of Iron, or the most Ancient Buildings in the World;
for time has defaced them, and the place of them knows it no more. But the
words of Isaiah are as fresh, entire, sound and perfect to and at this very
day, all one as they were in the first Moment be uttered them, or as they were
in that hour wherein he first Wrote them down, God having been pleased to
preserve his Writings in the World.

For by the way there has been great Opposition against these kind of things,
by Satan and his Incarnate Instruments, and the Powers of Darkness, The Bible
it self (wherein then were all the Books of Moses) was very ^nigh lost in the
days of Josiah, when there was but one Copy thereof accidentally found to have
been hidden in the Temple. It being supposed that some Idolatrous King a little
before had Destroyed or Burnt them all. As the like was usual with the
Persecutors of the first Christians. Who again would hide them, and rather lose
their lives then give up and surrender their Bibles. Wherein they were more
Noble then some now a days, who say, They do not much value the outward Letter,
if they should be tried but the tenth part so far, for they say they have it in
their Heart. ^ut by their good leave, it would not long remain in their ^eart,
if neither they nor others for them had it not also Writ^^n in Ink and Paper
for to turn unto, Read and seek out of it (...) any time.

Th^s also discovers the Sin and Hypocrisy of those of the Romish Church, who
say they are Christians, but they are not, but of the Synagogue of Satan and
Antichrist; for they also have used the very same methods to Suppress or Burn
all such Bibles as a^ in the National Tongue of any Country, and all those
Boo^s which contain words of Truth which spring up any where aganst their own
Error, Idolatry and Superstition. Which ag^in is the duty of all such as are
Children of the Truth to pr^^erve and keep a foot in the World as the others
seek to dest^ry and suppress them; for as to this the Rule is certain (alth^ugh
it is not altogether so clearly apprehended by many) That as words of Goodness
and Truth are kept up above board, and m^de known Openly and Universally on
this Earth where S^tans seat is; So his Kingdom does accordingly by degrees
f^ll and lose Ground in the World. As contrariwise the King^om or Interest of
Christ (who is the Eternal Word) would (...) much increase and prevail in the
World, According as ^ood words and true words and right words are made Public
and received in the World. This is a Truth of great Importance. (...) would to
God it were understood thoroughly by all Persons (of whatever opinion or
denomination for they should not seek their ^wn party, but the things of Jesus
Christ) and done accordingly

Another Reason of my willingness to write and Publish Books (not which
Minister to Contentions and Strivings, for they are unprofitable and vain,
Titus 3. 9. But such as are to the use of Godly edifying, may be gathered from
what is said in psalm 102. 18. This shall be written for the Generation to come,
and the People which shall be created shall praise the Lord. For by my sending
Books or Printed papers unto them I may Preach unto People at many miles
distance, and put them in mind that they may obey the word of the Lord as in my
presence, so much more in my absence, Hereby also People may be able after my
Decease, to have th^se things always in remembrance; That being Dead, I may yet
speak. Heb 11. 4. and thus Preach to the succeeding Generation even whilst my
Body shall be in the silent Chambers of the Grave, and leave my mind behind
me, in my Books and writings, eve^ when my Soul is gone out into the other
World; That the people which shall be created may be thence exhorted, put i^
mind or instructed to praise the Lord.

The more universal and enduring (If any man's Work abide, He shall receive a
Reward, 1 Cor. 3. 14.) any god is, it is so much the better, and should rather
be endeavored o be done. Whereupon it appears that the Writing and Publi^ing
of such a Book as The Practice of Piety, or the Whole Luty of Man if it should
be alike received in the World, would ^e a doing more good throughout this
Nation, and for the Generations to come, then if one should Preach constantly
every day into the most Numerous Congregations for Twenty, Forty, or Si^ty
Years, and longer none usually does.

But here it may be surmised and said, Of making man^ Books there is no end,
Which Solomon does not here fin^ fault withal, for himself Wrote several; but
he brings this saying in to show what should be the Epitome and Tendency o^
them all, Namely, To fear God and keep his Commandments; Which, until it be
done Universally and Constantly by all People whatever, from the least of them
unto the greatest of them, says the Lord; for so is his requiring and
expectation in these days, Jer. 31. 33, 34. The Wisdom of God says as to this
Matter, For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line,
line upon line. (The Holy Ghost doubles it over and over) here a little and
there a little, Isa. 28. 10. Since the Wisdom of God has Ordained that it
should be so, and it must be so; This should hence forwards put to silence that
Ignorant Objection of foolish Men, who say, What need is there of such
abundance of Books and Sermons in the World? Let such ^awfully Remember and
Consider it again, That the Foolishness of God is Wiser then Men, and his own
Spirit says expreslly, For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept,
line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a little.

And further by th^se my Son be Admonished, in this thing to admire and comply
with the Wisdom of God; for by his Ordaining that it should be so and it must
be so, herein, Yea, he Loved the People. Wherefore they should do according to
what is after Written, All his Saints are in thy hand, and they sat down at thy
Feet: Every one shall receive of thy Words, Deuteronomy. 33, 3. Wherefore again People
should be Admonished, in no wise to reject (see John 12. 48.) this Counsel of
God against themselves, but to receive of his Words; for the Saints and
Servants of God do receive of the Words of God, Every one shall receive of thy
Words.

I have one thing more to Admonish the People of this my Generation and
Country of, and to exhort them unto, which does concern them all. Say I these
things as a Man, for does not the Law and the Gospel say the very same? for it
was the Requiring of God of old time, Who is the same to day, yesterday, and
for ever; That none should appear Empty before the Lord. But every one was to
do somewhat according to his Ability, They that could not go to the price of a
Lamb, were to bring a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons. And by what
is written in the Gospel of her who Cast in her. Mite (whereof two make a
Farthing) into the Offerings of God. By this it appears that even day Laborers
and Vine Dressers, yea the poorest of the People, should not serve God with
that which cost them nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. But it is expected from them, that
even they should Honor the Lord with their Substance (for he is to be served,
by all that is within and without us, even with the Fruits of our Labor) and
consecrate their Gain unto the Lord, and their Substance unto the Lord of the
whole Earth, Mich. 4. 13. Toward the Publishing and Propagation of his Eternal
Truth, according to their several Power and Abillity. For, if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that he has not.

But this is yet more especially required and expected from them that are Rich
in this World; for the Gospel (and miserable will be the end of those who shall
not obey the Gospel) does Charge them that they be Rich in good Works, ready to
Distribute, willing to Communicate. This is a Faithful saying, and these things
I will that thou affirm constantly; That they which have believed in God might
be careful to maintain good Works: These things are Good and Profitable unto
Men. So that the most High God requires and expects from them more especially
that they should Honor him with their Substance, and give out of their
Abundance, and Prop^rtionably to their Ability, be ready to distribute for the
Service and Propagation of his Eternal Truth. If they would buy good and Godly
Books, and give them to Poor People, laying an Injunction upon them, and having
a Promise from them to read and consider thoroughly of the things contained
therein; This would be the best kind of Charity, for this would be a doing good
to their Immortal Souls: Whereas Common and Outward Alms is only a Temporal
kindness unto the dying Body. As it is Written, Be not thou Afraid when one is
made Rich, when the Glory of his House is Increased, for when he dies, he
shall carry nothing away; his Glory shall not descend after him. So it is
sensibly seen that Rich People do Sicken and die all one as the Poor and Needy;
And then they will find, To what purpose was this Waste? For that same Money
which they expended in fine Clothes, Gayety or Retinue, in making a Figure in
the World (as a Dream when one awaketh, so O Lord when thou awakest, thou shall
despise their Image) in Gluttony and Drunkenness, which is making provision for
the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, in Pride Pleasure, Prodigality, Gaming,
or other vain things, This might have been given to the Poor, or it might have
been Expended in making known thy Truth, Isa. 38. 19. which seems to be the
best of Works for the Reason aforementioned; and then it would have done
themselves more good, and have stood them in more stead then the Riches they
used to the hurt of the owners.

If the Rich People have not heretofore, or shall not henceforward (that day is
coming on and hastening when, even the Rich among the People shall entreat thy
Favor, Psalm. 45. 12.) Obey and do according to this Exhortation and
Admonition; The word of God does find them out, and this comes to pass because
of what is Written, There is an Evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is
common among Men. A Man to whom God has given Riches, Wealth and Honor, so
that he wants nothing for his Soul of all that he desires, yet God gives
him not Power to Eat thereof, but a Stranger eats it, this is Vanity and an
Evil Disease. Even so God gives not to such Power or an Heart (O that there
were an Heart in them to fear me, says God, And, Wherefore is there a Price
put in the Hand of a Fool to get Wisdom, and he has no Heart to it?) either to
give unto the Poor, or to consecrate their Gain and Substance unto the Lord, by
Expending it for the Service of his Truth. But as our Savior Jesus Christ, who
is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, speaks Pertinently, Properly, and truly
when he twice in the same Chapter calls it the Mammon of Unrighteousness, the
Unrighteous Mammon, Luke 16. 9. 11. In the Margent opposite to Mammon in both
places, it is Riches, for they are most commonly gotten by Unrighteous means,
viz. By such means as are contrary unto or different from that Great and
Complete Rule of Righteousness in Scripture. Even so again it is most commonly
seen, That what is got by Unrighteous and Sinful means, is likewise spent in
Unrighteous and Sinful ways; as such are those aforementioned. And therefore
they hate the Light and the Truth, which would manifest and reprove their Evil
ways; For the same reason they are Rebellious against it, and would not have it
come forth. According to that other true saying of Jesus Christ, And this is
the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men loved Darkness
rather then Light, because their Deeds were Evil, for every one that does
Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, least his Deeds should be
reproved. In the Margent it is discovered, But he that does Truth, comes to
the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
But when the Lord comes after a long time (which yet will certainly come at
Death and Judgment) and reckons with those Servants for this Talent committed
unto, and entrusted with them, then it will be seen and discerned, what way
will be found best to have Used or Employed the same, or by sinful
Covetousness, to have the rust of their Silver and Gold be a Witness against
them, and to have heaped up Treasure together for the last days, James 5. 3.

As for mine own part I have put my self to Difficulties, Disadvantages and
Loss, as to my Worldly Substance, for to my Power (I bear Record) yea and
beyond my Power I was willing that the following Words may see Light, and that
these Children which are come to the Birth may be brought forth. But to allude
unto 2 Cor. 8. 13, 14. This might be eased by an Equality, that now at this
time their abundance may be a supply for my want; I mean by the Charitable
Contribution of Christian People, who receive the Truth in the love thereof.
For this work of the Lord is common, and should be the joint Endeavor of all
his Servants, For thy Servants take pleasure in her Stones, and Favor the Dust
thereof, Psalm. 102. 14. which is the least thing belonging to it. So then they
should help and forward every least thing that tends to the building up of
Zion: As the certainty of the words of Truth does build up the People of God
(which is Spiritually Zion) in their most Holy Faith, and toward making them a
People prepared for the Lord. Whether it will be so or not according to the
Intimation here given; However I hope and trust that Almighty God will be
pleased to pardon mine Ignorance and Infirmities, and Graciously accept of
these my Labors and endeavors in making known his Truth.

And because that Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God gives the
increase, therefore I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord-Jesus-Christ,
Humbly beseeching him to give his Blessing unto, and accompany with his Spirit,
what is hereafter written, that they may appear to be upright, even words of
Truth; And that they may be as nails fastened by the Masters of Assemblies,
which are given from one Shepherd.

SERMON I. ON
Isaiah XXXVIII. 2, 3. Then Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall and Prayed
unto the Lord; And said, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore.


I Have Written and Preached, and (Blessed be God most high that performs all
things for me) have caused to be Printed and Published, (This shall be Written
for the Generation to come; and the People which shall be Created shall Praise
the Lord, Psalm. 102. 18.) Six several Sermons or Discourses on the foregoing
Verse. Now the Order, Method and Course of our Ministry, requires to speak some
things from the words abovementioned.

In the shutting up and conclusion of that Book it was said, that all the
Sermons and Preaching in the World, if they be rightly and truly managed, were
all to the very same end and purpose, To instruct and exhort us, To set our
Souls in order for we shall die; Or that they may be set in order (which was
explained to be in a readiness, and that nothing be wanting in them) against
the time they shall go out of these Bodies. We do hence see what is to be done
then, when that time comes. So that by those words we are Instructed how to
die, or how to behave, fit and prepare our selves a little before, and as we
come to die. But now in the Words which I have here chosen for my Text, we are
taught what we must do throughout all our Life. So that in the three first
Verses of this excellent Chapter, we are informed and directed how to live and
how to die; What we must do in our life time, and what in the Day of Sickness
and of Death: And what would Man have more in order to his salvation, Security
and Happiness, then to know how to live and how to die. Truly, there cannot be
more desired then these two things, For herein is Comprised the whole State of
his Duration, both in this World and also in his Passage into the next. for
inasmuch as the Spirit says, Blessed are the Dead that die in the Lord, Rev.
14. 13. We may assuredly gather, that they who live well (as such do who live
unto the Lord) will also die well, and will die in the Lord. Again, they that
die well, or who die in the Lord, will be blessed for evermore, even so as to
receive, partake of and Inherit that Blessing which the Lord has Commanded,
even Life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3.

When I first entered upon my Ministry, I promised unto my Hearers, that I would
insist only upon useful and profitable Subjects, which I have observed
accordingly, and yet more chiefly when I have spoken of these things. I do
hereby appeal to the several Hearts and Consciences of those who shall Hear or
Read this, Can ye think of a more profitable and useful Subject of Discourse
then for ye to be put in mind and directed, how ye ought to live, and how ye
ought to die?

The Words of our Text, are Hezekiahs Prayer and Saying unto the Lord, in the
presence and hearing of his Prophet, which may be supposed by way of Answer to
that message and saying of Isaiah from the Lord unto him, which was, Set thine
House in order, for thou shall die and not live; And thereupon this behavior
and reply of Hezekiah is thus recorded, Then Hezekiah turned his Face unto the
Wall, etc.

Now what God spoke in time past unto Hezekiah by the Prophet, in these last
Days he does speak the same unto each Man or Woman, in his word and by the
Ministry thereof, all one, as if he now called them severally by their Names,
such an one and such an one, yea, every one of ye, Set thine House in order,
for thou shall die and not live.

It is certain, That every one cannot make so Good an Answer and Return
hereupon as Hezekiah did; for as all are Transgressors from the Womb, so the
greater part of Men and Women do continue so. But to make such a comfortable
Answer and Return, is only the distinguishing Lot, and Portion of the
Generation of thy Children, the true Saints and Servants of the Lord.

There is a wide difference between sudden wishes and real continued
performances: For the first, even Sinners and Hypocrites, the Ignorant and
Ungodly have some times good wishes and wouldings toward God. O that they did
please him and were at Peace with him, when indeed they do not go about so to
do and obtain it. But the Righteous and Godly know it is vain and deceitful
work before the Lord; (Cursed is He, that does the Work of the Lord
deceitfully) Unless their Good Resolutions be turned into actual performances.
For even a wicked Balaam, could and did cry out before hand upon a serious Fit
and Mood, Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my last end be like
his, Numbers 23. 10. When yet for all this Good Expression, he did soon after
Love the Wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. Even so there are in the
Wicked and Children of Disobedience, some secret and inward thoughts, that it
would be better for them if they did lead a Godly, Obedient and Righteous Life;
But notwithstanding all these Good Thoughts, Like the Dog they return to their
Vomit; and so they continue and persist still in their former Ungodliness and
Irreligion, Sin and Transgression. But it is only a Godly Hezekiah, or one like
unto Hezekiah, who can make that most sweet and comfortable Review, and Appeal
to him that is Invisible, and have their own Heart and Conscience within them,
Witnessing to the Truth, Reality and Sincerity thereof, Remember now O Lord I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth and with a Perfect Heart,
and have done that which is Good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore. Not for
Grief and Vexation that he had done so. In no wise; but through that abundance
of Comfort and Rejoicing, which upon this very same Reflection did hence stream
and flow in upon his Soul. For I trow and assure ye, that such a Reflection or
Remembrance is better, and will contribute more to ones future, which indeed,
is the only real and enduring Happiness; Then to have lived in Pleasure on the
Earth, to have been wanton, or to have nourished our hearts as in the Day of
Slaughter, James 5. 5. For it may be sensibly perceived even now, that the
Pleasures of this life (However, sweet they may seem to some in Enjoyment and
whilst they were present; yet as they choke the word, Luke 8. 13. So they make
Death bitter and more terrible. When a Man comes to die, if he has heretofore
lived in all the Pleasures, Riches and Honor of this World, he is never the
better for having had them; but rather he suspects his condition to be the
worse, in that they have occasioned so much the more Sin and Guilt, and Pride
unto him, as to which, he must go away to give an Account; and this Account
will be with Grief and not with Joy, which will be unprofitable for him; He
being then to undergo so much Pain, Loss and Punishment, for the sin which he
Committed in the Days of Flesh. And then also the Soul, makes inquiry what his
Good she has done in order unto, or toward God; and as from the other sort
does arise fearful Expectation, so the having done Good will stand in some
stead, and yield Comfort and Hope, and Assurance and Boldness in that Day. The
only want and failure here will be, if there has been any Good done, would God
there had been more of it and it had been better, but that cannot be now
neither, for care should have been taken as to this sooner and before; However,
the Soul must go away to give Account and receive for it as it is.

It is probable by these two kinds of Speech, Hezekiah was sick unto Death,
then Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall, That Hezekiah was at this very
time, when the Prophet Isaiah came unto him and said thus, that then he was
lying in his Bed of Sickness and Languishing; As yet more fully appears by what
is after Written, When he had been sick and was recovered of his sickness, ver.
9. And then afterward, mention is made of his Going up to the House of the
Lord, ver. 22. Which he was not able to do whilst he was there. And as it is
elsewhere Written, The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing;
Thou will make all his Bed in his Sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. Now these things are
Written in the Book of the Lord, for our Hope and Comfort, for our Learning and
Admonition, that we should also sometimes in thought and supposal, throw our
selves before hand upon a Sick and Dying Bed. That is, put the case and imagine
it so to our selves, before we come to lie upon it in Deed and Reality; For we
shall never be the sooner sick in Conceit for thus doing, but only thereby we
may be the better strengthened in the Soul, and Inner Man against and at the
very time, when our outward Body shall be actually Languishing in the Bed.

For to this agree, two alike Speeches of the Ancient Heathen Pliny, which are
near to the same purpose and signification. The one whereof is, This is the sum
of all Philosophy (which was given to regulate and make better the manners of
Men) If we would be so in our Health, as we profess and resolve we will be when
we are sick. The other saying is a little further improved, This is the Sum and
Height of Wisdom, if we would do those things whilst living, which we shall
wish we had done when we come to die. Now if with these two sayings, we take in
also the Knowledge of God, considering our Subjection and Duty to him that is
Invisible, as also with the Grace and Truth that came by Jesus Christ. In that
Revelation which God made unto mankind by and through him, which speak of
things that must shortly come to pass, which pertain to the Kingdom of God and
also to us Men, both as to what we are now, and what we shall be. Let there be
but the full assurance of Faith concerning these things, and what kind of
thoughts will then naturally and necessarily spring up in the Soul, just as
that is Gasping, and she is departing from the Body even quite contrary unto,
and vastly different from what we had whilst in the midst of Life, Health,
Strength and Vigor. For then we were, if not wholly and only, yet chiefly and
Principally taken up with and busied about Worldly and Visible things. But do
but thoroughly conceive thy self to be once a dying, then the Mind will be upon
the Invisible Things of the other World, whereinto the Soul is just going. If
you do but hold out a Bag of Money, or even necessary and wholesome Food, to a
man, when he just Lies at the Point of Death: If he has any Thoughts or
Apprehensions at all, they are quite of another and different Kind than what he
had formerly concerning the same. For however he did formerly seek after them
both, yet now he has no Appetite or Desire after the one, nor stomach after
the other. But there does arise an Antipathy and Loathing of them both; or
rather a Knowledge, that now his breath is going forth, there is no help in
them; for they cannot hold it in beyond the Appointed Time; and now the Time,
yea the Set-Time is come, they cannot continue Being, much less can they give
an Happy Being. Their Silver and their Gold shall not be able to deliver them
in the day of the Wrath of the Lord: They shall not satisfy their Souls, nor
fill their Bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their Iniquity, Ezekiel.
7. 19. The same does now appear as to all our past foregoing Life, whether it
be Twenty, Thirty or Forty Years; so it will be as to those who shall arrive at
Threescore and Ten, or Fourscore, or Ninety Years; It is all but as yesterday.
when it is past, and as a Watch in the Night, Psalm. 90. 4. Nay, it is not all
than so much as a quarter of an Hour, or one minute that is to come: We spend
our Years as a Tale that is told. For it seems all one then. And so it being
evident, that the World is then passed away, and all the things thereof as to
us, of consequence, as we know and find this; we must have but little Regard,
Thought, or Desire after them. Like as when one is Riding Post, and at full
Speed upon the Road, how little does he mind such a single Tree, or Little Bush
that stands by the way-side? for perhaps we just see it as we pass by, but we
soon forget, and not think upon it: Even so we are passing through this world.
Upon the Souls Dissolution, or flight from the Body, the Lightning which moves
from East to West, in the Twinkling of an Eye, is not quicker in its motion,
as appears by the Quickness of Thought now, and by sight, the Principal Sense
and Operation of our Soul. And when she is Launching out into her Eternal
State, All the things of this World, about which we have been busied, and
employed so long, will not seem so much, or not much more then a little single
mark or token, that stands alone by it self upon a long Road. As we are
gathering up our feet in the Bed, in order to yield up the Ghost: How will the
Spirit within gather up it self and make toward the Father of Spirits? What
would she then give to have Peace toward God, or a God reconciled and in
favor with her, and for an assurance, that now she is to be dislodged from
this Tabernacle of Clay, she may be received into Abraham's Bosom, or that she
might say truly, Into thy hands I commit my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me,
O Lord God of Truth, Psalm. 31. 5. It is not said, Thou have made me, but thou
have redeemed me. From which again it appears, they being added by way of
necessary and consequent Reason thereof, that there is no commending our
Spirits into the Hands of God when we come to dye and to give up the Ghost,
without God has first redeemed us by his truth. From what are we to be
redeemed? Even from that vain Conversation and Corruption that is in the World,
through Lust, and from that sin and guilt which is in our Nature. He does all
things in his own order; We must first be Redeemed by God before we can commend
our Spirits into the Hands of God.

Now whilst we are in the midst of life and according as the Course of this
world stands at this Day, People would reproach such an one to be Melancholy,
Mad and Whimsical, if they did hear any one crying out and Expostulating with
the Invisible God, in such a Great Earnestness and Anguish of Spirit from the
very real sense and bottom of his Soul, as he does in Micah 6. 7. Will the Lord
be pleased with Thousands of Rams, or with Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil? Shall I
give my first. Born for my Transgression, the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of
my Soul? God indeed has given his first Born for the Sins of Mankind, when
Messiah was cut off, but not for himself, Dan. 9. 26. God knows the danger of
sin, and what wrath is annexed to sin Unpardoned; Or if an Atonement and
Reconciliation, and Agreement be not made for it. But People here in the flesh
do not thoroughly know and lay this to heart; And therefore it is, that we do
not see or hear of any one so very much concerned and affected for Sin, whither
it be Pardoned, or whither the Guilt and Evil deserving thereof still remains
in them, whilst they be in the midst of Life, Health, Youth and Vigor. But
verily, verily, I tell ye beforehand, that when we come to lie in extremis,
and at the very point of Death, if our senses and understanding (which is a
Great Mercy of God) is preserved entire, sound and perfect to the last, then
this will be the greatest thought and searching of Heart; Seeing that I and my
Naked Soul must now appear before God, stripped utterly off from this flesh, and
spoiled and bereaved from all the things of this World, which heretofore did
stupefie and harden against him, or they did hinder and intercept the sight of
his Invisible Majesty, Is this God now, or will He be at Peace, or angry with
me? Shall I hear and receive from him, Well done Good and Faithful Servant,
enter thou into thy Masters Joy, or I know you not, depart from me, thou worker
of Iniquity. Go away thou Accursed Creature into Everlasting Punishment,
Prepared for the Devil and his Angels. God hates nothing that he has made as
it is his Creature, till afterward he sees Sin and Evil in them. Hereupon a
Multitude of thoughts does arise in the Soul, whither my sin be Pardoned and
taken away or not. And why do thou not Pardon my Transgression and take away
mine Iniquity; for now shall I sleep in the dust, Job. 7. 21. If the Soul had
but once assurance that God would do this for her, then she could with as
little fear and concern commit her Body to sleep in the Dust, and then her self
could also without Terror step forth upon the dark Mountains; as now we do
without fear, yea, willingly go to Bed to take our ordinary common sleep each
Night, in a Bed of Damask, Violet or Roses; or as any one ever lay down with
Sweetness and Joy in the Marriage Bed of his most Dearly Beloved. For as a
Young Man Marries a Virgin, so shall thy Sons M^^y thee: And as the Bridegroom
Rejoices over a Bride, (...) shall thy God Rejoice over thee, Isa. 62. 5. For
then it (...) upon Death, which is the loosening and dissolution of other
(...), that the Souls of the Righteous are Married and United ^^to God. They
are gathered up unto the Father of Spirits, and stand in his Presence, and near
and next unto; yea, they are one with him (as Husband and Wife make one Flesh)
in whose Presence is fullness of Joy, and at whose Right Hand there are
Pleasures for evermore.

But let no Stranger meddle with this joy; let not those who are Aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, and not in Covenant with God, ever think to receive or
to come in for to share and partake of these Good and Comfortable things: For
as before observed, there is no commending of our Spirits when we come to dye)
into the Hands of God, without having been Redeemed by him from Sin and Guilt,
from the vain Conversation and Corruption that is in the World, from Satan and
his Temptations. So it is here, in Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. Take them all together,
there is no Agreement or Peace to be made with the Lord (no, not with those
Great, Many and Near Offers and Overtures there mentioned) without following
that which is good, and obeying the Requirings of the Lord, in doing justly,
and loving Mercy, and walking Humbly with thy God, throughout thy past and
foregoing Life. There is no other way under Heaven, to get the sin of our Soul
pardoned or taken away, or to make Atonement or Expectation for it, but to come
into Covenant with God, and not to break it again, but to observe it, according
to what is written: Not according to the Covenant that I made with their
Fathers, in the Day that I took them by the Hand, to bring them out of the Land
of Egypt, which Covenant they brake, although I was an Husband unto them, says
the Lord. (This confirms the Truth of what was before spoken.) But this shall
be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, After those Days
says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward Parts, and write it in their
Hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my People. And they shall
teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, know
ye the Lord, for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the
greatest, says the Lord; for I will forgive their Iniquity, and will remember
their Sin no more, Jer. 34. 31, 32, 33, 34.

From all this considered together (for a Covenant must be taken all together,
as it lies in the whole, and not by Peace-meals) it appears, that the only way
for God to forgive our Iniquity, and remember our Sin no more, is to be in
covenant with God, to take him for our God. Wherein is supposed, that he is to
be our Ruler and Governor, and we his People; which implies Subjection and
Obedience, to have his Law in our inward Parts, and written in our Hearts. For
what end and purpose is that? Namely, for us to observe, keep and do it. So
that the ready and compendious way (there is none besides it) to obtain
Forgiveness of Sins, and an Inheritance amongst them that are Sanctified, is by
Repentance for the past, and Obedience for the future. There is no other way
under Heaven given unto Men, whereby they must be saved: To this do all the
Scriptures, both Law and Prophets, Christ and Apostles give witness. If the God
of Truth has Redeemed us, and Delivered us from the Hand of our Enemies, it
is, that we might serve him without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before
him all the Days of our Life.

All this Doctrine is pertinent, and direct to our Text; for it was this which
gave Hezekiah that comfort and rejoicing that did spring up even through his
Weeping and Tears, when the Message of Death was brought unto him, that before
that, he had walked before God in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart. and had done
that which was good in his Sight. For there is no Dying in the Lord, without
having Lived unto the Lord: There is no dying the Death of the Righteous,
without having lived the Life of the Righteous.

It may seem a strange thing, but only it shows forth the exceeding Delusion
and Subtilty of Satan, that one may speak many of the Truths of God, and yet
not be saved by them himself; that one may Preach unto others, and yet Himself
be a Castaway; and Prophecy in Christ's Name, and yet at the last Day be
rejected and disowned by Christ. So Balaam could, and did really wish and
desire to die the Death of the Righteous: And when he afterward says, Behold,
I have received Commandment to Bles^, and he has Blessed, and I cannot reverse
it, Numb. 23. 20. Hereupon his own Reason (for the like Reasoning and Truth
runs throughout all the things of God) might have told and acquainted him, that
it is impossible to dye the Death of the Righteous, without having lived the
Life of the Righteous; for of necessity such an one must have been Righteous
before, which does respect some, yea, and the most considerable part of his
foregoing Life, for otherwise such an one could not properly and truly be said
to be Righteous; inasmuch as the Denomination is taken from the greater Part.
And seeing that the Order, Decree and Purpose of God stands on this wi^e, The
Righteous has hope in his Death, Prove. 14. 32. Such must have been Righteous
before their Death; for otherwise the Spirit which always speaks properly and
truly, would not have called them Righteous. None else have Hope in their
Death. Not all the Ministers and People on the Earth, can ever reverse, alter
or change this same Order, Decree and Purpose of God. Now here is the strange
thing (which rather shows that Satan acted in Balaam as to that) that when
Balaam knew this before, and how desirable indeed it was to dye the Death of
the Righteous, yet that he should presently hereupon love the Wages of
Unrighteousness, which he might conclude would cut him off, and hinder him from
the other good and desirable thing. But truly Satan deceives not only the Poor
and Foolish, but even the more Wise and Learned, and Eloquent of Mankind, for
so was this Balaam.

And so as Rabshakeh could speak in the Person of his Master, for thus says
the King of Assyria, Make an Agreement with me by a Present, and come out to
me. Isa. 36. 16. So if the Great God of the World should speak on that wise
unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, as indeed he does not, but rather disclaims
and disowns, and denies that sort, If I were Hungry I would not tell thee, for
the World is mine, and the fullness thereof: Think thou that I will eat the
Flesh of Bulls, or drink the Blood of Goats? Offer unto God Thanksgiving, and
pay thy Vows unto the most High. But suppose that any false or pretended
Messengers or Ministers from him, should Preach unto you on this manner; For
thus says the Lord God, make an Agreement with me, (so far is no false
Doctrine, for Jesus Christ the Truth it self, Preaches the same to Mankind,
Agre^ with thine Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way. But here comes
in the Falsehood, and it is falsely applied. Make an Agreement by a Present, and
that must be Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousands Rivers of Oil. The cunning
corrupt Romish Priests, have hence drained a great deal of Tithes and Alms to
feed and enrich themselves; for they have fallaciously Reasoned and Persuaded
the People, that what was given unto them this way, was making a Present unto
the Lord, and consequently an A^tonement for their Sins. But all this will not
do, for i^ one should go yet further, and as those who gave up their Children
unto Moloch, so they would give up their very Children which came out of their
very Bowels as Sacrifices to appease God, their first Born for their
Transgression, and the Fruit of their Body, for the Sin of their Soul. All this
is more besides the matter still, for God requires none of these things. What
are Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil unto him, whose is the
World, and the fullness thereof? But this is more than all the Sacrifices and
Alms in the World, which make so great an outward show and noise, to walk
humbly with thy God; that is, to be obedient unto him, for this is the best and
most real instance of Humility. And this walking Humbly with thy God, denotes a
doing so throughout ones Life, even as long as we walk at all.

In truth, if we do thus walk Humbly with our God, we have no Reason to fear as
concerning the Sin of our Soul: For we may let God alone to do as to that, even
according to the Words of his Covenant and Truth, (provided always that we be
and continue in Covenant with him) For I will be merciful to their
Unrighteousness, and their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more, Heb. 8.
12. Most Precious and Comfortable Words, which I had rather in truth to belong
unto me, when I lie upon my Death Bed, or in whatever Ho^^ I am taken, either
violently or suddenly out of this World, then to have a Medicine or means found
out how I might live not only Fifteen, but if it were Fifteen times Fifteen
Years longer; for if God is merciful unto my Unrighteousness (which signifies
where I have not come up unto, but have come short of that great Rule of
Righteousness in Scripture) and if he remembers my Sins and Iniquities no more,
then let Death come upon me, as soon as it will, and what way it will, it
cannot possibly hurt me. But this will never be, unless in our foregoing Life,
God is our God, and we are to him a People.

There is no way to be Blessed in ones Death, but to be Godly in ones Life.
There is no way to have God for our Friend, and to be at Peace with us, when
through the Passage or Entry of Death we come to appear before him, but to have
lived unto the same invisible God, to have served him with our whole Heart, and
to have obeyed him in all things in these days of our Flesh. As we live, so we
shall dye: and so again we shall dye, that is, Receive after Death, according
as we have lived.

These are Truths of great importance, and necessary to be Understood aright,
and done accordingly, that Souls may no longer Shipwreck and be lost upon those
deceitful and broken Planks: As if it were then soon enough to serve God
thoroughly and constantly, and Universally when they come to be Sick, or in
Declining and Old Age, or upon a Dying Bed. God forbid, for this have I found
in all my Study out of the Book of Gods Statutes, and in all my enquiring and
searching diligently out of the Scriptures of Truth, that such a Man or Woman
who thinks so, and will venture and run the risque to Act accordingly, It were
better that a Millstone were tied about his Neck and that he be thrown into the
Sea, for this would only sink him into Temporal Death and Destruction; But the
other deceit if trusted and relied on will involve them into Everlasting
Destruction, from the presence of the Lord and the Glory of his Power. Such
will never enter into that rest which remains for the People of God; Inasmuch
as they were never his People, who did not serve and obey him in the most, nor
yet in the best part of their life time.

Although some, yea, too many of that kind of outward worldly Priesthood now
among us, (Who heal the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly, crying,
Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace) Will also huddle up the matter after
their rate, when People are lying in Fears and Ho^rours on their Death Bed, and
send them out of the world with a vain hope and false thought; yet even the^^
might have Learned better and more faithful dealing from that aforementioned
saying of corrupt Balaam, (for h^^ fault and failure only was, that he spoke
well but did ill^ Behold I have received Commandment to Bless, and he hat^
Blessed and I cannot reverse it. So it is on the other han^ where we Ministers
have received Commandment to Curs^ or to speak evil, (As Cursed are all they
that err from hi^ Commandments) Or where he has threatened to Punish^^ there
God has Cursed and Threatened, and He will Punish^^ and we cannot reverse it.
Not all the Ministers, Preachers, or Understanding People now living on the
Earth can reverse, or change from the least Title of the Word of God, that it
should fail or not be fulfilled.

I heard once a Minister of the Dissenting sort (wh^ commonly are more faithful
herein then those of the Church Ministry) say, that several People who had
lived Ungodly and Ignorant Lives, would send for him when they lay upon their
Death Beds. And if they were of the Substantial and Richer sort, they would
perhaps offer him Money if He would speak a word of Peace and Comfor^ unto
them, when lying in those sore and last Agonies o^ Soul. But it would have been
in him a sinful Corruption^ if he should have Perverted the Word of God and
took it for that end as he did not; but it has been the manner of some so to
do. Said he, however I would go to them, but when I came to them I did not
Answer their Expectations, for I used to repeat before such, what is Written in
Isa. 3. 10, 11. Say ye to the Righteous it shall be well with him; for they
shall eat the Fruit of their doings. W^ unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with
him, for the Reward of his hands shall be given him. This Scripture is very
pertinent and proper to such an occasion: Herein this Minister (who probably
now is a Partaker of the Truth of the former Verse, he being at this time gone
off from the Stage of the Earth) showed himself a Workman approved of God,
Dividing the Word of Truth aright, and giving to every one his Portion. And
indeed, any one that rightly knows and understands the things pertaining to the
Kingdom of God, does also find, that the whole Design, Order, Drift and
Tendency, of all that is Written in the whole Scripture, stands on this wise,
They that have done Good, shall come forth unto the Resurrection of Life, and
they that have done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 29. For
we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the Body, according to that he has done, whither it
be Good or Bad. So that only a Godly Righteous and Sober Life, and Good Deeds
will avail and stand in stead in a dying Day.

For though the common deceit, which each Man has in the deep of his heart
(which also is intimated to them to their own Danger and Loss, by those who
take upon them the Office of Preaching Repentance and Remission of sins) that
People may turn from their Iniquities some time hereafter, a little before
their Death. That they may have the Pleasures of sin for a Season, the
expediency of Transgression, the Profit and Wages of unrighteousness in the
mean while, and then leave them off just soon enough to obtain Pardon. But
certainly, this is quite to leave the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, to
go backwards to Imperfection, not laying again but utterly overthrowing, yea,
and contradicting the Foundation of Repentance from Dead Works; for these
should be utterly forsaken, and Fruits should be brought forth Meet for
Repentance. And yet further, this would make void both Law and Gospel; for they
require that, We observe to do his Statutes and Judgments all the Days that we
live upon the Earth, Deuteronomy. 12. 1. That we serve God without fear, in Holiness
and Righteousness before him all the Days of our Life, Luke 1. 74, 75. And
however, it shall be distributed unto the other sort as to Acceptance or
Pardon, yet surely, I know it shall be better with them that fear God, which
fear before him and turned from their Iniquities and kept his Commandments in
those Days of their flesh, whilst others continued in Sin and Disobedience. In
the latter Days ye shall consider it perfectly, Jer. 23. 20. This Jeremiah
said, when he immediately speaks thereupon of those Prophets, Which Ran and
Prophesied, when God had not spoken unto nor sent them; and they did not turn
People from their Evil way, and from the Evil of their doings. Whereby may be
seen that if this effect does not follow also, they are no Ministers of Gods
ordaining, although they do take upon them the office and continue in the
Exercise thereof, after the Law and Commandment, the Ordinances and
Institutions of Men. But in the latter Days (when their time of Trial is over)
they shall consider it perfectly; and when they come to see every, and each Man
have his own reward proportioned and adjusted according to his works and
obedience; Then that which themselves shall miss and come short off, will raise
bitter anguish within themselves and make to loath those Shepherds. (See Zech.
11. 8.) Which should have Instructed and Guided them otherwise. For this is
certain on the right and safer side, that the sooner any one comes to
Repentance, and brings forth Fruits Meet for Repentance and abounds in Good
Works; God is now the better pleased with that Man or Woman, and He will give
to such a more full reward hereafter.

Conceive your selves beforehand, and whilst in Health let us in serious
thought throw our selves upon a Dying Bed, just gasping and breathing out our
very last; and then think what Temper and Disposition of Soul we should be in,
if we were in this Hour brought to the Gallows, or to the Fire for our Life to
be taken off from the Earth in a violent manner. Here it may be either for the
Sins of others, as Jesus was hanged on the Cross; and so it is of all true
Martyrs and Sufferers, it is not so much their own Sins, as the Sins of their
Persecutors, which put them to Death. But if any one suffers as a Murderer, or
Robber, or an Evil Doer, against which, there is some Law of God also, then he
suffers for, and dies in his own Sin. Or if one is killed by another, then it
is the Sin of the Murderer which brings him unto Death. But however it be, a
Dying Hour will come upon all one time or another; and then if they have any
remembrance or understanding, Ask now of the Generations that were before thee,
and did you ever hear of any one that could then say seriously and thoroughly,
It is vain to serve God, and what Profit is it that we have kept his
Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? Does
it not then rather seem on the other hand, It was vain that we have not served
God more. The Godly and Righteous make such a Reflection and looking back, and
the Wicked find it is vain, because they did not serve God at all, or not so
much as can be properly called serving of God; for now they experimentally find
all other things to be vain. When the end thereof is come, we are then
thoroughly sensible of what is written, Remember how short my Time is, Wherefore
have thou made all Men in vain, Psalm. 89. 47. Therefore only it is that we have
no more profit, because we have not yet better kept the Ordinances of the Lord;
for the more we do that, the more Profit or future Reward we shall receive;
whereof we shall perceive somewhat more, as we come near to the end of our
Hope, the Day of Death, which is indeed to the Children and Servants of God,
the Birthday of Immortality. Therefore only it is, that we have not more
Profit, because we did not so much as we should, walk Mournfully; but we should
have walked yet more closely before the Lord of Hosts. To walk Mournfully, is
according to the Reproach and manner of Speech of the People of the World; for
they imagine and say, as if Religion and the Service of God, was a Melancholy
and Irksome thing; whereas if it be True and Universal, Inward and Real, it is
the greatest satisfaction and Peace to the Soul of Man, of any thing in this
World.

In a Dying Hour, when all things fail and slip from us. God and Religion are
the only Resort. My Soul cleaves fast unto thee, says the Psalmist by the
Spirit. But though hardly ever any one in a dying Condition did say, that it
would have been vain for them to have served God; we have heard of Thousands
sad Examples on the other Hand, crying out upon their Deathbeds of the Misery
and Deceitfulness of Sin, with Anguish, Bitterness and Vexation of Spirit, that
ever they themselves should give way unto it, and really and sincerely then
wishing, that themselves had lived otherwise. Then they confess and
acknowledge, that it was an evil and bitter thing to have forsaken the Lord,
and that his Fear was not in them. And they have not cried unto me with their
Heart, when they howled upon their Beds, Hos. 7. 14. That is, upon their Sick
and Dying Beds. By the Phrase of Howling, the Holy Ghost does seem to allude
unto that kind of Noise which Dogs usually make when they are in Pain and
Misery; the Sense or Smart whereof makes them to Howl, when they have no Reason
of Soul to comfort and mitigate the other. Even so the Sinners and Hypocrites,
when they are under violent Pains of Body, or the languishing of Pining
Sickness, and yet much more from that fearful Expectation of those dreadful
things of the Invisible World, all this will sometimes make them cry out and
howl; and yet at the same time they do not cry out with their Heart to God; for
that has been a long time at enmity and distance from him; and indeed they are
ignorant and unacquainted with him.

In a Dying Hour things will appear in a just and real value, and then will be
discerned what was best to have been done: Then shall ye return and discern
between the Righteous and the Wicked; between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. In the latter Days ye shall consider it perfectly. It is
certain that we must give Account for all, and the several Talents which we
have received, as Knowledge, Health, Riches, Time and such like.

Now to instance in this last, which is most proper, because we are here
speaking of a Dying Hour: When Time is ended, and shall be no more, which do
you think will tend to better Reckoning, when we come to give an Account for so
many Days and Hours spent.

Either so many Days or Hours were spent in Hearing, or Reading, or Meditating
on the Word of God, in his Law does he meditate Day and Night, Psalm. 1. 2.

Item, So many Hours in Worship and Prayer.

Item, So many Hours expended in good Works, and the Duties of Christianity.

Item, So many Hours in Honest Labor in our Trade or Employment, which is a
complying with that Prime Ordinance of God, In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou
eat thy Bread, till thou return unto the Ground, Genesis 3. 19.

All these will turn to Good and Profitable Accounts, that we may find Mercy,
Comfort and Reward from the Lord in that Day, 2 Timothy 1. 18.

But then comes in also the Account which some must be forced to make on the
other and worse Hand.

Imprimis, So many Hours spent in serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures.

Item, So many Hours in Cards and Dice, and in other vain and unnecessary
Recreations.

Item, So many Hours in Carnal Visits and Company.

Item, So many Hours in Pride and Dressing.

Item, So many Hours in Stage Plays.

Item, So many Hours in Taverns or Alehouses.

Item, So many Hours expended in serving of Mammon, Covetousness, and getting
of unjust Gain.

All these and such like, will tend to Loss and Punishment at that Day.

This Question is easy to be answered, and it will be seen which of these Two
will tend most to Men's and Women's Happiness at the Last Day.

Seeing we must all unavoidably give Account for so many Sabbaths as we have
had, Will it not tend to better Account to have spent the remaining Hours
thereof after the Public Worship is over, in Hearing the Scriptures, and what
Truths do flow from them? (for on the Sabbath Day, besides the double Burnt
Offering, was to be a continual Burut Offering, Numb. 28. 9, 10. The Holy Ghost
thereby signifying, that that Day was to be wholly and thoroughly spent in the
immediate worship of God, and Hearing, Reading or Meditating on his Word. Or
the very same Time expended in Worldly Company, and therein speaking their own
Words, contrary to Isa. 58. 13. Or in Carnal Perambulation in the Fields. Ay,
but here some will be apt to say, Should not they who are Working, and Trades
People all the Week long, have some Delight and ^ecreation on this Day of Rest?
To which I answer, they should call the Sabbath a Delight, and delight
themselves in the Lord, Isa. 58. 13, 14. And delight to do thy Will, O my God,
Psalm. 40. 8. And so to Hear his Will; for if Heaven is not thus begun with them
whilst on Earth, as to delig^t in that which is good, it will not be their
Portion when they come to die. As Isaac went out to Meditate, (in the Margent
there it is to Pray) in the Fi^ld at Eventide, Genesis 24. 63. So it seems to be
no Sin to walk out into the Fields in the Evening of the Sabbath, if it be for
Meditation or Prayer, or to discourse together only of the things pertaining to
the Kingdom of God. But it seems to be sinful to spend the Evening of the
Sabbath or Lord's Day in Loytering and Idleness, or standing by the Walls, or
in the Doors of the Houses, Ezekiel. 33. 30. when they will not go to hear what is
the Word that comes forth from the Lord, as the same is truly and faithfully
alleged from the Bible.

Some of my Kindred according to the Flesh, have despised me upon the Account
of my Preaching in a little Meeting or Assembly of Christians, as if it was
mean little, pitiful and unbecoming that Birth, Education and Family I am off.
Good God! what kind of Imaginations do lurk in the Heart of Man! Can any one be
too good to serve thee? And is it beneath those of what (...) called a Genteel
Birth and Extraction (which echo like, (...) a Voice, and nothing else, for
they also are formed out of the Clay) to come down to the plainness and
simplicity of thy Worship. As for mine own part, I do abho^ such a Thought with
the utmost Indignation from the very bottom of my Soul; but I cannot help the
Talk, Esteem and Reproach of others.

But lest it should seem somewhat too trivial to men^ tron or rehearse these
things, We may read somewhat alik^ to this, in 2 Samuel 6. 14, 15, 16. And David
danced before the Lord wi^h all his might, and David was girded with (...)
linen Ephod. And as the Ark of the Lord came into the City of David, Michal,
Saul' s Daughter looked through a Wi^^ dow, and saw King David leaping and
dancing before the Lord, and she despised him in her Heart, and came out t^
meet him, and said, How Glorious was the King of Israel who uncovered himself
to Day in the Eyes of the Handmai^ of his Servants, as one of the vain Fellows
shamelessly uncovereth himself. David was here so far from being discouraged at
this sarcastical kind of Saying, that he (...) more confirmed in his Duty, I
will play before the Lord, will be more vile then thus, and will be base in
mine own Sight, and of the Maidservants which thou have spoken of, of them
shall I be had in honor. Even so will I Preach Righteousness in this little
Congregation (for that no more are gathered together, that is the Sin and Fault
of those who refuse to come; it is their Stubbornness and Disobedience, their
P^ide and Abomination of Heart.) however Vile or Base I shall be thought of by
others for it; knowing and believing that where Two or Three are gathered
together in his Name, and in his Fear, there God and Christ will be in the
midst of them. But God has chosen the foolish things of the World, and base
things of the World, and things which are despised, has God chosen, 1 Cor. 1.
27, 28.

All those aforementioned Imaginations of Pride, will vanish and disappear
utterly, and seem as nothing upon a Deathbed. Which time is hastening upon
them, as it has been already fulfilled as to those of foregoing Generations,
as to the Rich and Chief of the People. As a Dream when one awaketh, so O Lord,
when thou awakest, thou shall despise their Image, Psalm. 73. 20. The Lord of
Hosts has purposed it, to stain the Pride of all Glory, and to bring into
Contempt all the Honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23. 9. When Pride will profit
them nothing, but rather sink them down into the lowermost Hell; and Riches
with all their Vaunting will do them no Good.

As Socrates (that real Martyr for the one God, against the vain Polutheism of
the Gentiles) told his Judges immediately after they had passed the Sentence of
Death upon him, I go away to die, but ye to live a little longer, but which
will be the better for us God knows. My Answer is alike to this scornful
Reproof of those that are at ease, and the contempt of the Proud concerning
this matter: I am resolved (by the Divine Grace) to go on in this manner of
way, Reproach it in as pitiful and mean a manner as you will; and ye will
continue a little longer in your Contempt of Gods Word and Commandment, in your
going on according to the fashion and course of this World, and in the way of
the Multitude; but which will be better for us at last, God knows. But the same
Word of God, which speaks not one Tittle of Good of this kind of Conversation
and manner of Acting, does make known to me, that as long as I continue
faithful in his Service, and am not weary of well-doing, for in due Season, we
shall reap if we faint not: If I fear not the Reproach of Men, nor am afraid of
their Revilings: Then the same God who chose David before Michals Father, and
before all his House, to appoint him Ruler over Israel, the People of the Lord;
he also may choose me to reign in his Kingdom before such Scoffers and
Reproachers of me, only for serving God in the Word of his Ministry; and of the
Saints and Servants of the Lord, I may be had in Honor, in the day of
Eternity, when such like shall be thrust down into shame and everlasting
Contempt, and become an hissing to Angels and Men.

In a word, Let People do so in all the several things pertaining to God, as
they will wish they had done when they come to be Sick unto Death, or in a
dying Day; or as soon as they are let slip into Eternity. Remember this great
End, and thou shall never do amiss.

SERMON II. ON
Isaiah XXXVIII. 2, 3. Then Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall and Prayed
unto the Lord; And said, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore.


THere is not a Sentence or Word in Scripture, but what is observable, and
somewhat may be gathered from thence: Yea, the very Iota's, Points and Stops
thereof, are to be heeded and attended unto; for some meaning and signification
may be also drawn and conceived of, according as they are and do stand: And so
when we here Read, that Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall, and Prayed
unto the Lord, some Use and Word of Instruction is hereby conveyed and made
known unto us, namely, that in our Worship of the Invisible God, whether it be
Public or Private, we should turn our Face to the Wall, that is, as says the
Psalmist, Turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity, and quicken me in thy way,
Psalm. 139. 37. This we should do at all Times, and in all Places, but yet more
especially in and amidst the Worship of God, we should turn away our Eyes from
so much as beholding other Men and Women; not looking about (as the manner of
many is) at every one that comes into the Church or Congregation: Nor yet
should we stare about on this side or that side, to observe other Peoples
Devotions, to the neglect of our own. Nor yet should we look about what
Vestments, Clothes or Apparel such an one, or such an one is in. In a word, we
should turn away our Face from all outward and other Objects unto the Wall;
which being the same still, and there being no great variety therein, will not
distract the Mind, nor yet much divert it from its being more intent and fixed
on its proper Object, the Unseen God; whom we there come to bow down before,
and worship in our Soul. And this I speak for your own Profit, and that you may
attend unto the Lord without Distraction, 1 Cor. 7. 35. It is the manner of
some, to shut their Eyes in Prayer, to hinder and prevent themselves the more
from Wandering and Distraction, in looking on outward Objects: But Satan who
hinders still, can and also does fill the Mind with other Thoughts and inward
Phantosms, that unless the Mind be more intent upon him that is Invisible, and
also upon Invisible things, still it will be distracted. And so it may be on
the other Hand, as Balaam fell into a Trance, but having his Eyes open; so one
may altogether as well pray unto the unseen God with his Eyes open, whom his
visible works do yet more put in mind of, especially if we lift up our Eyes to
him that dwells in the Heavens, altogether as well as when they are shut,
provided always that we turn our Face to the Wall; that is, the Eyes of our
Understanding inwardly, from Visible to Invisible things.

At the first hearing of that Message, when Hezekiah thereupon turned his Face
to the Wall, in probability, he thought that then he was to go out of this
World; and so he would of his own accord, by turning his Face to the Wall, go
out from the World in Thought and Conceit, before his Soul should go out of the
Body indeed. Like as when News was told them of the Death of Lazarus, then said
Thomas which is called Didymus, unto his Fellow Disciples, Let us also go, that
we may dye with him. And so to die and go out of the World in thought, before
we dye and go out of the World in^eed, much use and benefit may be made hereof.
I wrote unto you an Epistle, not to company with Fornicators of this ^orld, or
with the Covetous or Extortioners, or with Idola^^rs, for then must ye needs go
out of the World. Isaiah ^riteth, that the Multitude of the City shall ^e
forsaken (...) and Jeremiah wishes for a lodge in the Wilderness, that he
^ight get out from the Assembly of Treacherous Men. Cer^^in it is, that the
more we do sometimes abstract and ^^parate our selves from our
Fellow Creatures, and from ^ll the things of the World, the more and nearer
Com^union we have and enjoy with God. The more we set ^ur Affection on things
above, the less we are pressed ^own with the things of this Earth. Blessed is
the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee. But ^^is same
Man whom God chooses, and causes to ap^roach unto himself, he is also
separate, and does come ^ut from the things and Men of the World: And truly
(...) it is upon a Sick and Dying Bed. However much we ^ept Company with Men
and Women our Fellow-Crea^ures, yet then there is an inclination in the Soul
to ^um ^way his Face from them; for they cannot help, avail or ^tand instead in
this time of the greatest need and extre^^ity. What are all the Men of the
World unto us, just ^t the time when we are Sick unto Death? It is sufficient
^o have turned unto them when we were in the midst of ^ife, because we then
lived in a Community and Society, and had need of one another: But now it is
reasonable, (which indeed we naturally do) to turn from them when we come to
die. Nothing of what we have done to please Men, will then avail or stand in
stead, but what we have done to please God; and truly it were to be wished that
we had turned from them sooner.

But as Saul said unto Samuel, Turn again with me; but Samuel turned about to
go away: Which was in dislike. So contrariwise Hezekiah upon his Sick Bed, did
not turn away his Face toward the Wall, out of any dislike to Isaiah, for here
they were both of a Principle, that is, both Godly, but Saul was Ungodly. But
Hezekiah did thus for another Reason, namely, that he might the better
terminate, direct and offer up his Prayer unto God. But here again it is true,
that as it is written, Unto which of the Saints will thou turn thee? So it is
upon a Dying Bed, the bare having the Company of the Saints, o^ even of the
Prophets of the Lord (although they are better Company than others) yet this
will not stand the dying person in such stead, unless his own Life has been
Holy before, and unless Himself has obeyed the Voice of the Word of the Lord,
throughout his past foregoing Life, by the mouth of the same Prophets.
Another's Goodness, or Holiness, will not extend unto, or save thee: But if
ever thou do expect to see the Lord with comfort, thou must have Goodness and
Holiness in thy self also. For every Man shall bear his own Burden, Gal. 6. 5.
The Soul that sins, it shall die. The Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the
Father, neither shall the Father bear the Iniquity of the Son. The
Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him, and the Wickedness of the
Wicked shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Sanctity of Isaiah the Prophet,
although he came to Visit Hezekiah on his Sickbed, would not have benefited
Hezekiah so far as to render him meet for Gods Favor and Acceptance, unless
Hezekiah also had walked before God in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and
done that which was Good in his sight. Probably King Hezekiah knew this, That
neither the Holiness nor Godliness of Isaiah, nor yet of all the People within
his Realm and Dominion, would avail as to him, unless Himself also had been
Godly and Holy, And so all his Precious Things, and all his Treasures that were
in his House, or in his Dominion, would not by any means Redeem his own Soul,
nor give to God a Ransom for him: For the Redemption of a Soul is precious, and
it cease for ever. And it cannot be Redeemed with such corruptible Things as
Silver and Gold, nor yet by the Obedience and well-doing of others, except the
Righteousness and Obedience of Jesus Christ, by which many shall be justified.
Yea, They will be justified by it, who could not be justified by the
Righteousness and Obedience of all their other Fellow Creatures throughout the
world: For as by the Offense of One, Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation: Even so by the Righteousness of One, the Free Gift came upon all
Men to Justification to Life, Romans 5. 18. And so his Righteousness was imputed
to David, Hezekiah, and all the Good Men that were ever living upon the Earth
before, or at the very time, or who have been ever since Jesus Christ was
manifested in the Flesh. But besides that, the Righteousness of all the
Subjects that ever David or Hezekiah had; And so the Righteousness of all our
Fellow Creatures, which we have ever known, or heard of, will not avail, so as
to be imputed to any other. The Knowledge and Sense whereof might make Hezekiah
to turn unto the Wall, when he had received the Message of Death. And so
likewise it will do as to us, when we come to lie in a like condition: We must
severally, and every one of us stand upon our own Legs, when we come to stand
in the latter days on the Earth, and when every one of us are to receive for
the deeds done in the Body. What others have done, what is that to thee? Look
to thine own self? for according as thy particular Deeds (and not others) have
been, either Good or Evil, thou shall be particularly recompensed. Then Judas,
which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was Condemned, Repented himself,
and brought again the Fifty Pieces of Silver to the Chief Priests and Elders,
saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the Innocent Blood. And they
said, What is that to us! see thou to that. This is a fearful consideration
against them who commit Sin, or omit Duty (which is also Sin) to please other
Men. For though Judas had committed this sin of betraying the Innocent blood to
please the Chief Priests and Elders, yet we hence see, That when he came once
to be in Extremity of Conscience, and he was drawing near to God to suffer for
this his Evil Deed, what a short, slighting and vexations kind of Answer did he
receive from them; What is that to us? See thou to that. And so it will be as
to all the sin that we have committed, or as to the Good which we have omitted
upon the Account of, and to please others, why this will be the result and
consequent thereof as from them, when we come to be punished, and lose so much
for the same, in the future distribution of things; if we come to ask for Help,
Comfort, or that they should make it up unto us, they will in like manner
answer, What is that to us? See thou to that.

Whereas those who committed Sin or omitted Duty t^ please others, should
herein have made the right Inf^rence; They should have seen to that sooner, so
as no^ to have done that same thing at the Instigation of, and at the Mind or
Pleasure of others. Said the chief Priest^ and Elders unto Judas, What is that
to us? When Jud^^ did it out of regard and respect unto them, and to fulfi^^
their desire. But herein is showed forth the very Mind(...) Temper and
Disposition of Mankind, they would have such a thing done, but then they would
not have the Guilt and Punishment thereof. They would have the Convenience,
Expediency or Pleasure of the sin; but the^ they would escape from and avoid
the misery which i^ Consequent and Annexed thereto. Judas liked well enough of
the Thirty Pieces of Silver, but that Repentance and Anguish of mind
afterward, which occasioned him to hang himself, if he could have had the
first without the last, this he would have liked well enough. And so the chief
Priests and Elders thought it expedient to pu^ Christ to Death; but thereupon
to Contract the deep Dy^ and Guilt of Murder, to fall thereupon under the
Wrath and Displeasure of Almighty God. And what they falsely furnised, that if
they had not done it, the Romans would have came and taken away their Place and
Nation; but by their doing of it, they took the effectual and ready means to
bring them in; for through their grievous sin of putting Christ to Death, the
Romans did at length come and take away their Place and Nation. Which God might
have kept and restrained from them, had they not thus grievously offended him
in killing his Son; Whereupon he made good his Word, As to slay those Wicked
Men and let out his Vineyard unto others, Mark 12. 9. To commit sin, and then
to be willing to avoid the Punishment, is to endeavor to put a sunder what God
has joined together, which is impossible: for our Gracious God, in that he
might the more de^er and keep People from it, has ordered that misery should
be linked on to Iniquity. So that if People commit the one, they must of
unavoidable consequent have the other, although in thought and desire they
would fain let alone and escape it. The Creature can never be too hard for God;
and where he has committed sin, or done things worthy of Punishment, he cannot
by any Trick or Artifice avoid the severity of his Vengeance.

Like as Amnon hated his Sister Thamar, after he had committed Incest and Folly
with her; And as the Ten Horns which thou saw shall hate the Whore: So it is
usual for sinners upon their Death Beds to hate their Whores, their Drunken
Companions and such like, with whom they have been Partakers in any Sin or
Iniquity. For the Guilt thereof does then more appear forth, and they are going
away to receive for their Evil Deeds: The foreknowledge whereof does raise this
Evil Affection of Hatred, Dislike and Antipathy. So that even upon that
Account, there is an Actual Inclination upon our Death Bed, to turn away our
Face from our Fellow Creatures, who are to survive a little longer.

Moreover a full and through knowledge does then arise in us, that they are not
able then to give us any Actual help or relief, now our Breath is a going
forth. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man, in whom there is
no help, Psalm. 146. 3. In the Margent it is salvation, which signifies safety
or preservation. Upon a through Knowledge and Consideration hereof it appears,
that there is little or no help in them even in the midst of our Life, and yet
there is much less in that moment wherein we come to dye. If we have done never
so much to please Men, it signifies nothing in the Hour of Death: They are
under the same Law and Liableness to Death, and they cannot deliver themselves:
So that besides the Evil and Guilt, and Sins of Omis^^on, which they have been
Instrumental unto us to Contract; Out of the knowledge, how insufficient and
unable they be to Administer any Actual help, we readily and naturally turn
away from them, for we must stand, or fall wholly to our selves.

This and such like may be one reason of Hezekiah turning his Face unto the
Wall; Besides, that thereby he might the more abstract from Men, and be more
intent and fixed on the unseen God. For that mind which would pray unto him,
should cast off and be clear from the thoughts of all other things, the more to
engage his heart to approach unto the Lord, which the more it is done, it is
(...) much a greater obligation unto the Lord, for to He^ and Answer such an
ones Prayer.

The Prayer of Hezekiah unto the Lord, which is he^ Recorded, does begin after
this manner, Remember no^ O Lord, I beseech thee. As it is Written, He that
teac^eth Man Knowledge, shall not He know? So He that gives to Man Memory or
Remembrance, shall not He Remember? And as it is there again Written, The Lord
knows the Thoughts of Man, that they are Vanity. (...) the Lord Remembers all
the Thoughts, Words and Actions of Man, in order to render unto every one
accordingly. Great in Counsel and Mighty in Work (for thi^ Eyes are open upon
all the ways of the Sons of Men, (...) give to every one according to his ways,
and according to the Fruit of his doings, Jer. 32. 19. The Lord looks from
Heaven; He beholds all the Sons of Men, from the plac^ of his Habitation. He
looks upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth: He fashioneth their Hearts
alike; He considere^ all their Works, Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15. So that his Eyes
being upon all the ways of the Sons of Men, and he considering all their Works,
he must of Necessity Remember them. Put thou my Tears into thy Bottle. Are not
these things noted in thy Book? Are not Five Sparrowt sold for a Fa^ thing? And
not one of them is forgotten before God. A^ so the very Hairs of our Head are
all numbered. Go^ knows all things, which shows also, that he remember^ (for
Remembrece is a Knowledge and keeping in Mind (...) past things) all things
that have been done on this Eart^ by all the Creatures and Things therein.
Known unto Go^ are all his Works from the beginning of the World; Y^ they are
Registered and set down by him. The Sin of Judah is Written with a Pen of Iron,
and Graven with (...) point of a Diamond, Although no Man did ever speak or tak^
notice thereof. And so seeing that God knows a^^ Things, and Remembers all
Things in all Persons an^ Creatures, What need had therefore Hezekiah, or any
other of the Saints and Servants of the Lord, to pra^ unto him in that manner
of Speech, Remember me Lord, with the favor thou bear unto thy People, Psalm
126. 4. Lord Remember David, and all his Affliction^ Whereas God does and will
Remember, without being prayed unto for so to do. But as to this the Lord does
speak by Ezekiel, that though He would do such a thing for Israel, yet for all
that, He would be enquired of by Israel for that thing. And so though God will do
many things, Nevertheless, yet he would have the Creature pray unto him for it.
Both in obedience to his Commandment of Calling on his Name, as also to show
forth that dependence, subjection and desire, which the Creature has after the
same from his Creator.

Herein also his Servants do speak after the manner of Men, when they pray in
such a manner; Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people, Neh. 5. 19. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also,
and spare me, according to the Greatness of thy Mercy. Remember me, O my God
for Good, Neh. 13. 22, ^1. And in another place he says to this purpose, Wipe
not my Good Deeds out of thy sight.

Hezekiah prays, That God would Remember the Good Life which he had led. He
might have thus known, that there had been no need for him to use those words,
for God would have Remembered his Good Life Nevertheless.

It may be convenient and necessary to keep a Catalogue of our sins, and a
Catalogue of Gods Mercies toward us. The first to the intent, that we may
confess and be sorry for them, that so God according to his Gracious method and
promise may forgive them; That we see and eye continually the Rock whereon we
had well nigh split, and more certainly avoid and pass by the same for the
future; That we may bear Iniquity, and loathe our selves in our own sight for
them; That all the few and evil Days remaining of our Pilgrimage, We may walk
in the Bitterness of our Souls, because we have transgressed against the Lord
our God. Which same will be a Reaping in Joy, in the life that is to come; For
according as our present grief for sin has been, so accordingly will our
future Degree of Consolation be.

And so again, it is convenient and necessary to keep (...) us, a Catalogue of
Gods Mercies, that we may be alwa^^ mindful of them, and endeavor to render
unto the (...) according to the Benefit which we have received; that (...) may
offer unto him the Sacrifice of Praise continual(...) Because he loadeth us
with his Benefits daily; that his gre^^ Goodness and Mercy may engage us yet
more to clos^^ strict and Universal Obedience unto all the Words of (...) Law;
that we may offer him Praise, and Glorify him, (...) ordering our Conversation
aright, and such like.

But it is neither convenient nor yet necessary, to kee^ by us any Catalogue at
all of our several good Deed^ for God himself will keep a true, faithful and
exact Register of them: For God is not Unrighteous to forget yo^ Work and
labor of Love, which you have showed towar^ his Name, in that ye have
ministered to the Saints, and (...) minister, Heb. 6. 10. Not the least good
deed, even to (...) Cup of cold Water ministered unto one in the Name of a
D^ciple of Christ, Mat. 10. 42. shall be forgotten, nor (...) pa^s unrewarded
before God.

But as he remembers all our good Deeds, from the greatest of them to the least
of them, to recompense (...) every one according to his ways, and according to
the fruit of his doings; for thou Lord, only know all that (...) in the
hearts of all the Children of Men) so he remembe^ all our Sins and Evil Deeds,
from the greatest to the lea^^ of them. Thou have set our Iniquities before
thee, and (...) secret Sins in the Light of thy Countenance, Psalm. 90. (...)
For God shall bring every Work into judgment, with eve^ secret things, whither
it be good or bad, Eccles. 12. 14. (...) order to do which, he must of
necessity remember ea^^ and every one of both sorts, which again is as certai^
as that he knows all things; for he keeps and continu^ them in Knowledge, which
is Memory or Remembrance.

Remember O Lord, how I have walked before thee; The they should more
especially remember, and be put (...) mind of, who live without God in the
World, or wh^ have not that constant Sense of the Invisible God upon their
Souls and Spirits as they ought to have. Althoug^ they do forget God, and not
think of him, yet still (...) their Workings, Motions and goings are before
him. Man's goings are of the Lord, How then can a Man understand his own way?
Prove. 20. 20. Though we do not see God, yet he sees us; but then indeed we
should have a continued sense and knowledge of God seeing us, which should
engage us to exceeding Cautiousness and Circumspection in all Godly, Righteous
and Sober living. For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary,
from Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth, Psalm. 102. 19. Even so we should
with the Eye of Faith, and with the Eyes of our understanding being
enlightened, Eye him continually as he sits above on his Throne, in the High
and Lofty Place, the Inhabitation of Eternity. Unto thee, lift I up mine Eyes,
O thou that dwell in the Heavens. Behold, as the Eyes of Servants look unto
the hand of their Masters, and as the Eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of her
Mistress (...) So our Eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that He have mercy
upon us. And so it is elsewhere written in like manner, At that Day shall a Man
look unto his Maker, and his Eyes shall have respect unto the holy one of
Israel. And the Eyes of all Israel, as of one Man shall be toward the Lord; As
God Eyeth us, even so we should Eye God. But how can this be, seeing that God
is invisible? It must be done by Faith. Which being the evidence of things not
seen, makes them as if they were seen. After the Fruits and Effects thereof are
reckoned up, in Heb. 11. It is said in an observable manner of Moses, By faith
He forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King; for He endured as seeing
him that is Invisible. This is a constant Lesson of Instruction and Admonition
to us, upon whom the ends of the World are come, that by faith we should in
like manner forsake and not give way unto the Pleasures of sin for a season,
nor yet the Titillations of Lust, nor yet fear the Terrors of Men, nor yet to
be perverted and turned aside by their favors, but to endure all things in
Uprightness and Innocence, and according to the Dictates of a Good Conscience,
as seeing him that is invisible. With our Souls which are Invisible, we may
see, or at least understand the Invisible God; All one, as the outward Eye does
see things visible. As all things are naked and opened unto the Eyes of him
with whom w^ have to do, Hell and Destruction are before the Lord (...) how
much more then the Hearts of the Children of Men^ Prove. 15. 11. So all People,
both Godly and Ungodly, Righteous and Wicked, Saint and Sinner, they do al^
walk in the sight and presence of the Invisible God. With this difference, The
Godly, Righteous and Saints do walk as in the sight and presence of the
Invisible God. That is, they have a knowledge and sense thereof; and they do
thus and thus, with an Intention and Thought at the very time, that God sees
them and i^ present. But the Ungody and Wicked, and Sinners do walk only
(leaving out the Particle as) in the sight and presence of the Invisible God,
For Hell is Naked before him, and Destruction has no covering. God sees all
things, He fills Heaven and Earth, all things and all places with his
presence. So that of necessity, they must be in his sight and presence if they
are any where; but these do not walk as in his presence and in his sight. So it
is in that sense also. All People of both sorts, Good and Bad walk before God,
that is, they are in his sight and knowledge. But only the good so walk before
him, as in his obedience and wellpleasing to get his favor and acceptance.

The Generality of People, do not walk before God as Hezekiah did, but they
^^ve at Random, and all one as if there was no God to see their doings, and as
if He would not Judge them, and they were to give no future Account for the
same. God both Sees and Remembers where the least Portion of our Precious Time
is not spent in his Service and Obedience, but it is Consumed and done away in
Loytering or Idleness, in Sinful or Vain Things. I my self have too much to
Answer for in this Nature. And my self have too much to Answer for in this
Nature. And so, God sees and Remembers where we do not live up to that Grace
and Knowledge He had Given and Entrusted us w^thall: And so he Remembers also
where we are not so Good and Holy as we might have been: And also where we have
not Improved our Christian Graces and Talents as we might have done. When God
comes to enter into Judgment, He will show himself to be a Remembering God.
These things have thou done and I kept silence; Thou thoughtest I was
altogether such an one as thy self, (as if such and such things were over and
forgotten; In no wise) but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before
thine Eyes, Psalm. 50. 21. Things will then appear vastly different over what
they do now. For now Fools make a mock at sin; They follow it with Greediness
and Merriment, and account it as a thing of naught, as to the doing them any
harm. But then they will find, that this which was formerly so light in their
Opinion, will sink them down to the lowermost Hell. That it will be as a Talent
of lead, which is Wickedness; Which will press down the Souls of those that are
Loaded and Encompassed therewith into the lowermost parts of the Earth, the
Land of Darkness and of the shadow of Death, where no Light is of Comfort or
Freedom from misery.

Happy is He that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is in the
Lord his God. Happy is He, that can make his appeal and sweet Recollection with
our Saint in the Text, Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth. Such a review will be comfortable; but it will not be
altogether so, to have it then said unto them, Son, Remember that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy Good things, Luke 16. 15. For this will be but so much
the more Torment, when they are slipped and passed away finally and eternally,
and they are in that place where they want a drop of Water to Cool their Tongue.

Even we know Experimentally by our selves, that when we are now in any Pain or
Misery, the Remembrance of what Pleasures of Life we have formerly had, or what
good things we have heretofore enjoyed, will not administer one Dram of
present comfort; Nay, contrariwise, It is an Enhancement of the present misery.
How much she has Glorified her self and lived Deliciously, so much Torment and
Sorrow give her, Rev. 18. 7. So it will be meted out, Adjusted and Proportioned
in the future State of the Restitution and Distribution of all things. How much
Pleasure any one has had hereon Earth, the less He will have after he is
removed and gone off from it, yea, There will be so much Torment and Sorrow
given to the Person that had it. This is an unanswerable Argument and Terrible
consideration against Living in Pleasure on the Earth, or being wanton therein,
or Nourishing their Hearts as in the Day of Slaughter. And it should make us to
equally fear to enjoy Pleasure, however Agreeable or Grateful it may now seem
to Flesh and Blood, as we would be to take a Snake or Adder into our Bosom; for
although it may seem smooth or tickle, yet at the last it may sting us unto Death.
Or, as we would be to suck in the Cruel Venim of Asps. For so stands the Case
with Poor Mankind, that their Wine is mingled with Gall, and the Clusters out
of which it is made are bitter. For so it stands in the Order and Connection of
things, as they are decreed and appointed by God, That for faring sumptuously
every Day, they must come to the place after these Days of their Flesh are
ended where they shall be Tormented; for so much Pleasures of Life and
Delicacies they have had here, after Death they must have so much Torment and
Sorrow.

This again is a most clear and convincing Demonstration, That the living in
the Pleasures of sin for a Season, or the Catching after and enjoying the
Delicacies and Recreations of the World, is not a walking before God in Truth,
for the end of any ones living in Pleasure or Delicacy, is in order to be an
Happy Men. But now it is impossible from the order of the things of God, that
either the Pleasures of sin for a Season, or the transitory delights of the
World, should give unto any Man the true Happiness, because they have such
bitter and miserable consequents, no more then a Cup of sweet Poison, can tend
to the well Being and Health of the Body. So that it must follow by necessary
consequence, that whosoever follows after the Pleasures of sin for a Season, or
the delights of the World, although he now Bless himself in his heart, saying, I
shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of mine Heart, to add
Drunkenness to Thirst, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. Although they hug themselves in their own
Conceit, I shall have Happiness, because that I enjoy so many Pleasures and
Delights in Order to it; Yet still herein they do not walk before God in Truth.
For they do not go in the right Road to Happiness, but they are mistaken and
deceived in heart, and they are in a false Path, as the end will prove; for it
will at last let them down into the Chambers of Death, the place of Punishment
and Misery.

We may thus know and conclude, that as God gave us a Being at first, so it is
Natural and Reasonable to expect only from him an happy Being. My Soul wait
thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him, Psalm. 62. 5. And thereupon
we should walk before him in expectation, and seeking after it. And here if we
go the right way (And He led them forth by the right way, Psalm. 107. 7. There
is a great deal in that) which is Chalked and Pointed out, Butted and Bounded
in his written word, as long as we make that our Guide and Rule, then indeed we
walk before God in Truth. But as sure as that word is Truth, Thy Word is Truth,
the Pleasures of sin for a Season, (however eagerly they are sought after and
followed by the People of the world; for Satan who deceives the whole world
makes use of this as the great Bait to beguile and catch Souls unto himself)
are not the true way to Happiness and Blessedness in the End. Because that
which may be known of God is manifested in them, for God has showed it unto
them, Romans 1. 19. So in like manner it may be truly reasoned, that which may be
known of God, touching his future distribution of things is already manifest in
Men, for God has showed it unto them. And accordingly may be observed, that
Melancholy and Heaviness of heart (in the midst of Laughter the heart is
sorrowful) which is immediately at, or after having the Pleasures of this Life.
That Regret of Mind and Vexation of Spirit immediately ensuing upon the
Pleasures of sin for a Season: All this and the like, is but a manifestation
before hand^ or as a Pledge, Earnest and F^reru^ner, whereby God has shown
unto them that Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath, which shall be
upon every Soul that does Evil. This and the like is a fore-shewing of Pain,
Punishment and Misery to come. And so again it is on the other good hand, Where
is Approbation of Mind, the satisfaction of a good Conscience, a Joyful Hope
and Comfortable Expectation, as all these and the like are annexed to our
having our Evil things here, to our enduring labor and taking Pains in the
Obedience and Service of God, this is an earnest of the Spirit and a
Manifestation in Men, whereby God has shown unto them that Glory, Honor and
Peace, which shall be to every Man that works good, Romans 2. 10. And that
assured future blessedness, which shall be to every one that has lived and
done according to the Will of God.

Thou therefore endure Hardship as a Good Soldier of Jesus Christ, says Paul
to Timothy. Which is a Lesson of Instruction to be put in Practice by all
faithful Christians, for as we are in the way of Duty and Service of God, the
more denial of our selves we have used as to present ease and safety, the
greater satisfaction and enjoyment we shall have hereafter; whereof now we have
a little glimpse earnest, assurance and foretast by that Complacency of mind
and lively hope, we may sometimes perceive after such and such Acts of Duty.
Notwithstanding, the same do expose us to present worldly Inconveniences, Loss
and Trouble. However we are contented and satisfied, and Joyful; for it is
something for God. And so the more Labor we have been at, the more Rest we
shall have hereafter; and this same Rest will be found yet so much the more
pleasant. And He saw the Land that it was good, and Rest that it was Pleasant,
Genesis 49. 15. Which will be yet more so, as we may perceive by the Irksomness of
its contrary, that is, Restlessness. And so the more Tribulation we have gone
through in the world, the Greater will be our Recompense and Crown; The more
loss has been sustained in his Service, the greater gain will be hereafter; as
Lazarus was comforted for the Evil things he had in his life time. Yea, in
whatever seems Evil, Harsh, Uncouth and Irksome, it will be made up double,
yea, more then an hundred fold in the time of the Restitution of all things,
When the times of Refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. So that
in each thing we take in hand, we should not so much regard whither the same be
Pleasant or awkward, but whither it be Duty or Sin, whither it be Good or Evil,
whither it will tend to our Benefit or Loss, our Reward or Punishment in the
last Day. And so we should either do, or not do the same, either abstain from,
or give way unto it.

Hereby also we may somewhat conceive of the exceeding Evil, Mischief and
Danger of Loytering or Idleness. For only Just to Rest or Breath a little, and
so to Labor or Business again: Otherwise there can no Good come possibly of
it. Nay, it tends to so much Loss to be sustained throughout all Eternity. And
it is a Losing so much of the Things which we have wrought, that they receive
not a full Reward, according as may be apprehended from. 2. John. 8. Which
though there is not much Account made of through Ignorance or Unbelief at
present, yet in the latter Days ye shall consider it perfectly. And when we
come to see every Man's Reward Proportioned and adjusted according as his Labor
and Work has been, then what themselves shall miss and be disappointed of
through Idleness and Sloth in the Days of their Flesh, will raise bitter
Anguish and Indignation within themselves for not having been steadfast,
Unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord; for they were then
foretold, but now they will see that their Labor would not have been in Vain
in the Lord. If they did somewhat Work and Labor therein, yet still they will
have Indignation and Anguish that they did not Work and Labor therein, yet
more and more. As it is supposed, that the Pain of Loss will be More Grievous,
Irksome and Intolerable then the Pain of sense. So likewise this part of the
Pain of Loss will be sufficiently, afflicting and disquieting to the Soul, that
she will then wish that she had not in the least Given way unto Idleness. But
she should have looked upon it as One of those Devices of Satan, the Enemy, to
deprive and hinder her of so much Good in the Future Recompense. As to this the
Rule should be as to all the other Devices of Satan, Not to Give way unto them,
and not to suffer our selves to be kept off or hindered by them.

It is an admiration to me, that any one should not know what to do with their
Time, seeing that each and every one has a God to serve and a Soul to save,
and surely all Portions and Intervals of Time which can be spared and deducted
from other Things of Life, should be employed to this Great End; as indeed All
Things whatever we have to do, should be brought in subordination and tendency
to i^. We have still corruptions to subdue and Conquer; and we are to perfect
and fill up what (...) wanting: Nay, still we might forecast and Think (...)
something in order to Work out Our own Salvation; an^ this being the Business
for which we come only and Principally into this World, we might herein hearken
and (...) according to those Gospel precepts, Not Slothful in Business,
^ervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Giving all Diligence to make our calling
and Election sure.

We should do well and wisely, To exercise the Remembering and Understanding
Office of our Souls: for they are made by God our Creator, capable to do both.
The Remembering part is chiefly conversant about Things that are past, which by
Remembrance are made as it were present unto us. And here ye should call to
Remembranc^ the former Days, in the which after ye were illuminated (...) ye
endured a Great ^ight of Afflictions, Heb. 10. 32. Y^ may call to Remembrance
the former Days whilst y^ did live in Vanity, Ungodliness and in your
Unregenerat^ state. That ye may see the Rock whereon ye had well ^igh split and
been Shipwracked; and so more carefully and certainly avoid the same for the
Time to come. That ye may thoroughly Understand and be deeply convinced of the
folly and Danger thereof, and so be more confirmed in mind against them for the
Time to come. So it is of Use and Benefit to call to mind the Days when we
were first illuminated and converted unto the ways of God; That we may still
keep up our former Zeal and Love toward God, and the Sounding of the Bowels,
and that earnest desire to please him. Remember both the Good and Evil of your
past life, in order to do the one more, and to more eschew the other.

But the Benefit would be yet much greater, to exercise the understanding
Office of our Souls, as it reaches unto things to come, which makes them in a
manner present unto us. Here in the first place, the Contrivance and
Workmanship of our Souls is to be admired at, that they are made as Angels of
God, capable not only to choose the Good and avoid the Evil, but also to see
and know things to come and a-far off. Seeing that the Soul is made with such a
capacity and faculty, It should be accordingly exercised and used for God made
it so for this End and Purpose. And if we did know before what would ^ome
hereafter, we should never do amiss; which especially holds true as to the
things to be manifested before us with open Face, after that this life is
ended. If we would receive into our minds a through knowledge of them, so ^s to
embrace and receive them, to be warned and take ^e warning, People would not be
so Destroyed and Per^sh as now they do. My People are Destroyed for lack of
^nowledge, Hos. 4. 6. This is to be understood of that E^ernal Destruction
spoken of in the Gospel from the pre^ence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power. To ^onvey this knowledge into the Minds of People, is the and of all
the Revelation of God; which is but an order^y Declaration of things which
shall shortly come to pass after that this life is ended. Now faith is the
substance of ^^ings hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; for it (...)
the very same as pertaining to invisible and future things, what Knowledge is
of visible and present things. ^aith is the Knowledge of Invisible and Future
Things. ^he great Necessity and Usefulness whereof hence appears, (...) that it
is so often said in the Gospel of Truth, That ^aith saves us; intimating
thereby, That if we did but ^now invisible and future things, in like manner as
we (...) now know visible and present things (as so we may) then (...) should
be certainly saved, and we should not miscarry (...) to all Eternity.

My beloved Brethren, it would be of incredible profit ^^d advantage to each of
us, to sometimes, yea often step ^wn into the Chambers of Death, and take a
Prospect of (...) Horrors of Doomsday, and to go forth in thought, ^o the
place of departed Souls, before our own Souls shall (...) there indeed, to the
intent so to order our Conversation ^^ght to which the promise is of being
shown the Salvati^^ of God, Psalm. 50. 23,) and to be such manner of persons,
(...) all holy Conversation and Godliness, during the few remai^g days of our
flesh, as we shall indeed wish and desire we (...) been, when we are let slip
and departed from it. Re^ember the great End of things, and thou shall never do
^^iss, Keep the Judgment of God continually in thine ^^e, when the dead, small
and great, shall arise and stand ^fore him, and thou shall never go much astray.

It is the manner of Beasts to think of, and be convers(...) only about present
things, which are Just before them; (...) to remember what is past, and to
apprehend what is (...) come, This is only what Reasonable Creatures can do,
(...) what Men and Women may do: Unless by their own (...) fullness, sloth and
ignorance, it is fulfilled on them what (...) written; Nevertheless Man being
in Honor, abides not: (...) is like the Beasts that Perish, Psalm. 49. 12. But
I will (...) on to add yet further, It is like unto the Immortal (...)
All-knowing God to Remember the past and to app(...) hend the future, yea, it
is an Image of his own Etern(...) for it does resemble even God, Who quickens
the De(...) and calls the things that be not, as tho they were, Romans (...)
17. For both past and future things are present unto (...) High and Lofty one
who inhabiteth Eternity. Which (...) ternity one defines to be, a Perpetual
now. Even the h(...) of our head are all Numbered, and not any thing is (...)
gotten before God: And as we Remember each thing our past Lives, both the Good
and the Evil, to more (...) the one and yet more eschew the other, we do
the(...) come nearer to his similitude and likeness: And so we(...) again, as
we cast an Eye forward upon the things that (...) to come; Hereby we make the
things that as yet be (...) to be as though they were, for shortly they will come
(...) pass; and it is but a little time, and He that shall co(...) will come,
and will not tarry.

Talk no more exceeding Proud, let not Arrogance (...) out of your mouth, for
the Lord is a God of Knowledge, (...) by him Actions are weighed. And so the
Lord is a God (...) Remembrance, and a God of Prescience and by him A(...) ons
are weighed. And seeing that Actions are weigh^^ by him, our Actions ought to
be weighed by us also, the Balance of the sanctuary and of his word, so that
(...) may not be found wanting.

SERMON III. ON
Isaiah XXXVIII. 2, 3. Then Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall and Prayed
unto the Lord; And said, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore.


Come now to show, and discourse,

1. What it is to walk before God in Truth. 2. With a perfect heart. 3. What it
is to do that which is good in his sight.
And then of the Consequent upon the whole; And Hezekiah wept sore.

As to the first, Remember, O Lord, how I have walk(...) before thee in Tr^th.

We Read in sundry places of Scripture of this Thing, ^^uth. But from these
words, this Doctrine will pre^^tly appear,

That it is the Duty of all who call themselves Servants of the Lord, to walk
before the Lord in Truth throughout the whole course of their Life.

So did Hezekiah, not for a Season, or at such a Ti(...) only, but throughout
the general Course, Bent and (...) nour of his Days; Even as long, or for the
most pa(...) he walked at all, he walked before the Lord in Truth.

Now the Scripture mentioning this Word Truth so (...) often, and in all places
it does recommend the same, (...) exhorts us to the Receiving and Practice
thereof: as als^ finds fault, and Reproves where it is wanting, or wh(...) the
Truth is not obeyed, Gal. 3. 1. Or People do not (...) cording to the Truth. We
may hereby see and un(...) stand, that exceeding great Stress and Necessity is
(...) hereon, in order to our Eternal Salvation and Happi(...) Open ye the
Gates, that the Righteous Nation, which (...) eth the Truth (in the Margent it
is Truths) may enter(...) Isa. 26. 2. That is, Enter into that strong City
menti(...) ed in the foregoing Verse, which the Lord has buil(...) and
prepared for such of the Inhabitants of the Eart(...) he shall judge and find
worthy. And here the word (...) Promise, and the Condition annexed, is, That is
must (...) to the Righteous Nation that keeps the Truth, or Tr(...) Which
word Keeps, denotes a constant heed, adhere(...) unto, and Observance
thereof. And not to chop(...) change with the wind, or to turn with the
Fashion, (...) titude and Course of this corrupt world; as to say (...) thing
is Truth to day, and another contrary unto, or (...) ferent from it, is Truth
at another time. No such ^^ter; for his Truth endures to all Generations,
Psalm. (...) Like God, its Author, with the Truth there is no V(...) bleness,
nor shadow of Turning. And like unto (...) Christ, who is the Way, the Truth
and the Life; it is (...) same yesterday, to day and for ever: So that this
man(...) them to be Children that are corrupters, they have fors(...) the Lord,
Isa. 1. 4. That they have Prevaricated, (...) turned aside from his Truth; They
are gone away (...) ward, who speak thus and thus concerning it, as the (...)
ner of many is in these our Days. And that they (...) not the Righteous Nation,
or the Righteous People, (...) keep the Truth, to whom this Precious Promise is
ma(...) for such kept it, or rather did by Chance happen(...) light thereon for
a Time, but they did not keep it (...) tinually (Blessed are they that keep
Judgment, and he (...) (...) Righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106. 3.) and so
they (...) no Lot, and Share, nor Right to enter into that ^^ong City which the
Lord has made for Judah and ^^rusalem, yea, for all the Inhabitants of the
Earth, who ^ould keep the Truth, or walk before him in Truth.

For this Good and Sweet Word of Promise is made ^t only to the Righteous
Nation, but to every and each ^^rticular Soul therein, that keeps the Truth.
So that ^^ese Two Consequences must necessarily arise, That even (...) the
Unrighteous Nation, which Keeps not the Truth, (...) those few Inhabitants
and Souls therein, who are ^^ghteous, and do Keep the Truth, shall enter into
the (...) of our God. Again, Suppose it were a Righteous (...)tion, and did
Keep the Truth, here the Denominati(...) is taken from the greater part, and it
is called a Righ^^^us Nation, where the Multitude, or most are so: But (...)
some ^ew therein were Unrighteous, and did not Keep (...) Truth, here the
Promise would be only to the for(...) sort, and not to the latter. The Reason
whereof is (...)dent, Because the Soul that sins, it shall die: The (...)
shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father, neither shall (...) Father bear the
Iniquity of the Son; the Righteousness ^he Righteous shall be upon him, and the
Wickedness of (...) Wicked shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 18. 20. So that as (...)
being an Inhabitant of a Righteous Nation, which keep(...) the Truth, will not
give thee Admission, or Entrance in(...) City of God, unless thou be Righteous,
and keep the (...) thy self. So although thou Live in an Unrighte(...)
Nation, (where most are so) which Keeps not the ^^uth, yet if thou art
Righteous thy self, and Keep (...) Truth, yet thou will enter into the City
of God, al^^^ugh never so few are besides. The Marginal Reading (...) Truths in
the Plural Number, shows; That it is not the (...) Keeping of One, or Some of
the Truths of God, but (...) Keeping all of them, which is requisite and
necessary, (...) we enter therein. It was the same Spirit of God ^^ich spoke
that in Isaiah 26. 2. as also which spoke that Isaiah 38. 3. and which probably
gave Hezekiah that ^^owledge, How necessary was Keeping the Truth, or the
(...)king before God in Truth, in order to enter into the Ci(...) of our God,
And therefore it was, that just at the Time he was to be removed out of the
City of Jerusalem, by Death; and he then would fain be removed up into the
Heavenly City: Therefore he addresses himself to God in the first Place,
Remember how I have walked before thee in Truth. For in very deed, as such a
Path, way or Road leads to such a Place, so the Truth leads to Heaven.

According as we may further Gather from what is elsewhere written, Lord, Who
shall abide in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy Holy Hill? He that
walks uprightly, and Works Righteousness and speaks the Truth in his
heart. Psalm. 15. 1. 2. So that whatever Truth is in our heart (Provided it be
the Truth of God and arising out of his Word) It ought to be spoken forth. Yea
the Plain and Simple Truth, the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth. For
although there is a common saying abroad in the World (agreeable to the Wisdom
of the Flesh, which is for Sloth, ease and Present safety) that all Truth is
not to be spoken; yet as sure as the Spirit of God in the Scripture last Quoted
does teach the way of Heaven, and lay down the foregoing Qualifications and
Conditions, which we must have and do before we come there, whatever Divine and
serious Truth is in our heart We must and ought to speak it, come what will
thereof, if we do not intend to be Disappointed of Heaven at the last. And if
the doing should bring Trouble or suffering on our loins (for this Objection
the Worldly Wise Man has against this Duty; and therefore he will refrain to
utter it) We must do it nevertheless, This being that manifold kind of
Trib^lation which we must go through, before we enter into the Kingdom of God.

Take another Scripture, how that the Truth ought (...) no wise to be
concealed, but it is to be spoken out. I ha^^ not hid thy Righteousness within
my heart; I have declar^ thy Faithfulness and thy Salvation; I have not
concealed (...) Loving Kindness and thy Truth from the Great Congregation Psalm.
40, 10. So that to speak constantly the Truth, (...) whole Truth, and nothing
but the Truth; and this (...) for a Day or two, or for a Week, Month or Year,
(...) throughout our whole Life, is pleasing and acceptable (...) the sight of
God our Savior, who would have (...) men to be saved, and to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth.

Notwithstanding all the Arts of Dissimulation, Deceit, Secrecy, Evasion,
Equivocation, or such like, by which Satan's Kingdom stands: (all which are
contrary to Simplicity and Godly Sincerity) I have observed in my Experience,
That to confess, and speak out the Truth of the matter in most instances,
Things have then succeeded more prosperously with me, than when I have done
otherwise. And the Truth has gained and been esteemed of more than all the
Little Arts of Falsehood. Honesty is the best Policy; and it is best to Live
within the straight Lines of Duty, and never to transgress at any time: So it
may be affirmed in all cases, It is the best way to speak the Truth, whatever
will be the Consequent thereof.

We may Read what a great Value and Estimation God himself puts upon it, Run ye
to and fro through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in
^^e Broad Places thereof, if ye can find a Man; if there (...) any that
executes Judgment, that seeks the Truth, and ^ will pardon it, Jer. 5. 1. By
which last is imported, as (...) seeking the Truth, would almost make atonement
and Exp^ation for other sins. His Spirit goes on to add, O Lord, Are not thine
Eyes upon the Truth? Verse 3. Even ^^e Eyes of Complacency, Delight and
Approbation herein.

The Time would fail me to mention all those seve^^l places of Scripture,
wherien the word Truth is spo^^n of. But in every one of them, it may be
observed, that very Excellent and Glorious Things are spoken ^oncerning the
Truth; and the Drift and Design there^f is to exhort the Inhabitants of the
Earth to think, ^eak and do according unto it all Times; Even ^^at they may
keep the Truth, speak the Truth in their ^eart, and Walk before God in Truth.

There has been a Proverbial saying, as if Thoughts ^^re free. Every one might
think what he would in (...) deep of his heart. But such people do not Know,
(...) rather, they do not consider, That they are to be ^^dged by the word of
God, which is a discerner of the Thoughts, and Intents of the Heart. Neither is
there any Creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked
and opened unto the Eyes of him with whom (...) have to do, Heb. 4. 13. But too
many in our days have improved this a little further; as if Talk and common
Discourse was free, and there was no account to be made, or given of it
hereafter. For how many Li^^ and Falsehoods are now uttered forth in common
Conversation? Whether it be in talking of News, or public affairs, According
to the side they rank themselves o^^ they do not much Regard whither the Thing
be true (...) false, which they Utter forth to Uindicate one side, an^ run down
or slander the other. And so it is in reference (...) to Common Neighbors,
Prejudice seldom or never speak (...) well, If it be concerning any Person
against whom the^ have an Enmity, Hatred or Grudge: They do not refu^^ to speak
Evil falsely of him, or to utter Reproaches an^ Revilings against him. As says
the Wiseman, In the Multitude of Words there wants not sin, so in the Wor^ and
talk of this Nature there is a Multitude of sin committed. Herein is found
true, And the Tongue is a Fir^ a World of Iniquity: So is the Tongue amongst
our Members; that it defiles the whole Body, and sets on Fire (...) course
of Nature, and it is set on Fire of Hell, Jam. 3. (...) Although the Common
talkers of the World do not mu^^ Regard this, yet whosoever truly fears God, He
dares (...) speak one false Word of another, although it be of (...) greatest
Enemy he has in the World. For he kno^ that speaking falsely of any one would
not be a walkin^ before God in Truth; and therefore he refrains from speaking
Evil falsely of any Man. So speak ye and so do, as the that must be Judged by
the Law of Liberty. James 2. 12.

There are other Instances of walking before God (...) Truth, as in the Worship
of God. And here we are (...) see well to it that our Worship be in Spirit and
in True(...) But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshipp^^ shall
Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth. For (...) Father seeks such to
Worship him. God is a Spirit, (...) they that Worship him, must Worship him in
Spirit and (...) Truth. John. 4. 23, 24. Notwithstanding all controv^^sies,
Disputes and different Congregations which are n^^ (...) this Nation and
throughout Christendom; yet as to this the Rule is safe, herein to do as Moses
did, who was admonished of God when he was about to make the Tabernacle. For
see (says he) that thou make all Things according to the Pattern showed to
thee in the Mount. Heb. 8. 5. And now that the Old Dispensation is abolished we
are to see that we Order all Things in our Worship according to the Pattern
showed to us in the Gospel. That we may in our Worship (which is a great thing
relating unto that God with whom we have to do) walk before God in Truth.

I do believe and speak after my Judgment, that there is not a way of Worship
now in this Nation, nor yet on the Earth, which is exactly according to the
Scriptures of Truth in all things, and in all things according to the Pattern
showed in the Gospel. And I suppose it will be so seen at the Day of Judgment,
wherein it will be Found and Rehearsed, That all have sinned and come short of
the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. So the several Churches and Congregations, the
several Saints and Servants of God have somewhat erred and come short of the
Spirituality and Truth of his worship, as it was in the Mind and Ordaining of
God, and as might be apprehended from out of his Book, for it may be observed
now adays, that in each Sect or Party (however they are Nicknamed,
Distinguished, or Termed) there is something which is good and true, and again,
there is somewhat which is Erroneous and Savours of Men.

Now as to all this, the faithful and knowing Soul, as ^he Soars up above all
the Ordinances of Religion, as they are managed now adays by the Worldly
Priesthood, they seeming to her cold, dull, low and f^at, and she apprehends
somewhat above them, and is for higher and more excellent seize: So the
same knowing and faithful Soul is vexed and dissatisfied; That she knows not
where on this Earth, the People do worship God in all thigns exactly according
to the mind of the Spirit; Nor where ^er self may turn to the People of a Pure
Language, that ^hey may Call upon the Name of the Lord with one Consent, Zeph.
3. 9. And she does thirst and desire earnestly, that she might once Worship the
Lord God her Invisible Creator so in the Congregations of his People, as they
were in the Days of a Old. But where are they so now? And she has great
Thought and Earnestness of Heart, when that time will again come, when it shall
be fulfilled what is Written, Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the Days of Old and in former Years, Mal. 3. 4.
Though here again it is to be thought, that as long as we are on this dark and
corrupt Earth, we shall never come to worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth
(still we ought to endeavor and to do the best that ever we can) till we come
to fall down on our Faces before him in Heaven, the Habitation of his Holiness,
where we shall see all things in the light of the Lord.

What will satisfy this perplexity and doubt, and desir^ of Soul as to this
great thing in the mean while, should be to this Effect and Purport, As the
Lord says unto (...) the Inhabitants of the Earth, Eschew Evil and do Goo^ 1
Pet. 3. 10, 1. So let him, or they that love salvation and would go to Heaven,
be sure to do this as much (...) ever they can, Avoid error and receive and
follow the truth in all the several instances thereof. As God himself speaks
on this wise, If thou shall learn to separate t^ Precious from the Vile, and to
put a difference between (...) Holy and Profane, then shall thou be meet to
come unto (...) Altar. So here it may be reasoned and applied, if the know
and also shall carefully and constantly do t^ same, to take out the truth from
that Multiplicty (...) Error which is abroad in the world, like as is the
gath^^ ing of Gold or Silver from out of the Dross, or Hon^ from the Wax; If
thou know to put a difference between truth and falsehood, so as to gather
and receive (...) first into thy heart, and cast away and not admit the (...)
there sort, then thou shall be meet for to come with (...) ceptance on the Altar
of the Lord, Thou shall enter i^ his City, the Holy of Holies, the highest
Heavens, (...) to his presence and to his own Divine Majesty. Be (...) to
observe this Rule in the worship of God, Eschew (...) falsehood and error
therein, and receive and do accord(...) to the truth, according to the very
best of thy Knowledge and Understanding, and with all thy Heart, (...) and
Will; and then thy worship will be accepted with the Lord, and in thy worship
also thou will walk before the Lord in Truth.

Another Explication of walking before the Lord in Truth, is, to walk in such a
way as is Butted and Bounded in his word, which is Truth. This seems to be the
most proper Acceptance and Understanding thereof, for to make Gods written
Word and Revelation our Guide and Rule throughout the whole Course of our Life,
is a walking before the Lord in Truth, and it is the true and right way to
Heaven, as to go through or by such and such places, is the way to such a City
or the like. The Word and Truth of God are near one and the same thing.
Sanctify them through thy Truth, Thy word is Truth, John 17. 17. And so the
walking according to the Word of God, or the having our Conversation according
to the Gospel, is to walk before God in Truth. And so it is reciprocally, To
walk before the Lord in Truth, is to walk according to the Word of God: Every
Variation, or Deviation from it is a false way. Therefore I esteem all thy
Precepts concerning all things to be Right, and I hate every false way.

It was both a Puzzling and also a sudden Question of Pilate, What is Truth? To
me it seems to be the expressing forth the Nature of things as they are, with
the Connection between themselves and how they pertain to us Men. Things again
are divided into things present and things to come. Now to know the very Nature
of both these, and how they belong unto, and are to be had by us, What is Good
for us, and what is Evil for us, so as to choose the Good and Refuse the Evil,
this is Truth. Here again, to make a Right Judgment and Choice for our selves,
so as to pursue the best of Ends (viz. Future Blessedness and Glory) by Lawful
and Right means, This a walking before the Lord in Truth.

And so it may be conceived of in other like Instances.

As to the Second Particular, What it is to walk before the Lord with a perfect
heart. Paul gives the Character of some Jews, that they had a Good mind toward
God. And here, Put and Conceive this together along with that, a good mind
toward God, and to walk before him with a perfect Heart, do contain the Sum
and Excellency, and Attainment of all Religion, so as to make it accepted with
God; for what would God have more of his Creatures, then that they should have
a good mind toward him, and walk before him with a Perfect Heart?

Before we show what this last is, it may be observed, how that as it is
written, The Eyes of all wait upon thee. So the thoughts of all Men and Women,
although many of them are cumbred about many things pertaining to this Life, and
though too many do forget God; yet still the Thoughts of every one of them more
or less, are toward their Invisible Creator. Namely, That it is with them in
this present State, according as he orders and disposes. But especially the
great thought and searching of heart is, what he will do to them in the future
State. Says the Psalmist, I Remembered God and was troubled; I complained and
my Spirit was overwhelmed. Even so, all other things we could bear, for they
are little and soon pass away: But as God was the Creator of our whole Being
at first; so upon him does depend our whole future Being (thence does arise up
great thought and searching of Heart) Wither the same shall be Happy or
Miserable, Good or Evil unto us. And many times from the fear and apprehension,
that it will be evil and miserable to the Creature, as to Futurity, thence does
arise Enmity and Hatred toward their Creator. And you that were sometimes
Alienated and Enemies through wicked works, yet now has he Reconciled, Col. 1.
21. And so according as People have been sinners or sinful, so Proportionably
their Minds are Evil, or Evil affected toward God, out of a slavish fear and
dread, least he should in^^ct Wrath, Punishment and Misery on them hereafter.
But Contrariwise, as they obey his Commandments and do the things that please
him, they have Hope and Expectation of good things to come; and thence does
(...) in them a good mind toward God; which does sh^^ and express it self
forth in Obedience, Ho^our, love and Good will toward him. Which two last
again, because none can give unto God (For who has given to him and it shall
he recompensed to him again) is ^^ewn ^^^th to ^^e Saints that are on the
Earth, and to the excellent (as the Righteous is more excellent then his
Neighbor) who come nearer to the likeness of God then others of their fellow
Creatures. All the Acts of worship or outward Religion signify nothing, and
they do not avail as to receive any thing from the Lord, without this one thing
of a good mind toward God. Which is showed particularly in 1 Cor. 13. Where it
is said, Though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and so it is of all the
Gifts and Good works in the world, without Charity (which in the Greek Language
signifies Love, or this Good mind toward God) it all Profits nothing. So again
it is on the other hand, if any has this good mind toward God, or comes to
walk before him with a perfect heart, although he does not altogether abound so
much in Acts of outward Religion (although he will constantly wait upon God in
all his Ordinances, as hearing of his word is one of them) nor yet make so
great an outward show therein, I will not Reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or
thy Burnt-offerings to have been continually before me, Psalm. 50. 8. Yet God is
now better pleased with such an one, and he shall be sooner saved hereafter,
then if another should like Anna, Depart not from the Temple, and serve God
with Fastings and Prayers. Night and Day, Luke 2. 37. Or be continually Reading
in the Bible, and do all this out of a slavish Mercenary Principle of saving
the Soul; but all the same while they have not a good mind toward God, nor
walk before him with a perfect heart, as there have been many such outward
Worshippers and mere Devotionists, especially in the Romish and our National
Church. To do Judgment and Justice is more Acceptable unto the Lord then
Sacrifice.

To walk before God with a Perfect heart, denotes and requires, That it be
whole and complete, and that nothing be wanting. And so when we Read often in
Scripture of serving or seeking the Lord with all their Heart, or with their
whole Heart. As again on the other side, Many are Reproved, and found Fault
with, Because their Heart was not whole with God, nor continued they steadfast
in his Covenant; This is the same in signification with that of walking before
the Lord with a Perfect Heart. We Read often in the Books of Samuel, Kings and
the Chronicles where the History of the Kings of Judah and Jerusalem is
recorded, That Character is given of some, That they did follow and cleave unto
the Lord with their whole Heart, but most did not. But there was some
Exception, or Reserve, wherein Part of their Heart did go after Idols, or their
own Imaginations. So is the case with the common sort of People. Each of us
have a Good Obedient heart toward God in some Things, but not in all Things,
and so it is not a Perfect heart: For that is Perfect to which Nothing is
Wanting, but in the hearts of such is Wanting alike Obedience to the Law of God
in other Things, as what they do Render and Yield. And so it is as to the Word
of God, The heart of People does Love and relish the Word of God in some
Things, but not in all Things; for according as either People have kept or
Transgressed against it, so they either like or conceive an Enmity, or a Rising
and Rebellion in their hearts against it. The Drunkard or Sottish Person does
not Really and Inwardly Love all those Texts of Scripture, which make against
that sin, or which Threaten a W^ and Misery to come to those who follow it. So
it is with the Unrighteous or Unclean Person, They have secret inward rancour
and Indignation against that Part of the Word of God, which finds out and
speaks against their several and Particular sins. We may hereby somewhat
apprehend what exceeding Evil there is in sin. As it is written, Three
Shepherds also I cut off in one Month, and my Soul lothed them, and their Soul
also abhorred me. Zech. 11. 18. This was their sin and fault. So the case
stands between God and the sinner, The Soul of God lotheth the sinner, and
the Soul of the sinner also abhors God. This should be a prevailing
consideration for every one to stand in Aw and sin not: Because that Each Act
of Advised, Deliberate and continued sin carries and contains in it a lothing
and abhorring of God himself. As again God lothes his own Creature, the Work of
his own hands, as he sees sin in them. This Lothing and abhorring either of the
Creator toward the Creature, or of the Creature toward the Creator, is as
directly opposite and contrary to the having a Good mind toward God, as
Darkness is unto Light. It is also contrary unto a Perfect heart, for this is
an Imperfection to a Witness; Yea such an Imperfection that unless it be
remedied and taken away, it will lay the Creature in Punishment and Misery.

As for mine own Part, although in my common or week Day Life and conversation,
I have spoken and done Many Things, which are contrary unto, different from,
and not according to the Pure Word of God; yet I do not therefore dare to Hate
or Reproach that same Word; Nor yet (for none does so as to the Word
abstractedly) to the Person of him who ministers or speaks forth the same
Word against this my Sin and Error. For I know, this would make the Guilt of
my Sin seven times yet Greater, and Consequently Uengeance would be taken on me
sevenfold when the Lord comes to Punish the World for their Evil and the
wicked for their Iniquity. But I Judge it safe to lay my Hand upon my Mouth,
and hold my Peace; and where I see my self faulty to Endeavor to mend. And
where I have not already attained, neither am already Perfect. Phil. 3. 12.
There to Go on to Perfection. Heb 6. 1. Avoiding the Error and deceit of the
World herein of always Purposing and Resolving and not performing accordingly;
or of complaining and yet not mending: But we should still Press forwards and
Undeavour Unfeignedly so to do. Not to attain unto absolute Perfection is the
Infirmity of the Flesh; but not to endeavor after it is the fault and failure
of the Spirit. Here again it must be acknowledged, that to walk before the Lord
with a Perfect Heart, is sooner said then done. For it is the whole which God
requires of Man, It being the first and Great Commandment, Thou shall Love the
Lord thy God, With all thy Soul, and with all thy Strength and with all thy
Mind. This Particle, All, being Annexed to all the Faculties and Powers
thereof, makes it a Perfect Heart: For so it is, where is all, or the whole of
a Thing.

Besides this Appeal which Hezekiah makes unto God in his Pining Sickness not
by way of self Commendation, but as a stay and support to his Mind under that
outward Evil of Body, The Spirit it self gives a very Good Character of him,
And he did that which was Right in the sight of the Lord according to all that
David his Father did. He trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him
was none like him, among all the Kings of Judah, nor any that were before him.
2. Kings. 18. 3, 5. So that his doing according to all that David his Father
did (who was a Man after Gods one heart in all Things saving the matter of
Vriah the Hittite) Thus in reality and in Truth Hezekiah did walk before the
Lord with a perfect Heart.

By this also may be seen that the Spirit of God keeps a Register of each Man
or VVomans Life. And God who is no Respecter of Persons, but in every Nation he
that fears him and works Righteonsness is accepted with him; Who accepts
not the Person of Princes, nor regards the Rich more then the Poor, for they
are all the Work of his hands, does in alike manner keep a Book (Put thou my
Tears into thy Bottle, are not these things noted in thy Book?) Wherein the
several deeds here done in the Body of all the Particular Men and Women of all
Generations and Countries, from the greatest of them unto the least of them,
are written and noted all one, as we see it written thus and thus, of the
several Kings of Judah and Jerusalem, how they did carry it toward the Lord
God; for so we may read it thus or thus, recorded of the Inhabitants of the
Earth in the Scriptures of Truth.

There is an Emphatical and Pertinent Scripture to our present purpose, in Hos.
10. 2. Their heart is divided, now they shall be found faulty. A divided heart
is not a perfect heart; and as long as it remains thus divided we hence see,
that it will be found and pronounced faulty, that is defective or wanting in
the sight, Estimation, Judgment and Account of God. And yet alas! Is not this
the case of us all, or of most of us, Is not our heart divided, one part is
toward God, and another part is for the World, and for the Men and Things
therein? According to what Paul speaks of himself, So then with the mind I my
self serve the Law of God, but with the flesh the Law of sin, Romans 7. 25. He
that does not observe and feel the like within himself, is Blind, Ignorant and
knows nothing as he ought to know. Does not one part of our heart Savor the
things of God? And again, another part of our heart does Savor the Things of
Men. I discern and experience it so in my self. Now this is but a divided
heart, which God in Hosea finds fault with. And when he says in the Proverbs,
My Son give me thine heart, It may be truly reasoned and concluded, that he
will have a whole heart or none. And hereupon the word of Instruction and
Exhortation arises on this wise, that this same divided heart must be cut off
(Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your hearts, that ye be no more
stiffnecked) or rather changed and renewed, that all the heart may be brought
into entire obedience, Subjection and Conformity to God, till it becomes a good
and perfect heart which He is well pleased with and delights in and will accept
off, for want whereof it is, that we neither find God, nor yet does he hear our
Prayers. The heart hankers after some Carnal Lust, or other Sin, or Act of
Disobedience (Consider of this thoroughly and amend thy ways and thy doings O my
Soul) and therefore the Lord has withdrawn himself, and hides his Face, and
does not manifest himself unto us as He d^d in former Days. But your Iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his Face from
you that He will not hear, Isa. 59. 2. So that where we cry and the Lord does
not hear, or where we do not find such an Answer and Return to Prayer as we
have experienced heretofore, there let us examine our selves, whither there be
not some Sin or Iniquity (which is the Cloud that hinders, that our Prayers do
not pass through) in us, which God is displeased with. Here our heart is
divided and found faulty; for with some part of it, it obeys or serves some Sin
or Lust, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over us,
Isa. 26. 13. And we do not seek or serve him our whole heart. But if from
thence thou shall seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find him, if thou shall
seek him with all thy heart and with all thy Soul, Deuteronomy. 4. 29. And ye shall
seek me and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart, and I
will be found of ^ou says the Lord, Jer. 29. 13, 14. In both these observable
Scriptures is contained the inseparable condition ^nnexed, to which the promise
is made of acceptance from the Lord, If thou shall seek him with all thy Heart
and with all thy Soul. There must be no Exception or Reserve, and nothing in
the least is to be taken out of the heart, for it to be fixed or employed
about, saving God only and the things pertaining to his Kingdom. This is to
walk before the Lord with a perfect heart, which did yield to Hezekiah so much
inward comfort, as streamed forth in outward Tears when He laid upon his Bed of
Sickness. It will do the same also to every one besides that shall do the like
things. As we have a further Example and confirmation hereof in another Serva^^
of the Lord, who thus witnesses of himself, That we were (...) pressed out of
measure, above strength; insomuch that we despaired even of Life. But we had
the Sentence of Dea^^ in our selves (this was a sad Case and Extremity. Bu^ he
goes on to add sweetly) for our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, That in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of Go^ we have had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor. 1. 9.
10. 12. Hence may be seen again the absolute necessity of (...) Godly Life
foregoing, which is to yield this rejoicing. Hence also suspect and tremble at,
and do not for Te(...) Thousand Worlds trust thy Soul upon that uncertainty o^
huddling up the matter by a Deathbed Repentance which will Administer Horror,
or only Carnal Peace an^ Stupidity; which will be after followed by the gnawing
(...) the Worm which shall never die. For such can never make that comfortable
Reflection as Hezekiah did in the Text, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how
I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect heart, an^ have done
that which is good in thy sight.

This is the Third thing proposed to be spoken unto.

And here I would recommend to all such as shall Rea(...) this (which may also
be applied unto the two foregoin^ particulars) That whatever ye do meet with in
the cour^^ of your Reading the Scriptures (which were given to ma^^ us wise
unto Salvation) concerning doing good, Be here (...) structed that this is
written for your Admonition also. T^^ Time would fail me to speak of all those
many and (...) veral Texts of Scripture, which speak of this Thing (...) doing
Good. Now as all Making or Preaching of Sermon (if they be managed aright) are
but a Reasoning out (...) the Scriptures concerning the same Things: So if the
Hearers or Readers of the Word would also compare Place with Place; and
narrowly mind and observe from within themselves what further Significative and
true Thoughts do arise from thence, they might be Preachers also, at least to
themselves, that is to their own Hearts or Consciences. In which sense they
might Hear a Sermon, or rather a still Voice within them, dictating to Good and
Testifying against Evil all the week long.

Whereas I could bring more out of this Treasury of Divine Truths as pertaining
to this Subject, I shall Instance ^ut in two or three Texts of Scripture, that
being Sufficient, for in the Mouth of two or three Witnesses every Word shall
be established. The first is, Psalm. 37. 3. Trust in ^he Lord, and do good, so
shall thou dwell in the Land, and ^erily thou shall be ^ed. Whereby is shown
forth, That Good is not only to be done at the time of our Death, but even in
the very midst of and throughout the time, we dwell in the Land, that is on
this Earth where we now Inhabit. And by the first and last words of this Verse,
Trust in the Lord, verily thou shall be fed. The Holy Ghost does hereby tacitly
anticipate and meet with an Objection or Surmise in heart, as if People should
think or ^ay, that if they did Good, they should be impoverished and come to
want themselves. But here by Arming their minds beforehand, with Trust in the
Lord, which is a relative Term and Presupposes danger and difficulty, through
which God will carry them for all; and then comes in at the close thereof,
Verily thou shall be fed. This again satisfies the heart, not so much of the
Natural Man who does not altogether so well discern these things, ^ut it does
the Spiritual Man and Faithful Soul, who does discern and lay hold of the
promise so far, that though if He should do so much good as He would, He must of
necessity ^ell all his Estate, or give all his Goods to feed the Poor (for that
of Almsgiving seems to be the doing of good here meant and intended) yet
nevertheless, He will do some good according to his Ability; And also withal
observe the Rules of Justice to his Kindred and Family, as well as those of
Mercy and Almsgiving to the Poor. For this is a constant Rule, that we should
not break one Commandment of God, to yet more fulfill another; Nor yet jostle
and thrust out one Duty out of (...) greater Zeal for the observance of
another. For as ha^^ been aforesaid, We should walk before God with a perfe^^
heart: Even so good should be done Universally without doing it, only in some
things and not in other things. (...) Good Man will guide his Affairs with
Discretion, Psalm. 11^ 5. So He is good in all Relations, and will approve hi^
self Universally so in all things, in all Times and Place^ and in reference to
all Persons.

The Second Scripture which I shall Instance in, is, Jo^^ 5. 29. They that have
done Good shall come forth un^^ the Resurrection of Life. This again is to be
Understoo^ of having done good throughout the course of our Life h^^ on Earth.
So wonderfully much does the Scripture spe^^ of and make for this Thing of Good
Life. And Hezeki^^ knowing this by the same Spirit, that the having do^^ Good
would entitle to the Resurrection of Life, like as (...) Man who is a drowning
or sinking does catch hold (...) somewhat to save and Preserve himself, so he
does he(...) fitly and properly make his Appeal unto God on this wi(...) now he
was a surrendering up his Life into his hands, o(...) of a Desire and
Expectation that a Better and more End(...) ring Life may be Given unto him
instead thereof. Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I have done t^^ which
is Good in thy Sight.

The Third Scripture which I think convenient and necessary to allege for this
Purpose is Acts. 10. 38. H^ God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost
and wi^^ Power; who went about doing Good, and healing all t^^ were oppressed
of the Devil; for God was with him. T^^ same Jesus is elsewhere called the
Prince of Life. Acts. ^. 15. in the Margent it is, the Author of Life.

By which may be seen what a Relation and tenden^^ the doing of Good has unto
Life. Now Jesus Chr(...) not only suffered, but also lived an Example, that
(...) should follow his steps. And this Place in Acts. 10. 38, so written, to
the Intent, that every one of us who wou^^ Love and Inherit Eternal Life. (What
Man is He t^^ desires Life? Answer is made, Depart from Evil and Good, Psalm.
34. 12, 14.) Should in our several Respecti^^ Stations, and according to our
several Ability and Capacity, go about and do good also; for so far as we do
this, God is with us. Whereby again may be seen, and perceived the Goodness of
that Supreme and Almighty Being. Who went about doing good, and healing all
that were oppressed of the Devil.

Hence again, We may understand what a doing of good is; for as the being
oppressed of the Devil is an Evil, so to have that same Evil either removed or
taken away, or ^ured and healed, this is a doing good. By the way, the worst
oppression of the Devil is, when Sin and Guilt is brought into the Conscience
through his Temptations or Instruments. And so it is, as to all other evils or
harms whatever, the either taking them away, or curing and heal^ng them is a
doing good. It is written of him that did the greatest and all the good that
was ever done to Mankind. When the Even was come they brought unto him ^any
that were possessed with Devils, and He cast out the Devils with his word, and
healed all that were Sick, That (...) might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Isaiah the Prophet, ^aying, Himself took our infirmities and bare our
sicknesses, Mat. 8. 16, 17. The very Words in Isaiah are these, Sure^^ He has
born our Griefs and Carried our Sorrows, Isa. 53. (...). And it being after
added, The Lord has laid on him ^e Iniquity of us all, for He shall bear their
Iniquities and He ^^re the sin of Many, Verse 6. 11, 12. This goes further ^ven
to the Fountain Head, the Original cause and ^ource of Infirmities, Sickness,
Griefs and Sorrows; for ^^n and Iniquity is the cause of them all. This is
effectu(...) and sound work. And as sin is the greatest and only ^vil: so to
cure, heal, take away, Remedy, or someway or ^ther to provide against sin, is
doing the greatest Good. So ^^at to Instruct the Ignorant is a doing good, yea,
and (...) resemblance to him who was the Author and Finisher of ^^r faith, who
went about doing good, for we Read that ^^e sat down and taught his Disciples
and the Multitude. ^his is a kind of doing the greatest good; for it is a doing
^^od unto the Immortal Soul, the more excellent part of us, ^^d not only to the
dying Body. Brethren, if any of you do err from the Truth, and one convert him,
let him know that (...) which converteth the sinner from the Error of his Way,
she save a Soul from Death and shall hide a Multitude of (...) James. 5. 19 20.
And so by the Words of Gods Gra^^ and Truth to Persuade, Testify and Exhort
People from their Sinful and Ungodly courses, From living in (...) religion and
contempt of God, as that if continued (...) would involve them into the
Greatest of Evils, So con(...) quentially it must be the Greater Good to
dissuade th^^ from it. And then Giving Alms to the Poor, and M(...) string
comfort to the Sorrowful, in as much as Pove(...) and Sorrow are sore Evils,
and such like are instances (...) doing Good. The more and Greater Good People
(...) here, the Greater and more full Reward they will rece(...) hereafter. As
again it is on the other worse hand, (...) more sin any one do commit, It is a
treasuring up Wr(...) to themselves against the day of Wrath; which
consider(...) on should be a prevailing motive to cease from the (...) and do
the other as much as ever we can.

Remember how I have done that which is Good in (...) sight. Now all Things are
in the sight of God. But (...) do that which is Good in his sight, may have a
twof(...) Sense and Meaning, either to do Things in order and (...) tention
unto God; and upon that Respect it is that we(...) Good, because God commands,
requires and is well pl(...) ed therewith, when we do it as unto the Lord and
(...) as unto Men. As also what will appear Good in (...) sight of the Lord now
and by his Judgment hereaf(...) For it is one Thing to do Good as in the sight
of (...) Lord and another as in the sight of Men. For the (...) sees not as
Man sees. That which is highly este(...) amongst Men is an Abomination in the
sight of the (...) And so it runs and may be conceived contrariwise, (...)
which is highly esteemed by the Lord God, is le(...) ed and despised amongst
Men, For these call that (...) which is good in the sight of the Lord. And
again, They (...) that Godo which is Evil, Isa. 5. 20. But a Godly Heze(...) or
that Soul like unto Godly Hezekiah, does (...) as in the sight of the Lord, and
not as (...) Men.

As the Lord said unto Sarah, At the time appointed will I return to thee,
according to the time of Life, Genesis 18. 14. So at the time appointed when the
great Day of his Judgment is come, will God Judge every one of us according to
the Time of Life, and as it was with us at such a Time of Life and such a Time
of Life, (of some we shall give a better Account then of others) so as to take
in the whole Term of Life, from the time that we had the first Knowledge of
Good and Evil, unto the Day of our Death.)

SERMON IV. ON
Isaiah XXXVIII. 2, 3. Then Hezekiah turned his Face toward the Wall and Prayed
unto the Lord; And said, Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee in Truth, and with a Perfect Heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight, and Hezekiah wept sore.


THAT we do walk all our Days in the sight of the Lord, and whatever we do it
is in the sight of the Lord, and how that God will Judge us for all the
Thoughts, Words and Actions of our whole Life, even from the very time that we
had the Knowledge of Good and Evil, are most forcible considerations, what
manner of Persons we ought to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness, in all
Obedience and Righteousness, In Purity and Innocence, and Uprightness of Life.
In all thy work and in whatever thine hand finds thee to do, in thy
Feastings, Sportings, or Recreations, Do thou awfully and constantly Remember
that God sees thee and God will Judge thee. And after any thing is over and
past, whither it be an Act of Good and Duty, or else an Act of Sin or Evil,
This know that the same is passed over into a thing to be Judged off; and for
the same thou shall receive Reward or Punishment, Gain or Loss at the last Day.
O that we could once have a lively, true and through sense, how that we Live
and Act all along in the sight of the unseen God; whom though we do not see, yet
He sees us. And then we should be as careful to please and approve our selves
unto him in all things, as ever any Servant was to his Master, any Maiden to
her Mistress, or as any Poor Person is to his Rich and Bountiful Benefactor, or
as we study to please those whom we most Love and are most beholden unto. As
God stands behind the skreen of the visible Creatures and always looks on
the Inhabitants of the Earth: So we should abstract from these visible things
and outward objects, and with the Eyes of our understanding being enlightened
and turned inward, We should look toward our Maker; and as both our selves and
all our ways are in his sight (He sees the way that I take) even so we should
with the Eye of Faith continually see him that i^ Invisible. And this is to
walk before God, or with God as the Scripture does express it and recommend the
same unto us. And Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took him, Genesis 5.
24. Even so for us severally to walk with God, whilst we dwell here on the Face
of the Earth, that when here we shall be no more (as it is evident that here we
do not continue by Reason of Death God may take us unto himself into the
highest Heaven for evermore. It was not without good Reason, that when Hezekiah
had received the sentence of Death which is a removal from this Earth, that He
should then in a most proper manner make his appeal unto God o^ this wise,
Remember O Lord, how I have walked before the in Truth, and with a Perfect
heart, and have done the which is good in thy Sight; For He knew this to be the
ready way by his having done thus, that now He w^ to be taken away from the
City of Jerusalem, for G^^ to take him up to himself into the Habitation of
(...) Holiness.

The same God, who in wisdom made and orders (...) things, sent us so many
Days here on Earth on purpo^^ to call us to an Account and to Judge us for the
sam^ The consideration and inference whereof should be this (...) to our
selves, Namely, That we should so live every Day as we will averr and justify,
and stand by the same at the Bar of God, and as we will Answer for it at his
Judgment Seat. For if we are resolved and purposed on this wise, then we should
do nothing but what is Lawful and Right; For when God enters into Judgment,
nothing but what is so, shall be justified in his sight. And whether we are of
that foregoing Purpose and Resolution of mind or not, yet still we must
unavoidably give Account and be Judged for the several deeds done in the Body,
whether they be Good or Evil. We must be Judged as certain as that we must die,
which again is as certain as that we now live.

This is the difference between the Godly and Righteous, and the Wicked,
Ungodly, or Ignorant People of the World; The former part so live, as thinking
and knowing before hand that they must be judged; and therefore they are for
preparing and making up their Account before hand, They are for doing all
things that they may stand in that Day, and they do entreat their Judge in the
mean while for his Favor, Acceptance and Reconciliation, and Acquital against
the Great Day of Everlasting Decision. But the Wicked, Ungodly and Ignorant do
live at Random, and in Forgetfullness, or Unmindfullness of the future
Judgment; They being resolved on their way (I have loved strangers and after
them I will go) They do things at a venture, and they run the risque of the
future Judgment; and so they are in danger to be broken, snared and taken, to
fall and be Condemned in that Day. In a word, Let People do whatever they will
in the mean time, yet the Great Day of Judgment will surely come and will not
tarry one moment longer beyond the appointed Time. This we are now warned of
again before hand, that when it shall come we may have the less excuse or Plea,
that of this and of every Day of our Life after Years of Discretion, we are not
only in danger, but we shall be certainly called to an Account.

As the Wise Man says, Remember the End and thou shall never do amiss. So it
may be applied and reasoned a little further, keep the Judgment of God always
in thine Eye, and thou shall never go much astray.

And Hezekiah wept sore.
In the Margent it is, with great weeping. Here it may be ^urmised and asked,
What need had Hezekiah to we^^ sore, or with a Great Weeping, seeing that He
had led so Good a Life, which must needs Administer much Comfort and Rejoicing?
But a manifold Reason may be assigned thereof, as will appear in the Sequel of
our Discourse. One is from that Natural fear and dread which all Men (both Good
and Bad) have at the Instant Approaches of Death; especially those under the
Old Testament Dispensation (as Hezekiah was under that) wherein future Life and
Immortality were not so clearly and distinctly revealed and made known, as
under the Gospel.

Although in the midst of Youth, Life, Health and Vigor, we can think of Death
without Weeping. Probably a Melancholy sigh, or a secret inward and sad
though^ may arise at the serious and through apprehension thereof. But when
indeed it shall stand before us like an Arme^ Man or Messenger, and say to the
Soul, Come along with me, then it is no easy matter to Refrain our Voice from
Weeping and our Eyes from Tears, for that our works shall be judged; and we are
going away from the Land, when we had if not all, yet most things comfortable
and convenient for us, tho^ none truly satisfactory unto us. A^ in the midst of
Prosperity, we do not know through^ what Adversity is; and as in the midst of
fullness we cannot then so well feel what Pinching Hunger is, even s^ in the
midst of Life, Though we are in Death, that is, subject unto and drawing toward
Death; yet then we know not thoroughly what Death is. The Ruffling Royster,
(...) the Jolly Merry Man of the World, may cast a Contemptuous Smile or Pish
at the Hearing of Death when it (...) afar off from him; but when it shall
approach nigh an^ touch him, when He shall be Death struck, and the shadow of
Death shall sit upon his Eyelids, then his force Smile, or Proud Scorn and
Disdain, will be turned into Weeping and Real inward Sorrow. If People will be
ever serious, they will be so when they come to lie on the Deathbeds, and as
Death does Naturally fix the Coun(...) nance, so it is evidently and sensibly
seen to work Peop^^ into a great Composedness and Seriousness of Spirit: For
then indeed it is a weighty and near affecting thing, that the Soul is going
about when she is a going away into Life Eternal, or into Everlasting
Punishment; when she has but one Cast or Throw, which is to make the Final and
Everlasting Decision for Endless Happiness or Misery. We see by Poor
Malefactors when they come to receive the due reward of their deeds, what a
crying and howling will they make at the Place of Execution; and this they do
not so much for the Pains which they shall undergo, In being cut off hastily
and violently from this Land of the living, but out of a fearful Expectation of
yet greater misery to come. But Hezekiahs weeping sore, or great weeping was
not for this Reason, for his Life was True, Perfect and Good; So that after
him, none was like unto him among all the Kings of Judah. And God that cannot
lie, has now under the Gospel promised Eternal Life to the patient continuance
in well doing, Romans 2. 7. But probably Hezekiah did not know of this, as the
Saints and Servants of God of latter Ages do. And then like one who is turned
and dispossessed out of a Cottage, may at first take it in Indignation and
Vexation, when He then knows not that it is in order to be removed into a
Palace or ^^ner House, as He afterward finds it. So Hezekiah then not
knowing, that if He should be taken out of his Earthly Palace, that He should
be received up into Heaven the City of the Great King which would be much
better, He might probably think it Irksome and a Loss to be taken from the
other. That Hezekiah was partly Ignorant of thus much, appears from his own
Words in the following Part of this Chapter, For the Grave cannot Praise thee,
Death cannot Celebrate thee; They that go down to the Pit cannot Hope for thy
Truth. This last He spoke as one under that Dispensation from the Mount Sinah
which gendreth Bondage, Gal. 4. 24. And so this his Distrust and Ignorance did
Gender Tears and Weeping in him. But by your leave Good Hezekiah, we under the
Gospel can contradict the latter part of your saying, for from thence we do
believe, yea we know and are assured, that they which go down to the Pit, can
and do Hope for Gods Truth. And Notwithstanding it is Written in the Old
Testament, For in Death there is no Remembrance of thee. Yet now Christ has
abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to Light through the Gospel,
we can truly contradict that saying also, for in Death there (...) most
Remembrance of God; For the Remembrane^ which we have of God in this life is
much less and as (...) Remembrance in Comparison of what Remembrance of God we
shall have in and after our several Deaths. An^ we now can give a Plain and
Satisfactory Answer in the Affirmative, although by its being asked so short it
seems to imply a strong Negation, for we know that God will show wonders to the
Dead (as that will be a wonderfu^^ thing indeed to fulfill in a litteral sense
in the last Day what is Written in Ezekiel. 37. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.) And the Dead will
Arise and Praise God, Psalm. 88. 10. And ou^ flesh also shall rest in Hope, for
it shall be raised up an^ rendered entire flesh again, Notwithstanding it will
for some time be left in the Grave and see Corruption, as the Holy one of God
did not, when Jesus Christ shall change our vile Body, that it may be Fashioned
like unto his Glorious Body according to his working, whereby He is able even
to subdue all things unto himself.

Here is to be observed that Good and Godly Mind o^ Hezekiah and of David; for
these did weep and were grieved at Death, because they thought that thereby
the^ should be hindered from Praising of God, and telling (...) his Truth and
Wonderful Works, They thought the^ should be deprived of his Worship, and from
having an^ Sense and Remembrance of him. Which as to be wi^^ God is the
greatest Happiness of Man, especially to the Soul that seeks and serves him,
who loves and delights in him and chooses the things that please h^^ So to
be without God in the World, or to be turned in^^ nothing after Death in
Respect of God, this is the greatest misery of Man, especially if it be
considere^ what an Unexpressible Benefit, Comfort and Satisfaction ^t is to be
with God. Herein the Godly and Graciou^ Soul, is quite opposite and perfectly
contrary unto the Ungodly and Graceless Person; for the first cannot bea^ or
away with the thoughts of being without God, bot^ in this Life and in the Life
to come. Nothing less wi^^ suffice that Soul then to be with God for ever, and
to have God for her Portion for ever. But the Ungodly and Graceless Person as
He is An alien from the common wealth of Israel and without God in the World;
For he makes it his own wretched and willful choice to be so. And herein though
He was made in Honor, capable to know God, to serve him and enjoy him
hereafter, yet by not understanding and doing thereafter, He does become like
the Beasts that Perish. So such an one would desire with all his heart, to be
without God in the other World also, for He fears and apprehends, and expects
no Good from him, but Evil; For in the other World He will be either the God of
Mercy, or the Lord to whom Vengeance belongs. He will be so one of these two
ways, unto all the Reasonable Inhabitants of the Earth. And who would not fear
him in this World, shall feel him in the next. Those who in this Life did
despise and would not accept of his Goodness, shall partake and be sensible of
his severity in the next. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
Living God.

Every Sinner or Ungodly Person is a Fool, as may be demonstrated particularly.
And as it is Written, The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God. Even so
they that are corrupt and have done abominable works, the Sinner and Ungodly,
the Hypocrite do indeed wish and desire that there was no God, for they would
not have God Reign over them. But that same wish and desire of theirs is as
Vain and Impossible, as it is yet further provoking and makes their sin yet
exceeding more sinful in the sight of him, with whom we have to do. What
strange Imaginations do sinners conceive in their minds, that they may not
receive in themselves a Recompense meet for their Evil deeds; which yet are all
to no purpose, avail or behoof as any other ways to possibly avoid the Wrath
and Indignation of God against them. They had better agree with their Adversary
quickly whilst they are yet in the way. Or let him take hold of my strength,
that He may make Peace with me, and He shall make Peace with me, Isa. 27. 5. As
the Apostle Paul could cry out, O wretched Man that I am, Who shall deliver me
from this Body of Death? So this, or the like Exclamation may be taken up, O
the exceeding Evil and Guilt of Sin, Who shall deliver the Sinner from all the
Evils that are due unto him for it (...) None but Jesus, which delivered us
from the wrath to come.

And that also He will do no other way, Then in turning away every one of you
from his Iniquities, Acts 3. 26. So that if the sinner will not turn away from
his Iniquities, He shall feel all the Evil consequents that follow upon it. We
may see somewhat thereof in the Glass (...) the word; But we shall not fully
know the utmost Evil and Sinfullness of Sin, until in the future State we come
to see the wrath of God and what kind of Punishment He will inflict for the
same; Which indeed will be a Judgment worthy of God, and an Horrible Vengeance
shall overtake the ungodly. The Righteous shall rejoice whe^^ He sees the
Vengeance, He shall wash his Feet in the Bloo^ of the Wicked. So it will be the
return and saying, no^ of David only, but of the other Saints saved by the
Lord, which shall stand by when He shall Judge the World, and make distribution
of Good or Evil, to every one according as their deeds have been, then it will
be returned and said, Horror has taken hold of me, because (...) the wicked
which forsake thy Law, Psalm. 119. 53.

The Godly and Ungodly are of two different mind^ as indeed they must be so,
for otherwise the one would not have been Godly and the other Ungodly. A Godly
Hezekiah of Old Time did weep, because He though^ that by Death, He should be
for ever deprived and hi^ dred from the Praise and Worship of God, and from
enjoying sweet Communion with him again. Wherein (...) was Ignorant, for Death
does only make way to enjo^ Ten Thousand times more and longer Communion wi^^
God. But the Ungodly of our Days do weep and ho^ near the time of their Death,
because they think an^ dread that they shall meet with God in the other World
What makes them to weep and howl is, because th^^ they expect no Good but Evil
from him, as so indee^ they will have if they receive the due Reward of the^
Deeds, Luke 23. 41. As the Ungodly now count it a Pr^viledge to willingly
absent themselves from and negle^^ the Worship of God, for they Account that an
Irksom^ Dull and Tedious thing, so they could be contented to sleep for
evermore and not Praise God throughout all Eternity; They have no miss of that,
because they take no delight therein; as indeed Praise is not seemly in the
Mouth of a Sinner. An unholy Creature, cannot Praise an Holy God; And in this
sense it is true, when understood of such as are Dead in Trespasses and Sins,
for the Grave cannot Praise thee, Death cannot Celebrate thee: But whosoever
offers Praise, Glorifieth me, and to him that orders his Conversation
aright will I show the salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23. And it is He only who
orders his Conversation aright, does aright offer Praise; and whosoever aright
offers Praise, Glorifieth God.

Though Peradventure Hezekiah might have a little apprehension thereof, yet He
had not a through and full knowledge of future Life and Immortality, and it was
this which caused him to weep sore. For any one would be apt to weep at a
Message, how they are to be bereaved off and taken from all Good Things here,
and not to know where to have others in their stead.

As to all this the Word of Consolation speaks on this wise to such as lived
under the Old Testament Dispensation, Thus says the Lord, a Voice was heard in
Ramah, Lamentation and bitter Weeping, Rachel Weeping for her Children, refused
to be Comforted for her Children, because they were not. So it is all the
World over, People are Irrecoverably deprived of Persons and Things, and as
there was some comfort in the having of them, so it is inward Anguish and
Grief, Lamentation and Bitter Weeping, when People consider thoroughly that
they once had such good things, as Children, Friends and Relations, and such
like, and they are not. Neither can they possibly be again when Dead, unless
they should come forth and appear again to us (as they will) in the future
State and Resurrection. Now comes in the Word of Answer and Comfort, to the
foregoing Complaint and Weeping, Thus says the Lord, Re^rain thy Voice from
weeping and thine Eyes from Tears, for thy work shall be rewarded says the
Lord, and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy, Jer. 31. 15, 16. As
in the Verses following our Text, The Word of the Lord says unto Hezekiah, I
have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears. So in this Place of Jeremiah, The
Lord says unto Hezekiah, and to all his Servants together under the Old
Testament Dispensation. Thus says the Lord unto Hezekiah, under whom may be
understood all the Faithful, Refrain thy Voice from Weeping and Thine Eyes from
Tears, for thy True, Perfect and Good Life shall be rewarded, says the Lord.
And so the Lord says unto all the Inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, who did
obey and serve him, and who lived before the Time his Son Jesus Christ was
manifested in the flesh, Refrain your Voices from Weeping and your Eyes from
Tears; for your works shall be rewarded, says the Lord, and they shall come
again from the Land of the Enemy.

To have faithfully and diligently served God all our Life time, and it may be
for that to have sustained several VVorldly Losses and Inconveniences, and
after all to have no future Good or Reward thereof, would be apt to raise
Anguish in the Heart, and Tears in the Eyes. But then here to have assurance
from the Word and Promise of God (whom it is impossible for to lie) that it
shall be made up and considered, this again will effect it so, That they shall
refrain their Voice from Weeping and their Eyes from Tears.

And they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy.

This Scripture was in Part fulfilled, as the Evangelis^ does show, When Herod
sent forth and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the
Coasts thereof, from two Years Old and Under, according to the Time that He had
diligently enquired of the Wise Men, Mat. 2. 16. Now when these Infants were
Murdered, they were there by sent into the Land of the Enemy, which is Death,
for the last Enemy is Death. Now as Lamentation and Bitter Weeping was
occasioned by Reason of that, by consequence there must be comfort, when they
shall come (...) again from the Land of the Enemy. This may be understood of
all the Children of Rachel, and not only those Murdered by Herod, for He slew
more then wh^^ were the Children of Rachel, even some of the Children of Leah
also, who was Mother of Six Tribes, Genesis 30. 20. And Rachel was but of two,
Viz. Joseph and Benj^min. Now Herod slew all the Children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof. So it must take in all the
descendants from Jacob or Israel. But because that Rachel was the most true and
proper Wife of Jacob, the Wife of his Covenant and Labor, and because she
was most concerned and affected for her Children, therefore the Holy Ghost
makes use of her Name, for indeed she was somewhat a Type and Signification of
the Church of God. And Answers to Jerusalem which now is, and is in Bondage
with her Children, Gal. 4. 25. The Enemy meant and spoken of in Scripture, is
Sin, Death, and the Devil. And He shall thrust out the Enemy from before thee,
and shall say, Destroy them, Deu. 33. 27. O thou Enemy, Destructions are come
to a perpetual End, Psalm. 9. 6. This Enemy in both these places spoken of is
the Devil, who makes use of those two his Instruments, Sin and Death for to
Destroy. So that conceive and put all this together, seeing that Sin, Satan and
Death, are the Enemies of Mankind; And the Devil would fain, yea, He does by
the means of Sin and Death bring them at last into his Land, which is a Land of
Darkness, of Dragons and Scorpions, where the shadow of Death and no Light is.
And when He has them there, He would keep them there, unless here again
Almighty God, who is Greater in Power and Might, should cause them to return
from this Land of the Enemy. Which He will do in the Resurrection, and only to
such who shall be Accounted worthy to obtain that Resurrection. That will be
Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth to Poor Mankind. But here again as for them, (as
Hezekiah will be one of them) who shall be Accounted worthy to obtain this
Resurrection, and to return again from this Land of the Enemy, The Lord God
will wipe away Tears from off all their Faces. How so? By doing what is there
aforesaid, He will swallow up Death in Victory, Isa. 25. 8. And as they have in
the mean while the well grounded hope thereof, They may well refrain their
Voice from Weeping and their Eyes from Tears.

It is observed, that some constitutions are more subject and inclinable to
weeping then others, as Children, Young People and Women are more apt and
ready to it then Men of full Age; and again, some are more inclinable to it
then others, for in some Men it is evidently seen, that their heart is become
like the nether Millstone, which nothing in the World can make to shed Tears,
o^ to really weep. But there is no Person living, who does not sometimes Lie
and Labor under the thing signified thereby, that is, Vexation, Grief, Pain
and Sorrow, or i^ somewhat which is a Feeling and Resentment of Misery. And
Tears of Weeping, are but outward signs of expressing these forth. As Waters,
when they are deep, are most silent and make the least noise in running. So
that sorrow of mind is then greatest, (like as fire when Pent in is most raging
and violent) when it is kept in and not expressed forth in Tears and Weeping;
for it (...) felt and experienced, That an Ease and Mitigation thereof is had
by sending forth of Tears and by the Voice o^ Weeping. But when any one is
under a Great deep an^ remediless Misery, and He is thoroughly knowing and
sensible thereof, it is hard to refrain from Tears. We shall experience it so,
When the Rain shall descend and the Flood^ come, and the winds blow and beat
upon our Earthly House(...) In order to make it fall; When dangerous Diseases
and Death it self shall be upon us; Or, when we shall be under deep Poverty,
with the miserable train thereof, Hunge^ and Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, or in
Imprisonment^ when one lies in a low, deep and dark Dungeon. Sait^ Jeremiah, I
called upon thy Name, O Lord, out of the lo^^ Dungeon.

Although People make now a Laughter or Jesting, (...) Weeping and Tears, and
some are so Puffed up th(...) they think themselves above it, and as unbecoming
them; Yet if they did know and consider thoroughly on the other side, That Fear,
Pit and the Snare are upon them, ye Inhabitants of the Earth; And how it stands
in the Nature of Things and their Establishment. And then (...) Man look
thoroughly upon his own Frame and Constitution, his own Vileness (for we are
here in Vile Bodies Weakness and Mortality, how he is Dust and Ash(...)
walking up and down like a shadow, a little dependa^^ Being, and much more
there is to bring us into a Lo^^ Trembling and Weeping condition; for lay all
this (...) heart and it will appear, that Weeping is much more becoming Man
then Laughter. Nay, properly, and in Truth Laughter is as unbecoming Men and
Women (whatever Fashion it be in amongst the Company of the World) in this
weak, imperfect, mortal and miserable condition here on Earth, who are liable
to Death here and Damnation hereafter; As Laughter is not becoming any one in
Bedlam, who is under Shackles and Fetters, and lies upon a Bed of Straw. For as
the Poor Lunatic or Mad Person Laughs, because He knows not thoroughly his own
miserable Imprisoned condition devoid of Reason. The same also is the very
Reason of that Laughter now in use in the World amongst Sinners, who are
Children of the Devil (He who commits sin is of the Devil) and the Servants
of sin, for they are subject to Death here, and endless misery hereafter; but
this last they know not or do not thoroughly consider of, and therefore it is,
That they spend their Days in Mirth, and in a moment go down to the Grave, and
from thence to Hell.

We may now hear one speaking from Heaven unto all the Inhabitants of the
Earth, what He did once to the Daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but for
your selves, who are in the Wilderness, which may be properly called, Bochim,
A place of Weeping, because of that manifold kind of Tribulation and Trouble
ye meet with all in the World, and yet ye will have more before ye come to my
Kingdom. We should VVeep yet more especially for those sins which caused the
Death of our Lord Christ, so as to turn all our Weeping into Mourning for Sin,
for this is to lay the Ax to the Root of the Tree. For Sin or Ignorance (which
Ignorance is also a sin) is the Root and Antecedent cause of all Sorrow,
Trouble, Affliction and Misery. And I will pour upon the House of David and the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and Supplication; and they shall
look upon me whom they have ^ierced, and they shall Mourn for him, as one
Mourns for his only Son, and shall be in Bitterness for him, as one that is
in Bitterness for his first Born, Zech. 12. 10. Here we should turn all our
Mourning, and Bitterness into Mourning and Bitterness for those very Sins,
Iniquities and Transgressions, which Pierced the Lord of Life, which Crucified
the Son of God and put him to an open shame.

As all things in this World are full of mixture, as of Good and Evil, Joy and
Sorrow, Prosperity and Adversity, Bitter and Sweet together. So sometimes may
be observed and felt, even in Mourning and Outward Bitterness, some Inward
Rejoicing and Sweetness intermingle^ therewith. Let not this seem strange, For
if in the mids^ of Laughter the heart is Sorrowful, (this is experienced, and
there being the same and alike Reason for Contraries, Why may not the Heart be
Joyful in the midst of Weeping, and when the Eye is a trickling down Tears?
Th^^ is only felt by the Godly and Devout Soul, upon he^ Exercising the Acts of
true Contrition, and her Pouring forth Penitential Tears. O what Gladness and
Sweetness is there sometimes in the midst thereof in the Inne^ Man, When God
makes the Bones that He has broken (...) Rejoice (I my self have Experienced
this inwardly) and according to his own Gracious Nature, Word and Promise,
does Revive the Spirit of the Humble, and does Revive the Heart of the Contrite
ones, Isa. 57. 15. Whereby that Scripture is fulfilled at this present time,
They th^^ Sow in Tears, shall Reap in Joy. He that goes forth an^ weepeth,
bearing Precious Seed, shall doubtless come again with Rejoicing and Bringing
his Sheaves with him, Psalm. 126. 5, 6. For by that Joy and Rejoicing which God
does give in the midst of, or Immediately after Tears and Weeping, this is a
Pledge, Earnest, Forerunner and Assurance before hand, that He will exceedingly
much more and longer make good and fulfill this same his word hereafter. There
is seen, yea, and sensibly perceived such a thing, as Weeping sometimes for
Joy. And (...) we know by our selves, that we have often many and several
Reasons inducing us to do thus and thus, in o^^ and the same thing. So besides
the Reasons afore-alledged, I do assuredly gather from other Places of
Scripture, This was the Principal Reason why Hezekiah wept sore, Namely,
Through the abundance of Comfort, which upon Reflection of his foregoing well
spent Life, did thereupon flow and stream into his Soul. For such a True,
Perfect and Good foregoing Life, (as sure as the Scriptures are true. And the
Work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness,
Quietness and Assurance for ever, Isa. 32. 17.) Must necessarily yield unto
Hezekiah Consolation, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. It is manifest that He
did not weep sore, out of any Vexation or Repentance that He had led so Good a
Life. In no wise. But rather at that very Instant, Joy did spring up unto him
out of those Wells of Salvation, which if He had then died, He had went away to
have more fully tasted on.

Another Reason which caused him to weep sore may hence proceed, even from his
Great Earnestness He had then with God; for in what Prayer He then made and
directed unto him, He was very earnest and real therein, which made him to gush
forth into Tears and Weeping. This is a frequent and common thing with the
Saints and Servants of God, that when they are extraordinary and very earnest
indeed with God about any thing, to Weep and Pour forth Tears before him, as we
may Read several Examples hereof in Scripture. I shall instance but in one
which is very pertinent to the present purpose, it is Written of Jacob, That by
his strength He had Power with God. Yea, He had Power over the Angel and
Prevailed. (How all this was done and effected, it may be seen by what is
Immediately added further) He wept and made Supplication, Hos. 12. 3, 4. And
herein Hezekiah showed himself to be a true Son of Jacob, an Israelite indeed,
for as appears from the Verses following my Text, He also got hereby
Acceptance and Audience from God, Go and say unto Hezekiah, Thus says the
Lord the God of David thy Father, I have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy
Tears. So that He had some fruit and effect of his weeping sore, even all that
He would have and desire for the Lord to grant his Request. It is very
acceptable with God, and commonly gains the point when his Servants do weep
before him in Prayer: Provided it be done, not in Hypocrisy, Dissimulation,
pretense and outward show; but when it really arises from a broken and contrite
Spirit (The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, a broken and contrite Heart,
O God thou will not despise) From a troubled Soul, and when it is under Great
Earnestness, either to be delivered from such an Evil which then lies upon he^
or to have such a Good thing which she then wants an^ desires.

The Scripture in sundry places speaks concerning Tea^ and Weeping, and it may
be perceived, that the Dr(...) and Tendency of all of them, is to recommend
rath(...) Weeping then Laughter unto us, for that tends to Go(...) and
Rejoicing in the latter End. According to what t(...) Wise Man says, It is
better to go to the House of Mourning then to the House of Feasting, for that
is the End of (...) Flesh, and the ^^ving will lay it to his heart. Sorrow
(...) better then Laughter, for by the sadness of the Countenan^^ the Heart is
made better, Eccless. 7. 1, 2. Add to this wh^^ our Savior Jesus Christ says
and promises, Blessed are (...) that hunger now, for ye shall be filled.
Blessed are ye th(...) weep now, for ye shall Laugh. Woe unto you that Lau(...)
now, for ye shall Mourn and Weep, Luke 6. 21, 25. Alth(...) the Practice of the
World runs opposite and contrary, (...) they would Account such not fit to
live, who do not gi^^ themselves out to Jocoseness, Merriment and Vain
Laug(...) ter; yet the Scripture by the which we are to be Judge^ and according
to which all Men must receive, does (...) speak one Good Word of Worldly and
Carnal Joy, whi(...) is like the Crackling of Thorns under a Pot; Making great
Blase and Noise, and may a little scorch for (...) Time, but it yields not much
Solid, Inward and Lastin^ heat, and it is all suddenly extinct and as nothing.
(...) all our Joy and Delight should be in God, and in (...) things pertaining
to his Kingdom, In waiting for the (...) solation of Israel, and out of
Expectation of what (...) will shortly do unto his Creatures, viz. That is to
say, (...) such of them as shall be found worthy to partake and (...) ceive
thereof. And (as aforesaid) all our Sorrow (...) Weeping, should be turned into
Sorrow and Weeping (...) our sin, because we have sinned against the Lord, the
(...) bitation of Justice, the Hope of our Fathers. To resol^^ with the same
Hezekiah, after He was a little Reprie(...) and Lifted up again from his Bed of
Sickness, wherein (...) wept sore, yet He did retain the same Weeping State
(...) Inclination for all the Fifteen Years, which were add(...) further,
according to what himself says, I shall go so(...) all my Years in the
Bitterness of my Soul. Which Words are Written for our Admonition and Ensample,
for our Imitation and Practice, upon whom the Ends of the World are come,
Namely, That each of us should severally go all our Remaining Years, Months,
Weeks and Days, of this our Pilgrimage in the Bitterness of our Souls. And if
we should also when we come to lie on our Deathbeds, Weep sore, Provided it be
for the very same Reasons as Hezekiah did, It would be never the worse, but
better for us.

Now with what kind of Use and Application shall I conclude the foregoing
Sermons?

The first Use shall be a short Word of Exhortation, Namely for all that shall
hear or read these lines, To walk before God in Truth and with a Perfect Heart,
and to do that which is Good in his Sight. How this may be done, has been
already showed. My Business at present is to Exhort and Persuade People so to
do. Have ye in the past time of your Lives walked before God in Truth, and with
a perfect heart, and done that which is Good in his Sight? Some have, and some
have not. But this know, God requires that which is past, Eccles. 3. 15. He
will certainly call you to an Account, and Judge you for the past time of your
Life. That is gone by and there is no recalling of it, yet the future course of
your Life is somewhat more in your Power. Do ye therefore secure the A^^^ues,
Walk before God in the beginning of each Day, (...), all the Day long; And as
ye do thus in the several Days, the residue of your Life that is to come will
(...) True, Perfect and Good. For it is not a vain thing ^or you, Because it is
your Life, and through this thing (...) shall prolong your Days in the Land,
whither ye go ^ver Jordan to possess it, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. It is not a ^ain or
Indifferent thing in the first place to Hear or Read the Word of God, or not to
do it. For all that ^ver will be saved, will be saved by the Word of God. As
Contrariwise, Destruction and Misery are ^hreatned to those who refuse it, or
turn their Backs from it, or who only give it the Hearing, but do not
thereafter. But Moses says, Set your hearts unto all the Words which I
testify, because it is your Life, Which is the nearest thing belonging to any
one; for it is this which gives the resentment and feeling of all other things.
And through this thing of walking before God in Truth, and with a perfect
heart, and doing that which is Good in his sight, Ye shall Prolong your Days.
It Prolonged Hezekiahs Days Fifteen Years more, and it will prolong your Days a
longer space of duration then Fifteen Thousand, yea, Fifteen Millions of Years
in the Land of Eternity, whither and when ye go over the Jordan of this Life to
possess it.

The Heart and Conscience of every one must necessarily assent to the Truth of
this following Proposition, Seeing that Man must live and abide for ever, (for
so it is from the Order, Decree and Determination of God concerning us) He
cannot do otherwise then desire to be happy for ever, when He goes over the
Jordan of this Life, as well and all one as He desires and endeavors to live
happily and comfortably in this Life, on this side of Jordan. Seeing that M^^
must live after Death, He must all one, and also does desire to be Happy and
Blessed after Death, all on^ as it is Natural and every one does desire to li^^
Comfortably, Pleasantly and Happily before Dea^^ And seeing again from the
Order, Decree and Determination of God, There is no^ other way und^^ Heaven to
be Happy and Blessed for ever, but (...) walking before God in Truth and with a
Perfe^^ Heart, and by doing that which is Good in his sigh^ throughout all our
remaining Life: Hereupon (...) Word of Exhortation speaks most strong and
forcibl^ to every one that would be saved and happy for (...) ver (as every one
would who knows and believes (...) future State) Go thou and do likewise. What
I say (...) thee, I say again to all, Go thou and do likewise, Ev(...) to walk
before the Invisible God in Truth, and wi(...) a Perfect Heart, and to do that
which is Good in (...) sight, all the remaining Days thou walk, move^^ and
breathest on this Earth. If you do but atten(...) unto, and understand
thoroughly that Reasoning and Truth which lies in this consideration; It will
appear to be the most Strong and Powerful Argument in the World for to Persuade
Men.

The other Use which I shall draw and infer from these last words of our Text,
And Hezekiah wept sore, shall be, To Recommend unto those who are in Reality
and Truth obedient Servants of the Lord, to be in a State of Weeping and
Mourning. Say I these things as a Man? For does not the Law of the Prophets
Recommend and say the very same unto ye? Therefore also now says the Lord,
Turn ye even to me with all your Heart and with Fasting (the intent whereof is
to afflict our Soul, Isa. 58. 3.) And with Weeping and with Mourning. Let the
Bridegroom go forth of his Chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet. Let the
Priests, the Ministers of the Lord, Weep between the Porch and the Altar; and
let them say, Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thine heritage to reproach,
Joel. 2. 12, 13, 14, 17. And in that Day did the Lord God of Hosts call to
Weeping and to Mourning, and to Girding with ^ack-cloth. (Little of this is
obeyed and observed in this Generation and Country of ours, but herein is
fulfilled what is next Written) And behold Joy and Gladness, slaying oxen and
killing sheep, eating Flesh and Drinking Wine: Let us Eat and Drink for to
Morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in mine Ears by the Lord of Hosts,
surely this Iniquity shall not be Purged from ye, until ye die says the Lord
God of Hosts, Isa. 22. 12, 13, 14.

But here it may be surmised and said, That such kind of harsh and sour
Doctrine may be Reasonably expected from the Old Testament Dispensation, which
came from Mount Sinah which gendreth Bondage, from whence the Law was given in
Fire, in Blackness and Darkness, and Tempest of Thunder and Lightning. But the
Gospel was not ushered nor brought into the World after that manner, for it
came in a still Voice, with a Fear not, for behold I bring you Good Tidings of
Great Joy which shall be to all People, Luke 2. 10. Does this same Gospel
Recommend, or say any thing concerning this State of Weeping and Mourning? For
if it should, How would it then bring us Good Tidings of Great Joy, which shall
be unto all People? Yes, assuredly it does both; but herein is Comprised the
Mystery of God, That the Weeping and Mourning must go before the Joy, which is
to be manifested in us, and had by us. Says the Apostle James, who spoke by a
true Gospel Spirit, Be Afflicted, and Mourn and Weep: Let your Laughter be
turned to Mourning, and your Joy to Heaviness. Humble your selves in the sight
of God, and He shall lift you up, James 4. 9, 10. And then by consequence if we
do all this, The Lord who shall turn our Captivity as the Rivers in the South,
will again turn our Mourning to Laughter, and our Heaviness to Joy. According
as is promised by his Spirit, which spoke through the Evangelical Prophet, And
the Ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with Songs; They shall
obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away, Isa. 35. 10.
Our Savior Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, (in whom all
the Gospel does center) does assure and promis^^ the same in those afore-quoted
words of his, wherein also He does Recommend to all that are Christians indeed,
this State of Weeping now, with that true Word of Encouragement, for ye shall
Laugh. As also He tacitly finds fault with, and threatens where People Laugh
now, for they shall Mourn and Weep. So that the way to Happiness hereafter, is,
by Mourning and Weeping here. As again, Laughter and Merriment now (I only
speak here of the Laughter and Merriment of the World, which arises from the
things thereof) is the way to misery hereafter. Behold, in this Gods Thoughts
are not as Man's Thoughts; For herein they are contrary to the Thoughts of the
People of the World, who if they see any one to serious and Godly, herein they
conclude him to be Melancholy and Miserable^ whereas as sure as Gods Word is
true, this is the only way to the true Blessedness. But contrariwise it is as
to the Merry M^n of the World, for in the Judgment and Estimation of God, if we
take a view o^ them by the Glass of his Word, and go into the sanctuary and see
the end of these Men, Surely thou did set them in slippery Places, Thou
castedst them down into Destruction, Psalm. 73. 18. As the pleasant and purling
streams of Jordan, do empty themselves into the Dead Sea; So all their sinful
Mirth and Laughter will End and Terminate in endless Howlings.

Seeing that these things are so, What manner of Persons ought we to be in all
Gravity of Spirit and Serious Conversation? Even with the same Hezekiah, Like a
Crane or a Swallow, so did I chatter, I did Mourn as a Dove, Isa. 38. 14. For
as to this, the sweet Word of Promise speaks on this wise, And the Days of thy
Mourning shall be ended, Isa. 60. 20. Which again (according as our Mourning
has been) will be made up in a Proportionable Cup of Consolation and
Rejoicing. And though as afore-observed of some Constitutions, that they cannot
Weep, or shed Tears: So here it may be, when People are in Health, Wealth and
Prosperity, when they have the World at will, as we commonly Phrase and
Understand it, and all things are smooth and easy with them, When their Eyes
stand out with Fatness, they have more then heart could wish, Psalm. 73. 7. When
they are Puffed up with sensuality and the Good Things of this Life, then
indeed they cannot so easily be in a State of Weeping and Mourning. But here
again, as it was commanded in Old Time, that they should not come near their
Wives, when they were in their solemn times of approaching and drawing near
unto the Lord God. And as now under the Gospel, the Apostle delivers the Rule
unto Husbands and Wives, Defraud ye not one the other except it be with consent
for a Time, that ye may give your selves unto Fasting and Prayer. So in like
manner it may be Reasoned and Inferred, That we should sometimes abridge and
deny our selves, even the Lawful Comforts and Enjoyments of Life, that we may
the more afflict our Souls, and so come to be in a due Posture and Frame, for a
State of Weeping and Mourning.

FINIS.
SERMON V.
Isaiah XXXVIII. 4, 5. Then came the Word of the Lord unto Isaiah, saying, Go
and Say to Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy Father, I have
heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears; Behold, I will add unto thy Days
Fifteen Years.


IF we consider thoroughly and Weighfully in our Minds these three following
Scriptures, Thus says the Lord, Let not the Wise Man Glory in his Wisdom,
neither let the Mighty Man Glory in his Might, let not the Rich Man Glory in
his Riches. But let him that Glories, Glory in this, that he Understands and
knows me that I am the Lord, Jer. 9. 23. 24. For what Nation is there so
Great who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all Things,
that we call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. And Jesus lift up his Eyes and said,
Father I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I know that thou hear me
always, John 11. 41, 42. Put and conceive all this together, and it will hence
appear that the Greatest Privilege, Honor and Excellency, and Benefit, which
can accrue to any Man on this Earth is for God to hear his Prayer, To be nigh
unto him in all things that he Calls upon God for; and herein the Righteous and
so any one is more excellent then his Neighbor, according as he knows, and
understands more of the Lord God. We see evidently now, that some do Account of
and set by themselves, because they Join House to House, and lay Field to
Field, and because they Wax Rich and abound therein. Who, because they are
Purse Proud and have more Money than such and such of their Neighbors and
Acquaintance, their hearts are not only lifted up above their Brethren, but, I
had almost said, above the Lord their God also. For, forsooth, they refuse and
disdain, and are ashamed to come to the place of his worship and of hearing his
word, for the Plainness and Simplicity thereof; and because that only some few
Poor People do come there. Have any of the Rulers believed on him? So it has
been alike asked more than once or twice, by some of my Carnal Kindred who walk
in the Vanity of their mind, having their Understanding darkened as to the
things of God, and as to the true method of the Dispensation of his Kingdom, Do
any of the substantial and Rich sort of the People come to hear thee? I cannot
Answer as to any of them, but if any of the Poor of the Flock, or those Poor
despised ones in the world, whose Prayer God hears (Thus says the Lord, the
Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy one to him whom Man despises, (...) him whom
the Nation abhors, Isaiah 49. 7.) Do come here to this Assembly, it is more
to me (as I conside^ these things when I go into the sanctuary and take (...)
View and Estimate thereof from out of the Glass of the word) than if Kings and
Princes, Lords and Ladies, (...) other Rich and Honorable Men and Women, did
com^ to hear me Preach the Word; Though Peradventure the would lift up and exalt,
and please that Worldly Corrupt Nature which I confess and speak to my shame,
(...) yet too much in me. Some do Account themselves (...) ry much, because,
perhaps they are beloved of, or Popular amongst their Neighbors, another for
his Honor, another for his Courage and Might, and becau^^ by such an one, The
Lord has given Deliverance from the Syrians, or for his having wrought Great
A^chiev^ ments. Another perhaps is lifted up in Soul, because (...) the Gifts
that are given him, and the word of wisdom (...) committed unto him (which is
the most Valuable (...) all the Privileges of Mankind, but here it is
alleviated again with this consideration, that where are Great Gifts, there
must be Great Accounts.) Another is Delighted and Transported within himself,
because he has a Wife and Children to his Mind, or because he has some other
Worldly Blessing. And so one is lifted up for one thing, another for another,
if we did run throughout the several Particulars among the Children of Men. But
all these and such like, are but light and small things in Comparison of the
great things of Eternity, and the exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory. As God
said unto Solomon, Because thou have asked this thing and have not asked for
thy self long Life, neither have asked Riches for thy self, neither have asked
the Life of thine Enemies, but have asked for thy self Understanding to discern
Judgment. Behold, I have done according to thy Words; Lo, I have given thee a
Wise and Understanding heart. So that there was none like thee before thee,
neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee. And I have also given that
which thou have not asked, both Riches and Honor, so that there shall not be
any among the Kings like unto thee all thy Days. And if thou will walk in my
ways to keep my Statutes and my Commandments, as thy Father David did walk,
then I will lengt^^n thy Days, 1 Kings 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. And as it is written,
For your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of these things. But seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you, Mat. 6. 33. From all this put together, it is my inward and
very thought; As I behold and observe how Men differ from one another, and one
Prides himself in this thing, another in that, whereas none should be Proud for
any thing which he has, but be humble and thankful for each distinguishing
blessing or mercy received. As it is Written, But to the Saints that are in the
Earth, and to the excellent (Mark that word excellent) in whom is all my
delight. And as there is one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon,
and another Glory of the Stars; for one Star differs from another Star in
Glory. So each Man or Woman does excel or differ from one another in Glory or
real worth, according ^s they know and understand, and have more of the Mind of
God. All your excellency is of me, says the Lord, and derived from him. And as
long as we walk and breath a little longer on this Earth; The more any one is
in favor with God and has more of his will and secret (The secret of the Lord
is with them that fear him.) Herein only one Man excels another, or
differs from, and exceeds such an one in real worth. That Courtier who can
soonest obtain a favor from his King or Prince, he is the best Courtier: So
amongst the vast Number of we Fellow Creatures on Earth, although there is no
difference between the Flesh of a Saint or of a Sinner; for our flesh is as
their flesh, and our Children as their Children, and we are all near the same
(both Godly and Ungodly) as to the same outward Frame, and Composure. But that
is the best Man or Woman, who has most interest now in the Court of Heaven;
who even whilst here on Earth is soonest heard by the Great King, for this is
an Earnest and Assurance beforehand, that he shall one day stand in his
Presence; Who is an Israelite indeed, a true Son of Jacob, Has Power with God;
Yea, he had Power over the Angel and Prevailed, Hosea 13. 3, 4. As a Prince,
have thou Power with God; and with Men, and have Prevailed, Genesis 32. 28. Who
like another Lot, has that Interest and Prevalency with God, that himself
says, I cannot do any thing till thou come thither, Genesis 19. 22, Although it
were to be in the Destruction and Punishment of the wicked, yet God could not
do it till he came out from amongst them. And so he speaks on that wise to his
Servant Moses, Let me alone, (that is, Do not Pray, or Interceed for them) that
I may consume this People in a moment. Or like another Elias, who was a Man
subject to like Passions as we are, And he Prayed earnestly that it might not
Rain, and it Rained not on the Earth by the space of Three Years and Six
Months. And He prayed again, and the Heaven gave Rain, and the Earth brought
forth her Fruit, James 5. 17, 19. Who is here brought in as a^ Example, that
the effectual ^ervent Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much: Who, when God
hears not sinners, but if any be a Worshipper of God and does his Will, him
he hears, has this Testimony, that he is a Worshipper of God and does his
Will, because that God hears his Prayer. If I regard Iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me. But verily God has heard me, he has attended to
the Voice of my Prayer, Psalm. 66. 18, 19. By which it follows of Consequence,
that the Psalmist did not regard Iniquity in his heart: For God to be nigh unto
us in all things, that we call upon him for and to hear our Prayer, is the
greatest of all Wordly Blessings and Mercies put together, either long Life,
Riches, or what we would have in this World; for if God hears our Prayer, then
we shall have, what we would have in the next world, which is much better and
more enduring.

Go and say to Hezekiah, thus says the Lord, the God of David thy Father. This
and the foregoing Verses are a kind of Dialogue between the Great God and his
Creature Hezekiah; which Dialogue or Conference God manages by his Prophet
Isaiah. That God should hearken unto the Voice of a Man, Joshua 10. 4. Seems
wonderful if we have but those just and raised thoughts of the Godhead, (in
Comparison of whom in Greatness or Bigness the vast Fabric of the whole World,
is but as a Dust of the Balance) and the true Knowledge of our selves. But yet
the Lord who humbles himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and in
Earth, is pleased to keep a care over, and a Communication with his Creatures.
The whole Scripture is but a Declaration in order of what has passed and been
transacted between God and Mankind, in the several Persons there instanced in.
The whole and sum of which may be conceived to be this, their Creation at
first, their Preservation throughout this World, and what things are in order
to their salvation in the next World. The first Part hereof is signified by
that kind of speech so often used. Thus says the Lord that formed thee, or the
Lord thy Maker; And here the same Lord, who turns Man to Destruction, says
again, Return ye Children of Men: For after that he had in the foregoing Verses
(whereof ye have already heard it Discoursed abundantly.) Sent a message of
Death, in our next word he sends a Reprieve from this Sentence, or a
lengthening of his Temporal Life Fifteen Years longer. Whereby is shown forth,
that as himself is the Lord and Author of Life, who first gave it; So he can
cut it off, and Determine it whenever he will, or lengthen and continue it
out to what Space or Duration he thinks fit; as also this adding of Fifteen
Years, is a Type and Signification of that adding of Life for evermore unto
that which is now as a vapor and continues not; but as soon as this shall
end, that will immediately begin and never end, as may appear yet more clearly
from the sequel and drift of our Discourse hereon.

The God of David thy Father. As our Savior Jesus Christ proves the
Resurrection of the Dead, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac and the God
of Jacob, God is not the God of the Dead but of the Living. So he is fitly
styled, the God of David thy Father. For he, that is, his Soul was then also
living unto, o^ in Respect of God, and thereupon a Promise of further
Continuance of Life is Properly Grounded and mad^ unto one of his Grand
Children, even Hezekiah. A^ God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, and I will be their God and they shall be my People. 2. Cor. 6. 16. Here
is a Limitation and Annexing to these Words of his Covenant. I will be their
God. He is never said to be the God of Saul, Ahab, or (...) such as were
Wicked, Disobedient and Ungodly, bu^ the God of the Patriarchs, and of David,
who we^^ all his Servants and did walk before him as Obedie^^ Children. At
first he is the God of all Created Being^ He calls them all by Names; But
afterward as (...) beholds Sin and Evil he Disowns and casts off that Title,
Depart from me ye that Work Iniquity. The Use whereof may be this to each and
every one of u^ Namely, to be sure to get within the Covenant. A^ Thomas said
to Jesus Christ, My Lord and my God, (...) if we can say Truly as to the Great
God who made the World, My Lord and my God. For if it is so, we shall be both
Partakers of his Blessedness, and also of his Holiness. Hereby also may be seen
and perceived the Great Blessing, advantage and Privilege of being descended
from Godly Parents or Ancestors. For as to this, the Gracious Word of promise
speaks on this Wise, And showing Mercy unto Thousands of them that Love me
and keep my Commandments.

And without all doubt it fared the better with Hezekiah here, for the
Godliness of David his Grandfather or more Properly his Forefather, for there
were more than three Generations or Descents between David and Hezekiah. We
read Several Times in the Books of Kings and Chronicles, that a Blessing was
entailed on his Posterity for David's sake; and where some of his Children or
rather descendants did not walk in Gods Covenant, nor keep his Statutes,
nevertheless God would not cut them off quite nor destroy them utterly, Because
of the Loving Kindness and Mercy, which he still retained unto David their
Forefather; as there are Sundry Expressions to this purpose in the Scripture.
Besides that there was somewhat in Hezekiah himself which God liked and was
well pleased withal. Yet he liked him so much the better and was more pleased
with him because of David his Father. As appears here by stiling himself the
God of David his Father, When he acquaints Hezekiah of hearing his Prayer, and
that he would do such a Good Thing for him. There is not a Word in Scripture
but what is Observable, and somewhat may be gathered and drawn from thence of
the Mind of God. Hereby may be seen that God had a kindness and Favor unto the
House and Family of David, as indeed he had to that and to the Family and House
of Abraham, and of Jacob or Israel. There are more Good Things said throughout
the Book of the Lord of them, than of all the Families of the Earth besides.
But therefore chiefly it was, because of what was aforesaid to Abraham, In thy
seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed, and of this Man's seed, and
so of Jacob and of David's seed (To show which the Genealogy of him is so
Particularly reckoned up in the first Chapter of Matthew) according to the
Flesh, God would raise up his Son Jesus Christ. And therefore this Diversity
may be now observed under the Gospel, that, unless when it is Quoted out of the
Old Testament, he is never called the God of Abraham, or of Isaac and Jacob nor
yet the God of David, but there he is styled and Named the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, according as so Paul calls him by the Spirit.

As our Savior Jesus Christ argues to the Jews, If ye were the Children of,
Abraham ye would do the Works of Abraham, so here in like manner it may be
Reasoned, that if the Lord was the God of David thy Father, so he would be the
God of Hezekiah also one of his Posteri^y; Provided always, and as long as he
did the works of David his Fore-father. And as God did preserve David, from
many Perils and Dangers, so the same God would preserve Hezekiah also from the
Danger of Pining Sickness, and give him as it were a new Life and Health
springing from out of it as the day does succeed the Darkness of Night. Where
God says a Thing, he does always perform the same, which accordingly he did
make Good and fulfill unto the same Hezekiah, as appears by the History thereof
as it stands recorded in Several Places of the Bible.

I have heard thy Prayer, I have seen thy Tears. As concerning Gods hearing our
Prays, the sum of that matter is, That God will be Sanctified by all them that
draw near unto him. The Worshipper is not to Regard Iniquity in his Heart, but
to call upon the Lord with his whole heart and then the Lord will hear our
Prayer and be found by us. Be ye clean that bear the Vessels of the Lord, Isa.
52. 11. And so it is requisite to be cleaned from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit in order that our Prayers may ascend up, and be accepted with and
Granted by the most high God. Therefore it was, because that Hezekiah had
walked before God in Truth (For the Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him in
Truth) and with a Perfect Heart which is a whole and not a divided heart;
Therefore it was that the Lord heard his Prayer.

I have seen thy Tears. It commonly gains the Point or obtains the thing
Requested for, when the People and Servants of God do shed Tears in Prayer; if
this be done not in Hypocrisy, or Dissimulation, but out of great Earnestness
and Reality of Soul; the Truth whereof is here fulfilled; for therefore it was
that Go^ heard his his Prayer, and saw his Tears. Though we Creatures do not
see God, yet God (...) we Creatures, and knows how it is with us. The Eyes of
all wait upon thee, and thou give them their Meat in due Season. And there
does arise a little Anguish, and great Thought and Searching of Heart in the
Reasonable Creature, who have also Eyes in their Understanding, as well as
Outward Bodily Eyes, Why, They cannot see God. Why, in this Life, and in this
State here on Earth, No Man has seen God at any Time, the only begotten Son
which is in the Bosom of the Father he has declared him. And so the Son, who
is the Word; And the word Preached or Spoken does, declare God, that is, make
him to be Conceived or Understood. Though we do not see God, yet we see his
Works, which we cannot so much as look without doors but we behold them. For
it is his Heavens which ^e Created, and his Earth which we tread on. By which
together with that Invisible Reason and Knowledge which he has given us, The
Invisible Things of him from the Creation of the World may be clearly seen
being Understood by the Things that are made, even his Eternal Power and
Godhead. So that though we cannot see God as yet, with this Outward Bodily Eye
of ours, yet with the Eye of Faith or with the Eyes of our Understanding being
Enlightened we may see him that is Invisible, And so after our Spirits are
Dislodged from these Bodies we shall see him Face to Face and know him as we
are known, as he knows us and we now know one another. Certain it is that his
Eyes are upon all the ways of the Children of Men to Recompense to every one
accordingly whether they be Good or Evil; And so he sees and beholds whatever
we do, whether we Laugh or Mourn, are Merry or Sad.

I have seen thy Tears. As our Lord did argue to the Pharisee, Ye Fools, Did
not He that made that which is without, make that which is within also. In like
manner it may be truly reasoned, He who sees that which is without, sees that
which is within also. And so the same God, who sees our outward Tears, sees
also that Sorrow of Heart and Vexation of Spirit, that secret Anguish and
Discontent of Mind, from whence these Tears do flo^ forth and proceed. He sees
every le(...) crany and corner of our Inside also, and seeing that (...) is the
will and appointment of God, To comfort all the mourn, to appoint unto them
that mourn in Sion, to gi^^ unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for
Mournning, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heavines^ Here God is like
unto a skilful Physician (Shall not (...) that teaches Man Knowledge, know?)
Who kno^ the bottom and ground of the Sore or Disease, wh^^ he has in hand to
heal and recover. Even so our Go^ knows and understands to the utmost, all that
Mourning and Spirit of Heaviness, with the true causes and o^casions thereof,
that is in the hearts of all, or any of the Children of Men; which is necessary
in order to Administer Comfort, Joy and Relief to it. The trouble Spirit and
the restless Spirit, the groaning Spirit and (...) dissatisfied Spirit, or
whatever does afflict, is painf^^ or irksome; all couched and comprehended
under that (...) word, the Spirit of Heaviness: All these, and whatev^^ is
more, or such like, is Known to God, the Father (...) Mercies, and the God of
all Consolation. Says (...) Psalmist, Put thou my Tears into thy Bottle. Are
(...) these things Noted in thy Book? I am weary with (...) Groaning, all the
Night make I my Bed to Swim, I wa^^ my Couch with my Tears, Psalm. 6. 6. And
then it follo^ For the Lord has heard the Voice of my Weeping. Whi^^ is
Parallel unto and is another Example to confirm t^^ Truth of our Text, That God
does see the Tears (...) hear the Voice of the Weeping of his Servants and
Peop^^ According to what is elsewhere Written, I cried (...) God with my Voice,
even unto God with my Voice, and (...) gave Ear unto me. For this is to be
understood and attended unto, that as in one sense God hears the Li^ labor of
the formal Half-Christian, or of the Wicke^ and Ungodly; for they do sometimes
in custom and (...) little to satisfy Natural Conscience, Pray unto hi^ And so
he does hear the mumbling of the Papist ov^^ his Beads, the much speaking of
the Heathen, and (...) Worship of the Jew, as it is at this Day, as He is a^^
knowing; for there is not a word in my Tongue, b^ thou O Lord, know it
altogether. And so he hea^^ their Devotion as we do the humming and noise of a
^^ye, which we are forced to hear, but we do not Mind or Regard. But he does
not hear the sinful or false Worshippers in such wise, as they are not to think
that they shall receive any thing from the Lord. But in Scripture sense, when
God hears the Prayer of his chosen People and Servants; He does fulfill their
Petitions and give and grant unto them, what they Pray unto him for. In like
manner God does see the Tears of such a Profane Person as Esau, as he does see
all things: And so he does hear the howlings of them upon their ^eds, Who did
not cry unto him with their heart, Hos. 7, 14. But yet he is not so far moved
with one or the other, as to admit the one to Repentance, or Vouchsafe a Pardon
to the other. According as he says and declares elsewhere, Yea, they made
their hearts as an adamant stone, least they should hear the Law and the
Prophets, which the Lord of Hosts had sent in his Spirit by the former
Prophets. Therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of Hosts. Therefore it
came to pass, that as he cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I
would not hear, says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 7. 12, 13. Such did heretofore
harden themselves against God, and now God will harden himself against them,
although they are his Creatures and the work of his own hands. And so the same
God, though in his Love and Pity to Poor Mankind, ^e redeemed them; That is, like
setting up one again after they had been broke or Bank-rupt; and though he (...)
very Pitiful and of tender Mercy, which is over all ^is works. But yet those
Souls who shall fall under his Severity and Vengeance, and shall be cast into
Hell, He will be hardened against their Wailing and Weeping, and Gnashing of
Teeth, although it should be for ever. And the same Lord Jesus Christ, who is now
ou^ Advocate with the Father, and in this Life holds forth even unto them the
Scepter of Mercy, will be to the hard and impenitent in heart, who despise his
Goodness, long^uffering and forbearance, an Inexorable Judge. But according to
the meaning and intent of the Holy Ghost here in our Text, when God sees our
Tears and Hears the Voice of our Weeping, it is, when God takes away and
removes that Evil and Afflicting thing from us, for which we weep and shed
Tears, according t^ what is elsewhere written, He will swallow up Death (...)
Victory, and the Lord God will wipe away Tears from (...) all Faces. Tears do
most commonly arise from the Apprehension of this thing of Death. So it did
wit^ Hezekiah, as has been abundantly showed in the foregoing Discourses: And
so it does with most of the Children of Men, who know and understand somewhat
more concerning it, either what may bring Death o^ or sooner hasten it, this
does usually raise and occasion Tears, or at least that inward Sorrow and
Anguish (...) Heart, which Tears are the outward sign and effect (...) And as
the Word of Consolation here goes to the ve^^ Ground and Original cause of
those Tears, He sh(...) swallow up Death in Victory; That is, God will overcom^
Death and cause it to cease to be, So that those ve^^ same Creatures shall come
forth into Life again, upon whom Death had seized and done its utmost. Aft^^
Death has devoured and destroyed them, God (...) raise them up and restore
them entire and whole agai(...) and he will save them from the Destruction; of
necessary Consequence then, those Tears must be wiped aw(...) which did arise
only by Reason of Death. All one (...) the Cutting of his Days, and his Sense
and Apprehe(...) on of his going to the Gates of the Grave, and of (...) being
Deprived of the residue of his Years, made Hezekiah to weep sore. But after
that God had seen th(...) his Tears, and sent another different message of
add(...) Fifteen Years more, this instantly made him to (...) and refrain from
Tears, as appears and may be ma(...) festly gathered from the following Part of
the sa^^ Chapter. Behold, for Peace I had Great Bitterne^^ (which kind of
Expression seems as the Sun Shining (...) yet greater Brightness, after it has
come out from (...) Dark Cloud.) But thou have in Love to my Soul delive^^ it
from the Pit of Corruption, for thou have cast all (...) sins behind thy back;
The Living he shall Praise thee, (...) I do this Day. The Lord was ready to
save me, therefo^^ we will Sing my Songs to the stringed Instruments all (...)
Days of our Life in the House of the Lord. Here his (...) ^^er weeping sore,
and his Tears are turned into Praise and Songs: And so it will be with the
Souls of all those that shall be saved in the Great Day of the Resurrection and
Restitution of all things, and from thence forth throughout all Eternity;
Nothing but Praise and Songs will be heard amongst them, Notwithstanding all
the Sorrow and Fear, Trouble and Weeping, as they passed through this Vale of
Life. And this will be in the House of the Lord, in the highest Heavens for
evermore; which may be called the Presence Chamber of the Great King, as all
the World is his Palace, House, or Temple. The Redeemed shall walk there, and
the Ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with Songs, and
Everlasting Joy upon their Heads. They shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and
Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away.

What I say unto you, I say unto you all, VVatch. And as God is no Respecter of
Persons, but in every Nation he that Fears him and Works Righteousness, is
accepted with him. And as the God of Abraham is the same and alike unto all who
do the Works of Abraham, so the same God, who saw Hezekiahs Tears will see our
Tears also, provided we be in Covenant with him as Hezekiah was; and they be
upon the same Account and only for the like Reason as his were. Truly, my
Beloved Brethren, It is a Great Matter and a very Desirable Thing to be under
the care and concern of God, to be one of them of whom he says, I have written
thee upon the Palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. For here
again God has common care and providence over all his Creatures, both Men and
the Fowls of the Air as they are the Work of his ^ands; But then besides that
he has an especial and Peculiar care over his own Peculiar People and Redeemed
Ones. Like as he gives Common Knowledge unto almost all Men and Women, but the
saving and Distinguishing Grace unto his Elect. And as it is written, All thy
Works shall Praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints shall Bless thee. Psalm. 145. 10.
Even the Inanimate Works do Praise God although they cannot speak forth, but
they Praise God as they are standing and remaining Monuments of his Praise, in
that he made (...) Created them. But the Saints Blessing God impor(...)
speaking forth with a living Voice. And this Bless(...) God does again seem to
import somewhat more (...) further than that Praise which the Heavens, or th^^
Part of the Creation of God which is without Life, (...) show. So certainly
there is somewhat more and furth^^ in the Saints Blessing God, than that Praise
of (...) Name which is outwardly rendered by the Mixed Multitude or common sort
of Mankind. Remember me, (...) Lord with the Favor that thou bear unto thy
People, (...) visit me with thy Salvation. Psalm. 106. 4. Here (...) Psalmist
knows by the Spirit, and accordingly he Praise and Addresseth unto God as such
for the Distinguish^^^ Favor and Salvation which he has for his own People
over what he has for the common stock of Mankind. And this will more
Eminently, Illustriously (...) Remarkably appear at the End of all Things, wh^^
some shall be saved, and the Saints which now bless Go^ shall be made Blessed
by him; and the other sort sh(...) be Condemned, Perish and be made Miserable.
Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has rejected them.

The Lord seeing our Tears will Administer Conso^^tion, because here it will be
found true (an Examp^^ whereof was Hezekiah) They that sow in Tears, sh^^ reap
in Joy. So again, from the Lords seeing the V(...) nities and Sportings of some
of the Children of (...) should (I do not say, it does, because most have no^
Sense and Apprehension thereof) yield and aff(...) grief unto them, because
that the more Carnal (...) People have in this Life, the more Eternal Sorrow
th^^ will have after this Life is Ended. Woe unto you t^^ Laugh now, for ye
shall Mourn and Weep. But it is Pitiful and Miserable thing to be despised and
not (...) regarded by God, which is to be a fore^orn wretch a(...) cast off by
our Maker, To be cast out of thy sight, Jo(...) 7. 4. As Jonah complained and
feared, he should (...) when he was in the Whales Belly; which yet he was (...)
there, although many others are out of Gods sight in t^^ sense even when they
breath, move and live on (...) Earth; But he quite gives them over as a Father
does (...) Continued Provoking and Disobedient Child. But if any of us should
be disowned by and separated from God our Creator and Preserver, as he will do
so by a great many at the last Day, Depart from me, I never knew ye, ye Workers
of Iniquity, Alas! What Despicable and Vile Beings should we be? Who thereupon
must (...) necessarily fall down and sink into Misery, as the Body, when the
Soul is out of it, sinks and turns into Corruption and Dissolution: Even so the
Soul or whole Man without God, will be nothing else but Restless and Tormented.

As the Danger and Misery is very great, yea unexpressible to be without God,
so is the Benefit and Happiness as great on the other side, yea to be greatly
desir^d and sought after, to have God Propitious, Favour^ble, and nigh unto us
in all Things that we call upon ^im for. If we once have God for our Friend,
then we have him who possesses all Things, and what can that ^oul want? As was
aforesaid, If God hears our Pray^^ here on Earth, this is an earnest and
assurance before ^and that we shall one day stand in his presence in the
Highest Heavens, so it is here again, If the Lord sees ^ur Tears and hears the
Voice of our Weeping in these Days of our Flesh when it is upon the very same
account as Hezekiahs and the Psalmists was (for the ble^^ing and advantage
belongs not unto Wordly sorrow which Works Death, but Godly sorrow which
Works Repentance to Salvation not to be Repented of) so the ^orrow toward
God Works and Effects it so for (...), that we shall come into be Partakers
of the Conso^^tion, even the Consolation of Israel. I say, this also (...) an
earnest and assurance beforehand, that when these ^ays of our flesh are Ended,
The Days of our Mourn^^g shall be Ended, Isa. 60. 20. And we shall come to ^^at
place where it shall be said, Behold, the Taberna^^e of God is with Men, and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be
their ^od. And God shall wipe away all Tears from their ^yes, and there shall
be no more Death, (Mark here ^gain how fitly this is put in the first place,
for all Tears and the things next named are by Reason of Death neither Sorrow,
nor Crying, neither shall there be any (...) Pain for the former things are
passed away. Rev. 21. 3, (...).

As one Scripture says, Woe unto us for the day gives away, for the shadows of
the Evening are stret^^ed out. Jer. 6. 4. And hereupon Anguish arises in (...)
heart, and our Eyes are ready to burst forth into (...) because we must
severally, yea we shall shortly Tast^ Death. Do ye know what kind of Taste it
is? It is (...) terness, for so we conceive it and Agag truly Phras^ it. And we
have every one of us, (yea the non he(...) ers of the Word also, for God has
showed and m(...) known as much unto them) received the Message (...) Word of
Command from the Lord of Life, who (...) put and now holds our Souls in Life
and can call (...) them out again whenever he will, Set your Hou^^ your
Souls, the Inhabitants of your Earthly House (...) order for ye shall die. If
it was this Night that (...) Souls should be required of us we should Fear, yea
(...) we should be apt to weep sore also; Here again^ would revive us if God
did see our Tears and say^ (...) each of us, Behold, I will add unto thy days
Fifth(...) Years.

Some in this assembly may Probably live Fifth(...) Years longer, same Thirty,
Forty, Fifty, together (...) the odd Years, Mouths and Days, according as to
(...) his Time is appointed and his days upon Earth are (...) that of an
Hireling. And so if I should Dogm(...) cally affirm and Preach, set your Souls
in order for(...) shall die, that is, very suddenly and quickly, e(...) this
Evening, to Morrow, or this week at furthest^ have no warrant ^o to say.
Several of ye may hear (...) perceive the Decree and Sentence of God otherwi^^
Behold I will add unto thy Temporal Life, so ma^^ Years, Months, Weeks and Days
more, as it is kno^ in the Purpose and Mind of God concerning each (...) us,
though it is Uncertain and Unknown to every (...) of us, therefore ye would not
give much heed (...) nor believe such a Doctrine of Mine that should (...)
quaint ye, that ye should die within a week or suc^ little Time. But if I
should teach and affirm constable(...) ly as I do this day, Set your Houses in
order; For ye shall most certainly die one time or another, this ye must
Necessarily assent unto. And also this ye cannot do otherwise than assent unto,
that the few and Evil Days remaining of your Pilgrimage will run out and
Elapse, as the former days of your Life are gone, Vanished and passed by
already. As suppose a Man should live to Fourscore and Ten Years of Age, (to
which length of Days not more than one of Ten Thoussand do arrive) if he has
lived Threescore Years already, the Thirty Years which are yet to come will
pass and at length be quite expired out and finished, as the Threescore Years
already have been. An End will come; as it is Emphatically noted and doubled
for our the more taking notice thereof by the Prophet, An End is come, the End
is come, it watches for thee; Behold it is come; The Morning is come upon
thee, O thou that dwell in the Land. The time is come, the day of trouble is
near, and not the sounding again of the Mountains. Ezekiel. ^^. 6, 7. The Time of
last Sickness or Death has already come upon many Millions of past
Generations, and upon a very great many of the present. The same also watches
for thee, who art as yet Breathing on this Earth, and it will very quickly be
returned and said as ^o thy case and feeling, Behold it is come. The Morn^ng of
Futurity and Immortality is come upon thee, O thou that dwell in the Earth;
the Time is come; and if thou have sinned and done Evil, the day of Trouble is
near, even that Indignation and wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, which shall be
upon every Soul that does Evil; for the day of Death unto such is not the End,
but the beginning of Sorrows. And not the sounding again of the Mountains.
There is no more Resorting to the Pleasures and comforts of Life, or to those
Methods and arts of hardening and Insensibility, as have been heretofore used.
This End of Life has long since come upon Hezekiah, although he had Fifteen
Years more added unto his days. Why, they are over and gone and near upon
three times Fifteen Hundred more since the Lord by Isaiah spoke thus unto him.
Now as in truth, nothing is long that has an End, and as it is written, It is
a light thing that thou should be my Servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob,
and to Restore the preserved of Israel, I will also give thee for a Light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the End of the Earth. So in
like manner it may be truly Reasoned, it is a Light thing that God should give
unto us the Reasonable Inhabitants of this his Earth Threescore Years and Ten
or Fourscore Years, nay if it were to every one of u^ also the days of
Methusaleh, nine hundred sixty and nine years; for it is immediately afterward
recorded; And ^^ died. Genesis 5. 27. For we can conceive and apprehen^ somewhat
more, Namely, what is like unto what is expressed here, to Restore the
preserved of Israel. That is, in the sense which we would allude and apply
unto, for to the agree the other Scriptures of Truth, As God in the first an^
continued forming of Man of the dust of the Ground Br(...) thed into his
Nostrils the Breath of Life and Man became (...) Living Soul. And as he does
preserve this Breath of Li^^ in, and holds our Souls in Life all the days we
Breat^ live and move on this Earth: So it is an easy thing for this same God to
preserve this Breath of Life again after it is gone forth and the Man returns
to his Earth, and also to preserve the dust of the Ground (which he does
accordingly) into which his Body turns and Moulders. So as in the Resurrection
(for God will do so) to Restore the preserved of Israel, to restore the
preserved of Adam, even of all his Children and Posterity: So that he will
resto^^ the preserved whole Body and Soul of each and every o^^ of them. Why,
the Soul was preserved all the while (...) the Cabinet, Archives and keeping of
God (according (...) the Scripture Phraseth it, Commit the keeping of their
Sou^^ to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator.) And he w(...) restore
and raise up the Body also, which all the while was preserved in his dust and
ashes according as it was either buried in the Ground or burnt with Fire,
according to the two ancient ways of Interment and disposal thereof after it
was dead and the Soul gone out of it. Yea, and it would be a light thing if God
should not do thus, as to raise up all the descendants of Adam, the Tribes of
Jacob, and in this sense also, To Restore the Preserved of Israel, that his own
great work of Creation might be Perfect and Complete unto the End of the Earth,
unto the End of time, yea unto the end of his whole work of Creation, for that
would not be Perfect and Complete, unless he should annex salvation unto it.
That is, save and bring it up again from that Perishing and Corruption, that
Death and Dissolution which has already come in part, and is yet further to
come upon the whole Creation of God, Because the Creature it self also shall be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious liberty of the
Children of God. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth (the reason
whereof is that Perishing and Corruption, the Death and Dissolution which as
yet it is subject unto) and Travaileth in Pain together until now, Romans 8. 21,
22. But when God shall extend his salvation so far as to save and preserve the
whole from the same Perishing and Corruption, Death and Dissolution which it
has underwent, when the New Heavens and the New Earth (under which are
comprised all things contained in them) which He will make, shall remain, Isa.
66. 22. By which word, remain, (...) denoted an Eternal, Immutable and
Irreversible State of things. For if it was to be for never so many Millions of
Years, it would not be properly remaining but transitory, because that the
several Parts and Portions of time do pass and succeed one another. Then the
whole Creation instead of the former Groaning and Travailing in Pain, will
rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory, Because that thus it will be
delivered from the former Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of
the Sons of God, and then shall be brought to pass that saying, I know that
whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever, Eccles. 3. 14. And the Works of God
will be found worthy of himself, that is, Eternal. It stands on this wise in
the order and decree of things, to do them at first in a lesser degree in order
to a greater: To carry and advance them from Imperfection to Perfection. It is
sown in Corruption, It is raised in Incorruption: To first make them with a
Perishing Nature, and afterward Graft on and add an Eternal Nature, that they
are never more to be done away, nor yet to cease to be. All this comes from
the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in Counsel and Excellent in working. And
all this is as certainly true and will be found so in the appointed time, as
God is God; which again, is as certain as that there is a world and any thing
in it; for he is the Maker of all things and by whom they subsist.

Then Philip opened his Mouth, and began at the same Scripture and Preached
unto him Jesus. So if one was to begin at this same Scripture, Behold, I will
add unto thy Days Fifteen Years, and from thence Preach unto you Eternal Life,
(which God that cannot lie promised before the World began (for discovery was
made thereof by little and little unto the Fathers.) But has in due times
manifested his word through Preaching, Titus 1. 2, 3.) It might at first seem
hard and perplex unto ye, how the Preacher would draw forth and infer Eternal
Life from these Words; which at first sight and appearance rather shows the
contrary, that the Life of Man will come to an utter end. And yet it has been
made out in some Measure. But the Reasoning and Inference of Eternal Life does
yet further arise from that word, add. For as the Apostle Paul argues somewhat,
yea, very much in reference to the case in hand, If there be no Resurrection of
the Dead, then (...) Christ not risen; for if the Dead rise not, then is Christ
not raised, 1 Cor. 15. 13, 16. So in like manner it may be here reasoned, if
God did add Fifteen Years unto Hezekiahs Life, because he had heard his Prayer
and seen his Tears, so he will add unto him and to all others (who pray and cry
for, and shall be Judged worthy) that Blessing which the Lord has commanded,
even Life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3. The words foregoing are to be taken
notice of, As the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that descended upon the
Mountains of Zion: Even so this Life for evermore, is to descend upon the
Reasonable Inhabitants of this Earth, after they are descended into the Bars
(...) the Pit. Which it is as easy for God to give unto th^se his Creatures, as
to command his Dew to descend down from above. It is as easy a matter with
Almighty God to Link and Annex on Life for evermore, as soon as this Life,
which is as a Vapor, and continues not, is ended, as to add Fifteen Years, or
any Days, Weeks, Months, or Years, to this Temporal Life, or as it was to hold
our Souls in Life those Days which are past already, or as it is to give any
Life at first. All things are equally possible to an Almighty Power, and what
he has said, shall be fulfilled. And therefore it fitly and properly comes in
the middle of that aforequoted Place out of Titus, In hope of Eternal Life,
which God that cannot lie, promised before the World began, Titus 1. 2. For
indeed it is promised throughout all the Old Testament, though it be most
commonly shaded there in Dark Speeches and General Expressions, as I am the God
of Abraham, etc. I am thy God. I commanded them Statutes, which if a Man do, He
shall even live in them. This of necessity must be understood of future and
Eternal Life; for Transgressors also did live this Present and Temporal Life.
The Lord, the hope of thy Fathers. And therefore they must remain and be raised
up again in being though dead and gone, or otherwise God could not be properly
and truly styled their Hope. And so this adding of Fifteen Years unto the Days
of Hezekiah, was an earnest and pledge beforehand and also a making known and
showing unto him in a mystery, that God would add and annex unto him Life for
evermore, when those Fifteen Years of Reprieve should be gone out. In a Word,
the difference between the Preaching, manifestation and making known of Eternal
Life under the Old Testament; And that to us now made under the Gospel, was as
the first breaking of the Day or Twilight, is now as to the Shining more and
more unto perfect Day, or as an Hour and an half before Sun rising, is to its
shining in its fullest and clearest Brightness. For those of old time, had but
just a Guess and Glimeering thereof; Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life, John 5. 39. But we know and are assured that in
them we have Eternal Life; Now Jesus Christ has Abolished Death and brought
Life and Immortality to Light (which before was in the Twilight only) through
the Gospel. And this is the promise that he has promised us, even Eternal
Life, 1 John 2. 25.

O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! How do thou fill and swallow up our Thoughts
with Terror and Amazement! To Launch forth into thee (which we unavoidably
must) seems at first sight as dreadful, as for us little Creatures to throw our
selves into the great and wide Sea, where we are as it were lost and are as
nothing in Comparison of it. Or, as it seems dreadful to stand alone upon an
exceeding high Pinnacle, having no more room than only just to se t our foot
upon with nothing to hold by, but encompassed about only with the thin, Vast
and Spacious Air. Unless we have hope, the Anchor of the Soul, which must have
some Ground or Object to fix on. Now the Object of Hope is the Promises; and
Particularly and in a most eminent manner, that great Promise which he has
Promised, even Eternal Life; Otherwise we shall be of all Men, yea, of all
Creatures, most miserable. For as the Tree Falls, so it lies. As Death leaves
us, so Judgment find us. As the Soul goes out of the Body, whether sanctified
and renewed, or unsanctified and unrenewed, so it remains and so it must appear
in Gods sight when she shall come before him, and is to receive accordingly,
There is no Redressing or Altering her Condition in Eternity. Fifteen Years,
yea, Fifteen Thousand Years, yea, Fifteen Millions of Years, yea, Fifteen
Millions of Millions of Years, (for (...) many will God add unto the Life of
every one of us, as soon as ever this fluid Breath is gone forth out of our
Nostrils) And so to go on in Numbers after that manner (...) as long a scrowl
of Figures, as long as the Earth is (...) Circumference, which is about 21000
Miles, or as would Reach up from hence to the highest Heavens which is (...)
thousand times longer, which would amount to such (...) Number as no Man can
Number. And yet all this would b^ no more in Comparison to Eternity, than the
twinkling (...) an Eye is to our whole Life here. Conceive in your Though^ all
the Sand that is on the Seashore, or on the Earth, all the Piles of Grass that
did ever Grow or are now Growing, (...) the Grains of Corn, all the leaves of
Trees, all the dro^^ of Rain that ever fell, or the drops of water that are in
th(...) Sea and Rivers, all the Stars that are in the Firmamen(...) In a Word,
all the Creatures, Men, Beasts, Birds, Fish(...) Flies, and Insects, which
were ever, or now are: Take (...) reckon all this together which will amount to
a Prod(...) ous, I had almost said, Infinite Number; but that would be improper
speaking, for the greatest Number is not (...) And all this again, is no more
to the Years of Eternity, (...) Proportionable to the duration thereof, than a
Minute, (...) second now is unto a Year.

I cannot go further in the description of Eternity, whi^^ like the High and
Lofty one, the Inhabiter thereof, hat^ no Bounds nor measure.

Two Practical uses and inferences from what has be^^ now said, I would
recommend and leave for (...) Readers own Private, particular and several
Meditation^

1. Think always, I mean before ye are entered into it, (...) think much upon
Eternity.

2. Pray without ceasing, and be ye always in a Prayin^ Posture of mind. Having
your heart continually lifted u^ toward the Invisible God, and Requesting
those Mean and Preparatory things of him. For himself having spoken to us his
Creatures, Do this and live, there the heart is always to be Answering and
Saying, Lord, evermore give us this Bread, even that Bread which comes down
from Heaven and gives Life unto the World. Lord, Give us Grace, Strength and
Power, to do all those several things, which thou requirest of us, that we may
also do these things and live. After two Days will He revive us, in the third
Day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight, Hos. 6. 2. That he
would hear our Prayer and see our Tears, even that he may add to our Days
Fifteen Years, or how few soever the remaining Evil Days of our Pilgrimage are,
or shall be according as it is in the appointment and foreknowledge of our God,
yet that we may in these Days of our flesh offer up continually unto him strong
Crying and Tears, that we may be heard in that we fear before him; That when
these Days of our Flesh, the time of our Ministration and Warfare here on Earth
are Ended, the Lord would add unto each of us a Blessed Eternity; which He will
to such and only to such, as he shall find and judge worthy to obtain that
Resurrection. For we must of necessity be raised up and restored to Life and
Being again, so to remain throughout the Vast and Infinite Duration thereof.

As to the first, Think always and very much upon Eternity. As often as you
think upon time, which is every Day, and as often as you hear the Clock strike,
Do you also think upon Eternity; and let that enter into your thoughts. And
compare the vast odds and difference between them both, the Natural result and
consequent whereof is, That ought to be most minded, which is of most concern.
As the Days are now passing on, so the duration of Eternity will quickly begin
but never End. And we are continually breathing and moving toward it, till at
length the body like the shell, does actually break and ^all from it, and the
Soul is as it were hatched and brought forth into Eternity. I my self, and so
ye who now dwell ^n time, must be Launched forth into that State and that
^nfinite duration, where time shall be no longer. And as this is certainly
true, in the order and decree of God concerning us Mortal Creatures, so we
should always think much of it, and have it continually in our Minds. B^^ this
is the unhappiness and fault, that People are so usually cumbred with the
little things of time, that they forget and do not heed the great things of
Eternity. An^ the things Temporal do Choke and stifle the sense (...) things
Eternal: But here we should all along use t^^^ Godly Discretion and Soul saving
wisdom, as to renounc^^ abstract and separate from them, in order to think more
an^ have yet greater searching of heart, how to secure o^^ selves a blessed
Portion in the good things of Eternity.

Secondly, Pray without ceasing, Or, Be ye always in (...) Praying Posture of
Mind, having your heart lifted up unto God. Which use does hence arise, that if
God hea(...) Hezekiahs Prayer, so as to add to his Days Fifteen Year^ more;
This is Encouragement and Invitation to us also for us to offer up continually
Prayers unto God, that (...) would add unto these few and evil Days remaining
of o^^ Life, Fifteen Millions of Millions of Years; yea, that va^^ exceeding
infinite duration, which no Man could Number^ of a Blessed Eternity. It is very
well worth while Praying throughout our Life, that we may gain Heaven. Th^^
Duty of Praying without ceasing, may be performed by have ing the heart always
fixed on, or lifted up unto God. T^ have it always Bent toward, and intent on
him that is Invisible. And continually breathing forth Desires, Supplications,
Entreaties and Intercessions unto him. That as the Pulse continually Beats, the
Mouth continually Breath^ so the Heart and Soul may continually Pray unto God^
Even for Grace and Glory. That is, not so much to Pr^^ for Heaven immediately,
or per saltum, to leap into it (...) once. For there is no such doing, but for
all the mean things which are Necessary and Preparatory toward it. Even (...)
wrestle with God in Prayer, until the breaking of the D^^ of Immortality; and
not to let him go, Except thou bl^^ me with the blessing which the Lord has
Commanded, ev^^ Life for Evermore. As soon as, and against the time, the life
which is as a Vapor and continues not is Ended (...) That the same Lord, the
God of David our Father, as (...) did add Fifteen Years to the Days of
Hezekiah, so that (...) would be pleased to add unto thee or me, or such of us
(...) are of his Elect, when this Temporal life of ours is E^ded, Life Eternal.

Amen.

