To the Present QUEEN MARY
Richard Stafford, a Scribe of Jesus Christ, desires Temporal Preservation and
Eternal Salvation.

THE Sense and Compassion of what is likely to be thy final Condition, does
constrain me to write thus unto (...), and to admonish thee with the following
Words of Truth. I do see with an Eye of Faith, That They which do iniquity,
shall be cast into a furnace of fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of
Teeth, Mat. 13.41, 42. For if it is not so, Jesus Christ must be a Liar and
Deceiver: But as certain as he is Christ, viz. the Anointed One of God, there
shall be such a thing: And he therefore made it known to warn and testify unto
all the Sons and Daughters of Men, That they do not Iniquity; and so they shall
not come to that Place of Punishment and Torment.

And seeing that thou thy self have so long, and do yet live in and practice
Iniquity (or In-equity) thou art therefore concerned herein; and thou art in
great danger of future Condemnation, and Eternal Misery: Which will be upon
thee, unless thou do confess and forsake thy own Iniquity) when thy soul is
slipped out of this Tabernacle of Flesh, and must appear before that God with
whom there is no respect of Persons, and who has given such a Law to Mankind
of every Nation, Country, and Language, and to all the Generations which shall
pass through this Earth, as is declared in Scripture, as thy own Conscience,
and the Spirit of thy Mind may somewhat judge, and conceive hereof before hand:
for that would willingly set thee safe as to the dreadful and doubtful
uncertainty of thy own Eternal state ann Condition, if thou would set thy
Conscience as in the sight of God, and would suffer it to have its proper,
full and perfect work. Hearken not, or be sure not to trust thine own
Everlasting Happiness or Misery, to the suggestions and sayings of those who
call themselves Bishops and Overseers; who say they are sent forth to Minister
unto thy Salvation, and that of others. But thou art cautioned again, not to
hearken unto, or at least not to trust unto them. For the Enemy of Souls has
raised a Mist, and cast a dead sleep over those Watchmen, that they are become
blind, and see only on the worldly corrupt side, or They are dumb Dogs, they
cannot bark sleeping, lying down loving to slumber: They all look to their own
way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter, and so they are destitute of the
truth, supposing that Gain is Godliness: Their principal business is how to
keep or get Preferment; They study and endeavor how to please and not to
offend; though it be to sooth and be silent as to the sin and transgression of
the Rich and Mighty People, as if they were only to have their Portion in this
Life, and after Death to suffer a greater Punishment and Misery. For the
Bishops and Pastors should seek to turn away Iniquity from Jacob, and to turn
many to Righteousness, but instead of that they do strengthen the hands of evil
doers, that none does return from his Wickedness by promising him Life, by
vainly assuring People, that they shall go to Heaven, though they go on in
their own ways, and after their own Thoughts. But notwithstanding all the
Multitude of our Modern Pharisees, who by reason of that, and their Justifying
themselves before Men, they have the fashion as yet on their side, the Word and
Judgment of God does pronounce, and will determine them to be Ministers of
Satan, transformed into Ministers of Righteousness; for they do rather Minister
unto the destruction of Souls, by preaching and speaking for the
deceiveableness of Unrighteousness, so long, that day by day they perish in it.
And they do rather keep People in, than lead them out of the Mystery of
Iniquity.

But setting aside all deceitful workers, and corrupt handlers thereof, hearken
and attend unto what the Scripture (which is able to make thee Wise unto
Salvation) says expressly and clearly of it self: For as Laban said, It must
not be so done in our Country, to give the younger before the firstborn, Genesis
29.25. So is the current, moaning and requiring of the whole Law of God; for it
is not consistent with that Righteousness and EQUITY where with the Lord will
judge the World, Psalm. 98.9. It must not, or it ought not to be so done in this
Nation of the Earth for thee who art sprung out of the Loins of thy Father, to
have his Right and Inheritance before his Death, or willing Resignation. The
same I have more at large demonstrated in my Discourse on 2 Cor. 10.4. and more
particularly in page 21. to which I refer thee, and beseech thee to read and
consider what is there noted out of the Scriptures of Truth, as thou would
willingly obtain Eternal Salvation, and avoid Everlasting Misery.

And it being the declaration of the Mind and Will of God, that such a thing is
an Iniquity, viz. a thing not equal; for thee, who art his Creature, to act yet
contrary (let me tell thee plainly and be not angry thereat; for the fault is
in thy self who do commit this Iniquity, and not in me who do only Admonish
of and Reprove the same:) This is downright Disobedience and Rebellion against
thy God. In which if thou continuest, thou art now under his Wrath and
Displeasure; and when thy Breath is out of thy Nostrils, thou will fall under
his severe Punishment, and suffer the Vengeance of Eternal fire; for that will
be allotted unto thee, if thou do now in the days of thy Flesh give thy self
over, Jude 7. to the things which are contrary to his Law. Either thou will
Repent of this thy sin and Disobedience, or thou will not. If thou will not
obey God who commands, That the Wicked restore the Pledge, and give again what
he had Robbed, Ezekiel. 33.15. Thou will be in certain danger when thou die to
be Miserable for ever: But if thou do come to Repentance, the sooner thou
do, it will be better for thee throughout all Eternity. For the sooner any
one comes to Repentance and lives in Obedience, God is the better pleased with
that Man or Woman, and he will give to such a more full Reward hereafter. Even
the Souls will discern and perceive this so far, that even when they are let
slip into Eternity, they will wish that they had served and obeyed the Lord in
those days of their Flesh, in which they did continue in Despising and
Transgression. So that from the Day of the Date hereof ( October 19. 1691.) or
rather from the day that this Word is delivered and made known unto thee, Thou
art hereby put in mind and exhorted; yea, thou art Charged and Commanded from
the Law of the Lord thy God, to give up again and resign thy Kingdom and
Inheritance, unto him whose Right it is; and then thou shall find favor in the
day of thy Death. Thou art to do this purely out of Conscience and fear of the
Lord, and only out of Obedience to the Word of his Grace, and for the Salvation
of thine Immortal Soul.

For the Law of God cannot be altered, or reversed, or dispensed withal; nor
yet may People think by a stricter Observation of some of the Commandments, to
make atonement for the neglect and violation of others. Thou did well in
putting out an Order for the strict observation of the Lord's Day. For
notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense or in truth, God's Laws is
obeyed, it is better than the open Contempt and Violation thereof. If in the
deep of thy heart, thou do not much care whither God's Commandments are kept
or not, but thou did thus to deceive and ingratiate thy self with Godly and
well-meaning People, and hereby to strengthen the more (though it is not
possible to make Right) thy present Ti^le; all this is Gross Hypocrisy. Shall
not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the Heart. But if thou
did this out of a Good Mind toward God, and out of a desire for the saving
of thine own Soul, then thou will hearken unto, and receive this further Word
of Instruction, viz. As we must come out of Egypt quite, and not leave an Hoof
behind, Exodus 10.26 So if thou would arrive at the Heavenly Canaan, thou must
abstain from every Transgression of any other Commandments of the two Tables.
Thou art not to pick and choose, or Article with God which to do or observe,
and which to neglect; but if thou would be where David is, thou must practice
the same as He did, For all his Judgments were before me, and I did not put
away his Statutes from me, Psalm. 18.22. It is not simply the Observation of a
Monthly Fast, which is pleasing and acceptable unto God: For Jesabel did
proclaim a Fast, when she was to take away Naboths Vineyard. And the Spirit of
God says expressly by Jeremiah 14.12. When they fast I will not hear their Cry,
and when they offer burnt Offerings and an Oblation, I will not accept them,
but I will consume them by the sword, which has been exactly fulfilled in many
chosen Men of England, who have been sent out into the Neighboring Nations, or
into Ships, and there they have dyed, or been killed by the Grievousness and
Instruments of War. And by the truth of that which we now see and know, it is a
certain token that God will not hear and accept all your several Acts of
Religion and Worship: But as he speaks in the tenth verse of the same Chapter,
He will remember your Iniquity, and visit your Sins. For though to forget and
utterly take off from the Remembrance of them, ye mention only King James; and
to excuse your selves, ye speak Reproachfully and Contemptuously of him,
against whom ye have dealt treacherously, see Mal. 2.14. Micah. 7.6. yet he is
thy own natural Father: But chiefly, He is a Creature whom God has placed in
such a Relation, and concerning whom he has given such Laws, Orders and Rules,
which the People have transgressed, and done otherwise than they showed and
commanded. He was our King, but our People did not keep his Commandments, nor
regard the Oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. which they had taken unto him, so that
your sins are not against King James, but against God. The Prophets throughout
their Writings, do abundantly speak against Sin, Iniquity and Trangression; all
which which are general things, which are reduced into such and such particular
Acts. And here again the People fly out, and hope to excuse and save
themselves. But God answers them in short, Wherefore will ye plead with me, ye
all have transgressed against me says the Lord the Lord of Hosts, Jer. 2.29.
And since it is Transgression, What an unreasonable and unaccountable thing
thing is it? That any Creature should continue and persist therein? For a Worm
to wriggle with its Maker, to stand as it were at plain Opposition and Defiance
with the great Creator and Governor of the World; That a dying Creature of
five or six Foot long, should os yet exalt it self, Exodus 9.17. against the
great God, unto whom the whole World is but as the dust of the balance, and who
is from Everlastigg to Everlasting. No Creature would dare or presume to do
according to this manner, if God were not out of sight, and if he did not keep
silence; and also it is because he does render present punishment: But for
these reasons the Children of Men are so refractory and contemptuous against
him. Whereas it would be better for them if they did consider and fear, how
that the same word, which does mention, how that no Man has feen God at any
time, John 1.18. God does hold his Peac even of old, I^a. 57.11. That sentence
against an evil Work is not executed speedily, Eceles. 8.11. The same word
speaks expressly of the Glorious appearing of the great God, Titus 2.13. That
the Lord shall appear to he Joy of some, and the shame of others, as may be
seen, Isa. 66.7. Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence, Psalm. 50.3.
And I will punish the World for their Evil, and the Wicked for their Iniquity,
and I will cause the Arrogance of the Proud to cease, and will lay low the
Haughtiness of the Terrible. Isa. 13.11. which last has already been fulfilled
in the foregoing Generations; and is daily now fulfilling in the several
Persons of Men and Women, as they die and go away, and then does the Word begin
to be fulfilled, and these shall go away into Everlasting punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal: Mat. 25.46.

Is it not for thee, O Mary, to obey God? If thou do, it will be accepted:
But if not, Sin lies at the Door; which (when thy Breath is out of thy Body)
will let into Everlasting Misery: for this Word (which is truly gathered out of
Scripture, is steadfast, and every Disobedience and Transgression receives a
just Recompense of Reward. He that Believes and Obeys, shall be saved; but
he that Believes not, nor yet Obeys, shall be damned.

The Postscript, which is laid before thee, whither thou Read it or not,
however it remains written, that thou may read it whenever thou will.
FOR Herod himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon John, and bound him in
Prison for Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife, for John said unto Herod, it is
not Lawful for thee to have thy Brother's Wife, Mark 6.17.18. In like manner,
thou may send forth again, and put Richard Stafford in Prison, for Richard
Stafford has said and published it; and he does again hereby say and publish
the same, That it is not Lawful for thee to have thy Father's Kingdom before
his Death, or willing Resignation. It was not so much John the Baptist, that
said so in his time; nor yet Richard Stafford who writes and affirms after
this manner: But the very Law of God, (which is mentioned by John and myself)
says so. He had but one or two texts, viz. Lev. 18.15. and 20.11. But I have
one half of the Ten Comman^ments, which were given on Mount Sinah, engraven in
Tables of Stone, and also written (...) the Fleshly Tables of our Hearts, (as
we might perceive i^ the vail of Transgression was done away) and also many and
sundry places of God's word besides; and all these give attestation to what I
have written. Now it is one of the highest degrees of sin and disobedience,
when any Man or Woman shall not only be contented, and resolved to do contrary,
or otherwise then the Law of God commands and requires; but they will further
imprison, punish, or put to death him who shall make mention of this Law of
God, and confront it to their doings. And therefore the Spirlt who searches
all things and knows where the very provocation of sin lies, does elsewhere
rehearse it up more particularly. But Herod the Tetrarch being Reproved by him
for Herodias his Brother Philip 's Wife, and for all the Evils which Herod had
done, Added yet this above all, That he shut up John in Prison, Luke 3.19, 20.
Both Herod and John Baptist are now gone off from the Stage of this World; but
now it would be better for Herod if he had never put John into Prison; so both
Mary Stuart, and Richard Stafford are now going off from this Earth, and I do
here tell and warn thee before hand, That it would be better for thee (Mary) if
neither thy self, or thy Ministers and Servants under thee, had never, or shall
yet forbear to put Richard Stafford, the Scribe, in Prison, for no other fault,
but only for writing the Law and Truth of God. It is near the same, whether
this was, or shall yet be done by thine Especial Comwand, or by thy silent
(which gives consent) Will and Pleasure, and then it is by the Officiousness of
those under thee. But take ye all ho^ to your selves and fear, least the same
Law and Truth of God (who does now all th(...)s and Years of your Life suffee
your Manners, Acts 13.18. in this World, but when they are ended.) I say again,
Take ye all heed and fear, least the same Law and Truth of our God, should
reserve and bind ye in everlasting Chains, under Darkness, unto the Judgment of
the Great Day, and from thence ye be cast into Hell. Whereof as Earthly Prisons
are some kind of Representation, so they do as much come short of the real
Torment and Misery thereof; as now the light and distant heat does come short
of, and is less than the fire it self. For as they are refreshing and
comfortable, when the last is nothing but pain and devouring: ^o there is a
sweetness in suffering for the Truth and Righteousness, which does arise from
the sense and assurance of a greater future Glory and Reward; when they that
inflict it, are hereby liable unto greater Condemnation, and they shall feel a
more exceeding and enduring Misery, which shall be without

END.

