A Modest Plea FOR AN Equal Commonwealth Against MONARCHY. In which the
Genuine Nature and true Interest of a FREE STATE is briefly stated: Its
Consistency with a National Clergy, Mercenary Lawyers, and Hereditary Nobility
examined; together with the Expediency of an Agrarian and Rotation of Offices
asserted. ALSO, An Apology for Younger Brothers, the Restitution of Gavil-kind,
and relief of the Poor. With a lift at Tithes, and Reformation of the Laws and
Universities. All accommodated to public Honor and Justice, without injury to
any Man's Propriety, and humbly tendered to the Parliament. By a Lover of his
COUNTRY in order to the Healing the Divisions of the Times.

In the Multitude of Counselors there is safety. LONDON, Printed for Giles
Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1659.

To The Right Honorable, The High Court of PARLIAMENT.
The Supreme Authority of the Three Nations.
Right Honorable,
BEing moved to give in a Testimony against the most Epidemical Abuses and
corrupt Interests of the Times, I know none to whom with more justice it might
be Dedicated, than your Honors, whom the providence of God has called to be
our Reformers, into whose hands God has pleased to put a great price, an
opportunity of making this Nation the happiest in the World; In order to which,
he has also paved your way, causing the Hills to melt like Wax, and the
Mountains to dissolve like Snow before you, having smitten the Great ones of
the Earth, and caused Princes to fall at your feet, and removed whatsoever
stood before you, or might in the least obstruct or retard the work of
Reformation: so that no man can any longer say, There is a Lion in the way. God
has put the Nation like wax into your hands, that you may mould and cast it
into what Form your Honors please: We are now Rasa tabula, and your Honors
may write what you please upon us, I hope it will be holiness to the Lord, that
we may for the future be truly termed a Holy Commonwealth and Royal Priesthood
unto God. It was not for naught the Lord raised your Honors as from the Dead,
and restored you to the Administration of that Power that was so long detained
in unrighteousness from you, without doubt God has some great work for you.
And now behold the Expectations of all men are upon you; all the Nations of the
Earth are looking to see what your Honors will do, for whom God has wrought
so many wonders, whom God has Crowned with so many signal Victories, for whom
God has so often appeared in the High Places of the Field, making bare the Arm
of his Power, and rebuking the pride of your Enemies. God has also sent a day
of Trial, that the falsehood and Hypocrisy of many might be discovered, that
all corrupt interests and Persons might be made manifest. And they that were
not of you, are gone out from among you, they that were not spirited for the
Great Work of the Lord, that (having put their hands to this Plow) looked
back, and behold they are turned to Pillars of Salt; God has made them
Monuments of his disple^sure, and blasted their designs. But the Hearts of Gods
People are still with you, and their Hands, even the Hands of Moses and of
Israel are lifed up in your defense. Also God is with you, And who then shall
be against you? I need not now desire of your Honors, not to build on old
Foundations, I know your Honors experience has taught you, they will not,
they cannot stand. Our Commonwealth has stuck long in the birth, and the
Nation been cast into strong Pangs and Throws in bringing forth our Liberties,
and it seems could not be Delivered altogether without blood: But we hope now
through the dexterous midwifery of your Honors Prudence, what has been so
long expected will be brought forth, and that we and Posterity shall have cause
to bless God in behalf of your Honors, as for the Builders of our Breaches,
and the Restorers of Paths to dwell in.

It was not intended that this Pamphlet should fawn upon your Honors in the
midst of your Triumphs, being most part of it committed to the Press before the
breaking forth of the late Rebellion (when the Author little thought his Thesis
should so soon be disputed with swords points, and decided in so solemn an
Appeal to Heaven) where it has been imprisoned till now by the injury of the
Printer: But if your Honors please to receive it into your Protection, and
pardon the boldness of this address to your Honors; it will oblige the Author
to study how he may better deserve the Countenance of your Authority, and
render himself more serviceable to your Honors, to whom he has in all
Humility devoted himself, etc.

An Epistle to the Reader.
Candid Reader,
BEing in Capacity of doing my Country no greater service, I have presented her
with a Glass or Mirror, in which a candid and discerning eye may discover some
of the Political Errata's, or Wens that disfigure the Face, and crase the
constitution of her Government, which I humbly conceive proceeds chiefly from
the lameness and imperfection of our late Reformation, in which though we have
for a long time been struggling and wrestling with Tyranny and Oppression, yet
have had our endeavors seconded with little better success then were
Hercules's that famous Hero's incounters with the Hydra; of which having lopped
off one Head, there still sprang up two; in like manner we were willing to
flatter our selves into a conceit, that Tyranny had received a mortal wound by
that fatal stroke that took off the Kings Head, and unhorsed the Nobility. But
experience (the Mistress of true wisdom) has taught, it is not lopping the
boughs, or cutting off the top branch of Monarchy, that will deliver a Nation
from bondage, unless the Ax be laid to the root thereof, to the evil root of
bitterness, whence springs all our misery, to the root of every usurping and
domineering interest, whether in things Civil or Divine; for otherwise we do
but prune, dress and culturate the stock, that it may grow the thicker, the
faster, that it may thrive the better. A King being but one person, the top and
head of a Monarchick State, the taking away of him is but the taking down the
upper story, or uncovering the roof of the Government, whereby it is exposed to
all storms and tempests, to the injuries of ill weather, which is altogether
unsafe and imprudent, if the rest of the structure be designed to stand, if the
whole Frabrick be not demolished. And is not this our present state and
condition? Have we not deprived our selves of all the conveniences of
Monarchy, of whatever of excellency or beauty was in it, and retained only the
flawes and evils of it? Was it not the grand evil of that state, that it set up
a few great Families, and raised them to an extravagant and excessive height,
by the ruin and oppression of the rest? Were not all the Laws with the whole
constitution of its Government, made in favor of the elder brethren and great
families, while the bulk of the people which consists of younger Sons, were
left to shift for themselves, and scramble fer a poor livelihood; and is it not
so still? Are they not still the Sons of Fortune, and their own right hands,
the Heirs of their own merits? that is vagabonds on the face of the Earth,
having no lot among their brethren, sine nomine and lare, without House, Name,
or Family; and is not this a greater evil in a Free State, that pretend to an
Equal Commonwealth? Nay, may not these say, It were well if it were with us as
in the days of old, when by reason of the Multitude of Preferments, it was as
improbable for a person of worth and ingenuity to miss of employment as how to
find it; or if any one were so unhappy as not to find entertainment in neither
Court nor Hierarchy, could yet offer a repulse, hide his head in a Monastery or
religious House, that used to receive such to whom the world was most
inhospitable. May not these say, was it for our interest to put down one Court
and King, to set them up in every great Gentlemen's Family? Was it for our
advantage to throw down the ancient Nobility, whose greatness was balanced by
a jealous Monarch, to set up a more numerous of a modern stamp, without any
balance? are they the less formidable for waving invidious Titles, or will
they not be our Masters if they be our Landlords? Have we gained any thing by
throwing down of Bishops, do not all their Lands run into one and the same
Channel, for enriching and aggrandizing of elder Brethren? Nay, may not the
things we have destroyed witness against us, and the days of old reprove and
expostulate with us? Was this our evil? was this our crime? that we secured
part of our Lands, in a common stock and public revenue intailed on the Altar,
for the relief of our younger Children, from whom they are now wrested? Is
there not as unequal a distribution of the wealth and Riches of the Land as
ever? Is there not as much Pride, Covetousness, Extortion and Oppression now as
ever? Do not men (notwithstanding all the light that has dawned upon the Word,
and the many Hazards and Casualties Riches are exposed unto) with as great
travail both of mind and body, accumulate wrath as ever? do they not endeavor
to build their nest as high as ever? though as Solomon has observed, they know
not who shall come after them, whether their own, or the Son of a stranger
shall inherit them, whether a wise man or fool shall be master over all their
works; is not this an ancient evil, and still a great vanity? that men should
be more brutish and unnatural then the worst of bruits to their own flesh, and
like Canibals, destroy the very fruit of their own loins, by exposing their
younger Children to misery and poverty, to build themselves a great Name in the
Earth, when as they know not but that their Heirs, like those of Augustus, may
be their greatest Enemies instead of the firstborn, for whom they design their
Princely Patrimonies. How justly does God often blast and curse these great
Estates that are the product of so much partiality, Oppression and
unrighteousness, and may be not also the Government by which it is permitted?
Certainly did we belive the Scriptures, that it is so difficult a thing for a
Rich Man to be saved, and that poverty is a temptation to take the name of God
in vain, we should not be so industrious on the one hand to bar the doors of
Heaven against our firstborn, and render their passage through the Gate that's
straight enough to all, more difficult then a Camels through the eye of a
Needle: and on the other hand offer temptations to the rest to do evil; I say,
we should not make the Tables of the one become their snares to wax fat, and
forget God, and to tempt the other with misery, which not unoften ministers as
bad council as that of Jobs wife, to curse God and dye? To conclude, will
virtue be in any reputation, while riches are in such great esteem? Oh what
Iliads of evils are the offspring of this Covetousness and Oppression? but to
proceed, after all our great expectations, are we not still in the wildern^s,
instead of being arrived at the Canaan of our Liberties, that good Land we
promised our selves by our Reformation? or else as Samuel sometime said to
Saul, What means this bleating of Sheep and Oxen? so, what means the sighing
and mourning of the people? what means those harsh and querulous notes that are
continually grating in our ears; are they not witnesses hereof? is not every
man's mouth like the Children of Isreal's, found full of bitter complaints? Is
there not a great m^rmuring throughout the Nation? does not not every one cry
out more then ever of the deadness of Trade, of the hardness and iniquity of
the times? and is it without cause? are not all Trades and Professions over
stocked? is not knavery crept into every shop, and fraud and deceit into all
professions? and are not Thieves and Beggars daily multipliplyed, and those of
none of the worst Names and Families throughout the Land?

And have not too complaints been added, many and various endeavors? into how
many several forms and moulds of Government have we of late been cast? How many
new experiments have we made; of how many instruments and new devices made
trials, and all to no purpose, into how great pangs and what sore travail has
the Commonwealth been cast, and yet not able to bring forth the desired and
expected Reformation, we have so long waited for. How has the Nation staggered
and reeled to and fro like a drunken Man? We have set up and pulled down; we
build, and then again destroy; we go forwards and backwards, not knowing which
way to turn us, being all this while groping in the dark, not knowing what
ayleth us, or what we would have, only we are sick and that unto the death.

Also many have been the Physicians that have undertaken our cure, to heal the
distempers of our State, but have proved mere Mountebancks, either their
ignorance mistaking, or fear concealing the rise and cause of our malady, and
so proved very unsuccessful in their undertakings, what shall we then do? shall
we tamper no more, but leave time to work out Cure, to heal and make up our
breaches? without doubt that cannot be safe, for our disease grows upon us
daily, we are every day worse then other, the very symptoms of death and
dissolution are hastening upon us: and though I pretend not to be a Prophet, or
the son of a Prophet, yet I dare venture to predict, if what is spelled from
visible and natural causes may be so termed, that unless God please to raise
some noble and generous spirits to undertake the discovery, and with undaunted
Reformation destroy the root of all our Evils, we shall yet hear our Bells ring
more changes, and instruments of Government be wound up to more harsh and
discordant Notes then any our ears have been entertained with yet.

Now to know the spring and source of our misery, I presume we need neither
consult an Oracle, or ask Council of a Conjurer, and perhaps it may be less
difficult, then safe to discover; the Caution of Solomon being good Council, Be
not righteous over much, neither make thy self over wise, why should thou
destroy thy self: Whence we may learn it is not the difficulty, but danger that
obstructs the discovery of many things. For who will contend with time that is
mightier, or too strong for him? So I returned and considered all the
Oppressions that are done under the Sun, and to behold the tears of such as are
Oppressed, and they had no comforter, and on the side of the Oppressors there
was power, but they had no Comforter. Now should we ask Council of our old
Nobility, the Lawyer, the Clergy, or the Citizen, we know what would be their
advice, to face about, return to the old constitution, to go back again into
Egypt, to return to our making of brick, and so build up the things we have so
lately destroyed, for it was better with us then it is now; we shall never find
out a better constitution in which all interests were so well bounded and
balanced, as the old, faith the Ancient Nobility. Nor will any so well suit
with the genious humor of the English people, and the tenor of their Laws,
says the Lawyer, Religion and Learning never flourished so well as under
Monarchy, nor were there then so many Schisms and Heresies, says the Divine.
In the time of the King and Court, we had far better Trading, says the
Citizen; nor were we then burdened with so many Taxes, says the Countryman,
so that all are willing and agreed to face about and be as they were. And what is
the reason of it, but that men mistake their interest, and there is an evil
report raised on the Land, whether we are traveling, as if it were a Land of
Confusion and not of Peace and Liberty. And the Spies have done ill offices,
which has occasioned this brief Map or Description of a Commonwealth, or the
presenting these few bunches of Grapes, that you may have a taste of what
Liberty may be expected in the Canaan toward which we are setting our faces.

Let us therefore stand still and see the salvation of God, and not murmur
against his providence that have so long detained us in the wilderness; but
follow the Captains and Leaders that first lead us out of Egypt, and are now
restored to put us in possession of what we have so long expected, if we do not
through unbelief render our selves unworthy to enter.

Courteous Reader,
THe Author of these Discourses living where the Keys of the Press hang at
their Girdles, who had rather stifle than in the lest be accessory to the birth
of any thing of this nature: was necessitated to make use of one at too great a
distance for his inspection, and therefore to trust wholly to the courtesy of
the Printer, by whose negligence the following Errata's have been suffered in
many places, to steal away the sense of the discourse; there being many other
smaller lapses through mispointing, and the like, together with the Errata's of
three or four of the last sheets, that the Author not having an opportunity of
perusing, must be submitted to the Readers judgment or Candor, to be either
corrected or forgiven.

Epistle to the Reader,PAge 1. l 23. r. Cultivate f. Culturate. p. 2. l. 28. r.
after f. offer. p. 3. l. 19. r. world f. word, and l. 22. r. wealth f. wrath.
p. 5. l. 17. r. him, f. time. l. 27. r. then, then. l. 30. the Genius and
humor.

PAge 6. line 13. for that Olygarchy, read Oligarchy that etc. p. 7. l. 21. f.
equalities, r. capacities. p. 9. l. 26. f. stabi^ity, r. subtlety. p. 16. l. 4.
f. pricks r. P^kes. p. 22 l. 28. of those etc. r. to those. p. 44. l. 16.
limit, r. remit. p. 47. l. 4. humane, r. humor. p. 49. l. 9. learned, r.
leavened. p. 50. l. 23. stated, r. elated. p. 52. l. 8. curbed, r. crabbed. p.
54. l. 30. conclusion, r. confusion. p. 58. l. 11. their r. either imprudence
etc p 58. l. 1. strain, r. theme. p. 61. l. 4. burnings, r. turnings. p. 62.
l. 2. imprudent, r. impendent. p. 62. l. 26. concern, r. conceive. p. 63. l 21.
and worse, r. divorse. p. ^6. l. 5. Oppressors, r. Oppr^ssions, p. 67. l. 8.
most, r. more. p. 68. l. 8. Sons, r. Sions. p. 69. l. 2. rescue, r. receive,
etc.

THE PROEM, CONTAINING A PLEA for an Equal Commonwealth or Free State against
Monarchy.
I Have sometime (by what charms I know not) been so strongly possessed with a
fond opinion of the indifferency of all forms of Government, that I have looked
on none as objects of greater pity, then such as prompted by an ignorant and
blind zeal, have left their memories on the file of History, and their names
registered in the bloody Rubricks of Times-Calender as Martyrs of State; for as
I presumed all Governments alike subject to corruption and oppression, so I
supposed none incapable of becoming the Conduits of Justice, and administering
Truth and Righteousness to the people.

And therefore have been apt to interpret a noncompliance with present power,
as rather proceeding from ill manners, or a peevish kind of morosity, that in
some turbulent ill-natured spirits, is the infirmity, or rather hereditary
malady of their Melancholy Complexion, then from any true work of Conscience,
or Reverence (as commonly pretended) to the Sacred Bonds of Religion; which
betrayed my rashness into a fond conceit, that not only the Malcontents
under one Government, would be the same under any other, unless their ambition
were gratified with a share and interest in the administration and management
thereof; but a^^^, that such good natures as can comply with one, will, if the
Scene (chance) to change, and the Balance of Affairs turn, with as great
readiness espouse and cast themselves into the embraces of another, as
acknowledging the tribute of all faithful duty and loyal obedience justly due,
and of right to be paid, to whatever Power is so well sledg'd, as to extend the
wing of their Protection, for a defense to the Lives and Estates of all such as
are willing to own and receive warmth from their Authority.

The consideration whereof rendered me very neutral in reference to State
affairs, supposing Faction and Ambition to bear greater sway then Religion, in
by assing men's Propensities, and ruling their inclinations as to things of this
nature: Insomuch, that I have been apt to pity and commiserate the unhappiness
of those God had been pleased to call up to the battlements of Sovereignty, and
placed at the Helm of Affairs; by reason there never have been wanting such, as
on all occasions, are willing to malign and revile their persons, to cast shame
and reproach upon their names, and arraign the best of their actions as guilty
of Pride and Oppression; and all this by the verdict of a Jury of prejudicated
thoughts, impannelled in their own breasts, and before no more equitable a Bar,
then that of their private and forestalled judgments; when as my more simple
Charity has been apt to prompt me to a more favorable and candid opinion.

But with whatever fond apprehensions my childehood, and days of former
ignorance and vanity might be enchanted withal: I have at length gathered this
wholesome fruit, from the bitter root of our late troubles and changes, of
being better able to distinguish between good and evil, and of having the eye
of my understanding opened, to a clearer discerning of that wherein the true
interest of our liberties and felicity is wound up; so as no longer to make up
the Consort of those, that suborned by the flatteries and fallacies of base and
corrupt interests, call light darkness, and darkness light; being by the
experience of those few years wherein we have of late run the Gantlet of so
many several forms of Government, Baptized into a new Belief, and made
Proselyte to another opinion then what ignorance and prejudice had formerly
ingarrisoned my apprehensions withal; as having found the Strokes of one more
smart, and giving a deeper wound to both our spiritual and civil liberties then
others.

And though I was never possessed with an evil spirit of Opposition, or genius of
Contradicting and Snarling at what is present; but rather studied at least a
passive, if not an active compliance with the present Power; as knowing there
was never any Power, whose Commission was not passed, if not under the
Broad-Seal of Heavens Approbation, yet at least by the Privy Seal of Gods
permissive Providence; which I have always taken as a sufficient warrant for
paying the tribute of passive Obedience, wheresoever I received the benefit of
reciprocal Protection: Yet I cannot but acknowledge some Governments more pure,
refined, and less prone to corruption then others; and certainly, those wherein
the Supreme Magistrate has an interest distinct from that of the people, must
be most apt to degenerate, and have greatest propensity to Tyranny and
Oppression. Now whether Monarchy, that winds up all the strings in the
Instrument of Government to the interest of a Single Person; that tunes Laws,
Religion, and all things, to an harmony and compliance with the Monarchs single
Will, may not justly be suspected of this strain, I leave at the Bar of any
considerate man's judgment to be decided.

Certainly, whatever gloss or varnish the Courtship or flatteries of Princes or
their Parasites may set upon it, such a Government is diametrically opposite
to, and inconsistent with the true liberty and happiness of any people.

I remember I have read a pretty strange passage of one of the French Kings,
that he was the most Religious Prince, and greatest Tyrant that ever wore the
Crown of France. I was (I confess) sometime startled at the strangeness of the
Character; but our late experience of one might wear the same livery, makes me
able, not only to digest the wonder; but also to give credence to this general
Aphorism, That whatever may be the Qualifications of any Prince, in reference
to the personal indowments of his mind, the title of Good was never justly
attributed to any King, in reference to his Office, except comparatively: And
therefore in my apprehension, Elective Kingdoms have small advantage of
Hereditary, by reason the unhappiness of such Governments, seem not so much to
spring from the nature of the person administering, as of the Office and
Dignity, which ever lays an Iron Yoke of Slavery and Oppression on the peoples
necks: So that considering the vast expense of blood and treasure with which
the competition of the Office and Dignity is usually managed, by the scarlet
Candidates of Crowns and Scepters, an Hereditary Monarchy seems ecligible, as
the lesser evil; especially, if by some fundamental Constitution, like the
Sallick Law of France, the absurd (though not unusual) pretensions of women and
children might be cut off: For to hang the Keys of the power Civil and
Ecclesiastic upon Apron-strings; and to put the Scepter into a hand, fitter to
wear a Distaff, is to invert the order both of God and Nature, and to set a
Nation with its heels upwards. And yet I know it is the opinion of some, that
women and children are fittest to make Princes, as being of a more passive
spirit; and therefore likeliest to steer by the advice of wise Council; by
reason they repose less stress and confidence in their own prudence, then men,
in Authority of which the happy and prosperous Reign of Queen Elizabeth is
usually alleged; but whether without wrong to the more then masculine vigor
of her spirit, and matchless quickness of parts, whereby she was to a wonder,
qualified for Government, and reported rather to outstrip, then come short of
the more noble Sex, I leave others to judge. But should we grant this assertion
to to have the countenance of Reason, and that experience had also set to its
seal of Conformation; its so far from being of any advantage to Monarchy, by
warding off the blow usually given by such as skirmish against it, with their
reasons sharpened with these inconveniences, that it gives the deepest wound to
its reputation that could be desired; by asserting, that Oligarchy, by the
general consent of all times and ages, has been exploded as one of the worst
Tyrannies, to be the best of Monarchies.

I have met with some, that plead much for the Single Person that should be
only the name, without the thing; the office, without the power; the shadow or
image, without the substance; as if it were impossible for men, that are the
Masters and proprietors of reason, to be knit together into civil society and
peace for their own common interest and safety, without erecting either some
gaudy thing to humor them, or some Scarecrow to fright them into obedience:
Nor do I know whose convenience would be herein consulted, except the Lawyers,
who (if like Packhorses trained up in one road) not able to change their
accustomed pace or style, it be prudence for the Nation to hazard a relapse
into Tyranny, and again expose their lives and liberties to the will and lust
of an Arbitrary Power, to set up a John of Oak, or Will. of Style, with
infinite expense of blood and treasure, by reimposing the Yoke so lately cast
off, that this pack, etc. may not alter the style and form of their Writs, etc.
I say, wherefore the Nation should be so over indulgent to a corrupt interest
of men, rather then to regulate and reform the forms of Law, that through the
subtilty of this Generation, are become rather snares then fences of our
estates and proprieties, falls not within the precincts of my apprehension.

Should we now unbowel and trace unto its original this Name, for which there
have of late appeared so many Advocates, I presume it would be found of as ill
complexion as the word Tyrant was accounted amongst the Greeks; the english
word King being but the abreviate of Cunning, the usual epithet as all men
know of Knaves; and to speak the truth experience has made good, though never
so great a Saint has sat upon the The One, the Devil and a Bishop has ever
stepped into the Office: For I am not of that fond opinion that Kings are not
capable in their private equalities of like virtues and qualifications with
other men; but that notwithstaanding their accomplishments, how excellent, how
bright, how orient soever are their personal virtues, they stand on slippery
places; and their dignities, their interests, their parasites, their flatterers
are snares too great for them to retain their integrity, and therefore that the
Talent of Sovereign Power is too great, too precious to be entrusted or
deposited in one man's hand, though an Angel, least so great a temptation should
endanger his fall, and make him appostate to a Devil.

That Kings are Gods scourges and given in wrath we have the testimony of
Scripture: Nimrod was a great hunter, a mighty man, a great oppressor, and the
first King or Prince we read of, the first that invaded the liberty of the
World, that first usurped Authority, and presumed to exercise Dominion over his
brethren, the first that put a period to that Golden Age, wherein no other then
paternal Government was known: But though thus nigh the morning of time, God
sent his scourge Nimrod as a just plague amongst the other Nations of the
Earth, yet the people of God, the seed of Abraham, the children of Israel were
a long while after free, a Free State, and enjoyd their native libertys, till
the time of Samuel, when they rebelled and desired a King like the other
Nations, that they might be like the Heathen whom God had cast out, which God
construed no other then Apostasy, and rejecting of him, then rebellion and high
treason against his own divine Majesty, and said, They have rejected me, and
then tells them what would be the issue, fruit and product thereof,

They should give away their liberty, and be subjected to an arbitrary power,
and become the slaves and vassals of their King, who should take their sons and
their daughters to make them his servants, and send them forth to fight his
battles, that is, to be the instruments of his pride and luxury, and the
champions of his malice and ambition.

And then he should destroy their propriety, and take away their houses, and
their vineyards and give them to his servants. Thus the Spirit of God gives the
same description of a King, as of what we call a Tyrant, a Nero, a Monster, as
if they were all one, and it were essential to the nature of the office or
dignity to be a Beast of prey, a Leviathan, an oppressor and devourer of the
people, which charracter has been too easy to be read in the lives of most of
the best Kings, whose names are not taken off the file of memory.

Now as for those that would have a mock, a counterfeit, a limited King, a
King and no King, an empty Title, a bare Name, vox and preterea nihil, or I
know not what: They propose a remedy worse then the disease; for to divide the
Sovereignty, is to lay a Scene of blood, to sow the seed of a perpetual civil
war, and intail ruin on our selves and posterity; what is divided cannot
stand; there will spring up perpetual jealousies, fears and annimosities, which
will cause intrenchings on each others authority, until the one have supplanted
and overturned the other, this is to institute a civil war, Anarchy and
confusion, instead of a well ordered Commonwealth or Polity.

Having thus unmasked the true nature of Monarchy, which is no other then the
more gentle or civil expression of Tyranny, I shall endeavor to obviate some
of the most plausible and strenuous arguments, by whose strength and stabillity
it is endeavored to be obtruded, and our assents conciliated to the reception
thereof.

One of the grand arguments whereby the betrayers of our Liberty endeavor to
decoy us into the Iron Yoke, we have so lately shaked off, is taken from our
long use and custom to draw therein, which has made tlavery become almost a
second nature to us and therefore endeavor to scare us from our liberty as a
novel and dangerous thing, as if servitude were more natural to a Nation then
freedom, or any custom could utterly expunge nature; I am sure the former
cannot reflect with greater disgrace, or more derogate from the honor of our
Nation, that we should be of so course a metal, so base an allay, of so
Spaniel-like-couchant, slavish and degenerate a spirit, then the other does
deviate from truth; but the worthy Advocates of this cause, measure truth by
the wicked Standard of their base and corrupt designs, as they take the
altitude of all other men's spirits, though never so brave and elevated, by the
Jacobs staff of their own pitiful crowching, fawning humor.

It would waste more ink and paper then I am either willing or have leisure to
bestow, should I show how much the State of our Nation is altered, and into how
great an unsuitableness we are of late traveled unto that Government, this
argument would plead prescription for.

But of what weight or truth it is of, will easily appear to any that have
taken notice of that passage of our modern History of the last Century, which
concerns the gallant Hero Sir Philip Sidney, who though born in that most
unlukie juncture of time for producing brave spirits, when the Nation truckled
under the Government of a woman, was yet thought worthy of the Polish Crown,
and had an overture in order to his election thereto, had not his jealous
Mistress prevented; if then one born under the influences of a femal
Government, and not of the highest rank of Nobility, was thought fit to sway a
Scepter, of how great blasphemy against the honor of our Nation, may they be
thought guilty, who say the free born people of England, after they have broke
the more ancient Norman Yoke, and the more modern of a latter, etc. are not fit
to enjoy that liberty, that has been the price of so much blood and Treasure:
But should we conceed all the argument seems to beg, that our necks ate used
to the Yoke, and we are become familiar to servitude; shall we therefore
willingly suffer our ears to be bored to the posts of our new Masters doors,
and become slaves for ever? shall we court our bonds, and glory in that which
is our shame? shall we never learn to be free, and value liberty? shall we
never emancipate our selves and posterity, but intaile thraledome and slavery
on them, also to all generations? For so long as we draw in this Yoke, our
condition is the same with slaves; whatsoever is born unto us is a vassal of
our Lords; the fruit of our loins must drink of the same cup with us, draw in
the same yoke, groan under the same tyranny and oppression we bequeath unto
them; nay, who knows but their bondage may increase, like that of Isreal's under
the Son of Solomon, whose little finger was heavier then his Fathers loins; for
tyrannies usually exasperate and wax worse with continuance; shall we now
beaqueath our children liberty or bonds, freedom or oppression. If we who have
had our necks worn with the yoke, and our backs bowed down with heavy burdens,
are of a couchant slavish spirit, perhaps our posterity, if born in a freer
air, and under the influences of a more benign Government, may prove of more
generous and noble spirits, worthy of, and knowing how to prize their liberty.
But without doubt those brave and gallant souls, by the Conduct of whose valor
and prudence, we have broke the Iron yoke of arbitrary and exorbitant power,
and by the good providence of God, redeemed the captivity of our Nation, from
the unrighteous bonds of its wicked oppressors, are worthy of, and know how to
prize and improve what has been purchased with so much sweat and oil, and will
not in the end sell their birthright for a mess of pottage, but leave an off
spring, heirs of their own valor and gallantry, that will with the utmost
perril of their lives and fortunes, defend and preserve what the labors of
their ancestors has purchased, with sore travail both of mind and body, and so
transmit it entire to their posterity, through many generations, till the
consummation of all things, and that time shall be no more.

But for a farther and more satisfactory Answer, to silence this Argument, we
may consider how the Scene is changed, and Balance of lands altered since
these last Centuries, and by reason thereof, with howgreat difficulty Monarchy
has made good its ground since Henry the 8th's days, in which it began first
to decline, and has ever since been posting to its period.

For that wilful Prince, by alienating the Church Revenues, quite altered the
balance of Lands that was the Basis of his Government, and thereby did that
service unawares that pulled up the stake of Monarchy. For the Church (which
with all its preferments, was at the Kings devotion and sole dispose) did at
that time possess a third part of the Lands and wealth of the whole Nation:
Which being afterward sold, and coming into the hands of private men, set up
many thousands of families that had no dependency on the Crown. Since which
time, the number of Freeholders being much increased, the Nation has had a
natural and strong vergency toward a Commonwealth; which has been much
discovered in the spirit and complexion of our Parliaments, of which the house
of Commons (heretofore an inconsiderable Truckling kind of Court, that was
only summoned for the Prince to milk their purses, and let the people blood in
the silver vain) grew now more peremptory, and began to give check to their
Princes Exorbitances, insomuch that Queen Elizabeth was put to her Courtship to
retain them in allegiance, as afterward King James to a thousand shifts and
juggles, who notwithstanding all his King-craft and cunning in which he so much
gloried and boasted himself, so great a Master was scarce able with much
juggling and dissimulation to divert the Storm from falling on his own head,
which afterward rained so much blood and vengeance on his Son and Posterity, to
the utter ruin and confusion of his Family.

To conclude therefore this particular, it being a Maxim of truth, placed
beyond all hazard of Contradiction, That no Government can be fixed in this
Nation, but according to the Balance of Land. That Prince that is not able
neither by his own nor the Public Revenue in some measure to counterpoise, if
not ore-ballance the greater part of the people, must necessarily be Tenant at
Will for the Crown he wears: For they that are the Proprietors of the Land and
Wealth of any Nation, will with case be able by the Magnetisme to draw the
greatest number of Abettors to their side, and so to guild ore their
pretensions as to render them current with the people, and so in the end, give
Law to the rest of their brethren: Therefore where there is one Proprietor or
Landlord as in Turkey, there is absolute Monarchy; where a few, Aristocracy, etc.

Now since the Crown Lands and Church Lands of this Nation are sold, what other
prop or pillar of security is left for the Throne of a Prince to rest upon,
except that of a Mercenary Army, lies not within view of my apprehensions: and
then how wholesome or safe advice the re-establishing of Monarchy is to this
Nation, I leave all men (that have not altogether abjured their reason and
conscience) to judge and determine.

As for those poetical if not profane flourishes wherewith Orators and Poets,
the constant parasites of Princes, use to guild ore Monarchy, pretending it the
most natural and rational of all other Forms of Government, and that whose
pattern was first shown in the Mount, or rather let down from Heaven,
paralelling it with Gods Regimen of the Universe, which is alleged as it
prototype or first Exemplar, and therefore to have something more of a divine
right and character impressed upon it than any other, etc.

These I say are such trite, bald and slight reasonings, that they do not merit
so much respect as to receive an answer; for may we not as well by this loose
and allusive way of arguing borrow a pattern from Heaven for the Triumvirate,
that Augustus Lepidus and Marc. Antony sometime imposed on Rome. Does it not as
well quadrate with the Sacred Trinity, by the triple Scepter of whose divine
providence the Empire of the world is administered, as by theirs sometime that
of the Romans? Will any one therefore be so bold as to say that was the most
natural and rational Government, and founded by no less than a divine right,
according to its pattern and Archetype in the Heavens! Notwithstanding the
brand of the blackest and bloodiest Tyranny Rome ere saw has been set thereon,
by the universal consent of all Historians.

Or may we not considering the pride, ambition, rapine, extortion, injury and
oppression, that usually crowd into the Courts of the best Princes, with as
much or more reason parallel absolute Monarchy with that of the Prince of
Darkness, in which there is no trinity as in the other, and therefore more
exactly quadrate to the absoluteness our proud Monarchs so much endeavor to
obtain.

I confess could we have a prince to whom Majesty might be attributed without
profane Hyperboles, that were a true Vicar or Lieutenant of God, that was not
subject to the passions and infirmities much less the vices and monstrosities
of humane nature, that could neither be imposed on by deceit, nor abused by
flattery, whom the passions neither of fear nor affection could warp to the
least declivity from what is right and honest, whose reason could never be
biased by any private interest or base respect to decline the paths of justice
and equity, but would manage the reins of his power with a like constancy and
stediness as by the hand of providence the helm of the Universe is steered: I
should then become an Advocate of Monarchy, and acknowledge it to have the
impress of Divinity, and bear the Character and Inscription of God upon it, to
be the best and most absolute form of Government, and a true Copy of its Divine
Original: But till security be given for such a righteous administration, I
desire to be excused from being a pander to Ambition, or the advocate to
Tyranny, as having learnt, It is not good for a man to be alone, especially on
the high and slippery places; but in the multitude of Counselors there is
safety: And me thinks the very dialect of Princes in the plural number
(whatever of State or Majesty may be pretended) is a witness of, and does
clearly speak the unnaturalness of such exorbitant monopolies of power, and
that though they act in a single capacity, are willing to speak like a
Commonwealth.

Most of the other arguments of which the advocates of tyranny make use, are
drawn from the pretended advantage of that Government, above and beyond others
in respect of secrecy, celerity, unanimity and the like, which though
conveniences, yet being far too light to counterpose and balance the other
incommodities, together with the great charge and excise they are rated at,
require no other answer, nor shall I wast more time and ink upon them: Yet how
these conveniences may be taken in, we have an expedient propounded by M.
Harrington, according to the example of the Roman Commonwealth, by erecting a
dictatorian power, if the state of affairs at any time so require.

Having thus passed the pricks of the sharpest arguments, that are usually
raised in defense of the odd thing called a single person, I shall only speak a
word or two to that is founded on the single command, That in times of war and
eminent danger, when the gates of Janus Temple are set open, is committed to
one man, it being a received maxim, that reason has always conceded an
advantage to the absolute jurisdiction of a single person in the field,
prescribing to that end but one General to an Army, for fear of divisions upon
contrary counsels and commands.

To which may be replied, notwithstanding Generals are not taken upon trust, as
Kings in successive Monarchies, but upon the test of experience, and proved
sufficiency manifested in former services; yet if it seem expedient to the
Commonwealth, there may be a rotation in that office as well as others, as was
anciently in the Roman Republique, whose Armies were led forth by their annual
successive Consuls, and that with great success and victory.

But the Expedient our present Parliament has found out by Commission, does so
fully answer this objection, that I need say no more unto it; for without
doubt, it is the Interest of a Free State to have all the people so trained up
in Military Discipline and made familiar with Arms, that he may not be thought
arrived at the just accomplishments of a Gentleman, that is not able to lead an
Army into the Field, it being among the Romans no absurd Apostrophe to leave
the plough tail to head an Army or vice versa when their Military employments
were accomplished: How much then may they be thought to fall short of the
accomplishment of a Gentleman, that know not how to manage the Conduct of a
Troop of Horse, as I fear too many of our Gentlemen upon a due scrutiny would
be found, who notwithstanding all their great pretenses to be accounted
Armigeri or Esquires, are scarce stout enough to discharge a pistol, or were
ever militant beyond the borders of their Ladies Carpets.

I shall now sound a retreat to the further progress of my pen on this Theme,
lest I should seem too much to triumph ore a baffled and prostrate Enemy, it
being my desire to use victory with like moderation, I desire to bear a Foyl,
Conquest or Captivity: Therefore since by the good providence of God, together
with the gallant Conduct of the no less prudent then valiant Asserters of our
native Rights and Liberties, we are re-instated in the possession of our Birth
rights, I shall attempt the discovery of those rocks and shelves on which in
the late night of Apostasy we split our Liberties, and endangered the utter
ruin and shipwreck of our lives and fortunes, in the dangerous Sea of an
exorbitant and unlimited Power: and thereby strike some sparks of light for the
future better steering of the Commonwealth, in whose bottom as all our lives
and felicities are adventured, we are all concerned to endeavor its being
brought to a safe Port and Harbor.

The work then of our present Pilots that sit at the Stern and manage the
Conduct of our affairs, is to endeavor the Commonwealth may be so equally
balanced as it may neither have propensity to a second relapse into Monarchy,
as of late, or Oligarchy, which is worse, nor yet into Anarchy, the worst of
all three: But to settle a Free State upon such just and righteous foundations
as cannot be moved, that may be a strong Rampire of defense not only to our
Civil Liberties, as men from the future encroachment of Tyranny or inundation
of Exorbitant Power, but also of security to our Spiritual Liberties, as
Christians from the invasion of those that desire to domineer and lord it over
the Consciences of their Brethren: Both which seem so linked and twisted to
each other, that what conduces to the security of one, has no small tendency
to the establishing of the other also, and do commonly so inseperably accompany
each other, that wheresoever there is a Free State or equal Commonwealth
Liberty of Conscience is inviolably preserved together with a convenient and
inoffensive latitude in toleration of Religions, as in Holland, Venice, etc.

Now for the better securing of these we are to take notice of what persons or
things are most inconsistent with, and have greatest enmity to, the interest of
a Free State or equal Commonwealth.

For discovery of which as I know it a crime of presumption unpardonable for
one seated in the vale of a private condition to pretend a fairer prospect into
the interest of State, than those providence has placed in the Watch-towers
and on the pinacles of power: Yet by reason a by-stander may be allowed to
discern something of the Game, and he that is out of play to show the ground to
a Bowler, and one that stands below may better know what props the foundation
rests upon, than he that is on the top of the Tower: And it being the duty of
every one to cast in his mite to the vaster treasures of their knowledge to whom
providence has committed the Conduct of our Affairs, I am bold, being partly
thereto encouraged by that great candor wherewith I observe the like tribute of
zealous and faithful hearts are already received, to tender what in my
apprehension may have a tendency to a future settlement and security. I confess
were we at this time bowed down under the Government of a Monarch in whose
Court every Counselor of State is to be taken on an implicit faith to enjoy
by his Princes Patent and favor a Monopoly of Reason as well as Honor, and
that his understanding is no less elevated than according to the proportion his
Titles and Fortunes swell above the tide of other men's: I might justly be
accounted absurd to offer any thing of this nature, as knowing with what scorn
and contempt so rash an adventure would be encountered.

But in a Free State wherein the greatest Senators are not ashamed to confer
with the meanest persons, I am not afraid to put my self into the crowd of
those that make addresses of this nature: Wherefore to conclude this
Parenthesis and resume the thread of our discourse, there are not as I presume
pass two or three sorts of persons whose interests run counter to, or indeed
are not twisted and wound up in the same bottom with that of a Free State, or
at least in the spining out of a few years might not be interwove therewith,
and those are the Lawyer, Divine, and Hereditary Nobility, as for the Cavalier
and Courtier, I question not but a little time would breath out their
Antipathy, and warp their affections to a perfect compliance and closing with
an equal Commonwealth.

Of the Ministry or Clergy.
IT being the Method of Heaven for Judgment to begin with the House of God, I
shall first speak to the reformation of the public Ministry, or National
Clergy, so far as they seem prompted by their interest, to run counter to that
of a Commonwealth; and though I know (notwithstanding the complexion of their
Coat, which seems, or at least ought to promise greater moderation) it is no
less dangerous to meddle, or in the least exasperate this generation of men,
then to puddle in a Hornets nest, or encounter a Bear robbed of her whelps; yet
my conscience bearing me witness, I have neither malice to their persons, nor
envy their preferments; I shall not forbear to give in my testimony against
the corrupt interest and principles wherewith they are leavened: Where by the
way, I must profess my self unsatisfied of what ground or foundation may (since
the Jewish Priesthood was abolished) be ^ound in Scripture for that distinction
between the Laity and Clergy, which custom has introduced into most Christian
Commonwealths; my zeal and charity being apt to prompt me to a like wish with
that of Moses, That all the Lords people were Prophets, or rather to think all
the Lords people are holy, and to be accounted a Royal Priesthood to God: Nor
can I persuade my self learning is so necessary a qualification for the
teaching of the Gospel, as some would make us believe, having observed our
Savior altogether rejected the wisdom of man, and made not use of the learned
Scribes or Doctors of the Law, but simple and illitterate Fishermen to be the
first Heralds of Peace unto the world, to proclaim good will to the Children
of men, to be the first Evangelists and Messengers of the glad tidings of
Salvation; and indeed the introduction of learned Rabbis into the Church of
Christ, and blending Divinity with the learning of the Gentiles, seems to run
counter to the whole design of the Gospel, which is by the foolishness of
preaching to confound the wisdom of the world. Certainly the sword of Gods
Spirit will be able to do its work, though not managed by the skilful hand of
an Artist, or Master of Fence, that has been brought up in the Polemicks and
Digladiations of humane litterature, vain Philosophy, or Sophistry of the
Schools.

Nor do I find that the Apostles, and those sent forth by Christ, to be the
Catholic Bishops of the whole earth, and to teach all Nations, did assume
unto themselves any distinction of garb, color, or habits from the rest of
Christ's Flock; and I have read of some that were censured in the Primitive
times, or first Centuries, for wearing large black Cloaks; for what is this but
to bring back those Jewish types and shaddows, to cloud and obscure the
brightness of the Gospels dispensation, that were long since dispelled and
abrogated, by the a rising of the Sun of Righteousness upon the world; for as
one has lately well observed, What is the canonical girdle, and formality of
Doctors wearing boots, but as types and allusions of those places, of having
their loins girt and their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel, etc.

Nor do I read that they who were called to the Ministry did look upon that as
a writ of ease, or sufficient warrant to quit their other particular callings,
trades and vocations, but that Paul wrought with his hands, that he might not
become burdensome, and it is generally presumed, our Savior wrought at his
Fathers Trade; not that I would not have those that Minister in spiritual
things reap of others carnal; but that it seems more according to the rule and
precedent of the Gospel, that they should be content with what voluntary
contribution, God shall move the peoples hearts unto, then by force and rigor
of Law exact a maintenance.

And when I find the Apostle saluting the Church in Caesar's family, I am
prompted to wish, that all our Houses were Chapels unto the Lord, and that our
families, like that of Caesar's, contained a Church within them: I am sure it
is no new observation, that the greatest heat and zeal of Religion, has been
always found in conventicles and private meetings, which suggests unto my
thoughts no small ground of suspicion, that our parochial Churches, Bells,
together with the whole order, pomp, method, and formallity of our National
Clergy, and public worship, stands upon no other foundation then that of
humane invention, which by the stream of corrupt times, have been carried
beyond the pattern and precedent of the Primitive Ages, and become very unlike
and dissonant to the exemplar Christ and his Apostles left us.

Nor am I satisfied, if the generallity of men are incapable of receiving the
truth and power of godliness, whether the endeavors of giving all men a
tincture of Religion, and forcing them into the garb and livery of an outward
profession, which is the great design of, and plea for a National Clergy, be
more acceptable unto God then Morality. I know under the Law, God had a
peculiar people that were picked and culled as it were from the dross and
rubbish of the rest of mankind that were to be built up in an outward
profession and National way of public worship, adorned with many Ceremonies,
together with much pomp, and outward splendour, but whether Religion be not now
under the Gospel, a more inward, refined, spiritual and less visible thing, I
humbly submit to serious consideration. And if I am herein mistaken (for I
pretend not to Infallibility) I should be thankful to any God shall be pleased
to make use of as instruments to better inform me; for I would willingly see
and know my errors.

But if it be here objected that the Primitive times were times of persecution,
in which the Church was as it were under Hatches, and Christianity in its
Infancy, and the Professors thereof forced to hide themselves in holes of the
Rocks and Caves of the earth: But now having gained ground upon the world and
being in better plight, and since it is come up out of Egypt from the House of
Bondage from under the pressures, afflictions, persecutions, and burdens of its
Heathenish Taskmasters, under which it formerly groaned, ought, according to
the example of the Israelites, be adorned with the spoil of the Heathen, etc.

I answer, That as the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, so it
consists not in any outward pomp and splendour Its said the Kings Daughter (or
Spouse of Christ) is All-glorious within, and by how much the more ground
Christianity has gained upon the world, by so much the less need does it now
stand of the Wisdom and Learning of men to commend and propagate it, then when
it was to encounter with so great opposition, and such potent Antagonists as
under the Heathen Emperor it met withal. And if the truth did then under all
those disadvantages not only make good its ground, but so much gained upon the
World when it had few other Champions than poor Fishermen and illiterate
Mechanics; how much less need it now fear brow-beating when the power of God
has subdued so many Nations to the knowledge and obedience of his truth, and
has made Princes of the earth bow unto the Scepter of his Son.

Some dawnings of these truths began in a great measure to break forth upon
that little Assembly which by way of scorn is commonly called Praise God Bare
bones Parliament, of whom many are able to bear this testimony, that they were
the first Power of this Nation that did most visibly own Christ in the purity
and simplicity of the Gospel: But Christ's appearance in their meekness, much
like his riding to Jerusalem on an Ass, was so far from being received with
Hosanna's, that it was utterly rejected and refused by the Policy and wisdom of
this Generation, which was unworthy of so great a mercy, and indeed not ripe
for that purity and simplicity of Reformation, that they by a Spirit of Faith
seemed strongly carried forth unto: Which eminently appeared in their sudden
striking at the root of two such potent Factions as the National Clergy and the
Lawyers, which they would hardly have done had they only consulted with flesh
and blood, or not steered the Course of their Counsels by something beyond the
Compass of humane prudence. And whether the Nation is yet willing to part with
their Calves they have so long worshipped, I know not, but I am sure it has
pleased God to give them a great discovery of the corruption, pride, ambition,
and flattery of this sort of men, how willing they could be to reap their own
profit though sown in, and springing from the ruin of the Nations liberty and
felicity, how willingly they could sell their brethren slaves into the hands of
Tyranny and Oppression, to purchase to themselves Dominion and Lordship.

I would not be taken for an Enemy to either the Magistracy or true Ministry,
as knowing they are the Ordinance of God, and the very light and eyes of the
world; only that which I am chiefly moved to witness against, is, that
unnatural divorce and separation that is at this day found between them in
Christian Commonwealths, which I account no less contrary to the Maxim of
true policy, than the mind of God and precedent of its first institution: And
however it came to pass that the Civil Magistrate was thus trapan'd, to have
the Keys of the Church taken from him, to be thrust out of the Temple as an
unholy thing, to be prohibited from Ministering at the Altar, and so the better
part of the blessing wrested from him, to whom (if any more than other) it does
chiefly appertain, and this by a company of Hirelings: I know not, but I think
I may be bold to say it was not so in the beginning.

For first these two Functions of Magistracy and Ministry are united in their
source and origin, viz. Christ the supreme Head of the Church, who is both
King, Priest, and Prophet.

Secondly, the Moral Law which we call the ten Commandments, and the Judicial
Laws of Moses given by God, setting aside some Idioms and properties of them
peculiarly relating to the Jewish Nation are the Rule and Standard for Civil
Governors to rule by, and the Equity of them is written in men's hearts by
Nature, and renewed by Christ. Which being the common rule of our Obedience
both toward God and Man, plead much against that distinction of its
Administrators, viz. that of one Law there should be two Ministers, especially
in so great a distinction, if not opposition, as is found at this day.

Thirdly, The two Functions were united in the ancient Patriarchs, who were
Kings, Priests, and Prophets in their several Tribes and Families, which
continued during the first Ages, and more innocent time of the worlds Infancy,
during the time of Paternal, the first and best of all Governments, when, if
ever, was that Golden Age so much mentioned by our Poets, a time when Tyranny
and Oppression were unknown.

But after the liberty of the world was invaded by Tyranny, and Esau sold his
Birthright for a mess of pottage, the Power of the two Swords became parted,
and to render the purchase of Empire more cheap and easy, the ambitious
Candidates of Dominion were willing to compound and part stakes, permitting
others to domineer in things of conscience, so they would hold the stirrup for
their ambition to get into the saddle of Civil rule and Empire, by which means
the Sword and the Keys might come first to be parted, and so found in several
hands, which has been the cause of most of those wars and deluges of blood
that have been poured forth since the beginning of the world, to wit, by the
clashing of the two Powers, Civil and Ecclesiastic. Now whether after the
extirpation of Paternal Government and institution of the Order of Priesthood
in Aarons family and the Tribe of Levi, both Swords were retained in the same
hand during the time of the Judges, as also after that through the Jews
Apostasy from God, Kings were anointed, is disputable: Though this is certain
they were not altogether excluded, but did sometimes administer in spirituals
as well as temporals; for we often find the good Kings reading and expounding
the Law unto the people, according to the Obligation laid upon them by the
command of God, as also consecrating the Temple, and blessing the people,
things pertaining to the Priestly Office: But after the Captivity both
Functions were visibly united in the persons of the Highpriests, who exercised
the Regal as well as Sacerdotal Office, till the coming of our Savior.

And the light of this truth notwithstanding that night of Ignorance and
Paganism that covered the face of almost all the known world, was not
altogether hid from the Heathen; for during the Republique of the Romans, the
Priests of their Gods were chosen out of their chief Senators, and after their
Liberty was betrayed into an Empire, the Flamen Dialis or High Priest of their
chief god Jupiter was the same with the person of their Emperor.

Nor since the extirpation of Popery has this Doctrine been altogether a
stranger to the British Shoars.

Henry the 8th was by the universal consent of the reformed Clergy acknowledged
under Christ the Supreme Head of the English Church, together with the Title of
Defender of the Faith, which has ever since been granted (though perhaps out
of modesty not always usurped) to all the rest of our Kings and Princes, but
with what decorum, especially when a child or woman was in possession of the
Throne, I leave others to judge: But I remember to have read, that when the
Archbishop (as I take it Abbot) had a charge put in against him, his Judge was
declared the King, to whom he was referred to give an account, as to his
immediate supreme in his own Order; thus civil were those times unto their
Magistrates, whereas now they are prohibited with a procul ite profani, under
no less dreadful penalty then an Anathema, to lay their unhallowed hands upon
the Ark of God, or to offer strange fire unto the Lord, as they are pleased to
term all Divine Service that is not offered in a Priests Censer. Now the
vestal fire of our Religion, like that of old Rome, must be preserved upon the
Altar of the peoples heart, by a peculiar Order of Priesthood, least all the
coals of devotion should otherwise be quenched amongst us; as if it were
impossible to retain the Ark of Gods presence or Religion without a National
Clergy, to be its Guardians, as if the very Heavens of Christianity were in
danger to fall, did not the shoulders of the Clergy bear them up, were not they
the Atlas and Pillar whereby they are supported; so much are these men willing
to arrogate unto themselves.

But to return from this digression, since in the head of all Government
Christ, and in the first Copy of it, amongst the Patriarchs, and in the time
of the Maccabes and in the practice of many Nations, both Christian and
Heathen, the Magistracy and Ministry were twisted together, and exercised by
one and the same, I can see no good reason why they should be parted now,
either in the superior or subordinate Ministers of Justice: Kings have always
accounted the Sacerdotal dignity as one the fairest flowers in their Crown;
(and why Republiques should set a lower value on it, falls not within my
apprehension) they esteemed it a thing most perilous and unsafe, to trust any
besides themselves with the absolute and total power of the Churches Keys,
since those that by that means get a place in the consciences of men, and
pretend to use the Sword of the Spirit, have been always able upon the least
provocation, to arm themselves with greater terror, and quench their thirst of
revenge with deeper draughts of blood then those that were only armed with the
Civil Sword; it being no small advantage upon motions of private revenge, to
set so good a gloss upon their cause, though never so bad, as to be able to
suborn the terrors of hell and conscience, and so make use of the Millitia and
Artillery of the Almighty in their own defense: It is too too well known how
apt the spirit of the Clergy is like that of Peter's, to call for fire from
Heaven upon the heads of their enemies, and to hold the people in a blind fear
and expectation, that their prayers shall be answered. I am sure this State
has little reason to trust a provoked and enraged Clergy, who not only look
upon themselves as injured by the late sale of their best preferments, and
perpetual exclusion from a share and interest in the Legislative power, being
by Act of Parliament incapacitated of having a suffrage in that high and
supreme Court; whereas they used and still expect to give Law to the rest of
the Nation; but also know themselves in little less then a praemunire, by
driving a wiked bargain, in which our Liberties were to have been exposed to
sale, as the price of redemption for their Episcopal Dignities.

Nor indeed is our State rich enough, without reversing the late sales, to
purchase their good wills (were they desirous so to do) or ever bribing them to
so great compliance, as to become the States Orators, or to bark any thing but
faction and sedition against the Commonwealth.

It is not a small thing will satiate the ambition of the English Clergy, who
many of them though taken from the meanest of the people, usually so much
forget their Orignal, that they think the best preferments below their merits
and capacities: Now what prudence it can be for the State to keep up a
discontented and enraged Clergy, to be always pelting from the Pulpit, balls
of Wildfire among the people, to kindle a second war and combustion,
pretending they are the coals of Gods Altar, for warming the peoples hearts
with zeal for his glory; is a maxim of policy, that moves not within the Sphere
of my intelligence.

I should therefore humbly propose, That the Tables of such Money Changers
might be orverturned, and these Buyers and Sellars that make Merchandise of
Religion, and turn the holy function of the Ministry, or Sacerdotal Office,
into a mercenary Trade or profession, into which the meanest of the people
(after seven years Apprentiship in the University, commonly called sitting at
the feet of Gamaliel) are thrust for a piece of bread, may at length be driven
out of the Temple of God: And since (as we hope and believe) the time is come
in which we may expect the fulfilling of that glorious promise, that Kings
shall become nursing Fathers, and our Princes nursing Mothers to the Church;
that our Magistrates that have been always termed Pastores populi, or
Sheep-heards of people, would resume the care of feeding Christ's Flock with the
sincere milk of the Word, and no longer make use of journey-men and hirelings
in Christ's Vineyard, or discharge the most considerable part of their duty
toward God and his people, by proxy, or suffer themselves who are the heads
and Elders of Gods Israel, to be supplanted and beguiled of their birthright,
and by consequence the blessing intailed upon it.

I presume no Christian Magistrate is so ill read in the duties of his place,
as in the least to doubt whether he be no less obliged to teach then govern the
people God's providence has placed him over. I blush to think with how great
shame this reflects upon that ill custom, either pride or ignorance has
introduced amongst the chiefest of our Gentry and Nobility, who entertain
Chaplains in their houses, to discharge the duty of their families by a Deputy,
as if they had received this new Article into their Creed, that it is their
duty to serve God by proxy, and instead of wrestling with God after the example
of Jacob, that Prince of Israel, and being their own Orators at the Throne of
Grace, they thought it more acceptable to retain an Advocate or Attorney to
plead their cause for them, as is the corrupt and unrighteous custom to fee
Lawyers before the unjust tribunals of men; and that this is no less effectual
a means to procure our cause to go well in the Court of Heaven, then to speed
in those here upon earth.

Whereas Solomon gloried more in the single name of a Preacher, then all his
gilded Titles, as King of Israel.

Some dawnings of this truth was sometime manifested to the late Protector
(before he was ensnared by the pomp, and beguiled with the honors of this
world) together with many of the chief officers of the Army, who looked upon it
as their duty to teach and preach to their several Regiments and Companies in
which they reaped the fruit of Gods glorious presence, strengthening their hands
in the day of battle, and crowning their heads with wreaths of victory and
triumph.

And I know not why we may not expect the Ministry and Religion, to thrive as
well in the hands of a zealous and pious Magistracy, in which both functions
being twisted and united together, may be of mutual ornament and support to
each other, as in the hands of a Mercenary and ambitious Clergy. I am persuaded
the Church of God will never be built with less noise and disturbance, then
when like the builders of the second Temple, they that use the Trovel with one
hand, shall hold the sword of civil power (for punishment of vice) in the
other. And as we have had a succesful experience that our battles were best
fought, and wars managed by a praying Army, so I am persuaded our Commonwealth
would best thrive and prosper in the hands of a religious and preaching
Magistracy.

And this I could wish might be the Criterion and Character of such as are to
be trusted with any considerable Talent of Power, as the only safest way
whereby to secure both our civil and spiritual liberties: I mean, that the
experience and acquaintance, with the ways and outgoings of Gods secret
providence, both toward the world and their own souls, might be the test and
touchstone whereby the spirits of men might be tried and known as fit to be
entrusted with the power of a Christian Commonwealth.

For though I am not of opinion, that every Saint is fit to have the conduct of
armed Troop, or a place at, the Helm of State affairs: Yet I think it
desirable, and to be endeavored, that whosoever has the conduct of Troops or
a place at the Helm of a Christian Commonwealth, should be a Saint, and one
that has given so good and ample a testimony thereof in the face of the world,
that if ever he prove Apostate, a black brand of perpetual infamy may rest upon
him in the eyes and memories of all succeeding ages.

The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, therefore let not the wisdom
of this Generation, the children of this world, who are Aliens and strangers to
the Kingdom, think to put by the Heirs from their inheritance: for God will not
suffer them to be baffled, the Lord will make good their title, and his promise
to his Son, to whom is given the Heathen for his inheritance, and uttermost
parts of the Earth for his possession, and to whom shall be gathered the ends
of the Earth, not only as to their shepherd and universal Bishop, but also as
to their King and Prince to rule over them. Now for the better preventing any
mistake, or misapprehension of what has been here spoken. I would not be
understood to deny Magistracy and Ministry to be distinct in their object and
exercise, the one compelling men's bodies, the other instructing and informing
their minds; yea there is a distinction in Ministry, for there is the Ministry
of natural and legal righteousness, and the Ministry of Evangelical and
spiritual righteousness, which differ only as Christ's first and second
appearance. But because Magistracy and Ministry are distinct, must they
therefore be separated, or because they are given and dispensed singly, as I
grant they often are; and some have Ministerial gifts which are not qualified
to be Magistrates, may they not therefore where they are both concurrent in
gift, be exercised by one and the same person? not that I think all that are
Magistrates de facto, called thereto by men, have ability to teach; but were it
not fit that none should be called to Magistracy, as Judges or Justices, but
such as are able to deliver to the people the mind and will of God in things
that concern civil Conversation and righteousnss between man and man, which is
the height of that Ministry in truth, which many, yea the greatest part of the
National Ministry have any skill or dexterity to manage.

And least I should be accused of innovations or novelties, may I not allege
the practice of our conscientious Judges and Justices, as a confirmation
hereof, who in their charge upon the Bench, and dealing with malefactors and
offenders, do open the Law of God to the Countries, and ground their judgments
upon conformity thereto; and were it not well it were done more, and that their
decisions did more rest thereon?

Or might I not here allege the practice of Constantine, who usually made such
Orations as we call Sermons, I am sure I have the Authority of Mr. Baxter for
it in his Holy Common wealth, page 29. 7. or M Taverners preaching at St.
Mary's in Oxford, before the Judges and face of the whole University in Queen
Mary's days, being at that time the High Sheriff of the County, which is taken
notice of (as I take it) in the Book of Martyrs, but certainly Laymens
preaching cannot seem a novelty to those that have any acquaintance with
History, or our own times, it having been allowed of by Antiquity, as well as
of more modern ages, and that in the Popish and Prelatical Churches, as well as
Anabaptists for our own times; how many Lay, illiterate, and Mechanic persons,
have not only been permitted and connived at, but also approved, and received
the stamp of Authority from our late Tryers, to enter upon pastoral charges.

And is it not then unreasonable to deny the Magistrate that is qualified for
it, an interest in preaching, as well as ruling, not that I would tempt the
Magistrate to interpose with his Authority in things of a spiritual nature, and
discerning, to compel men therein against or without their light, or to cut
asunder with the secular Sword those knots upon men's judgments, which they
cannot minister effectual light to unty, or resolve; no, as for such
authorative teaching or enforcing Doctrines of faith, by virtue of his civil
power, I am no Advocate for that; but if he may not compel to faith, may they
not therefore instruct in faith as well as manners? yea, ought not every man as
well as the Magistrate, to employ that Tallent if God has given it him? and
therefore least I should be thought either to lay too heavy a burden upon the
shoulders of the Magistrates, or that it is the design of these proposals to
open a door to Atheism, Anarchy, or confusion, by throwing down the public
settled Ministry, the supposed Pillars of Religion, its humbly offered to the
serious consideration of those that are in Authority, that if they shall think
fit to hearken to the voice of the people in taking away Tithes, they would
think of some way, either out of Gleab Lands or other ways of raising a
Revenue for the maintenance and encouragement of a competent number of
Itinerate Ministers, to be assistant to the Magistrate in visiting such dark
corners of the Land, where poor souls sit as in the valley and shadow of Death,
and whose hearts God has not yet moved to a voluntary and cheerful
contribution, to the necessities of such as being enabled by God, and having
the true stamp and seal of divine mission, are willing to lay out their
Tallents among them, that so through the pious care of our Magistrates, they
may not be necessitated to labor altogether with their hands, that are
faithful Laborers in Gods Vineyard. And by reason that the spirit of God is
not limited, but moves and blows where he lists, and that we expect the
powering forth of the spirit on all flesh, that every one may be permitted to
have the free exercise of their gifts without let or molestation, until that
time be come wherein we shall not need to teach every one his Neighbor, and
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; but all shall know him from the highest to
the lowest, when the light of the moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun seven fold, when the whole Land shall become a Goshian, a
Land of Light, and the Lord shall be a Sun and a shield unto us. As also that
this liberty may be inviolably preserved, that every people that are willing
and desirous to associate themselves in brotherly love, and the fear of God to
build up one another in their most holy faith under any Way or Form whatsoever,
and to choose their own Pastor, either out of the gifted Laity, or learned
Clergy, according as their judgments and consciences shall prompt them, may
have no interruption, or be imposed upon by either the Magistrate or Itinerant
Ministry, they keeping themselves within the pales of the Law and bounds of
moderation and moral honesty, but may enjoy like Privileges and protection
with the rest of the free born people.

And that the Magistrates and Itenerants would rather make it their business to
rouse and awaken such poor souls as seem wraped up in a dangerous sleep of
carnal security, in a total neglect of all Christian Duties and Ordinances,
then to judge and censure the Religion, Truth or sincerity of any making a
profession of the Gospel, to which they also witness by the innocence of an
unblameable life and conversation. And that the Magistrate would be exceeding
zealous in punishing and discountenancing all manner of vice and prophanness,
where and in whomsoever it shall be discovered.

Of Tithes.
HAving thus with great freedom disburthened my thoughts concerning the
function of the Ministers, I shall now craveleave to speak aword or two, to that
Grand question now in debate concerning their maintenance by Tithes, which
having for a long time been looked upon with an evil eye, and that not only by
such worldlings as are eaten up with Covetousness, and into whose souls has
entered an eager thirst and pursuit after riches, but also such whom in charity
and conscience we are bound to believe are the people of God.

And since for the space of these many years, they have from all parts of the
Nation been complained of as a great burden and grievance; and that they are
become so fruitful an occasion or Lawsuits and unchristian contentions, to the
enriching indeed of the Lawyers more then the Clergy: I say, considering these
things, together with the manner of their first introduction and estabishment
by Law, which seems to have been not altogether without wrong to the poor (who
both by the Law of God and their first concession were to share therein) as
also injury to the propriety of the first owners, it being well known that
Tithes were originally the voluntary benevolence of the people toward the
relief of the poor, together with the better supports of those that ministered
in spirituals, and were never impropriated to the Clergy, to the exclusion of
the poor, till the darkness of Popery and superstition had ore-spread the face
of the Earth, it being then that Kings took upon them either out of devotion,
or being suborned by fear of the Popes Thunder to make these Concessions and
Donations to the Church, to the injury and disinheriting of the first
proprietors. Or if we consider the nature of the thing it self, without
respect to the unjustness of their original (it being a thing that has not the
least countenance of reason, that men should be compelled to pay not only
beyond the proportion of the tenth part of their substance, but also of their
labors, that strangers should not only reap where they have not sown, but
also inherit the sweat of the poor man's brows) and that under the countenance
of law contrary to all right and equity, imposing a kind of soccage or slavish
tenure by the plough upon the Nation, whereby to hold their Lands on their
Lords the Clergy) I presume there will be found reason enough why the
Parliament (whose duty it is, as the peoples stewards, from whom as they
received the Tallents of their power, so ought to give an account of their
stewardship, and in all things lawful to obey their voice as the voice of God,
according to the command was sometime given Samuel, though upon a worse
occasion, even then when they had rejected the Lord, and desired a King) should
hearken unto this voice of the good people of the Land, in the abolishing of
Tithes, that are so great an eye sore and grievance to them, which I humbly
conceive might be best done for the advantage of the state and satisfaction of
the people, if the Parliament would please to grant their Lands, might be
totally discharged thereof at a reasonable rate and composition with the State,
which would not only give encouragement for a more cheerful payment of future
taxes, as the exigencies of affairs shall require, but also supply the State
with a vast sum of present moneys, not only to satisfy Impropriators, and pay
the Arrears of the Army, but also discharge the public debts, and probably
raise pensions for the necessary support and maintenance during life of such of
the present Incumbents, which if not employed as Itinerantes, or in some other
service of the State, must on this account be put by their Free-holds according
to Law, and therefore in conscience ought to be considered either by Pension or
employment (as heretofore on like occasion the Monks) having done nothing,
whereby to forfeit the favor of the State, or their interests in those
public Revenues; for though (as I said before) I am of opinion, that the
first introduction of Tithes, or rather their establishment by Law, was not
altogether without injury to the first proprietors; yet since they have
continued so many ages, and that the Lands have run through so many hands, and
their purchase hereby rendered so much the more easy: I humbly conceive with
submission to better judgments, that prescription of so long time, has not
only begot a title in the present incumbents as Tenants for life, but also
settled the Inheritance or Reversion (as of all other public Revenues, so of
these) in the State. And therefore as it seems unreasonable any should expect
to have their Lands discharged gratis of an encumbrance, that has continued so
many Centuries, nor indeed can without injury, there being no other way as yet
discovered to raise Moneys for satisfaction of either Impropriators or
Incumbents; and should the State give up their title to the Reversion freely,
they must necessarily lay the greater taxes on the Nation, for payment of the
Soldiers Arrears, etc. so likewise, since no time can ^lead prescription, or
give a just title to the sweat and labor of a Freeman, whence the profit of
Tithes seem rather to result, then to be accounted the natural increase of
Land; it seems no less unequitable they should be rated by the State, at their
rack or utmost value to the people, but rather at a moderate or under rate, by
reason they may (not without reason) suppose, their labor gives them in equity
the best title, if not in the whole, yet at least to the greater share of them.
But should the State endeavor to sell them at a full value, or continue them,
either in kind or converted into a Rentcharge upon their Lands either to the
same, or alienated from the Clergy to any other use whatsoever: I doubt the
Nation would be so far from receiving satisfaction, that they would rather
think themselves agriev'd, then gratified thereby. Now to how considerable, or
rather vast a sum the composition for Tithes, though at a low or undervalue,
would amount unto, may be easily calculated by Dr. Bradly's present to Caesar.
For if the very improvement of first fruits and tenths, according to the
present value of livings, would have yielded Caesar 100000 in hand, and 50000
pounds per annum, as he pretends to evince in his said Book Dedicated to the
Late Protector; how much more magnificent a present would the sale of Tithes
afford the Parliament for the above mentioned public uses, etc.

An humble Motion in behalf of the Poor.
IF the State shall think fit to take away Tithes, I humbly conceive they may
gain an opportunity (by annexing Gleab Lands to certain Workhouses erected and
situated at convenient distances) of raising a stock, and employing such, as
by reason of poverty, are not able to set their industry on work, that so none
may be permitted to eat the bread of idleness, nor the voice of the poor and
needy be any longer heard in the Land; which if prudently managed, and with
that thrift and providence, I humbly suppose they might, there would be little
cause of terming it a robbing Peter to pay Paul, by reason they might yearly
pay so round a Rent to the State toward the maintenance of an Itinerant
Ministry; that the Lands thus disposed of might rather, be thought farmed out
to the best ease and advantage both of State Ministry, and people, then given
in Frank Almoigne. I have often wondered that of all these streams of bounty,
the pious charity of many well disposed people have powered forth, so little of
it runs in a fit Channel, either to set the Mills of industryon going, or to
grind bread for the empty bellies; and the rather, by reason the bread that is
thus cast upon the waters, is most likely to return with increase, and that
after a few, not many days; for what is bestowed in promoting industry, is able
to make grateful returns in the fruit of their labors, when as Donations to
other uses do often nourish idleness, and serve only to maintain Pride and
Luxury. I know not of what temper other men may be, that can relish the
pleasures of their plentiful and luxuriant Estates, when so many of their own
flesh lie stinking in the streets, and are clothed with rags and misery; I am
sure it much abates the content of my small fortunes, to see any one stand in
need of the bread I eat. Nor can I expect to be more happy while there is a
beggar in our streets: O that our Rulers would at length put on the bowels of
compassion toward the poor. I am persuaded if a greater door of encouragement
were opened to industry and diligence, nothing would prove a more effectual
means to crowd out that Poverty and Penury, that has so long dwelt amongst us;
we have the experiment already tried to our hands in our neighboring State of
Holland, a Nation that may be a myrror of industry to all the world, a little
spot Land which did it not lie so low, I should call a Mole hill. I am sure the
Inhabitants may almost without a Metaphor, be termed the very Ants of diligence
and industry. A righteous man is merciful to his Beast, then much more to his
Brother; God feeds the Ravens, and shall we suffer Christians to starve at our
Gates? How many opportunities has God put into the hands of this Nation for
the relief of its poor? How many Abbey, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, Kings and
Malignants Lands have been exposed to sale, and yet no provisions made for the
poor, not one Workhouse erected for setting the industry of the poor on work.
Certainly the deasness of this uncharitable age to the cries of the poor, is
one of the crying sins of this Land, and which is very clamorous at the Gates
of Heaven, for pouring down judgments, and empting the Vials of Gods wrath
upon us, without doubt Englands poor, is one of Englands greatest crimes and
black reproach.

Having thus unladed my thoughts of whatever of consequence was upon them in
order to the Ministry, least any good nature should take offense at these no
less moderate then modest proposals, and judge them of too harsh a strain, or
scruple the removal of Landmarks, bearing the inscription of so great
Antiquity, though perhaps (if duly scanned) would be found at first erected by
no more pious hands than that man of sin, we commonly call the Pope. I shall
only leave this Querie on the file of their memories, and so limit them to
their own thoughts for further satisfaction.

Que. Whether since the Presbyterians, were selling their younger Brother
Independency, like Joseph, into the hands of an Egyptian Tyranny, for fear he
should (according to his dream) have reigned over them: and that persecuted the
Israel of God, that set their faces toward the promised Land, the Canaan of
our spiritual and civil Liberties, to the very brinks of the Red Sea of a
bloody persecution, have not justly forfeited their Tithes into the hands of
the State, and may not justly account their lives a ransom of the
Commonwealths Clemency, for my own part, I cannot but look upon the Clergy in
as great a praemunire, for their so active compliance with the single Person in
the late Apostasy, as they that in Hen. 8. time, acknowledged the Popes
Supremacy. And I know not why we may not charitably enough suppose, that the
reason why neither of the Universities, the reputed Schools of the Prophets
(who were so forward both by their Verses and Addresses to Court an Usurpation)
have made no earlier acknowledgements to the present Power, or owned the
Commonwealth, be not, for that they (being influenced and tinctured with the
spirits of the old Prophets, the National Clergy) are in expectation of a turn
in the scale of affairs, and relapse into Tyranny, cherishing a like fond
expectation of the Resurrection of Monarchy, that sometime a Prelatical Parson
did of the Common Prayer, applying thereto that saying of our savior concernng
Lazarus, Our friend is not dead, but sleeps.

Of the Universities.
AS a necessary Appendix to the Reformation of the Ministry, is that of the
Universities annexed, where I cannot but in the first place take notice to how
dissonant a Key of Discipline, to the Government of a Commonwealth, they are
at present strung and tuned, which gives birth to no little wonder in my
thoughts, that the great zeal which in the first infancy of our Commonwealth
burst forth in demolishing and melting down all the Images and least Vestigia's
of the late King and Tyranny though but pointed on a Sign-post, did
notwithstanding spare, and not so much as singe the least hair of those little
living Idols, or Monuments of Monarchy, that in every College presume to
exercise, and challenge to themselves a far greater and more exorbitant Power,
then any of the Kings of larger Provinces; not only assuming the high
Prerogative of a negative Vote in all things, though of never so great
consequence, to the interest and advantage of their Colledge^ ^hereby setting
up their single Reasons as infallible in competition with, and as the standards
by which all their fellows are to be measured: But also arrogating Respect,
almost. Idolatrous, requiring not only their back-sides, but the very shadow
of their Garments, (as if containing some occult, if not divine quality, like
those of our S.) to be reverenced, with little less then Adoration.

They have also their Minions and Favorites, on whom are usually conferred all
Offices, Privileges, and Emoluments, and that upon the account of as little
Learning and slender Merits, as theirs who have been most loaded with Honors,
by the prodigality of the most dissolute and luxurious Princes; the steps being
the same by which Scholars ascend into the favor and good opinion of their
Head, with those by which Courtiers climb into their Princes.

Some by the silent Oratory of their countenance, together with the mediation
of the Q. R. etc.

Others by the persuasive Rhetoric of Arguments well tip'd with silver,
together with the mediation of some great and powerful friends of the
Candidates, by which means is purchased the favor of being Registered in the
Golden Legend of the little Popes memory, as a Saint Canonized for the next
office or preferment, shall become vacant within the Sea of his narrow province
or jurisdiction.

Others have travailed to the Paradise of the good man's favor, or the
fortunate Islands of their preferments, in the more common track'd Road of
parasitical flattery and meritorious obsequiousness with, other the like good
work and Courtly accomplishments that are held in esteem, and studied according
to the humane fancy and complexion of the good old Hogen Mogen, etc. And hence
proceed those frequent storms that arise in College Basins, to the disturbance
of that Peace and Tranquillity, and over-casting with the black Clouds of
passion and discontent, that serenity of affection and unity that ought always
appear in the Firmaments of such Societies. So that instead of being (as is is
pretended, the Schools of the Prophets, or Nurseries of Learning and Religion,
they are become Schools of Fence, and the very Cock-pits of little petit
Quarrels, and Bulrush-Contentions; the very Abstracts and Epitomies of the more
voluminous frauds, injuries, factions, and Trapanings; together with the other
ingenious Arts of knavory, viz. supplanting, undermining, slandering,
backbiting, etc. that were at first hatched beneath, and now professed and
studied in the Courts of Princes.

All which laudable Customs are the natural result and product of that
excellent knack of Government, the Heads of Houses pretend so much skill and
dexterity in; a thing much like King James's King-Craft, that consists in
fomenting and ballancing of Factions, by dividing their fellows to the pious
intent of keeping the scales even, that so upon all occasions of Elections, and
other the like Emergencies, it may rest in the sole power of the politic Head,
to turn the balance which way soeever his gain or corrupt interest shall bias
his affections, and that without help of the least grain of Merit in the
Candidate, or other Reason of his suffrage, then the powerful Magnetism of a
Golden Opportunity.

This is the Government and Discipline under the droppings of whose benign
influences our youth received the first tinctures of their Education: these are
the subtle Arts and Mysteries of iniquity, in which a tener is unguiculis, they
are trained up.

These, are the places in which their minds are blur'd with prejudice, and
learned with the ill natured principles of Tyranny and Presbytery, which by
means hereof has of late so spread and defused it self like a spreading
leprosy to the infection and debauching of the greater part of the Nation.

These are those corrupted and polluted Fountains, of which whosoever drinks is
possessed with a like Lunacy or madness with that we read of the Galli or
Priests of Mars, who used to geld themselves: In like manner they who having
had their Reasons sophisticated and bewitched with the charms of an Accademick
Education, and drunk deepest of these supposed wells of knowledge, are apt by
the operation of a no less wonderful kind of frenzy, not only to geld and
deprive themselves of both their civil and spiritual liberties, but are zealous
to make all else Proselytes to the like Lunacy, crying down all for Heretics,
and worthy of no more favor then Fire and Faggot, that will not cause their
first born to pass through the fire unto Molech, and sacrifice their Liberty,
dearer then a thousand lives to the great Diana, of whose shrines they take
themselves to be the Silversmithes.

Certainly its more then time, that the poisoned waters of these defiled and
polluted Fountains that intoxicate and make drunk with madness and folly the
whole Nation, were either dried up, that there may no more clouds of discontent
and envy thence exhale to darken and orecast that sun of prosperity, that in
the dawning of a Free State and happy Government, has once more after a long
night of Apostasy and Tyranny, displayed its Golden beams upon our British
Islands; or rather that they were thoroughly purged from that leaven, venom,
wormwood, and Antipathy, that partly from the nature of their Government, and
partly the complexion of the persons in whose hands at present depoposited,
they have contracted against the Nations true interest and felicity, together
with the Noble Patrons and Advocates thereof.

Now in order to the Reformation of the Universities; I shall only start a few
Queries at present, having on the Anvil of my thoughts (if these rude Essays
find acceptance, or my endeavors should receive countenance from Authority)
which as I want a foundation of merit whereon to build an expectation, so am
void of confidence to suggest much hopes to my ambition) a model, which may
possibly be offered to the light of public censure, but in the Interim shall
crave a candid acceptance of the following Queries.

1. Whether they that Founded our two great Universities, seem not more to have
consulted the Honor, then convenience of the Nation; since if that had been
respected, the Colleges should rather have been dispersed at convenient
distances throughout the several Counties.

2. Whether the complaint of Learned Bacon, that the Nation was over stocked,
or rather burdened with too many free Schools and Colleges for the proportion
of its preferments, may not with greater justice be taken up now since the sale
of the late Bishops, Dean and Chapters Lands, then when the Church was in the
height or Zenith of its Pomp, Pride, and Glory.

3. Whether since the most considerable Ecclesiastic Preferments are now
vanished and quite abrogated, it were not more for the peace and interest of
the Commonwealth, that the Universities (waving their pretensions of divine
Right, and being the Schools of the Prophets) should stoop to a more honest
civil notion of Schools of Education and humane literature, for training up the
youth of the Gentry in Learning and good manners?

4 Whether the rendering of generous and noble Education cheap through a
multitude of Accademick and Collegiate small preferments, where mean men's Sons
are tempted to a lazy kind of life, and trained up to a capacity an expectation
of greater preferments, then either the complexion or constitution of the
Commonwealth can bear? Be not of dangerous consequence to the peace of the
Nation, by over-stocking it with persons stated by their Education, and
discontented for want of employment suitable thereto, and therefore desirous of
change and innovations: Or more brief, Whether it be not the Interest of every
prudent Commonwealth, to give encouragement and maintenance to no more of mean
fortunes, being bred up to Great and Noble undertakings, then the Commonwealth
shall in probability have occasion to employ and make use of.

5. Whether the Government of Colleges by Heads of Houses, be not unsuitable to
a Commonwealth; or whether it be not inconsistent with the frugality of a
prudent State, to maintain at the vast expense of the publ^ck Revenues, such as
are of no greater use to the U. or R. P. then (as was heretofore observed of
Bishops) great Brass Andirons to Chimney corners, when as greater Learning and
ingenuity withers for want of favor and encouragement.

6. Whether the reserving the Physic Garden, public Schools, with the
Revenues thereto belonging for maintenance of Professors, together with some of
the fairest Colleges in each University, endowed with a proportionable Revenue
for an ample encouragement of a competent number of able and industrious
Tutors, for training up the Gentry in humane literature, might not keep up as
handsome and creditable face of an University, without the wrinckles of so many
sowe^ Doctors and Heads of Houses, who serve only to check and brow-beat
ingenuity? And whether these with the single Gymnasiums necessarily to be
erected in some of the remoter corners of the Land, as at Durham, and the like,
might not be of a sufficient capacity for the receipt and accommodation of as
many as are either fit or willing (now the preferments are gone) to go to the
price of a liberal and generous Education? and therefore as useful to all
intents and purposes of the Commonwealth, as a greater number of Halls and
Colleges, that according to the observation of some, are mere formalities of
eating Mutton, not only burdened with the unnecessary charge of Heads,
Coaches, etc. but also prolix Frier-like lists of Fellows whose most innocent
employment is to murder time, and feed on the bread of idleness.

7. Whether Chelsey, where was sometime designed a College for Polemick
Divines, and the study of controversies, be not a most convenient place, by
reason of its vicinity to the City of London, the chief Theater of public
affairs, for founding an English College, for refining of our language, after
the example of Cardinal Rich lieu in France, as also for training up the better
sort of our Gentries Sons in a more Generous and Noble way, and less curbed
studyes, then are commonly, though with little profit, taught in our other
Colleges and Universities, and in which beside those handmaid Arts and
Sciences, together with the three learned Languages, may be read the three
Modern, French, Italian, and Spanish, and more especially, History, Politics,
the Civil and common Laws; together will all other the more polite and neat
studies, that have greatest tendency to Oratory, and trayning up of Statesmen,
that they may be useful to the Commonwealth, serviceable in their Generations,
and a Crown and Ornament to their Country.

8 Whether if care were taken, that all Arts and Heroic exercises of Activity,
for forming the more Majestic port and Gentile Carriage of the Body, and that
are of tendency to the better accomplishment and Noble breeding of Gentlemen,
as riding the great Horse, Fencing, Vaulting, Dancing, Music, and the like,
were introduced into some of our Colleges, instead of that Monkish formality
and ridiculous pedantry of our Universities, might not be a means of bringing
them into greater Reputation with our Gentry, and prevent so ma^y of their Sons
running over to France, and foreign shoars for Gallantry and breeding, whence
they commonly return like Solomon's Merchants, fraught with nothing but a few
apish postures and Peacocks feathers, for the expense of all their gold and
precious time?

9. Whether the mingling of Military Exercises, and use of Arms, together with
the Gentries studies, might not better qualify them for the service of their
Country, and less enervate and debase their spirits for Heroic undertakings,
then the common pedantick road of Accademical Education.

10. Whether if were not a more profitable and laudable custom for Scholars
in the Universities, to speak Latin, and compose their politer Exercises in
English, contrary to the common practice; since when they come into the world,
they have greatest use of elegant English to write, and a promptitude in
familiar Latin for travail and converse with strangers.

11. Whether a Labratory for Chemical Experiments, together with frequent
Anatomies, would not be of more use and greater advantage in Colleges for
making new and farther discoveries into the America of nature, and enriching
the world with knowledge, then those many fruitless wrangling Disputations in
which Scholars are trained up, that tend to nothing but strife, and rendering
men factious, Morose, and troublesome in the Commonwealth.

12. Whether such ingenious Arts as Limning, Drawing, Painting, Carving,
Ingraving, making Watches, with other Mathematical practices, might not
profitably be taught at leisure and spare hours by way of Recreation to other
studies, such Gentlemen as have a natural and prompt genius to such kind of
ingenuities, by persons maintained about Colleges for that end and purpose?

13. Whether the way of traffic and Mercha dise, together with the Arts of
grassing, planting, improvement of all sorts of grounds, with all other good
husbandry and Agriculture, might not more profitably be taught in Colleges, as
parts of Occonomicks, then those many jejune and trifling Notions of Genus and
Species, that are crowded into our Logicks, and commonly hang like dusty
Cobwebs in the windows of Juniors intellects, darkning and sophistcating the
light of their understandings, till the prudence of riper years sweep them away?

13. Whether it each College did every year send out one or two of their
Fellows or Tutors to travail with such of the youth, as were desirous of that
accomplishment, whereby that help and advantage of education might be rendered
less chargeable, and more safe to young Gentlemen, might not be advantageous to
the Commonwealth, and of great tendency to the advancement of Learning, by
maintaining more constant and exact correspondence with foreign Parts, for
bringing over new experiments, and increasing the light of new discoveries.

14. Whether the teaching of Arts and Languages together, might not render the
study of both more pleasant and facile, and be a more effectual method for
compendiating the long and tedious journey of Education, then the teaching of
them apart, as is the common practice: and therefore whether the annexing of
Schools to Colleges, were not a necessary expedient for avoiding the
conclusion of many Methods; and that the first Principles of Mathematics may
he laid during the time of infancy, that being the most docile and suitable age,
and to which it is more grateful to converse with Numbers and Figures, rather
then crabbed Languages, which usually like a Gorgons Head deter young Novices
at their first setting forth toward the Land of knowledge?

15. Whether the statutes and discipline of Colleges, being altogether of a
Monarchick Monkish and pedantick strain, were not fit to be repealed,
especially as to Oaths, and the injurious annexing fellowships to several
Counties, since thereby is often opened a door of preferment to unworthy and
scandalous persons, while its barred to them of better deserts and learning;
and therefore whether some general Rules might not be made and calculated for
the use of the whole University, by which the Colleges might be better
governed, then their Popish statutes that impose so many unnecessary and
profane Oaths, and employments contrary to the conscience or inclination of
the students?

16. Whether such a Reformation of Schools and Universities, might not render
Learning more pleasant and acceptable to Gentlemen, and be a probable means of
stocking the Nation with a more able and Learned Gentry for the service of the
Commonwealth, then hertofore it has been.

Of the Regulation of the Laws and Lawyers.
I Have now done with Universities, though much more might have been said,
which I shall reserve till a fitter season, not knowing whether the times are
yet able to hear them, or that I have not already said more then is suitable to
the Complexion of this Age: I shall now proceed to speak of the other two grand
interest Antagonists to a Free State or Commonwealth, which I take to be the
Mercenary Lawyer, and Hereditary Nobility; both which I presume might be taken
off by a through Reformation of the Laws, that at present, through the
corruption of time, look so much a squint at a Commonwealth, and are so
exceeding propitious to Monarchy, and this by no greater cost then prohibiting
their profession to be any longer Mercenary, and abating those high privileges
they confer on the first born,

In reference to which I should humbly propose,
1. That since Vassalage has been long since abrogated in this Nation, that
some course may be thought of, how without injury or wrong to the propriety of
Landlords, the duties and services with which most Lands are charged, may be
taken off at a reasonable composition, as the infamous Marks of servitude, and
badges of the Norman yoke and tyranny, that so all Lands may be held by one
tenure, the most free and absolute that can be devised; that so Lands being
discharged of such unnecessary cumbrances, the decision of all Lawsuits and
controversies about Inheritances, may be rendered more facile and easy to be
determined by the verdict and umpire of men of conscience and prudence in the
several Counties.

2. That the great privileges of Primogeniture, by which Families are raised
to a height inconsistent with the interest, and contrary to the prudence of a
Free State, not without injury and ruin to the younger Sons proceeding from
the same stock, may be abated and moderated; and to this end that Gavel kind
which was the ancient Custom of this Island, before subjugated to the Norman
yoke (and that is yet preserved in Kent) may be instituted throughout the
Nation, for the future prevention of those great Families, that by the two
great indulgence, or rather iniquity of our Norman Laws, are raised to an
height not to be supported, but by the injury and suppression of others, that
being constrained to truckle under them, are bruised and crushed by their
greatness.

Not that I would introduce a levelling of all Estates and families to the same
proportion, which were absurd and ridiculous: But for keeping up a Gentry fit
for management of the most important affairs of the Nation, the elder Brother
may be allowed, either according to the Custom of the Jews, a double portion,
or else the advantage of the personal estate, or the like, as shall in the
wisdom of our Senators seem most expedient: and here truly my compassion is
apt to become passionate, and with a Pen dipped in the deepest sense of sorrow,
to weep out an Apology in the behalf of the younger Sons of our Gentry, which
though a digression, yet being not altogether impertinent to our present
strain, I shall make bold to insert it.

An Apology for younger Brothers.
IT has been a long received custom in this Land, or at least of as ancient
date as the Norman Monarchy; that notwithstanding the elder Son obtains the
whole inheritance, yet to bestow a generous and liberal Education on the
younger: in which considering the circumstances of those times, together with
the complexion of their Government, I find no cause wherefore to accuse our
Ancestors of their imprudence or injustice.

For first, the levelling, of Estates, has always (and that justly enough)
been accounted altogether unsuitable to the Majesty and gaudy splendour of
Monarchical Government, which has sometime, though falsely been supposed, not
only the most absolute and perfect form, but that which by long experience
has been found most suitable to the Genius or humor of the English People, the
interest of which Government, is rather to have large public Revenues, with a
vast stock of Preferments, wherewith to gratify the ambition of the more
ingenious part of the Gentry, who have nothing to rely on, save what they can
purchase in the favor of their Prince. Nor was Antiquity herein deceived; for
when the greatest part of the Nation, by this means reap their chief
subsistence from the public Revenues of the Commonwealth and favor of the
Prince, in whose sole dispose they are, and on whom for this cause, they look
upon as their common father, and indeed to whom they have greater obligations
then to their own Parents: there appears little probability how the Pillars of
such a Government should be easily shaken, whose basis is founded on the
interest of so great a part of the Nation, to defend it with the utmost peril
of their lives and blood. Nor have we more reason to accuse our Ancestors of
impiety, or injustice, then imprudence, since heretofore so great and ample
were the public Revenues, that a younger Son could either in Church or State,
by the wings of his own industry or merits, have raised himself to as high a
pitch of honor and fairer fortunes, then those of his elder Brothers
birthright; so that to be the firstborn was scarce a privilege, except to
such as wanted worth to advance them. Wherefore while the Church and Court were
open with their large train of preferments to entertain the more ingenious of
the Gentries younger Sons, and Monasteries to intombe those of a less Mercurial
Genius, there was little reason for commenceing this complaint: for this I am
compelled by the violence of truth, to confess in defense of the ancient
Constitution of the Laws and Government of this Nation, that whatever were
their other faults, they were not injurious to younger Brethren, till after the
sale of Church Lands, and the abrogating those many preferments that were their
former inheritance.

This was the former state of the Nation, in which if younger Sons were
debarred a share in their Fathers inheritance, they might receive an ample
compensation from the Church their Mother, whose jointure was no less then two
thirds of the whole Land, so that they might seem rather owned as the only
Children of the Commonwealth, and honorably maintained at the public charge
thereof, then difinherited by the unkindness of the Laws. A Generous Education
was then a sufficient portion, which is now for want of suitable employment
become a curse instead of a blessing, serving to no other end, then to
discover, if not augment their misery, so much is the scene of things changed
since Hen. 8. spoiled the Church of her Revenues, and by consequence these of
the fairest part of their Inheritance, and yet nothing of the rigor of the
Ancient Laws are herein abated toward them. It is not my intention (God knows
my heart) to speak a word in approbation of those superstitious uses to which
any Abbey or Bishops Lands were heretofore employed, but with reflection on
those good and pious, to which (in the opinion of some) they might have been
converted.

Nor is it the design of these discourses to retrive Ecclesiastical promotions,
or demonstrate a necessity of rebuilding the things we have so lately
destroyed, but rather to show how unsafe and injurious it would be to establish
and fix a Commonwealth upon the ruins and tottering foundation of a decayed
Monarchy; nor do I blame the prudence of our late Reformers, that unhorsing the
pride of the Clergy, and putting down the Hierarchy, they rather sold, then
reserved in a public stock the Revenues of the Church, by reason it may seem
more safe for a Commonwealth to keep nothing may encourage an invasion of its
liberty, or become the reward of usurpation and Tyranny, only I could wish,
that since the Reason and Circumstances of our Laws are quite altered, we might
not still build on old foundations, and intail the whole Land on a few
Proprietors or elder Brethren, to the exclusion and utter ruin of the greatest
part of the Nation, and contrary to the interest of a free State or
Commonwealth. I dare not charge all our late changes, and many burnings in the
balance of affairs on this account, though I cannot but observe that our times
have rung more changes, been tuned to more different instruments, and ran
through several forms of Government, than were from the time of the Norman
Conquest known before, to which how much the discontent and poverty of our
Gentry may have contributed I know not, but Solomon says, Oppression will make
a wise man mad. I am sure the younger Brothers are by far the greater number,
and through Natures courtesy commonly as rich in intellectual endowments, as
poor in fortunes, and being by the Tyranny (as affairs now stand) of Law and
custom debarred, sharing in their Parents Estates, to which they conceive
Nature equally intitles them with their elder Brother; its no wonder if they
desire to interrupt the Peace and Tranquillity of the Commonwealth, since by
the shakings thereof they may probably root themselves in fairer fortunes, then
from its peace and settlement, they may with reason expect; and that which arms
their discontent with fit weapons for revenge, and renders them more
formidable, is their generous Education; for certainly its of very unsafe and
dangerous consequence, to qualify such for great and noble undertakings, that
are Heirs to no other fortunes then what their valors can purchase with the
ruin of the Commonwealths Peace and Government. Therefore had those that made
the public Revenues a prey to their Ambition, also drunk up those streams of
bounty, by which the Schools and Universities are fed and maintained and so
taken away the means as well as the encouragement of liberal Education, they
had better consulted the Peace, though not the honor of the Nation: for so
long as these are open (if not better ordered) I doubt there will be Vipers
hatched to eat through the womb of Government, by which they conceive
themselves injured and debarred, both that which nature gives them title to of
their Parents, and the ancient constitution of the Commonwealth in public,
Revenues which I would not have understood as proceeding from any prejudice or
ill will to the Universities, which I much honor, and in which with
thankfulness I acknowledge to have received my Education, but only to discover
the shortness of that policy, that taking away the Preferments, should reward
and Crown all Accademick endeavors, yet never reduced the means whereby men
are qual fied for an expectation, and prompted to an ambition of them; and
indeed of a like strain is most of our modern policy, not skin deep, and rather
to be accounted shifts and present evasions of imprudent evils, then Antidotes
of solid prudence for either the obviating, or healing any disaster or malady
in the body politic.

Certainly a generous Education is not proper for such as are intended for
little less then slaves. It is Ignorance is the Mother of Obedience, whereas
knowledge makes men proud and factious, especially when they concern their
fortunes and employments, are not correspondent to the grandeur of their birth
and education.

The younger Son is apt to think himself sprung from as Noble a stock, from the
loins of as good a Gentleman as his elder Brother, and therefore cannot but
wonder, why fortune and the Law should make so great a difference between them
that lay in the same womb, that are formed of the same lump; why Law or
Custom should deny them an estate, whom nature has given discretion to know
how to manage it.

Learning ennobles and elevates the soul, causing it to despise and set light
by small and base things, and therefore where that flourishes, men are not
easily taught to submit their necks to an Iron yoke of slavery; which promps
the Turkish prudence to extinguish all such lights by which men gain a prospect
or discovery of the thraldom and misery of their Condition. It would drink more
ink, and waste more time then I, or perhaps the Reader would willingly bestow,
to give an account of all the mischiefs and inconveninces that proceed from the
fertile womb of this single mistake, that a generous Education (notwithstanding
the abolition of all encouragements of Learning and ingenious Preforments) is a
sufficient portion for a younger Brother. Wisdom is good with an Inheritance,
but the wisdom of the poor man is despised. The Muses without a Dowry are but
despicable Virgins, and the unnatural, though usual and worse, that is at this
day found between Wit and Money, renders both useless, if not pernicious to the
Commonwealth. I doubt not but should we take a view of things through the
prospective of some men's Obs^rvations, we should discover this in part the
cause of that tranquillity and settlement, peace and prosperity, with which in
former times this British Isle was Crowned; as also of those many shakings and
Convulsions in which these latter Ages have seen her cast into: And can we
expect it should be otherwise? when (as Solomon has observed) There is not
bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men to
skill, etc. which seems to proceed from no other cause then the iniquity of our
Laws, pouring all the wrath into one Channel, and conveying the whole Land into
the hands of a few Proprietors or elder brethren.

I confess those providence has placed on high, on the battlements of supreme
power, may if their eyes are open, and not blinded by private interest, command
a fairer prospect, and discern farther into these things then such whom a
meaner fortune has left in the valley of a low and private condition,
therefore I shall not presume to inform those Intelligences that turn about the
Orbs of Government; only could wish there were such a scene of things brought
forth as may give encouragement to expect a settlement without a miracle.

To which as things now stand, I cannot persuade my self but that the
establishing of Gavel-kind would have no small tendency; for can any thing be
done more suitable to a Commonwealth? or is there any thing more just and
equitable, then that all the Children should share in their Parents
Inheritances? or indeed is there not rather an absolute necessity thereof,
since all the former avenues by which men had access to Preferment are hedged
up? is not the only door at present open to a fortune, that of the Law? which
is also now together with all other professions so overstock'd with students,
and thereby become so burdensome, that the Nation will no longer endure it. For
are they not necessitated to devise daily new Querks and subtilties, whereby
suits may be multiplied to the confusion of Estates and Oppression of the
people; How much more honorable would it be to our Reformation and new
established Government, that there were a more equal and righteous
distribution of the things of this Earth; then that the greater part of the
Nation should be put to shift and scamble for a livelihood, or be necessitated
to live on the sins of the People. Not that I would advise to break down the
hedge of propriety, by a promiscuous and injurious levelling of Estates; and so
open a gap to confusion; no, none but a devil would advise that: But why
Estates may not for the future descend regularly to the whole Offspring that
are of the same blood and family, in stead of one branch thereof, I know no
inconvenience in that, especially in those circumstances we are in at present,
being fallen into an Age so Eagle-cy'd and quick-sighted, as to discern spots
in the Sun, and discover corruption in the Heavens; which the duller Optics of
Antiquity judged immaculate, and as altogether incorruptible: An Age that dares
pry into the pious frauds, and unmask the most religious deceits, which the
devouter ignorance of our Ancestors never beheld, but at a superstitious and
reverentiall distance: An age in which the art of living or to gain an honest
subsistence, is grown so subtle, so difficult and abstruse a mystery, that few
are able to master it: In which the younger sons of our Nobility and chiefest
Gentry, are necessitated to stoop (for want of better employments) to low,
servile, base and mechanic employments, or do worse, by reason whereof some
Citizens have of late years been elated to that strange degree of pride and
arrogance, as with scorn to refuse admitting any lower rank then the children
of the Nobility to be their servants, or that less than an Esquire should wipe
their shoes, so much has wealth gotten the start of Birth, Education, and
Virtue. How justly may the younger Children of this Nation take up that of
Solomon, and apply unto themselves: There is no more remembrance of the wise
then of the fool, and the same happens unto both; wherefore is one wiser then
another, for poverty is the portion of them both: and may say, their oppressors
are increased (like those of Israel in Egypt) as their numbers are multiplied.
How great an encouragement would it be to those that are ingenious to have some
foundation whereon to build their fortunes, to have something, some stock
wherewith to begin the world, and set the wheel of their inventions going: How
many ingenious Gentlemen that are now clothed with rags and misery, might have
raised themselves to fair Estates, had they had a stock wherewith to set their
industry on work; for can any man make brick wherewith to build themselves a
fortune without any straw? How many might this have reprieved from an untimely
death, who might have been useful to their Country, and Ornaments to the
Commonwealth, had their parts and ingenuities found due encouragement? How
many brave sparkling Wits, that might have proved bright stars and shining
lamps both in Church and Commonwealth, have been extinguished in obscurity, for
want of maintenance, the oil whereby their lamps should have been fed and
nourished?

What Is the Reason so many of the best Names and Families throughout the Realm
lie stinking in the streets covered with rags and vermin, but that for a fond
and idle fancy of keeping up the name and family, the whole Inheritance is
intayl'd on the firstborn, and nothing but poverty and misery on all the rest
of the blood and kindred, as if it were less discredit to have many beggars,
then not to have one Gallant that is able to fly a Hawk, and keep up the cry of
Hounds belonging to the Family? What madness is it, that on the account of
Primogeniture, the whole Estate should be swept away by one who perhaps is
fitter to wear long coats and a fools cap, then manage an Estate, or has not a
grain more wit then will just secure its being begged, or that else perhaps will
spend it on Whores and Sycophants, while his most ingenious Brethren, are
either roosted under the ruins of some smoaky old Cottage, or exposed as
Pensioners to be maintained by the cold charity of a wretched miserable world?

It was a custom among the Heathen (justly condemned by Christians) for the
Father to appoint and design such of his Offspring so soon as brought forth,
on which he was willing to bestow the cost of Nurture and Education, which was
performed by the Ceremony of lifting it from the ground, on which the Midwife
had for that purpose set it, and was commonly the lot of those Nature had most
accurately formed, and sealed with the most promising signatures to vouch a
future eminence: Whereas the rest, especially such as were branded with any
kind of monstrosity or notable deformity, were no sooner enlarged from the
dark chambers of their Mothers Wombs, but exposed as a prey to be entombed in
the bowels of wild beasts, before they were capable of knowing the Authors of
their injury, or having any resentment of their Parents inhospitality or
unkindness: Whereas we on the other side take pleasure in a numerous
offspring, and though we do not expose any which is forbidden by our laws, yet
commonly deny bread to all, except the eldest, sending forth our younger fry
more naked and unarmed into the world then Bees their castlings, as if they
could feed on the breasts of flowers, or glean up an Estate with a like
facility, as those little Animals do their honey.

I have often wondered at the great severity of our English Law, that mulcts the
pruning away of the least spurious excrescency of lust with no less penalty
then death, when as it denies all younger Sons, though never so legitimately
sprung from a noble stock to share or receive any sap there from, lest thereby
the growth of the top branch should be hindered from attaining that extravagant
height, to which by the withering and ruin of the rest its proud ambition
might aspire to climb; so that all the mercy our Law affords these younger
sprouts, is only a bare protection from the stroke of a more sudden and violent
end (that might do them the kindness of putting a quick period to their
lingering pain, whose life is only upheld by the bread of affliction) while they
consume with poverty, and at length wither and dwindle away by want or famine.

Were it not far more just to restrain Marriage, or at least give check and set
bounds to the lust of Parents, by stinting the number of their offspring to a
child or two, and sealing up the fertile womb, then thus turn that blessing of
God, Increase and multiply, into the greatest curse, and visit the iniquity of
the Parents upon the Children? Or were it not a greater act of charity,
according to the example of the Heathen, to expose or drown these latter
births, as we do such supernumerary dogs etc. as would otherwise ore-stock our
Commous, then thus expose them like so many little Moses's in Arks of Bulrushes
to a Sea of poverty and misery, from whence they may never expect reprieve,
unless some miraculous Providence (like Pharaohs daughters) chance rescue them
into her Court and favor? Our Law making no more provision for younger
Brethren then if they were to be clothed like the Lillies of the field, or like
Elias to expect their food from Ravens, receiving no other comfort from the
hands of men, then what they can suck from the dry breasts of an old Proverb,
that God will send meat wheresoever he has provided mouths, then which nothing
more true, did not the covetousness of men withhold it.

It was the custom of our Gentry and Nobility to clap such of their phlegmatic
offspring, as nature had not made mercuriall enough to ambiate either Church
or Court preferments into some religious habit; and so keep up the splendor of
their Families, by pruning away such under branches for the service of the
Altar, as either through their number or folly were like to let in poverty,
and thereby become a disparagement to the noble stock, from whence they sprang,
which has prompted some to an opinion, that if in these more populous Northern
Climates, a kind of Protestant Monasteries were erected for encouragement of
Chastity and single life, especially among the poor sort: it would (pardoning
the soloecisme of the name) be more consonant to the Maxims of state and true
policy, then in those hotter and more barren Climates, where there is so little
danger of being ore-stock'd or burdend with people, that on the contrary they
want men for the necessary defense of their Territories: Of which we have a
pertinent Instance in Spain, whose Religious Houses (did not their blind
devotion so much triumph over their Policy) had long since been buried under
their own ruins; for there can no other account be given, why that wise and
prudent Nation laboring under so great a weight of affairs, and scarcity of
men, to manage their wars, should tolerate so many hives of drones; Which so
long as they shall continue, may give good caution and security to its
Neighboring States and Princes, to lay asleep their fears and jealousies of
his ever attaining that Universal Monarchy, at which for so many centuries the
lips of his proud ambition have been thought to water: there being little
probability that his palsy hands should graspe the Universe, that has not
strength enough to hold that little part thereof, he has already fastened on,
and therefore the Spanish Conquests may not unfitly be compared to those of
Rivers upon the banks of their channels, loosing as much in one place as they
gain in another.

But since Providence has been pleased in mercy to bring back our captivity,
and again to cast us into the advantageous form of a Commonwealth, if
Gavell-kinde were once established, we shall stand in need of no other devices
for keeping out of poverty, then the setting industry on work according to the
opportunities plentiful occasions will administer in an equal Commonwealth.
But I shall now return to the Lawyers from whom I have made so long a
digression: I have read that in the more pure and less sophisticated times of
our Ancestors, great Estates have been passed in few words, and the conveyance
proved more firm and good then those tedious, prolix, tautologicall
Instruments, the knavery of latter Ages has introduced.

In sign that this is sooth
I bite the white wax with my tooth.
Or the like being the form of those more simple and sincerer times, whereas
now through the fraud of Lawyers all things are so ambiguously penned, that none
but a Sphinx in their mysteries is able to understand or unriddle them.

The Professors of which mystery of iniquity that live upon the sins of the
yeople, are of late grown so numerous, that like Locusts or an Egyptian plague
of Caterpillars they cover the face of our land, and are thriven to such vast
Estates, that whereas heretofore the Church and Clergy being in possession of
two thirds, of the best Lands throughout the Realm, gave birth to the statute
of Mortmain for security of the rest: We may justly fear unless some prudent
care be taken for prevention of their future purchases, lest this Pack, etc. by
their Querks etc. instate themselves in our Inheritances, and ingrosse the
wealth and Revenues of the whole Nation unto themselves, etc.

I have heard this subtle Generation were not in so fair a plight, when every
Term they beat upon the hoof to London with their Satchels on their backs, and
at the Towns end proffered their Services, like Watermen at the Thames side, to
be retained by the Country Clients; and I know not whether we may ever expect
a golden Age, or to see good days, till the interest of this corrupt
Generation be laid as low as any Histories can produce a president; which at
this time must needs have the greatest countenance of justice that can be, they
having been so notoriously instrumental in betraying our Liberties: And selling
us into the hands of Tyranny, by which together with their other iniquities
they have contracted so great an odium in the hearts and eyes of all honest
men, that I know not whether the hanging up of their Gowns in Westminster Hall
might not be as acceptable a Trophee in the eyes of the people, as the Scotch
Colors.

I have often wondered, that notwithstanding the great mischief the Nation has
suffered by the Lawyers penning our Laws and Acts of Parliaments, being known
to leave flaws, and always render them so lame, they can for their advantage
wrest them to what sense they please, and thereby make themselves the Lords and
absolute Arbitrators both of our lives and fortunes; that for prevention of
like future abuses they are not excluded the House of Commons as well as the
Clergy, there being as much reason and more precedent for the one then the
other, for that the Judges never had Vote in the House of Peers, but only sat
upon the Wool-pack, whereas the Bishops had like privileges with the other
Lords. It being very incongruous in reason that they should be the makers of
our Laws that are the mercenary Interpreters, lest byast by their own
Interests, in stead of fences to our proprieties, they make them snares to our
Lives and Estates.

But it is hoped the prudence of our Senators will make so through a Reformation
of the Laws, that as they are the birthright and inheritance of every
Englishman, and the interest of all persons to know and be intimately
acquainted with them, so they shall be rendered so facill and easy, that the
meanest capacity may conceive them, at least so far as he is concerned therein;
that so there may be no longer any occasion of keeping up so corrupt an
interest of men to make justice mercenary, who have been always found the
Panders of Tyranny and betrayers of our Liberties; and that for the future,
every man may be permitted to be his own Orator and plead his own cause, or
procure what friend they please to be their Advocates, that so the study of the
Laws may be the exercise of our Gentry, who may thereby gain opportunities of
becoming Patriots to the Commons, as were the Roman Patricii to the Plebeians,
to the begetting a good correspondence between the Gentry and the Commonalty,
and that it may be no longer a mercenary profession of selling Justice to the
Oppression of the poor, etc.

But that right may be done gratis to every man, and the cry of the Oppressed
may no longer be heard in our Gates; But that Judgment may run down like a
stream, and Righteousness like a mighty torrent in the midst of our streets.

I shall make bold to offer one thing more in reference to the Law, which is
the project that has been so long discoursed of concerning Registers in each
County, a project commended by the general suffrage of all men, even Lawyers
themselves as an admiral expedient for preventing frauds and securing of
Inheritances, and therefore great pity it is not put in execution, which if it
were, and that all other Courts of Justice and Judicature as shall be thought
needful for securing the property of the people, were settled in the several
Counties, it would silence that great and long complained of grievance of the
Peoples being constrained to undergo such sore and tedious pilgrimages from the
farthest parts of the Land to London. as if Justice had but one Tribunal, or no
other Temple then what is erected in that single City, to influence the whole
Nation. I shall conclude with that honest desire of the Inhabitants of Hull of
late, presented to the Parliament; That the Laws by which this Commonwealth is
to be Governed, may be those holy just and righteous Laws of the great and wise
God our rightful Lawgiver; and where any case is unprovided for in the express
terms of his word, care may be taken to determine it, with the most exact
porportion that is possible thereto, that so our Laws being founded on the
Scriptures, and so composed, as not only to have great affinity with, but also
to border on the very subburbs of Divinity, the greater Reverence and Authority
may be conciliated to each; and it may seem the less incongruous for our Civil
Magistrate to be utriusque peritus, skilful in both.

Now whatsoever has been here spoken out of a most intensly heated zeal for
public good, with reflection on the abuses of the Law and professors thereof.
I would not have misconstrued to reflect upon their persons which I honor, and
acknowledge many of them to be men of great Candor and integrity, but rather of
the corrupt interest of the profession, it being the design of these
discourses, to witness only against interests, and not to revile or asperse
the persons of any whatsoever, etc.

And indeed to speak my mind freely, the grand Error in the Reformation of
these times has been its weeding out of persons, when as the blow should have
been levelled against the interests, which notwithstanding the frequent change
of persons, still take root and spring up in as great vigor as before, and
therefore I humbly conceive, till the Ax be laid to the root of every evil and
corrupt interest, we may not expect to reap any great fruit or success by our
Reformation, for all flesh is corruptible, and every man a lie, nor is he that
marches in the Rear any better able to resist the Temptation, or avoid the
snares, then he that fell before him.

Of the Hereditary Nobility.
THe Third and last sort of men that seem by their interest prompted to an
enmity to, and opposition of, an equal Commonwealth, is the Hereditary
Nobility, whose apprehensions being swelled and elated with the greatness of
their Titles, and cherishing a fond opinion of the Gallantry of their blood,
think it below them to stand on an equal level with the rest of their
brethren; I confess were there on the face of the earth (according to the
fictions of the Poets) a Race of Heroes that were of the kindred of Jupiter,
and could deduce their pedigrees from the Gods, whose natures had escaped the
general pollution, or been less tainted with humane infirmities then other
mortals, whose bodies had been framed by Titan, of better clay, and a more
refined mould then the rest of the rude Mass of man kind, and whose parts and
intellects (as its said of Saul) were higher by the head and shoulders then the
rest of the peoples, whereby it might be evidenced nature had designed them
unto Rule and Empire: there were then some plea, some ground, for that
distinction the Tyranny of Custom has introduced among the Children of men.

But if these Pyramids of greatness were at first erectect by the hands of
Monarchy, only for the better support and ornament of the Thrones of Princes,
and are, (if well understood) no other then golden Trophies made of the spoils
and ruins of the Peoples Liberties; that not only in fair Characters preserve
the memories of their Oppressors, but also upbraid them with their former (if
not present) servitude and slavery. I cannot but think it might much conduce to
the security of the Peace and Liberty of the Nation, to have them removed out
of the Peoples eyes, that they may neither longer continue the objects of their
Envy who hate them, or by dazzling with their gaudy splendour, the weak eyes o^
fond adorers, revive and awaken the memories and desires of what they sometime
were the appurtenances and Appendix: or if they are (as by some pretended) the
very pillars and buttresses of Monarchy, the Bulworks and Citadels of Pride and
Tyranny, and that notwithstanding the standard of Regal Power be taken down,
the Peace and Liberty of the Nation seems not sufficiently s^cure, nor to have
obtained a full and perfect conquest over Oppression, while any of the
Fortresses in which it has formerly been ingarison'd, be not levelled and
dismantled; it were better that these should abate something of their Height
and grandeur, that seems to ore-top and threaten ruin to the public Liberty:
then that the Nation should be put in danger of relapsing into slavery, or to
have their Controversy so lately decided by the Umpier of Heaven again
disputed in fields of blood.

Or if these swelling Tumors and unhandsome wen of Greatness do ill become the
face of a Commonwealth, and spoil the symetry and beauty of its proportions;
were it not better they should be pared off, than our state rendered of a
monstrous and prodigious shape? If after all our expense of blood and treasure
for purchase of our Liberty, our title and pretensions to a Free State may
justly be called in question, so long as we remain pupils and underwardship to
our Hereditary Lords and ancient Guardians, is it not time we were emancipated?
or if that may not in truth be admitted for an equal Commonwealth, in which
there is any other path known to the Temple of Honor, then what passes through
that of virtue? Is it not prudence to hedge up all those by-ways of Birth and
Fortunes? Were it not better the sustenance of our polity and Government should
be plainly penned without the flourishes and Ornaments of such Capitals, which
being admitted, may either seem superfluous, or through misconstruction in
danger marring of the sense, or rendering the nature of our Constitution
dubious and ambiguous, than by a contrary practice minister occasion of
intangling men's judgments with such scruples, knots and difficulties, that the
best state Critics being unable to unty, nothing but the sharpest sword can
cut in sunder; I would not willingly be understood to plead against all
distinction of Rancks and Degrees amongst men, ^n which consists the harmony,
grace and beauty of the world, and which cannot be proscribed or abolished,
without confounding the Economy and Order of all Societies, without unlinking
the Chain of Nature, without cancelling and reversing the Law of the universe,
and un^ovelling the world into its first Chaos of confusion; Nor should I speak
a syllable against Hon^urs being Hereditary, could the valor, Religion, and
prudence of Ancestors be as easily entailed on a line or family, as their
Honors and Riches, could but their Gallantry be made Hereditary as well as
their Fortunes? Could they transmit their virtues as well as names unto their
posterity, I should willingly become the Advocate of such a Nobility, and
suffer my ears to be bored to the posts of their doors; and rather acknowledge
them our perpetual Masters and Dictators, then hazard the choice of worse, upon
the doubtful election of the people, with whom the best men are not always in
greatest reputation.

But since no choice can be more perilous and unsafe, then the casual lot of
nature, I had rather stand to any election, then mere chance; by reason we
have oftener known fools the sons of wise men by nature, then of the peoples
choice or adoption. Honor is the crown and reward of Virtue; is it not then
unseemly they should wear the badge and livery, that were never admitted within
the outmost Court of her Temple, that are the very slaves and vassals of vice
and wickedness? I cannot but pay a greater tribute of respect and honor in my
thoughts, to the worth of such as have raised themselves to a high degree and
pitch of eminence, by the wings of their own merits, then to such as are only
born up by those the credit and reputation of their Ancestors has bequeathed
unto them: Wherefore that Honor may be a spur to valor, and the reward of
Virtue, let it not be prostrated to every rich and sordid miser, who by
abandoning all Virtue, Hospitality and Humanity, has with much oppression and
grinding the face of the poor, scraped much wealth together; but rather on such
as by their Valor and Prudence, have brought most credit and reputation to the
Commonwealth: Wherefore if the Parliament please out of such to create Knights,
or make the chiefest Ministers of State Lords by Office, or during life, I
should account it no solecism in a Commonwealth, but an ornament thereto.

Now the reason I look upon the Divine, the Lawyer, and Hereditary Nobility, as
such irreconcilable Antagonists to a Free State, is not grounded singly on the
real prejudice they either have, or are like to receive therefrom; but rather,
on what their fears and jealousies are apt to suggest unto their apprehensions,
being conscious that their private interests stand in opposition to that of the
Public; which could they be content to let go, and wave the advantages an
injurious prescription has given them over their Brethren, their concerns
would be equally interwove and wound up with others in that of a Commonwealth;
and might find it alike propitious to themselves with any other of like parts
and ingenuity: But such is the evil nature of man, that to have done an injury,
is a sufficient ground for future enmity, and rather to prosecute, then any way
compensate those that are indebted for a former discourtesie: Therefore the
best and soonest way to be reconciled to such, is quickly to requite their
injury; for measuring others thirst of revenge, by the standard of their own
malice, they can never believe any one is friends with them, so long as he is
in arrears to them for an ill turn: So that their fear of revenge breeds
distance, and that increases alienation and disaffection, which brings forth
farther hostility, with increase of injuries. In Analogy to which Doctrine, the
best way to give the Antagonists of the Commonwealth ease, and its self
security, is, by causing their fears to fall upon them, and thereby deliver
them from further pain, and the Public from its jealousies and future danger;
for it can never be expected, they should espouse the interest of the Public,
before they have buried that of their private; that they should imbark
themselves in the same bottom with that of the Commonwealth, so long as they
have so many of their own to look after; till these are shipwrack'd, they will
not be much concerned in the safety and prosperity of the Commonwealth.

We shall never be so well united in our affections and designs for public
good, as when we are become all of one price, and to have but one common
interest: for it is nothing but the diversity of Interests that breaks us in
pieces, and crumbles us into so many different factions and designs, which as
it was good policy in our Mona^chs, so but bad prudence in a Commonwealth: the
Interest of a Prince being to break the strength of his people, that one
faction being balanced by another, he may with more ease and facility render
himself Master of all, according to the advice of the old Maxim, Divide and
Rule. But the strength and glory of a Commonwealth is its union. And indeed it
had otherwise been impossible, that ever Princes should have been able to have
tied up the hands of Nations, and bound the strength of Sampson in Cords, and
bands of withyes; had not the policy like that of the Philistims first shorn
their locks, and deprived them of their strength: Had they not first according
to the fable of the Faggot, loosed their bond of union, by starting many
interests, and kindling diverse animosities among them, they had never fastened
the Cords of slavery and bondage on them. The Philistims had never sported
themselves with Samson, or Ulisses with Polyphemas, had they not first put out
their eyes. Nor had Princes ever put a hook into the Nostrils of the Leviathan,
or played with the mighty Whale; had they not made use of a like stratagem.

Men complain much, and seem to have a great sense of the many Factions and
Divisions in Religion, as they are pleased to term them; but how inconsiderable
are these to the grand National or civil Factions. I confess those of Religion
may sometime be made use of to paliate, but they are of other factions, that
are the bitter root of all our breaches and divisions: Were there not one
interest of the Nobility, another of the Commonalty; one of the Clergy, another
of the Laity; one of the Lawyer, another of the Countryman; one of the
Soldier, another of the Citizen; one of the elder, another of the younger
Brethren, we might soon see an end of the other.

These are the interest that clash so much one against another, and make such
tumults in the world; and were these once cancelled and forgotten, the other of
Presbyterian and Independent, Quaker and Anabaptist, etc. would soon vanish, or
at least, make little noise or disturbance in the world. How happy might all
men be, did it please God they might recover the fight of their common
interest, and their strength which consists in union. How easily might all the
Nations of the earth shake off the iron Yokes the Tyranny of Princes has put
upon them by this means? and with how great facility might this be done! with
how little prejudice and detriment to any man's particular, might all be made
happy, if laying aside all animosities and jealousies, men would but lend an
ear to reason, rather then passion. But to proceed, since it has pleased God
once more to put a price into our hands, and cause another opportunity of
recovering our Native Rights and Liberties to dawn upon us, I desire we may not
be as fools, not knowing how to use it; but that all ways that are safe and
honorable may be taken for the securing and improvement of it; and therefore
that the builders of our State may be furnished with a spirit of Wisdom from
above, that they may become The Repairers of our Breaches, and, The Restorers
of Paths to dwell in; that they may not deceive themselves, or the Nation, by
thinking to patch up a sorry half potch'd Commonwealth, upon the old, crazy,
and rotten foundations of Monarchy as heretofore; having had experience, that
it will not, it cannot stand. They that are best read in Politics, and have
been most conversant in the Histories of antiquity, know, that as a
Commonwealth is the best and most absolute form of Government; so it is a nice
and ticklish thing, and has been difficult to fix in Nations under less
disadvantage then we, who have been so long used to a contrary way of
Government: which I speak not to discourage, but rather awaken the endeavors
and resolutions of our Senators, to watch and secure our liberties. The ancient
Commonwealths have been necessitated to make use sometimes of violent physic,
to purge and evacuate the rank humors of the Body Politic, and such as I
would not have prescribed a Christian State, supposing there may be found out
such as are more safe and gentle. It was the unhappiness of the Grecian and
Roman Republique, to be often guilty of the greatest ingratitude toward them
that best deserved of them; and not unoften to stain their hands with their
bloods, whose former merits seemed to challenge a Crown, rather then a Cross
from them. How often has Greece, for the security of her liberty, sacrificed
that life, by which she has formerly been preserved from ruin and
destruction? Who has not heard of the unhappy Tragedy of that valiant Captain,
that more then once preserved the Capitol, and snatched Rome, as a prey, out of
the very teeth of the Galls, its barbarous, and at last fatal enemies? And how
often has Greece rewarded her Captains victories with Banishment, instead of
Triumph? and that upon the single account of some small suggestion of
jealousy, or weak argument of too great Magnificence or Popularity: so jealous
were those Republiques of their liberty, that the General of an Army durst not
make use of a little Plate in his House, least it should cause envy, or render
him suspected of too much Grandeur and Ambition, and that he endeavored to
supplant the Commonwealth, and render himself their Lord and Master. Others
have been constrained to level their Palaces with the ground, lest the
sumptuousness and magnificence of their Structure, should become the object of
the Peoples envy and hatred. When these things come into my mind, I cannot but
wonder any should think it so easy and facile a thing to erect a Commonwealth,
as that it may be done with a wet finger, and requires no more then inserting,
The Keepers of the Liberties, instead of the name King, and that then the work
is finished, without any farther trouble or alteration, as many seem to be of
opinion. I confess, had we not at so dear a rate bought experience to inform us
of the contrary, this mistake might have past for venial, but that makes it an
unpardonable error. Now what may (as I humbly conceive) have a considerable
influence on the Nation, for the better fixing it on the right basis of a
Free State, are as follows.

Of an Agrarian.
1. FIrst, that there may be an Agrarian fixed, for stinting and setting bounds
to the vast unsatiable desires that are found in greedy men after riches; which
makes them not only lay field to field, and join house to house (as was the
complaint of the old Prophets) but to lay Town to Town, Parish to Parish,
County to County, and Island to Island. May we ever expect a more righteous
administration of things, while there are no bounds set to the waves of this
raging passion, that is ready to swallow, not only the houses of the widow,
but whole Countries? while there is no check upon covetousness, the root of all
evils; upon the immoderate desires of men, that like the daughters of the
Horsleach, cry, Give, give; that are more unsatiable then Hell, or the Grave.
Shall a price be set on the poor man's sweat and labor, and shall the growth of
families have no bound? shall they raise their houses (according to the design
of Babel) to the Heavens? as if having filled the earth with oppression, they
would take Heaven also by violence. Is this suitable to a Commonwealth? or was
this the design of our Reformation, to put the whole Land into the hands of a
few Proprietors? was it for this end Abbeys were demolished, and the Hierarchy
taken down, that a few Gentlemen, or elder Brethren, might have their lands,
because they had not enough before? Is this the purchase of all our blood and
treasure? to set up a few more great families, to increase the number of our
Masters; who when they have engrossed the lands and wealth of the whole Nation,
there will remain nothing for either of them to purchase, or us to sell, but
our selves to be their slaves, and so restore vassallage, that has been so
long abrogated. We have had great disputes and sharp controversies; first,
about a House of Lords, and since a Senate: But, in my apprehension, not worth
a bulrush; for the case is the same, whether Lords or not Lords, when as the
great Landlords in each Country, shall be constantly chosen by their Tenants,
to be our Legislators. Were it not as good they should have patents to sit for
life, since we cannot suppose they will willingly accept of a Writ of Ease, or
sit out of play (having to great stakes in the game) so long as they can so
easily be shouldered in by their Tenants: Or if at any time they be kept out,
have we not experience that they will leavy war against the present power? Does
not the war at this present day witness thereto? is it not then all one,
whether we have an everlasting Parliament, or successive, if elections are but
a new choice of the same men, and that it be not difficult to prick a
Parliament, before the Writs are gone forth? And were this all the
inconvenience, the evil were more tolerable; but do we not see how apt these
Gentlemen of such vast and rank Estates are to leavy war, and imbrue the Land
in blood? does not this proceed from the greatness of their retinue, the
multitude of their tenants, the asfluency of their estates and fortunes?

Now what better expedient can be devised for this mischief then an Agrarian?
is it not more just and equirable then the Grecian ostracism, or the Roman
proscriptions? can a Commonwealth be fixed without it? is it not absolutely
necessary, that the proportion of lands be st^nted, lest otherw^^e the whole
Island in process of time fall into the hands of one or few Proprietors? what
then will become of our Free State? will not our Landlords erect what
Government they please over us? moreover, will not this give great
encouragement to hospitality, and works of charity, that men should know the
bounds of their Estates, the pillars on which is wrote their ne plus ultra? how
can we ever expect good laws, or a more righteous State, while those worms of
the earth, that possess the greatest dunghills, must be our Senators, because
they have the greatest rout of tenants to voice them into the saddle of
Authority. Is this suitable to a Free State, or becoming Christians? To what
purpose is more wealth then what may with credit bear up the port of a chief
Minister of State, and furnish forth the comforts and enjoyments of this life?
is not he a Leviathan, and more greedy then Death, Hell, or the grave, that
desires more? Now that such an Agrarian (which for its proportion, is submitted
to the wisdom of our Senators) may be introduced, without breaking down the
hedge of any man's propriety, it is humbly proposed, that there may be a time
assigned, wherein they that want posterity, or a noble spirit to part with any
of their wealth to their poor relations, may convert their lands into a
personal estate, or otherwise dispose of them, by reason that an excess or
redundancy in that, as exposed to greater casualty and hazard, so is of less
danger to the Commonwealth then the other, which time expired, that all taxes
and public charges may be laid on such as have not conformed thereto, til
their estates be crumbled down to the common standard, or due proportion, and
that the State or Commonwealth may be declared heir, and to inherit whatever
beyond the just proportion of the fixed Agrarian any man shall leave unto his
heir or posterity.

Of the Militia.
2. THat at all those that have been true to, and by the free expense of their
blood and treasure, have purchased a share and interest in the cause God, has
pleased to crown with so great success and victory, may be put in posture to
defend their Liberties, and trained up to the use of Arms and Military
Discipline, in all places throughout the Land, until time shall have worn out
all animosities, and that the whole Nation shall become entirely united in
their affections one to another, and be as of one lump, and then that all may
be exercised in Arms that are not incapable either through age or infirmity. I
need not I presume show how commendable a thing it is for a Nation to be of a
courageous and martial spirit, or how necessary they should bear their own
Arms, and not to put weapons into the hands of strangers, or their slaves to
make them their Masters, and become subject to a base and mercenary Army, being
things so clear, that he that has but halt an eye may read and foresee their
inconveniences.

Of Elections to Offices, etc.
3. THat certain fundamental Constitutions, by which both the spiritual and
civil Liberties of the people may be secured, be agreed on, and all that expect
the privilege of vote or suffrage in Elect^ons of Knights of the Shires, etc.
or to bear any office of trust in the Commonwealth may be sworn thereto, and
that men may be esteemed qualified, not so much by their estates, as Religion
and Virtue of bearing the chief offices of trust in the Commonwealth; and to
this end that the qualifications according to which they are to be capacitated,
may be so stated and limited, as to bear the access of all unworthy persons
that are like to betray their trust, or connive at the springings up of
Usurpations, Tyranny and Oppression; and by reason the Elections of Parliament
men are at present managed with so much tumult and noise, that the more sober
and modest people are ashamed, and discouraged to be present at them: that the
Parliament would think of some other way by Subscriptions in each Parish, or
the like, less subject to popular tumults, in which the more rude and violent
carry it from the more discreet and sober, not so much by plurality of voices
as by noise and violence, being (as commonly managed) more like an Assembly
met, to choose the Lord of a Whitsun-Ale, then Knights of the Shire. As also
that none may be trusted with more power then God has furnished them with a
capacity to understand, and abilities to administer without stain to the
reputation of the Commonwealth; and therefore that no Apes in purple, or Asses
with golden Trappings, may be admitted to sit and bray upon our Tribunals and
Seats of judicature, to bring Authority into contempt and disgrace: But that
every one may carry their own brains, and not understand their Places by Proxy,
or have the Orbs and Spears of their understandings turned about and governed
by a mercenary intelligence, as is the Custom of some Reverend Mayors by their
Learned Recorders, etc.

I confess here to fore for the encouragement of Trade, there might be some
Reason of endowing Corporations with large privileges, but since all Trades
have been overstock'd, the case is much altered. It might also be more the
interest of Princes, to trust a good share of power in the hands of sheepish
and tame Citizens, that are content not only to pay dearer for their honor,
but also depend more upon their will and humor then those that better
understand themselves: Whereas the interest of a Commonwealth is to employ such
as are less phlegmatic and more mercuriall, of greater spirit, prudence and
activity for the management of their several Trusts and Provinces, then are
usually found among such as have had the advantage of no better Education then
their Trades; or known other Academy then their Shops or Exchange.

Of Rotation.
LAstly, That there may be such an equal Rotation of all Offices of Trust and
Places of power, that all that are capable may alike taste of Rule as well as
subjection: By reason that fixed powers, like standing waters, are apt to
corrupt and stink in the Nostrils of the people.

The Conclusion.
MAny other things might have been proposed, but not knowing what Reception
will be given, to what has already been said, I shall at present for bear. I
have not presumed to chalk out any particular model, referring that to the
wisdom of our Senators, that are best able to determine thereof: And were they
pleased to borrow light from any others apprehensions, there are not wanting,
whose thoughts and Pens having been well traversed on that Subject, may better
expect that honor then I; My design being only to propose some Fundamental
things, that may lay a firm Basis for an equal Commonwealth to be founded on,
leaving the form and superstructure thereof to be erected by the hands of our
Master Builders, which through the blessing of God have never miscarried in any
of their Heroic Undertakings.

And whatever others may think of the design of these discourses, I am so well
satisfied in my own breast, that I think I may be bold to say, it is that God
has signally owned, and what his people, the good people of this Land, are by
a spirit of faith strongly carried forth in expectation of. Certainly such a
Commonwealth as is here pleaded for, is the best and most happy of all
Governments, is the best and most religious of all Causes; and whatever of
Religion is pleaded against it, is either of ignorance or malice; for what
detriment can this bring to Religion? Is it because a mercenary Ministry is
more holy, more acceptable, then one that is free? or to preach for hire be
better then out of zeal and conscience? or is a Clergy taken from the meanest
of the people, more holy, more righteous then the heads and Princes thereof? Is
not the firstborn as acceptable as the younger Brethren? How then may a
Commonwealth be charged with supplantiug Religion or destroying Piety? Does
that subvert either Magistracy or Ministry, that twists them both together:
Many would fain have their Ministers Bishops, and their Bishops Lords, Is it
not as well if our Lords be Bishops? Many would have the Clergy increased, and
Ministers made Justices of Peace, Is it not as well if our Justices of Peace
become Ministers? Let it not therefore be said, that through the sides of the
Ministry we would wound Magistracy, when it is desired they should be a support
and ornament to each other.

But may our Government more truly be accused of discouraging Learning? May
that be thought guilty of this, that prefers every man according to his
deserts? that by the Rotation of its offices, takes in every one to have his
share, and turn in the administration of its power? That furnishes every man
with employment suitable to the greatness of his parts and Education, that
suffers no man's Talent to rust, to lie hid, to be buried or laid up in a
Napkin, but invites and gives opportunity for the use and exercise of them. Is
to contract the number of Hals and Colleges (when the Nation is over-stock'd)
to discourage Learning? Did not my Lord Bacon long since complain thereof, when
there were fewer Colleges and more preferments? and is there not more reason
now? I presume no body will say that Learned Hero was an Enemy of Learning. Is
it rational to think these times need as many Colleges as those before Hen.
8. when there were thirty thousand Students in one of the Universities; And yet
that we may not envy those times, little the more learning; for does not every
one know what Scholars the Monks were? And how learned those Ages that swarmed
with so many fat and flow bellies? Did not one of the Saxon Kings translate the
Bible for the use of his illiterate Clergy, because his Clergy understood not
Latin as he gives the Reason? And do we not now spoil many a good Plough-man
to make a poor Scholar, and rob the Shops of many a fit mechanic, to keep our
Colleges thinly stocked with half-witted sleepish Fellows?

And is this for the Advancement of Learning, to render it more common and
contemptible then the Art of Fidling? That the education and exercise of
Princes should become the study of every pedant and pesant; That Minerva and
the Muses should be prostrated to the profane accosts of every Coridon, and
sullied by the rude embraces of every Mechanic Son? Is it not that too has
brought it into so much contempt and disgrace with the Gentry and Nobility?
that has made it accounted a base and pedantick thing? Is not Learning cheap
enough, when greater Parts and Ingenuity may be hired for a piece of bread,
then would heretofore have purchased a Cardinals Hat? Should we make enquiry
into the Causes of that detriment Learning has received, and what obstructs
the Advancement thereof, we should find it another thing then what most men
suppose. It is that distinction and diversity of modern times have introduced,
whence have sprung many nice and curious studies unknown to Antiquity, and the
wiser ages of the world, studies that bring no advantage to the Commonwealth,
that yield neither pleasure nor profit to those that converse in them, save
what folly and custom has entailed upon them, studies in which our choicest
wits do lose their time, and consume their strength to no purpose; except to
become skillfull in a literate kind of ignorance, while the more solid parts
of Learning lie altogether uncultivated and neglected: Studies that are not
only jejune and barren of any profitable Fruit, but such as sophisticate and
adulterate the understandings of all those that are most conversant in them;
That preoccupy and blurre the mind with prejudice, and render men froward and
perverse to the reception of the Truth; Studies that blind the Understanding,
deprave the Will, byasse the Judgment and corrupt the affections; That render
men morose, peevish, uncharitable and inhumane: That crowd the world with
multitudes of Books, of which there is no end, either in respect of number, or
their use, such as might better be spared then read, and if burnt, the world
neither the less wise nor learned; For demonstration of which I shall instance
in two or three professions of great repute in the world, and first of Divines
which are commonly distinguished into Casuists Polemick School, and practical
Divines; Of which all or the most part might very well have been spared, had
men acquiesced in the Scriptures, and been content to have waited on the
Teachings of Gods Spirit: But so soon as the wisdom of men, and Policy of
Princes had erected this which should be all men's study and employment into a
particular Profession, and registered it among those that are commonly called
the Learned; To add the more credit thereto, they began to mix and blend it
with the Learning and Sophistry of the Schools, pretending to adorn-it with the
spoils of the Heathen, but what is found to have sophisticated and adulterated
the truth and simplicity of the Gospel: Now because this mixing it with false
and incoherent School-Learning, had (through its incongruity and contradiction)
brought forth great variety and multiplicity of opinions, and in all
probability spawned most of those Sects, Heresies, and Errors, that now swarm
and are lodged in the Heads and Judgments of unstable minds: It was thought
necessary to introduce Polemicks for purging and winnowing Divinity from the
Chafe of such Errors, as the former practice had filled it with; and
therefore certain Colleges were erected for Students of Controversies, for
maintaining the Gideons and Champions of the Truth, who like the Knights
Templers, or those of Malta were to defend the Holy Land, or maintain the
possessions of Truth, from the invasions and incroachings of error, which was
performed with such ill success, that in stead of composing and reducing
errors to the Obedience of the Truth, they became much multiplied by the
subtle cavilling wits of these persons altogether given to wrangling and
contradiction, that at length the very Fundamentals of Religion came to be
called in Question, and the Pillars of faith shaken, and all things rendered
disputable, and argued pro and con, by the perverse and scepticall wits of
Truths pretended Champions. Thus rather then they would seem idle or want
employment, they fell to seeking knots in Bull-rushes, and made, where they
could not find difficulties, till at length the itch of disputing proved the
scab of the Church, while in the mean time all necessary and useful Learning
was neglected.

By the like steps and degrees did the study of the Laws also climb into the
repute of a Learned Profession: For first, Monarchy having introduced a great
variety of tenures, resulting from the diversity of feuds and services, as
Grand Sergeanty, Knight Service, Soccage, and the like. which are but so many
several degrees of servitude and slavery, their study was impropriated to a
peculiar order of men, who to render their profession more difficult and
advantageous, introduced the prolix tautological forms of Instruments that are
in use at this day, that through the multitude of words they might darken
knowledge, though under a contrary pretense of perspicuity and avoiding
ambiguity; and being entrusted with penning of Acts, Ordinances and Statutes,
they rendered them dubious and ambiguous for the better grounding contrary cases
upon them, to which time has added multitudes of readings on Statutes,
Comments corrupting and darkening the Text, Reports, Cases, Abridgements, etc.
by which the Law is rendered so intricate, prolix, and scabbed, that it racks
and tortures the best wits that have undertaken the study thereof. Now there is
no greater badge of the slavery of any people then the multitude of their Laws,
it being their interest to have them as few, brief, and plain as possible, and
to speak truth, Law is or ought to be nothing but pure Reason founded on the
Word of God, or such clear and natural inferences and deductions as unbyast
reason shall make from the Moral Law, and then what need would there be of
those many Books and large Volumes of so many Reports, Cases, Presidents,
Comments, etc. with which the world is crowded.

I might in like manner instance in Politics, which as commonly handled, is
nothing but an Art of knavery that consists in ballancing of Factions, and
casting a mist of different interests before the eyes of the people, making
them scramble for Nuts and Trifles, or like the dog in the Fable, catch at
specious shadows, while they let go the substance, and suffer themselves to be
cajoled and jugled out of their Liberties, and made a prey to exorbitant and
arbitrary power; of which (were the eyes of men open to discern their true and
common interest, which is to abolish all names of distinction and faction)
there would be no use, for honesty would be found the most genuine and true
policy, and that which would abide the touch, when all other shall be found
false and counterfeit: When the credit of all our Quacks and Empericks of
King-craft and State Policy shall become Bankrupt, and they forced like
Mountebanks to remove their Stages and seek new Quarters, wherein to set up
their Trade of Juggling: How many of these have we of late seen with disgrace
hist off the Stage, before they had well looked about them! how many of these
crafty Foxes have of late been unkenell'd, and their faces covered with shame,
that they have been glad to hide themselves in corners: Those (that like the
Foxes of Sampson with firebrands in their tales) were so skilful in kindling
factions and jealousies, to set the world on fire; as if, like Nero, they were
with nothing so well pleased, as to warm themselves at the ruins of the world.
Now were all these spurious excrescencies pruned from the Tree of Knowledge,
these curious, useless and pernicious studies abrogated, these mazes and
meanders of trifles (in which most of our best wits are lost and wilder'd)
removed: How would all those paths that lead to useful knowledge, that are now
unfrequented and over grown with weeds, be resorted to? How would all the
fruitful parts of learning be cultivated? what profitable voyages might be made
to the America and remotest parts of nature, that are yet unknown and
undiscovered? what admirable scholars, and how able and learned a Gentry might
we then expect to see, that had acquired not only a small smattering in a
little curious and useless learning, and made a small progress in some one of
the learned professions, but had run through them all; that were not only
Lawyers, but also Divines, Statesmen, Historians, Philosophers, Physicians, in
a word, not lame (as nowadays) but absolute and universal scholars: This is the
true account of learnings decays and detriment, with the readiest means of
restoring it to its Pristine strength and luster, to which I know nothing that
has greater ten-dency then the Commonwealth proposed, so far it is from being
prejudicial thereto.

To proceed therefore, have then the Lawyers any just cause to criminate our
Government, or to bring in a large bill of Indictment against it, or implead it
as guilty of injury to them? is it any wrong to them for every one to plead his
own cause? have they any interest or propriety in other men's causes, in the
Suits and Contentions of other men? if not, wherein are they injured? in that
every one is presumed to tell his own tale best, to be most eloquent in his own
behalf, and to best understand his own business? is it not rather to be
wondered, that the Gentry and Nobility have with patience so long suffered
themselves to be slighted, contemned and trampled on, by a Mercenary Generation
of men, that sell their breath, as Laplanders do winds, and raise and enrich
themselves by the ruins and shipwracks of others fortunes?

Or in the last place, will the Nobility suffer any great loss hereby? is there
any thing more then a gilded title, a bare and empty name that is in jeopardy,
which in a Commonwealth either signifies nothing, or what amounts not to so
much as a feather in their caps? or if they are loath to part with it, may they
not wear it to their graves? No body desires that any of the present
Proprietors should be robbed of one Iota in their titles; and I presume none
will desire them any farther: If they do, Lucian will tell them they are
mistaken, their Honors must not wait on them to the other world, they must not
enter with them into Charons Boat, the surly Ferriman will have them left on
this side the banks of Acheron. But if they desire they should descend to their
posterity, if so be their estates be equally divided according to Gavel-kinde,
we shall not much differ about that, if one or all of their sons (according to
the custom of some Countries) assume the titles of their Ancestors, I know none
will envy their Honors, or be much offended with their petty Lordships; only
I should think it more generous and prudent to lay them down at the
Commonwealths feet; and after they shall have approved themselves persons of
Worth, Honor, and Integrity to their Country, they need not doubt but to
receive them with greater luster and advantage, as a badge rather of their own
then their Ancestors Virtues. If now the partition walls (as has been
proposed) of all particular and private interests (at first erected by the
subtilty of Princes) were thus broken down, and the interest of every
particular become the interest of all, and the interest of all but one; how
happy, how unanimous should we be? and how plain and easy a thing would the
Doctrine of Politics become? with how great ease and facility might the Helm
of the Commonwealth be steered and governed? in how great peace and tranquillity
should we live? what a constant serenity of Peace and Prosperity might we
enjoy? We might then beat our Swords into Plow-shares, and turn our Spears into
Pruning Hooks, we should then no more hear the sound of the Drum, or be
affrighted with the Alarums of Civil Wars and discords; but might sit under
our own Vines, and eat the fruit of our Figge-trees in safety: We should then
see the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid, and
the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling together, and a little Child to
lead them, and The Lion shall eat straw like an Ox, and the Sucking Child
shall play upon the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his hand
upon the Cockatrice Den; for they shall not hurt nor destroy throughout the
Holy Mountain of the Lord: But the whole Earth shall be full of the Knowledge
of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea.

Thus shall it be, when the Knowledge of the Lord has destroyed every base and
private Interest from off the face of the Earth; when he has taken away that
diversity of Preying Interests, that are the Source and Spring of all our
miseries, the seeds of all those Factions and Divisions that rage among the
sons of Men, and makes them tear, rend, and prey upon one another, that has so
entangled the Doctrine of Politics, and rendered them so dark and abstruce, a
Labyrinth so difficult, a Maze and Mystery of Iniquity, that has turned the
Art of Government, into an Art of Juggling and dissembling; that has brought to
light those wicked Machavilian Maxims of the Kingdom of Darkness, that were
first broached by a Conclave of Devils, Divide and impera: Qui nescit
dissimulare nescit regnare, and the like; that has devised necessity of State
as an Apology, and Religious Pretenses as a cloak for the blackest crimes the
Sun ere looked upon; that has put the Inscription of the Cause of God, upon
most wicked and Devilish Designs; that has made Religion hold the stirrup to
Ambition, become the Pander of Greatness, and a Stalking-Horse to Lust and
Wickedness. But it shall not be thus in the Holy Mountain of the Lord, in the
Holy Commonwealth of Israel, in the New Jerusalem that is coming down from
above, and when there shall be new Heavens, and new Earth, all old things shall
pass away, which is not far off; the World, and unrighteousness of man has
now but a short part to act; for the time is approaching, in which every false
Mask and Vizard shall be pulled off, in which a window shall be opened into
every secret and false breast, and the hidden thoughts of men's hearts
discovered; and that the World shall be no longer cheated, to espouse corrupt
and base Interests, because gilded with glorious pretenses of Religion, and
bearing False Inscriptions upon them.

Now for the truth and reason of these things, I durst appeal to the Judgments
and Consciences of the most understanding men in the Nation, as knowing their
hearts witness to them; and were their bodies of Crystal, pellucid, and
transparent, I know we might read the same Apprehensions in them: for I cannot
imagine it proceeds from ignorance, but interest, that the light of those
truths has not hitherto been more discovered. So many are interessed in the
grand Cheat of the World, so many are the Silversmiths that reap profit from
the Shrines of these Diana's, that it is no wonder there appears so great a
zeal to keep up their credit and reputation: But the day of the Lord which is
at hand, will discover them. I know most men are led by a blind and implicit
faith they have pinned on the sleeves of some learned Rabbis, being ready to
Worship and fall down before any Galf, Custom has set up among them: These out
of love I have endeavored to undeceive, though I thereby set up my self as a
Mark and But for all the shafts the Malice of men can dart against me. And
being loath to detain and imprison the Truth in unrighteousness, have given in
my testimony against the Corruption of the World, which I know to be a cheat;
and the manners of men, who are a lie, and Vanity. How it will be received, I
am not solicitous; if I perish, I perish, and hope I shall be able to say, as
sometime that Great Soldier Belisarius, Mihi non culpa nocuit sed invidia. But
as for the Truth, I know it cannot long be stifled, but must and will prevail.

Magna est veritas and praevalebit.
THE CONTENTS.
A Plea for a Commonwealth, page 1. Of the Ministry or Clergy, page 21 Of
Tithes, page 38 An humble Motion in behalf of the Poor, page 42 Of the
Universities, page 45 Of the Regulation of the Laws and Lawyers, page 56 An
Apology for Younger Brothers, page 58 Of the Hereditary Nobility, page 75 Of an
Agrarian, page 84 Of the Militia, page 87 Of Election to Offices, etc. ibid. Of
Rotation. page 89 The Conclusion. page 90
FINIS.

