THE Absolute Truth, and Utmost Certainty OF THE Word of God: AND That all
Things which are contained in the Scriptures, yea to every Tittle and Iota
thereof, will be fulfilled. Demonstrated in a Discourse on Romans IX. 6.

By RICHARD STAFFORD, formerly of Magdalen-Hall in Oxford.

Isa. 55. 10, 11. For as the Rain comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and
returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and makes it to bring forth and
bud, that it may give Seed to the Sower, and Bread to the Eater. So shall my
Word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but
it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the Thing
whereto I sent it.

London. Printed, and are to be Sold by Ralph Simpson, at the Harp in St.
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXCIX.

ROMANS IX. 6. Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect.


ONE of the Greatest Prejudices against the Preaching and Publishing of the
Word of God is, in that so very few are converted by it, and do Obey it. Let
Men Preach till their Hearts ache (as the common Proverbial Speech is) and tire
out their Lungs, spend their strength, yea, Seek out acceptable Words, as
Ecclesiastes did, and do all that ever they can in the work of the Ministry,
both by studying in Gods Statutes as David's Practice was, and also by Prayer
and Diligent Labor; yet still the World will not be Reformed, nor brought off
from their lees of Corruption and Iniquity. They will go on in their old former
ways, Ungodliness and Wickedness, let the Ministers and Servants of God say and
do whatever they can. Therefore it is, that the Word is called, the Weakness of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 25. In that it is deemed to be unable and insufficient to effect
the very thing it does intend at, that is, to bring People over unto the
obedience of the Law of God, and to Regulate their lives and manners.

The Commandment is Holy, Just and Good in it self; Thy Precepts concerning all
things are Right, Yet here lies the great stumbling Block and Rock of offense,
which quite keeps off the ungodly and mixed Multitude from getting over it, and
the steps of Good and Faithful People do well nigh slip thereat, In that,
Notwithstanding it is so little obeyed, and so very little heed is given unto
them by the Generality of People. They will indeed talk of the Commandments of
God, and make a show as if they had performed 1 Samuel 15. 13. And were guided
thereby, but all along and in the mean while, They do walk in a way that is not
good after their own thoughts, Isa. 65. 2. And according to their own Will,
Humor, Inclination and Imaginations. It is a common saying, that People will
have their Will whatever it cost them: And it is to be feared (as there is real
Ground for this Surmise, from the Word of God) that too many are bent and
resolved upon their own Will though they should be damned, or condemned for it
at the Day of Judgment, and it cost them no less than the Loss of their
precious Immortal Souls.

We read in the Old Testament, of the Lords Controversy with his people; and
this is the Controversy which he has with the Inhabitants of the Earth,
Whether they shall do according to his Word and Commandments, and be led by
the silent and inward Dictates of his Spirit. Or they think, speak and
practice, for the heart of every one of them is deep: Our Lips are our own;
Who is Lord over us? Thoughts are free, according to their own Supposal and
Imagination. And so it is of the Words and Actions in the Children of
Disobedience, They speak and do as they list. This is a Controvercy which at
the last will be decided to the Creatures Punishment and Misery.

The Psalmist does speak further of the people of his Generation; They corrupt
others, and speak of Wicked Blasphemy; Their Talking is against the Most High.
There is indeed that Knowledge, and Outward Worship, and inward Reverential
Esteem, Universally received amongst the people of this Nation, that hardly
any, unless some very few Debauched, and Ignorant Young Men of the Richer sort,
do talk directly and immediately against God himself; For this would be so
odious and detestable, that even the Common Multitude would not bear it. But if
they do not speak out, because that they profess that they know God, but in
Works they deny him. But they think and Act to the very same purpose. God sees
and knows the thoughts all one, as if they were wrote in Great Letters upon the
Foreheads of those who did conceive them. And he does make alike construction
of their Actions, as if they did speak out the same what those Actions do
Import.

Things are confused and seem perplex through the doings of Sinners and
Hypocrites. By the former of which, I mean those who are open Barefaced and
Manifestly Sinners; Who will own that they Commit Sin and Transgression, and
make excuses for it; and cry out. Lord have mercy upon us, or the like. By
Hypocrites, I intend such who observe all the Parts and seasons of the Worship
of God, and other things pertaining to Religion; and yet they live in the
Breach and Neglect of some of the Commandments of God. But whilst they seem to
be Righteous and Religious when they are not; And they justify themselves
before Men, whereas God knows the heart; And what is highly esteemed amongst
Men, is an Abomination in his sight; Whilst they commend themselves and call
themselves Godly and Lean on the Lord, Micah 3. 11. As Counterfeit Gold does
sometimes Shine and Glister more then true: So they Profess more Honor and
Obedience to God then perhaps his very Elect and Real Servants, Hence our way
is the more intricate to trace and find them out, then those who are downright
Sinners and Ungodly. Whatever are the doings of all the Children of Men, the
Word of God does find them out; And however the Rebellious and Disobedient
would render it ineffectual and useless, that is not binding and obligatory to
them, and that it should be rather falsified then fulfilled, when it speaks of
Men's obedience unto Righteousness; for as for their Part, they will not yield
it. As we see and observe these things in the World, we are not thence to doubt
in our own Mind; But it these and such like things, still we may have Recourse
to this great Assertion of the Apostle, Not as tho the Word of God has taken
none effect, for they are not all Israel, which are of Israel. That is, They
are nor all the Servants of God, who have the Name and pretend to be so, or do
herd themselves in their Number.

I did therefore choose and thought Good to insist upon these Words, chiefly,
if not for the Removal (for it will still abide and remain) yet for the right
understanding of that first Prejudice, which in the very beginning lies against
the Word of God; In that so very few are converted by it and do obey it; That
ye who do believe and obey to the saving of your Souls, be not soon shaken in
Mind, by the Disadvantages which arise thereby; for it may anon appear, that
this is yet a greater fulfilling of the same Word.

As the Apostle Paul does record of himself, That after the manner of Men, he
had fought with Beasts at Ephesus: So both in the beginning, entrance and
course of our Ministry (which is more advanced and carried on by Writing,
Printing and Publishing then by speaking with a living Voice; For whereas the
Voice Perishes in the utterance and the matter is soon forgotten by the Hearer,
that reaches to the People afar off and to after Ages) I say again, that both
in the beginning and course of our Ministry, we have met with Scoffers, who
with their several kinds of sayings, did endeavor either to turn us aside from
our intended Ministry, or to defeat the design thereof. As it was said to
Ezekiel, Thou art not sent to a People of strange Speech and of an hard
Language, but to the House of Israel. Not to many People of a strange Speech
and of an hard Language, whose Words thou can not understand. Surely, had I
sent thee to them, they would have hearkened to thee. But the House of Israel
will not hearken unto thee, for they will not hearken unto me. For all the
House of Israel are impudent and hard hearted, Ezekiel. 3. 5, 6, 7. So if I should
recount my manifold Experiences, I should make known that I have met with more
perverse and contrary usage, Evil entreaty, contradiction and false Reproaches
from Formal and Nominal Christians, and from outward Worshippers, then ever I
did from open Sinners and the manifest Ungodly: Though I have spoken equally
against their Sin and Ungodliness, as I have laid open the Hypocrisy and
Foolish vain deceits of the others. And yet all this does nothing shake me in
Mind, nor yet does it at all abate or lessen from my present Comfort in the
well grounded hope of my future acceptance from the Lord. But rather it does
increase and confirm me therein, That I may have boldness in the Day of
Judgment, because as he was, so are we in this present World. For the like did
happen to him also, to be thus opposed and contradicted in his Ministry by the
Scribes and Pharisees (who were the then Teachers and Expounders of the Law)
and by the Jews, who were as exact and constant in all the Parts and Times of
the outward worship of God all the same while, as the People of this Nation do
go continually to their Parish Churches, or other Congregations and Assemblies.

Where the most good is either done or intended, there the Devil does raise the
greatest opposition; and the old Serpent does never show himself more subtle
then when he Acts through those who seem to be Religious and to make a fair
show in the flesh. So that when the Spirit of Lying and Falsehood or Reproach
does proceed forth through them, it has a greater Appearance and Likeness unto
Truth; and so it passes down glib with them, who judge according to Appearance
and not Righteous Judgment.

The Lord is well pleased for his Righteousness sake, He will magnify the Law
and make it Honorable, Isa. 42. 21. And as the Ministration thereof is more
worthy and excellent then the Business and Employment of the Greatest Kings or
wisest Statesmen. Nevertheless Ignorant and Ungodly Minds, like as when Michal
saw David Dancing before the Ark, she despised him: So they will lessen and
have a low esteem of such a kind of Office. Or as they Proudly and Disdainfully
think, that it is not consistent with a Good Birth and Education. Alas! All
these and such like are but foolish and false Imaginations, which Satan
suggests and keeps in the Minds of some People for to uphold his Kingdom. It is
all but Imagination and nothing of reality therein, for as it is said in the
Book of Job, I am also formed out of the Clay. Nehemiah the Governor of the
Province speaks in the behalf of the Poor, Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of
our Brathren, our Children as their Children, Neh. 5. 5. God has made of one
Blood (observe that) all Nations of Men, for to dwell on the Face of the Earth,
Acts 17. 26. Wherein then does one differ from and excel another, even in
respect of these vile Bodies, whilst we are in the midst of Life and carry them
about us, all one as when they come to be in the place of Skulls, where the
Poor and Rich are all alike. And whereas the Richer sort now adays call
themselves a good Family, I wish that sin and contempt of God, and that shame
which is among them of coming down to the Plainness and Simplicity of his
Worship, or to the place where his Word is Preached, did not manifest and
demonstrate the contrary. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt by the second
Death. And this is overcoming that Corruption which is both within our own
Nature, and also that which is in the World through the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eyes and the Pride of Life. And truly, if the Pride of Life was
overcome and rooted out of the minds of any one, as it is out of every one who
is indeed the Child and Servant of God and an Heir of Glory; then all those
things that Savor of Men; All those Imaginations and Sayings which arise up
from the Pride and Fashion of this World, or from the chief that is from the
Rich People thereof, will all sink and fall to the ground, and be as dung in
Comparision of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, or what may further his Gospel in
the World.

For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 1. 16. What need had the
Apostle to say this? But only in Relation and Answer to those who would imagine
and fasten shame thereon, in order to dissuade from what was Good and Praise
worthy. The Devil Acts in the minds of People to endeavor to beat off, or let
and hinder one who may be a proper Instrument and Labourer in the Work and
Vineyard of the Lord. But the shame wherewith they would reproach that, shall
at last return upon their own heads, when themselves shall at last rise up to
Shame and Everlasting Contempt; And they who were a shamed of Christ in this
Adulterous and Sinful Generation (It is not said, Jewish or Heathen, but in
Epithets proper and suitable to this Country of England at this Day) of them
shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when He comes in the Glory of his Father with
the Holy Angels.

People are commonly ashamed of that whereof a great stir and clutter is made
beforehand and nothing comes of it. And hereupon it is, that Ignorant Persons
and Unbelievers would endeavor to fasten shame on the Preaching of the Gospel.
For as they think and object, the Gospel imports good tidings and talks of
great, yea, the greatest things in the World, and nothing hereof is seen to
them nor presently had. That Reason which Paul gives in Romans 1. 16. Seems to
Answer all this to two sorts of People, the Jews and Gentiles, I am not ashamed
of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the Power of God unto Salvation to every one
that believes (Observe and Attend well to that) To the Jew first, and also to
the Greek. It is therefore said, To be the Power of God unto Salvation, unto
the Jew first. This was to instruct and rightly inform him, who did expect
Salvation by Moses and the Prophets; as to which they did both come short,
which the Gospel of Christ does supply and make up. The Jews were not so much
Ignorant in Part, as Unbelievers in Part; But the Greeks or Gentiles were
altogether Unbelievers in the whole. And take them as such, they can no more
understand what this Power of God unto Salvation is, then if you talk the same
unto a Brute Beast. And therefore it is fitly put before, To every one that
believes. For put the case, you should talk of Salvation to an Infant or to a
Child of a twelvemonth old, Will He understand what thou say? In no wise. So
it is, if you talk to a Savage Indian, who knows nothing of God or Futurity;
and when such an one is in good Plight and Health and has none but Friends
about him, then talk to him concerning Salvation, which signifies Safety and
Preservation from Danger, whereas he sees and perceives no danger at all. And
He will think that the Man is Idle or Mocketh, or is Foolish, who talk and
discourses thereof. It would be near the same to acquaint some Poor Ungodly
Beggars about Salvation; If they are Healthy, Lusty and Strong, if they have
before them a Meal of Good Victuals and they know where to have another, they
do not apprehend much more or besides this. But they think such an one speaks
Parables, or Nonsensical things unto them.

It is very observable, how it is Ushered and brought in, A Brutish Man knows
not, neither does a Fool understand this. When the Wicked Spring as the Grass,
and when all the Workers of Iniquity do flourish, It is, that they shall be
destroyed for Ever, Psalm. 92. 6, 7. So it is, though it be besides their
Opinion and Expectation. In like manner when any of the other Truths of God, or
of the things pertaining to his Kingdom come to be declared and spoken of, the
same Preface may be used and put before, A Brutish Man knows not, neither
does a Fool understand this. So it will be of the things whereof we shall by
and by speak, A Brutish Man knows not, neither does a Fool understand this:
It being usual with the Holy Ghost, when He comes to make known things which
will hardly meet with Credibility and Reception, to Anticipate and take notice
of the same beforehand. As Isaiah 53. Begins after this manner, Who has
believed our Report? Importing that very few or none would, until afterward
they should see it fulfilled.

It is properly and truly expressed when such are Termed Brutish Men and Fools;
For though they have the shape of Men, yet they understand no more of the things
of God; And thereby also we are given to apprehend (for it is the Wisdom and
Knowledge of God which gives them this Character) that if they do not use that
Image of God which he had Implanted in them, toward the Knowledge of God and
of the things pertaining to his Kingdom; They lose it again, and
Notwithstanding they retain the same outward shape with his Saints and
Servants, yet in inward likeness they are very Brutes. And so whatever or how
much they know besides if they have not this knowledge also, they are in very
deed Fools, because hereby and for want thereof they become Subject and Liable
unto Loss and Punishment.

Now if I had altogether to do with Brutes and Fools, I should be ashamed of
Preaching the Gospel, unless there were some Spiritual People who know of the
things whereof we speak; Or unless their understandings were somewhat opened
that they could a little conceive thereof. But if the Mystery of the Gospel be
a little opened and made known unto ye, then neither will ye object shame, nor
yet shall I incur shame in the Preaching thereof. And in the mean while this is
no running away or besides from the Text, but it shows and confirms all along
that the Word of God has some effect and reality. For whereas People are
commonly ashamed of that, whereof a great clutter and stir is made and nothing
comes of it. But the Gospel is in Word, and that is not so much as in things.
But yet the Gospel come not to you in Word only, but also in Power and in the
Holy Ghost, and in much assurance, 2 These. 1. 5. It is much more then in other
Words, for thus much is evident and sensible, that they have not so much Power
over the Hearts and Consciences of Men as this Gospel has. Neither were any
other Words under Heaven, Accompanied with so, many Signs and Miracles and
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, whereby God himself did bear Witness to the certainty
and reality of the things contained in this Everlasting Gospel. And then it is
in much Assurance that it shall be all fulfilled and found true.

This is the very Reason why things so go on as they have and do now in the
World, That the Scriptures might be fulfilled; And therein the Word of God has
its effect, Which speaks of things exactly as they are. But here this is to be
attended unto, that the Things and Words of God are to be performed and
fulfilled in their Season, Luke 1. 20. That is according to the Order and
Succession of Time, some have been already fulfilled, others are now at this
Day fulfilling; But the greatest and most things of all are yet to be
fulfilled, as in the future State, the Resurrection of the Dead, the Day of
Judgment and the Succeeding Eternity. The thing is certain, though the time
appointed for it is long. For the Vision is yet for an Appointed Time, but at
the End it shall speak and not lie, though it Tarry, Wait for it; Because it will
surely Come, it will not Tarry, Hab. 2. 3. Gods work as to the Inhabitants of
the Earth is a work of six or seven Thousand Years continuance, which is a
going and carrying on ever since He first Created Man on the Earth, during all
the while, He who has called the Generations from the beginning, has ordered
them to pass through, all which is but a short time in respect to God, to whom
a Thousand Years are but as one Day, though it be long to us. And accordingly the
Scripture speaks of it thus differently both these manner of (...) That is, It
is short as to God, and long as to us Imperfect Creatures. For the Lord is not
slack as concerning his Promise, as some Men count slackness for a Thousand
Years, is as one day with the Lord, 2 Pet. 3. 8. For he will finish the Work
and cut it short in Righteousness; Because a short Work will the Lord make upon
the Earth, Romans 9. 28. Yet as to us, the time appointed is long. Return, O
Lord, How long? Psalm. 90. 13. And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry
Day and Night unto him, though he bear long with them, I tell you, that he will
avenge them speedily, Luke 17. 7, 8. How long, O Lord, Holy and True, Do thou
not judge and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Rev. 6. 10.
Though it was said sixteen hundred years ago that God would avenge them speedily,
it is not done as yet; But though it be somewhat long as to our Expectation and
Desire, yet it will be sure at last, and it will be all done together, as may
be understood from the following Verse here, And white Robes were given unto
every one of them, and it was said unto them that they should rest yet for a
little Season, until their fellow Servants also and their Brethren that should
be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. And so the Destruction of Sinners
and Transgressors shall be together, Isa. 1. 28. Even of all Generations and
Countries. So that such being the Decree and Order of God, ye are in no wise to
think, Not as though the Word of God has taken none effect, For it will be all
found true in its Season. Not one jot of the Law shall pass away, until all be
fulfilled. And not one of the sayings therein as to future things, shall fall
to the Ground till it shall indeed so come to pass. Heaven and Earth shall pass
away, but my Words shall not pass away. The Grass withers, the Flower ^adeth,
but the Word of our God shall stand for Ever, Isa. 40. 8.

Hereby also it may be understood, that Unbelievers and the Ignorant Multitude
are certainly deceived in their Imaginations. For whereas they Judge very much
by Events; And because they see no such dreadful Judgments poured down upon
Sinners, That all things happen alike to all, and continue as they were from
the beginning of the Creation: Men and Women fall asleep, and dye as People
usually do, they think falsely, They may therefore do as they will; It is the
Preachers Trade to cry out against sin, but they are vain Words for they come
to nothing. Whereas we speak of future Rewards and Punishments, and the Time of
Decision is not yet come. Son of Man, What is that Proverb that ye have in the
Land of Israel? Saying, The Days are Prolonged, and every Vision fails, Tell
them therefore, thus says the Lord God, I will make this Proverb to cease, and
they shall no more use it as a Proverb in Israel; but say unto them, the Days
are at hand and the effect of every Vision, Ezekiel. 12. 22, 23. This Answers to
the very Words of my Text; For it shows that the Word of God has some, and
will have yet a greater Effect. As the same is again Affirmed, But the Word
which I have spoken shall be done, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 12. 28. And though
the Vision which we see (With the Eyes of our Understanding being enlightened)
is yet for many Days to come, and we Prophecy of the Times that are afar off,
yet they will be present and near also. And it is therefore thus ordered by the
Wisdom of God, to prove the Children of Men these forty, fifty, or sixty Years,
To know what is in their Heart, whither they will keep his Commandments or no,
Deu. 8. 2. And He said I will hide my Face from them, I will see what their End
shall be; for they are a very froward Generation, Children in whom there is no
faith, Deu. 32. 20. According to the Revelation of the Mystery (Mark that)
which was kept secret since the World began. But now is made manifest, and by
the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment of the Everlasting
God, made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 25, 26.
Here is the Mystery of God Revealed and Manifested (which same Mystery of God
at length will be finished as He has declared to his Servants the Prophets,
Rev. 10. 7.) For things were purposely so ordained to prove all Nations,
whither they would yield an Obedience of Faith. That they might walk by Faith
and not by Sight. And herein the other Scriptures agree and have Relation, He
that believes, shall not make haste, Isa. 28. 16. Which being twice Quoted by
Paul, in Romans 9. 33. Romans 10. 11. The latter Words instead of, shall not make
haste, is, shall not be ashamed. Both put together make up near the same Sense
and Meaning, and exactly Pertinent to the matter in hand. That is as much as to
say, That whosoever does know and really believe the things of God in the very
order as they stand and are Determined, He shall not make haste; As to think,
or go about to get them fulfilled sooner then their appointed Time. And whosoever
is fully persuaded of and does embrace them by Faith, He is not ashamed in this
World for following after invisible and future things; but more especially, He
shall not be ashamed (it is spoken in the future tence) in the World to come,
for they shall be Actually given and made Good to the Soul that seeks them.

By Faith we apprehend and lay hold on these Encouraging Promises, And they
that be Wise (In the Margent it is, Teachers) shall shine as the Brightness of
the Firmament; And they that turn many to Righteousness, as Stars for Ever and
Ever, Dan. 12. 3. Brethren, if any of you do err from the Truth and one Convert
Him. Let him know that He which Converteth a sinner from the Error of his way,
shall save a Soul from Death, and shall hide a Multitude of Sins, James 5. 19.
Here it has been Scoffingly and Sarcastically objected unto us, What, you
Convert Sinners? They will not be Converted by thee, Go and Convert those at
your own House. But Jesus said unto them, A Prophet is not without Honor, but
in his own Country and among his own Kin, and in his own House, Mark 6. 4. And
He commonly does the least good amongst them. Like as the light of a Candle on
a Candlestick, gives light to those further off, but casts a dark shadow next
round about it self. Moreover, ye are to know. Not as though by our own Power or
Holiness, we can make this Lame Man to walk, Much less to run in the way of
Gods Commandments. Nor yet by our own Knowledge or Wisdom can we bring any one
back into the right way who was gone astray. We do utterly Disclaim and
Renounce whatsoever is of self, or our own. But yet when He that Out of the
Mouth of Babes and Sucklings has ordained strength, Psalm. 8. 2. He that makes
the Dumb, Exodus 4. 11. And the Stammering Lips, Isa. 28. 11. to serve for his
own Glory, does appoint such a weak Vessel and Unworthy Instrument, for the
Ministration of his Word and Truth; Although the Person himself cannot effect
any thing, yet the Word and Truth of God which appears forth through him, will
have its effect, one way or another, either to Salvation or Condemnation,
either to make People partakers of the Mercy of God, or to Load them with more
Guilt and Ill deserving, if they will not obey the Word of Life. And though this
last seems to be an hard saying, yet it is grounded on those Words of the great
Preacher of Righteousness, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin, but now they have no Cloak for their sin, John 15. 22. And so the
Apostle Paul Witnesses in behalf of himself and of the other Ministers of the
Gospel, For we are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ in them that are Saved,
and in them that Perish. To the one, are we the Savor of Death unto Death, and
to the other the Savor of Life unto Life, and Who is sufficient for these
things, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. As himself does Answer this last in the fifth Verse
of the following Chapter, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. And if we are not
sufficient to think, neither are we sufficient to speak or to do: We are mere
Creatures in the hands of God. As in him we live and move and have our Being.
So whatever Good Words and True Words do proceed forth from any one, It is what
before he had put into our Heart. It is agreeable unto his method and manner of
Dispensation, to Publish and make known his word and will unto the Inhabitants
of the Earth; By Men of the like Passions and of the same Flesh and Blood with
our selves. And it has so came to pass, that who have been the greatest
Instruments of his Glory, and have received most from God of any in their
several Generations; The World has not known them, but despised them. Which
has happened not only as to the Ungodly and common sort. But even so it has
been with the Multitude of outward Worshippers, and who called themselves the
Servants of God. The truth of this observation appears from the History of the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and of his Faithful Ministers ever since,
who have been Workmen approved of God, and not Men pleasers. That is to say,
such who have Fashioned the Word of God according to the Will and Lust of the
Rich and Mighty People. Which if they had been indeed the Servants of Christ,
they would not have so Learned of him their Master.

For as the Rain comes down and the Snow from Heaven, and returns not
thither, but Waters the Earth, and makes it to bring forth and bud; that it
may give Seed to the Sower and Bread to the Eater, so shall my Word be that
goes out of my Mouth: It shall not return unto me Void, but it shall
Accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I
sent it, Isa. 55. 10, 11. It shall Accomplish either the Salvation or
Condemnation of People; It shall thus Prosper in the thing whereto God sends
and intends it. That if it does not reform them, it will leave them more
without excuse. The same Word, which now warns them of both, will pass upon
their several and respective Lives and Deaths for all Eternity. Though when the
Word of God is laid before People and they obey it not, nor do accordingly,
then it is thought to be vain, weak and ineffectual; Yet God Himself here
says, It shall not return to him Void; But whither they will hear, or whither
they will forbear, it shall be known that there has been a Prophet among them,
Ezekiel. 2. Such Words have been made known, or such things have been Written;
That they might have turned from their Iniquities, and from the Evil of their
doings, which however they were Stifled or Disregarded in the mean while, shall
rise up again at the Judgment of the Great Day. They were warned and testified
against, and his Laws were set before them; but when they would not take
warning, nor yet yield unto him, who by his Word Spirit and Ministers testified
against them to bring them again to his Law; All these and such like are Signs
and Prognostics that such People will Perish. It here so comes to pass. As
when Paul expounded and testified the Kingdom of God, some believed the things
which were speaks and some believed not, Acts 28. 23, 24. So it is of
Preaching every Sermon out of the Word of God, or hearing forth every Testimony
of Divine Truth, Some obey and give heed unto it, and some do not. Then
Zerubbabel the Son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the Son of Josedech the High
Priest, with all the Remnant of the People obeyed the Voice of the Lord their
God, and the Words of Haggai the Prophet (as the Lord had sent him) and the
People did fear before the Lord, Hag. 1. 12. And so we read in Ezra. 10. They
did obey the Commandment of the Lord, in Putting away the strange Wives. But
we Read more often in the Book of Kings, Chronicles, Isaiah, Jeremiah and in
the Evangelists; That the Chief and Multitude of the People did not obey, then
that they did obey. And yet it was the Word of God which was Preached unto them
also. But it so came to pass, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled which
speak of their Destruction. When the Prophet came to Ananiah with Words from
the Lord, and met with a rough Answer from Ananiah. He said, I know that the
Lord has Determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not
hearkened unto my Counsel, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. And so it was remarkably Noted of
those that came out against the Children of Israel to Battle, For it was of the
Lord to harden their Hearts, that they should come against Israel in Battle,
that He might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor; but
that He might destroy them as the Lord Commanded Moses, Josh. 11. 20. And so it
was Emphatically remarked after that gentle Reproof of Eli unto his Sons;
Notwithstanding, they hearkened not unto the Voice of their Father, because the
Lord would stay them, 1 Samuel 2. 25. It is just the same, after all the
Preaching and Good Admonition and Counsel, warning after warning. Line upon
Line, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, here a little
and there a little. Notwithstanding all the things which are contained in the
standing written Word of God in the Bible; Notwithstanding all that is Preached
and Alleged out from thence every Sabbath and Week Day, throughout the several
Congregations and Places of this Island; Notwithstanding all the Reproof and
Admonition of Christian Friends and Acquaintance. And what is yet more and
nearer and closer unto them, Notwithstanding all the Accusings and Dictates of
their own Conscience (which is Gods Witness in Man or Woman) yet still, There
are a People in the World who will not hearken unto the Voice of all these.
Though it must be carefully said as to Temporal Judgments, that they therefore
Refuse and Disobey, because the Lord would slay them. But as to futurity, The
Lord is not willing that any should Perish, but that all should come to
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. However, He affording them the means thereof after
continued and repeated Provocation, as to that he gives them up at length to
themselves, to their own Hearts Lusts and to walk after their own Counsels, in
which they going on will Perish Everlastingly. God has suffered it so to be,
That Satan works with all Deceivableness in them that Perish, which comes upon
them through his continued Temptations and Suggestions.

I have oftentimes thought that People would never do so of themselves, as now
they do in Offending, Displeasing, Despising and Provoking of God, but that an
unseen Enemy does stir them up. Like as it is recorded, But there was none like
unto Ahab, which did sell himself to work Wickedness in the sight of the Lord,
whom Jesabel his Wife did stir up, 1 Kings 21. 25. In the Margent it is
Incited. So though there is a great deal of Wickedness in the Heart of Man, by
Reason of original and inbred Corruption (for Flesh and Blood will Imagine and
Practice Evil) Yet this Corrupt Nature would never proceed and tend so far
(especially in immediate Rebellion against, and Provocation or Despising of
God; for what is showed forth against his Word, is against God himself, as it
will be found by his Interpretation and Judgment at the last, though perhaps this
may be now besides, and out of the Mind and Intention of the Creatures) unless
this Infernal Jesabel, whose Right Name is Beelzebub did stir and incite them
up. Now the Serpent was more subtle then any Beast of the Field, which the Lord
God had made, Genesis 3. 1: He is more cunning then all, or any of the Sons or
Daughters of Men (as they are merely such without the assistance and direction
of Gods Word and Spirit) He tempts, suggests and does whatever He can, that
each one in particular may lose Heaven, and fall into Hell, He walks about
seeking whom He may devour. It is his continued Business and Employment.

So that it is not altogether so much to be wondered at, though indeed it is a
matter of Horror and Grief, Psalm. 119. 53, 158. and Sighing, Ezekiel. 9. 4. That
when God has made such very severe Declarations from Heaven against all manner
of Sin and Transgression, and against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of
Men. Which also will be Executed upon and sensibly felt by them after that
their Breath is out of their Nostrils, and their Souls are departed from their
Bodies; Yet Nevertheless in this Time of Provocation and in this Day of
Temptation or Trial in this Wilderness of the Earth, still People go on therein
and do the same. Yea, rather more Greedily and Earnestly then they would have
done, if God had revealed no wrath and future Punishment against the same. I
knew a Man, who after he had been convinced of the Sin of Unrighteousness, and
after He had heard the Word of God declared against it; Yet the next
opportunity afterward, He would more eagerly Practice the same. And so when
the like has been done to Harlots and Unclean Persons, the Sin and Danger of
their course has been laid open and made known unto them by my Ministry of ^e
Word, it has been told unto me, that at the very ^e moment, they would for all
Practice the lesser Acts of Lasciviousness: This shows after what manner the
Spirit of Disobedience does work in the Children thereof; And when they will of
set Purpose Transgress yet more and more, in plain and downright opposition to
the Word of God, and to the Preaching and Ministration thereof. When they will
run greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, Jude 11. Or to the Error
of any of their own ways, any Law or Ordinance of God to the contrary
Notwithstanding; When they will break these Bands asunder, and cast away these
Cords from them; And they will do it the rather, because the Lord by his Word,
and Ministers has forbidden it. This and such like in the very Truth, seems to
be that Sin of Presumption, or that Sinning with an high hand, whereof it is
written, The Soul which does Presumptuously, shall be cut off from my People
says the Lord. Ay, But the People of the World do not value nor fear that
Threatening, for such Persons who do Presumptuously and Sin with an high hand do
commonly live out their appointed Time in Health, Strength, Wealth and
Prosperity, as other People do. Yet Alas! In this they are Ignorant or
Unmindful, that God has another Place besides this Earth, and another time
besides this Life, wherein He will fulfill and make true his Word, For though a
Sinner does Evil an Hundred Times and his Days be Prolonged, yet it shall be
well with them that fear God, which fear before him, Ecles. 8. 12. But the
sinner being an Hundred Years Old, shall be Accursed, Isa. 65. 20. By which
Phrase of Accursed, we are given to understand that the Word of God does speak
Evil of him now (for so Maledictio the Latin Word for a Curse, does signify)
and it shall go Evil with him at the last. When all the Curses that are
written in this Book shall be upon him, Deu. 29. 20. And shall be also Excuted,
and the Lord also shall Blot out his Name from under Heaven, so that Himself
shall not go there. This is to be cut off from Gods People, when they shall be
Blotted out of the Book of the Living, and not written with the Righteous,
Psalm. 69. 28. So that though when He heard the Words of the former Threatening, He
blessed himself in his Heart, saying, I may live as long as other Men and
Women, though I walk in the Imagination of my Heart, to add sin to my Lawful
desires. For that is, Adding Drunkenness to Thirst. ^asmuch as Thirst is a
Lawful and Necessary desire, wh^as Drunkenness is a Sin. So the Course of the
World goes on, that whereas such and such Thoughts, Words and Actions are
Lawful and Necessary, People go on to graft and add thereto Vain Thoughts,
False Words, and Sinful Actions of their own, whereof there is no need. For as
Thirst may altogether as well, or rather be better quenched and satisfied
without Annexing Drunkenness to it. So People might think, speak and Act
altogether as well, yea better, then by conceiving Vanity, speaking forth
Falsehood, or Acting of Evil. It is yet seven time^ a greater Sin, and will
make the Oven or Furnace seven Times yet hotter, which shall be for their
Punishment^ when they Tag or Link on an Oath, or Speech of Vain Swearing to an
Expression, when the sentence which they speak would be more perfect and entire
without it; Or if to their Actions and Doings, they Annex Iniquity and
Transgression. Nevertheless so it has been, so it is, and so it will be,
during the Time of this Generation. Although at length there will be an End of
Transgression, And the Wicked shall be no more, Psalm. 104. 35. For in what
Prayer the Spirit of Truth does dictate, is included a Promise that so it shall
be. Yet until these latter Days and that Time is come, the World will go on in
Sinning, let what will be spoken or declared against it.

Herein the Word of God has its Effect; For hereby it is confirmed, I had
almost said, seen, but I am sure it is perceived, that there is a Devil, Who
deceives the Nations, and deceives the whole World, Rev. 12. 9. For these be
the Days of Vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled, Luke
21. 22. So it is as to the foregoing Sin and Transgression, which bring these
Judgments on the Earth; It must needs go on in its course, that the Scriptures
might be fulfilled, which say, in Mat. 7. 13. and Mat. 25. That some, yea, and
the greater part of Mankind shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. But as
our Lord said concerning offenses, It must needs be that offenses come. But Woe
unto that Man by whom the offense comes, Mat. 18. 7. So in like manner it may
be here applied, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled; It must needs be that
the greater Part of Mankind shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. But Woe
unto those Particular Souls, who shall have their Lot and Portion in this
matter; For they can no more cease to be miserable, then they can cease to be.
This is as certain, though as yet it is not altogether so evident and visible,
then that there is a World which we behold, or an Earth which we tread on: For
says the same Word, by the which the Heavens and the Earth were Created, and
the same Truth by the which they are now upheld, and the things therein are
Connected together, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words shall not
pass away.

Though it is imagined and said, that seeing is believing. It is an improper
Expression, For faith is the evidence of things not seen: And that which a Man
sees, He does not so much believe as know, yet for my Part, when I think of
Heat, or Read the 25th Chapter of Matthew, How that all Nations shall be
Gathered, and Christ shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd
divides his sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on the Right hand
and the Goats on the left, and shall say to the one, Come ye Blessed, etc. And
to the other, Go ye Cursed, I say, All this is as evident and manifest to me,
as i^ I did now see that Great and Terrible sight with my outward Bodily Eyes.
And truly, if we did see that vast and doleful herd of Condemned Criminals, as
they are going to the Place of Everlasting Punishment, we should fear. For it
is a thing Infinitely more to be Pitied, then now a little Commiseration does
arise, as we behold Sheep or Cattle going to the Shambles and Slaughter House.
What God has said by his Son Jesus Christ, shall certainly come to pass: So
that this will as certainly be as if we now saw it with our Eyes. For it will
as certainly be in the appointed Time, as that we now present, were once living
on the Earth. What can be more forcible to make us take the utmost heed that
our selves be not among them?

It would be an hard Case, if there was not one in such a Parish or
Neighborhood, who should go to Heaven. But I trust that several will, as I am
assured from the Scriptures of Truth, That all those will who have a Good
Conscience, and are willing to live honestly in all things, Heb. 13. 18. So it
would be Melancholy and Dismal to suppose. But yet it is justly and truly to
be feared, that some in this Neighborhood, I do not know one of them, but the
Lord knows who the very Persons be that are in such a place now; Who shall be
found amongst those Goats, at the very last Day. But either to convince them
thereof, or to make it known unto them, would make their Life hang in doubt,
and fill them with a fearful Expectation, and give them a trembling heart: So
to point them out by their Names and Distinct Persons, it would make all
Christians, Note that Man or Woman, and have no Conversation with them, If he
or she should prove certainly a cast away, or a Condemned Creature at that Day.
But every one would be afraid or shy of them in the mean while (as now they are
of a Man that is to be hanged or put to Death) I do here somewhat allude to
those Words of the Apostle, If any Man obey not the Word of this Epistle, Note
that Man, and have no Conversation with him that he be ashamed. So if any Man
or Woman amongst ye do not obey those things, which have been here alleged
unto ye from the Word of the Lord; If there be any who will despise and go frow
ardly in the way of their heart. And further, if there be any who shall do
Presumptuously and Sin with an high hand, as of set Purpose, to Sin and
Transgress more and more, because such things have been spoken against that,
and all manner of Sin and Transgression; Truly, my Brethren, Partakers of the
same Flesh and Blood, these and such like are sad Signs and Prognostics, that
such very Persons will be indeed found among that Number of Goats at the last
Day, and to them I am now sent with heavy Tidings, It would be good for them if
they had never been Born; And upon them this Word Preached and Published will
have its effect (like the Sun which does melt Wax, but harden Clay) for Evil,
but not for Good. And here People should not so much as keep Company with such,
so as to Encourage them in their Evil Deeds, or so much as barely to
Countenance them in their Rebellion, Transgression, or even in their Contempt
of the Lord God; But only to warn, exhort and testify, that they seeing
themselves as it were cut off from the Society of Mankind, by perceiving the
Inconvenience and Misery thereof, may understand the ten Thousand Times greater
Misery to be cut off and deprived from the General Assembly and Church of the
first Born which are Written in Heaven; And from God the Judge of all, and the
Spirits of just Men made Perfect. And this would be some means for them to turn
out of the wrong way which leads unto Destruction; And they may be ashamed of
Transgressing without a cause, Psalm. 25. 3. Or, that they should ever despise
the Lord their God.

It was aforesaid, that the foregoing Sin and Transgression which bring these
Judgments on the Earth must needs go on in its Course that the Scriptures might
be fulfilled. What are these Judgments? They are declared in Math. 24. and Luke
21. Rumors, stirs and commotions of Wars, Nation against Nation, and Great
Earthquakes shall be in Diverse Places, Luke 21. 11. And there was a Great
Earthquake in Jamaica, in June or July, 1692. There was an Universal shaking of
the Earth throughout most Parts of Europe in September, 1692. And in January,
1692. There was the Greatest Earthquake in the Islands of Sicily, and Malta, so
as to swallow up an Hundred and Six score Thousand Inhabitants, then ever I
heard or read of in History since Man was Created on the Earth. These are Great
Earthquakes in Diverse Places, and Fearful Sights, and Great Signs there have
been from Heaven; As the Great Comet about eighteen Years ago, which is no long
Time according to the Course and Reckoning of Time in the Decree of God, and
according to Scripture Account. And for ought we know, that gentle Universal
shaking of the Earth in England, France, Holland, or the Low Countries; Wherein
it is more observable, and shows that the Hand of God is somewhat more in it,
then the ordinary Course of Nature: Because it happened thus at the very same
Minute of Time in other Places, which were distinct and separated one from
another by the Great and Wide Sea; All this may be a forerunner of a much
Greater Earthquake, from which we are no more secured and absolutely preserved
by the Advantage of our Countries Situation, and because such things have not
been so usually among us as among others, For the Pillars of the Earth are the
Lords, and he has set the World upon them. For He who stretches the North
over the empty Place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing, Can find out this way
to Punish us if he please. As it is yet more certain, that tho if the Earth
should not swallow us up alive, yet it is but a very little while, and it will
receive and devour our Dead Bodies, as also it gives Assurance of what he has
promised, which has been in some measure already, and is yet to be fulfilled,
Saying, Yet once more I shake not the Earth, but also Heaven, Hag. 2. 6. Heb.
12. 26. Which is not only set forth by way of Greatness of Expression, or to
signify only the Men and Women contained therein; but it shall reach and affect
even the very Elemental Bodies, even the whole Creation according to 2 Pet. 3.
As our selves shall one Day see; All one as we now hear, that those foregoing
signs are fulfilled. And as at such a Season of the Year, we behold all the
Trees shoot forth and the Grass does grow, then we know of our selves that
Summer is near at hand; So likewise when ye see these things come to pass, know
ye that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand. Now it is nearer then ever it was
yet. But we are given to understand farther, that by the more then ordinary
appearance of these foregoing signs, we are just entering upon, if not falling
into those Great and Glorious Times. Whereof the Scriptures do abundantly speak
that it shall be in the latter Days, that the Great Things of God shall be
fulfilled. And though Christ said Sixteen Hundred Years ago, This Generation
shall not pass away till all these things shall be fulfilled (By which kind of
Expression faith is exercised and proved, as also the understandings of Men are
somewhat Puzzled) yet take and include Christ himself into that Generation (for
he was then in the Days of his Flesh, and a Generation includes all that are
living therein) and it holds literally true in that sense, for He the Son of
God has not passed away, But was without beginning of Days or End of Life, but
abides continually. But I do verily believe, That though there is never a Christ
now on Earth, nor an Enoch, nor yet any such of whom there is a saying, That
any now living shall not die; Yet before all the Young Men and Children, and
Infants, that are now Breathing on this Earth are gone off from it, there will
be yet somewhat a Greater and more extraordinary Manifestation concerning the
Kingdom of God, then has been in all the mean Generations, since Christ and
his Apostles were on the Earth. And this I do assuredly gather, because the
Time of the Promise draws nigh, Acts 7. 17. As is Manifest from the yet greater
Appearance and Conspicuousness of those foregoing signs here mentioned.

All this put together should induce us to lay these things to heart, and to
tremble and fear continually before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, for what
he has already done on the Earth, as also out of Expectation of what he will
do yet further. Which Expectation our hearts should be always very full off,
and in no wise Choke and Stifle the sense thereof with Gluttony, Drunkenness,
and the Cares of this Life, and so that Day come upon you unawares, Luke 21.
34. Which is brought in upon this occasion. As Moses said upon that terrible
sight at Mount Sinah, I exceedingly fear and quake: So the same mind should be
at all Times and in all Places, in all the Servants of God, as to what they
have heard or seen, He has done more lately, is now a doing, and will shortly
bring yet greater things to pass, then all these in this Earth, the lower Part
of the World.

As God at first made all things, and does now uphold them by the Word of his
Power: so some of them do move and go on according to his Will, Appointment and
Decree. Known to God are all his Works from the beginning of the World, and so
it is as to what He will do toward the End thereof, as our selves know what we
intend to do at such a Time hereafter, if we have the same Mind and Will,
Strength and Opportunity, Life and Power of Action, or such like. The want of
any of which do often cause a neglect or failure of the same. But now with God,
there is no variableness nor shadow of turning, He is Almighty and Eternal.
What He once Decrees, Purposes or Wills, he does certainly bring to pass; and
he speaks of things before they are done, While they are yet Springing up do I
tell you of them. And so it is, when he speaks of things beforehand, and they
do afterward come to pass in like manner, then it is, that his word is
fulfilled. There are a Thousand Instances of this in Scripture, and so very
many, for the whole is but an orderly Declaration of such things, that it is
superfluous to mention Particulars.

Those who know somewhat more of God, then the ordinary and common Multitude,
do apprehend, perceive and observe, that as all things are Gods, from the Cedar
in Lebanon to the Hyssop on the Wall, from the greatest to the smallest; for
his Providence and Government of things is comprehensive of and extensive, even
unto sparrows and the hairs of our head, the more inconsiderable Creatures, and
every least thing that belongs to us; All one as to Angels or Men, or to the
yet greater Works of the Creation. So as that same Word in Scripture does speak
of all things that are done on this Earth: So Reciprocally whatever is done or
comes to pass or happens here, it is all a fulfilling of the same Word. There
is hardly any thing whatever, be it of greater or less moment, but some Places
in the Book of the Lord do speak thereof either in express Words, or near to
the same purpose. There shall the great Owl make her Nest, and lay and hatch,
and gather under her shadow: There shall the Vultures also be gathered every
one with her Mate. Seek ye out of the Book of the Lord and Read, No one of
these shall fail, no one shall want her Mate; for my mouth it has Commanded,
and his Spirit it has gathered them, Isa. 34. 15, 16. As the Apostle says,
Does God take care for Oxen? So does his Word speak of Cormorants, and Bitterns
and Ravens, Wild Beasts and Satyrs, Schreech Owls and Great Owls, and Vultures
and Thorns, and Nettles and Brambles? Yes, verily it does, and of all the
things in the Earth, and even of the very Times and Seasons of the Year, How
Grass does grow upon the Mountains and Herb for the use of Man. Observe this
last, which leads again toward our Subject and Intended matter. For as the
same Apostle Paul goes on to add, Says He it altogether for our sakes? For our
sakes, no doubt this is Written, 1 Cor. 9. 10. So as there is a certain
Connection and Linking on together of all the Creatures and Works of God
(whither Living or Inanimate) So they have each severally, and all together a
yet greater Connection, Tendency and Relation to us Men and Women. It is so
Written of them, and so Gods speaks of them in his word, for our sakes, in
order to us, as they are somewhat concerned, and do belong unto the Exercise
and Administration of his Kingdom and Dominion over Men: He being the God unto
whom we and all the other Creatures besides, have to do. It is but a small
matter as to these outward visible present things, But the Kingdom of God is
within you; And the chief and only matter is as each stands in Subordination,
Subserviency and Tendency to the invisible and future State of things; and that
is Branched out only one of these two ways, Salvation or Condemnation,
Happiness or Misery.

The Word of God has its effect, upon all Men and Women of every Country,
Nation and Language, from the beginning of their Generations unto the End
thereof, one of these two ways, Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel
to every Creature. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved; and He
that believes not, shall be Damned, Mark 16. 15, 16. He that obeys all the
whole Word of God shall be saved; but He that obeys not the Word of God shall
be Damned. He that observes all things whatsoever Christ has Commanded, Christ
will be a Savior unto him, But He that does not observe all things whatsoever
Christ has Commanded, He is without the Covenant and Benefit of a Savior; and
He shall Perish. For the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming
Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ; Who shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction,
from the Presence of the Lord and the Glory of his Power.

It is Reported of Chrysostom, who was in his Generation a Preacher unto a
very Numerous Auditory in the City of Antioch. (Where the Disciples were first
called Christians, And I would to God, they had never been called any thing
else since) that He should say, that if He was to Preach before all the Men and
Women living upon the Earth, and such a thing were possible for them all to be
gathered together, and his Voice could reach them all (as such a thing might be
now effected by Printing and an Universal Publication of the several Copies,
which would be a very good work if it were so done) He would choose for his
Text these Words, O ye Sons of Men, How long will ye turn my Glory into shame?
How long will ye Love Vanity and seek after leasing? Selab, Psalm. 4. 2. So if
the like was here to be supposed, as indeed it might be of good effect if it
were so done, there could not be a more proper Subject chosen then what has
been here insisted on, To show, How that the Word of God will have its effect,
upon those Multitudes, Multitudes in the Valley of Decision, Joel 3. 14. So as
to decide their future State and Condition one way or another. As the Proverb
is among the Latins, Ye may guess at the Bigness of Hercules by his Foot: So we
may make some estimate of this Generation of Men and Women now living upon the
Earth, by such a mixed Multitude Assembled together of Saints and Sinners. As
there are probably of both sorts, so it is abroad in all Parishes of this
Nation, and also in all the other Habitable Parts of the Earth. Some will
believe the things that have been spoken, and some will believe them not. Some
will obey these Words, and some will obey them not. And Perhaps, of this latter
sort, some will be found, who will sin yet more Violently and Earnestly, and
Greedily, because such Words of Soberness and Truth, have been declared unto
them. They will make (if they can) the Preacher a Liar; and what lies in them,
the Word of God of none effect. As if it was not able and sufficient to Convert
Sinners from the Error of their ways, in that themselves are resolved not to
be Converted by it. There be those abroad in the World, who do not Hear or Read
this; and if they do not altogether so perversely and obstinately against the
Word Preached, for they hear little or none at all; and it may be out of a
secret Consciousness, that their own Lives are not Answerable thereunto, nor
yet will they Regulate their Life and Manners according to it; and they imagine
that then to Hear or Read the Word of God, will but so much the more increase
their Sin and Guilt. These do not consider, how that the Height and Abomination
of Iniquity is set forth throughout the Old Testament; In refusing to Hear Gods
Words, The Spirit it self calls them, This Evil People which refuse to hear
my Words, Jer. 13. 10. (Which I would, were more attended unto even by the very
Worshippers of God) that when an opportunity is given, or Door is open to hear
the Word Preached, they count it a matter indifferent, they may hear or let it
alone. But let such know, That when the Dead small and great, shall stand
before God, They shall remember, and find that it was matter of Duty for them
to have heard, and not as a thing of Indifferency, which carries along with it
a Contempt and Neglect of the things pertaining to his Kingdom. It will be then
seen which way does most please and shall find Acceptance with God, as also
whither the Presumptuous sinner does not yet more displease and provoke him by
those his Imaginations. But even in those who are most Ignorant and keep away
from the sight and hearing of his Word; Nevertheless, God has not left himself
without Witness, for they have a certain Rumor and Notion, or rather an
apprehension of the things contained in the Bible. They have many silent and
serious thoughts within themselves; and when these do reprove, warn and
Testify, they do in like manner Presumptously against them, as others do
immediately against the word Preached. But where is that degree of the Spirit
of Contradiction, and that utmost Height of Disobedience, To do after their own
Lust and Will, any Law or Ordinance of God to the contrary Notwithstanding. For
the Language of Stubbornness speaks on this wise, I have Loved strangers, and
after them I will go. This makes their sin to be exceeding sinful in the mean
while, and such shall be beaten with more stripes, and Inherit a greater
Condemnation at the last.

The Prophet does intend somewhat alike to what it before mentioned, when he
uses that Phrase and kind of words. Hearken unto me ye Stouthearted that are
far from Righteousness. Isa. 46. 12. Stouthearted, such as will not submit as
it were out of a Piece of Pride and Bravery, and they do of set purpose keep
off. I bring near my Righteousness, it shall not be far off and my Salvation
shall not tarry. Verse. 13. But they will go further off and stand more at a
distance and delay yet more that they may not see it. A perverse and contrary
manner of Acting, which God does behold and will recompense upon them.

There are some who let God do what He will, send forth his Light and make
further Manifestations of his Truth, give more Pressing Motives and Arguments,
send his several sorts of Judgments, yet they will not return unto the Lord.
And so Notwithstanding all his methods of Mercy and Truth, when there are Great
Multitudes already brought over and Converted, yet they reckon it as it were a
greater Piece of Gallantry and Honor, that for all this they will not be
persuaded. Who in the Land of uprightness will deal Unjustly, and will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord, Isa. 26. 10. In that exceeding Glory of the
Church, by the vast Multitude of the Gentiles coming in, yet still some will be
Rebellious, yea, and refuse to come. And therefore is that Denunciation and
Threatening put as it were just in the middle of all those Blessings and
Promises, For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall Perish;
Yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted, Isa. 60. 12. If that be their
Humor and Resolution, so it may be to kick against the Pricks, to run their
Head violently against a Brass Wall, to set themselves as it were against their
God. When He has Prophesied and Foretold of such an Universal Reformation,
they will what lies in them, make God a Liar, for themselves will still refuse
to be reformed. O Wicked Fools! Poor Ignorant Souls! This ye cannot do, but
confirm his Word the more, for his Holy Spirit does foresee this Stubbornness
and Refractinoriness of Yours, and speaks of it some Thousand Years before your
selves Practice it, That the Purpose of God might stand, And what Himself has
said shall be fulfilled. Nevertheless, for your Evil Intent and Malice of
Heart, you shall smart and be Punished for the same. They shall Perish and be
utterly wasted; And then themselves shall know whither it would not have been
better for them to have served God, (then as they did) to have went on in their
own Perverseness and Opposition.

After all, What shall I say? God has spoken thus, and himself shall do
accordingly. I shall go softly, all my Years in the Bitterness of my Soul. As
often as I do seriously and thoroughly reflect thereon, I have great heaviness
and continual Sorrow of Heart. I do not speak this in Words of Course, or only
in Scripture Phrase; But from an inward feeling of the same, and from the very
Truth of the matter. For though I could never wish my self Accursed from Christ,
rather then that my Brethren and Kinsmen according to the Flesh should Perish.
I have had yet a much greater concern for my nearest Kindred according to the
Flesh (Although herein, They have Rewarded me Evil for Good, and Hatred for my
Love, Psalm. 109. 10.) Then for the rest of my Brethren and Sisters of the
common stock of Mankind. Yet herein, I say the Truth in Christ I lie not, my
Conscience also bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost, that I have several times
wished that my self had never came forth into Being, rather then I should know
and see so many of my fellow Creatures, who are Flesh of my Flesh, and Bone of
my Bone, go away into Everlasting Punishment and Misery. I have had that
greatest Compassion and most Earnest sensible concern for them. For as it is
Proverbially spoken of very ill weather That one would not then have a Dog
abide out of Doors: So Eternal Damnation is such a Terrible and Miserable thing
to them, who believe and apprehend it thoroughly, that one would not wish it to
the greatest Enemy one had. I must confess again, that this great Compassion
and Earnest concern, which I have formerly had for others, does now go off and
lessen with me. And what may seem yet more strange, It does so even as I behold
their continued Provocation and Repeated evil doing; which will more certainly
seal them over unto the Day of their Destruction.

In this Temper of Mind I come yet more near to that of the Spirit, which says
on this wise, Yet behold therein shall be left a Remnant that shall be brought
forth, both Sons and Daughters. Behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye
shall see their way, and their doings: And ye shall be comforted concerning the
evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have
brought upon it. And they shall comfort you when ye see their ways and their
doings: And ye shall know that I have not done without cause, all that I have
done in it, says the Lord God, Ezekiel. 14. 22, 23. There is so very much
Malignity and Evil deserving in Sin, that when God Himself (which the Ministers
of his Word do very faintly and imperfectly now) shall lay it open before his
Saints and Servants, As that they shall see their ways and their doings, As we
behold Dirt and Mire now, even they shall be Comforted concerning all the
Punishment and Misery which he will lay upon the Inhabitants of the Earth, though
it be upon their own Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, the Wife of their
Bosom, the nearest Kinsfolks and Dearest Friends according to the Flesh. So
that they shall not Pity the tender and delicate Man, who was most set out with
Riches, Beauty, Good Breeding, or common good Nature (if it was mixed with
Ungodliness or Contempt of God) Nor yet the tender and delicate Woman, which
would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for
Delicateness and Tenderness, Deuteronomy. 28. 56. And How then will she undergo so
much Pain and Fire? And ye shall know that I have not done without cause
(without their deserving of it) which we shall more clearly perceive then though
we cannot now; but we are apt to think it hard that Mankind should dye
Eternally for tasting a little Honey, or for the Pleasures of Sin for a season)
all that I have done in it, even in his utmost Vengeance and Everlasting
Punishment, says the Lord God, Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be
strong in the Days that I shall deal with thee? I the Lord have spoken it, and
I will do it, Ezekiel. 22. 14. By the former Part of which Expression is shewh
forth, that God will overcome their former Stubbornness and Presumption, By the
Punishment He will inflict, that He will get the Victory and make them to
yield. In the latter part is the Ratification and Confirmation of it, I the
Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. As to all that foregoing Wickedness and
Rebellion of the Jeres, Wherein they denied the Holy one and the just, and
desired a Murderer to be granted unto them and killed the Prince of Life, How
does Peter lay it before them and Assign the cause thereof? And now Brethren, I
wot that through Ignorance, ye did it, as also did your Rulers. But those
things which God has showed by the Mouth of all his Prophets that Christ
should suffer, He has so fulfilled, Acts 3. 17, 18. When Himself was in the
midst of his sufferings, He says, Think thou that I cannot Pray my Father,
and He shall presently give me more then twelve Legions of Angels. (Who would
have preserved and defended him from all those Wicked Men that were his
Crucifiers) But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled; that thus it must
be, Mat. 26. 53, 54. In like manner as to all that sin, Iniquity and
Transgression, which God has spoken of by the Mouth of all his Prophets,
Evangelists and Apostles; It must needs go on in its Course, That the
Scriptures might be fulfilled, Both as to that and also to the further end and
consequent thereof, When He shall Punish the World for their Evil, and the
Wicked for their Iniquity; And that will be found true also, Which speaks of
the Wide Gate and Broad way that leads to Destruction, and many there be who
go in thereat, Mat. 7. 13. Amalek, was the first of the Nations, but his latter
end shall be that he Perish for Ever, Numbers 23. 20. Though they are in the
first, highest and most prosperous Wordly State, thss hinders not, but rather
sooner occasions, that they be miserable for ever, as we Learn from sundry
other Places of the Word of Truth.

The Scripture does stand Checquer wise, if I may so express it. It is made up
of black and white, for therein is an intermixture of Promises and Threatenings,
Good and Evil things, Blessing and Cursing, Life and Death. It is so almost in
every Chapter. I shall instance in one, and mention the same use thereof that
is there macle. And as the Spirit of God does make mention of the Eloquent
Orator, Isa. 3. 3. It is a necessary part of Oratory to leave something with
the Hearers at last, that it may surely stick and he remembered by them. At the
close of this Discourse, I would observe unto ye, how, that in the Tenth
Chapter of the Hebrews, there is an intermixture of Threatenings and Promises,
Good and Evil things, for there is mention made, Of a fearful looking for of
Judgment and of Fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. Vengeance
belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord. And again, The Lord shall
judge his People, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living
God. After all these terrible things to the Wicked and Ungodly, The Apostle
speaks in a more mild strain unto the Christians, Knowing in your selves, that
in Heaven ye have a better and an enduring substance, and of a great Recompense
of reward, ver. 35. After ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the
Promise, ver. 36. But amidst and in the conclusion of all, He shows himself to
be a faithful and skillful Workman, dividing the Word of Truth aright, and
giving to every one his Portion, for he says, Now the just shall live by
Faith, but if any Man draw back. My Soul shall have no Pleasure in him. But we
are not of them who draw back into Perdition, but of them who believe unto the
saying of the Soul. So People are to take and receive in by Faith, all the
things that have been afore-written. They must live by Faith, if they will be
justified and saved. But if any of ye draw back, that is, go off and recede
from his Truths, neither God, nor yet any of his Saints and Servants will have
any Pleasure in that Man or Woman. But by the Divine Grace and Assistance, it
shall be my constant and continued endeavor throughout all the remaining Days
of this Life of Vanity, as I hope, and do hereby exhort that it may be of
others also, that we be not found amongst them, upon whom the Word of God will
have its effect to Condemnation, but not to Salvation; But rather that ye and
my self (there is nothing in the World which I so much desire) may be found
amongst them, who shall believe to the saving of the Soul.

FINIS.

