Because that in the following Discourse the Reason is Recited and Answered,
why my Ministry is Rejected and not Received by this Ignorant, but more
especially Corrupt World; therefore I thought it Expedient and Necessary to
Publish the same.

EZEKIEL ii. v. And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will for bear
(for they are a Rebellious House) yet shall know that there has been a Prophet
among them.


IF we could now know and discern, as we shall know and discern (In the latter
Days ye shall consider it perfectly) when we shall be actually carried forth
from Time to Eternity, then we should have other kind of Thoughts concerning
the Things of God, then we have in this Life, and on this Earth. Who shall
ascend into Heaven? That is, to bring Christ down from above, Or who shall
descend into the Deep? That is, to bring up Christ again from the Dead: But
what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy Heart, that
is, the Word of Faith which we Preach. The Word of Faith will in a manner do
all this, that is, bring down things out of Heaven that they are made known
unto us, all one as the things of this Earth. This Word of Faith, makes
invisible things to be in a manner visible, and things Future to be Present
unto us. Of this sort are the whole Scriptures of God, which contain an Orderly
Declaration of things which are most surely believed among us. So that they are
the Word of Faith which we Preach. The Scripture does chiefly speak of things
which are yet to come, and will be fulfilled after that we are gone off from
the Stage of this Earth, and we shall find it so upon the reflection and
remembrance.

Of this sort is the Text I have here chosen, which partly speaks of things
Present, and partly of things to come. And they, whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear. Hereby their Proof and Trial is had as to this
present Time: for this denotes forth their present kind of Demeanor and
Behavior hereupon. But by that Phrase, Yet shall know, The particle shall, is
an Adverb of Futurity; and by what is further expressed on, That there has
been a Prophet among them, is shown forth a Recollection, that so it has been,
which they were not aware off, and did not altogether so clearly discern then.

The Reason of my choosing this Text to Discourse on here, is to this effect,
Inasmuch as I have been a Preacher unto the People of this my Generation and
Nation for several Years last past, and as yet my Ministry has been Rejected
and not Received amongst them; whereupon I am forced to make this, or the like
return, That I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
Isa. 65. 2. I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught, and in
vain; yet surely my work is with the Lord, and my judgment with my God, Isa.
49. 4. As for every Sin there is some seeming excuse, so for their not hearing
the Word of the Lord at my Mouth, There has been such an imagination in the
Minds of People. To speak out those Thoughts of Heart, it seems to be to this
purpose, As some did contend with Peter that he went in to Men Uncircumcised
and did eat with them, Acts 11. 3. So the people of this Nation have heard a
certain kind of Rumor or Report, That I have Written and Spoken sundry things
in behalf of a Papist; and inasmuch as Popery is not the truth as it is in
Jesus (as indeed it is not, which I do hereby acknowledge as much as
themselves) From hence they would Fallaciously and Falsely Reason and Conclude,
That I have not Taught, nor yet as long as I retain these Principles, do I
teach the way of God in truth. And therefore it is that they turn their backs,
and they refuse to hear the Word of the Lord Preached by me.

If in all this, I have not been unfaithful to God, nor yet in handling his
Word, Neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; Our heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy way, Psalm. 44. 17. 18. But I
have affirmed his Word and Commandment only in the same manner as they stand
Recorded in the Book of the Lord: Then those non Hearers are convinced out of
the Law as Transgressors; for refusal or neglect to hear the Word of God, is
Sin and Transgression. It seems very strange, That those who seem to Preach and
Talk very much against Sin; yet themselves in this matter, give way unto, and
are guilty thereof. But it is no new or unusual thing, that some speak against
Sin in the general, and yet at the very same time, themselves are guilty of the
same in the particular Nature hereof.

True it is, that Popery is made up of Idolatry, Superstition and Error. But
yet we are in no wise allowed by the Christian Religion, which does command,
That ye resist not evil, Mat. 5. 39. Recompense to no Man (and if so, it ought
not to be done to a Papist) Evil for Evil. Be not overcome of Evil, but
overcome Evil with good, Romans 12. 17, 21. So that it is not true and incorrupt
Religion, but contrary to it, To Murder, Rob, or do any Evil or Wrong unto a
Papist. Unless People are become altogether ignorant and dull of Apprehension,
It is a most easy thing to be conceived and understood, That a Man may be no
Papist, and yet do no Evil or Wrong unto a Papist. Agreeable hereunto is the
Will and Commandment of the most High God, who does not esteem Papists to be
worse than Idolaters, Strangers, Heathen or Publicans of Old. As to them, God
declares himself and his Will to be on this manner, I will come near to you to
judgment; and I will be a swift witness against false Swearers, and against
those that turn aside the Stranger from his right, Mal. 3. 5. Such is the
Revealed Will of God. And moreover, it is the same Robbery and Injustice in the
Nature of things, to disposess or spoil a Papist, as any other Person.

What I have Written in behalf of a Papist, did amount to no more then this,
That merely or so far only as he was a Papist, he ought not to have been turned
aside from his Right; which I grounded from Mal. 3, 5. aforecited: And also
from Lam. 3. 35, 36. To turn aside the Right of a Man before the Face of the
Most High, To subvert a Man in his cause, the Lord approves not. Which is as
plain a Declaration of the Mind and Will of God, as any thing in the World can
be; and altogether as plain and self-evident as that maxim is, Whatsoever ye
would that Men should do unto ye, do ye even so to them, for this is the Law
and the Prophets. In this place of the Lamentations it being said, Man,
indefinitely, it extends equally and all one, to Sinner as to Saint, to Gentile
as well as to the Jew, to Bond or Free, yea to all of the Race and Lineage of
Mankind, To turn aside the Right of any Man whatsoever, or to subvert any Man
whatsoever in his cause the Lord approves not. So that, if herein I have only
delivered and made known the truth as it is in the Scriptures of God, then also
it is the truth as it is in Jesus, for Jesus is the Word of God: Then I say,
That when the Dead small and great shall stand before God, I shall have
boldness in that Day, when I shall at the Bar of his Judgment Seat, implead the
People of this my Generation and Nation, for their not hearing or not receiving
that part of the Word of God which was committed to my Ministration; and
themselves may meet with fear, shame and confusion of Face, when they are
called to give an Account for the same; then also shall they know who did
forbear, That there has been a Prophet among them.

They are in our Text called Rebellious who did forbear; for so many things in
the Scriptures of God are spoken forth against them who are non hearers or who
refuse to hear his Word. Seeing thou hate instruction and castest my words
behind thee, Psalm. 50. 17. This evil people which refuse to hear my words, Jer.
13. 10. Yea, there is much more said against them then those Cautions are
against Deceivers, or Take heed what ye ^ear. Where again it is observable,
That we are not forbid to hear but intimation is rather given, That we should
hear, as well as prove all things; for how could we Prove them, unless we did
first hear and know them. We ought to Take heed what we hear, that is, Examine
and Prove well what we do hear. Seeing that these things are so, I admire, how
any who pretend to have the real fear of God, can or do turn their backs upon
the Preaching of his Word.

Such who forbear and refuse to Hear, Read, or Receive it, would have the Word
of God (which like its Author, is without Uariableness or Shadow of turning) to
be fashioned and modelled according to their own Imaginations and Lusts. Which
same Imaginations and Lusts of Men are different from, and contrary unto the
Word of God. A manifest Evidence that there is a spreading and prevailing
Corruption, Transgression and Iniquity in this Nation; because that the
multitude of People is so very much zealous for it; for the multitude have been
all along, for what is either contrary unto, or different from the Law and
Revealed Will of God. Even from the days of your Fathers ye are gone away from
mine Ordinances, and have not kept them, Mal. 3. 7. This Word Ordinance, does
denote an established and fixed Order of things according as God has appointed
them. And here it is witnessed and affirmed, That in the several Generations
and Countries, the People have varied from, and have not kept them. Now there
is more credit to be given unto the affirmation of the Word of God (that being
a forerunner of his future Judgment) then to all the Uindications and
Hypocritical Pretenses of the People themselves, that they have not gone away
from his Ordinances, when indeed they have; or then indeed is to be had to all
the sayings, of Bishops, Doctors, or Preachers, the Priests and People
themselves, Who Rob Father or Mother, and say it is no Transgression; Prove. 28.
24. When indeed it is a Transgression. And so it will clearly appear at the
Judgment Seat of Christ, when another Scene and Face of things will be seen
over what is now; then they which justify themselves before Men, and who are
highly esteemed amongst Men will be abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.
15. And on the other hand, that solid, sincere, unaffected Piety, that
universal Zeal for God, and for all his Commandments indefinitely without
exception, not keeping some and neglecting others, as the manner of many is at
this Day, but an actual observance of all them, not breaking the least
Commandment, Mat. 5. 19. For any specious end or pretense whatever, although
this be now spoken against, and reproached by Men, who are the Transgressors,
will yet be commended and accepted by God.

In all probability and likelihood, the Stream and Multitude of the Jewish
People, did run against Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, with as much Zeal,
Heat, and Enmity: As we have seen and known the greater part of the Inhabitants
thereof, do hate him that was King over this Nation, and for these twelve Years
last past, They would not have him Reign over them, Luke 19. 14. And that for
the same Reason: For as our People feared that such a one would Conquer and
Enslave them after French Methods, and compel them to Popery. So peradventure
the Ancient Jews might have secret indignation and hatred against
Nebuchadnezar, because he had made a Conquest over them; for this belongs to
Conquerors, to be inwardly and secretly hated, though they are outwardly
feared. And also because this Nebuchadnezzar was an Heathen, an Idolater and a
Stranger; and as it was Not lawful for a Man that was a Jew to keep company
with any other Nation, so they did conceive, and keep up unkindness and hatred
against them. Notwithstanding this mind of the Jewish Nation; yet Ezekiel a
true Prophet of the Lord in his seventeenth Chapter, does speak ^undry thing,
in behalf of the King of Babylon, according to humane Apprehension; whereas in
Truth he speaks, for the Oath and Covenant of God, which the Jewish Nation had
taken unto him. So that here it might have been Objected and Upbraided unto
Ezekiel, What do thou go about to destroy the Worship of God, which at that
day was among the Jews, and to bring in the Heathenish customs? Inasmuch as
thou would have us retain our subjection unto an Heathen King, and not
rebel against him, as we have done: Nevertheless the Prophet Ezekiel does
there speak sundry things against their Rebellion: Nay, It is not so much
Ezekiel, as the Spirit of God God which spoke by him, who knows best what is
his own Laws, and what is pleasing in his Sight. Seek ye out of the Book of the
Lord, and read; for therein it is written, That we should have our Conversation
honest among the Gentiles, least the Name of the Lord should be Blasphemed, and
the way of Truth evil spoken of amongst them: That we should carry out selves
wisely toward them that are without. Recompense to no Man evil for evil,
Provide things honest in the sight of all Men: Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good. Now seeing that our God has given such and such
Commandments, and many more to the same purpose, as may be seen in the Old and
New Testament; here to allude unto that saying of Peter, in Acts 11. 17. What
are we the Ministers and Preachers of his Word, that we should withstand God?
Or that we should vary from his Word and Commandment? Or that we should be
silent so as not to make mention of this Word and Commandment of the Lord,
because that it will displease the People, in that they have lately acted
contrary thereunto. Far be it from me, and let my Tongue cleave to the Roof of
my Mouth, if ever I should be a Menpleaser after this manner. For if I yet
pleased Men, I should not be the servant of Christ. By his Grace and
Assistance, and invisible Protection, I will go on, and proceed to behave my
self truly in his Covenant, that is, to speak out and assert the Commandments
of God, exactly in the very same manner as they are: However my Ministry is
Received or Rejected by the Multitude; or whether I do bear the Scorn and
Reproofs of the High and Mighty People, as David himself witnesses he did,
whose example herein I am conformed unto. I am determined through Christ that
strengthens me, to follow the Lamb, who is the Word, and the Word is God, and
so the conducts and leadings of Divine Truth, Whether soever it goes, whether I
have many or few hearers; for herein God will be more glorified; and hereby I
shall give a good and right Account of my Ministry.

It has been the way and method of Satan, in the several Generations and
Countries; and so he continues to do at this Day, that where he sees and
discerns (for he is both a knowing and discerning Spirit) that such a ones
Ministry would do more good; than others; or that God has anointed such a
particular Creature of his with the Oil of gladness above his fellows; There
Satan the Enemy will labor and endeavor some way or other to puzzle and
perplex his Ministry, so as to render it either of none, or if that is not
possible, yet of less effect. And though what is of God, will stand in spite of
Men or Devils; and the same will be received nevertheless, by some of the
Servants of God: Yet many others in such a time of Temptation and Trial, will
fall and go utterly away. For Example whereof, we may have recourse unto the
History of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles; whose Writings and sayings do
abundantly show forth and manifest the Reproaches and perverse Usage of the
People concerning them. Of our Lord and Savior himself, Being made better then
the Angels; Heb. 1. 4. And greater then all the Prophets, yet we thus read, He
is despised and rejected of Men; he is despised and we esteemed him not, Isa.
53. 3. And yet in him was the words of our Text literally fulfilled. And they,
whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear (for they are a rebellious
House) yet shall know that there has been a Prophet among them. Even that
Prophet of whom God by Moses spoke, I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their Brethren like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him. Yet in the Days of his Flesh,
some of the People of that Generation did hear Christ, and others again did
forbear and not hear him. Who Reproached him for a Deceiver, Mat. 27. 63. And
many of them said, he has a Devil, and is mad, Why hear ye him? Joh. 10. 20.
And yet some of the very same Persons, after they had Crucified and Put him to
Death, then they did confess and acknowledge, Now the Centurion and those that
were with him (even those People who had Reproached, Persecuted and Rejected
him) watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake, and those things that were done they
feared greatly; saying, truly this was the Son of God. After that they had
crucified the Lord Jesus, then they did know, and own him to have been a
Prophet; yea the very Son of God. And so it was with the other Prophets, after
they had Persecuted and Slain them; and after they had finished their Testimony
and Ministry, or after that they were Dead; then the People could Remember and
look back, that such an one was a Prophet or an eminent Servant of the Lord.
Lo, when this is come to pass, then shall it be known that there has been a
Prophet among them.

The foolish and absurd Nature of Men, does more prize and esteem of things by
their want, then by the having them. Like as we value Health in the time of
Sickness: So such a precious Jewel as a sound, faithful understanding Ministry,
which is Health and Life to our Souls, which feeds them with Knowledge and
Understanding; even this is more esteemed when it is lost then when had and
enjoyed. Like as in the time of Samuel, The Word of the Lord was precious, in
those Days there was no open vision. So when a thing is common, or present, or
easily had, then also it is apt to be refused and not esteemed off: But when
the same is past by and irrecoverable, then they wish for and desire it.

Another Reason why those eminent Instruments of the Glory of God, in their
several Generations, were rejected by the People thereof; because they did
Preach and Teach what did vehemently and violently contradict the Lusts and
Will of Men, and they would not endure that, but keep unto their own Lusts
still; and thereupon they Reproached, Rejected and evil entreated the Servants
of the most High God, who did teach the way of Salvation. There is somewhat of
this in all, even the worst and most disobedient of Men: They have some Sense
and Apprehension of the Great God over all, and they fain would be at Peace and
Reconciliation with him; for as he does good, so he can punish and make
miserable, as is evident to the most Ungodly and Ignorant, by that Sickness and
Death which he sends upon the Children of Men; And therefore, though they have
Transgressed, and do still go aside from the way of his Commandments: They
would so have it, as if God had given no such Commandments at all. Like the
question of the Serpent (by whose Temptation they are still acted) Yea, has
God said, ye shall not eat of every Tree in the Garden? By which he would
cunningly suggest and instill into their Minds, as if God had not said so. Even
so a Thought does arise in the Hearts of the Disobedient, as if God had given
no such Commandments. But when his faithful Ministers do affirm that he has,
then they seem to be Setters forth of strange Doctrins, and to Bring some new
things to their ears. Hence there are that Raise up strife and contention, Hab.
1. 3. For these Ungodly Men walking after their own Lusts will strive and
contend against such who Preach the Word and Commandment of God, against their
Ungodliness and Lusts. Therefore as it is in the following words, The Law is
slacked, ver. 4. When it is either forgotten or broken by them.

If we look back unto the particular History of the Prophets and Apostles, we
shall find that the Reproaches and evil Entreaty of the People against them did
arise for this very cause. What a stir was there against Paul, made by
Demetrius and his fellow Crafts Men, when he Preached against the Idolatry of
the People of Athens; and so he mentions that he was evil entreated at Philippi
for the Like Reason. The Inhabitants of both Places did imagine that they did
Please, Atone and Worship the Great God of the World, by those their Idolatrous
and Superstitious Rites and Customs: But when the Apostle did from the Spirit
of the most High God, contradict them therein, then the Heathen were in a rage,
by having heard that heretofore themselves followed a vain thing. The Doctrine
of the Apostle Paul as to this matter, is exactly fitted and applied against
these their false Imaginations. God that made the World, and all things
therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples
made with hands, neither is Worshipped with Men's hands as though he needed any
thing, seeing that he gives to all Life and Breath and all things. Forasmuch
then as we are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is
like unto Gold and Silver, or Stone graven by art and Man's device. Now
Preaching and Publishing has that Effect, that some do believe, receive and
obey the things Spoken or Published, others do kick against them; as it is said
in the same Chapter, that they mocked at the following Doctrine of this same
Apostle.

It is a work of an hard Nature to strive against the Lusts, long received
customs, established Rites and Habits of Men: For custom is a second Nature,
and when People have been long used to a thing, you had almost as good tear or
pluck away one of their Limbs, as go about to remove or persuade People off
from it. Can a Leopard change his Spots, or an Aethopian his Skin? So may they
do well, who have been accustomed to do evil. That is, it is very hard and
difficult. Nevertheless if that same custom be evil or vain; then as the same
God did Create the outward Man; so in the second or New Creation of him, which
is called the New Birth, or Regeneration (which signifies a being born again)
the Grace of God will persuade off from, and get rid of that same evil or vain
Custom. Says the same Apostle, If after the manner of Men I have fought with
Beasts at Ephesus. Now Beasts will (what lies in them, unless they be broken
off from it) unto their Lusts, and to their Customs; and so long as Men are of
the same Mind, they are after the manner of Beasts: Like as a Carriers Horse
will go on in its wonted way; so The brutish among the People are for doing
still (though it be evil or false) what they have been used and accustomed
unto; for such are led by Sense and Memory, and not by Reason or Judgment. Now
Faith is an higher and more sublime Principle of Action, which carries above
all these: And where the Man does live by Faith, and act by Faith, then He puts
away childish things, 1 Cor. 13. 11. Then he puts away the inferior
Principles; by which others, and perhaps himself formerly did Act and Live. And
now he is acted by Faith only. Whereby he becomes somewhat above and beyond a
Man, as Reason Advances above a Beast; For Flesh and Blood does not reveal
these things unto him.

The just shall live by his Faith, Hab. 2. 4. Which is a great and observable
Scripture, in that it is thrice quoted by the Apostle Paul; and it is written
for our Instruction and Admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.
To lead and bring People over unto this Noble and Divine State of Living by
Faith, is the end of all our Writing Books and Preaching Sermons. But the
generality of Mankind has been so long Settled upon the lees, and sunk down
into Earthliness, Sense and the things of this Life, that they are not so
easily and soon raised up to this Spiritual frame of Mind, which if obtained,
would influence all their Actions. There is that in the Hearts of Natural
Unregenerate People, and also that remainder of Corruption, and of the old
Nature, even in the Regenerate; that these last do grow weary of, and the
others do strive against the Heavenly seed of true Doctrine. There is a
reluctance in the former, and an aukwardness in the latter. And as it is
written, There was War in Heaven, Michal with his Angels fought with the Dragon
and his Angels. So hence does arise War in the Soul of Man: Christ Jesus, with
the words he puts into the Heart, does fight with the Devil and his
Suggestions, and also with what Temptations arise from the Flesh, and from the
things of this World; and accordingly as one prevails or the other, so is the
Man determined to Good or Evil, Truth or Falsehood, Right or Wrong.

There is a way which seems right in a Man's own eyes, but the paths thereof
lead unto Death. And as God has made our Nature with a strong bent and
tendency to the thing that right is; so even in our backslidings and goings
aside, we do not commonly any thing that is wrong, but under a show and outward
appearance of right. The time comes, that whosoever kills you, will t^ink
that he does God service, John 16. 2. Said Jesus to his Disciples, and that was
committing a grievous Sin, even Murder it self. Yet however strange it may
seem, yet so it is, that People are so infatuated and deluded as to think that
they did serve and obey God, whilst they were acting a thing contrary to his
Laws. This confirms what was before observed, That People think that they do
keep the Commandments of God, even whilst they break and transgress them, and
they fain would have it so as if they had not sinned. An Example hereof may be
seen in the History of the fall of Adam. Now the Serpent was made more subtle
then any beast of the field, which the Lord God had made: And he said unto the
Woman; yea has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden, Genesis 3.
1. By which he would cunningly insinuate in the first place, as if God had
given no such Commandment; which yet was so evident to their Hearts and
Consciences, That the Serpent himself could not well gainsay and deny it, as
appears by the Answer of the Woman, in ver. 2. 3. Whereupon the Serpent did
reply in ver. 4. 5. And frame another kind of Temptation; unto which the Man
and Woman do unhappily yield. But then it being added, And the eyes of them
both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. By their Eyes being
opened, may be at first supposed, as if their Condition was not hereupon become
worse but better for the present: For so it seems, where those who heretofore
were blind or Blear-eyed do see, Here again it may be perceived, from the
following Verse: There was also in them, a secret consciousness that they had
offended God; for it was this which made them hide Themselves from the presence
of the Lord God, among the trees of the Garden. From all which considered
together, this true Observation may be gathered, That though Satan would
suggest unto Sinners and Transgressors; as if God had given no Commandment
against what he tempts unto; yet nevertheless, after they have committed the
same, there is a consciousness, and full conviction within them, that they have
also herein done somewhat to offend and displease God; which is also sensible
unto themselves, by that guilt which does appear forth upon their inward parts,
and by that fear which they labor under.

In every instance of Transgression before the fact is committed, A deceived
Heart does turn them aside: And so it is afterward, The deceived Heart does
continue and hinder them from coming to Repentance. Sin does cast a Cloud over
the understanding, which does hinder the influence of the Sun of Righteousness,
and deprives of the knowledge of things Divine. Remarkable is that of Daniel
12. 10. Many shall be purified and made white and tried; but the wicked shall
do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall
understand. Hence it is, even to them which stumble at the word, being
disobedient, 1 Pet. 2. 8. That People are so puzzled and perplexed at the works
and doings of God. We have sinned with our Fathers, we have committed iniquity,
and done wickedly, Psalm. 106. 6. And what is the consequent of that, may be
seen in the next verse. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt.
Therefore it was because they had sinned and done wickedly, and committed
iniquity. This is the very Reason why People do understand so very little
according to truth of the Works and Doings of God; for God will not manifest
himself unto the Soul which is defiled with Sin, Iniquity or Filthiness. And so
if People were alike Obedient to the Word of our Ministry, and if they would
come to hear it (for their refusal do that is one Act of their Disobedience)
then they would be satisfied and convinced of our Truth, Sincerity and
rightness therein: Even that we do Not handle the Word of God deceitfully, but
by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every Man's Conscience
in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. And that we do speak out the Truth, the whole
Truth, and nothing but the Truth, not making less of it, nor concealing any
part of it; as the manner of most Preachers and Teachers is, least they
displease their hearers. If any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the
Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, John 7. 17. So
on the other hand from what is written, That we might turn from our iniquities,
and understand thy truth, Dan. 9. 13. We may learn and gather, that the only
way to come to the knowledge of the things of God, is by Obedience and keeping
his Commandments: As contrariwise it is only because of their Sin, Iniquity and
Transgressions, that any do remain in ignorance and darkness.

As David says by the Spirit, Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will
declare what he has done for my Soul, Psalm. 66. 16. So we (both Ministers and
hearers) are allowed, yea in Duty we ought to declare and make known our
several Experiences between God and our Souls; that if the same be good, they
may be for the edifying and instructing one another; or if they be evil and
failings, then it is for the warning of each other, that we may all see the
Rock, whereon our Souls, or the Souls of others, had almost been Shipwracked;
or the place and stumbling Block, whereat our steps had well nigh slipped: Or
if any of the Ministers of God lie under Reproaches and false Censures (as my
present Case is) then we may Rehearse the matter from the beginning and expound
it by order unto the people, Acts 11. 4. We have Examples hereof in the
Apostles, Peter and Paul; whose second Epistle to the Corinthians, is chiefly
made up of Apologies and Vindications of himself, from false Calumnies and
Reports. We may find the like in the other Prophets, Ministers and Servants of
God. And the Rebuke of his people he shall take away from off all the Earth,
Isa. 25. 8. So in the mean while he is well pleased, that according to the
Knowledge, Understanding and Truth he has given them, they should do it
themselves.

In misunderstandings between Minister and People, and so between Man and Man,
there is most commonly some fault on both sides; So it is here, besides the Sin
and Ignorance, Perverseness, Stubbornness, Contempt and Disobedience to Gods
Word and Commandment, which is in the People of this Generation and Nation: I
cannot say neither, That I have made my Heart clean; or that I am wholly
without fault or blame. Though here to enter in my Protestation, In all that
has come upon us, I have not forgotten God, nor behaved my self falsely in his
Covenant. When I taught and affirmed constantly, that it was his Commandment
and revealed Will, I will be a swift witness against false swearers and against
them that turn aside the stranger from his right, Mal. 3. 5. Yet in the bearing
forth and suffering for that Testimony, I gave way to so many things, which did
savor of Men, and of the fleshly corrupt Nature that was in me, that the work
was spoiled and mismanaged by me: That even several of his Saints and Servants
were ready to imagine and conclude, that there was nothing at all of God in it.
When I was numbered among the transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. Blessed be God for
conforming me therein to the example of Jesus Christ uor Lord; and I was put
into Prison, yea into the same place with real Criminals, who were there
justly, for they received the due reward of their deeds, Luke 23. 40, 41. But I
had done nothing amiss as to that matter; yet I was foolishly, falsely, and
ignorantly dealt withal and proceeded against, as a breaker of Man's Laws;
forsooth only because I did exhort them to keep and to do according to the Laws
of God; and yet still Let it be done according to the Law, Ezra. 10. 3. And I
had admonished them of the breach and violation thereof, in order to bring them
again unto his Law and into the way of his Commandments. I did nothing more, or
beyond, or besides this. But for me to be used as a Transgressour for this
doing, by them who in truth were the Transgressors themselves, this was
strange Sottishness and Ignorance in my Persecutors and Oppressors, who did
seek after my Soul, they have not set God before them, Selah. Psalm. 54. 3.

Whilst I was in Prison I thought That God should do somewhat more for my
Deliverance (yea, sometimes a vain Imagination did arise, That it should be in
a manner extraordinary by way of Miracle) then he did for my fellow Prisoners.
For I thought it hard; yea, an horrible Suggestion did peep forth, and was just
perceived in my Mind, as if it would be Unrighteousness in God if he should
suffer me to be plagued and holden like other Men; But blessed be his Name, it
was not so with me; For he has been with me in five Troubles, and has
delivered us from so great a Death, and does deliver: In whom we trust that he
will yet deliver us, 2 Cor. 1. 10. And he caused the Enemy to entreat me well
in the time of Evil: For in every Prison or House of Confinement I was in, I
had more favor and kindness showed unto me, then any other Prisoner. But as to
the former part of this Thought of mine, a seasonable Answer did recur to my
Mind, on this wise, viz, If thou would have God do more for thee then for
other People in seeming like outward Condition, then thou should see well to
it, and endeavor that Thou, even thou, do exceed and go beyond those my
fellow Creatures and Brethren in Godliness and Holiness, and by a greater Zeal
for the Name and Glory of God; and by a greater Diligence and Labor to Promote
and Propagate his Religion and Truth in the World; Through and by thy
Sufferings, To bring many Sons and Daughters unto Glory. And if God should
restore unto thee the joy of his Salvation, and uphold thee with his free
Spirit, then to make the right inference and Practice afterward, Then will I
teach Transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted unto thee, Ps. 51.
12, 13. For I should be alike Zealous and Earnest for all the other
Commandments, as for those particularly for which I Suffered; And so I should
have reproved all manner of Sin and Transgression, even in all People, From the
greatest to the least: And so in the meanest all one as in the highest; as I
did reprove the Sin and Transgression of the Rich and Mighty People; for which
my doing, they threw me into Bonds and laid Persecution on my Loins.

Holiness unto the Lord, and Obedience to all his Commandments, is what God
indispensably expects and requires from all his Servants and Creatures. But he
looks for higher Degrees and a greater Measure thereof in his Prophets, unto
whom he Reveals his Secret, and brings them near to himself. For so it should
be done by the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, Psalm.
65. 4. and whom Almighty God does delight to Honor. The Psalmist Pronounces
such an one Blessed. For certainly the more Godly, or the more Devoted and
given up to God, any one is, he will have the more Peace and Comfort in this
Life, and be the more Happy and Blessed throughout all Eternity. In the visible
Church of God in the several Generations and Countries, There have been all
along Observed to have been those of the Devouter sort; and so there was
amongst the Philosophers or Professors of Philosophy, a stricter sort then the
generality of the rest. And truly it is this Devouter sort and Stricter sect of
Religion (I mention this to all that shall Hear or Read these Words, to quicken
and exhort them unto the utmost Preciseness and Circumspect walking) who when
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force,
They do also thus take it by force. We Read that when the Lord was to descend
upon Mount Sinah; or when Moses was to deliver any extraordinary Message from
God unto the People, or the People were to meet with God; Then the People were
to Sanctify, Purify and Prepare themselves four Days before hand, and not to
come near their Wives. And what these did for a set Time, his Prophets and
especial Servants did throughout the general Course of their Life. That is, in
the Things pertainign to God, they did somewhat more than others, Mat. 5. 47.
For they were much more Godly than the common standard and size of Religion as
it was then in the World.

But here I will speak of mine own Infirmities; Instead of my being more Holy
and Sanctified then others; instead of my being harmless and undefiled, and
separated from sinners: And whereas I should have exceeded the rest of my
Brethren in Godliness (considering what kind of Testimony I bore forth, and I
suffered for) yet contrariwise I fell into a Worldly kind and manner of Life,
and did retain the vain and foolish things of Pride, and the Fashion of this
World; all which was in no wise agreeable, but contrary unto the Spirit of the
Ancient Prophets. Good God! How much did I herein fall off and go aside from
his High and Heavenly Calling? This shows, and hereby it may be discerned and
seen, how easy it is for the Things which savor of Men, and of the fleshly
corrupt Nature, and of the Pride of Life to creep in and intermingle with the
best and most Divine Works. Now there was a day, when the Sons of God came to
present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also among them, Job 1. 6.
Even so in the most Divine Things, somewhat of the Devil, the World and the
Flesh, will come in and mingle therewith. The best Men have most Temptations,
and the best Works meet with the most Opposition, which would endeavor to
defeat and spoil it. And so when I was employed in a Noble matter, wholly a
right work (to allude unto Jer. 2, 11.) I did not then so carefully and
watchfully see to it, as in duty I ought to have done, least I should omit or
be guilty of somewhat which would render it of none, or of less effect: But
through my neglect and failure herein (I wish I could speak it Weeping) Satan
got an Advantage over me, as to serve his own Pestilent Destructive Ends, in
Letting, Hindering and Resisting of Good.

I had need to take up a great Lamentation as to my self, even To Weep with the
Weeping of Jazer, Jer. 48. 32. As I Remember from whence I am fallen. And I
should herein Repent and do the first works. As I Recollect and can apprehend
how very much I am now fallen short of what I was Originally Created unto. I
have often heard a secret and still Voice speaking unto my Spirit, like that in
the Prophet. O Israel thou art my Servant, in whom I will be glorified. And so
it has seemed to me; As if Almighty God had called me by my express outward
Name O RICHARD STAFFORD, Thou art my Servant and Creature, in whom I will be
glorified. Truly this is a great word, and belongs to every Inhabitant
throughout the whole Earth, whether Male or Female, Bond or Free, High or Low,
Rich or Poor, they are all and severally the Servants or Creatures of God, in
whom he will be Glorified. That is, either in their Salvation or Condemnation.
The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the Wicked for the day of
Evil, Prove. 16. 4. The Servants of God are such who obey him and keep his
Commandments, and do the Things which please him: In these he is glorified to
their own Good and Comforts. But those again may be more properly styled the
Creatures of God than his Servants, who live at random, and in forgetfulness of
their Maker; and in these also he will be glorified to their own Evil and
Punishment

In that day there shall be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness unto the
Lord, Zech. 14. 20. So it should be written upon the Fore head of each of us;
and it should be engraven upon the Tables of our Heart; so that it may be
continually in our Mind and Remembrance. O Man or Woman, calling Him or Her by
their respective Names, Thou art my Servant, in whom the invisible God will be
glorified. As this following is a nearer and more honorable Relation.
Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and
touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, And will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty 2 Cor. 6.
17. 18. Even so it is here, it is a better and more comfortable Diversity for
the Lord Almighty to say unto us, Thou art my Servant in whom I will be
glorified; then if he should only say, Thou art my Creature in whom I will be
glorified. For his Servants shall serve him, Rev. 22. 3. But amidst the Common
and Promiscuous multitude of Mankind, There are many Rebels and Enemies, in
whom he will be glorified though it be to their Destruction.

And they come unto thee as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them; for with their
mouth they show much love but their heart goes after covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.
31. And so by the outward posture of People, and by their coming to the public
places of his Worship they make a show of much Honor, Reverence and Obedience
unto God; but their Heart goes after their own Pleasure or Profit. They are
still for doing their own Will, and for going after their own Thoughts. They
will sit a Sermon out; but after it is over, and they are gone from it, they
are apt to say, Their Lips are their own: Who is Lord over us? There are those
who are yet more Disobedient and Rebellious; for they will not so much as come
to the place of Hearing. Others again will Hear and not Obey. And another sort
are forgetful hearers of the Word.

As when Jesus Discoursed of that True Bread which comes down from Heaven, and
gives life unto the World; The Hearers thereupon said unto him, Lord evermore
give us this Bread, John 6. 32, 34. So it is evermore the desire of my Soul;
and so it is of all Faithful and Knowing People, when we hear such an one is a
good Minister, Preacher, or Teacher. Lord evermore give us the Preaching and
Teaching of thy Spirit. For though the outward Teachers should be removed into
a corner, Isa. 30. 20, Or if the lot of our Habitation is cast into a Barren
Ground, where is a Dead Ministry or Dull Teaching; yet the Spirit within us is
Life; and by this Spirit we know the Things that are freely given us of God.
For what Man knows the things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man which is in
him? Even so the things of God knows no Man but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.
10. Even so the Elect do know and discern more of the Things of God than other
People, even by the Spirit which he has given them. So they do now know and
discern more of the Appearances and Doings of God unto the World and to his
Church, then the mixed Multitude. Shall the Lord do any thing, and not reveal
the same unto his Servants the Prophets? So his Elect Servants do know and
receive them for such, that is, for those to whom God does communicate himself
more then to his Ordinary Creatures; when the same was not understood by the
generality of the People. There was never yet any true Prophet of the Lord, but
who did approve, manifest and commend himself to the Hearts and Consciences of
some of his Servants. And so it is, that whereas the common People in the Words
of our Text, Shall know, that is, in the latter Days, and toward the end of
Time, That there has been a Prophet among them. The Elect Servants of God know
the very same at the Time, and whilst the Prophet is among them.

Those Prophets were Ordinary or Extraordinary. By the Ordinary Prophets, I
mean the common Priests who were to Read and Expound the Law. By the
Extraordinary Prophets are to be understood such, whom God had Anointed with
the Oil of Gladness above their fellows. To whom he had made known more of
himself then he had done unto the common Stock and Level of Mankind. The
Denomination of the Word Prophet, comes chiefly from Prophetare; which
signifies as much as to Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a Trumpet,
and show my people their Transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins, Isa.
58. 1. And so every common Minister or Preacher of the Word, as he is Faithful
and True in the Discharge of that part of the Office, may be called a Prophet
both in the Old and New Testament Acceptance; as when we read of the Schools
of the Prophets. Is Saul also among the Prophets? By this Word is denoted that
distinct Rank of Men, such as are the Priests and Clergy among us at this Day.
And so we read in the Gospel, For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may
learn, and all may be comforted. And the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to
the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14, 31. 32. But as one Man now is seen to excel another
in Strength, Greatness, Beauty, Wisdom, or such like according to the manifold
Variety of the Creation and Workmanship of God; So the same everlasting God,
the Creator of the ends the Earth, had also amongst them to whom he
Communicated a greater measure of his Spirit and of the Knowledge of himself
and of the things pertaining unto his Kingdom than unto others; as we read in
the example of the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles.

Said Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, I must go and Preach the Gospel in
other Cities, for thither am I sent. And so the Prophets and Apostles were as
Captives removing to and fro, Isa. 49. 21. And traveling from Place to Place
for to Preach the Word of God and to make known his Truth. And as Wisdom cries
without, she utters her voice in the streets: She cries in the chief place
of concourse, in the openings of the gates; in the City she utters her words,
Prove. 1. 20. So their Residence or Habitation for the most part was in or near
the City of Jerusalem, the chief City of Judea, where the Palaces of their
Kings, Rulers and chief of the People were. This I do the more willingly take
notice of; because there have been some ignorant People in the Neighborhood of
the Place of my Nativity, who did therefore refuse to hear that part of the
Word of the Lord which was committed to my Ministration, because they imagine
or say, I am not long fi^ed and settled in the country. O Foolish People and
Unwise! Should any one therefore refuse to hear the Ancient Prophets, or Christ
in the Days of his Flesh, or the Apostles, because they did not always tarry in
one place? Or refuse to hear the Jewish Priests, who were in their time
Worshippers of the Father, and accepted with him, because both Priests and
People did three times in the Year go up to Jerusalem. The right Practice and
Inference from hence should be for People to hear such a one more gladly, and
earnestly, and to lay hold of every Opportunity, letting none slip, because he
is not always a Preacher among them. How Ridiculous and Nonsensical would this
seem and appear, if People would not go to such Itinerant Judges for Justice;
because forsooth they do not come and inhabit in the particular place of their
abode. And it is a like Error in Things pertaining to the future and endless
Life, to refuse to receive Knowledge at the Priests Lips, Mal. 2. 7. Only
because they do according to the especial Ordering and Appointment of God Run
to and fro, Dan. 12. 4. For the increase thereof, and for the Publishing and
communicating forth of the same. Said he, whose Example I desire to follow in
this my Generation (for hereby I shall have boldness in the Day of Judgment,
because as he was, so are we in this present World) Wist ye not that I must be
about my Fathers businefs? And so I speak unto ye my Country Men and
Neighbors, Would ye not have me to be about my God and Creatours Business?
What is that? Some of ye may be ready to think and say: Why To declare unto
Jacob his Transgression, and to Israel his Sin. Micah. 3. 8. To bring Jacob
again unto him, Isa. 49. 5. And to endeavor to gain one Point, that is, if I
could be somewhat instrumental by his Blessing and Grace, and by the continued
goings forth of his eternal Truth (I will cry unto God most High, unto God that
performs all things for me) to bring over the People of this Nation unto the
obedience of one of his Commandments; for this would be an inlet and help, and
it would make way by degrees, and in succession of Time to bring them over unto
the Obedience of all the others.

I have often thought, that if it shall appear at the last Great Day of the
Lord; when he shall write up the People, and Rehearse from the beginning of the
World, all things as they were done, that I was a doing the Work of the Lord
all along; as it seems to be according to his Word and Commandment now: Thou
shall not have thy Brother in thine Heart, Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy
Neighbor and not suffer Sin upon him, Lev. 19. 17. To teach Transgressors thy
ways, and that sinners may be converted unto God, Psalm. 51.: How will they
(especially some of my nearest kindred according to the Flesh) be ashamed and
confounded, who have opposed and reproached me; and yet much more will they be
ashamed and confounded, who have Oppressed, Persecuted and Imprisoned me. Then
the lying lips will be put to silence, which speak grievous things proudly and
contempuously against the Righteous, Psalm. 31. 18. And they will wish that
those Hands had been before that cut off, which have acted cruel and tormenting
things against me. And they who did not hear, but they did forbear (for they
are a Rebellious House) yet now shall know that there has been a Prophet among
them. That is, one who did faithfully and truly declare and tell them of their
Transgression and Sin. One who neither had, nor yet did pretend to have
extraordinary Assistances or Measures of the Spirit, nor yet more knowledge
than others of his Generation. But as Paul says, I thank Christ Jesus our
Lord, who has enabled me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the
Ministry, 2 Timothy 1. 12. And He that is faithful in the least, is also faithful
in much. So according to that Ability and Knowledge God had given me as his
Creature, I have the Testimony of mine own Conscience; That I did endeavor all
along to be faithful for the most part, even to handle his Word According to
the integrity of my heart, and the skilfulness of my hands, Ps. 78. 72. And I
would Not hide his Righteousness, nor conceal his Truth, Psalm. 40. 10. Which
arose and he made known in my Heart; Though when he Who gave authority to his
Servants, and to every Man his work, and commanded the Porter to watch, Mark
13. 34. Shall call me to an Account about this particular Work he had allotted
and set out to me; for it is here said, That he gave to every Man his work.
Herein I shall give up such like an Account, That as it was managed by me, it
was accompanied with several Failures and Imperfections: Yet nevertheless, this
will be some joy and lessening of the other Grief; that however I did endeavor
to get it done and finished, thinking it better to have it done any way then
not at all. The Lord opened mine ears and I was not Rebellious: Which will be
some hope and comfort in that Day. I ought To have feared no more, nor be
dismayed, neither be lacking. Jer. 23. 4.

In the last great Day of Judgment, The Lord will show who are his, and who is
holy; and will cause him to come near unto him; even him whom he has chosen,
will he cause to come near unto him, Numb. 16. 5. At that Great Day of
Decision, all Things that are written in the Scriptures concerning his Church
and People, and concerning his doings toward the Children of Men, will be
fulfilled and laid open: Then shall be known what Prophets have been in the
several Generations and Countries. The Lord will recount his Worthies and bring
them forth by their Names, who were for Signs and Witnesses to his People. Then
also those Things which are now in the Dark, and which People are in doubt and
question whither there is any thing of God in it, will be brought to open
Light. And then God, who is judge himself, will speak and testify, Psalm. 50.
6, 7. How He, even He himself was concerned therein; and he will make all his
Churches, yea, even all his Reasonable Creatures know that he was God, even
their God; and consequently they should have received him for their Lord and
Governor.

Many more things might here be spoken as touching this, but for the more full
Declaration of them, we refer you to the Hearing of that Day: Both as
pertaining how the Case stands between God and all Mankind in the general; and
also as to every Individual and Particular Soul. For He who has Created these
things, that brings out their Host by number, he calls them all by Names,
not one fails, will not pass over nor let slip so much as one Man or Woman
without Examination and Retribution, when the Great Day of his Judgment is
come. Whose Providence is over the least Things even Sparrows, and the Hairs of
our Head, He will Bring every secret thing into Judgment; and we must receive
for the Deeds done in the Body, whether they be good or bad.

For we shall certainly be called into question for this Day, and so of every
Days Actions, after that we are come to the Years of Discretion, and have the
knowledge of Good and Evil. I shall give Account of my Preaching and Ministry,
and so the People will of their hearing and profiting thereby; As also, they
who refuse to hear, who Contemn Gods Word and Commandment, will be called to an
Account: Even those who now forbear and are Rebellious, shall know, and in the
latter Days they shall consider it perfectly, whether they would or not, that
there has been a Prophet among them. I pray God to convince and make it known
unto the Inhabitants of this Nation, That they may be Wise and Discerning in
Time, before it is too late; and that they may know and come to hear the Things
that belong to their peace, before they are hid from their Eyes.

So much may serve for Explanation and Paraphrase of our Text, and to
illustrate the Truth thereof: Now let us improve the same in some few Practical
Uses and Inferences.

In the First place, Seeing that these things are so; Hereby may be perceived
the exceeding Benefit and Advantage of a knowing and discerning Spirit. It is
Recorded of Issachar, That he was Discerning in the Times and Seasons, that he
might know what Israel had to do. This is written for our Admonition, upon whom
the Ends of the World are come: To the intent that we also should be discerning
not so much in the Times and Seasons as in the latter and last end of things;
that we may know what we have to do, in this mean while in the Time of our
Probation and Trial; and how we may demean our selves in these Days of our
Flesh; wherein God does prove us whether we will keep his Commandments or no.
For truly if we did now so know and discern of the latter and last end of
Things, as indeed we ought and may know of the latter and last end of Things,
and we shall be at last forced to it, when the End is come: Hereby a great deal
of Sin and Evil would be avoided and prevented in the mean while; as also much
Good and Duty might be done, which now through ignorance and want of
discerning, is left undone. Eschew Evil and do Good is all that God does
require of Man; and the more any one does eschew Evil and do Good in the
several instances thereof, it will be so much the better for that Man or Woman
throughout all Eternity. And according as the Knowledge and Faith of People is,
so they do one or the other. If ye know these Things, happy are ye if ye do
them, Said our Lord to his Disciples. Nay, if one did fully know such and such
Things, and consider thoroughly all the Reasons that persuade to it, there also
he would do them; as we find in the Things of Daily Use and Experience. For
almost all Sin does proceed and arise from want of Knowledge. As for instance,
The Sin of Unbelief does arise from want of the Knowledge of the Power of God,
what he can do; As if any thing were too hard for the Lord, which nothing is.
Had Zacharias at that very Time known that those Things he was told of Luke
120. would indeed be performed, he had not been struck Dumb for his unbelief.
And so the Sin of Distrust does arise from want of the Knowledge of the Will of
God, even what God will do. And so when any one falls into a Sin, through such
a foregoing Temptation, it is for want of a true and through Knowledge; for
such suppose and imagine, that there is more good in the Temptation, then
really there is. It is commonly said, That if we did know before, what would
come after, we should never do amiss. Which is most true, as to the Things
pertaining to God, and to our own future State and Condition: As to which, we
should never finally miscarry, if we would receive into our Knowledge, all that
God and Christ has told us before concerning it. Our Creator has done his
part; for he has made us as Angels of God, capable to know Things before hand;
and also capable to Choose the good, and refuse the evil. But this is the
degeneracy of Mankind: This is their fault now, and will be their Condemnation
hereafter; That when they were Made in Honor, yet themselves should wilfully
become Of no Understanding, but like the Beasts that Perish. That is, to be
only for present and sensible Things, but not to regard the Future and
Spiritual, which chiefly belong to Man to Mind; because they are his greatest
concern. Says the Wise Man, Moreover that the Heart be without Knowledge, it
is not good! Nay, it is stark naught; for such being Blinded will insensibly
slide into the Ditch of Destruction. As to those who shall finally and
eternally Perish at the last Day, The Return will be made, and the Reason will
be Assigned, My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. Which
will hold true as to that everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his Power. It is not without very good Reason, That
the Duty of Knowledge is so very much inculcated and recommended in Scripture,
which was given to make us wise unto Salvation. Teach me good judgment and
knowledge: for I have believed thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 66. To the same
purpose is Prove. 1. throughout. The neglect of Knowledge is threatened and
condemned Isa. 1. 3. Et. 5. 13. Et. 27. 11. Ps. 32. 9. Jude. 10. Prove. 27. 22.
Jer. 8. 6. Ps. 14. 4. Ephesians. 4. 18. Ps. 82. 5. Ps. 92. 6. 2 Pet. 2. 5. In a Word,
it is a very great Good, and will be a great Gain to have the knowledge of the
Things of God, but chiefly of those things that are to come, as well as of the
Things present. So it is a great evil, and will be a great loss to be found
without this Knowledge.

Secondly, By what has been aforesaid from the Words of our Text, may be
perceived the much yet greater excellency and preciousness of the Grace of
FAITH. Says Paul, Though I have all Knowledge, and though I have all Faith, 1
Cor 13. 2. Hereby may be seen that Faith is distinct from, and does properly
succeed and follow after Knowledge: So that we are right enough in making it
our second Use and Application. The Object of Faith is future and invisible
Things, according to Heb. 11. 1. But the Object of Knowledge is present and
visible Things. Now Faith is the Principle and Foundation, the Sum and
Substance, the Marrow and Kernel, the very Vitals and Inwards of all Religion.
For first of all Faith fixes and terminates on the unseen God, who made all
things, both visible and invisible; both Things present, and Things to come.
But then besides, we are Creatures that are continually passing on; we being
here in a transitory Life, and in a transitory State. And we have on, and
continually make toward those greater and more abiding Things to come. Now as
Faith does discover, apprehend, and lay hold of all these things, it thereunpon
becomes to us all in all. Says Jesus Christ, Have Faith in God, Mark 11. 22.
And it being elsewhere said, The just shall live by his Faith. So that I would
chiefly recommend and put my Readers in mind, to have Faith in God, and live by
Faith. That as the Apostle says, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do,
do all to the glory of God. Even so, do ye live by Faith, and be full of Faith,
and of the Holy Ghost; that whether ye Sleep or Wake, whether ye be busy or
idle, whether ye be in your Shops, Barns, Houses or Fields, whether ye be upon
a Journey, or sitting still; Nay, even whilst ye are eating your necessary
Food, or not eating, in whatsoever Posture or Action ye are in, let your Hearts
be always musing and thinking, and be full with expectation, And looking after
those things which are coming on the Earth, Luke 21. 26. And shortly after that
we depart hence, will be manifested before us with open Face. For the Divisions
of Reuben, there was great thought and searchsearching of heart. So after the
invisible and future things of God, which pertain to us Men, let there be
continued Thought and searching of Heart; To give all diligence to make our
Calling and Election sure. Let this be all your Labor and Care: And as ye
always Breath, and your Pulse is continually beating; so let your doings and
movings be toward and in Subordination and tendency to this great end, how to
secure and lay hold on the better Things for your Portion. Thus to have Faith
in God, and to Live by Faith, is indeed the way to be Carried from Faith unto
Salvation.

The Third Practical Use and Inference is, To teach every one of us to be of an
Obedient, Humble, Lowly and Trembling Spirit. It has been aforesaid, that the
wicked, Ungodly and Disobedient, would fain have the Commandments of God be
fashioned according to their imaginations and Lusts; and when they have indeed
Sinned, they would so make a show, as if they had not sinned; or as if the
Commandments of God were not so as they are Recorded in his Book, and delivered
by his faithful Ministers. I have Read among the ^ayings of Luther, That
nothing displeases God more than when we Defend and Cloak our Sins, and will
not acknowledge that we have done wrong, as did Saul. For this is Adding Sin to
Sin, and a linking one Transgression on to another. That is, when such have
Sinned or Transgressed, In speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the Heart words of falsehood, Isa. 59. 13. To vindicate
themselves; and it is a Persisting still in their Stubbornness, Disobedience
and Rebellion; which instead of lessening does aggravate and increase their
Guilt, and it does provoke God more and more. By that manner of speech,
Conceiving and uttering from the Heart words of falsehood, Is meant and
intended, when People will of set purpose invent and speak lies and words of
Falsehood at the very same time when they know it to be so, only to cloak and
excuse their foregoing Sins. But all this, both the lying false Spirit; as also
the Perverse, Disobedient, Rebellious and Refractory Spirit is far from the
Godly; as we may know by the Examples of David and Hezekiah.

By the way, though a parcel of ignorant People or Men pleasers, who are
Corrupted by filthy lucre, do imagine or say, That a King or Rich Man, ought
not to be Reproved: Yet we learn and know the contrary from the Word of God,
that they both may, and also they ought to be Reproved, if they commit Sin or
Evil, all one as inferior People. We may Read in 2 Samuel 12. That when Nathan
Reproved David, he did not imprison Nathan for it, as Amaziah and other Ungodly
Kings would sometimes do unto the Prophets of the Lord; but he acknowledged his
Offense. And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord. And so
when Isaiah denounced that sad Message to Hezekiah and his Posterity, What is
the Return and Answer which Hezekiah made thereupon? Then said Hezekiah to
Isaiah, Good is the Word of the Lord which thou have spoken, Isa. 39. 8. Both
David and Hezekiah were Servants of the Lord, who were overtaken with a fault;
but yet they are for our Example and Instruction, how we should behave our
selves under the Reproof of the Word, either in the public Preaching and
Ministry thereof; or when we are Rebuked privately, as one Man does his
Neighbor. Namely, not to Rankle in Spirit, nor conceive Enmity and Hatred
against the outward Person of him that does it; like Ahab to Micaiah I hate
this Man, for he Prophesies not good concerning me; but evil. Not to kick
against the Reproof, because it pricks the Conscience; in which sense,
notwithstanding people harden themselves now in the mean while, yet hereafter
it will be found true, It is hard to kick against the pricks. Nor yet should
any one dare to Reply against God, Rom 9, 20. Nor yet as it is in the Marginal
Reading there, to Answer again; for this is a sign of a Malapert and Saucy
Servant. But as the one is to give, so the other ought to receive the Reproof
In the Spirit of meekness, and to acknowledge that he has Transgressed against
the Lord his God, and that he has not obeyed his voice, Jer. 3. 13. But now he
is heartily sorry for it, and unfeigendly resolves to mend his fault, and do so
no more.

The end and Requiring of the Law, is Obedience: And this is the way when we
have not performed that, to make it up and supply it, so as to render and yield
it for the time to come. All that God does require of us, and the only way to
please and be reconciled unto him, is to obey his Word, to have a great fear
and dread of the invisible God in our inward Parts, and a care not to offend
him, and to express forth whatever Honor and Reverence we possibly can toward
him. For though when we are full and in Health, Youth and Strength, we are apt
to despise him, and say in our Heart, tush God we care not for thee: Yet on the
other hand when we are in Hunger, Want, Cold, Affliction or Pain, and more
especially when Old Age begins to creep on, when the Floods come, and the Winds
blow and beat upon this house of our Body; when Dangerous and Tormenting
Diseases are upon us, and grim Death approaches nigh to Arrest and Carry our
Souls into another place, then we know and are indeed sensible, that as God
does Good, so he can also Punish and make the Creature really Miserable. As
when we are Hungry or Cold, or Sick, we would willingly do those things, and
use those means to be full and satisfied, and warm, and well again. So we being
By Nature Children of Wrath, and liable unto Misery and Destruction, which will
at length certainly come upon us, unless in God is our help, in God is our
Salvation, Life and Happiness; so that from hence the Word of Exhortation does
arise and run most forcible, to actually persuade us to do those things, and so
to walk that we may please God that he may do these great and good Things on
our behalf; Namely, that when Death has done its worst and utmost upon us, he
may raise us up again, and give us the Blessing which the Lord has commanded,
even Life for evermore. That he Who has filled the Hungry with good things,
would fill our Hungry Souls with satisfaction. I shall be satisfied when I
awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 15. There is all contained in this Word
Satisfied: what we can think of or desire, or would have; for then it will be
returned to our unspeakable rejoicing: Now it is as we would have it. What Man
is he that desires Life, and loves many Days that he may see good? Psalm. 34.
11. So the question may be a little reversed and altered, What Man is there
that does not desire Life and many Days that he may see Good? For it is evident,
That if any one does not desire many Days, it is because he does not see Good
in them; and all this Life, and all this Good, and all this Satisfaction (if I
should express it by more words, it is all but the same still) is had by
Obedience. Says God to his reasonable Creatures, Obey my Voice and Live.

As for the other Branch of this our Third Use and Application; Namely, That we
should be of an Humble, Lowly and Trembling Spirit: It is a part of and
comprehended under Obedience to those Commands of our God, What does the Lord
require of thee, but to walk humbly with thy God, Micah. 6. 8. Serve the Lord
with fear and rejoice with Trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. Verily, verily, we poor
mortal Creatures can never be in too low and humble a State; neither can we
have too mean an Opinion and Conceit of our selves. For verily every Man at his
best State; is altogether vanity, Selah, Psalm. 39. 5. There is the Ratification
and Confirmation of it. And as every one of us at our best State are altogether
Vanity; even so we should know and be sensible of as much our selves, as to lay
it deeply to Heart. Humble your selves in the sight of God, and he shall lift
you up, James 4. 10. Confess your selves as nothing and altogether unworthy and
unprofitable. Then it was when David was Little in his own sight. That God
exalted him to be King over all Israel; and what was Ten Thousand Times better
he gave unto him his holy Spirit, and the Spirit of God spoke by him, and his
word was in his tongue. But he gives more Grace, Wherefore he says, God
resists the Proud, and gives grace to the Humble. Here if they would be
still Humble therewith, and use it well, he would increase even that More
Grace; for he would give exceeding Gifts unto Men, if they would remain still
Low and Little in their own sight. But if once they are lifted up, then he
hinders, or witholds, or takes away the Qualifications wherein they boast, or
some way defeats and spoils them that no Creature should glory in his Presence.
My self am a sad Example and Warning of this, for I speak this (...) my shame.
I have perceived from within my self, drawings of God upon the account of my
Spiritual Pride and Affectations of gentility and such like. It is my present
Testimony, and I declare it of mine own miserable Experience; for hereby I
shall lose so much of that Full Reward which I might have had for all Eternity,
if I had all along remained Little in mine own sight, and such as a Creature
should be. Take heed and beware of Pride, and of the least giving way unto the
lifting up of Mind: I mean that which no Man sees, but it is known only
between God and thine own Conscience. As before said; No Man can be too Low and
Humble. So here it is, No Man can keep too far off from Pride, so as not to
give way unto the Thoughts and Dictates thereof in the least, it being a deadly
and dangerous Evil.

And then for what belongs to this (for fear and humility commonly go together)
that we should always be in a fearful and trembling State, according to what
Paul says, And I was with you in Weakness, in Fear, and in much Trembling, 1
Cor. 2. 3. It is Observed, That in very Cold weather, how little and contracted
we are within our selves: When we are Cold or Hungry, or in Pain, or in
Affliction, then commonly we least stand upon, and do not care for, nor value
the nicities of Pride. But we are Humble, viz, such as frail and miserable
Creatures should be: Even so for the very same Reason, we should Pass the time
of our sojourning here in fear. For the most Brittle Glass is not more subject
and liable to be broken then we are in all times and places subject to
Destruction and Misery. For what is our Life? It is even as a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. It is but a puff of
Breath in our Nostrils; And what is more fluid and uncertain then that? Suppose
a Man were to tread on a Rope an Hundred Yards high, from which if he should
fall, he would certainly break his Neck: or suppose we were to pass over a wide
River or deep Pit on a Bridge, no broader than just the Soles of our Feet: and
we had nothing at all to hold by, How carefully and fearfully should we walk
thereon? So is our Case and Condition in the Body, and in this Life. For though
the Eye of Sense sees it not, yet the Eye of Faith, and the Eyes of our
Understanding being enlightened do discern and know, That we are as yet (it is
but for a very little while) kept from the dreadful Things of the invisible
World, only by this thin vail of Flesh which we carry about us. We are but for
a very short respite preserved from drowning by this tottering and ruinous Ark
of the Body, which will not preserve us always. Now if a poor Creature was to
swim for his Life, he would not be without fear in the midst of his Swimming,
if he has any sense or apprehension of his Danger; And if he has no sense nor
apprehension of his Danger, then he will be certainly Drowned and Perish. Just
so is the Condition of all People in this World. We are by Nature the Children
of Wrath, as well as others. And as such, Death and Hell followed with him,
Rev. 6. 8. Like a cruel and devouring Dog, does run after and pursue us. So
that the same Word which the Angel spoke unto Lot, does belong to ^ery one of
us, Arise and escape for thy Life. And truly, unless we do arise and escape for
our Life, and unless we are warned (as the Preaching and Ministry of the Word
gives the warning, and unless we take the warning, which the Obedience to the
same word does. As it is written, By Faith Noah being warned of God, of things
not seen as yet, prepared an Ark to the Saving of his House, Heb. 11. 7. But if
it were not for this, we should certainly fall into the Damnation of Hell. And
those People, who like Brutes Beasts go blindfold through the vale of this
Life, without any sense, apprehension or fear of the Damnatino of Hell, they
will more certainly fall (...). The Reason why any are so fearless and
unconcerned as to this (as too many are) is because they see it not. But if
Hell Fire was evidently set f^h before their Eyes; They would be at their wits
ends, and think they could never get far enough off from so terrible a thing.
Even as Lot did arise and escape for his Life to avoid the Flames of Sodom and
Gomorrah; So where they see it by Faith, will reasonable people arise and
escape for their Life, to avoid the Fire and Damnation of Hell; all one as we
now see they do whatever they can to run from an Inundation of Water, of from
the Sword of a devouring Enemy. In this last Instance, when people fly from the
Sword, from the drawn Sword and from the greiousness of War, Are they then
without fear? In no wise, unless they shut their Eyes, or are stupid; and then
such are soonest knocked on the Head. Even so again it is here, The last Enemy
Death dogs us at our heels: And as it is said in the Book of Revelations, Hell
follows with him. And can then people live without fear? And yet for all they
who live most without fear of Hell, will soonest fall into it. I have read of
Damocles sitting at a Table feeding upon Dainties and good Cheer, but directly
over his Head there did hang a drawn Sword by a single and weak Thread. Such an
one as long as he did not see it, might be without fear; but if he did look up
and behold it, then he can be no longer heartily and really merry, No more then
Belshazzar could when he saw the hand writing upon the Wall. In like manner,
The Wrath of God (which in Scripture is called the Sword of the Lord) is
revealed from Heaven against all unrighteousness of Men; and it hangs directly
over all the Children of Disobedience, and all the Sinners and Transgressors
of the Earth, by the single Thread of their uncertain Lives. For this same
Wrath of God will be really executed upon and sensibly felt by them after that
their Breath is gone out of their Nostrils, and their Souls are departed from
their Bodies. How then can any Live in pleasure upon the Earth, and be wanton,
and nourish their hearts as in a day of Slaughter? Unless to complete the
Parallel in this also; Herein they become Like the Beasts that Perish, As to be
quite insensible and ignorant thereof. Alas! Notwithstanding the Brute Beasts
are thus insensible and ignorant in the m^n while, they must at length come to
the shambles, and then they smell Blood, and they would fain not go, but they
are pushed in. Even so those who by multitudes are going on in the way to Death
and Hell, when they come near to the first, then they begin to know and are
sensible of the other also; but then it is too late, And the door was shut,
Mat. 25. 16. Time past cannot be recalled in a Thought; neither will a Desire
at the last gasp be accepted for a godly and well spent Life.

They who in the midst of Life and Health, go on securely without the fear of
God, and of his Threatenings, and in unmindfulness of their Latter End: Even
these will not be without fear when the Time is come that they must Die: But
the Soul will indeed Shiver and Tremble, as She is taking her flight forth into
the invisible World. Or if she should be hardened and rendered insensible
through a foregoing Deadness in Trespasses and Sins; or through Bodily Pain and
Sickness, which take up and employ all her Faculties at that time; yet after
she is actually dissolved from this Tabernacle of Clay, then if she is laden
with Sin and Guilt, will succeed A certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and
fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries, Heb. 10. 27. For in the
World to come there is no hardening against God, or the sense of his Judgments.
Therein the Devils believe and tremble.

All people must and will fear one time or another. But as the Wise Man says,
Happy is he that fears always; who fears most in this World that he may fear
least in the World to come. For from this kind of fear, that is, a fear of God,
and a fear to Sin against him, does proceed a good Conscience; thence is no
fear, that is slavish or has torment. Then comes Perfect love which casts
out fear. But as it is written, When the Sun was going down, a deep sleep fell
upon Abram, and loan horror of great darkness fell upon him. So now the Sun of
our Life is going down; let it be both our Desire and Prayer, and also
Endeavor, that a Filial and Reverential fear, a great Aw and Dread of the
invisible Lord God may fall, and always remain upon our Souls and Spirits. That
for these very few (now they are fewer then ever they were yet) remaining Days
of our Pilgrimage we may Walk in the fear of the Lord, and in the Comfort of
the holy Ghost, against the time comes when we are to fall severally Asleep in
the Lord Jesus; and from thence ever to awake after his likeness.

It has been fulfilled already as to the Inhabitants of this Nation and
Generation. The same is now fulfilling whilst I am Publishing these things; and
it will be yet fulfilled as to their ^uture kind of behavior toward my
Ministry, (For all will not believe, though a Man declare it to them.) whilst I
go in and out amongst them. But especially it will be more evidently, clearly
and illustriously fulfilled after that we are all departed off from this Earth,
(Behold I have told you before) And they, whether they will hear, or whether
they will forbear (Why do not some hear, and others forbear) For they are a
Rebellious House. Notwithstanding now, they call themselves Christians; but as
All are not Israel, who are of Israel, Romans 9. 6. So all are not Christians at
this Day, who hold fast the Name thereof; Yet They shall know that there has
been a Preacher among them, who has Preached the Words of God and of eternal
Life.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.
So Witnesses RICHARD STAFFORD a Scribe instructed in the Law of GOD, and in
the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. As Paul was in the City of Jerusalem brought up at
the Feet of Gamaliel; So I was for the space of Six Years Educated at Magdalen
Hall in Oxford.

FINIS.
LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1700. And are to be Sold unto such who Will
receive the Love of the Truth that they might be saved, 2 These. 2. 10. And who
will Consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance to the Lord of
the whole Earth, Micah. 4. 13. and toward the outward labor and charge of
Making known his Truth. 38. 19.


