The Cause and Cure of Divisions OR, The way and means for all Christ^^^^
(However they are Distinguished (...) Named) to come to Unity.
Demonstrated and Pointed out from the Scriptures of Truth; By RICHARD
STAFFORD, a Scribe Instructed therein.
THE Necessity and Obligation of all that call themselves Christians unto
Unity, may be understood from what is Written, Endeavoring to keep the Unity
of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. But observe here how the Apostle enforces
the Exhortation. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one
Hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith ^^e Baptism, one God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.
There cannot be greater Arguments and Motives then these here mentioned, why
that all Christians should keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace,
because that the Apostle here says, There is one Body and one Spirit. And like
as one outward Sun does enlighten ma^y Millions of Inhabitants of this Earth:
Even so one and the self same Spirit of God and of Christ, does actuate all the
Children and Servants of God in all their several Generations, and the Places
of their Respective Habitations. Even so it is meet and right, and follows of
necessary Consequence, that they should be one in Love, Heart and Affection
(for so much does Unity signify) and also where they live near one another,
they should do as the first Christians did, that is to say, Meet and be all
with one accord in one Place, and all they that believed were together, and
they continued daily with one accord in the Temple, Acts 2.1, 44, 46. For the
Worship of that Great and one God. Hear O Israel, and so hear this all ye that
are in Deed and in Truth his Servants, The Lord is one God, Father of all, who
is above all, and through all, and in you all. So that of the same right
Consequence again, If one God is in you all, then also ye should be one, as ye
serve and worship, and have Relation unto that one God, who is in you all. And
so likewise it would be, if as there is one faith, so they did all keep and
adhere only unto that one Rule of Faith and Worship, and Manners, which God
has given unto us all in the Holy Scriptures: And if they had all the alike
knowledge, and more especially if they were Universally Obedient and
Conformable unto it, as the first Christians were. For that Book of the Lord is
but one Truth also, and in all things consistent and agreeable with it self.

But in the Parable, unto which the Kingdom of Heaven is likened by that Great
Oracle of Truth, the Lord Jesus Christ, The Servants of the Householder came and
said unto him, Sir, Did thou not sow good Seed in thy Field? From whence then
has it tares? He said unto them, an Enemy has done this, Mat. 13.27, 28. Even
so the Good Man of the House (for so he is called, in Mat. 20.11.) The Great
Lord and Creator and Governor of this Great House of the World; He did first
of all and from the beginning make and constitute one Church, and that they
should be one fold, even under one Shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ; And also he
did Sow Good Seed in that Field, as to preserve and continue that Unity which
he had begun and established among them; as so it does abundantly appear, by
that Law and Precepts he has given us. By this shall all Men know that ye are
my Disciples, if ye Love one another. But from whence then ha^^ it tares? He
says unto them, an Enemy has done this. So here it may be ^urmised and asked,
from whence came these Divisions and that Biting and Devouring one another,
amongst those who call themselves Members of the Christian Visible Church (for
the Divisions whereof all one as of Reuben, who herein was unstable as water,
and tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine) There was great thought and
searchings of Heart. Why, An Enemy has done all this; even the Spirit which
works in the Children of Disobedience. They do disobey some part or other of
the written word; and thereupon arise Divisions, and strife and every Evil
work. As the Apostle James asks the Question, From whence come Wars and
Fightings among you? Come they not hence, even of your Lusts that War in your
Members. Even so in like manner it may be asked, from whence come that Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath and Strife, (all which are the works of the flesh
and they exclude from the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.20, 21.) And Divisions which
are now amongst those who call themselves of the outward visible Christian
Church, Come they not hence, even of your Lusts (which signifies an Inordinate
Coveting, or Sinful Transgression) that are in their Souls? Come they not
hence, even from the Spirit of Disobedience, which works in the children
thereof? They do proceed from some kind of Disobedience or other. Like
Diotrephes, who Loved the Pre-eminence, or some sinful and indirect thing or
other do lead them aside.

Or as the wise Man says, Lo, this have I found, that God made Man upright,
but he has sought out many Inventions. Even so he did make Man to Worship
himself; and in the beginning he did ordain and constitute this Worship to be
in Spirit and in Truth; For God is a Spirit and they that Worship him, must
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And in order to this, He has given a Rule
and Direction for his worship in his word, which is very pure and true, or
truth it self. But Alas! Herein Man has found out many Inventions. In their
setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their Post by my Posts, Ezekiel.
43.8. He has intermingled and added many things into the Worship of God, which
God never Commanded, nor came they into his mind, as himself says by his
Prophet Jeremiah. As to which Jesus Christ the Son of God, and consequently he
best knows his mind and will, who is also the High Priest of our Profession,
and much greater in the House or Church of God then Moses; For this Man was
therein as a Servant, but Christ as a Son: This same Jesus Christ says, In
vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men, Mat.
15.9. And a little after he says, which relates also unto the same subject
matter, Every Plant which my heavenly father has not Planted, shall be Rooted
up, ver. 13. So that both God and his Son Jesus Christ do express a reproof and
dislike of these things. What things? That any thing should be offered up unto
him in Worship, or Sacrifice, or as a Type of Worship, Which he Commanded not,
nor entered into his mind, and which he never required at their hands. And that
they should either teach for Doctrines, or use for Worship the Commandments of
Men; as to which, every Plant that my Heavenly Father has not Planted, shall
be Rooted up.

Now God Almighty declaring his will to be on this manner, it follows by the
same true and necessary consequence, that every and each thing in the Worship
of God, which is not of his own Immediate Divine Institution and Appointment,
should be laid aside and not used. And it is upon this Account only and for
this reason only, that they who truly fear God and fear his Name, who are
indeed the Disciples and followers of Jesus Christ, so as to Learn of him and
to do the things which he says, do not care to comply with, nor conform unto
what is the Commandments and Impositions of Men in the Worship of God.

As for mine own Part, although I do just barely go unto the Church of England way
and place of Worship; Like as Jesus Christ our Lord gave us an Ensample herein.
For of him it is Written, That as his Custom was, he went into the Synagogue on
the Sabbath Day, Luke 4.16. And strait way on the Sabbath Day, he went into the
Synagogu^ and Taught, Mark 1.21. For as may be understood, from Acts 13.15.
They were more Noble then those now adays of our National Church. For they
would allow of any one who was able so to do, To speak a Word of Exhortation
unto the People. But these confine it only to such a sort of Clergy, who most
of them are either Ignorant or Unfaithful in the work of the Ministry, and they
are Blind leaders of the Blind. As to which Jesus Christ says, If the Blind
leadth Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch; Such Priests and People shall
fall into the Bottomless Pit: Yet Nevertheless, Jesus Christ, as his custom
was, went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day; Although the worshippers therein,
both Priests and People, had Corrupted their way. So my custom has been from
my youth up and is at this Day, to go unto the Parish Synagogues, or Churches,
as they are commonly called, although there are some things therein used, which
have a show of will Worship, and after the Ordinances and Precept of Men; which
I speak according to my Judgment, and that also Guided by the written Word of
Truth, I could wish were laid aside. For according to the aforementioned
Aphorism of Divine Truth, Every Plant that my Heavenly Father has not Planted,
should be Rooted up. And also the Ministry and Teaching thereof in too many
Places (I do in no wise say that it is so every where) is grown and become
De^d, dull and formal. It continues to be fulfilled at this Day what Jeremiah
spoke of in his time, that the Pastors were become Brutish. The Priests said
not, Where is the Lord? And they that handie the Law knew me not: The Pastors
also Transgressed against me, and walked after things that do not profit, Jer.
2.8. And some of them at this Day and even in this Nation, Do not Profit the
People at all, Jer. 23.32. Or very little, but both Priests and People have
Corrupted their way, having a form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.
So that, although from the Example of Christ and by what he says, Mat. 23.2, 3. I
can just go unto their Assemblies, yet I can in no wise consent unto all their
ways without Violating Faith and a Good Conscience. And because I do fear (...)
Oath (which the Spirit of God, in Eccles. 9.2. Does ^^em to commend and prefer
before him that fears not (...) Oath) and I would also willingly stand fast
in that Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, According ^o that Rule and
Command of the Divinely inspired Apostle, therefore only it is, that I am not
allowed, nor ^^^lited of to Preach in the usual Places of Preaching. But as
Paul did, so I do Preach in an House, Acts 28.30, 31. The Kingdom of God, and
Teach those things which concern Jesus Christ. And because, that on me also is
laid a necessity to Preach the Gospel, and Woe unto me, if I Preach it not, I
had rather therefore utter my Voice in the streets, and cry in the chief Place
of Concourse, and in the opening of the Gates, and in the City utter my Words,
Prove. 1.20, 21. And Teach in the streets, Luke 13.26. According to that Gospel
method (all which shall turn for a Testimony against them) rather then wholly
neglect it. If those of our National Priesthood would impose and require no
more then what Christ and his Apostles did Ordain, Institute, Impose and
Require, Perhaps I might be of their Number; but seeing that they do require
and insist upon such and such things, which the Gospel does not insist on nor
require; As to which they shall give Account before him, that is ready to Judge
the Quick and Dead at his appearing. And as for my Part, I had rather be a
Minister of the sanctuary and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord has
pitched and not Man, Heb. 8.2. Knowing and Believing, that that Tabernacle
which Man has Pitched and not the Lord (by which the Worship of God is
signified; for that was the place wherein God is Worshipped) is false, for it
is opposite unto the other, and will be rejected and disallowed by him.

As it is Written, Then verily the first Covenant had also Ordinances (in the
Margent there it is Ceremonies) Of Divine service and a Worldly sanctuary, Heb.
9.1. So it may be affirmed at this Day, that what is called the National
Church, or the Church of England, has truly Ordinances or Ceremonies of Divine
Service, and a Worldy kind of Religion, modelled after the fashion of and
according to the Course of this World. Now as People may in their reason
conceive, that if one should now Worship God after the manner of the first
Covenant, which had Ordinances, or Ceremonies of Divine Service and a Worldly
sanctuary, Do ye think that the Lord would accept thereof and be well pleased
therewith? In no wise. And so it is to be feared and may be thought as to that
manner of Worship now adays, which has* Ordinances and Ceremonies of Divine
Service and a Worldly sanctuary, that God in these latter days under the
dispensation of his Son, does find fault with that also, for the same reason as
he does the other. For as the Divinely inspired Apostle Argues and Reasons
concerning that, Which was a Figure for the Time then present, in which were
offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make them that did the
service perfect as pertaining to the Conscience. Which stood only in Meats and
Drinks, and Diverse washings, and Carnal Ordinances (In the Margent there again,
it is Rites or Ceremonies) Imposed on them until the Time of Reformation, Heb.
9.9, 10. Now to use and retain the figure still, when the thing figured is
come, this must be Nonsense and Absurdity, and God is not pleased with, nor yet
does accept of the Sacrifice of Fools. And so if there is any thing in such a
way of Worship, which cannot make him that does the service, or uses that kind
of worship perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, it is evident that here
People should not always rest therein, but go further and press still after the
mark of the high Calling, after those things which can, or at least in more
measure, make them that do the Service, or use the Worship Perfect, as
pertaining unto the Conscience. And as the Jewish Worship did stand only in
Meats and Drinks, and Diverse Washings, and Carnal Ordinances Imposed on them
until the time of Reformation: So it may be observed, that the National Worship
does somewhat consist in Meats; for it does prescribe its Meat days and its
Fish days; and in Diverse Bowings and Gestures, and such and such kind of Rites
and Ceremonies, are to be observed and imposed upon the People by the Precept
of Men, Isa. 29.13. Not here thoroughly considering and attending unto the last
Words. Which should indeed cut off and alrogate them all, Until the time of
Reformation, which now being fully come under the Gospel, the Dispensation of
the Son of God, Jesus Christ being the High Priest of our Profession, and who
is Greater in the House of God then Moses was, for he was as a Servant, but
this Man as a Son; It does, or should follow of Consequence, that if we would
(to which we are Commanded) stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free. In order to that, we should admit or suffer nothing to be imposed
on us after the way of Carnal Ordinances, or as Ordinances of Divine service,
or by way of Rites and Ceremonies; By the Ordinances of Men, unless Christ has
also ordained the same in his Gospel. For that also serves unto the Example and
Shadow of Heavenly things. As Moses was Admonished of God, when he was about to
make the Tabernacle; for see (says he) that thou make all things according to
the Pattern showed to thee in the Mount, Heb. 8.5. But as Jesus Christ himself
says, But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship
the Father in Spirit and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to Worship him.
God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, John 4.23, 24. So now the fullness of time is come and under this
Dispensation of his Son, all things in, or pertaining to the Worship of God and
of Jesus Christ, ought to be done according to the Pattern showed to us in his
Gospel. I say and repeat it again, that People may more attend unto and observe
the same, That in these Days, every thing in the Worship of God and of his Son
Jesus Christ, ought to be made and done according to the Pattern showed to us
in the Gospel. This I do teach and affirm constantly.

So that, as aforenoted, such and such things were imposed on People, until the
Time of Reformation. But that being now fully come, It follows from hence, that
there should be yet a further Reformation even in our reformed Churches, that
is, to bring them up or back again unto a Greater Degree of Spirituality and
Truth; And to do all things according to the Pattern showed to us in the
Gospel. For then only Primitive times would return (When they were all with one
accord in one Place, and all that believed were together) When things shall be
once again done according to the Primitive Rule and Manner. When as it is
Written, A great Number of the Priests were Obedient unto the Faith. So again
some Good thing might be then expected for the Church of God, and for the Unity
thereof. If the Priests or Clergy of this Nation were so Universally Obedient
unto the faith of Jesus Christ, as to prefer the Truth of his Worship before
their own temporal Livelihood, Corrupt Interest, or filthy Lucre, 1 Pet. 5.2.
So that there might be the same mind in them also which was in the Apostle
Paul; As to count all things but Loss or Dung, for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord. And as he says, For I could wish my self
were accursed from Christ for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the flesh.
So they could be contented to be divested of all things for the Glory of God,
and for the Truth of his Worship, then indeed, but not until then some good
thing might be expected for the Church of God and for the Unity thereof.

But as long as Corrupt Interest has the prevailing and upper hand, things
will still continue as they are. For this has been the subtlety of Satan the
old Serpent, who herein, was more subtle then any Beast of the Field. To get
his threshold, or a threshold of Man's making and devising, To be set by Gods
thresholds, which his Prophet does reprove and find fault with, in Ezekiel. 43.8.
And their Post by my Posts; and then Satan the Enemy gets it to be confirmed
and established by Annexing such a National Maintenance and Livelihood, and
such and such Preferments unto it. For those outward things, as the Kingdoms
and Power and Glory of this World (under which Riches and Money, the greatest
Idol thereof is also included) Are delivered unto him; so that to whomsoever he
will, he gives it, according to what is Written, Luke 4.6.

Thus and hereby it comes to pass, that those great Assertors and Vindicators
of Rites and Ceremonies, and of those Ordinances and Institutions of Men, who
are Ministers of the Worldly sanctuary, which Man has pitched and not the
Lord, who have set their threshold by Gods thresholds, and their Post by his
Posts, do therefore contend with might and main for their own Traditions and
Impositions, and their own Interminglings with the Worship of God, whereby they
have Corrupted it from its Simplicity and Purity, as it was in Christ Jesus, in
the first times. Nevertheless they will in no wise consent, nor yet admit of
it, that they should be laid aside, nor yet that those Plants which our
Heavenly father has not Planted, should be Rooted up. Although it be according to
his express Will and Declaration, that they should be laid aside; yet
nevertheless they do and will retain them, Any Law or Ordinance of God to the
contrary Notwithstanding, whereby it is evident, that they do Provoke the Lord
to Jealousy and Indignation; So that he will not accept of their Worship.

But yet for all, they do thus and thus, for the same and alike reason, which
we read of, in Acts 19. And the same time there arose no small stir about that
way. For a certain Man Named Demetrius, a Silversmith, which made Silver
shrines for Dian^, brought no small Gain unto the Crafts-men whom he called
together with the Workmen of the like O^^^pation; and said, Sirs, ye know that
by this Craft, we have our wealth. Moreover ye see and hear that not alone at
Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned
away much People, saying, that they be no Gods which are made with hands. So
that not only this our Craft is in danger to be set at naught; but also that
the Temple of the Great Goddess Diana; should be despised, and her Magnificence
should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the World Worshippeth. So that this was
in a matter of Worship also. But further, since that the Nations have been
brought over from the Worship of Dumb Idols unto the true living and only God,
the Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all things therein; yet still there
has been all along no small stir about the way and manner of the worship of
this true God. The main Controversy, Question and Doubt therein has been
chiefly as to this Point, whither God is to be served and worshipped according
to the Pattern showed to us in the Gospel, as Moses was Admonished of God, for
says he see that thou do all things according to the Partern showed to thee in
the Mount. And now in these last days under the Dispensation of the Son of God,
All the Rudiments of the World, with all the Jewish Ordinances and Observances
(Which all are to Perish with the using) the Commandments and Doctrines of Men,
Col. 2.22. They having been all abolished and done away, ever since that Jesus
Christ, the High Priest of our Profession said that it was finished on the
Cross; which is so as to all that dispensation and way of Worship. But now the
hour being come, wherein People are not to Worship at Jerusalem, nor yet at
yonder Mountain. But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers
shall worship the father in Spirit and in Truth, for the father seeks such to
worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth, John 4.23, 24. From this place again, it is evident and
manifest, that all things now in the Worship of God and of his Son Jesus
Christ, ought to be done according to the Pattern showed to us in the Gospel.
For that is Spiritual and True, yea, Spirit and Truth it self.

So that the stir which has been all along in the Christian Churches about the
way and manner of the worship of God, has been as to this Question, whither
God ought only to be worshipped according to the Pattern showed to us in the
Gospel; or whither he is to be worshipped by the mere Ordinances and Inventions
of Men; or whither they also should be brought in and intermingled therewith?
As to which, they that contend earnestly for the faith (wherein also is the
worship of God included) which was once delivered unto the Saints, do also
contend earnestly that God ought to be worshipped only the first way; and they
are for having every Plant in his worship which our Heavenly father has not
Planted, to be Rooted up. But as for the others again, who have sought and
found out many Inventions in the worship of God after the Commandments and
Doctrines of Men, they are for keeping unto them still, thinking within
themselves and alleging to one another, as Demetrius did to his fellow
Crafts-men, Ye know that by this Craft, we have our wealth. And so it is, By
these Liturgies, Rites, Ceremonies, Traditions and Institutions of our own, we
have our Church Preferments and Livelihood; And if we should once yield or
consent unto them, who go about to persuade and turn away the People, That as
Paul said, they be no Gods which are made with hands: So that is not the
worship of the true God, which is the Circumcision made with hands. That is not
the worship of the true God (for he is not pleased therewith, nor will accept
of it) which is made and devised by Man. However, this Foundation and Truth
stands firm, it being an Eternal Maxim fixed in the Heavens; Notwithstanding
Men through Corrupt Interest would gainsay, or distinguish against it. But if
this truth were once Universally received into the minds of Men, as indeed it
ought to be, so as for them to obey it and do accordingly, what would be the
Consequence of all? It follows, So that not only this our Craft is in danger to
be set at naught; We should not only be in danger to lose our Tithes and Church
Revenues, and our Cathedral service would be despised, and the Magnificence and
outward show and Pomp of our worship would be destroyed. Which the Rich and
Chief of the People are most of all for. Such being the Vanity of their minds,
as to falsely think that God is altogether such an one as themselves, Psalm.
50.21. So that because they like nothing but what is costly, and makes a Goodly
outward show, thereupon they wrongly imagine as if God was not pleased with any
worship, but what did make an outward show. As to which it is thus Written, The
Kings Daughter (whereby Mystically and Spiritually is signified the Church of
God) is all Glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. The Kingdom of God comes not with
Observation (in the Margent there it is with outward show) Neither shall they
say, Lo here, or Lo there; for behold the Kingdom of God is within you, Luke
17.21. The true worship of God does not stand, nor consist in Diverse washings
or sprinklings, or in Carnal Ordinances imposed on the worshippers until the
Time of Reformation (which words do imply that they should be utterly laid
aside now the Time of Reformation is fully come under the Gospel) nor yet does
the true worship of God stand or consist so much in Diverse Bowings and
Cringings, or Gestures, but it is an inward thing; for what is Spiritual or in
Spirit, is inward. But they being vainly puffed up in their fleshy mind, Colos.
2.18. Would have Gospel worship, which is altogether an Inward and Spiritual
thing, to be so modelled and framed, as to make a fair show in the flesh; and
they have got their Worldly Interest and Livelihood to be interwoven and mixed
therewith.

This is the very reason why the Error and Corruption of the Papacy has been
and continued so long, even unto this Day, and the end thereof is not as yet.
The Priests and Clergy Men thereof, who may be styled the Corrupters of all,
what was before true and undefiled Religion, have got into their hands and
possessions such and such Revenues and Riches and Tithes, and yearly Estate,
called St. Peter's Patrimony, and the Patrimony of the Church; and they well
knowing the convenience thereof, and they being in no wise willing to part with
them, this makes them to stickle might and main for their own Errors and
Corruptions. And these Leaders of the People cause them to err, as so many
Thousands blindly and miserably do in what is called a great Part of the
Christian World. The like Error and Corruption, although it be in a much less
degree and measure, remains as yet even in the reformed Church of England. For
if it were once modelled according to the Pure Word of God, or if all things
therein were done according to the Pattern showed to us in the Gospel; It
should be yet further Reformed even from those Rites and Ceremonies, and Carnal
Ordinances and Impositions of Men. But since that there is such a Maintenance
and Livelihood set out by a National Law to the Clergymen thereof, for using
and keeping those Rites and Ceremonies, and Carnal Ordinances, and Humane
Impositions. As they have been kept and retained hitherto for this reason, so
in all Likelihood and Probability they will be kept and retained yet longer,
any Law or Ordinance of God to the contrary Notwithstanding. Although herein also
our first Reformers from out of Popery, seemed to have used the like method as
the Apostles and first Christians did in reforming from Judaism. For as they
did retain for some time a few Jewish Ceremonies, that they might hereby the
sooner gain and bring over the Jews, as Paul for this fame reason did
Circumcise Timothy: All which Jewish Ceremonies, the Christian Church did by
degrees and at length utterly lay aside, when there was no Hopes or Likelihood
further, to Convert the Jews unto the says. So our first Reformers from
Popery, did retain some Popish Ceremonies and a great Part of the Liturgy which
was the same in the Mass Book; but such as had nothing of the Leaven or Error
of Popery therein. As the Cross in Baptism, wearing the Surplice, Bowing
toward the Altar and such like; If hereby they might sooner bring over the
Papists unto their Communion, and accordingly many were, and almost all of them
did come to their Parish Church, until they were forbid to do so, by a Bell of
the Pope. But since that long process of time, it being above an Hundred and
Fifty years since the Reformation, these is no great Likelihood further of
bringing them over by this way and kind of Condescension; It is therefore now
high time, if they would do as the Apostles and Primitive Church did, whilst it
was Pure and Uncorrupted, so that now they should lay aside even those Popish
Rites and Ceremonies, and Carnal Ordinances, and whatever is merely an
Invention, Doctrine, or Commandment of Men, that all things may be done exactly
according to the Pattern showed unto us in the Gospel. This I do again teach
and affirm constantly.

And indeed it is written, For the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every
one that is Proud and Lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall
be brought low: And the Idols he shall utterly Abolish, Isa. 2.12, 18. Now
whatsoever is merely of Man's making and devising in the Worship of God, that is
an Idol. So that by true and necessary consequence, whatever is merely and only
of Man's making and devising in the Worship of God, that same should, yea, at
length it shall be utterly Abolished and done away.

And as it is elsewhere written, Many also of them which used curious Arts,
brought their Books together and burned them before all Men, and they counted
the Price of them and found it fifty thousand Pieces of Silver: So mightily
grew the Word of God and Prevailed, Acts 19.19, 20. So the time will come that
many of those which used humane Inventions in the Worship of God, although they
had their outward Worldly, Livelihood and Preferments by them, will cast them
away to the Moles and the Bats (which being blind Creatures, so these were fit
only for Blind and Ignorant Worshippers) and they will be apt to burn the
Books, in which those Inventions of Men were, that they should not be produced
and brought forth as a Witness and Evidence against them in the day of the
Lords Judgment and Indignation, For fear of the Lord and for the Glory of His
Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the Earth, Isa. 2.21. And so they
would do now, if the Word of God did grow mightily and prevail in their Hearts
more then the God of this World, or the Spirit which rules in the Children of
Disobedience. For although those who used Curious Arts did get their outward
Livelihood by them, like as Astrologers and Stage Players do at this day; Yet
when they once come to wisely and thoroughly consider, Shall I only to get a
little outward Worldly Livelihood for a short time, or for a moment, (for what
is our Life but a Vapor which passes away) thereby lose that Blessing, which
the Lord our Creator has Commanded for such as are his Obedient Children, who
keep and do according to his Laws, even Life for evermore? Even so the Priests
of the Worldly sanctuary, and of that Tabernacle which Man has Pitched and not
the Lord, I mean all those aforenamed, might thus reason and consider thoroughly
within themselves, Shall I, and so another may say, Shall I, although I have my
outward Livelihood and Preferment by such a way of Worship, which is made up of
the Inventions or Intermixtures of Men, thereby provoke the Lord to Jealousy
and Indignation, so that he will not accept of my Worship; and then it will not
become unto me a Worship to the saving of my Soul, so that in short, I shall
lose Life Eternal, only to get a short Temporal Livelihood in this World. God
forbid, far be it from me, this wisdom can never be justified of her Children,
for indeed it is the greatest Folly. Accordingly to what Christ Jesus, the
wisdom of the Father, herein spoke, What shall it profit a Man if he should
Gain the whole World and lose his Soul? And what shall he give in exchange for
his Soul? And thereupon each one should smite upon his thigh, and frame a right
conclusion that I would not commit Sin nor Practice Error, to get the greatest
Bishopric or Archbishopric, or even so much Revenues as the Pope himself
has. For even he has not the Thousandth Part of the Revenues of the whole
Earth; and if one had that, yet it could not be a sufficient Compensation for
the loss of our Soul. And then by consequence, I for my Part, and so another
should say, till the same mind was in them, as was in Luther and the other
Godly Reformers, I will not consent with, nor yet bear a Part in that false and
erroneous Worship, although any Ecclesiastical Dignity or Preferment might be
bestowed on me for the same. If our Priests also were so Obedient to the faith,
and zealous for the Truth of his Worship, so that this mind were once in the
Bishops and Clergy of the Romish, or of our National Church (which is much
better then that, although she is not clean come out from all the Dregs and
Defilements of Popery) then indeed some good thing might be expected for the
Church of God, and for the Unity thereof.

May it not at this day be truly said unto the Church of England, what John was
Commanded, Unto the Church of Thyatira write, these things says the Son of
God, who has his Eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are like fine
Brass, I know thy Works and Charity, and Service and Faith, and thy Patience
and thy Works, and the last to be more then the first. Notwithstanding, I have
a few things against thee, Rev. 2.18, 19, 20. Notwithstanding the Church of
England has done several things well, and she has many things according to
the Pattern of the Gospel, and of the Pure and Primitive Church; Yet
nevertheless the Spirit of God has a few things against her, because she has
not come so clean out of Sodom (to the Abominations, whereof the Roman Church
may be compared, for she has committed Spiritual Whordom and Fornication, and
Uncleanness in departing away from the Laws and Commandments of God) so as not
to leave an hoof behind. For there should not be in her the least rellick, or
remainder of Popery, or what is merely the Popes, nor yet any other Man's
Institutions. But she should have hearkened fully and thoroughly unto the Call
and Requiring of God, so as to have done accordingly. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing
and I will receive you. 2 Cor. 6.17. For even the very Monuments of Idolatry,
should be taken away and defaced. The Altars and Groves were to be burnt cut
down^^^ destroyed. And we are Commanded not to mention other ^ods, nor yet to
use their Names within our Lips. And we are to abstain from all appearance of
Evil, and we keep our selves as far as ever we can from the Accursed thing, and
so it should be of every thing that displeases the Lord. So likewise every
thing should be laid aside in his Worship, which is a great thing relating to
that God with whom we have to do, which he has not Commanded, nor Required,
nor entered into his (...)

Notwithst^^^^^^ these things ought to be so, yet still by reason of custom and
continuance, and when people have been long used unto a thing, they will not be
persuaded off from it, although it be the express Commandment of God to turn away
from these Idols and Inventions of their own (which also they make an Idol of
in cleaving unto them in opposition to his Commands) and chiefly, because by
this Craft and Usage they get their Living; Therefore People will still go on
in their own ways, and their Soul delights in their Abominations, Isa. 66.3.
And so they will keep unto their Inventions Imposed on us, by the Precept of
Men, Any Law or Ordinance of God to the contrary Notwithstanding; as here it
has been alleged to the contrary from the Scriptures of Truth, which contain
the Declaration and Mind of the most high God, who says by his Son Jesus
Christ, In vain (...) they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of (...), Mat. 15.9. As to which, again it may be truly reasoned and inferred,
that such People, who in vain do Worship God, Let not those People think, that
they shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Whether People will comply therewith or not, Nevertheless the Foundation of
God stands sure, and his Truth endures to all Generations firm and
unchangeable; Notwithstanding the People of this World are Contentious and do
not obey the Truth, through the Temptation of Corrupt Interest, and filthy
Lucre, yet still and all along, the only way and means, which can be understood
from the Scriptures (which were given by Inspiration of God, and to make us
wise unto salvation) for all Christians however they are Named or
Distinguished) to come unto Unity, that they may with one Heart and Mind
Glorify God even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is to have all things in
his worship done according to the Pa^tern showed to us in the Gospel, and that
every Plant which our Heavenly Father has not Planted be Rooted up; And that
all the Doctrines and Commandments, and Inventions of Men be utterly abolished
and laid as^^e, and not used at all, That the Lord alone may be Exalted in that
D^^.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. 1699.


