Hear this Word, O ye Princes, ye Priests and People of England; Especially
such of ye as Assemble at Westminster, at this your Session begun, December ^.
School.
THen Saul said unto his Servants that stood about him, Hear, now, ye
Benjamites, Will the Son of Jesse give every one of you Fields and Vineyards,
and make you all Captains of Thousands and Captains of Hundreds? 1 Samuel 22. 7.
From hence may be understood the Reason of the Disobedience and Rebellion of
the People of England unto those sundry Commandments of the Most High God,
which from the Scriptures, I have laid before them: Namely, Because the
Son-in-Law of does give them Money, or Lands, or Places of Profit, and to those
of the Priesthood, Bishoprics or Preferments, for the Sake and Love of which,
they cast the Law of God behind their backs. Neh. 9. 26. and they do not give
due heed and obedience unto the same. But let them consider further what the
great Oracle of Truth, the Lover and Savior of our Souls, says, What shall it
profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Matthew. 8.
36. or as it is in another Evangelist, Lose himself, or be a castaway? Luke 9.
27. Your Prince indeed (a Raiser of Taxes, and obtained the kingdom by
flatteries, and shall prosper until the indignation be accomplished, Dan. 11.
20, 21. 36.) has gained one kingdom of the Earth, and ye have gained less
Riches; But it will not profit ye, for the gain of them to lose your Souls,
your Selves, and be Cast-aways; and ye cannot give them in exchange for your
Souls: They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude
of their riches; None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to
God a ransom for him: For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it
cease ^or ever, Psalm. 49. 6, 7, 8. Again it is written, Riches profit not in
the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death, Prove. 11. 4. And
again it is written, Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the Lord; they shall not satisfy their souls
nor fill their bowels, because it is the stumbling block of their iniquity,
Ezekiel. 7. 19. That is like as the goodly Babylonish Garment and two hundred
shekels of silver and a wedge of gold, tempted Achan to commit the accursed
thing: So the silver and gold was the occasion or temptation of their falling
into such an Iniquity; and so it was the stumbling block of their Iniquity. But
it is evidently seen, for the like has been already fulfilled in some of your
Brethren and Companions of Iniquity, that in a few days, weeks, months, and
years more, An end is come, the end is come, behold it is come; The morning is
come upon thee, O thou that dwell in the land: The time is come, the day of
trouble is near, and not the sounding again of the mountains: For the Trade of
Sinning on still and working Iniquity will not last always: And then it will
not profit ye, for all the convenience, and pleasure, and respect, attending
upon your Riches, to have your Souls sent unto Hell, although your Bodies rode
enshrined in Coaches whilst here on Earth. Like Sins will have like Ends.
Consider the Example of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness; and of
Judas, who Betrayed his Master, and purchased a field with the reward of
Iniquity. It would be better for them now, if they had never loved the Wages of
Unrighteousness, nor yet took the Reward of Iniquity; even so, some of ye have
Betrayed your King and Master, and most of ye do allow the Deeds of them who
did so, and ye are Partakers with them in the Iniquity (which signifies an
unequal thing) done toward him: Because ye have those Places and Opportunities
of Gain, Profit, and Reward, under this Constitution, which perhaps ye would
not have had under the former Rightful Government. For your Gains-sake, ye will
not know, but refuse, to do do Right, ye Heads of the House of England, and ye
will not Obey the Commandments of the Lord, which enjoin People to do Right.
Every Disobedience and Transgression receives a just recompense of Reward. Ye
will find that it was a mistaken Interest to lose your Souls, even the
temptation and bait of Satan, for him to catch and destroy them. Ye have not
that faith which overcomes the world in its Terrors, Temptations, and
Allurements. But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and
perdition; for the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have erred from the faith: For the true Christian Faith
does not allow of Rebellion against, and the Deposing and Murder of Kings; and
for any to forswear themselves in not keeping unto that Oath of God, Eccles. 8.
2. they had taken to the Governors sens by him. But thou, O man of God, flee
these things, and follow after righteousness. They afore-spoken off are not
come up to that state of Mind as to think so, and make it their choice
accordingly. A little that a righteous man has is better then the riches of
many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16. Better is a little with righteousness, than great
revenues without right, Prove. 16. 8. for it will tend more to ones future,
which is the only real and enduring Happiness. He that truly fears God, will
not transgress the least Precept for the greatest Profit: But the Hypocrite
(though he seems to be Religious, for he does retain the outward Worship of God,
and perhaps is zealous in some things, and pretends to be Righteous) is for
getting and advancing himself in the World, whither the means be Sinful or not
is no hindrance unto him. But what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he has
gained, when God takes away his Soul? What good will they do him? Or, What
stead and avail will they stand him in, when his Soul is taken away utterly
from things for the sake of which he transgressed against the Lord? Such is the
Case of those People I here write unto.

As a Scribe instructed in the Law of God, I have for these Nine years
successively testified unto ye from out of his Law and Commandment, and with
the words of thy righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm. 71. 16. That ye have
committed a Sin in Deposing And that therein also, contrary unto his
Commandment, ye have Forsworn your selves, and not performed unto the Lord your
Oaths, but ye have despised the Oath in breaking the Covenant, when lo ye had
given your hand, Ezekiel. 17. 11. When ye did perform Fealty and swear Allegiance
and Subjection unto him, as then your Governor sent by God, 1 Pet. 2. 14, which
the Divinely Inspired Apostle does say even of Heathen Rulers, who are worse
than Papists. But ye have Rebelled against him, and cast off all manner of
Allegiance and Subjection unto him. This is plain and direct Forswearing your
selves, and not performing unto the Lord your Oaths, when ye had sworn
Allegiance and Subjection to such a King and Ruler, afterward to cast off
Allegiance and Subjection unto that King and Ruler, as now ye have done. So
that ye have committed a Sin, and done wrong, and sworn falsely herein. And I do
again hereby testify unto, and exhort ye, who are thus in the way of
transgressing the Word and Commandment of God, and in Rebellion against him,
That ye come to Repentance in all this. If ye will not, I take Record this day,
That as Jeremiah witnessed in his time unto the Inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem, From the thirteenth year ^f Josiah the son of Amos, king of Judah,
even unto this day, which is the three and twentieth year, (which was ten years
together) the word of the Lord has came unto me, and I have spoken unto you,
rising early and speaking, but ye have not hearkened, Jer. 25. 3. So for these
nine years last past, I have only from the Law and Commandment of God, and with
the Words of his Righteousness, wrote and testified unto ye, That herein ye
have committed a Sin and Transgression, and as yet ye will not not come to
Repentance. Ye have done a wrong therein, and to this day ye will not make full
Restitution. But ye do still Consent with the Counsel and Deed of them, Who rob
Father and Mother, and say it is no Transgression. Which Scripture expression
has been fulfilled in these days; For a certain Woman, (who is since dead)
together with her Husband now living, did violently dispossess and take away
(which is Robbery) her own Fathers Kingdom and Inheritance, and by putting him
in Fear, caused him to seek his Bread in a Foreign Country. And they, together
with corrupt Priests, and a mercenary People, say, It is no Transgresson. But
Sin is the Transgression of the Law, and it is a plain and direct Transgression
of that Law of God, which says, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, nor
any thing that (...) his. Thou shall not Steal, which forbids both secretly and
also openly taking it from him. And so in the instance here mentioned, ye have
Forsworn your selves, and not performed unto the Lord your Oaths in despising
and falsifying the Oath of the Lord; and as to that also ye will not come to
Repentance, so as to return again to your Allegiance and Subjection, unto that
same Person whom ye had formerly sworn unto. As the Apostle says, Nay, I had
not known Sin but by the Law; for I had not known Lust except the Law had said,
Thou shall not Covet. So here, That all this is Sin, and Wrong, and
Unrighteousness, and Swearing falsely, or Forswearing, it may be known and
demonstrated by the Law of God, which says, Thou shall not Covet. Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but perform unto the Lord thine Oath, Matt. 5. 33.

Notwithstanding these things are so, as I here write, (not out of mine own
head, but from the Statute Book of the Lord God) yet like those who said unto
Jeremiah, Chap. 44. 15, 16, 17. As for the word thou have spoken unto us in the
name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee, but we will certainly do
whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth, to burn Incense unto the Queen of
Heaven, and to pour out Drink Offerings unto her, as we have done we and our
Fathers, our Kings and our Princes in the cities of Judah, and in the streets
of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no
evil. But since we have left off to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to
pour out Drink Offerings unto her, we have been consumed by the Sword and by
the Famine. The Reason is alike of the Rebellion and Disobedience of those I
write unto. For as then they judged by temporal Events, because they thought it
went better with them at that present time by their Disobedience and Refusal.
So the Princes and Priests and People of this Land are ready to say, (it is
known to God all one as if they did speak out so plainly, but yet do ye dare or
presume to say, We will not obey the Word and Commandment of God. However, they
will not do it in this thing) or at least so is the thought and purpose of
their Hearts.

As for what things thou have alleged unto us in the Name of the Lord, from
out of his Law and Commandment, concerning the Sin thou say we have
committed, and the Oath we have violated, we will not hearken unto thee, so as
to come to Repentance and to make full Restitution, for now we are well and see
no evil. Thou have heretofore several times alleged unto us, that Declaration
of God, I will a swift witness against false swearers, and against them that
turn aside the stranger from his right, Mal. 3. 7. And so it may be truly
reasoned and applied as to those who turn aside a Papist from his Right. But,
How is this fulfilled? For does it as yet appear, that God is a swift witness
against false Swearers and against them that turn aside the Stranger (or
Papist) from his Right? For it is evidently seen, that the false Swearers and
Oppressors and Spoilers and Robbers of this kind, The tabernacles of robbers
prospers, Job 12. 6. For these ten years together, and it may be for thirty or
forty years more, are well and see no evil. They are altogether as, yea, more
prosperous, in outward Estate, than if they had not been false Swearers at all,
or as if they had not turned aside the Stranger (or Papist) from his Right. But
beloved, Be not ignorant of this thing, That one day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The Lord is not slack
concerning his Promise, (nor yet is he slack to execute his threatenings) as
some men count slackness; but is long-suffering to us ward, not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. I pray to God, that
this his gracious end (for which he waits) may be answered in ye. For the Word
of the Lord is unto ye Line upon Line, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept,
Precept upon Precept, here a little and there a little, to the intent that ye
who are in Error may return into the way of Righteousness. Be admonished and
exhorted so to do. O be not willingly ignorant; as if such a thing was no Sin
nor Transgression, or as if God would not be a swift witness against it,
because he does not presently strike the Sinner dead in his Sin: Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of
the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil. May not any Sinner hence
wrongly imagine, that God will not be a swift witness against his Sin, because
he does for some time suffer the Sinner to live and continue therein. God may
seem ^low, but yet he will be sure to fulfill his Word in punishing the world
for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity. A thousand years with him
are but as one day. Though on this Earth he suffers it during all the course
thereof, yet when Time shall be no longer it will be then seen, that God indeed
will be a swift witness against all manner of Sin and Transgression.

Ay, But here ye may be apt to imagine, We are not Sinners and Transgressors,
for we make Laws to suppress Vice, Immorality and Profaneness.

Which at first may seem Goodly and Commendable to as many as have not known
the depths of Satan: But as the wi^e Man says, That which has been, is now,
and there is no new thing under the Sun. So in the very last foregoing
Generation, A certain man by name Oliver Cromwell, who like unto Ahab, did both
kill and also take possession, 1 King. 21. 19. And like the Husbandmen, Who did
kill the heir that the inheritance might be theirs, Mark 12. 7, 9. Even so he
did cause the King to be Murdered, and then he took Possession of his House,
Estate, and Government. And then, As we have heard with our Ears, and our
Fathers have told us, This very same Oliver Cromwell, did set up for
Reformation of Manners; as by punishing Adultery with Death, suppressing
Drunkenness, Vain Cursing and Swearing, (although themselves had committed
advised deliberate Perjuries) strict Observation of the Lord's Day, and such
like. The Reasons which put him upon so doing, seem to be either an Act of
close and deep Hypocrisy; ( That the Hypocrite reign not least the people be
ensnared, Job 34. 30.) Thus to ingratiate himself with Godly and well-meaning
People, and thereby to hide and cover before them his other Transgression. (
Shall not God search this out? for he knows the secrets of the heart.) Or
else, fearing the Wrath and Punishment of God due to himself for the same, he
did vainly hope, and wrongly imagine, to make Atonement and Expiation, or
Commutation, for his own great Sin, by doing a kind of seeming good this way. O
the depths of Satan! O the exceeding subtlety of the Old Serpent, in deceiving
Sinners and Transgressors into Perdition and Condemnation. So it is at this
day, Our Princes are Rebellious and Companions of Thieves, every one loves
Gifts and follows after Rewards, Isaiah 1. 23. In the nature of things it is
equally and all one (yea rather worse) Theft and Robbery to take away either by
force or fraud, openly or privately, a great sum of Money as a small one: and
so it is all one Theft and Robbery to take a great House and Estate, as it is
to take a little one; and so it is as to a Kingdom, all one as to a Less
Matter. The Gospel Command is, That no man go beyond and defraud his brrther in
any matter, 1 These. 4. 6. God himself reproves and finds fault, When thou
saw a thief then thou consentedst with him; these things have thou done, and
I kept silent, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self,
Psalm. 50. 18, 21. As if, because God kept silence at the time, therefore it was
God's doings, and his Cause, and he did approve of and was well pleased
therewith; which is the Blasphemy of these days, and of the other late times of
Iniquity. Now if in this case, Murderers mentioned, Isaiah 1. 21. Rebels,
Thieves, and Robbers, should set up for Reformers, all this and the like is not
pleasing in the sight of God. Nor yet will thus doing avail the Sinners and
Transgressors to turn away the Wrath and future Punishment of God from
themselves; for the plain and express Declaration of Almighty God touching this
matter, is, The soul that sins it shall die. The righteousness of the
righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
him. But when the righteous turns away from his righteousness and commiteed
iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that the wicked man does,
shall he live? All his righteousness (which takes in his other Righteousness
and seeming Goodness) shall not be mentioned in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, (there it is pointed out
exactly) in them shall he die, Ezekiel. 18. 20, 24. Nor yet is thus doing pleasing
and acceptable unto our Savior Jesus Christ, for he says; With what measure
you mete it shall be measured to ye again. And why beholdest thou the mote that
is in thy brothers eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye:
Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye,
and behold a beam is in thine own eye. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam
out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly to east out the mote out
of thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7. 2, 3, 4, 5. Ye Hypocrites, first, ye your
selves, cease to do evil; Learn to do well, seek judgment: Relieve (in the
Margent it is Righten, which signifies to set right again) the oppressed,
Isaiah 1. 16, 17. Leave off Injustice, Wrong, Robbery, bearing False Witness,
Covetousness, and know to do right, says the Lord, who store up violence and
robbery in your palaces, Amos 3. 10. One whereof is consumed by Fire, Job 15.
34. And turn from your sin, and do that which is lawful and right. Let the
wicked restore the pledge, and give again that he has robbed, Ezekiel. 33. 14,
15. And where ye have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, there
restore to him fourfold. That is, Make full Restitution, if ye expect that
Salvation should come to your Houses and Souls. After ye have done all this, ye
will be more meet to discourage Vice, Immorality and Profaneness: God is alike
dishonored by those breaches of his law, Romans 2. 23. as by these: And ye would
be alike zealous against them as against the others, but that herein ye are the
Sinners and Offenders your selves. Be not deceived, God is not mocked: He will
not be so trifled withal nor deluded, so as to excuse your Sin and
Transgression, (which in an hard impenitent heart ye continue in, and thus
treasure up to your selves wrath against the day of wrath.) by your pretending
to stop or prevent Sins of another kind in other People. Except ye Repent and
turn from your own Iniquities, (and have all Gods judgments before ye, and keep
your selves from your iniquities, Psalm. 18. 22. 23.) ye will find that ye
deceive your selves into everlasting Destruction and Condemnation.

Your Prince or Chief one, is for seeking to an Arm of Flesh, and does not
think himself safe without a Standing Army, (for sinners and hypocrites are
afraid and fearful, Isaiah 33. 14.) as truly they have reason for it, all their
hope being in this Life: But if he had a thousand thousand men for his Guard,
they cannot preserve or defend him from that wrath of God which is revealed
from heaven against all unrighteousness of men; for all that do unrighteously
are an abomination unto the Lord, Deu. 25. 16. and which will be executed upon
the guilty, ( He will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7.) after that
this life shall be ended; no more then they can now preserve his Breath from
going forth when the appointed time is come. All his Guards and Soldiers are
but dying men themselves, whose Breath is in their Nostrils; and of such it is
thus written, Which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war; and they
have laid their swords under their heads, but their iniquities shall be upon
their bones, though they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the
living, Ezekiel. 32. 27. He will find more safety then from them, if he will do
according to the Command and Counsel of God; Let the wicked forsake his way;
and the unrighteous man his thoughts. Break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and
thine Iniquities, by making full Restitution where thou have wronged any man,
(here think upon thy deceased Wifes Father) by false accusation; if thou
would have Salvation (which signifies safety from all the evils of the other
world) come to thy House and Soul.

By what is here written of Truth and Meekness and Righteousness, they are
tried once more, whether the People who have been hitherto Disobedient and
Rebellious, will obey God's Word, and tremble at his Commandment, and do
according to his Law, Ezra 10. 3. My daily Prayer to God is, that they may do
so; (for my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is, that they might be
saved;) I do hereby again exhort them unto it; though I fear, least through the
subtlety of Satan, (who here makes use of that great and prevailing Temptation
of Interest, Profit and Gain, all which will not be a sufficient compensation
for the loss of their Souls) and he will hinder, tempt or deceive, that they
should not obey unto Salvation; and then this will be the return which I shall
make at last as to them; But unto Israel, (who were the outward worshippers) he
says, All the day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and
gainsaying People.

But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish upon every soul
of man that does evil. If ye will not obey, in the latter days ye shall
consider it perfectly; and when the days of your Flesh are ended, and the time
of your Probation and Trial is over; and that also is expired and gone, when
God gave ye a space to repent of your Iniquity, and ye repented not: Then ye
will have Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon your Souls, that
ye would not obey those his Laws and Commandments, which from out of the Book
of the Lord, I a Scribe instructed therein, and bringing out of that treasury
things new and old, have here set before ye.

Because some of ye heretofore, instead of obeying the Word, have persecuted my
outward Person, therefore it may seem expedient and necessary to annex this
Notice and Advertisement.

To all Rulers, Magistrates, and Officers of Justice; and to all others whom
this following may any wise Concern:
WHereas I do only reprove Transgression, and exhort People to come again into
the way of God's Commandments, I do set his Laws before Mankind, and I do
publish his Eternal Truth. I do nothing more, beyond, or besides this, which
again I do not out of mine own head, but only from the Statute Book of the Lord
God. If ye think that I deserve to be imprisoned for so doing, and ye will be
instrumental to confine me, God will judge, that ye and the other People do
deserve Damnation, for not obeying those his Laws and Commandments, which from
out of the same Book of Scriptures I have set before ye and them. And when your
Breath is out of your Nostrils, and your Souls are departed from your Bodies,
ye will receive yet greater Condemnation, and be beaten with more Stripes, for
your thus doing unto me his Creature, who was sent and employed by him in the
Ministration of his Word and Truth.

So Warns and Witnesses, (...)

Practical Books Written and Published by Richard Stafford.
OF Happiness: Wherein it is fully and particularly manifested, That the
greatest Happiness of this Life consists in the Fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, in opposition to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
convenience of Disobedience. Rules and Directions for the prevention of and
Recovery out of Sickness. A Discourse against Partial Obedience: Or that
dangerous Deceit so universal amongst them, who call themselves Christians of
keeping some of the Commandments of God and neglecting others. Some Thoughts of
the Life to Come. With a brief account of the State of Religion, as it is now
in the World. The great Benefits of Christ to all that believe on and obey him:
Being a Treatise on Hebrews 2. 15. Wherein it is showed and made known how
People may be freed and delivered from that slavish fear of Death, whereby they
are subject to Bondage throughout their Life time: and also how they may be
saved and preserved from the Evil and Danger of Death when it shall approach
nigh and come actually upon them. An earnest Call to all the Inhabitants of the
Earth, to Turn immediately to the Lord their God. An Exhortation unto all
Dissenters (however they are distinguished or named) to return into the
Communion of the Church of England: so far, as all things are done ^herein,
according to the Pattern showed to us in the Gospel. Six several Sermons,
Preached on Isaiah 38. 1. Wherein that great Duty of setting our Body and Soul
in order, ^or we shall die, is at large opened and explained. The Doctrine of
the Cross, or the Duty of Christian ^uffering, in a Sermon, on Mat. 13. 20, 21.
A Sermon on 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. The Nature of Gods Kingdom and Dominion over ^en,
in a Discourse on Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Divine Arithmetic Illustrated in the Right and
Exact Numbering of our Days, or a Discourse of the near and ^ontinued approaches
of Death unto every one whatsoever. The Extensiveness and Comprehensiveness of
the (...) Judgment of God. A Discourse of the Misery of Hell and Happiness of
Heaven, Grounded from Mat. 25. 46. A Discourse of Gods Hearing Prayer, Grounded
from John 9. 31. The observation of the three Great Festivals asserted in the
Christian Church, and also the Right manner of the observance of them made
known in a Sermon on Col. 3. 1. Preached on Easter Day. A Sermon Preached unto
the Inhabitants of the Town of Thornbury in Gloucestershire, March 20. 1697. on
Psalm. 143. 8. Two several Sermons, on Phil. 4. 11, 12. The necessity of keeping
still unto the Ordinances of Religion, Prayer, Hearing the Word, Baptism and
the Lords Supper, in a Sermon on Acts 6. 4. A Sermon concerning the Devices of
Satan, on 2 Cor. 2. 11. The exceeding Great Comfort and Benefit of having
walked before God in Truth, and with a Perfect heart, and of having done that
which is Good in his sight; Set forth in several Discourses, on Isaiah 38. 2,
3.
Advertisement.
Besides those aforementioned, These are to give notice, That I have several
other Practical Sermons or Discourses of mine own Composing lying by, me in
Manuscript: Which if they who have the Plenty or Competency of this Worlds
Goods, would ( According to their several Ability, Acts 11. 29.) Thus
Consecrate some part of their gain and substance unto the Lord, So as to be
ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate toward the outward Labor and
Charge of the Printing and Publishing of them, it would be for the Glory of God
( in making known his Truth.) And for the Edification and Benefit of his Church
and People; and consequently it would be a Good work in such Persons who shall
be helpful and any ways assistant herein, for which they would be rewarded by
God in the Life that is to come.

And I say unto you, Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness; that when ye fail they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations. Charge them that are Rich in this World that they do Good, that
they be Rich in Good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate, laying
up in Store for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that
they may lay hold on Eternal Life. This is a faithful saying, and these things
I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might
be careful to maintain Good Works; these things are Good and Profitable unto
Men.


