A WARNING-PIECE DISCHARGED: OR, Certain Intelligence COMMUNICATED To His
Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL, With all the real and cordial Officers
and Soldiers under his Command.

Wherein the present tempers of each Society of People in this Commonwealth,
under each Degree or Notion whatsoever, are inserted and controverted, in
relation to the election of a New REPRESENTATIVE.

As also, A brief and full Parallel betwixt the History of Israel and our late
and present Series of Affairs.

In which Simile, Our present General is compared with Moses, as he was their
Deliverer, Judge, and General.

By John Spittlehouse, a late member of the Army.

London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven Stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1653.

A Warning-piece DISCHARGED: Or, Certain Intelligence for his Excellency the
Lord General, with all the cordial Officers and Soldiers (of Jesus Christ)
under his Command, etc.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
HAving lien as it were Perdue since the 24 of April last, (that I published a
Vindication of your then-late thrice-noble action in the dissolution of the
Parliament, so called) to the end I might either see or hear how the same would
be resented amongst the generality of the people of this Commonwealth* as also
to know the tempers of each Society of persons in the same: And having now in
some measure obtained such my desires, I shall hereby presume the boldness to
communicate it to your Honors, viz. the various Opinions and Judgments of the
aforesaid persons (so far as they tend to the present purpose;) being digested
and distinguished under each degree of Notion which the said persons do now
bear in the Commonwealth: whereunto I have annexed some Animadversions, for the
clearer illustration of the same.

The Van of which persons and opinions I shall present you with, are the Grand
Royallists, commonly termed Cavaliers; who are a people (as far as I can
possibly gather) that do very well resent, that the Government of this
Commonwealth should be managed by those persons who have the present power in
their hands; it being (say they) the most conducing to Reason, for that they
have so gallantly fought and obtained what they now enjoy. 2. In that they
think it impossible that worse Governors should succeed, then were last in
possession thereof, (as to the generality of them.)

Which, to my apprehension, appears to be an Heroic and gallant resolution
in the aforesaid persons; yea, so gallant, as that I fear there is not any
other Notion of people in all the Commonwealth that does parallel them, (as to
such a condescension) and for which their civil and discreet deportment, I
judge them worthy of as much favor and respect from the present Governors, as
with safety can be granted them; inasmuch as from being the most turbulent
enemy to the quondam- Parliament, etc. they are now the most peaceable friends
to our present Patriots.

The second sort of Persons and Parsons I shall communicate intelligence from,
are the Demy-Royallists of this Commonwealth, viz. the Clergy and Laytie of
people under the Notion of Presbyterians: whom I so term, because they are such
a sort of people that would very gladly have a King, but to no other purpose,
then that they might ride upon his back, as the old Strumpet their Mother does
yet upon the Beast, Rev. 17. 7. (viz. that he might be unto them in stead of an
Ass, to bear the title of Supremacy, but they themselves The Power.) And this
they do, in imitation of their elder sister Prelacie, who in some measure had
done the like before, as in preferring their own Titular Honors before such
persons as had it really by descent; instance the Prelatical Clergy, who
ranked the Lords Spiritual before the Lords Temporal, but durst not attempt the
same upon the King, but that he must be Supreme Head and Governor, both over
things Spiritual, as well as Temporal. Which gross presumption and palpable
contradiction, I do very much admire the Nobility and Gentry of the Prelatical
party could endure, or be insensible of, had they ever looked upon Matthew. 23.
8. and 1 Pet. 5. 3. which two places are very worthy the serious consideration
both of the Prelatical Laytie, as also the Presbyterian: for if they duly
consider the same, they will clearly see, that their aforesaid idol-Priests
ought not in the least to assume any such title unto them, no, not so much as
of Rabbi, or Master; and that both by the command of Jesus Christ, and the
Apostle Peter himself, whom their old Mother-Harlot pleads succession from;
but I know not in what, unless in imitation of the aforesaid Peter in following
his Master afar off, Matthew. 26. 58. or denying his Master three times, (viz.)
1. As he is Pope: 2. As he is a Prelate: And 3. As a Presbyter; the two later
being lineally descended from him, as he is the Adulterer, or Man of sin, 2 Timothy 2. 3. and likewise of Papacy, Prelacie, and Presbytery, as the
Adulteress, or Mother of Harlots, as in Rev. 17. 5. so that the aforesaid
daughters are as well Harlots as their Mother, and that by unavoidable
consequence; as all that are rational must needs confess; as in the
constitution and ordination both of their Church Members, and Church Officers;
viz. by Rantizing Infants, and so making National Churches; as also by making
Priests* that are enjoined to maintain and uphold the same: instance the
Prelatical Service Book, and Presbyterian Directory; clear contrary to the
precepts and practice of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, as the Scriptures do
clearly declare to all that have an eye to see, and an heart to understand.

But such of late has been the craft and subtilty of the young Strumpet of
Presbytery, that since she perceived her self to be taken notice of by her
elder sisters customers, and that many of them began to be enamored of her (the
other being grown stale) did in a very short time grow so proud, as that she
could not brook her elder sister to be in the House with her, but endeavored
every day to get ground of her, by her Dalilah-like garb, whereby she incensed
such her lovers against her.

By means whereof, there grew a fierce and cruel contest betwixt the Clients of
the daughters of the foresaid old Bawd of Rome: but such proved the event, that
the younger Harlots Clients prevailed: which no sooner done but she her self
endeavored the old trick of her predecessors, to advance her self into their
Saddle, by the same means, and to the same purpose; as by clawing her elder
sister's chief Supporter to become her favorite: but such was his inclination,
that albeit he could not preserve his own Concubine from ruin, yet (had he not
been prevented by a third person) he would have played his game so cunningly
with her, as to have given her a fair fall.

My Lord and Gentlemen, I crave pardon for this digression; which I took upon
me, not that it does any way concern you, but that I might (if possible* shame
the people of God under the aforesaid Notions, out of the adulterous estate and
condition they are in, and that they would now at length take notice of the
many calls which they have had, out of that Antichristian or Babylonish
condition, inasmuch as it now more nearly concerns them then ever. But to the
thing intended. viz.

The aforesaid Demy-Royallists as far as I can possibly discover, have not the
least reason to offer, why any that is under the Notion of a Presbyterian ought
to have any hand in electing a new Representative, during the time that he
adhereth in the least measure to uphold that Hierarchy* either in its
Constitution or Ordination, as aforesaid: so that all they can say for
themselves, is only to rail at me, as if I had wronged them by saying they had
done their uttermost endeavor to advance Monarchy again in this Commonwealth
after the death of the late King. For (say they) had we done so, we could have
raised half the Nation against the Army and their adherents.

Resp. And could you so, Mr Pres-byte-er? Truly I must tell you, I think it
was neither for want of affection or endeavors that you did it not; witness
the private Juncto whereof your Love-ly Darling was both Secretary and
Treasurer, as he found to his cost; as also by several other like endeavors,
as is notoriously known by all that have in the least taken notice of your
deportments, both before and since the death of the late King. Yea, I have that
confidence in you as you are the people of God, (though yet in Babylon, Rev.
18. 4.) that you have a conscience that justifies me in whatever I said of you
in my late Vindication etc.

It is therefore my earnest request, that you would rest satisfied, and not
expect the least share or interest in a new election of persons to represent
this Commonwealth, for the reasons mentioned in that my aforesaid Vindication,
etc. And so I leave you in the other sense to stand or fall to your Master;
only this be assured that so long as you refuse to come out of your present
Babylonish condition, you will yet more and more be made participants of her
plagues; which I hope you either are, or shortly will be made sensible of: for,
albeit (as the Prophet says) you will not see; yet the time will come, yea and
now is, that you shall see, and be ashamed.

The third sort of persons are certain members of Gathered Churches, (but I
hope there are not many of them) and their adherents, viz. certain persons
under various Notions, which I shall at present forbear to particularize,
inasmuch as the Spirit of God is pleased to conclude them all under one general
denomination, as in Revel. 9. from verse. 1. to 12. they being the very persons
there mentioned, for that they have no more foundation in point of a settled or
Church-like decency or order of Religious Worship amongst them, (albeit, in
their own esteem, Christians in the highest degree that ever was) then the
aforementioned pit has a bottom.

This small hint I thought fit to declare, (by the by) to put them in mind of
their present condition, to the end they may not be henceforth any longer
high-minded, but may rather fear, inasmuch as Satan can transform himself into
an Angel of light; as also in that God is yet the God of order, and not of
confusion; as also in that it is a vain thing for them to think themselves more
spiritual then Jesus Christ whilst he had his abode on earth, who albeit it is
said of him, that he had the Spirit without measure, yet was he pleased to give
presidents and commands to such as should be his disciples to believe and
practice, as the doctrines of the Principles of Religion (which he terms a
foundation) mentioned in Heb. 6. and not to build themselves as castles in the
air, without the aforesaid foundation.

But inasmuch as there is to every thing an appointed time, as also inasmuch as
before the opening of the seventh Seal, there is to be a silence even in heaven
it self, for the space of half an hour, Revel. 8. 1. as also in that all truth
is not to be declared at all times; as also in that it is not prudence (as one
faith) to follow it too near the heels, lest it should prejudice the pursuer; I
shall forbear any further prosecution of their Opinions, as to a Spiritual
relation. Only this further, let them be sure that the Scripture must be
fulfilled, which says, that the Beast which was, and is not, and yet is, shall
go into predition, Rev. 17. 8. it being the eighth, and is of the seventh, and
goes into perdition, verse. 11. But to the present business.

It is evident that many of the aforesaid persons are very unwilling to entrust
the present Governors with their Civil relations; their reasons for which, I
shall insert first, in general terms, and afterward in particular. To each of
which, I shall return an answer. But lest I should fail to answer what they at
present do, and also might say at the utmost in point of Objection, I shall
(under favor) assume the boldness to plead the case in their behalf, so far as
it is possible for them to do; as by these following Assertions, viz.

Object. 1. That since the death of the late King, all the Civil and Military
powers of the Nation ought of right to have had their recourse to their first
ubi, viz. to the persons who first entrusted him to make use thereof for their
safety and welfare; which when he had violated the trust they so reposed in
him, they took him from it, as a Malefactor.

2. That the aforesaid persons are part of the men that have contributed all
their assistance toward the prosecution thereof; so that they think themselves
injured, in that they are not permitted to have an equal share of the
privileges that do now accrue thereby, being disappointed thereof by some
person or persons who have assumed the same unto themselves, without their
consent or approbation, and, for ought they can perceive, do still resolve to
retain and dispose thereof, according to their own wills and pleasures.

Resp. In Inswer to these your Assertions, I shall oppose the story of Israel's
deliverance from their Egyptian bondage: in which Simile, I shall compare our
present General to Moses.

Object. That parallel cannot agree, inasmuch as the aforesaid design was
managed by Moses only, whereas all men know that we have had several other
Generals before the present General; yea, such as he has been commanded by.
Again, victories are properly ascribed to him who commands in chief, and
therefore such victories are not to be applied to him.

Resp. I appeal to any knowing man, friend or enemy, whether the Lord has not
honored our present General with treble victories to any one Champion before
him whatsoever? (Not that I go about to flatter the present General, or in the
least to derogate from the worth and valor of the other, but only that I would
single him forth, as the daughters of Israel did David from Saul; in which
sense, I am confident I may truly ascribe him his ten thousand for the others
thousand.) For besides all his memorable victories, as in his conquest of
Ireland and Scotland in general, had not he the chief hand in all the former
and latter ones in England?

Where can you almost name any one considerable victory, where he bore not the
Bell from all the field besides? for the truth where of, I appeal as aforesaid,
in that I abhor to flatter the man, as much as he can to be flattered; but
merely as there is a constraint upon me, in relation to that I have taken upon
me to make good; viz. That our present General ought to be esteemed the same to
us as Moses to the Israelites, as he was their Deliverer, Judge and General.

Object. We do acknowledge that God has made him very instrumental, in turning
of the great wheel of Providence, but not to be compared with Moses; for he was
immediately sent from God with direction, both what he was to say and do before
his brethren the Israelites, as also in the sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt.

Answ. Pray show me where the Lord did acquaint Moses beforehand, with any more
then three signs of all which he was to show before the aforesaid persons?
which if you cannot, then it must needs follow, that Moses himself was led as
much in the dark, in the management of that great transaction, as our present
General has been in that which has passed through his hands, during the whole
Series of the war, and the counter-change that has happened therein, whether
in relation to Church or State.

Object. It is clear that the Lord told Moses, that he intended to smite Egypt
with all his wonders.

Resp. But did he particularize any more then three? can you conceive that
Moses did plainly know of the plague of Frogs, before the plague of turning the
water into blood was over? Or of the plague of Lice, before the plague of Frogs
was over? Or of the plague of Flies, before the plague of Lice was over? Or of
the murrain of Beasts, before the plague of Flies was over? And so consequently
of all the ensuing plagues.

Again, after the death of the first born, can it be in reason imagined that
Moses knew he was to divide the Sea, when they were pursued by Pharaoh, or that
he had knowledge thereof, until he had sent up his ejaculatory prayers to
heaven for a speedy deliverance from the imminent danger they were then in?
Exodus 14. 15. Durst he advance forward until the Lord commanded him? was it
not in his mind to have them stand still, yea, did he not command them so to
do?

Object. Doubtless Moses would not have commanded them to stand still, but that
he had some foreknowledge that the Lord would deliver them, as the following
words of that verse do declare; for he does not only bid them stand still but
bids them that they should not fear, and they should see the salvation of
the Lord, which he would show unto them that day: for, (says he,) the
Egyptians which ye have seen to day* ye shall see them again no more for ever.
The Lord will fight for you, (says he) and ye shall hold your peace.

Resp. All that can be collected from that his expression, is that the Lord had
in some small measure given him satisfaction that he would help them in that
their perplexity, that he that had brought them so far, would not now leave
them or forsake them; but that he would work some wonderful deliverance for
them: But what it was, or how it should be effected, certainly he did not know:
For had Moses known the manner of their deliverance, he would not have bid them
stand still, but rather have bid them march forwards, which he did not do
until the Lord had so ordered him; as also what he was to do, and what should
be the effect thereof.

Again, after that their miraculous deliverance, who can conceive that Moses
knew either how he should either feed or cloth so great a multitude, for the
space of forty years in the wilderness?

Again, was he not constrained to cry unto the Lord at Marah, where the water
was so bitter that they could not drink it? did he then know how to sweeten the
same, until he was showed a tree which should effect it?

Again, when they wanted bread, did Moses know beforehand how to furnish them,
until the Lord had told him he would rain them down bread from heaven, as also
in relation to flesh?

Again, when they wanted water at Rephidim, Chap. 17. did Moses know
beforehand what to do in that case? no certainly, for then he would not have
concealed the same so long as he did, (viz) until he had been like to have
been stoned by the people: but contrariwise it is manifest that he was again
necessitated to cry unto the Lord, and to ask him what he should do in that
great strait. And is it not there said, that the Lord directed him (after he
had so prayed) what he should do?

Quest. What will you infer from what you have said?

Resp. That Moses was altogether as ignorant of Gods intended proceedings in
that enterprise he had then in hand, as our present General has been in the
management of those things he has been carried forth to do, which I am
confident has been far beyond his first thoughts, or imaginations. Yea, I do
verily believe, that had our present General known beforehand the several
troubles and hardships he has passed, he would have been as hardly persuaded
to have undertook the same, as Moses in the case aforesaid; he would not easily
have been persuaded to have purchased his honor at so dear a rate, especially
had he known he should have been envied for such his honor being so obtained.

So that the Lord has been most evidently seen in carrying forth our present
General through all the difficulties, wherein many have formerly fainted and
lagged, because they could not see to the end of the Lords intentions, in his
great work, which he has done since they left off, and is yet to do; which
thing has also been the cause of all the murmurings at the apparent hand of
Providence in several particulars: as at the expulsion of the 11 Members; the
second purge of the Parliament; the bringing of the King to justice; and now
the late dissolution of the Parliament.

And therefore under God we are the most engaged to the present General of all
the men in the Nation, because the Lord has every way fitted him with the
strength, courage and valor of the aforesaid Moses; in that, I say, it has not
been in the least abated, but has rather been renewed, as the Eagle at the
casting of her bill; (viz.) at every of the aforesaid changes, (notwithstanding
the several desertions and murmurings as aforesaid) to the praise of the Lord
of Hosts be it spoken: so that by the good hand of God upon him, he has born
us up as it were upon the wings of an Eagle, and has been unto us as the good
shepherd that feeds his flock in green pastures, by the waters of comfort.

Even he, I say, has (under God) been the chief man, that has with the
aforesaid Moses, taken us from under the power of our Egyptian Pharaoh, and
from the iron furnace of Tyranny, and from the Brick-kilns of Papacy, Prelacy
and Presbytery, those three days journey, to serve the Lord in our present
wilderness-condition; he it is (I say, etc.) that has brought destruction upon
our Pharaoh, and all his host and that has led us through the red sea of a
bloody war, which we have by Providence passed, and in which our aforesaid
Pharaoh and all his host have been destroyed. He it is, I say, that with David
has plucked us out of the claws and paws of the Lion and the Bear, (viz) from
tyranny and spritual idolatry, which we were subject unto; as also from the
late bosome-vipers which with Paul he has shaked off his hand into the fire,
where they have perished with the faggot out of which they arose* which neither
he nor we did once think there had been such danger in. He it is that has
conquered our Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og* the King of Bashan, (viz)
Charles the first as King of England. Scotland and Ireland; and Charles the
second, as King of Scotland.

Object. To what purpose have you culled out these expressions?

Answ. To the end all the cordial members of this Commonwealth may henceforth
look upon our present General, as the aforesaid Israelites did upon Moses.

Object. As how?

Resp. As the chief Ruler appointed by God over us.

Obj. Moses did not usurp Authority over his brethren.

Resp. Pray show me where or when Moses received either Commission or Honor
from the aforesaid people of Israel, either as he was their Deliverer, General,
or Judge.

Object. It must needs be acknowledged that Moses received not his Commission
from the Commonwealth of Israel, in any of the aforesaid respects: but he
received the same immediately from God; which the present General has not.

Resp. From whom has our present General the Authority and Power he does
exercise? has he it from Man, or from God?

Object. We cannot say he has he it from Man; for that he cannot have, until
it be given him by a new Representative.

Resp. If he have it not from Man (as you have truly said he has not) then it
must consequently follow, that he has it from God, viz. by the hand of
Providence, as had Moses: so that, as I said before, we are now put into the
same estate and condition with the aforesaid Israelites in their
wilderness-condition: and if so, can we say that the people of Israel did
assume such a power unto themselves, as to turn Moses out of that condition the
Lord had so placed him in, as you now thirst to do? Did any of them I say*
unless that enviovs Corah Dathan and Abiram with their accomplices, ever
attempt such Pride and Arrogancy as in the least to question his then-Power
and Authority over them, and which the Lord had been pleased to bestow upon
him? And what was the reward the Lord gave to the aforesaid persons for such
their insolence? Read that story therefore, and consider it seriously, I
beseech you* lest you be found such persons as are risen up out of that pit
which swallowed them up for such their presumption or lest the heavy wrath of
God fall upon you as it did upon the foresaid Corah and his accomplices.

Again let the several other murmurings of the like ungrateful people be a
warning to you lest the like punishment befall you; lest the Lords destroying
Angel be sent amongst you: for be assured, the Lords hand is not shortened in
point of Justice, more then in point of Mercy; for the like sins will certainly
produce the like punishments.

Obj. To whom should we appeal, in case of injustice etc. if the General, and
so consequently the Army assume still the Supreme Power and Authority of the
Nation unto themselves, as at present they do?

Resp. Have you any cause to complain of his or their present carriage toward
you, since they so took the same upon them? if not, what cause have you to
complain, either of him or them?

Obj. He has not dealt justly with us, in that he has usurped our interest
in the supreme power, it being as properly our birthright as his own, in that
we have been found as faithful and real throughout the whole Series of
Affairs as himself.

Resp. Have you been more to him, then the Israelites were to Moses? did not
they as well aid and assist Moses in that enterprise, as you have the present
General? did Moses fight the Amalekites alone? did not the Israelites assist
him therein? And if so, what privilege ought you to claim in the supreme
power more then they? Consider seriously with your selves, I beseech you, and
see what you do in effect say less then (the aforesaid Corah, etc. viz.) Oliver
Cromwell, thou have taken too much upon thee, inasmuch as we ought to be equal
sharers with thee, and the Council which thou have chosen of thy own head
without our consent or approbation, who are as holy and as much in favor with
God as thy self, it being our birthright as well as thine own, inasmuch as we
have engaged our all as well as thee, or those thou have taken unto thee as thy
assistants. What if some of us were but the keepers of the stuff whilst you
fought the field? ought not we to have an equal share of the spoil as well as
your selves, viz. of all the benefits that have accrued by the victories you
have attained? besides* have not many of us hazarded our lives as well as your
selves in the high places of the field?

Again, what legal power have thou of thy self, to do as thou do or have done
since the death of the late King? was not all the Regal power cut off from the
power from which thou had thy power, by that one blow which separated his
head from his body? who had a just right after that blow to give thee a
Commission? or what Commission have thou for the present, since thy late
dissolution of the Parliament? if thou have, who gave it thee, or when was it
given thee? have thou not put thy self in possession of all the power of this
Commonwealth merely by thy strong arm and long sword? what then is this thou
have thus taken upon thee, except thou intendest to make thy self altogether a
Prince or King over us? Numb. 16. 13.

Resp. Hearken and consider, O ye stupid and ungrateful people! Are not these
your present thoughts against the General? And if so, has he deserved them at
your hands? Have you been like minded heretofore? Have your hearts been
formerly possessed with such prejudices toward him, whilst ye were under the
Egyptian Pharaoh, whilst ye were suffering in the aforesaid Iron-furnace, or
laboring in the aforesaid Brick-kilns, whilst he was chiefly instrumental in
working all the Miracles upon Pharaoh and all his servants and host, whilst he
turned their Babylonish sun of Monarchy into darkness, and their moon of
Church Government into blood; whilst he plucked their stars of Honor from their
Orbs, and their planets from their Spheres; whilst he was the instrument of God
to strike through Kings in the day of his wrath; whilst he was as Judge amongst
the Heathen; whilst he filled the places where he came with dead bodies; whilst
he wounded the heads over many countries; whilst he trod upon the Lion and the
Dragon, whilst he trod the young Lion and Dragon under his feet, viz. Charles
1. and Prelacie, and Charles 2. and Presbytery; whilst he brought you through
the aforesaid Red Sea of blood; whilst he went through the many straits and
hardships in England, Ireland, and Scotland; whilst he was put to make his
several addresses unto God by prayer and supplication, in his many great
straits and hardships? was it so with you, I say* during those times? Nay, was
he not contrariwise looked upon by you as a Prince and Deliverer indeed? Did
not you then court him at every turn with congratulatory Petitions, magnifying
him beyond what I am confident he desired from you? And is the case now so
altered with you? How is it, I say, that you can harbor the least jealousy of
such a Noble person, who has not spared to venture his dearest blood, to bring
you into the condition you are in, and which you so much desired? Consider
seriously whether you have not just cause to repent of such your fond
imaginations, as to have the least symptom of an evil conjecture of such a
right worthy Patriot? What can such your vanity be compared unto except with
the wanton carriage of the aforesaid Israelites, who when the aforesaid Moses
had put them into a condition of fullness, they presently waxed fat, and
(Jesurun-like) kicked against the Lord and his servant Moses.

And what is the present General, that you should murmur against him? is not
your murmuring against God, who has so honored him in the midst of you, as
your eyes have seen? yea, has it not for a long season been your daily
complaint, that he was the only means of obstructing the work of God, in that
he had all the power in his hands and might do what he would? were you not then
offended he did not put his power in execution, as by displacing such as were
then in present power, and would not manage the same as you thought they ought
and might have done? And are you now angry with him, that he has done
according to such your desires?

Object. He might and ought to have acquainted us before he had done it and not
to have done it so rashly upon his own accord, without our privity and consent
in the least.

Resp. Were you not in such haste for the execution thereof, as that you seemed
to think every day a year until it should be done? witness all your several
meetings at B. F. and elsewhere to hasten the execution thereof: and were you
not by so doing in a great measure made agents in the same viz. by your many
invocations to God, that he would give them courage and boldness, whom you
deemed fit instruments to accomplish the same? but it seems your fingers
would be dabling in every dish, being neither well fasting nor full.

Has not the honest man, think you somewhat to do with you that he is thus
necessitated to take himself off from what he might otherwise have done by this
time, to publish declaration after declaration, to give you satisfaction as to
that he has done? for otherwise what reason has the conqueror to court the
conquered into obedience? Are they to be looked upon in any other
qualification, (viz. in the condition they are in) then the mixed multitude
that came along with the people of God out of Egypt? Such as are indeed in the
Commonwealth, but not properly of the Commonwealth.

Object. We look upon him at present as a very honest and cordial man; but such
a place of singular eminency, as he has now voluntarily taken upon him, will
be a very great temptation unto him; for experience has taught, that those
that were sometimes famous for their Country, as the Earl of Strafford whilst
Sir Tho. Wentworth, whom when once poisoned with the aforesaid delicious bait
of honor, became presently as bad, as ever he was before good, etc.

Resp. And what of that? must therefore the Government lie destitute of
governors, because good men are subject to become evil by suchlike
advancements? or would you therefore have no good persons to undertake the
present burdens of the Nation. Again? what degree of honor does the honest man
desire more* then he has formerly had from you? Nay, I am confident* would you
call him Mr. Crumwel, or Oliver Crumwel Esquire, he would not be offended with
you.

Again, suppose this thrice-Noble Gentleman, (as he has been the chief
instrument under God of subduing or conquering. 1 England, 2 Ireland, and 3
Scotland; and has now out of his deep affection toward the public good, so
courteously taken your burdens upon his own shoulders) should have refused so
to have done, after he had dissolved the late Parliament, etc. what course
would you have taken for the management of the same?



Jehu his Chariot, which when once finished, and directions sent for calling
such persons whom they intended unto them, had it then been a fit time, think
you, for the General to have published those his intentions, to all the world,
viz. as that on such a day he intended to dissolve the present Parliament, etc.
I wonder any wise Men can have such fond imaginations, for by so doing you had
been voted traitors every Man of you, before you could have accomplished your
design, and what would have been the event of such an enterprise, if not
another war, I know not? In as much as they had so linked the Rabi Priests
unto them by their continuation of their tithes, and the Lordly power they had
given them to choose Pastors, as they call them, as that doubtless they would
not only have fitted them with fit Members for their supply, but also have
blown the bellows of dissension in every Pulpit, by magnifying the one* and
nihilating the other, until they had kindled another flame in the bowels of
this Commonwealth, which how easily they might have done amongst so much
combustible matter, I leave to all rational Men to judge.



England, Scotland, and Ireland? For if not all, why any, but such as must of
necessity, which was accordingly done. And therefore without dispute, it was
the only wise course that could have been taken, had Seneca himself been
living, and had had a hand therein.

Again, Suppose they had made you privy to such their design, what sort of
persons would you have made choice of for the Management of the aforesaid
employment.





Again; Did you judge them able and faithful, why should you not rather
encourage them to go forwards, then in the least to dishearten them; for can
you have fitter persons then able and faithful Men to govern you.

ad infinitum.

Moses; and was Moses reputed by the Israelites as their King? No surely; for
such was the envious expressions and suggestions of Corah and his Rebellious
Accomplices; for otherwise he was only esteemed as a Deliverer, Captain, and
Judge.



Israel, as appears by 1 Samuel Cap. 8. For Samuel tells the Israelites there
of no old matter or manner of Government, when he describes unto them the
nature and qualities of the Kings of the Nations, whom the said Israelites then
thirsted to imitate. By which discourse it appears that the Judge did not
exact one tenth of the State or Power which the said Kings claimed as their
Prerogative Royal. Which the said Israelites found to their cost in Solomon's
days; as by woeful experience they told his son Rehoboam, 2 Chro. Cap. 10.

Moses and a King?

Samuel tells you in the aforesaid Chapter, where when the Israelites had
desired a King to judge them (Mark) Like all the Nations, viz. the Heathen.
Which must unavoydably be the Consequent; for if Israel was the only peculiar
people of God, then all the rest of the Nations must needs be Heathens (at that
time when them words were spoken) the partition wall not being then broken
down.

like all the Nations?



1. In desiring a King like all the Nations, was plainly to betake themselves
to be governed by the Laws of the Nations, and so consequently in a desperate
manner to forsake the Law of God; and so consequently God himself; as in 1 Samuel 8. 7. and 10. 19. And hence it was that the Lord to signify his
detestation to such their desires, inforceth them by his judgments to
confess, (and that before their King) that they had added to all their sins
this evil, to ask them a King, Cap. 12. 19.

2. The evil of having a King like all the Nations, was to put themselves into
the condition of the Nations, who were accustomed to attribute all their
victories and deliverances to their Kings (as the Scriptures do plentifully
declare) and that without ascribing them in the least to providence. And hence
it was, that when they had a King, the Lord does upbraid them for their
Idolatrous humor to Monarchy, as in Hosea 13. where he uses these expressions
to the aforesaid Israelites, viz. When Ephraim (says he) spoke trembling, he
exalted himself in Israel, but when he offended in Baal he dyed, etc. Yet
(says he) I am the Lord thy God, from the Land of Egypt, and thou shall know
no God but me: for there is no Savior besides me. I did know thee in the
wilderness, in the land of great drought. According to their pasture, so were
they filled, they were filled, and their hearts were exalted; therefore have
they forgot me. Therefore will I be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the
way will I observe them. I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her
whelps, and will rent the cowle of their heart, and there will I devour them
like a Lion; the wild beasts shall tear them. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy
self, but I will be thy help. I will be thy King; where is any other that may
save thee in all thy Cities? And thy Judges of whom thou said, Give me a
King and Princes. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my
wrath.

For the fuller illustration of this, read 1 Samuel 8 and 15. and 16 Chapters, so
that Israel is chiefly said to have undone it self by asking a King to judge
them like all the Nations or Heathen.

3. The evil of having a King, etc. was to change them from being the people
of God to become Heathens, as to imitate them in all their licentious courses,
for certainly, a King like unto the Nations, must needs Act in all things
according to the Kings of the Nations. Or otherwise, he degenerateth from
being such a King; for to be like them is by imitating them, and not otherwise.
And commonly where such a King is, there will be like Subjects, without the
great restraining power of God to prevent the same. So that the good Kings of
Judah acted rather like Judges, then Kings; as by making the Laws of God the
rule and square of all their actions. Whereas they that ruled, as did the Kings
of the Nations, (viz. according to Samuels description as aforesaid) were all
Idolaters, as were the Kings of the Nations. Yea it is evident that many of
them endeavored as far as in them lay, to outstrip the Heathens in
wickedness; instance Manasseh, etc. So that as I said before, the consequence
of desiring to be ruled by Kings, is to desire to be made Heathens. And that to
all ends and purposes, which I desire may for the future be seriously
considered, both by the present persons in Authority, least they should assume
to be looked upon, or adored as Kings of the Nations, as also to prevent the
like desire for the future in such our wanton and unadvised Israelites, viz.
those of the prelaticall and Presbyterian judgments, who think that if they
have not a King, they cannot be Al a mode-de frans etc. as formerly they have
been, to their cost, and will be more if they persist in the like rebellious
thoughts against God, who is now tendering himself to be their King, as he was
to Israel in Moses days, which should they refuse, the Lord will undoubtedly
bring seven worse evils upon them, then has yet befallen them; but a word to
the wise is sufficient; for they cannot but know, that whilst the present
Conservators has the least cause of jealousy, that they hanker after such an
heathenish Idol (as has been clearly proved) which they can judge no less,
whilst each of the aforesaid parties continues vassals to, the two aforesaid
daughter Harlots of Prelacie and Presbytery, as formerly mentioned) they
cannot expect either to be made free denizens of this Commonwealth, but
contrariwise to be esteemed only as hewers of wood, and drawers of water to
the Israel or people of God, who abominate such Heathen-like practices. Again,
neither can they expect to be eased of their taxes and burdens which they seem
to groan under; which by abandoning: such their Babylonish and Heathenish
principles, they may easily prevent. But let me tell them this one thing more,
that they cannot desert the one, unless both; for the whore sits so fall
upon the back of the beast, that she cannot be dismounted, but by the ruin of
the beast, they being inseparable Concomitants, as the Patrons thereof very
well know when they said; No Bishop, no King, and now, No King, no Presbytery.





For what greater expressions of Affection can be made, then for you to hazard
both your bodies and souls, to preserve your friends from danger, which
unavoidably you must do, by taking the management of the Affairs of this
present Common wealth upon you; for the same danger which you are fearful the
present Conservators are subject unto, the like will you, or such your friends
whom you would so entrust. Have you more excellent Armor of proof upon you,
then those in present power? Is there such imminent danger in the present
Patriots to be poisoned with their present preferment; and are you, or your
friends such Medridatuses, as that it will have no such operation upon your
bodies? have they been so long accustomed thereunto? Are you fearful that our
present Patriots should with the Fig Tree loose its sweetness? or with the
Olive Tree, its fatness? or with the Vine, its Wine? and are you not possessed
with the like fear in reference to your own selves?

Certainly friends, there must needs be a Snake lurking under these green
herbs; there must needs be something in such your Expressions, more then you
have a mind to discover at present. And truly you give me some cause to think
you would prove the bramble, or else you would certainly have greater care of
your selves; and therefore let us search out the truth of the matter. Consider,
I beseech you, what you would undertake (viz.) a whole years temptation,
rather then these in present power six weeks, for so J. W. the donor of the
Mite, Alias, the Master of Sentences, would have it.

But good Mr J. W. deal really with me herein, for such affection is like a
black Swan upon Earth. Is it not because you think the Table of this
Commonwealth lies not level enough for your desired Comrades to play their
game upon, which the removing of our present Conservators you think would
wholly effect. Or is it not out of an ambitious desire to mount your selves
into the great Horse-saddle, because you have been so long Keepers of the
Stuff. Or is it not because you think your selves more able Pilots to guide
the new rig'd Ship of this Commonwealth, betwixt the Scilla and Caribdis (of a
tyrannical Monarchy, and a Baby lonish Hirarchie) then they that sit now at
the Stern. And if so, have they not great reason to look to themselves, how
they part with the staff out of their hands? Certanely they may be justly as
jealous of you, as you of them.



Moses did, before Iethro gave him counsel? Besides, if he have, has he not
taken unto him ten men that are both able and honest to his assistance?

Commonwealth, viz. to receive and answer Adresses, hear and relieve
Complaints, and do other things which may be just and requisite for them to
do, until about the first of June next, by which time an equal
Representative may be chosen.

I. W. Are not the present ten as competent a number as the seven you
mention in your last Querie, which you would have reserved during the
intervails of succeeding Representatives.

Again, are the present Conservators so little in your favor, as not to be
allowed by you the privilege of the aforesaid seven (viz.) to take in so many
fit persons as they shall have need of, when and where occasion is offered: As
also for such a continuance as you have there prescribed; but it seems you can
afford your own friends twelve months, but not above six weeks to those in
present power.

Again, you think you have played the Man, albeit a Wild one, by saying it
is acknowledged by most Rational men, that the power is primarily, and
originally in the people, as in your Epistle, without (either there or
elsewhere) expressing whom you mean by the people, save by some dubious
Characters, as where you propound to consideration, whether any Members of the
late Parliament, Lawyers or parties interested in tithes befitting for choice,
(as in your second Querie) without expressing in the least whom you mean by
persons interested in tithes (viz.) free Donors of tithes, or demanders of
tithes, or both. And yet to conceit that the three aforesaid particulars,
should not only be divulged, but also controverted and decided, as also a new
Representative completed in thirty six days, signifies that you are either a
very fleet man, or an envious man against our present Patriots.

Again Sir, Let me tell you, were you deputed to elect a considerable number
of persons to represent the Commonwealth, as aforesaid; yea, and that you had
your friend J L. sent for to your assistance: I am assuredly confident, you
could not find such persons amongst all your consorts, as will parallel these
ten in present Authority, for able and faithful men: And what is further
required by any rational unbiassed men -- But to begin where I ended (viz.)
with my aforesaid parallel of the present General to Moses, in point of civil
judicature.

Moses, if you will needs have him termed so.

Exodus 18. from verse. 13. to the last: Whence it is evident, that when Jethro
saw the great toil which Moses had in judging of so great a multitude, he
dehorteth him from continuing any longer in such a condition; for remedy of
which he prescribes his son in law Moses these following rules.

Harken unto my voice (says Jethro) and I will give thee counsel (verse. 19.)
and God shall be with thee. Be thou to the people to God ward, that thou may
bring the causes unto God: And thou shall teach them Ordinances and laws, and
shall show them the way wherein they must walk, and the the work that they
must do.

Moreover, thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear
God, men of truth, hating covetousness: And place such over them to be rulers
of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and rulers of tennes, and let them judge
the people at all seasons. And it shall be that every great matter they shall
bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall judge: so shall it be easier
for thy self, and they that bear the burden with thee.

Whereupon verse. 24. says, that Moses harkned to the voice of his Father in
law, and did all that he had said.

And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the
people, Rulers of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, Rulers of fifties, and Rulers
of tennes, and they judged the people at all seasons. The hard causes they
brought unto Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.

Now in all this it appears, that Moses was to have the election of the
aforesaid people himself, as also the sole management of all the circumstances
thereunto appertaining: And if so, where then will be your privilege of
electing men your selves.

Deuteronomy. Cap. 1. 9. etc. you will find that the people had a vote in the
elections, yea, and that by Moses own direction, as in verse. 13. where he
says, Take ye wise men, and understanding and known amongst your Tribes. Unto
which his Proposition he adds also the answer of the people thereunto (viz.)
that they did well recent the same, saying, The thing that thou have spoken is
good for us to do. So that undoubtedly they had the privilege of election, and
Moses of approbation; as appears by Moses following words, where he says:

So I took the chief of your tribes, wise men and known, and made them heads
over you, Captains over thousands, and Captains over hundreds, and Captains
over fifties, and Captains over tennes. -- And officers amongst your Tribes.
And I charged your Judges at that time (viz. at the time of their approbation
by him) saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously
betwixt every man and his brother, and the stranger that is with him. Ye shall
not respect persons in judgment, but you shall hear the small as well as the
great; Ye shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is Gods:
And the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it.
And (says he) I commanded you at that time all that ye should do: So that it
is clear the people did elect the aforesaid persons by Moses order, or
appointment.

Moses then by your own confession had the ordering and disposing of all
things, both as the Congregation of Israel did consist in Marshall and Civil
capacity. And as to your collection from Deuteronomy. 1. 13. I must tell you that the
case is now otherwise with us, then it was with Israel, for that Congregation
were at that time all unanimus, which you very well know we are not. Again,
it is not rational to conceive that the mixed multitudes had any hand in the
aforesaid Election.

viz. the Grand, and Demi Cavaliers. And if so, what is there then to obstruct,
but that our Moses may give order for a New Election with all possible speed
that may be.

Alexander did Paul, and for which the Lord will one day reward them. But
merely out of the apparent ruin that I see stands before such an Enterprise.
And therefore my humble request is that the Lord would so operate by his Spirit
upon all our affections (who claim an interest in the benefits that do accrue
unto us by the mavelous Acts of providence) that we would all unanimously
rely still upon the same providence, as also instrumentally upon him, (viz. our
present Deliverer, General, and Judge) whom the Lord has been pleased to make
use of, as formerly has been related unto you. And not in the least distrust
him, as either ambitious, or unfaithful to us, but rather endeavor with all
our might to strengthen his weak hands, and feeble knees, under so great a
burden, which out of his father-like affection he has taken upon him, and
that by encouraging him to persevere in the work of the Lord; as also
according to his late request, that we may invocate the Great and Omnipotent
Jehovah in his behalf, to the end he may first be acquainted, what he is to
do, and then that the same God would also give him power to put the same in
execution, to the glory of the same God, and the mutual comfort of us his
children and servants, which that he would be pleased to grant, is the earnest
request of the meanest of his and your servants,

JOHN SPITTLEHOUSE.

Postscript. Luke 2. 13, 14. and Rev. 19. 1. etc.
And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good
will toward men.

And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Allelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God:
For true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore,
which did corrupt the earth with her fornications, and bath avenged the blood
of his servants at her hand. And again they said Alleluja, and her smoke rose
up for ever and ever. And the four and twenty Elders, and the four Beasts
fell down and worshipped God that sat on the Throne, saying, Amen, Alleluja.
And a voice came out of the Throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his
servants, and ye that fear him, both small and great. And I heard as it were
the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluja, for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. And to her was
granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the
fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. And he said unto me, write,
Blessed are they that are called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb. And he
said unto me, these are the sayings of God. And I fell at his feet to worship
him: And he said unto me, see thou do it not: I am thy fellow servants, and of
thy brethren, that have the testimonies of Jesus; worship God, for the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.

He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

FINIS.

