A LETTER to the Loyal APPRENTICES In and about LONDON and WESTMINSTER, for
Their making of a Noble, Extraordinary, Rejoicing PROSSESSION, on Monday the
Eleventh of April, School. being His Majesty's Corronation Day, in Congratulation
of His Majestys safe Return Home; and for the Honorable, Firm, and Lasting
PEACE.
Written by Captain Anthony Stamp.
31. Dec. 1697. Gentlemen,
IT IS out of my kind Respects I have made bold, in this general Letter to you
all, who, though you now live under Obedience to your Respective Masters, till
your Several Terms of Years are expired, yet may in time come to be the Great
Body of this his Majesty's Emperial City, as well as those you now Serve:
Therefore are you very Considerable in your Selves, and equally concerned in
Public Rejoycings with those that are Freemen.

Now, That you may not be thought deficient in your Loyalty, nor insensible of
the Blessings of Peace, and the Benefits from thence to be received in a
Free-Trade, which in a small time will accrue to your own Profit, and
Enjoyment; if I may be deemed Worthy to Advice you, my Counsel to you should
be, for your bringing up of the Rear of all the Congratulations of the Kingdom,
being an Honorable Post, in the Second degree of Dignity; especially if in
some way of Rejoicing distingushed from others, and proper for you, it would
certainly gain you a lasting Reputation that Time shall not wear out* To that
good end, I have invented, and drawn a Scheme of a most Magnificent,
Triumphant, Congratulatory, Rejoicing Procession of Britannia and Four other
Ladies that represents his Majesty's Kingdoms: The whole of it will be so fine
and rare, that it is not to be paralleled.

I have designed that this Noble Procession shall be made by you, on Monday the
11th of April, being his Majesty's Coronation Day; as the only fit and most
proper time for you to make your Rejoycings in: Because by that time all the
remaining Congratulations will be presented, and all things relating to make
the same Graceful; will be got ready.

To gratify your Curiosity, I am willing to give you an abstract of the
intended Procession: For if I should give you the Scheme at large, it would
take up some Sheets of Paper to Set down in Order all the perticulars thereof:
The Heads of the most Material parts of it are as followth, which may Suffice
at present. There will be above Four Hundred Wind and String Instruments of
Music; at least Twelve Thousand Flambeauxs, a great Number of Footmen, Pages,
and Pages of Honor, all in Orange Liverrys: Fifty Banners, bore up, if not
more, according to the Number of Divisions: Every Division to contain about two
Hundred; and the Divisions you are to go in, are to be Distinguished by your
Habits one from another, by your being in several Ranks and Qualitys: For the
Meaner sort of you, ^re to go in the foremost Divisions, they carrying their
own Flambeauxs; and the ^etter sort of you are to go in the latter Divisions,
with others to attend you with Flambeauxs: The whole Procession is to be all in
White, (Saving the Ladies, Pages and Footmen) denoting Innocence and Peace in
your Innoffencive Mirth; Singing all the way you go a new proper Song, to be
made purposely for the Occasion; and the Music playing all the way the same
Tune. There will be five Champions in Armor, to go before their Respective
Ladys: Britannia mighty Richly Attired, siting in an Open, Stately, Triumphal
Chariot, to be drawn by Eight white Horses, Lead by Sixteen Grooms; and the
other Ladies in very Rich Apparel, siting in Four Distinct, Beautiful, Open
Chariots, differing one from another, each of them to be Drawn by six white
Horses, and Lead by Twelve Grooms, to each Set of Horses, in Liverry as before,
and all the Chariots to be drawn without Coachmen or Postilians.

There is to be Morris-Dancers and Anticks, with other strange Raritys. The
Procession is to proceed through the Street, in regularly Order, from Algate to
the Cathedral-Church of St. Paul's, so as to be there about Three of the Clock
in the afternoon, to hear the Divine Service for that day, with a Congratulary
Sermon to be Preached; and at the close thereof, Anthams also to be Sung before
you, made Purpusely for the late Blessings received; when all this is ended,
you are then to proceed on to his Majesty's Royal Palace-gate of White Hall, or
to Chairing-Cross, or St. James's Square, as you shall be directed. And when it
begins to be duskish, then you are to light all your Fambeauxes, and not
before, because they may the better hold out till all things are acted and
done: For, at one of those places is to be erected a most Glorious Throne,
Illuminated all over, without and within, with an inumerable Number of Lights,
and them within infinitely Multiplied; where his Majesty's Royal Heroic
Virtues are wrote in Capital Letters, with his Majesty's Ciphers and Crowns,
to be seen and Read, all in Glory; with the Sun also. When the Ladies Descend
out of their Chariots, they are to Ascend the Throne, and to take their Places
according to their Qualitys: The four Ladies are to sit under Britannia all in
State; where the Ultimate Cerimony is to be performed on a large Stage, placed
before the Throne.

Gentlemen, The performance of this will be a grateful acknowledgment of the
Dutiful Obedience you Justly owe unto his Majesty's High and Princely Merits:
And will let the World see, that you Seriously consider, and Thankfully own
what his Majesty has done for his Subjects, and the great Blessing to this
Nation in general, and this Honorable City of London in particular, as in the
following Instances.

First, 'Twas Divine Providence that brought his Majesty over to us, to be our
deliver from the then Impeding Slavery and Popery; and restore our Liberties
and Properties.

Secondly, By his Majesty's Protecting us in our Religion; and his being, not
only the Deffender of the Ptotestant Faith at Home, but a Broad also.

Thirdly, For his Majesty's Quelling of Scotland: And Reducing of Ireland, that
might else have proved an utter Ruin to England: And the Fight fought by him at
the Boyne, never to be forgotten.

Fourthly, For the Miraculus Preservation of his Majesty's Royal Person against
Treasonable Practices, that were designed, both a Broad and at Home, to take
away his most Sacred Life, purposely to Involue his Kingdoms into Confusion and
Blood.

Fifthly, For his Majesty's frequent Crossing the Seas, whereby he kept a
destructive War out of his Kingdoms.

Sixthly, For his Majesty's Safe Return Home with Glory, from the final end of
this Dangerous War.

Seventhly, For his Majesty's Personal Valor and Prudent Conduct did force his
Potent Enemy to Seek, and Yield to an Honorable, Firm, and Lasting Peace,
which his Majesty has purchased with the often Hazards of his most Precious
Life.

If all these Valuable Considerations shall, as I suppose they will, press home
upon you, so as to make the said Procession, it will Visible Demonstrate to the
World the Joy, Zeal, and Affection you Steadfastly have, and bear to his
Majesty's Royal Person and Government; and it will, besides, be a great Honor
to your City, and for your Selves, it will erect you an everlasting living
Monument of Fame.

Gentlemen, My Request is, That such of you as shall approve of this Laudable
design of mine, will, with what convenient Speed you can, be pleased to repare
to the Marine Coffee-House in Birching-Lane, near Cornhill, on Tuesdays,
Wednesdays and Fridays, from two of the Clock in the Afternoon, where
Attendance shall be given, not only to show the Scheme of the said Procession,
which I have Drawn at large, but Likewise to Sign an Instrument to Empower me
to Petition his Majesty, on your Behalfes, for his Royal Leave, whereby you may
make the said Procession accordingly; and if you are Remote from thence, and
your occasions cannot permit you to come thither, then I desire you, with those
others you meet withal, that are Apprentices in any other part of the Town, to
draw up such a paper amongst your Selves, and sign it, to Empower me, as
aforesaid, and send it by the Penny Post to the said Coffee-House for me, and
as soon as I have Obtained Leave for your making the said Procession, I will
give you Notice thereof in Print, and likewise what is further Requisite to be
done, in Order to raise a Fund to Complete the said design; and the Money so
raised, to be disposed of, for the use aforesaid, by such Persons as shall be
appointed by you. The more you are in Number, to make this Procession
Prodigious, will make the Charge thereof both Light and Ease to you all. I am

Your most Humble Servant Anthony Stamp
The 31st of December, 1697.
^ONDON, Printed for E. Whitlock, near Stationers' Hall, 1697.


