The LAMENTATION of Richard Stafford, a Scribe instructed in the Law of God,
for the Death of MARY Princess of Orange; etogether with a Word of Instruction
and Warning to her Husband.
THE Title hereof is proper, and taken from 2 Chronicles, 35.25. For though the
Practice or Usage of the World is to do it by way of Elegy or Rhyme, yet that
is to please a sort of injudicious and ignorant Readers. But as the true saying
is, If People will be ever serious, they will be serious upon their Deathbed So
that it is convenient and requisite, upon such a serious Subject especially; to
deliver nothing but the words of Truth and Soberness. As for my part, I will
write nothing hereon, but what I will aver and answer at the Judgment Seat of
God, and I will so speak and so publish, as I that must be judged and give
account for the same.

Says the Apostle Paul, But I would not have you to be ignorant Brethren
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as those which have
no Hope, 1 These. 4.13. He means the Heathen, which knew or hoped nothing
concerning Immortality and the future Being. But as for Christians, who
believed that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with them, they should not sorrow in like manner
concerning those that are dead, as they are apt to do, who think that such are
perished and become as nothing; for indeed and in truth, they have still a
future Being. Yet here again (it being evident and manifest from the Revelation
of God. That there are two kinds of future Being, the one of Happiness, the
other of Misery:) we are not therefore to deceive our selves with the common
error and mistake of the Multitude, as if all promiscously who sleep the sleep
of Death, were Happy because they are free from the Pain and Irksomness of this
life; for this Benefit only belongs to them who sleep in Jesus. And as to such
only we should not be sorry for whom we have good and true grounds that they
are blessed in the future State. But the same Duty which the Apostle here
teaches, does seem to intimate forth and imply as if we should be sorry for
such as to whom we have reason to fear.

Jeremiah and the People of the Jews lamented for Josiah, because he was (...)
good King, and for the want and miss they should have of him, and also they had
but the glimmering of Immortality, which is now brought to light under the
Gospel. I shall not ground my present Lamentation from hence; for though there
be as several Good and Wise People in this Nation, who can Rule and Govern
altogether as well as those who at present do so; yet if they have no Right so
to do, or if they take upon them, and Usurp to Govern before their time,
notwithstanding all their other Goodness or Wisdom, they are to be blamed. Even
so whatever her other Personal Accomplishments might be (a good Character is
left upon Record; concerning David saving the matter of Vriah the Hittite, as
to which he came to Repentance and wrote a Penitential Psalm) saving the matter
of taking away the Crown from her Father King James; Hence does arise to me all
the ground of my Lamentation for her, left for this same thing it should go
evil with her at the last.

For if God Almighty should judge (I refer all judgment unto him) that hereby
she lived and died in the continued breach of any one of his Laws or
Commandments. As depriving him of his Civil Right, seems to be a breach of that
Duty of Honoring her Father; as also it is a kind of Stealing or Robbery,
which is against the Eighth Commandment; and farther, It is a sort of
Covetousness, which is against the Tenth Commandment; I say again, If God
Almighty should judge it so, then she will receive the Recompense of a
Transgressor of his Laws.

Again, If God should judge it to be an Iniquity, which signifies a thing that
is not equal, as indeed so it seems to all such knowing Consciences, which are
free from Interest or Prejudice, Then the consequence of that also is, All
things which offend, and they which do Iniquity, shall be cast into a Furnace
of fire. Mat. 13.41, 42. So that, if she did Iniquity in her lifetime, God,
that accepts not the Person of Princes, not regards the Rich more than the
Poor, for they are all the work of his Hands, Job 34.19. will do with her
according to his Law and Truth.

Again, If the Judge of all the Earth (who will do Right) should at the day of
Judgment pronounce or affirm this or the like to this following, to be a
proposition of his own Eternal Truth, viz. As Laban said, It must not be so
done in our Country to give the younger before the firstborn, Gen 29.26. Even
so it must not, or at least it ought not to be so done in this Nation of the
Earth, For it is not consistent with that Righteousness, Psalm. 96.13. and
Equity, Psalm. 98.9^ wherewith the Lord will judge the World, for her who was
sprang out of the Loins of her Father, to have his Kingdom or Inheritance
before his Death or willing Resignation; Then it will be rendered unto her as
one that obeyed not the Truth, but obeyed Unrighteousness (the consequent
whereof is Indignation and Wrath; Tribulation and Anguish, Romans 2.8, 9.) So
that herein she did contrary to the Mind and Will of God.

But what if she were Good and Righteous in other things? As to this, Hear how
the Word of God decides and determines it; But if the Righteous Man turns
away from his Righteousness and commits Iniquity (God will judge whether
that was not her Case, though perhaps it may not be truly applied according to
the next words immediately following) and does according to all the
abominations the wicked Man does, (for she did only according to some of the
Abominations that wicked People do) shall he then live? All his Righteousness
that he has done, shall not be mentioned; in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall be die, Ezekiel.
18.24. There it is pointed out exactly. And so the Apostle James says by the
Spirit; For whosoever shall keep the whole Law and yet offend in one point, he
is guilty of all. For he that said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not
Kill. Now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill. thou art become a
transgressor of the Law! James 2.6, 7. In like manner it may be truly reasoned,
He that said, Thou shall not make nor Worship any graven Image, said also, Thou
shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths, Mat
5.33. Thou shall not covet nor do wrong. Now if thou do not make, nor yet
worship any graven Image; yet if thou do forswear thy self, and not perform
unto the Lord thine Oaths, if thou dishonourest thine own natural Father, if
thou do wrong and covet, thou art herein become a transgressor of the Law.

Many like things she (who is called the late Queen Mary) was Warned out of my
Books (which were but so many Reasonings and Inferences from out of the Written
Word of God) during her life time, and particularly in a Letter of mine
directed to her, bearing Date October 19th 1692. and Printed in an half sheet.
Her Soul exists and lives all one when it is lodged from the Body, as whilst it
was therein: So that even now she is more sensible of the truth thereof; for
though her life is now taken off from this Earth, yet it is continued elsewhere,
and she being now out of this ignorant (but more especially corrupt World) by
and according to the Sentences of God's Eternal Truth, she will be judged.

In two of my Printed Papers, there are these observable words in this respect,
Because that when a Prophet speaks in the Name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken,
but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 18.22. Which does imply on
the other hand, that when the thing does follow and come to pass, that is the
thing which the Lord has spoken and made it known by such a Servant of his
unto the Inhabitants of the Earth, and the Prophet herein has spoken it
advisediy, or rather obediently unto the Spirit of the Lord. which Spirit made
it known unto him, and commanded him to declare it unto others.

In my first Printed Paper Entitled, A Supplemental Tract of Governments; which
I delivered in to the House of Lords on January the 4th 1689. are the very same
words following, viz.

A Word to the present Queen Mary.
Put the Queen in Remembrance, Honor thy Father and Mother which is the first
Commandment with Promise, that it may be well with thee, and thou may live
long on the Earth, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. which does imply, that if she does not, she
will not be long Settled and Established here.

And then as a farther Confirmation of the same, on October the 5th 1692, I
wrote down these following words, which also I caused to be Printed and
Published in an half sheet, Entitled, Some more Words to be annexed to my Book,
Entitled, Things Plain and Weighty, viz.

This last seems to be falsified for well high these four years; Yet that time
is not long with God, that confirms the word of his Servant and performs
the Counsel of his Messengers, Isa. 44.26. It is so in the Mind and Will of
God, although there are not found any of his Servants here on Earth, who will
gently, Isa. 40.11. (God's doing being after this manner) Remove the Diadem,
and take off the Crown, Ezekiel. 21.26. If the Parties will not do it themselves,
for every one ought to help, that Iniquity should have an end, verse. 25. And
that it be done according to the Law of God, Ezra 10.3. And also that her
Spirit might be said in the day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5.5. For the thing
is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie; though
it tarry, wait for it because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

This last has been now exactly fulfilled by her Decease, and by her not
having attained to the common Term or Period of Humane Life. God himself by her
death (which our Common Law Books do truly and properly call the Act of God)
has removed the Diadem, and taken off the Crown from her; although she by
Disobedience and Rebellion to his Word and Commandment, would hold it as long
as she could, and now her Iniquity has an end; Turn away my Reproaches which I
fear, Psalm. 119.39.

I will hereby give this other short warning to her Husband, that for a little
while as yet survives her. That as it is written of those who Blasphemed the
God of Heaven, because of their Pains and Sores, and repented not of their
Deeds, Rev. 16.11. And so although thy Wife died in her Sin, Iniquity and
Trespass, and repented not of her Deed: Even so in all outward likelihood and
probability, the Spirit of Disobedience works yet rather more strongly in thy
Heart, that thou will likewise go on and continue therein until thou come to
die in this same Sin, Iniquity and Trespass. I have heard that exactly like the
Method of our first Parents in the Transgression, Genesis 3.12, 13. of the
throwing off their sin from one to another; the Man laying the blame upon the
Woman, and she upon the Serpent; so thy Wife did use to lay the excuse and
blame upon thee her Husband, as if that could cancel, annul, and make void all
Duty to her Parent. In no wise; for as we are not allowed to break one
Commandment for the observance of another, there being no necessity thereof,
even so the several Relational Duties may be all kept in their place, and he
would throw it off upon the Representatives of the People of England, and they
again upon K. J's Acts of Maladministration (which were either so many lies
made upon him, or Acts of Humane Ignorance, Error and Infirmity.) And how the
keeping of a Kingdom for a few months or years longer, seems to thee such a
Charming thing (it being indeed the principal temptation of Satan) that thou
art still for hazarding thy Soul and Body for the same; although to have and
enjoy the Empire and Dominion of the whole Earth for a thousand or ten thousand
years, (much less of a little part or Country thereof for a much shorter time)
would not be a sufficient compensation for the loss of a Soul. But here it is
also wrongly and Universally surmised, that the several consequences would be
so very dangerous and uncertain both to thy self and to others, if thou
should of thine own free accord, Resign and Restore the Kingdom back unto
him whose Right it is. Whereas fiat justitia and ruat Coelum. There can be no
real, but only an imagined inconvenience in doing of Righteousness and trusting
our God with the event of all, according to what is written; Offer the
Sacrifices of Righteousness, and put your Trust in the Lord, Psalm. 4.5. In
Righteousness shall thou be established: Thou shall be far from Oppression, for
thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it shall not come nigh thee, Isa.
54.14. But probably thou not knowing, and therefore not obeying the Scriptures,
will not repent of thy Deed, but go on to die therein, and be punished for the
same; although the future punishment of God will be such, as will make them
(upon whom it shall be inflicted) to gnaw their Tongues for pain.

It has been reported, That thou did swoon away upon the death of thy Wife,
which was somewhat like that of Saul, Who straitway fell along upon the Earth,
and was sore afraid because of the words of Samuel, (to morrow thou shall be
with me) and there was no strength in him, 1 Samuel 28.19, 20. And so in all
probability upon the death of her who was the Partner and Companion in the
Iniquity of thy life; hereupon the Terrors of the Lord and the Powers of the
World to come, might somewhat more move, shake, and break in upon thy Soul and
Conscience than at other times, which caused that Fit of Swooning, Sorrow and
Fear. This seems to be rather the cause thereof, than any great Love or
Affection; for if that was, How could he be so long from her each year, in
carrying on of Wars and committing of Bloodshed!

And though now again thy Lords and Counselors to strengthen thee still in thine
Iniquity (for they also are thy Companions and Partners therein, and by these
kinds of Method Satan's Kingdom stands; hereby he holding them Captive whom he
has already in his Snare, and will not let them repent of their Deed) have
made their several Addresses unto thee (both which are fraught with Falsehood
and Flattery) That they will support thee and thy Government against all
Enemies. But can they preserve thy Breath from going forth? Can they skreen
thee against the Wrath of God, which is revaled from Heaven against all
unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in unrighteousness? Romans 1.18. and
will be executed upon and sensibly felt by the Persons of such who have been
guilty thereof, after that they are gone off from the Stage of this Earth: Can
thy Bishops, Lords, and Parliament Men, or even all the Inhabitants of this
Nation whom they represent, support thee against these thine Enemies, Sin,
Death, and the Devil? For instead of rolling away the Stumbling Block ( Cast
away the Stumbling Block from out of the way of my People, says God) they are
rather still occasional that thou may continue in that sin, which they and
thy self have committed; and so hereby thou will sooner fall under the Power
and Destruction of Death and the Devil.

Wherefore O thou that art called King, let my Counsel (which I give not of my
self, but the Word and Law of God says, and commands the same), be acceptable
unto thee, and break off thy Sins by Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by
making Restitution to thy poor Father-in-Law, or to thy Deceased Wifes Father,
If it may be a lengthening of thy Tranquillity, Dan. 4 ^7, or according to the
Marginal reading of that Scripture, An healing of thine Error, (...) assure
thee in the Name of God, and from the Truth of his revealed Word, That if thou will indeed obey and go according to the Commandments and Directions thereof
(some whereof are made known in my several Printed Books and Papers) that it
will most certainly be a lengthening of thy Tranquilty, and an healing of thine
Error. But then thou must hearken unto and also comply with that same word
speaking on this wise, Turn thou away from it (to which alone is the Blessing
and Salvation of Christ, Acts 3.26.) and then Iniquity shall not be thy Ruin.

Written January 3. 1694/5.

