THE NATURE OF God's Kingdom AND Dominion over MEN, Clearly laid Open and
Explained, as the same Relates unto these following Particulars. God has
Established for all Nations an Obedience of Faith, a Life of Probation and
Trial, wherein all things happen alike unto all. He has also Permitted the
Prosperity of the wicked, and Ordained Adversity unto the Righteous.

IN A Discourse on Deuteronomy. 8. 2. Wherein is likewise showed, what Influence the
Knowledge of these things ought to have upon our Life and Conversation.

By RICHARD STAFFORD.

To make known unto the Sons of Men, his Mighty Acts and the Glorious Majesty
of his Kingdom. Thy Kingdom is an Everlasting Kingdom, and thy Dominion
endures throughout all Generations, Psalm. 145. 12, 13. And thou shall Remember
all the Way which the Lord thy God led thee these Forty Years, to Prove thee,
to know what is in thine Heart, whither thou would keep his Commandments or
no. Nihil tam dignum Deo, quam Salus Hominis. Tertullian. LONDON: Printed and
Sold By E. Whitlock, near Stationers Hall 1697.

Advertisement.
THese are to give Notice, that I have several other Practical Sermons or
Discourses of mine own Composing, Lying by me in Manuscript; Which if they, who
have the Plenty or Competency of this World, would thus Consecrate some part of
their Gain and Substance unto the Lord, Micah 4. 13. As to be ready to
Distribute and willing to Communicate toward the outward Labor and Charge of
the Printing and Publishing of them, it would be for the Glory of God (in
making known his Truth, Isa. 38. 19.) and for the Edification and Benefit of
his Church and People; and consequently it would be a Good Work in such
Persons, who shall be Helpful and any ways Assistant herein; for which they
would be Rewarded by God in the Life that is to come.

Charge them that are Rich in this World, that they do Good, that they be Rich
in good Works, ready to Distribute, willing to Communicate, laying up in Store
for themselves a good Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay
hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18, 19. This is a Faithful Saying, and
these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed
in God, might be careful to maintain good Works; these things are Good and
Profitable unto Men, Titus 3. 8.

THE NATURE OF God's Kingdom, etc.
And thou shall Remember all the Way which the Lord thy God led thee these
Forty Years in the Wilderness, to Humble thee, and to Prove thee, to know what
was in thine Heart, whither thou would keep his Commandments or no, Deuteronomy. 8.
2.
THE whole O^conomy, Dispensation and Establishment of all the Things of God,
and of the Things pertaining to his Kingdom, in that manner as they now are, do
all seem to be to this very End and Intent, to prove Man, to know what is in
his Heart, whether he will keep the Commandments of God or not. This also
comes from the Lord of Hosts, who is Wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in
Working; for in great Wisdom and Contrivance has he Ordained and Ordered
Things accordingly. By the Passage of the Children of Israel through the
Wilderness, was tipi^ied and signified that Passage of the several Generations
of Men and Women of the several Countries through this Earth, where they may
remember all the way, and all the several Steps and Stages of this Life, which
the Lord God of all Creatures does lead or carry them on these Forty Years in
the Wilderness, or these Thre^score Years and Ten, or Fourscore Years, which is
twice Forty Years (for so* the Days of Man are computed in Psalm. 90. and it
holds still thereabouts) in the Wilderness of this Earth, which is reckoned to
be about the middle part of the World. Where he has made of one Blood all
Nations of Men for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth, and has determined
the times before appointed, and the Bounds of their Habitation* The Condition
of Mankind, whilst they are a little time Breathing on this Earth, is fitly
compared to that of the Is^aelites in the Wilderness on diverse Respects: But
particularly from that Description which is given of it in Psalm. 107, 4, 5, 6,
7. They wandered in the Wilderness in a solitary Way, they found no City to
dwell in, Hungry and Thirsty, their Souls fainted in them: Then they cried unto
the Lord in their Trouble, and he delivered them out of their Distresses; and
he led them forth by the Right Way, that they might go to a City of Habitation,
Now here we have no continuing City, but Heaven is that City of Habitation, and
this Earth is but a through fare unto it; as we now go through a little Town or
Village unto a great City. This is now our present Condition on Earth, as we
stand toward God. We wander in the Wilderness in a solitary Way. As we are
mere Men abstracted from the Assistances of his Word and Spirit; Our Thoughts
concerning God, are but Imaginations, Our Words are Mistake or Falsehood, Our
Actions are but Errors and Turnings aside from the Right Way. This appears by
those Mahometants, Pagans and Indians, who are the Workmanship of God as well
as we; but for want of the Scriptures and the Light of the Gospel, as to that
Invisible Being who made them, or as to that Invisible World, they and we are
all entering into, They Grope for the Wall like the Blind, and they Grope as if
they had no Eyes, Isa. 59. 10. Even where is an appearance of the outward
Worship of God and Christianity, How many do wander in their Acts pertaining to
Religion? For even that of the Generality and Multitude is so defiled with the
things which savor of Men, and comes so short off that Religion which is to
the saving of the Soul, that the small Remnant is either forced to come out of
it, and touch not the Unclean thing; or else see well to it that their
Righteousness do exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, that
their Religion do exceed the Religion of the World, as it is commonly Preached
and Practiced at this Day, that even his Elect Children and Servants do wander
here in the Wilderness in a Solitary Way, being Destitute, Afflicted and
Tormented, they are People by themselves, as the usual Phrase is; which indeed
agrees to that Character the Holy Ghost gives of them, Feed thy People with thy
Rod, the Flock of thine Heritage which dwell Solitarily in the Wood, in the
midst of Carmel, Micah 7. 14. The People of God Dwell Solitarily; although they
are in the midst of Neighbors and Acquaintance, such as they are. Hungry and
Thirsty, their Souls fainted in them. This is as to God, and as to that good
Satisfactory and Enduring Thing, which he has Promised to the Sons of Men,
which on this Earth is kept in Suspense, and not actually, or at least not
fully given; but we are all along seeking and laboring after it.

Then they Cried unto the Lord in their Trouble, and he delivered them out of
their Distresses. This Trouble and Distress, is that same Bondage of
Corruption, and that Groaning and Traveling in Pain, spoken of, Romans 8. 21,
22. Which the present State of the Creation is under. And we being a part of
it, this should be our Business all our Life long, to Cry unto the Lord, and to
call upon the Name of the Lord, to be delivered and saved from it: And that
amidst all the Wandering of others, or of our selves, he would lead us forth
through this Earth, by the Right Way (there is a great deal in that) and when
God does lead, be you sure to follow, and take notice, so the Lord alone did
lead him, and there was no strange God with him, Deuteronomy. 32. 12. Neither
Idolatry, nor Covetousness, nor Sensuality, for these are kinds of Idolatry,
nor no strange Lust, nor no Sin, for in the Judgment of our Creator, any Sin is
a strange God, or a strange Thing which should not be there, viz. in any of his
Creatures. Take these two Directions along with you, and observe them, viz. to
follow when he leads, and that the Lord alone may lead thee, that there be no
strange God with thee, and I will warrant my Life for yours, that he will lead
you, and also bring you by the Right Way unto a City of Habitation; which is
Heaven, the Habitation of his Holiness (for the same Power that sent us here,
will translate us up to that High and Lof^y Place, if we shall be found meet
and worthy, where we shall be no longer Travelers, Pilgrims, or Strangers; but
in a proper and true Sense Fellow-Citizens and Inhabitants for ever to abide.
He led them forth by the Right Way. As for my self, in my Journeying and
Traveling, I have mistook the Way, but by enquiry and going forward, I always
arrived at the place at last where I would be. It is the very same in our way
to Heaven. People may, yea and they do often mistake the Right Way; but if they
will keep on in the Way of Holiness (which the Unclean shall not pass over,
Isa. 35. 8.) if they will seek out of the Book of the Lord, and Read in the
sure Word of Prophecy; if they will take ^eed to the Day Dawn and the Day Star
in their Hearts, and do according to the Light which that shows them. If they
will confer Experiences with the Saints that are on the Earth (for they that
^eared the Lord spoke often ^^e to another) But above all, if they will be sure
to be Traveling on, and in motion, and always making toward it, though
perhaps in Twenty Miles we may go half a Mile or more about; though in Sailing
over the Sea of this Life, sometimes we cannot go directly forwards, by reason
of contrary Winds; yet we may Sail this way and that way to make toward it,
and at last, God brings them to their desired Haven, Psalm. 107. 30. We Read
in the Acts of the Apostles of the Fair Haven, Put one Letter more in, and
Haven spells Heaven, which indeed is the Fair Haven; for it is all Fair and
Clear there, it being above all Winds and Storms. This is our desired Haven, or
the Haven where we would be.

More need not to be said to Parallel our Condition here on Earth for Threescore
Years and Ten, or Fourscore Years, with that of the Wilderness for Forty
Years. In the Text it is said, To Humble thee. And this seems to be the very
Reason of those several seve^e and harsh Dispensations of his Providence, as in
sending upon us Afflictions, Poverty, Sickness, and such like. As also why he
made us thus, and placed us in such vile Bodies, Phil. 3. 21. In the vulgar
Latin, there for it is Corpus Humilitatis, which signifies the Body of our
Humiliation; or such a Body as God has prepared, ordered, and thought fit for
this our present State of Humiliation and Imperfection, To Humble us. We are as
it were Men and Women in Carcases. And truly if we know our selves, and
particularly our own outward Frame, there is all the reason in the World, as
God in making us thus, and clothing us with such Garments of Flesh, which are
so course, if I may so express it, filthy and weak and little, did it on
purpose and design to Humble us: So we should be indeed Humbled. For wherefore
is Earth and Ashes Proud? Consider what were we whilst in the Womb; from thence
we were cast out to the loathing of our Person in the Day that we were Born,
Ezekiel. 16. 5. What are we now? A Breathing Cold of Clay? A sink of Phlegm and
Excrements* What shall we be? Meat for Worms, Ghastliness, stink and
Corruption? Can thou thoroughly think upon this and not be Humbled? However to
such as will be Obedient, the Language of Truth speaks on this wise, It is the
Will of our Heavenly Father and Creator, that during this short time we are in
this Wilderness of the Earth, we should be very Low, Trembling and Poor in
Spirit. Even by thine own Frame and Constitution, He has showed thee O Man
(from within thy self) what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, to
walk humbly with thy God, Micah 6. 8. And see that thou comply with his Mind
herein.

The Text goes on to add, to prove thee, to know what is in thine Heart,
whither thou would keep his Commandments or no. Here is the Principal Intent
Specified; and under this is comprised the Reason of almost all his doings
toward the Children of Men, from the Day he first Created them on the Earth,
until the End of time. He proved our first Parents, Adam and Eve, to know what
was in their Hearts, whither they would keep his Commandments or no; and they
did not keep them. And so he did afterward, Prove Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
who did keep them according to the Covenant and Measure as he did accept of.
For I know Abraham that he will command his Children and his Household after
him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, Gesi. 18. ^9. And so it is of all
the Descendants from Abraham ever since, some did keep his Commandments, and
some did not. Besides that constant and continued Proving them throughout their
Life, God does sometimes Prove his Children in an extraordinary manner, as he
did tempt Abraham to offer up his Son Isaac, which was a great Instance of his
Faith, and whereby he did know that he F^ared God. Seeng thou have not
witholden thy Son, thine only Son from me* even the Best and dearest thing, and
all that he had of that Nature. It is a Wonderful thing to Consider how he does
Prove all the Generations and Persons of Mankind, one after this manner, and
another after that, according to their different Circumstances and Condition of
Life, to know what is in their Hearts, whither they will keep his Commandments
or no. The whole History of the Bible, and of all his Servants, and Reasonable
Creatures mentioned therein, are to this purpose. The Servants of God did keep
his Commandments, but all his Creatures, whom he had endued with Reason, did
not. And so it is of all the Men and Women that ever trod upon this Earth;
whose Names, though they are not Recorded in that ^ook, yet they are in the
Register of him, Who brings out that great Host of his* Creation by number,
and calls them all by their Names. So likewise besides the ordinary manner of
dealing with his People, he did tempt and prove Job by his great and
extraordinary Afflictions, who in all them Sinned not, nor yet Charged God
foolishly; for indeed God did well and wisely as to him. What is Man that thou
should Magnify him, and that thou should set thine Heart upon him, and
that thou should Visit him every Morning, and try him every Moment, Job 7.
17, 18. All things are full of Temptation, even to the necessary Victuals which
we Eat, for there may be Gluttony; and to the Clothes which we wear, for there
may be Pride; even to all our Thoughts (and we do think continually) for there
may be, and too often is, Vanity and Evil. To our Words, for in the multitude
of them, there wants not Sin; and we may soon Speak Falsehood or Folly; and so
to our Actions and Doings; for there Sin, Iniquity, and Transgression do beset
us round, and it is easy falling into any of them, And so all Companies and
Conversation with our fellow Creatures do prove a Snare unto us, or there is
Man Pleasing and Perverting the thing that is Right, to humor and comply with
those that are above us in outward Degree or Riches. As also there is a fear of
Bearing Witness unto the Truth, and Speaking it out, least they should fall
under the Displeasure of Men. Many such like things do show that the Trial of
Man is had every Moment, as also it is had when he is at, and amidst the
Worship and Service of God, and at Religious Duties.

It is properly and truly a Life of Probation and Trial. And we are here upon,
or according to our good or ill Behavior, so we shall have the Eternal Favor
of God, or be rejected by him. Like as Apprentices are commonly put out a Month
before hand for Trial, to see whither the master will take them for Seven Years
or not, so these Seventy Years on this Earth, we Men and Women are upon Trial
for all Eternity; God hereby Proving us, whither we shall be meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, or Reprobates. Reprobate
Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has Rejected them, Jer. 6. 30. As
it is with the Earth it self, so it will be with the Men and Women, the
Reasonable Inhabitants thereof. For the Earth which drinks in the Rain that
comes often upon it, receives Blessing from God. But that which bears Thorns
and Briers, is Rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to be Burned,
Heb. 6. 7. 8. The good Fishes are to be gathered into Vessels, and the bad are
to be cast away. So shall it be at the End of the World. The Angels shall come
forth and shall Sever the Wicked from among the Just. Mat. 13. 41, 42. So God
will do at the End of World, but all this mean while, during which the
Generations pass through here, whither it be Six or Seven Thousand Years, it is
the time of their Probation and Trial, but after that is over, and finished,
God will then proceed to a Decision and Sentence.

For the more effectual Trial and Probation of Mankind, He has also ordained a
Life of Faith, and a State of Absence from the Lord, which is Grounded from 2
Cor. 5. 6, 7. Whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord,
for we Walk by Faith and not by Sight. The right Understanding of these two
things, This Life of Trial and Probation, and this walking by Faith do clearly
open unto us the Nature of God's Kingdom, and Dominion over us Men. It was
never known in any Nation, Country and Language, that the People there should
obey a King or Ruler, whom neither they themselves, nor yet any of his Subjects
ever saw: Which last it put in, because whereas Earthly Kings do Rule over
Countries of vast Extent and Circumference, and of Millions of Inhabitants who
are dispersed all over it; and he being but little and Circumscribed in Passion
as other Men, it seldom or never happens that he does see all his Subjects, nor
yet do all his Subjects ever see him. But yet a very great many do, and have
seen him: So that all the others having them for undoubted Witnesses and
Assurance, that there is such an One, they do, and must obey him, nevertheless
although they have not seen him. But as to God, though he fills Heaven and Earth,
and all things, and all places, with his Presence; though his Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and his Dominion endures throughout all Generations; yet
no Man of any Generation or Country did ever see him. No Man has seen God at
any time: The Only begotten Son, which is in the Bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, John 1. 18. And yet he reqires and expects to be obeyed by all
Nations, Kindred and Languages, yea by all the Inhabitants of the World. Whom
we are to Obey, though we do not see him, and all One as if we did see him. And
though God gives no present Visible Recompense, but contrariwise, We often
sustain outward Loss, Inconvenience and Hardship for performing Service unto
him, yet he Requires it. Hereby God is Glorified, and here is the Faith and
Patience of the Saints to perform it nevertheless. Now Faith is the Substance
of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen. And this Faith does
properly terminate upon an Unseen God, as it is Object. Whom having not seen ye
Love, in whom, though ye see him not, yet believing, ye Rejoice with Joy
Unspeakable and full of Glory. Receiving the End of your Faith, the Salvation
of your Souls, 1 Pet. 1. 8, 9. We Read very often in Scripture of the Name of
the Lord, The Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, so declare the Name of
the Lord in Zion, Psalm. 102. 15, 21. And of calling o^ the Name of the Lord.
Which Name of the Lord (to speak after the manner of Men) does suppose and
import as much, as if his Person were distant, and not seen by us. But here to
pursue the like Reasoning, as is in Psalm. 75. 1. Unto thee, O God do we give
Thanks: Unto thee do we give Thanks; for that thy Name is near, thy Wondrous
Works declare. So here it is, Unto thee O God do we yield Obedience, and render
Worship, for that thy Name, or rather thy Person included in that Name, is real
thy Visible Works declare, which we cannot so much as look upwards or
downwards; or without doors, but we must see them. We may behold with our
outward Bodily Eyes, the Truth and Reality of what he has affirmed, for I lift
up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I Live for ever, Deuteronomy, 32. 40. For we do, or may
continually see that vast fabric of the Heavens and the Earth, and all therein
contained, upheld by the Word of his Power, in a most Wonderful and Astonishing
manner. That vast and wide Roof of the Firmament, or Sky is kept up by his
Almighty and Visible Hand, without any Visible Beams or Pillars. By the way,
the declaring of these things unto ye, is a proper and useful kind of
Preaching, Because it is a Publishing the Name of the Lord, Ascribe ye
grea^ness unto our God, Deuteronomy. 32. 2. And a speaking of the Wonderful Works of
God, Acts 2. 11. Which the Apostles did to their Hear-ers.

It is a wonderful thing to Consider how the God, who made all things, and
fills all things, should yet be so little manifested unto Men; that he, who
is all Brightness and Glory, should not be seen amongst us* that he, who made
and fashioned us, in whom we live and move and have our being, should be so
little perceived by us; that when he fills Heaven and Earth with his
Presence, yet any should Live without God in the World. Surely Darkness has
covered the Earth, and gross Darkness the People. The Sun gives Light upon it
by Day, and the Moon by Night; and yet there is a greater Obscurity round
about, which the dull Element perceives not. There is yet a worse and greater
Obscurity in those, who see and walk thereon. Strange^ That Hitherto it should
not be as yet Universally fulfilled as to all the Inhabitants of the Earth, At
that Day shall a Man look to his Maker, and his Eyes shall have Respect unto
the Holy One of Israel, Isa. 17. 7. Whom he might see with the Eyes of his
U^derstanding being onlightened, as he does with his outward Bodily Eyes behold
the Works of God, and the Earth which he Treads on. By the Air he Breaths and
moves in, he might have a Sense and Resemblance of him that is Invisible. Who
does also beset him behind and before, is with him in his going out, and coming
in, and is acquainted with all his Ways. The least conceiving and Inward
Reasoning, will Instantly lead unto the acquaintance of him, Lift up your Eyes
on High, and behold who has Created these things; for it must be some One who
made all these things; for we do conclude, and know of the Houses which we
Inhabit, that some did Build them, although that was before we were Born. And
this great House of the World must needs have been framed by him, who Built all
things; and that is God, Heb. 3. 4. Through Faith we understand that the Worlds
were Framed by the Word of God; so that things which are seen, were not made of
things which do app^^r, Heb. 11. 2. The Heavens continue standing as they were
from the Days of the Creation; yet that once was, and must needs have been. But
then further, the very continuance and upholding of them does plainly
Demonstrate, and Point out his Eternal Power and Godhead.

Besides the Ignorance, Sot^ishness, and Negligence of Man in Understanding and
Seeking God, Psalm. 14. 2. Some Reason why he is not so Known, and Apprehended
by the Inhabitants of the Earth, is through his own Ordering, if I may ^o
Speak; for I gather it from his own Word of Truth, Verily, thou art a God that
hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior, Isa. 45. 15. If I may so express
it, though he is in them, and before them* yet he does hide himself, behind the
Skreen of Created things. And it ^ame to pass that in the Morning Wat^h, the
Lord looked unto the Host of the Egyptians through the Pill^r of Fire, and of
the Cloud, Exodus 14. 24. And so he does continually look unto the ^nhabitants
of the Earth, through the material and visible things, although we cannot see
him, Because he is Immaterial and Invisible. God sees us, when we do not see
him. He sees us always, but we do not see him at any time. Behold, I Go
forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him. On the
left Hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him. He hides himself on the
Right Hand (Mark that Phrase, again of hiding himself) that I cannot see him.
But he knows the Way that I take (this again confirms what is aforesaid,
though we do not see God, yet God sees us) when he has tried me, I shall come
forth as Gold, Job 23. 8, 9, 10. By annexing which last here his Spirit by the
Mouth of Job, does Intimate and set forth, that God does thus, on purpose to
try Man. This same Truth and Observation is yet more clearly Expressed in Deuteronomy.
32. 20. Which also comes directly to the sense of my Text, to Prove thee, to
know what is in thine Heart, whither thou will keep his Commandments or no:
Here God speaks on this wise, I will hide my Face from them, I will see what
their End shall be; for they are a very froward Generation, Children in whom is
no Faith. Now put all this together, and we are given to understand, that
when(...) God hides himself, and hides his Face, as he has done since the
Creation, hereby he does Try and Prove the Children of Men, and knows what is
in their Hearts, and sees what their End will be. In Deuteronomy. 32. There is as it
were a History and Re^earsal of all that Ignorance, Disobedience, Sottishness,
Blindness, Folly, and Ingratitude of Mankind toward their God; and the Reason
of all is as it were summed up, and Rendered in the Twentieth Verse, because God
hides his Face, and because they are a froward Generation, Children in whom is
no Faith. For had they but any Faith, they might find out God; notwithstanding
he is Invisible, and he hides himself, and he hides his Face; and if they did
but once find him out, and know him, it is impossible that ever Man, a
Reasonable Creature, should carry himself thus perversely and contrariwise
toward God, as he has done. Although the People of the World do reckon upon
Sin, as a thing of Naught, of no Significancy and of no Account, yet all Sin is
against God. And I am persuaded that (notwithstanding it is so ri^e, common and
customary in the World, as alas now it is) People would no more commit Sin
against God, if they did see him with his Bow bent and his Sword drawn (the
Scripture has described him in that manner) ready to take Vengeance on them
for the same, and if they did thoroughly know and believe how that there is a
Just Recompense of Reward annexed to every Transgression and Disobedience, than
now they dare Curse the King to his Face, for which they should incur his
severe Wrath and Displeasure Immediately. But if God was as Visible as our
Governors after the Flesh are, then there could be no such thing as Faith at
all, there could be no Trial of Obedience from the Heart (for it might be done
only with outward Act) How could he then so effectually Prove us, to know what
is in our Heart, whither we will keep his Commandments or no. Though God is not
Visible, yet his Works are: By the greatness and vastness, whereof we may very
well Apprehend and Ascribe greatness unto our God, for it must needs be a Great
God who has Created such great things. So, although he is Invisible, yet his
exceeding Greatness should make us more afraid; and keep us more in Subjection,
then all visible Terrors or Temptations, which are but little; as also his
Eternal Promises and Threatenings should weigh more with us, then all present
things, which are but momentary and s^dden.

Here is the Revelation of the Mystery which was kept secret since the World
began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets,
according to the Commandment of the Everlasting God made known to all Nations
for the Obedience of Faith, Romans 16. 25, 26. This thing, an Obedience of Faith,
to Obey God whom we have not seen, and to Obey for unseen things; all which is
Apprehended by Faith, whose Object is an unseen God, and unseen Things. Though
it is made known and manifest enough by the Scriptures and by the Gospel, and
though it has been Preached and Declared to the World, yet it is a Mystery to
them at this Day. But his Children and Servants, his Elect and Chosen One^ do
understand as well what it is to Obey and Serve an unseen God, for unseen
Things, as the Laborers in the Vineyard did, when they worked for a Penny a
Day, o^ as Servants and Laborers know for whom and or what they Labor, when
they do work for their ^asters* according to the Flesh for Yearly Wages, o^ or
so much a Day. An Obedience of Faith does aprehend things Future, all one as
things present; for ^ith is the Substance of things hoped for. Now thing hoped
for, are not as yet. And though some may (...) apt to Imagine that things not
yet, are not Substanc, yet the Holy Ghost knew better, when he expressed it
after that manner, then Scoffers and Unbelievers, who are apt to Object, and
say on this wise. For I pray you judge ye in your own Reason, is there not as
much Substance in things distant as in things near? Is there not the ^ame
Substance in things to come, as in things present? For even things present were
once to come. Is ^ere not as much Substance in Heaven as in Earth? (...)
believe, that whosoever shall be counted worthy to encer therein, he will find
Ten Thousand times more. But the People of this World are Ignorant, and Puzzled
at this Mystery of an Obedience of Faith, because the Promises and Threatenings
of God are future and to come, therefore People do not Regard nor Fear them.
Whereas Faith would here receive and embrace those Promises, and also be
Overawed by the Threatenings; notwithstanding they are future and Distant, all
one as if they were present and sensible before them. But the Generality of the
World are a very froward Generation, Children in whom is no Faith. There is
little or no true Faith amongst Men. And hereupon, Because Sentence against an
Evil Work is not executed speedily, therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are
fully set in them to do Evil, Eccles. 8. 11. There is a great deal in this. I
had almost said, that this is the Cause and Reason of all the Irreligion and
Ungodliness, Sin and Wickedness, that is abroad in the Earth, because God does
not presently Punish Men and Women for the same. It is this which makes the^
Armour-Proof and Hardened against the Ministry of is Wor^, and our Denunciation
of the Terrors of the ord against them. And so it is of that Evil People whi^
refuse to hear my Words, which walk in the Imaginat^n of their Hearts. Jer. 13.
10. For both sorts think in the Hearts, although the Word and the Ministry
thereof do^ speak Evil and Misery to us, yet nothing comes of it. ^or we are as
Healthful in Body, as Prosperous in outwa^d Estate, and seem as Merry and
contented in Mind as other People. The Tabernacles of Robbers Prosper, and they
that provoke God are secure into whose Ha^^^s God brings abundantly, Job 12.
6. Wherefore do the Wicked Live, become old, yea, mighty in Power. Their Seed
is ^stablished in their sight with them, and their Offspring before their Eyes.
Their Houses are safe from Fear, neither is the Rod of God upon them, Their
Bull Gendereth, and fails not, their Cow Calveth, and Casts not ^er Calf,
Job 21. 7, 8, 9, 10. So their Ground brings forth Corn and Grass, all one as
that of other People. God is kind to the Unthankful and to the Evil, Luke 3.
37. For he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil and Good, and sends Rain on the
Just and Unjust, Mat. 6. 35. There is a Just Man that perishes in his
Righteousness, and there is a Wicked Man that prolongeth his Life in his
Wickedness, Eccles. 7. 15. There be Just Men unto whom it happens according
to the Work of the Wicked; again there be Wicked Men to whom it happens
according to the Work of the Righteous, Eccles. 8. 14. No Man knows Love or
Hatred (that is of God) by all that is before him. All things come alike to
all. There is one event to the Righteous and the Wicked, to the Good, to the
Clean and the Unclean; to him that Sacrifices, and to him that Sacrifices
not, as is the Good so is the Sinn^r, and he that Swear^th, as he that Fears
an Oath, Eccles. 9. 1, 2. Though God has been Pleased to ordain and suffer it
so to be; yet it is before said, that the Righteous, and the Wise, and their
Works, are in the Hand of God. And so it follows by the same Consequence of
things, that the Works and Doings of Sinners and the Wicked, are in the
memorial and Register of God, even for him to bring forth the same unto future
Judgment, and make a several Distribution thereupon. For since the Fathers fell
asleep, All things continue as they were since the beginning of the Creation, 2
Pet. 3. 4. And so People are Born, Marry and Die Promiscuously and
Indifferently without any odds between Righteous and Wicked, Godliness or
Ungodliness, Obedience or Disobedience, of one Man between another. The
Scriptures do speak fully and abundantly hereof in many places; and also they
mention particularly in 2 Pet. 3. how the Sinners and Wicked, who walk after
their own Lusts, do hereupon Sin yet more and more, and go on securely, and
without fear, because of their present Prosperity and Impunity in this Life.
Whereas I profess Solemnly and Seriously as I see and observe these things, to
me it is the greatest Argument, Demonstration, and full Assurance* that all
things are indeed so as they are spoken of in Scripture. And I do through this,
which has been a Cloud and Stumbling Block to some, see clearly and apprehend
plainly the Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over Men, to be on this wise,
viz. As about the time of Forty Years, he suffered the manners of the
Israelites in the Wilderness, Acts 13. 18. says our Text, To prove them. In
like manner for about the time of Threescore Years and Ten, or Fourscore Years,
he does suffer the manners of all the several Persons of Men and Women, of all
Countries in this Wilderness of the Earth, letting them go on as they will, to
see what they will do, and what their End will b^. This is his Eternal Decree
which seems to be Establi^^e^ upon great Wisdom; for hereby ^e does Effectua^^y
prove them, to know what is in their Heart, whither they will keep his
Commandments or no. This very same Order and Dispensation of the things of God
toward us Men, may be understood from that of the Apostle, as indeed the whole
Series and Design of Scripture has a Relation and Tendency to what he has
written, For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive for the things done in the Body, according to that he has
done, whither it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Whereby it is clearly shown
forth and intimated, that People do not receive in this Life according to the
things that they have here done in the Body, but they will receive for them in
the Day of Judgment, and in the succeeding Eternity. There will be nothing done
of this, until these Bodies are laid in the Graves, and an Hour is coming after
that, in the which all that are in their Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they
that have done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5. 28, 29* God
will make one Work and Reckoning of it altogether, according to Mat. 25. 32.
And before him shall be gathered all Nations, etc. And the Destruction of the
Sinners and Transgressors shall be together, Isa. 1. 28. Even of all
Generations and Countries, although now they Live out their appointed time, and
Dye as other Men. The Spirit of God says by the same Isaiah, The Sinner being
an Hundred Years Old, shall be accursed, Isa. 65. 20. The Word of God does
Speak Evil of him now, and Evil shall befall him hereafter; although as yet he
has felt nothing of outward Harm or Evil. Good Men have been offended at the
present Prosperity and Impunity of the Wicked. We hear frequently thereof in
the Old Testament, but not altogether so much in the New. Those who had chiefly
Temporal Promises to encourage them to Obedience, might well Startle and
Stumble, when the Disobedient received the same in Effect. Verily I have
cleansed my Heart in vain, Psalm. 73. 13. There was not then so clear a
Revelation of the Judgment to come, and of the succeeding Eternity, which is to
make a wide Decision and vast Difference between the Righteous and the Wicked.
This would have instantly satisfied all their doubts. But now Christians, who
are assured of all this have no Reason to be Envious at the Foolish, when they
see the Prosperity of the Wicked. Yet, Do ye think the Scripture says in vain?
The Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to Envy, Jam. 4. 5. The difference
between the Sins of the Regenerate and Unregenerate is, the Regenerate have
little motions and tendencies toward the same Sins, which they crush and keep
short, but the others suffer them to break forth into op^n Act. And so there
are at this Day in sincere good People, some little Inclinations or Lustings to
Envy. They are apt to be Grieved, that they who Provoke or Despise God, should
Flourish and seem outwardly in better Plight then themselves. There is a carnal
Intermixture, something for themselves, when they Cry out O Lord, How long
shall the Wicked Triumph? How long will thou suffer them to do on this wise?
Perhaps they have their Portion in this Life, Psalm. 17. 14. As Augustine did
observe, that was the Reason of the long Prosperity and Continuance of the
Roman Empire, for their Exercise of Moral Virtues. Like, as we Read in One of
the Prophets, That God did give Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar for Wages, in serving
him with his Army in such a Work as he would have done. And this same is the
very Reason why many People have Health and Prosperity, Riches and long Life,
who will yet never go to Heaven; but they are Rewarded here for that little
good they have done. And therefore the Psalmist Prays by the Spirit, Deliver my
Soul from Men, which are thy Hand O Lord, from Men of the World, which have
their Portion in this Life, and whose Belly thou fillest with thy hid Treasure.
They are full of Children, and leave the rest of their Substance to their
Babes. This would not content and satisfy him, but he was rather afraid of it.
As for me (By which kind of Speech he would Distinguish and Exempt himself from
them) I will behold thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be sati^fied when I
awake in thy Likeness. I have Read of a certain Godly Man, who when he was
Exalted to great Perfe^ment and Revenues, he did very much fear, least thereby
God meant to give him his Portion in this Life; and thereupon he was doubtful
whither he should accept of it, yet afterward he did. However we are to let
God alone with the Ways of his Providence; for he, and not we poor Wretches,
knows what he has to do. How he deals with others, what is that to us? We
may rest fully satisfied, and most certainly assured with what the Wise Man
says, Though a Sinner do Evil an Hundred times and his Days be Prolonged, yet
surely I know it shall be well with them which Fear God, which Fear before him,
Eccles. 8. 12. God cannot be Unrighteous; and if he deals more Bountifully with
the Wicked in this Life then with you, certainly you will fare better then they
in that Life which is to come. It will be better for those who in the Days of
their Flesh, Lived before him in Righteousness and true Holiness, then with
those who in the same Days of their Flesh did Despise God, or Lived in some
Transgression or Disobedience the same while. Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do Right? Yea, He shall do Right, and make an exact Distribution
(Judgment will I lay to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet) to every
Man according as his Work has been. Does any wise or knowing Man envy Oxen or
Sheep as he sees them Feeding in good Pastures, but he rather Pities the poor
Creatures, because he apprehends what it is for, to Fat them for the Shambl^s.
This is the very case as to the Prosperity of the Wicked or Sinners, Righteous
art thou O Lord when I plead with thee, yet let me Talk with thee of thy
Judgments. Wherefore does the Way of the Wicked Prosper? Wherefore are all they
happy that deal very Treachero^s^y, thou have planted them. Yea, they have
taken Root, they grow, yea, they bring forth Fruit. Thou art near in their
Mouth (and so they were outward Worshippers, and did talk of God in a general
Way) and far from their Reins. But thou O Lord know me, thou have seen and
tried my Heart toward thee (whereby the Prophet does import his own sincere
Service toward God, and yet it was not outwardly so well with him: But he goes
on to add,) Pluck them out like Sheep for the Slaughter, and prepare them for
the Day of Slaughter, Jer. 12. 1, 2, 3. And so the Apostle James says by the
Spirit unto the Rich Men, Ye have Lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been
Wanton, and Nourished your Hearts as in the Day of Slaughter, Jam. 5. 5.
Tremble at this ye Gentry and Sensualists, and Merry Men of this present Age
and Generation. Though those Brutish Men know it not, neither does a Fool
understand this, What? It follows, When the Wicked spring at the Grass, and
when all the Workers of Iniquity do Flourish, it is (there it is Pointed out)
that they shall be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92. 6, 7. So it will be for ever
at last, although they are not presently destroyed at the very same time when
they commit their Wickedness and Iniquity. Am^lek was the first of the Nations,
but his latter End shall be, that he perish for ever, Number. 24. 20. The Decree
and Purpose of God stands on this wise, For the Lord God of Recompenses shall
surely Requite, Jer. 51. 56. At the time Appointed, when they come Dye, and
after that the Judgment.

As by a Right Understanding of the Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over
us Men, we come to know the very Reason why he does not presently Punish
Sinners, but oftentimes suffers them to Prosper. So by the same Reason of
things we may learn, wherefore he suffers or inflicts Afflictions and
Calamities on Godly and Righteous People. It is hard and somirk to think in
ones Mind, Verily I have cleansed my Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in
Innocence; for all the Day long have I been Plagued, and Chastned every
Morning, Psalm. 73. 13, 14. That when Man serves God diligently and faithfully,
and leads an upright and innocent Life, that th^n he should meet with greater
and sorer Troubles. To think this is Painful to One. Our Nature is Impatient
thereat and Resents it hardly. But this was the Lot of the Generation of thy
Children in former Days; and therefore we are not to think that any strange or
new thing, has happened unto us. But call to Remembrance the former Days in
which after ye were Illuminated, ye endured a great fight of Afflictions,
Partly, whilst ye were made a gazing Stock, both by Reproaches and Afflictions;
and whilst ye became Companions of them that were so used, Heb. 10. 32, 33. The
Apostle writes this to those precious and best Saints and Servants of God which
were in that Day. And I know a Man who has had a good Mind toward God from
his tender Years, who has made it his business and constant endeavor to keep,
and also to do the Commandments from his Youth up; who when he has been
Persecuted in Body, and been oppressed and rendered Poor in his outward Estate,
It has been Tauntingly and Sarcastically said unto him, Is this all that your
Prayers, Religion, and Fasting has come unto? The Scoffer did go on to add, If
I were to be Religious, I would be Religious for somewhat, and not thereby to
be Rendered Miserable (which might indeed be done in their meaning by close
Methods of Hypocrisy, but not by continuing whole and steadfast in God's
Covenant, without Transgression of, or Variation from some part of his written
Word, considering how the World has been, and is) but they who talk after this
manner, have not Faith, and they know not what it is to Live by Faith, or to
^ender an Obedience of Faith. We Read somewhat like hereof in the Book of the
Lord. Many there be which say of my Soul, There is no help for him in God,
Selah. Psalm. 3. 2. My Tears have been my Meat Day and Night, while they
Continually say unto me, Where is thy God? When I remember th^se things, I pour
out my Soul in me, as with a Sword in mine Bones, mine Enemies Reproach me,
while they say Daily unto me, Where is thy God? Psalm* 42. 2, 3, 10. I Remembered
God, and was Troubled, I Complained, and my Spirit was Overwhelmed, S^lah. I
have considered the Days of Old, the Years of Ancient Times, I Call to
Remembrance my Song in the Night, I Commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit
made diligent search, Psalm. 77. 3. Yea, I have sometimes observed, that when I
have walked with God yet more closely, and have waited upon him more
diligently, b^ing conscious of no Sin or Fault, yet a greater Affliction or
Vexation has ensued immediately thereupon. Truly this was a very sore Trial,
that when one should more expect and hope for Good from the Hands of God, then
to meet with Evil. Yea, An horrible Thought and Temptation has hereupon arose
in my Mind (which indeed has had that Effect, as to make me abate and diminish
somewhat from my former Zeal and Fervency, like unto that Saying of him,
Behold, This Evil is of the Lord, What should I wait for the Lord any longer, 2
Kings 6. 33. If only this comes of my Serving of God, shall I desist and leave
it off, and betake my self to the like U^godly Careless Life, or Formal Outside
Religion, which others do of my Circumstances, Condition and Years. God for
bid, I abhor the thoughts of it from the bottom of my Heart. But I will rather
on the contrary make the true and right Inference, That Evil, Opposition and
Trouble came from Satan the Adversary (which God did suffer and overrule) to
prove and try me yet more (wherefore I will yet more Resist Satan, and act yet
greater Revenge upon him) for there is a good sort of Revenge mentioned in 2
Cor. 7. 11. To the overthrow of his Kingdom, hoth in my self and others.
Hitherto I have served the God of Israel a little, but now I will serve him
much, and cleave yet more clos^ly unto him, for this Trouble and Affliction
which has befaln me. I will hear the Rod, and who has appointed it. Come and
let us (yet more) Return unto the Lord, for he has broken, and he will heal
us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. After two Days will he revive us,
in the third Day he will raise us up, and we shall Live in his Sight. Then
shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord. Hos. 6. 1, 2, 3. We may see and
know more of God through the Dark Cloud of Afflictions and Troubles: As also
then shall we know, if we follow on, to know the Lord, in the various
Dispensations of his Providence, and in the several kinds of Trial, Temtation
and Exercises, which he ordains or suffers to fall on us. And here it is, and
should be, that as we keep on Traveling, whither the Way under our Feet be Dry
and Good, or Wet and Dirty, through Thick and Thin, as we commonly say* As the
Sailer still makes toward the Haven, he is bound unto, come Fair Weather or
Foul, gentle Gales, or Euroclyd^ns, which signifies Tempes^uous Winds: So here
is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, that the Righteous should hold on his
Way, and he that has clean Hands, be stronger and stronger. For God and Heaven
I am bent, bound and resolved, this is my Journeys End, and here is my Desired
Haven, or the Haven where I would be. And I hope that by his Grace, and
Strengthening me with Strength in my Soul (which I always ask in Prayer) for I
am come to that Stedfastness and Purpose of Mind herein, that you may sooner
turn a Dromedary in his Course, then turn me aside from going on still in that
way toward God, and the Habitation of his Holiness, which he has Chalked out
in his Word, and showed me in my Mind (what I speak of my self, when I Declare
my own Experiences, I would that ye apply it to your selves also, for we are
Fellow Servants and Fellow-Travellers) through Good and Evil Report, through
Shame and Dishonor, as deceivers and yet true, in Afflictions, in Necess^^ies,
in Distresses, through Plenty and Poverty, in Sickness and Health, in
Prosperity and Adversity, sometimes at Liberty, and again through Prisons,
Up-hill and Downhill, and sometimes in a Plain, as our Way lie^. To have now,
and then a smooth Voyage, and then to be tossed to and fro. Even according to
that Degree or Measure of Tribulation, which our Heavenly Father has Appointed
and Ordained we shall pass through, before we come unto, and enter into his
Kingdom. So that whereas I before mentioned, that those Troubles and
Afflictions its coming on me immediately after my close walking with waiting on
the Lord did several times heretofore make me abate and diminish from my former
Zeal and ^ervency, This was my Ignorance and Infirmity then. For now I perceive
when I Understand things more, and aright, they should rather have increased
and heightened and confirmed it so much the more. For hereby then Satan did get
an Advantage over me, but if I had so done, as I now see that I should have
done, then I should not only have made his own Devices of none Effect, but have
turned and made them fall back upon himself. For this is the best way to deal
with an Enemy, to turn his own Canon upon himself; and not only to spoil the
Mines, but to spring those Mines upon themselves, which they had lain to Blow
us up; or according to the Scripture Phrase herein, that themselves may fall
into the Pit which they had dug for others. As it is written, Thou have
showed thy People hard things, thou have given us to drink the Wine of
Astonishment. So Jeremiah ^ad hard thoughts of God, when he said, Will thou be
unto me altogether as a Liar, and as Waters that fail? Jer. 15. 18. So I speak
it to my shame, and as a warning and instruction to others, I have had hard
thoughts of God, that whereas he had revealed himself to be good to Israel,
even to such as are of a clean Heart, that even when I was by his Grace upon
making my Heart clean then to receive Crosses and Disappointments, which our
Fretful and Impatient Nature calls Evils, then was fulfilled, But as for me, my
Feet were almost gone, my Steps had well nigh slipped, even to have turned a^^de
utterly from the Way of the Lord, or to have fallen down and go no further
therein. And truly unless it had been for some forcible Considerations drawn
from the near Approaches of Death, and the succeeding Judgment which God put
into my Mind, and they did weigh down, and overrule to continue still in his
Service (Blessed b^ his Name for it) I believe, and am afraid, that I had been
an utter Apostate from the Ways of God.

Moreover that the Heart be without Knowledge it is not Good, said Solomon. But
from hence we may see that Exceeding Advantage and Benefit of a full and
through Knowledge concerning the things of God. It is all in all and the
turning Point whereon does depend the Eternal Salvation or Condemnation of
Mankind. For where any one is saved, it is by Grace and Faith (both which do
include within themselves a Knowledge of the unseen things of God) that they
are saved. And so it is on the other Hand, My People are destroyed for lack of
Knowledge, Hos. 4. 6. Which will be found true as to those Miserable Souls at
the last Day, who shall be Punished with Everlasting Destruction from the
Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 9. For had
they known more of the things of God (and it was their own Fault and Negligence
that they did not) they had escaped and never came to that State of final
Condemnation and Perdition.

The Consideration hereof is an Unanswerable Argument, why we should do
according to the Counsel and Direction of Solomon, A Wise Man will hear, and
will increase Learning, Prove. 1. 5. And for that End we should take and lay
hold on all Opportunities for Hearing the Word, and not be Ignorantly Confined
to a dead and dull Ministry, or be blindly given up to follow a Blind Guide,
and none else: But in the Multitude of Counselors there is Safety, both in
Temporal and also in Eternal Concerns.

This Truth and Observation I make known, or rathea declare unto ye in the
General, that ye may just perceive of what exceeding Use and Benefit and
Edification it is to know fully and thoroughly (By both which Adverbs I
difference it from that Knowledge in Part or by Halves, which is but a little
coming forth out of Ignorance, and People should never sit down with a
Knowledge in part, or at halves) the Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over
Men, particularly in that Branch thereof, which relates to the Prosperity of
the Wicked, or the Afflictions of the Righteous. For this has been a mighty
Stumbling Block, which has hitherto hindered many People from coming into the
Way of the Lord, and others from walking on and continuing therein. This also
has a mighty Influence over the Minds of Men, in as much as it is Sensible and
Visible. The Apostle Paul cautions those he writes unto, That they be not soon
Moved or Shaken in Mind at the Afflictions which has befaln him; knowing that
thereunto we were appointed. And it being so contrary unto the Natural Prudence
and Wisdom of Men, to undertake or espouse a broken Cause, or to embarke ones
self in a Shipwrackt Vessel, hereupon it was that Christ Crucified, was to the
Greeks Foolishness (as his Meanness and Condescension therein, was to the Jews
a Sumbling Block, inasmuch as they supposed that the M^ssias would be outwardly
Glorious and Victorious over all his Enemies) for the Greeks could not think it
Consistent with their Vain Philosophy, or Moral Wisdom to receive and be
partakers of the Afflictions of the Gospel. And so far indeed it is true, that
consider it merely as a Man within the Limits of this present Life and short
Time, this Wisdom will never be justified by her Children. But let Faith come
in, the Substance of things hoped for, which are to come, and the Evidence of
things not seen; and this will quickly weigh down the Scale, and determine it,
and carry it for the Knowledge of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus much
is Universally Received and Acknowledged in this Christian Nation and Country
of our Nativity and Habitation. But still there is that mixture of Unbelief,
and so much which savours of Men, and of the Worldly and Fleshly Nature, that
it cannot thoroughly relish and digest Afflictions in the Ways of God, nor yet
have they that Knowledge of the Most High, as to perceive his Favor and Loving
Kindness therein, which is certainly true. For whom the Lord loves, he
Chast^eth, according to what the Spirit says, As many as I love, I Rebuke and
Chasten, Rev. 3. 19. Many are apt to doubt of the Favor of God, or to think
they are not in the right way of his Worship (I have heard of Examples of this
kind) because of those great continued Afflictions and outward Crosses they
meet with in the World. But herein all these People do err, not knowing the
Scriptures nor the Power of God, nor the Way of the Dispensation of his Kingdom
toward us Men. For the Reason and End of these Afflictions are to prove and
try them yet more, what is in their Heart, as Gold is tried in the Fire, and
they are designed to draw us nearer and closer to God, as also to wean us the
more from this present World. As it was noted before concerning the Prosperity
of the Wicked, that they had their Portion in this Life, God intending thereby
to Reward them here for that little Good they had done, for none is so bad, but
does some little good or other. So it is here on the other Hand, there is a
spot even of God's Children, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. And there was hardly ever any one so
Righteous upon Earth (Jesus Christ the Righteous excepted) who did not in some
little thing or other put forth their Hand to Iniquity. They committed or
Consented to Iniquity ^ess or more; but they did not make a Trade or
Continuance of it. For this cause they are here Chastened of the Lord, that
they should not be Condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31. Then it is that
People do err, when they do not know the Scriptures. For in these Scriptures
very much is said concerning the Prosperity of the Wicked, and the Afflictions
of the Righteous. So much whereof has been here declared and alleged out from
thence, that the Reader may Judge and Understand in like manner of all the
re^^. As the several things concerning it do arise up in his Thoughts, or as
they find from their own Experiences, as also from the Observation they make
from their own selves, as also from others abroad in the World, Seek ye out of
the Book of the Lord and Read; for there a Knowledge and Reason of the things
of God may be had and understood. To know a thing as it ought to to be known,
is to know it by its Consequences and with the Reasons thereof.

Now of the things which we have spoken, this is the Sum. We have heard of the
Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over Men, as the same is to prove and try
them, to know what is in their Heart, and in order thereto, Secondly, God has
Established for all Nations an Obedience of Faith. And Thirdly, All things
happen alike to all, and also as a consequent from the First, he has suffered
the Prosperity of the Wicked, and to Exercise the latter ^et more, he has
ordained Troubles and Afflictions for the Righteous. All these several Heads of
Discourse do hang and depend one upon another, as they are indeed and in
reality linked on and connected together in the great Order and Concatenation
of the things of God.

It now remains to show how the right Understanding of the Nature of G^d's
Kingdom and Dominion over Men, as it stands in this Order, and on this Wise, is
a necessary h^lp toward the making a Continuing and Persevering Work of it.

Sin and Ungodliness do certainly hinder from making a Continuing and
Persevering Work of it, they being quite opposite and contrary thereunto, as
Transgression is contrary to Obedience, and the Service of God is Diametrically
Opposite, and Perfectly Contrary to no Service at all. And therefore in order
to make a continuing and persevering Work of it, we must Sin not, and deny all
Ungodliness. The Principal I had almost said, only Reasons why all the froward
Inhabitants of the Earth do Sin against God, are these three. 1st, Because God
does not Render present Punishment. 2dly, Because God is out of sight. And
3dly, Because God holds his Tongue, or keeps Silence. Now (observe this) a
Right Understanding of the Nature of God's Kingdom and Dominion over us Men, as
before Explained, does answer all these and the like Imaginations in the Hearts
of the Children of Disobedience, or the Ignorant Multitude. For the same Word
of Truth which says, Because Sentence against an Evil Work is not executed
speedily, therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do
Evil; elsewhere speaks on this wise, I will Punish the World for their Evil,
and the Wicked for their Iniquity, Isa. 13. 11. The Punishment of God is almost
throughout the whole Scripture, spoken of in the future Sense, he will or shall
Punish. I do hereby tell and warn the Sinners and Transgressors and Hypocrites
of this my Generation, who bless themselves in their Heart, saying, They shall
have Peace and Safety, although they walk in the Imagination of their Heart, to
add one Sin to another. Who are apt to fancy as if God could not, or would not
Punish, Because he does ^ot Punish them presently, nor strike them dead in
their ^ins. Hear ye this Word and Tremble, it is as easy for God to Punish
them, or any of us, as for we to crush a Moth or kill the least Fly or Insect.
For he takes away our Breath, and we Dye, and then the sentence which was not
before speedily executed upon evil doers, does begin to be executed upon them.
There is no need to pour down* Judgments outwardly upon the Sinners Head, as he
did upon the Cities of the Plain; for he can stir up a Disease fron within,
which shall fetch out the Soul to receive for its Sinful and Evil Deeds. Says
one, It is easy for the Lord to recompense a Man according to his ways in the
day of his Death. Nay, He does it not so properly in the ex^ct and particular
day of Ones Death, as afterward: for as when we begin an Action or Commence a
Suit at Law against any Man, we do first Arrest him by such a Bayli^ or
Inferior Officer, So God has his Sergeant or Messenger who sits upon a Pale
Horse, whose Name is Death, and enters into Palaces all One as common Houses
(for no Place or Person is Privileged against him) who arrests severally all
the Men and Women of all Generations and Countries, and fetches out their Souls
from their Bodies, Luke 12. 20* And then God begins his Process or Proceedings
against them, according to what they have done in this Life, whither Good or
Evil. God could have Punished Man in this Life and on this Earth, If he had so
pleased. But his general Decr^^ is to spare them here, expecting that his
Goodness, Forbearance and Long Suffering should lead them to Repentance; but
when he has given them a space to Repent, and they Repented not, then comes
Retribution and Punishment. In this Life man does Despise and Provoke the Lord
God, but by Death God takes Vengeance on Man. For the Wrath of God is Revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1. 18.
Mark here diligently how it is expressed, It is Revealed, that is as much as to
say, It is made known from Heaven; but it is not yet executed and sensibly
felt, which will then be after the Breath of Men is gone out of their Nostrils,
and their Souls are departed from their Bodies; or rather when they come to
rise up, and be Reunited again, then they shall receive according to what they
did in them in this Life and on this Earth. On this wise all the great Promises
and Threatenings of God do stand: The Promises are now revealed or made known
from Heaven, they belonging unto Godliness and Righteousness, but are not yet
Actually given. But they shall be certainly given in the appointed time, or
rather at the End of time. And so the Threatenings are Revealed or made known
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men (by which last
Word is signified all that is contrary unto that great and complete Rule of
Righteousness in Scripture, Comprehending all our Duty to God as well as to our
Neighbor; and not only Injustice and Wrong between Man and Man, although this
is included also, it being contrary to that great and complete Rule of
Righteousness therein mentioned) but God does not execute his Threatenings
presently, nor yet are they sensibly felt by the Children of Men. Which yet
some of them will sensibly feel, Smart and Groan under, after that their
Spirits are deceased or departed from these Bodies of Clay, and are removed to
another place then this Earth. God has another place besides this Earth, and
another time besides this Life, to fulfill and make good every thing to the
least little that he has now spoken unto the Inhabitants of this Earth, in his
written and Revealed Word.

The Brutish Man and Unbeliever, and Ignorant Persons are apt to put off all
this with a transient Jest, or their way of Proverb, What, Shall I speak of it
after I am Dead? Shall I feel Punishment when my Body can feel nothing,
Implying as if there was an Impossibility in this. No such matter. Behold I
show you a Mystery* Neither they, nor we shall Dye; but we shall be all
changed. How now? What do thou contradict Scripture and the Experience of all
Mankind? It is appointed to Men once to Dye. Notwithstanding that I will
however make out what I before said and affirmed, that neither we nor yet
Unbelievers shall ever Dye. We, that is our selves, our Souls shall not Dye.
This is most true. For it is only the Body that Dies, then shall the Dust
return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit to God who gave it. Then the Soul
does only decease or depart from this Earthly House God knows where. Hence
Death is properly called a Decease or Departure. Our Life is only taken off
from the Earth, Acts 8. 33. but continued elsewhere* And so the Soul is equally
alive the next Hour or Day after her departure from the Body, all one as she
was when she was in it. And it returns to God who gave it. And then she has a
more Lively Hope or Comfortable Assurance of good things from him, or a Fearful
Expectation of Evil things, according as she has behaved he self well or ill
in the Body.

The showing unto ye this Mystery does also answer those two other Imaginations
in the Children of Disobedience, which emboldens them to Sin or Transgress
against him, because he is out of sight and he now keeps Silence. For besides,
that the same Word of Truth which says, No Man has seen God at any time, Joh.
1. 18. does elsewhere acquaint us with the Glorious Appearing of the Great God,
Tit. 2. 13. And how that it shall be one day said to the Cities of Judah,
Behold your God, Isa. 4^^9. The same Word, which does take notice, how that God
has a long time refrained himself, and held his Peace, even of Old, Isa. 57.
11. There it is added, And thou fear me not,. Even for that same Reason,
because he h^ld his Peace. And so he holds his Tongue when the Wicked
Devoureth the Man that is more Righteous then he, Hab. 1. 13. And also whilst
that Evil, Iniquity and Treachery are Transacted, which is mentioned in the
very same Verse. And so it is whilst the whole course of Sin and Transgression
goes on as the same is committed by the Generations of Mankind. Th^se things
have thou done and I kept Silence, Psalm. 50. 21. Why here the same Word that
expresses how God holds his Peace, holds ^is Tongue, and keeps Silence, does
also mention and assure us, Our God shall come and shall not keep Silence. I
will Reprove thee and set them in order before thine Eyes, Psalm. 50 3. 21. Even
all the things that were done in this Life, and on this Earth. Behold, how one
Scripture answers to another, for it is even so in the Order and
Determination of God. And we shall see it accordingly so fulfilled as it is
written in the Scriptures, when the Lord God of Elijah shall take away all the
Generations of Mankind from this Earth, and shall cause the Dead to arise, and
the great Day of his Judgment is come and the after State.

It was before mentioned, that though God is now out of sight, yet at this very
time he hides himself, and stands behind the Skreen of his Visible
Creatures; yet Faith would find him out and perceive him for all that. As also
an Obedience of Faith would approve our selves unto, and please him, all One as
ever any Son or Servant did serve his Father or Master according to the Flesh,
whom he saw every day, and was almost continually with him. An Obedience of
Faith must needs be accepted, because it is such an Obedience as God himself
has Ordained and Established; and the reasonable Creature in this State cannot
render any other. But I do believe and conceive, that as it is written, The
Lord will come down in the sight of all the People upon Mount Sinah, Exodus 19.
11. And it is af^erwards said*, And Mount Sinah was altogether on a Smoke,
because the Lord descended upon it in ^ire. And the Lord came down upon Mount
Sinah on the ^op of the Mount, V^r. 18 20. Which Lord in Acts 7. 38. is said to
be the Angel, Supposed to be the Son of God, even Jesus Christ. We Read there,
Verse 16. and Exodus 20. 18, 19. Heb. 12. 21. What effect it had upon Moses and
upon all the People, as to cast a very great Awe, Terror and Trembling upon
them. The like is not to be expected again in this World. But this I do believe
and conceive, that when the Inhabitants of the Earth of all Generations and
Countries from the Creation of the World unto the End thereof, shall be
Summoned to meet with God by Death and Judgment at the last Trump, For the
Trumpet shall Sound, then they shall have a sensible and more lasting
Apprehension of the Great and Infinite God himself in Person, then the
Israelites had for the time of his Angel on Mount Sinah. For that particular
Place, the whole Mount Quaked greatly, but then the Heavens and the Earth and
the whole Creation will quake and be dissolved to be changed and Created a new.
This also I do apprehend and conceive that in the mean while after the several
respective Deaths of particular Persons until this great Day, as it is written,
The Devils Believe, and Tremble. So the Souls of such Men and Women who in the
Days of their Flesh were Disobedient and Provoking to God, will also Believe
and Tremble. Yea, they will be Magor Missabib, Fear round about, Jer. 20. 3.
Because that in the Invisible World they will have nothing to harden
themselves, or to forget the sense of their approaching Condemnation and
Misery, as now they have, as also, because they will be nearer unto, and know
more of God unto whom all Flesh shall come.

The Apostle in 2 Pet. 3. makes the Use and Application of all this to our
Hand, for he speaking there of the very same admonishes, Seeing then that all
these things shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be in all
Holy Conversation and Godliness. Wherefore, Beloved, seeing that ye look for
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in Peace, without Spot and
Blameless. Seeing that the Dispensation of the Kingdom and Dominion of God over
Men stands on this wise, What can be a more forcible Motive and Persuasion then
the Knowledge and Consideration hereof for ye to be steadfast Immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord; for as much as ye know that your Labor is
not in vain in the Lord. For as much as ye haste unto, and draw nearer, and
must be let into these continuing things, the inference here is Reasonable and
Natural, Wherefore Beloved, seeing that ye look for such continuing Things, be
diligent that your selves continue in the Service of the Lord. I say, ye look
for continuing things, which is opposite unto perishing things, as such are all
present things, and things of this World.

I hope that none of ye do serve God for any visible present Recompense as to
thrive better in your Trades or Callings, and that ye are not in hopes to grow
more Rich hereby and come to a place where his lively Word is declared, and his
Spiritual Worship used out of any sinister Respects and present Ends. If there
was any thing to be got by it, what a Throng would be here? If ye do this, or
the ^ike, ye will be mistaken. For the Just shall Live by Faith. He will seek
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and trust that all these things shall
be added unto it. The Terms we are to enter upon Gods Service, is Grace here
and Glory hereafter; necessary Accommodations for our Pilgrimage, and the true
Rest to come; the Patriark Jacob's Request, Bread to Eat and Raiment to put on;
and all this is to be had only by Labor and Honest means, and no others. But
when People come to serve the Lord, if they have thoughts of any more, and they
do not find their Ends and Expectations answered, then they leave off the
Service of the Lord, which they would not have done, if they had known the
Nature of God's Kingdom and the Way of his dealings toward the Children of
Men. If there was a present Profit and Gain to be made by Religion, by every
one that would try after it, then none would Fear God for naught, Job 1. 9. nor
yet serve him for the alone Hope and Expectation of unseen things. But People
would traffic for Heaven, as they do to Jamaica or the Jndies, and all still
for the Love of themselves, and not out of any Love to the Lord of that
Country. What a Company of Mercenary Souls should we have? Then the places of
Worship or Hearing the Word of God, would be Flocked unto, even upon Week Days,
as the Exchange, or as Country People go to Fairs and Markets, to Buy and Sell
and get Gain. Then Worldly Minded Men would become the best Christians. Those
who are all for themselves, use Religion only now and then to serve a turn, or
for a reserve: But if there was any thing to be got at present by so doing,
such would do most therein, and still do nothing only for God's Sake. There
would be then no Work of Faith, nor Labor of Love, b^t all Selfishness. But
now, God has most wisely ordered it as it is, that the Trial of Faith might be
had, that the Excellency of Obedience may be seen.

But yet more clearly it will appear, how the right Understanding of the Nature
of God's Kingdom and Dominion over Men, helps to make a continuing Work, from
this Remarkable Scripture, Because they have no changes. therefore they Fear
not God, Psalm. 55. 19. My Soul has much Meditated upon this Scripture, it
being so very Applicable and Suitable to the People abroad in the World, for is
not this the very Reason of the want of the Fear of God? or when they talk of
it in a General Way, yet still there is not that real Awe and Dread of God upon
their Hearts, but there is a secret Contempt of him, and a froward going on in
the Way of their Hearts; as also a turning back from the Ministration of his
Word. And all is, because they have no changes, they see no odds, whither they
do or do not. Sometimes in mine own private Prayer, every Morning and Evening,
I have performed the same in a Per^unctory, Hasty and Careless manner; and
sometimes I have done it again more Solemnly, Awefully and Attentively. But I
have observed no great matter of difference about the succeeding of my Actions
the following day, whither I performed them in a due manner or not. Nay,
Perhaps, It went more cross and thwart when I was in the Morning before in
^ervent Prayer, then when I was remiss or negligent. And hereupon an evil Heart
o^ Unbelief has arose in me, as if Prayers did signify nothing; and there
would be no great matter of difference, if they were said merely out of custom
or not at all. Is not this the very same as to other things pertaining to
Religion? For do we see any odds or difference outwardly between him that
Sacrifices, or him that Sacrifices not* Between them that go into the
Sanctuary, or them that do not? Between them who are constant hearers of the
Word, or who despise the Word of the Lord, and refuse to come to the place
where it is holden forth or Preached. Themselves sometimes make a trial of
both, and they find no changes, and therefore they are Confirmed more and more
in their Ungodliness. Moab has been at ease from his Youth, and he has been
settled on his Lees, and has not been emp^ied from Vessel to Vessel, neither
has he gone into Captivity; therefore his taste remained in him, and his scent
is not changed, Jer. 48. 11. Even that Taste and Scent of the Old Corrupt and
Ungodly Nature. Now as to all this and such like Imaginations in the Hearts of
Men (for by Thoughts or Imaginations, every One is led guided and does
accordingly) Here a right Understanding of the Nature of God's Kingdom and
Dominion over us Men; How by the Ordering of things so as they are, he does
prove us, to know what is in our Hearts, whither we will keep his Commandments
or no.

By the way, any one may choose whither he will keep the Commandments or not,
but then they must not choose unto themselves that Eternal Life which God has
Promised to the keeping of them; nor yet may they choose or refuse to avoid
that Eternal Death* which is annexed to the Contempt, Disobedience and
Transgression of them.

God has also Ordained an Obedience of Faith, has Permitted all things to
happen alike unto all, an Hour of the Wicked, and the Power of Darkness, Luke
22. 53. Prosperity to the Sinners, Adversity to the Righteous. But above all,
the Knowledge and Understanding that all things shall be exactly so as they are
spoken of in the Scriptures, this will engage and oblige People to continue in
the Fear of the Lord, whither they have any changes or no; whither they be at
ease from their Youth, or emp^^ed from Vessel to Vessel, even however it is
with People in this Life, and on this Earth. They that know and understand all
these things, they will continue yet more fixedly, firmly and constantly in the
^ear of the Lord; and that so much the more, as they see the day Approaching.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 23. Line 36. for somirk, Read Irksom.


