SIX SEVERAL SERMONS Preached on Isaiah, 38. 1.

WHEREIN THAT GREAT DUTY OF Setting our BODY and SOUL in Order, For we shall
Die, is at large opened and Explained.

Wherein also many DIVINE TRUTHS ARE Made known relating to the same Matter;
And now Published, because of the exceeding Importance and Concernment of this
Subject unto all People whatsoever.

For Man also knows not his time, as the Fishes are taken in an evil Net, and
as the Birds that are caught in the Snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in the
evil time when it falls suddenly upon them, Eccles. 9. 12. For Precept must
be upon Precept, Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, Line upon Line, here a
little and there a little, Isa. 28. 9. London, Printed, and are to be sold by
Ralph Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1696.

TO THE READER.
IF I were to Judge of all others by my self, I should think that all People of
whatever Age or Condition of Life, should earnestly catch at and be very
desirous to look into and read all Books concerning Death and Mortality; if
perhaps they might light upon any thing therein, which may either mitigate or
lessen that fear of Death, which even in the midst of and throughout their Life
is sensible in all Men's minds. Which same fear has Torment and does afflict
them. But more especially if they may find any thing in their reading of this
kind, which may Teach, Instruct and Direct them what they must do to be Happy
after Death, and to make sure of it, all one as it is desired to live
comfortably and happy before Death. for if People are so very much concerned
(as we see they are) what they s^all eat, and what they shall drink, and
wherewithal they shall be clothed for this short time, because these things are
present and sensible, they should also take care beforehand, nay, they must and
will unavoidably think, when the end is come, the end is come, Ezekiel. 7. 6.
(which is doubled because the thing is established by God and for the certainty
thereof) whether it shall go well or ill with them throughout all Eternity; for
then these things will be present and sensible also. And it being the highest
Wisdom to do those things whilst living (especially since those things are to
be only done in our Lifetime. I must work the Works of him that sent me whilst
it is day, the night comes when no Man can work) which we shall wish and
desire we had done when we come to die, this should influence and actually
persuade People even in the midst of their Youth, Health and Vigor, when they
are Lusty and Strong, yea throughout all their Life here on Earth, to be
continually employed about this one thing needful of setting their Soul in
Order against the time it shall go out of this Body, and to make sure that when
their Earthly House of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, they may have a
Building of God, not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

This is the difference between the Godly and Sinners, between Wise Men and
Fools; the Godly and Wise do only those things in time besore it be too late,
or the Door is shut, which the Sinners and Fools do at last bethink themselves
and wish (it is the part of Fools to say, I never thought it would come to
this) when it is too late and the time is over and past.

As Christ said, the People of Nineveh will rise up in Judgment against the
People of this Generation and condemn them. So I testify in this my day, that
the Heathen may rise up in Judgment against the People of this Generation and
condemn them. For they (especially the wiser sort, some of them defining Wisdom
to be a Meditation of Death) did search and enquire diligently and think
continually what should become of them after Death; albeit they knew nothing
certainly concerning Immortality and future Life; but they had only a little
glimmering and conjecture thereof. And yet this did put them upon the practice
of Moral Virtue and the doing of Good Actions, that thereby they might be Happy
after Death. But now in this Christian Country, there is a most clear
Gospel Light and Revelation concerning it; yet to most People herein Death is
like a Damp which puts out all their Lights of Pleasure; and through Satan's
acting with all deceivableness in them that perish, the greatest part of Men
and Women do concern themselves but very little about it. But notwithstanding
their Supineness and Negligence (which is the miscarriage of the whole Wo^ld)
the Children of God, the Heirs of Life and Immortality in all their several
Generations and Countries were always and all along even in the midst of Life,
Health and Prosperity, great Meditators of Death.

O that I my self might be of their number; but as some little Hope and
Evidence thereof I did always as for my part even from my Tender Years think
very much of Death and what would follow thereon. I now call to remembrance my
Thought and searching of Heart which was in the days of old, when I was but a
Stripling, I did then Commune with mine own Heart, and my Spirit made diligent
search, What will bec^me of me after that this Body of mine which I carry about
me, is laid in the Earth? For I did ^ind then that my Spirit would live and
abide elsewhere, as truly God has shown this unto me from within my self ever
since I was a Child, and had the least Knowledge of Good and Evil, that there
was another Life and a succeeding State which People should enter upon and go
into after they were gone off from this Earth. I was all along for the greater
part, and I am still as verily persuaded and ascertained of it, as I am sure of
this Life which I now live, or that I now write down these words. And thereupon
revolving and pondering many things in my mind, how that all here is but vain,
little and passing away as a Shadow and does not signify much afterward, f^in
would I be Happy and Safe as to that succeeding and Eternal State of things,
into which my Soul must be launched forth out of this Body.

Accordingly I have made it my business to read all Books and Sermons that I
could light upon which treat of this matter. But especially I have searched and
enquired diligently into the Scriptures, in the which we think that we have
Eternal Life. But we know assuredly that the way to Eternal Life is taught and
showed therein. And I desire that what things I have in the following pages,
brought forth out of that Treasury of Heavenl^ Truths, may be published for the
Benefit and Instruction of others.

For I do not write these things out mine own Head, nor yet from mine own
Imagination and Invention, but only from the Scriptur^s which are given to make
us wise unto Salvation; and what is rightly inferred from Truth, is Truth
likewise. And although this Scripture way of writing is not so much liked of
and received by the Wise and Disputer of this World, or by those who would be
thought ^earned according to Mode and Fashion; Yet all other Books and Sermons,
whether they steal every Man his word from his Neighbor and borrow it from
other Men's Writings; or if it be the mere Product of their own Wit and
Knowledge, if it does not arise from and is bottomed on this Pillar and Ground
of Truth, it is all but as so much Chaff in comparison to the Wheat. I have
more Understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my Meditation.
I understand more than the Ancients, because I keep thy Precepts.

Many People think that they have the least need of Books of any thing in the
World; but they must necessarily have Food and Raiment for the Body, or Physic
against or in the time of Sickness. But if such had Faith and Knowledge, they
would apprehend, that, when the Commandment of God is, Buy the Truth and sell
it not; also Wisdom and Instruction and Understanding, Prove. 23. 23. It was
equally and alike necessary to buy such Books which contain Propositions of
Truth, and Wisdom, and Instruction and Understanding, as to buy Food and
Raiment for the Body, or the things which Minister unto sensual Pleasure. For
the Incorruptible Seed of the Word does all one feed up the Soul unto Eternal
Life, and is as necessary for her unto this end, as Meat and Drink does feed
and nourish the Body and preserve it in Temporal Life. The Word and Truth of
God being that Bread which comes down from Heaven and gives Life unto the
World. So that it is the best way of laying out our Money for that which is
Bread indeed. As so it will appear when People must give account for every
Talent received, and how they used and expended the same. Hereby also may be
justified the Wisdom of our Nation in giving a settled and established
Maintenance to such as Preach Sermons; and also herein the Labourer is worthy
of his Hire, Luke 10. 7. If they did divide the Word of Truth aright, giving to
every Man his Portion. Though here again is need of a distinguishing Judgment
which can separate between the Precious and the Vile, (But he that is Spiritual
Judges all things.) To know and discern between what Books are really Good to
the Use of Edifying and what are not; so as to receive the one, and reject the
other. He that has my Word, let him speak my Word faithfully; What is the
Chaff to the Wheat? says the Lord, Jer. 23. 28. As all Scripture is
profitable, so all Divine Truth is profitable, and such Books as contain most
of this sort, and affect the Heart and Conscience, Instructing and Exhorting
the Soul to the Things which belong to her Peace, and how to make her Calling
and Election sure, these are to be preferred before all others; and accordingly
those People do think so who are renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, and take
delight in the Things of God.

I had rather be faithful to him that appointed, yea and employed me in the
Ministration of his Word, as Moses was faithful in all his House. As we were
allowed of God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak not as
pleasing Men, the but God who tries the Hearts, although for this cause my
Books should be rejected by the Multitude of this Hypocritical and Corrupt
World (for the Time is now come when they will not endure sound Doctrine.) Then
seek to please Men, for if I yet pleased Men I should not be the Servant of
Christ) and so have my Writings received and approved off by them. But I do not
altogether so much Regard the Censure of Men, for, surely my judgment is with
the Lord, and my work with my God, Isa. 49. 4. which Work may be nevertheless
Good and Right, and Acceptable in his sight, although as to the outward and
visible success thereof, I have seemed to labor in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught and in vain. It is one thing to be worldly wise but another
to be wise unto Salvation.

As Balaam said, Behold I have received Commandment to Bless, and he has
blessed, and I cann^t reverse it. So we ought to assert the Commandments and
Sayings of God, in the very same manner as they stand Recorded in his Statute
Book, the Bible, and not otherwise. However too many do corrupt and handle the
Word of God deceitfully, by their Prophesying not right Things, but smooth
Things and Deceits. Yet sti^l they cannot Rev^rse it. So as to alter the Truth
and Signification thereof, nor yet to make one tit^le of the Law to fail. It Is
not so much what true Prophets or Writers preach or make known; not yet at all
what false Prophets or Writers preach or pretend to make known; but whom the
Word of God (who is judge himself, Psalm. 50. 6.) Blesses, they are Blessed;
and he or they whom the Word of God Curses, they are Cursed.

THE CONTENTS.
The Contents of the First Sermon.
ALL People in the midst of Health and Age are Sick unto Death, Page 3. The
true and right preparation for Death is by a constant course of Righteousness
and Holiness all the Days of our Life, p. 7. From that Branch of the Text,
Isaiah the Prophet the Son of Amos came unto him, and said, It is discoursed
against the Non-hearers or Rejecters of the Word of God, p. 12. Grace and
Holiness are Principles of Immortality and Eternal Life abiding in us whilst we
are in this dying Body, p. 19. The Use and Application of this Sermon is, If we
have served God a little in the foregoing part of our Life, to serve him much
toward the close and period thereof, p. 21.

The Contents of the Second Sermon.
To set our House in Order does denote to set our Outward Estate in Order, to
set our Body in Order, but chiefly to set our Soul in Order, p. 25. The
Resurrection clearly proved from those words of dying Joseph, God shall surely
visit you, p. 29. To set the Body in Order is to have it ordered according to
God's Word; which requires, directs and enables that it become free from sin,
and that Holiness be engrafted into it, p. 36. A Digression, wherein is showed
the very Reason, why God Almighty is so often styled the Lord of Hosts in the
Old Testament especially. The Greatness of God and of his Works of Creation is
somewhat described, p. 42, 43. To set the Soul in an Order is that it be in a
readiness, and that nothing be wanting in her, p. 46.

The Contents of the Third Sermon.
Throughout which is Discoursed of that Principal and Essential Thing wanting
in the Souls of Men, that they do not lay aside every Weight and the Sin that
does so easily beset them, and that they do not Resist unto Blood striving
against Sin. And that they do not strip themselves off from Selfrighteousness,
and be clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, p. 50, 65. Of Mixed
Holiness, P. 63.

The Contents of the Fourth Sermon.
Herein is showed how it is with us from our first Conception and Birth until
our Death, p. 81. The manner whereof is showed, and may be most clearly
conceived from those several Words, whereby it is expressed in Scripture of
Dying, Deceasing, Departing, Yielding up the Ghost, Gathering to his Fathers,
Falling asleep, p. 83. Of seeing Death, p. 88. In which there is nothing
dreadful to such as are indeed the Children of God, P. 96.

The Contents of the Fifth Sermon.
Of seeing the Lord's Christ, or rather of having Christ formed within us, and
that not in part only, but wholly and throughout, before we see Death, p. 98.
How to order our Good Works or Almsgiving that they may be acceptable with God,
p. 119. What may be thought of the different Sorts and Sects of Religion now in
the World, and concerning the Salvation of such of the Heathen as are indeed
Good and Virtuous, p. 124, 125.

The Contents of the Sixth Sermon.
Herein is showed what mighty Force, Reasoning and Exhortation is in this
Consideration, Thou shall die and not live, to set our Body and Soul in Order;
p. 132. Some Brief Remarks concerning Rich People, p. 141. The whole is
concluded with Two Practical Uses and Inferences, p. 148, 153. God has at this
Day Three Ways of Speaking, Manifesting and Revealing himself unto Mankind,
viz. by his Written Word, by his Spirit in the Heart and Conscience of each
Person, and by his Ministers. Here also a difference is showed between the true
and false, and what God will at length do as to the latter sort, p. 154, 155.
The End of all the Parts and Ordinances of Religion, and of all Books and
Sermons, if they be managed and composed aright, is to set the Soul in Order
against the time it shall go out of the Body, p. 158.

ERRATA.
PAge 24. line 4. for Charity read Chastity. P. 54. L ^ for summoned r. summed.
p. 53. l. 4. r. They know not. I. 32. for Minstry r. Ministry. p. 101. l. 33.
for Mal. 3. 8. r. Mal. 3. 5. ibidem, l. 24. r. To be obeyed. p. 35. l. 33. r.
We shall with them the better serve God.

SERMON I.
Isaiah 38. 1. In those Days was Hezekiah sick unto Death, and Isaiah the
Prophet, the Son of Amos, came unto him, and said unto him, Thus says the
Lord, Set thine House in Order, for thou shall die, and not live.
A Serious and thorough Consideration concerning Death and Immortality, was the
principal Inducement which did first bring me acquainted with the Ways of God;
for I have thought much thereon from my Tender Years. And now as I approach Day
after Day, nearer in Time toward it, so I ought to have it yet much more in
Remembrance, with continued Thought and Searching of Heart, how I may grapple
with that last Enemy; how either to pluck out or blunt the Edge of the Sting of
Death, that the Grave may not have the Victory over, me, that is, so far
overcome me, as to consign me over unto the Second Death, I would not therefore
by mine own good will Preach one Sermon, nor yet make one Prayer unto God,
wherein I did not mention somewhat or other of this Wisdom, as the Holy Ghost
calls it, that we may understand this, that we would consider our latter end,
Deuteronomy. 32. 29.

For indeed this is the Will of God, and of Christ, concerning us dying
Creatures, as also it does teach and instruct us, what Mind and Temper we
should be in, now we are for a very little while Breathing as yet on this
Earth. Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lamps burning, and ye your
selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, (observe that) when he will
return from the Wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto
him immediately; blessed are those Servants whom the Lord when he comes shall
find watching. And so we should every one of us wait and watch for the coming
of the Lord our God, and especially for his Ha^binger Death, which he sends
before for to bring our Souls unto himself, the God unto whom shall all flesh
come, Psalm. 65. 2. or rather what inhabits in Flesh, shall come. At the Death
or Departure of each Person, the Body or Dust returns to the Earth, as it was,
and the Spirit to God that gave it.

Says the Apostle, Whatsoever things were written asoretime were written for
our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the Scripture might have
hope, Romans 15. 4. And so this great place of Isa. 38. 1. which was written
three or four Thousand Years ago, is written for our Learning, who live almost
Seventeen Hun^dred Years after Christ. Yea, as Christ himself sai^ upon another
occasion, This Day is this Scripture fu^ filled in your Ears, so I testify
unto all that shall he^ or read these Lines, This Day is this Scripture, mean,
this very Text of Isa. 38. 1. fulfilled in you^ Ears; for instead of what is
there said, In those Da^ wa^ Hezekiah sick unto Death, now it may be read (...)
this wise, In these Days are such an one, and such a one, naming the several
People by their respective Names, and so it is of all the Dwellers in England,
ye^, and of all the Habitable Parts of the Earth, They are all sick unto Death.
For though indeed it was thus originally said upon the account of an
extraordinary Ulcer or Disease which was then upon Hezekiah; and by that phrase
in the Gospel, This sickness is not unto Death, John 11. 4. we must distinguish
between health and sickness, and again, between that kind of sickness which is
Recoverable and Curable, and that sickness which indeed is Mortal, or a
sickness unto Death; how then can it be here truly said, when many are in
Health, Youth, Vigor, Lusty and Strong, that they are all sick unto Death?
Nevertheless I will prove and make out what I afore-affirmed. Common Reason
shows that a growing Tree is equally alive in the midst of Winter, although
it does seem as a barren, dead, and dry Tree, because then it does not run in
Sap, nor shoot forth in green Leaves, even so by the very same similitude, by
supposing it contrariwise, it may be conceived, that in the midst of Youth,
Health, Life and Vigor (which are the Spring and Summer of our Age) we are all
the while sick unto Death; or as it is appositely and properly expressed in the
Office of Burial, In the midst of Life we are in Death, because that we do all
along carry about us in our Body the Seeds of this sickness unto Death, or the
Seeds of Mortality: According as it is expressed in the Book of Job, The Root
of the matter is in you; so as soon as we are Born, the Root of sickness,
(which is the usual forer^nner thereof) the Root of Death is in us, even from
our Cradle unto our Tomb, so that it is no false Doct^i^^ to affirm, That all
People (even the most Young and Healthy) are sick unto Death.

The Spirit of God did say thus of Hezekiah, even when he had Fifteen Years
longer to live, as appears by the sequel of that Story; and so the same holds
true of all Mankind severally. Though perhaps some among them may have the same
period of time twice, thrice or four times over; for perhaps some of them,
especially Children, may have thirty, forty five or sixty Years to live longer;
yet even at this very Moment they are all sick unto Death. A proportionable
number of strokes with an Hatchet will cut down the biggest Tree that did ever
grow on the Earth: And although one stroke is given now, and then another, the
Tree is all the while a cutting down. Even so each Day and Night, every Rising
and Setting of the Sun are two strokes of this Hatchet, which (as Time is
always in flux and succession) continues to be still cutting down the Tree of
our Life. To pursue this same similitude again, though it be to another matter,
yet it is to the same subject still, as to our own Death and Mortality. As it
is written, But every man in his own order, 1 Cor. 15. 23. so I have often
thought, that as God is the Lord of Life, he takes away one and leaves
another in his own Order, which his own Order is not to us discernable; because
that no respect or difference is had to Age, (for the oldest does not most
commonly go first) the Good or Evil, the Godliness or Ungodliness of the
Person, that one lives longer than another. But the case of us all dying
Creatures, as we are under the Everliving and Almighty God, is just like so
many Trees growing in a Wood or Coppee: As to which the Owner or Proprietor
sends his Bailiff, or Orders his Workmen to cut down one, and then another,
according as each is marked out, and according as he has use and occasion
either for a tender Plant, or a well-grown Timber Tree for Building, or an old
Tree for the Fire; even so the Great God over all, does give Command and
Commission to such a Disease, or outward Accident, (which herein may be
compared unto his Hatchet or Instrument) to go and cut down such a Man or
Woman, Stripling, Boy, Girl, Infant of Days, according as his Almighty Wisdom
sees and knows best, either cut him down quite, or shake him; for it is
evi^ently seen, that he sends sickness to this Person when another is well;
which sickness proves Mortal to some, and not to others; for there is a
sickness which he sends, and is unto Death: Again, there is a sickness which is
not unto Death, but unto the Glory of God in sparing Sinners so long, and to
the Benefit of them, if they did make a right (...) thereof; which again is but
a Reprieve, and short Respite; for at last comes the Sickness or Accident,
which is indeed unto Death. The Lord God of Heaven, (who knows all things)
knows which of the Trees growing in this or that part of his Wood, (as are the
several Cities, Towns and Villages throughout the Earth) are marked out for the
very next to be cut down. Though we do not know it before, yet (...)
afterward. Just like as at every Funeral we kno^^ ^ot then, which of the
Company that Accompanies the Bier will be carried next upon it themselves; but
this is seen and known afterward.

The Word of Instruction, which does arise from this Consideration and
Apprehension is this, As when Jesus Christ said to his Disciples, Verily one of
you shall betray me. And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of
them to say, Lord, Is it I? Mat. 26. 21, 22. so we may even now hear the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, God our Creator, speaking unto us from Heaven on this
wise, Verily I say unto you, that all of ye shall die. but one of you in
particular shall die before the rest. God now speaks thus from Heaven unto
every Neighborhood and Assembly of People; and we should be hereupon not so
much exceeding sorrowful, as exceeding careful; to live in trembling, Psalm. 2.
11. and pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. For we should every one
of us begin to fear and provide in such a manner, as if it was certainly I my
self that must die the very first, and next of any one in this Parish or
Neighborhood. It is godly discretion so to live each and every Day, as if it
should be certainly our last; and so it is here the same godly Discretion, and
Soul-saving Wisdom, to reckon upon our selves as the Man that shall die the
very next; for it is an essential part of Wisdom to think the worst, and put
the case at the worst, and to provide beforehand against the worst that shall
or can possibly happen) for in both these instances we are never the nearer
Death for thus doing, but only better provided and prepared for it. We should
so live now we are sick unto Death, in the sense afore-explained, as if we were
indeed sick unto Death in the common meaning and acceptance of the Word. We
should so live every Day now we carry the Seeds of Corruption and Mortality
about with us, as we would live if the Plague were upon us, and the Blue Spots
and Tokens did appear on our Skin, which do always and certainly presage a very
near approaching Death: The Reason whereof is this, Because that every Day must
come into account, and we must be judged for the Thoughts, Words and Actions of
every Day after Years of Discretion, and we are come to the Knowledge of Good
and Evil. I shall be Judged, and must give Account for what I did when I was
but Sixteen, Twenty, or Twenty-five Years old, as now when I am more than
Thirty; and so I shall be called in question at the Judgment Seat of Christ,
for what I do now, as for what I shall do in the last Month, Week and Day of my
Life, so that the Consequence is Natural and Necessary, I ought now as much to
walk in all Holy Conversation and Godliness, and to efchew Evil and do Good, as
much, and all one as if it was the last Month, Week and Day of my Life; for I
shall be equally judged for one, as for the other.

The end of our Redemption is, That we might serve God without fear, in
Righteousness and Holiness before him all the days of our Life. And although
there is much talking in the World of Preparation for Death, and of providing
for our latter end, as if it was then time enough to be godly, when we grow
sickly or old. In no wise, God forbid, for it will go evil with that Soul which
has not been godly before. Yet in the Scriptures, which were given to make us
wise unto salva^ion, which is a Perfect and All-sufficient Rule of Life, unless
to settle Temporal Affairs from the Example of Hezekiah in the Text (which as
it will by and by appear in the further prosecution of our Discourse the^eon,
has a further Meaning and Intention herein) there is little said concerning
Preparation for Death. The Holy Ghost thereby signifying, that the only
Preparation for Death is by an Obedient and Holy Life, by ordering our
Conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23. and as it becomes the Gospel of Christ,
Phil. 1. 27. according to the tenor and requiring of all the words contained
in the Bible. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at
hand, Rev. 1. 3. But if thou will enter into life, (that is the Future and
Eternal Life) keep the Commandments, Mat. 19. 17. which Commandments, Statutes
and Judgments we should observe to do in the Land which the Lord God of our
Fathers gives us to possess it, all the days that we live, upon the earth,
Deuteronomy. 12. 1. Besides this, the Scriptures make mention of no other Preparation
for Death. I have read that it is a Proverbial Saying among the Jews, (and
there is a great deal of Truth contained in those old Proverbs) The Sacraments
and Death require one and the same preparation, that is, in the Language and
Direction of the Gospel, to trim our Lamps, Mat. 25. 7. that is, to put them in
a readiness and posture of little more Brightness and Burning; for there was
Oil in them before (for want whereof the Foolish Virgins were condemned and
excluded from entering in with the Bridegroom) even so we should not have Grace
and Holiness for to get then, but have them gotten before; and only furbish up
and make a little more Bright and Eminent the Graces and Gif^s of God, that
were long before in us. But now we are just ready to come forth to meet with
our God, they should be a little more furbished, and made brighter than
ordinary, for to have the acceptance and well pleasing of God, The fine
Linen, the Righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19. must be sure to be gotten and had
long before; yea, and it is there said, It should be kept clean and white. But
if it can be washed and made cleaner and whiter than ordinary, just as we meet
the Lord our Righteousness, this will be comely and convenien^. And so we
should be sure to be clothed with the G^rment of Salvation, and with the Robe
of Righteousness all along; but because this Garment and Robe will be apt to
gather some dust and filth, whilst we are amidst the Corruption and Pollution
in the World through Lust; therefore it will be here meet and congruous to get
them brushed up, scoured and rubbed, just as we appear before the Lord God who
has clothed us with them. And as a Soldier should always have his Arms by
him, but perhaps they may contract Rust or Foulness, theref^re they are to be
scoured up just as he goes forth to Exercise and Use them; even so it should be
as to our having and putting on the whole Armor of God. A Christian should
always have by him, and on him, the Breast pla^e of Righteousness, and the
Shield of Fa^^h, and the Helmet of Salva^ion, and the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians.
6. 14, 16, 17. But then more especially is he to look to it, that all this
Armor be good and serviceable, or at least it should be rendered so, when he
comes to withstand with it in the evil Day.

Truly, this is a Point of great Weight, and had need be very well observed and
attended unto. For the general Mistake among People is, (which has destroyed
Thousands, and Ten Thousands) just like that of the Foolish Virgins in Mat. 27.
which take their Lamps, but no Oil with them; and whilst the Bridegroom
tarries, they all slumber and sleep, and then they are awaked on a sudden by
the Bridegroom's coming, and then they have their Oil to get. And whilst they
go to buy, the Bridegroom comes, and they that were ready wen^ in with him to
the Marriage, and the door was shut. Afterward (when it was too late) came
also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not. Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the day, nor the hour, wherein the Son of Man comes. And so is the
common Error of many People, every one would ^ain be saved, bu^ then they
would work out their own Salvation when they have not Time for it, and when it
is too late. Whereas they might, yea, and they should have done it before. I
testify unto all such, see to it that ye be wise in time. Whereas Jesus Christ
says, I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is called to day;
the night comes when no man can work. But these foolish and deceived People
would contradict and reverse that; for they neglect working whilst it is Day,
and put it off to that time, when they cannot work. In truth, Satan who works
with all deceivableness in them that perish, does suggest those false Thoughts
and Imaginations in those mistaken and miserable Souls.

I am sure, the words of our Text does advise, and direct them otherwise, if
they will give through heed and consideration thereto. For besides that, Heaven
is very well worth laboring all the Days of our Life. for; and there can never
be too much done to avoid Hell. They might this know, that when their strength
is firm, Psalm. 73. 4. they are sick unto Death: And they must dye one time or
another, as sure as they now live. And so they might have taken, and done
throughout all their foregoing Life according to the exhortation in the close
of our Text, Set thine House in order, for thou shall dye and not live.

To use a not much unlike Reafoning as is in Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 11,
12, 13. The plain Doctrine and Instruction which is delivered here, it is not
hidden from thee, neither is it afar off, that there is need only of some
extraordinary Prophet, who can foretell future, Unseen, Unthought of, Unexpected
Events. For such a message as this, Thou shall dye, and not live, the meanest
Laick, or most common Person, knows altogether as well as well as the greatest
Prophet or Preacher; or to expr^ss it according to those titles, wherein some
are now a days dignified and distinguished, as the greatest Bishop, Dean or
Doctor, or as the most learned Person. And as we sensibly find that things are
apt to be in a confusion, or some disorder, upon the death or departure of any
Person: So the natural Inference or Thought arises; yea common reason teaches
the same, even to set them in order, and prevent as much beforehand that
disorder which otherwise would follow and ensue thereupon. There is no great
need of another immediate Revelation from Heaven for this; for God has already
taught it unto us, by that common knowledge, which he has given unto us as his
reasonable Creatures: But yet God willing more abundantly to acqnaint us with a
lesson of so very great Importance, as indeed it is to every one of us: And
seeing that the same has a much further meaning, and requiring, than to order
the Disposition of our Lands, Houses, Money, and Goods. For it has a much more
Noble, even a Spiritual Sense and Signification, to set our Souls, which dwell
in this Earthly House of the Body, in order, for we shall dye, or yet more
properly, we shall leave these Habitations of Clay. Therefore I say, that God
has ordered the same, for further security; and to bring it yet more to our
Knowledge and Remembrance, to be written in his Statute Book the Bible, as also
we may find the same Engraven in the Word, that is nigh us, even in our Heart;
for we may also perceive a still Voice speaking from thence, Set thine House in
order, for thou shall dye, and not live.

Isaiah the Prophet the Son of Amos, came unto him and said. From hence we may
also consider, How God who at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in
time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto
us by his Son. For in those days, it was not so much Isaiah, but God himself,
who spoke this by Isaiah unto Hezekiah. To which agree those words of our
Savior unto his Apostles and Disciples, For'tis not ye^ that speak, but the
Spirit of my Father which speaks in you. Mat. 10. 20: And so God spoke by
Moses, David, Job, and by all the Prophets. But now he speaks by Christ, who is
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, in whom all the
others do meet and concenter. Searching what, or what manner of Time the Spirit
of Christ, wh^^h was in them did signify. 1 Pet. 1. 11. The Spirit of Christ in
them. In whom? Why, In the Prophets mentioned in the foregoing Verse: Whose
Spirit did actuate them all, just like as the Soul does actuate the Body.
Although Christ was than in Heaven, and they were here on Earth, in their
several Generations, long before God did send his Son in the fullness of Time,
for to become Flesh. The Spirit of God and of Christ are near one, and the
same; and so God and the Word of God are one, and the same; according to that
common Maxim, Nothing is in God, but what is God himself. So that we are not to
look upon those words which we find written in the Bible, as the words of
Moses, Samuel, Job, David, and the Prophets; or those in the New Testament, as
the words of the Evangelists and Apostles, who yet did write and speak them;
but we should consider of it higher and further as the word of God and Christ,
which God and Christ spoke by them. As when we send a Letter to one at a
Hundred Miles distance, whom we have known or heard of; we do by that same
Letter, speak to him in effect; yea, and as much to their knowledge and
understanding, as if we were in the same Room together, and we did talk to them
face to face: So I have often thought, that the Scriptures are as the Letter,
or Epistle of the Most High God; which is sent unto us, the Inhabitants of this
Earth; for hereby God does speak unto us from Heaven, the Habitation of his
Holiness, which is more than a Thousand or a Million of Miles distance from us,
all one as if we heard outwardly his Voice (which in that sense, no Man has
seen God at any time, nor heard his Voice) or as if the Lord did dwell Visibly
amongst us, which he does not.

Is it so? Yes verily, Then this is a mighty Argument, and terrible
Consideration against those who refuse to Read, or Hear the Word of God, See
that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who refused him
that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven. Heb. 12. 25. It was the Angel on Mount Sinah, and
Moses and the Prophets that spoke on the Earth; but it is Christ the Son of God
that now speaks from Heaven. For though Jesus Christ is long since ascended
on High, and Sits on the Right Hand of the Father; yet he speaks to us from
Heaven, even now in his Word, and in the Preaching and Ministry thereof. For as
Moses of old time has in every City, them that Preach him, being Read in the
Synagogues every Sabbath Day: Even so now, Christ has those who continually
Preach him as Moses had ^ by how much he is not only greater than Moses, but
even greater than the very Angels of God. And who will not hear the Ministers
of Christ, who preach him, or who Preach the Word of God; for whosoever
Preaches the Word of God, Preaches Christ, in as much as Christ is the Word
of God: Neither would such be persuaded, if Christ should come once again into
the World, after the same manner as he did, which will not be so; for his next
coming will be unto Judgment; which Will be in Glory and in Power, and in
flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. But in the mean while, he has gave the Word,
and there are those who Preach it. He has sent forth Laborers into his
Harvest, with full Power and Commission, He that hears you, hears me; and
he that despises you, despises him that sent me. Luke 10. 16. Even the Great
God himself, who made the World and all things therein. What do ye think will
become of those who despise God? As they who despise his Word, either preached
or spoken, written or printed, do despise God himself. Why? God has fortold
us, what will become of such, They that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed.
1 Samuel 2. 30. This is not all neither; for God will answer, requite, and punish
them in very like manner; They shall go forth, and look upon the Carcasses of
the Men that have Transgressed against Me; and they shall be an abhorring unto
all Flesh. Isa. 66. 24. Observe here the slighting kind of Phrase, Carcasses,
the Holy Ghost makes use of. That such little, despicable, and vile Beings) who
even in the midst of Life, are but Men and Women in Carcasses; Notwithstanding
some have Jolly and Red looks, A^e enclosed in their own Fat, according to the
Psalmi^^'s, Phrase, or are arrayed in fine Clothes) should ever behave
themselves contemptuous or disdainful toward a most Excellent, Infinite, and
Glorious Majesty, as the Invisible God is. If there should come any Letter to
me, or any order concerning me, under the Great Seal of England, with the Royal
Signet and Arms, and I would not Read nor look into it, nor hear what it was,
but take and stamp it under my Feet, or Burn, and Tear it, or throw it into the
Dirt, upon the Ground: All this, and such like, would be a contempt, and
affront to the Kings Person: Even so every Divine Word and Truth, whether it be
Preached Spoken, Written or Printed, does Bear the Image and Superscription of
the Invisible God, the great King of all the Earth. So that of necessity, a
contempt and despising of the one, is a contempt and despising of the other
also. He that despises the Word or Ministers of God, despises God himself.
Says the Lord of Hosts, unto you O Priests, that despise my Name; and ye say,
wherein have we Despised thy Name? Mat. 1. 6. The Priests do there say, Wherein
have we despised thy Name? And as they ask the Question in Mat. 25. 44. When
saw we thee an Hungered, or a Thirst, or a Stranger, and did not Minister unto
thee? So the doleful herd, that vast Multitude of cast a-ways, and forlorn
Souls, who shall be condemned a^ the last Day, will be apt to think or say,
wherein did lie, and consist the great Evil-deserving, and malignity of Sin,
that for that they must go away into Everlasting Punishment and Misery. They
will perceive it somewhat more than we can now apprehend or assign the reason
thereof in these Days of our Flesh: Though even th^n, ^^ey will not perceive it
thoroughly, and to the utmost, ti^l God shall discover, and convict them of it
more and more, by the Pains and Torments he shall inflict on them; for
otherwise, such thoughts would not arise in their Hearts, neither would they
ask such a Question. But this may be most surely gathered, and understood in
the mean while, as from the place afore-quoted, in Isa. 66. 24. The reason is
therein infolded and assigned why the Carcasses of some Men shall be exposed to
public view, because They have Transgressed against the Lord. So the like may
be understood from Dan. 12. 2. 1 Samuel 2. 30. And by Mark 8. 38. The reason why
some there shall awake to shame and Everlasting contempt, is because they were
ashamed of God, and of Christ, and of his Word, in this Adulterous and Sinful
Generation. So they did despise God, and despise his Word in this Rebellious
and Sinful World, whilst they were in the Days of their Flesh, and in this
Life, before they did drop into the Dust of the Earth; and therefore it is that
now they shall rise up to Everlasting shame and contempt.

As in those Days, when Hezekiah was sick unto Death, Isaiah the Son of Amos
came unto him. Aand as Paul went in unto the Jews, and Reasoned unto them out
of the Scriptures: So I do hereby denounce unto all such, who shall Hear or
Read these Lines; whether ye have Pale, Ruddy, or Healthful Looks; yet all ye
are sick unto Death; Thus says the Lord, Set your House in Order, for ye shall
dye, and not live.

What God does speak at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, in time past by
the Prophets, and in these last Days by his Son, who is the Word; and by his
Ministers: He does also, even now, speak the very same, by his Spirit within
the Hearts and Consciences of each Man and Woman. And so I put ye all to it,
that hear the Lord speaking, by me his Creature, unto ^e his Creatures this
Day. Do ye not? Or can ye not, at this very moment, perceive a still Voice,
from within ye severally, which exactly answers unto, and witnesses the very
same, as is the Message of the Lord God unto ye, Set your Houses in order, for
ye shall die, and not live.

Besides the sure Word of Prophecy, (for this is spoken of somewhat to come
hereafter) Whereunto ye do well that ye take heed as unto a Light that shines
in a dark place; there is also, and moreover, the day dawn, and the day star
arising in your hearts: Both which Lights do agree one to the other, and do
serve to one and the same end, viz. to lead, guid^ and direct us to Heaven that
Place, where is (...) of Life; in thy Light shall we see Light (...) it is
^^^ewhere written, The Sword without, the Terror within which do both conspire
and tend to a Third (...) Destruction. So contrariwise it stands in (...) as
pertaining to the Salvation of Man. Ther^ (...) the Word without, and also the
Word within; like Ezekiel's Roll in Chap. 2. written within and without: So
there is also the Law of God written in the inward parts, and also in the
Leaves of the Bible Engraven in Tables of Stone, and also in Table^ (...) the
Heart; both which do agree in one, and in o^^dience to both, is Man's Life and
Salvation. What God has joined together, let no man put asunder. What God has
ordered to be written and made known both ways, let no Man conceive without the
other. The right understanding and consideration of this would prevent, lest
under pretense of having more Veneration for the Word within, they have the
l^ss Esteem for the outward written Word.

As again, by minding only the outward written Word, they do not give so much
heed to the Dictates of the Spirit, and of the Word from within; which again,
some Superficial, Nominal and Outward Worshippers do err in as to the other
hand; whereas Truth lies in the middle between both extremes; and the right
manner of Acting, is to give heed, and have equal regard unto them both.

What the Everliving God does say, that we dying Creatures should immediately
obey. And such, who are indeed his Saints and People do assemble for no other
purpose but to sit, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. and hear all things that are commanded from
God and made known from his Word for to hear and do them; Deuteronomy. 5. 27. and they
do hereby avouch themselves unto him to be their God, and then God will
reciprocally avouch them to be his People. Set (...) unto all the words which I
testify among you this aay, which (...) shall command your Children to observe
to ^o all the words of this Law. For it is not a vain thing for (...) ^^^ause
it is your Life, and through this thing ye shall pr^lo^ (...) days in the Land
whither ye go over Jordan to possess (...) Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47. It is yo ur Life,
hereby ye will be taught and instructed that though ye die, ye may live again;
and what ye must do to inherit and partake of the Blessing which the Lord h^th
commanded, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. 3. For as the Sons of Isaac were
to do somewhat for their Father before they received his Blessing: Even so we
Creatures must do somewhat for God our Creator and Father (sor so he is to all
that show themselves obedient Children) before he actually confers and bestows
the Blessing which he has already pronounced and made known, signified by that
word, The Lord has command^d, even Life for evermore. Through this thing (viz.
Universal Obedience and observing all the words of his Law) ye shall prolong
your days in the L^n^, whither ye go over Jordan to possess it. This is
sufficient prolonging ones days to a witness to live the length of a whole
Eternity, or to live for evermore. In the Land, that is, the new Heavens and
new Earth where dwells Righteousness. After we are gone over Jordan; hereby
is typified and signified the River of this Li^e) for to possess it. For indeed
the very truth of the matter stands on this wise if we shall be rendered meet
and found worthy. As Jesus the Prince of Life did say when he heard that
Lazarus was sick, This sickness is not unto Death. When indeed it was a
sickness unto Death, for Lazarus died of that sickness. But Christ the Way, the
Truth and the Life, spoke on this wise, knowing in himself what he would do,
even raise Lazarus to Life again. And so it was for the Glory of God that God
might be glorified thereby. Even so in very like manner the words of our Text
may be read and reversed, Set your House in order, for thou shall live and not
die. For the Soul, which is we our selves, does not die when it goes out of
this Body, but only leaves this earthly House, and departs from this Body, and
changes its place of Abode and Habitation. I remember that I was very much
pleased and transported within my self, because I find from out of the
S^r^ptures of Truth and mine own Spirit witnessing the same what I have Read in
Cicero and Zenophon, Heathen Authors, where Cyrus, and Cato, and Scipio are
brought in speaking to this purpose and effect. Says Cyrus; It could never be
persuaded to me that these Souls of ours when they go out of this Body, do die
or perish. For most certainly they live unto God the Father of Spirits. For my
part I do as firmly b^lieve and am as verily persuaded of all this, as that I
now write these Lines, or as I am assured that I now live and breath.

It has b^^n aforesaid, That even in the midst of Life, Health and Vigor
every one of us was sick unto Death, because that we did all along carry about
with us in the Body the Seeds of Corruption and Mortality. Which holds true as
to the Flesh and outward part of us. But as to our Souls we are not sick unto
Death, but alive unto (...) in the Apostle's Phras^, or alive unto Everlasting
Life if we have the Seeds of Grace and Holiness in our Souls; which are indeed
the Principles of Life and Immortality abiding within us. To this agrees the
meaning of the Holy Ghost in several places of Scripture, particularly in the
Gospel of John. Says Jesus Christ, Ye will not come unto me that ye might have
life, John 5. 40. For the Bread of God is he that comes down from Heaven and
gives life unto the world. I am come that they might have life, and that they
might have it more abundantly. Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be a
Well of Water, springing up into Everlasting life, John 4. 14. He that
believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Water, John 7. 38. These two last Scriptures com^ directly to our
present purpose. For it being here said, In him a Well of Water springing up
unto everlasting life; and here it is said, That it shall flow out of his
Belly, and by what the Scripture elsewhere says, that such an one has in him
everlasting life, all this shows and confirms that the Saints and Servants of
the Most High God, by having Grace and Holiness and the new Life ingraffed in
them, they have also thereby even whilst their Souls inhabit in this weak, vile
and dying Body here on Earth, the Seeds and Principles of Immortality and
Eternal Life, so that they shall never see Death, that is Death Eternal; and
when their Souls go out of these Bodies, they do not die but live. And so it is
found true in them what Seneca says, who herein spoke much more like a
Christian than like an Heathen (for Flesh and Blood could not reveal these
things unto him, but God his Creator) says he, That day which some fear to be
their last (he means the Day of Death) is indeed the Birthday of Immortali^y.
For in truth the Souls of the Righteous are then Born and brought forth into
another World, into an in^^ni^ely better and more enduring s^ate.

The Ungodly are not so. It is otherwise with the Wicked and the Children of
Disobedience, or the Children of Perdition as the Scripture Phrases them. For
wh^t is the greatest Happiness to the Righteous, is the beginning of Sorrows
unto these. The Day of Death is either the best or worst of all the foregoing
Days, even according as the foregoing Life has been Good or Evil, Godly or
Ungodly, for the Souls of these Miserable Creatures do also live and exist, and
they are sensible also. Yet according to the meaning of the Holy Ghost,
especially in many places of the Revelations, and also according to the desire
and feeling of the Creatures themselves, it is Death and not Life, or rather
worse than Life to abide in Torment, Pain and Misery. And therefore it is so
often called the second Death, or Death. The Soul that sins, it shall die.
Turn you, turn you, why will ye die? Not that the Souls of them will ever cease
to be, in no wise. But they will be in such a wretched condition that Death
would be better than Life. According as it is written, In those days shall men
seek to die, and death shall flee from them.

As it is here explained these two manner of ways, this is the Order, Decree
and Appointment of God our Creator upon all the Reasonable Inhabitants of the
Earth, who are commonly called or known by the Name of Men and Women. It is
appointed for all once to die, but after that the Judgment, and then they are
to rise and live again. For the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the Graves shall hear his voice. And shall come forth. They that have done good
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.

S^eing then that all these things must so be, yea, and they shall so be, what
manner of Persons ought ye to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness.
Looking for and endeavoring whatever we can in this short space between,
during the few and evil days remaining of our Pilgrimage, that we may rise unto
the Resurrection of Life. Most People have done some little good in the
foregoing part of their Life according to their Station and Capacity, their
Condition and Employment in the World. But as it was said, Ahab served Baal a
little, but Jehu shall serve him much: So let every one of us make the like
Inference and Reasoning, and to take up the same Resolution as to put it in
continued Practice unto the day of our several Deaths in reference to the God
of Israel; hitherto and in the foregoing part of my Life, I have served God a
little, and I have done a little good, but for what now remains I will serve
God much, and labor whatever I can to do much good; for it will be only of the
number of those that have done good that will rise unto the Resurrection of
Life. This one thing to remember and practice, to observe and do is Benefit and
Use enough for your coming to hear this Sermon. But I am sensible beforehand of
all the Exhortation that has or can be used as to this matter that this will
be the effect of hearing this and of all other Sermons. As it was in reference
to Paul's Preaching, And some believed the things which were spoken, and some
believed not, Acts 28. 24. So some of ye will obey and do according to the
things that have been spoken, others again will not obey and do thereafter.
Some of ye will hear and endeavor to remember by pondering these things in
your Heart after ye are gone from hence (as Mary laid up the sayings of Jesus
in her Heart) there be those again who will hear with one Ear, and let it out
with another, that it shall go off and be with them as a flash, and a noise,
and as the Wind that passes away.

Even so it will be at the end of things, and as to all the Generations and
Persons of Mankind of all Country and Places. It is appointed to all to die.
This of necessity and force. Some of them did set their Houses in order, that
is, their Souls in a readiness and meetness before they died. Others again did
not set their Houses in order before they died, but they were careless and
negligent as to that, till indeed Death came upon them. He that feared the Word
of the Lord amongst the Servants of Pharaoh made his Servants and his Cattle
flee into the Houses (which were hereby preserved) and he that regarded not (in
the Margent here it is, set not his Heart unto) the Word of the Lord, left his
Servants and his Cattle in the Field, Exodus 9. 20, 21. which were therefore
destroyed. Even so it is here, he or they among the Inhabitants of the Earth,
that feared the Word of the Lord, obeyed the Exhortation in our Text, and did
set their Houses in order before they died; and those will be saved and
preserved, for though they die, they shall live again. But such of the
Inhabitants of the Earth as did not regard, nor set their Heart unto the Word
of the Lord, the Exhortation and Command in our Text. They did neglect to set
their Houses or their Souls in Order before they died, even these Souls shall
perish and be destroyed; for though they shall never cease to be, but they also
shall live again; yet it shall be only to receive and partake of Pain,
Punishment and Misery.

SERMON II.
Isaiah 38. 1. -- Set thine House in Order, for thou shall die, and not live.
IN which words Two Things are to be considered,

First, A Duty enjoin^d, Set thine House in order. Secondly, The Reason added
and annexed, For thou shall die, and not live.

As to the first, As when David was old and stricken in Years, and the Time
drew nigh that he should die, he gives charge, and takes care who of his
Children should succeed him in the Kingdom over Isra^l, as may be seen in the
first and second Chapters of the first Book of Kings, which was a great and
weighty Concern. So from that good and godly Example, as also from the common
Practice and Usage of the World, we learn that it is both lawful and
commendable, yea, it is the certain Duty as well as it is the Wisdom of each
one according to his Station and outward Circumstances to give charge and take
care concerning the Righteous Distribution and Disposition of those Houses and
Lands, Money or Goods to his Children and others to whom of Right it does
belong, as Sons, Daughters, Kinsfolks, Poor and such like. For as touching this
the Word and Law of God has Commanded and Directed, Children are not to lay up
for their Parents, but Parents for their Children. He that provideth not for
his own, and especially for those of his own House, has denied the Faith and
is worse than an Infidel. Neither will this be sufficient, available or
acceptable with God, to be Righteous unto all others, and to be Unrighteous
unto his own Children. For we may Read in Romans 1. 32. That those who are
without Natural affection are there Ranked among the vilest and worst of Men.
But contrariwise, As a good Man will guide his Affairs with discretion, Psalm.
112. 5. in the midst of, and throughout his Life, so more especially he will do
the same toward and before his Death. Even by so ordering his Matters by a
Righteous, Equitable, Equal and Impartial Distribution of his Goods amongst
them. As to give them no just Occasion for them to s^eak evil of him, nor yet
for his Adversaries to speak Reproachfully; and to prevent beforehand
Law-sui^s, Quarrelling, Hatred, between Brothers and Sisters, Kinsfolks and
Neighbors and such like. As we often know and hear that these last evil things
and inconveniences do too commonly happen for want of People thus setting
their Houses in order before they die.

To set the House in order is spoken by way of Me^onomy, that is, to set the
Things contained in the House in order, and that is Goods, as also Parchment
Writings and Evidences c^ncerning Lands; as we Read that Jeremiah did Seal and
Subscribe unto them when he made the purchase.

But this Phrase of the Holy Ghost has a further meaning than all this, even a
Spiritual Sense and Signification, therefore I now proceed to explain and
handle it in that Threefold sense and meaning, which the words will naturally
bear without any forced or violent Construction made upon them.

As Man is usually considered in a Threefold Capacity, outward Estate, Body and
Soul; of which two last he is made up and constituted, but the first is a thing
appendant extrinsical and belonging to him: So to set his House in order does
denote these three things.

1st, To set his outward Estate in order.

2dly, To set his Body in order.

3dly, To set his Soul in order, for this is the most Principal thing. That all
these are severally meant, included and intended when the Holy Ghost spoke thus
by Isaiah unto Hezekiah, Set thine House in order, will appear from other
places of Scripture, which was given by Inspiration from God, as also from the
very Nature and Reason of things.

It has been observed, that it is a Man's Prudence to make his last Will and
Testament in the midst of Life and Health, and to keep it always ready by him,
For the Party is never the nearer Death for so doing, but only more ready and
prepared for it. For in sickness there is Pain and Weakness enough to grapple
withal which will employ the Mind and Sense; so that it is best to be troubled
or perplexed as little as possible about Worldly and outward things, so from
that manner of Speech of the Apostle Paul, No Man that Warreth Entangleth
himself with the Affairs of this Life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. It is not said, he does
meddle at all but not Entangle, that is, not involve or Plunge himself in; for
this is a mighty hindrance to the Things of God. So his real Servant, who is
Faithful and Spiritual, as he does not that throughout his Life; so from hence
I have often thought, that it is not only Godly Discr^tion and Soulsaving
Wisdom, but indeed it is a happy and blessed condition, so to have ordered and
settled all Worldly things before, that when we come to Die indeed, then we may
have nothing to do but to Die. As Grace and Holiness should not then be for us
to get just as we come to Die, but they should be gotten and had long before.
Even so in like manner as to the disposition of this Worlds Goods, it will be
expedient not to be distracted then about that business, but care also as to
them should have been taken some considerable time before. For when one lies
upon the Bed of sickness, or in the Extremity and point of Death there are
other important things both of Body and Soul for to Mind and be busied about
then.

2dly, The Second Branch of that Duty enjoined, set thine House in order, is to
set our Body in order. In 2 Cor. 5. 1. the Body in express words is called an
Earthly House. For we know that if our Earthly House of this Tabernacle be
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an Horse not Built with Hands, Eternal in
Heaven. So this allows and justifies for our taking and interpreting the words
of our Text in this sense also. Set thine House in order, that is, set the
Earthly House of this Tabernacle, viz. the Body in order.

Now indeed there cannot be much said as to this, inasmuch as the Body is but
as the husk or shell, and as a tenement of Clay. And how can it then be set in
order just as it is going to dissolve and moulder into the Dust? But when the
Holy Ghost does in so particular a manner record, And when Jacob had made an
end of Commanding his Sons, he gathered up his Feet into the Bed and yielded up
the Ghost, Genesis 49. 33. By Faith Joseph when he died gave Comma^dment
concerning his Bones, Heb. 11. 22. Genesis 50. 25. Now the Scripture says nothing
in vain. But hereby we learn that the Body is not only to be set in order
throughout the cour^e of its Life, by endeavoring to keep it in a state of
Health, Sobriety, Temperance, Purity and Charity! But even after its
dissolution care is to be taken and order to be given beforehand concerning a
decent Interment and Burial thereof. As these Bodies of ours are the
Workmanship of God; for indeed to those who understand and consider them
thoroughly, they do appear to be a Noble, Excellent and Admirable Structure. I
am fearfully and wonderfully made. But then especially as these Bodies of ours
have a further Pre-e^inence and Honor as to be the Members of Christ, and
Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in you. And therefore Proportionably respect
and concern is to be had unto them, that these Members of Christ, and this
Temple of the Holy Ghost may be set in order before and after that we die.

When the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews takes particular notice, By
Faith Joseph when he died, gave Commandment concerning his Bones, hereby he
would show forth unto us Joseph's belief at that very time concerning a future
State and of the Resurrection. How that he had then a Faith and expectation,
that those very Feet which his Father Jacob had gathered up into the Bed, as
also his own Bones of his Body though now they were to become Dust and to be
Buried, yet as he says in the Original place, God will surely Visit you (he
means his Kinsmen, the Stock and Children of Israel) and ye shall carry up my
Bones from hence, Gen 50. 25. As much as if he should have said, God will
surely Visit us all, both my Kinsmen, Brethren, my self and all that shall
descend from us (which afterward were like the Stars in the Heaven, or the
Sand on the Seashore for Multitude) and so all the Generations and Persons of
Mankind, when He that turns Man to Destruction, shall say, Return ye Children
of Men, Psalm. 90. 5. This is Visiting and doing somewhat more for them; and
then those very same Bones of mine which I now take an Oath from ye that ye
shall carry them up from hence, God will lay Sinews upon them, and bring Flesh
upon them, d^d cover them with Skin and put Breath in them, and ye shall live
and know that I am the Lord, Ezekiel. 37. 6. Which will be Literally fulfilled at
the last Day. When this same Body and these same Bones, which is now seen to be
lain and Buried in the Ground and turns to Corruption, and dissolution shall be
raised up and be made whole and entire again in like manner (though it will be
done more suddenly, for it shall be done in a moment, in a twinkling of an Eye,
for the Trumpet shall Sound, and the Dead shall be raised Incorruptible and we
shall be changed) as they were corrupted and dissolved. The Scripture all along
and throughout is so very full and clear as to the Resurrection of the Body in
a Literal sense, that it is to be admired how any that Name the Name of Christ
or call themselves Christians, can deny or disbelieve it. Though I have heard
and talked with some nowadays, who just like Hymeneus and Philet as have
Erred as concerning the Resurrection, saying that it is already past. For the
only Resurrection, as some Erroneous People would have it, is a rising again to
Newness of Life and in a Spiritual sense. True indeed, there is a rising to
Newness of Life here that they may rise to the Resurrection of Life hereafter.
And Blessed are they which have their part in this first Resurrection, upon
them the second Death has no Power. But besides this, the Scriptures do in
diverse places speak expressly and clearly of the Resurrection of the Body; and
what God has joined together let no Man put asunder. So that they must be
infidels ^^d deny the Faith, who shall gainsay or disbelieve it.

As Jesus Christ proved the Resurrection of the Dead from that general
expression in the Old Testament, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the
God of Jacob; then comes the Reasoning and Inference, God is not the God of the
Dead, but of the Living. And so if any one should go about to prove the
Resurrection of the Body from this saying of Joseph upon his Death Bed, God
shall surely Visit you; it might at first seem an hard matter to make it out
from thence. Which notwithstanding will easily and clearly appear, if we attend
unto and consider thoroughly that Reasoning and Inference, which lies as it were
hidden within those very words. For though indeed and in truth these words
according to the intent and meaning of Joseph when he then spoke them, were a
prophecy and foretelling that God would bring the Children of Israel from out
of the Land of Egypt the House of Bondage unto that good Land, the Land of
Canaan, which he had promised and Sworn unto Abram that begat them, that he
would do. But as the Apostle says by the Spirit concerning what befell the Sons
of Jacob and Joseph, All those things happened to them in a Figure: So what God
did and the several things Recorded of them, they are a Show and Representation
to us, they are a Type and Signification, that as the Lord God the Creator and
Preserver, yea, and the Restorer of Mankind, did lead forth the Children of
Israel, from out of Egypt through the Wilderness into the Land of Promise: So
he did before that time and has ever since, and does continue to do so at this
Day to lead all the Generations, yea and single Persons of Men and Women of
every Nation, Country and Language from and throughout this Earth unto the
Land of Promise the Heavenly Canaan, either to the New Heav^n and New Earth
where dwells Righteousness; or else to the Land of Darkness, of Dragons and
Scorpions, where the Shadow of Death and no Light is, the Inhabitation of Sin
and Misery. Where every Son and Daughter of Men, and all the descendants from
Adam and Eve shall be, after that we shall Die and are removed from hence.

But now I come to that inward Reasoning and Inference, which lies couched and
included within those words of Joseph; and (Reader) do thou observe it. When we
Die it is evidently seen that the Soul and Breath vanishes and goes away and
seems to be nothing at all. And so the Body or House of Cl^y putrifies and
turns into common Earth and undistinguishable Dust, and consequently as good as
nothing, or as nothing as to a Reasonable and Living Creature. Now what is
absolutely nothing, cannot be properly the Object of God's care and concern;
and what is not simply nothing, or as it were nothing, he does not neither so
much mind. Because that as God is a Being, or rather the Foundation, Root,
Center and Comprehensive of all Beings, he containing all things that are in
himself. As the Divinely Inspired Psalmist says, His tender Mercy is over all
his Works. So of necessity it must be his work or being for to engage God's
Conservation, care and concern about it. As we learn from Heb. 12. 26. Every
least Word or Particle of Scripture is observable; for from out of it may be
gathered some Truth and Signification: So that when we Read Therefore Sprang
there even of one, and him as good as Dead, Heb. 11, 12. From hence we may
Reason and infer, that when any one is Dead, he is then as we commonly say, as
good as nothing. And inasmuch as God is not the God of the Dead but of the
Living, therefore when Joseph spoke thus by the Spirit, God shall surely Visit
you (both himself included when he was just giving up the Ghost, as also his
Brethren who were to Die a little afterward, hereby must be meant and
understood (as the last End and Event of things will most fully prove and
manifest it) that God would both speak unto and also do somewhat for his
Creatures, after that they are Dead and gone; and that is no other, but to
raise up to Life again what before was Dead, and to give it a Being what before
had no being, or at least as good as no Being. Our selves whilst here in life,
do not usually go into the Grave or into a Charnel House to Visit Dry Bone^;
for when our friends and acquaintance are once Dead, if we are perhaps invited
and go to their Funeral and accompany their Corpse to the Ground, there is an
end of all Visits as to them. And also unless we are Dumb or Mute or Idiots we
never make a visit to any one, but we talk somewhat or another to him. And also
when we Read of a Duty implied, of Visiting and Ministering unto those that are
Sick or in Prison, Mat. 25. 43, 44. We may from thence learn that the end of
all Visits unto People (seeing that much time is Squandred away herein amongst
Rich People to impertinent talk and impertinent purpos^s) should be to be
helpful one to another. For they in Sickness or in Prison cannot so well help
themselves; or to edify one another; Either to ask or Minister help should be
the End of all Visits. Though here again the Humor and manner of this Corrupt
World, is to say unto such as are in Want or Distress, Depart in peace, be you
warm and filled: But notwithstanding they give them not those things which are
needful to the Body, what does it profit? James 2. 16. What do all their good
and pitiful words signify which cost them nothing? People are very free of
them, and of their fruitless Wishes, when they Visit People in Imprisonment or
in Distress: Or they spend their Time in some vain, worldly Talk, without
dropping one Word of Godly and Divine Conversation. But as God is infinitely
greater and better than Man, so his Visits do as much differ from, and
proportionably excel theirs in Help and Benefit. For whereas Man says and does
not (which is sometimes for want of Power, and more commonly through
Dissimulation, or for want of Will) God both says and does. Our Good and
Gracious God does most effectually answer the true end of all Visits. For he
never makes a Visit, where it is understood in a way of Love and Friendship
(for the Scripture also makes mention of God's Visiting in a way of Anger and
Punishment, as Jer. 5. 9. Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord?
Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?) But either he does some
good thing, or some helpful thing to those he visits. With God to say and to
do, is one and the same thing. For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and
it stood fast. For has he said, and shall it not come to pass? Yes, as surely
as he ever s^id; though most commonly the one may be (according to his own
Divine Method) some Thousands of Years before the other. From all which has
been aforesaid on this Argument put together, it may be evidently concluded,
That whereas God (the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who ordered and decreed
him to be put to death in the Fl^^ but quickened by the Spirit, by which also he
went and preached to the Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19.) shall surely
visit all the Children of Men, who ever have or shall sleep in the Dust of the
Earth; hereby it may be certainly gathered, that he will both say something
unto them, and also do something for them. And what is that? Even to raise up
their Bones again from thence, and to perform that in a Literal Sense, of all
the Generations and Persons of Mankind of all Countries which he has said in
the Thirty-seventh Chapter of Ezekiel, from the fourth to the four^e^nth Verse;
for when all the Men and Women of all Generations from the beginning of the
World unto the end thereof, and of all Countries and places throughout the
habitable parts of the Earth, shall be raised up again all together, and as
they shall live and stand upon their feet (even those very same feet which they
had gathered up into the Bed, when they severally yielded up the Ghost) they
will make an exceeding Great Army, as it is there said in verse. 10. And ye
shall know that I am the Lord when I have opened your Graves, O my People, and
brought you out of your Graves, and shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall
live, and I shall place you in your own Land; (the meaning of which last
Speech, is, That as Judas went unto his own place, so God will make but two
distinctions, and place them severally in their own Land, even in the good Land
(as there is of both sorts of these beyond the Grave, as well as on this side
of it) according as their own Works or Deeds done in the Body, have been good
or evil. Then shall ye know that I the Lord have spoken it, and performed it,
says the Lord, Ezekiel. 37. 13, 14. This again confirms what was aforesaid, for
this speaking and performing both, is surely visiting according to the true
nature and end thereof And such of ye, who shall hear or read these lines, who
also shall be ranked in amongst that exceeding great Army, are my Witnesses;
and some of ye perhaps may remember, (when ye shall indeed see it performed
before your Eyes as the Lord has spoken) that in this Book or Treatise of
mine, according to the Knowledge and Understanding which God had given and
opened unto me his Creature, I did rightly: and according to Truth, explain
even in the most large and comprehensive sense as aforementioned, those words
of dying Joseph, God shall surely visit you.

Seeing then that these Bones (it is a certain truth) which we now carry about
us in the Body, and shall be la^d in the Grave, and God himself shall carry or
rather raise them up from thence, as also this whole Body of ours shall be
raised incorruptible, and set in order again, after that Death has disordered
it: The inference from all this, is natural and necessary, that there must be
also some Act of our own according to the Ability and Power put into our Hand,
to answer this Act of God's; namely, that we set this House of our Body in
order before; for we shall die and be raised again. Remember it for a constant
Rule, as there is expected our working together with the Grace of God, so still
and all along there must be some Act of our own (according to the Grace he has
already given us, and according to the Power and Ability put into our Hands) to
answer with God's Act on us Creatures. As when Jesus says, I go to prepare a
place for you, John 14. 2. to this we must endeavor by the Grace given us, to
prepare our selves in the mean while for that place, even that we may be meet
to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Even so it is here
in our present matter, though it has been here declared, God will set our
Bodies in order in the Resurrection and future State, as he did set them in
order in his first Creation, and Workmanship of them. For this Body was
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth (that is, in our Mothers
Womb) thine Eyes did see my Substance yet b^ing u^pe^fect, and in thy Book all
my Members were written, which in continuan^e were fashioned. (Observe here is
an Orderly Work and Procedure by that God, who is the Go^ of Order, and not of
Confusion) so I say again, to this first and last Act of God's o^^ these Bodies
of ours, if we would indeed obtain and have part in the bl^ssed Resurrection,
it is required and expected of us, that acc^rding to what lies in our power
(though we cannot make one hair white or black, nor yet add one Cub^t to our
Stature) we should also in the mean while, s^t our Bodies in order also, even
that we may keep ^^em from Filth and Pollution, from Unruliness and Diso^der.

But some will say, how must we keep or set these Bodies in order? This the
Scripture teaches, For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that
ye should abstain from Fornication, that every one of you should know how to
possess his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, 1 These. 4. 3. By Vessel, is
meant his Body, according to that other Scripture, for we have this Treasure in
Earthen V^ssels: But here it is said, Possess his Vessel. Perhaps it is not in
our Trade, nor yet in our Power to make Vessels, (for that belongs to the
Potter; neither can he make them, unless he has Clay brought ready to his
hand; for Creation is the incommunicable Attribute of the Deity, and all Men's
making is only fashioning, changing or altering, by bringing it into such a
Form or Figure; for they must have some pre-existent matter to work upon, and
there is no such thing as simple making in all the labor under the Sun, which
is done by the Children of Men) but in this instance of possessing our Vessel,
though we do not know how to make it, yet we may know how to keep this our
Vessel sweet and clean. And so we may know how to keep and set these Bodies of
ours in such order, like as we put Clothes on to Preserve them from cold, and
as we put Victuals in them to keep them from hunger and famishing. Even so may
any one resrain any longer from yielding his M^mbers Servants to Uncleanness,
and to Iniquity unto Iniquity: But that henceforth they yield their Members to
Righ^^ousness; unto Holiness, Romans 6. 19. The Apostle goes on to add in verse.
22. But now being made free from sin, and become the Servants of God, ye have
your fruit unto Holiness, and your end everlasting life. From hence we learn,
that to set these Bodies of ours in order, is to keep and preserve them from
sin; for hereby we shall with them serve God. And what is the blessed
consequent of all? Ye have your fruit unto Holiness, and the and everlasting
life. This teaches and instructs in two things. First; That this doing, and
thus setting them in order, is the way for God to set them in order in the
Resurrection, in the day of Judgment, and the future Eternal State which
succeeds after that. An Holy Body, is an Orderly Body.

In the second place, this proves and confirms, that as we do carry along with
us, in these our Bodies, the Seeds of Mortality and Corruption: So if we have
already, or can get Holiness ingraf^ed in them. This thing of Holiness, is a
Seed of Immortality and Eternal Life; which the Man or Woman has abiding in
them, even at the very same time when he is in this life, which is as a Vapor,
and continues not.

To mention again the Apostle's Dehortation, That ye yield not your Members
Servants to Uncleanness, and to Iniquity unto Iniquity; and as we naturally
receive in Food, and put on Raiment to avoid Hunger and Cold; and as we would
not willingly throw our selves headl^ng from an high Tower or Precipice, nor
yet dash out our Brains against a Stone^ Wall, nor run our tender Flesh upon
sharp Iron Spikes; for in all these and alike Instances, this would be the
ready way to break these our Earthen Vessels. And no Man that loves himself, or
understands how precious they are, and what a precious Jewel is contained in
them, would willingly have them broken, or dissolved before their time. So by
the very same consequence, we should abstain from all appearance of Evil; but
more especially and particularly, we should abstain from those Sins and Evils
which sooner bring on Diseases and Death, than others. Agreeable to th^s,
Christ Jesus, the Wisdom of the Father, and the Captain of our Salvation, has
given this word of Command, And take ^eed to your selves (the manner of
expressing it is observable, take heed) lest at any time your Hearts be
overcharged with Surfei^ing and Drunkenness, and Cares of this life, and so
that day come upon you at unawares. Now these three especially, Surfeiting, and
Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life (besides that the two first do overwhelm
and drown a Man, and the latter waste him out sooner) do expose to Sickness and
sundry kinds of Diseases and outward Accidents; so that the day of Death comes
upon such, who give themselves unto these sins, at unawares, or sooner than it
would otherwise; to which succeeds the day of Judgment and of Account. So
Adultery, Whoredom, and following the strange Woman, renders People weakly and
short lived, and brings rottenness into their Bones, that their Body and their
Flesh are consumed; as some of us have seen sad Spectacles, Examples, and
Monuments thereof. So Anger, Wrath, Malice, Hatred, Variance, Envyings, set
People together by the Ears, to Wound or Murder one another, when they go forth
by Armies or single Persons. Covetousness and Idleness does tempt them to Steal
and Rob upon the Highway; which at length brings them to the Gallows. So
indeed almost every Sin, one way or another, is a Destroyer; for it hastens
sooner into the Pit of Destruction. And it is one of those Paths of the
Destroyer mentioned in Psalm 17. 4. even of Satan, the invisible Enemy of
Mankind, who has his Name in the Hebrew Tongue, Abaddon, and in the Greek,
Apollyon. Both which in our English Tongue, signifies a Destroyer. Which he
makes use of, to lead the Sons and Daughters of Men into the Chambers of Death;
the very Pit and Brink of Hell, till at last they drop into it.

This place of Psalm 17. 4. is so excellent and observable, and there is so
much necessary and useful Truth contained in it; that it is worthy to be quoted
out at length, for the Reader to meditate upon the significancy and the Word of
Instruction which arises from thence: Concerning the Works of men, by the Word
of thy Lips have I kept me from the Paths of the Destroyer. As much as if David
should say, let other Men do as they will, if they go on to destroy themselves,
as we see the Works of Men are, and by their manner of acting abroad in the
World they do; as for my part, I will make God's Word my Guide and my Rule; I
will be sure to keep to that and not vary from it, and then I shall keep my
self from the Pa^hs of the Destroyer. I shall not be in those Paths which the
Blood-thirsty and deceitful Men are in, who do not live out half their Days;
and which those Sinners and Workers of Iniquity are in, who do not live out
half their days; for if it had not been for that, they might have attained unto
the Days of their Fathers. But this Rule does not hold always, for sometimes
the Wicked grow old and are mighty in Power; as Job says. And then chiefly my
Comfort is, as long as I hold my self to the Word of Gods Lips, not to turn
aside from it, to the Right Hand or to the Left, thereby I keep my self from
the Paths that lead to Hell, the Place of Destruction, which is on the other
side of the Grave.

And so to preserve our Bodies from falling into that Place of Destruction, is
to keep and set them in order; for to that end we should have them ordered
according to the Word of Gods Lips. And this is according to the aforequoted
Place, Romans 6. 22. to have them made free from Sin. Let not Sin therefore reign
in your mortal Body, ver. 12. I beseech you Brethren by the Merci^s of God,
that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, Holy (mark that Epithet, Holy)
acceptable unto the Lord, which is your reasonable Service. Know ye, that ye
are the Temple of God, and tha^ the Spirit of God dwells in you. If any Man
defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is Holy,
(here we see again, how the Eter^^^ spirit, in a wonderful manner is all along
Con^^^^nt to it self in promoting this thing of Holiness in us) (...) Temple ye
are. And so it is elsewhere written^ Be ye clean that bear the Vessels of the
Lord, Isa. 52. 11. And we carrying these ^arthen Vessels of the Lord, that is
to say, our Bodies continually along with us; Having therefore these Commands
and Instructions, Directions and Promises; Dearly Beloved, Let us cleanse our
selves (here must be some Act of our own) from all filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God. And then, if this earthly House
be thus set in Order, as to be free from Sin, and to be Holy; to be swept and
garnished within, and kept so: And if we touch not the unclean thing, but be
separa^e from all Evil and Defilement; then will be fulfilled and brought to
pass what God has said: I will dwell in them; and I will be their God, and
they shall be my People. Let us hear the sum and substance, the Conclusion of
this particular Head of Discourse, set your Bodies in order. That has been
showed, let your Bodies be o^dered according to the Word of God's Lips; which
requires that they be made free from Sin; and that they be kept and preserved
continually in Sanctification and Holiness. The Reason is evident, Why Holiness
in Particular must be had and ingrafted in the Body, before we die, because the
end of Holiness is Everlasting Life.

3dly. By those Words, Set thy House in order; is denoted and shown forth, that
we set our Souls in order.

The Phrase, set thine House in order, is a Metonomy; for by the Name of the
thing containing, is meant the things contained in that House; like as when
mention is made of the Cup, which Jesus a little before He was betrayed, took
B^ead and gave thanks, and gave it to them; saying, Drink ye all of this, Mat.
26. 27. Thereby is intended not the bare outward Cup, but the Wine contained in
that Cup. And so in li^e manner, this Phrase of the Spirit of God delivered by
the Mouth of Isaiah, does not so much signify that Hezekiah should set the
outward Walls of his Palace or dwelling House in Order, but rather his Household
concerns, which were contained in that House; nay further, that Tenement of
Clay wherein Himself did inhabit, his Flesh and Body, this He should set in
Order. Nay, to come yet closer and nearer to himself, He should not so much set
the earthly House of his Body in Order, this should be done; but yet much more,
He should set the Inhabitant of that earthly House, viz. His Soul in Order.

Now what was commanded to H^zekiah, is the Duty of us all severally upon whom
the ends of the World are come. The Soul is not our House, but the Inhabitant
of our House; and from the like Analogy and Reason of Things, by the very same
Interpretation and opening out of the Scriptures, which the Eternal Spirit in
the penning and giving them forth has designed therein; when He expresses the
things contained therein, by the Word or Name of the thing containing.
Therefore of necessity the Spirit of God did mean and intend thereby, when He
says, set thine House in Order, set thy Soul in Order; because that this Soul
of ours is the Principal, and I may say the only Thing that is most Immaterial
and Substantial, which is contained in this earthly House of ours.

If we compare Mat. 16. 26. For what is a Man pro^^^ed, if He shall gain the
whole World, and lose his Soul? together with Luke 9. 25. where instead of his
own Soul, it is thus written, What is a Man profited, if He gain the whole
World and lose himself? Now put both the^e places together, and from them both
it will undeniably follow, that the Soul is the Man himself. Man fest Reason, I
will go on to add yet further, ev^n very. Sense teaches the same; for we may
understand and perceive, that the Body is just enlivened and (...) sensible,
but is as it were a mere Trunk or Engine for the Soul to Act in. It is
evidently seen, that the Body upon the Decease or Departure of the Soul from
out of it, is just like an empty House, Tenement or Cottage without any
Inhabitant at all in it; which as that thereupon does fall into Ruin and Decay,
without any one to mind or look after it; so the Body yet much sooner Moulders
into Corruption, Stink and Dust. Fear, and the Pit, and the Snare are upon
thee, O Inhabitant of the Earth, Isa. 24. 17. This is a most proper and
apposite Expression of the Holy Ghost, to call us Inhabitants of the Earth.
From whence I will go on to Remark yet further, that just like as Snails carry
their Houses upon their Backs, even so we carry about the Houses of our
Habitation (I mean this little Tenement of Clay, the Body) all along, and every
where with us. We are wrapped up and covered all over with it. And it is a
moveable walking House, that has not Foundations, Heb. 11. 9. which herein is
opposite unto and distinct from that City, which has Foundations, there
mentioned in the next following Verse. And also herein it is opposite unto and
distinct from that House Eternal in the Heavens, spoken of, 2 Cor. 5. 1.

Now what we must do, or how to behave our selves, to set our selves (who
inhabit and are contained within this earthly House) in Order, proceed we to
show according to that measure of Knowledge which our Creator has given unto
us. To set in Order, in one Sense is a kind of Speech which is used, when from
out of a great mixed and confused Multitude of Men; these are Marshalled and
put in order of an Army: And indeed, it is observed of a well Disciplined Army;
that it is one of the most orderly things in the World, when each Officer and
Soldier (notwithstanding their vast Multitude) knows and stands in his proper
Place, Rank and File, not moving one Hands breadth from out of it to the Right
Hand or to the Left; and they do move and act nothing without Command or Order.
And so when we read in Joel 2. 7, 8. And they shall March every one on his
ways, and they shall not break their Ranks, neither shall one thrust another,
they shall walk every one in his Path: Observe all this, for these things being
so written and dictated by his Spirit, hereby we are shown and instructed, how
God is infinitely pleased and delighted with this thing of Order in his Army,
and in the very great Camp (for so it is there called, verse 11. as indeed it
is) of his Creatures or Created Beings.

And from hence I would observe and make k^^wn (though it may seem a little
Digression, yet I shall soon again return to our subject Matter) that when the
Scripture styles God in manifold Places of the Old Testament, the Lord of
Hosts. It has a much larger and more comprehensive meaning and signification
herein, that as He was King in an especial Manner over the Children of Israel
(for that Government was a more immediate Theocracy then over the other
Nations) so He was their Chief Captain or General of their Armies or Hosts, and
that He did fight their Ba^tels in dispossessing their Enemies from out of it,
and giving them the Land of Canaan. In Truth, in this Sense He was the Lord of
their Hosts, as He did lead forth the Children of Israel by their Hosts from
out of the Land of Egypt, and gave them Possession of the promised Land. And so
in another Sense, inasmuch as we are to Publish the Name of the Lord, ascribe
ye greatness unto our God, Deuteronomy. 32. 3. And forasmuch as an Host or Army is one
of the greatest and most terrible things here living on the Earth, therefore
when the Spirit or Spiritual Men would ascribe greatn^ss unto God, they do in
this manner express it by his being Lord, which signifies Chief Ruler, and that
He has Dominion and Authority over them, and that He is greater in Power,
Strength, and Multitude than all of them put together. But chiefly, the
largest, highest and most comprehensive meaning and signification of these
Words; the Lord of Hosts, seems to be taken from that great Place, in Isa. 40.
26. Lift up your Eyes on high, and behold who has created these things, that
brings out their Host by number, He calls them all by Nam^s; by the
greatness of his might, for that He is strong in Power, not one fails. And so
as He has Created all these things, and brings out their Host by number: And
as the Heavens and the Earth were finished by him, and all the Host of them,
Genesis 2. 1. He is prope^^y and truly in this great, noble and comprehensive
Sense, Lord of the Hosts of his whole Creation; which being many, are properly
styled, Hosts in the Plural number, to denote and set forth their Multitude.
Now compare that Army we read of in Scripture of a thousand thousand, 2 Chronicles.
14. 14. which was the greatest that we read of in common History; for Xerxes
had as many, with the Hosts of the whole Creation of God, either for bigness or
Multitude; and even they seem as a small Multitude of Grasshoppers. It is He
that sitte^h upon the Ci^cle of the Earth, and the Inhabitants thereof are as
Grasshoppers; that stretches out the Heavens as a Curtain, and spreads them
out as a Tent to dwell in. His divinely inspired Prophet hereby intimating,
that the vast Bo^y of the Heavens, which is ten thousand Times bigger than the
Earth, with the whole Circumference, Longitude, and Latitude of it, is no more
in comparison to the infinitely exceeding greatness of God himself, then the
Heavens does exceed in bigness, the Curtains of any common Bed, or any usual
Shepherds Tent. The making of any thing, does give an absolute Right and
Property in the thing it self to the maker thereof. And in this Sense God is
Lord of all, even of the Heavens and the Earth, and all the Host of them,
inasmuch as He Created them, and all things contained therein. It is now called
the King's Army, and the King's Host; because that the King's Money pays them;
whereby they are helped unto, and furnished with Food and Clothes. But as the
Lord says, All Souls are mine. So all Armies and Hosts are his; because he
Created and gave Being to the Horse and his Rider, and to all the several
Creatures that are therein. He makes Grass to grow for the Horses, Corn and
Wool for the Men. And as David says, The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness
thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. The Silver is mine, and the Gold is mine, says the Lord
of Hosts, Hag. 2. 8. Observe how fitly that Character, The Lo^^ of Hosts
succeeds after all the former. Though here again it may be observed, that the
Rebellion and Disobedience of Mankind, will endeavor to thwart him herein; for
by their good will, his peculiar Children and Servants shall have the ^east
share therein, by the violent Spoiling, Grasping, and Oppression of others.

But now to return again into the way of our Discourse. As a King or a General
does go forth to view their respective Armies; and they order their Men to be
drawn forth, and to stand in Battle Array, that out of them they might Detach
and Pick out some Chosen Men for such a particular Action, or Enterprise they
send them about. Even so, The Lord looks from Heaven, he beholds all the
Sons of Men; from the place of his Habitation, he looks upon all the
Inhabitants of the Earth. And now he calls out one to Death, and then again he
calls another, and then a third, and so on. The Stars in their Courses, fought
against Sisera. And as they above are seen and observed to be in their Courses,
so it is expected and commanded by the Lord of Hosts, that all the Inhabitants
of the Earth should stand and be in their Order. For as the Soldiers in an Army
know not what particular Man the General will Detach and take out next. Even so
we the Inhabitants of the Earth, know not which of us the Lord our God will
call out next by his Trumpeter or Messenger, Death: But this we certainly know,
that we shall be called out every one of us, one time or another. When the
General or Captain calls for a Man, and he is not to be found in his Order and
Place, woe be to that Man; for he thereupon undergoes some Reproof, Punishment,
or he is shot to death. And so in like manner, if our Souls are not set in
Order before, and when God calls and requires them out from our Bodies, woe be
unto those Souls, for the Reproof, Threatening and Punishment of God will befall
them. Thus much is signified and to be understood from what is written, And
when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw there a Man which had not on a
Wedding Garment. And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not
having on a Wedding Garment? And he was speechless. Then said the King to the
Servants, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. From all this Parable, or rather Similitude
before rehearsed, whereby our condition here in this dying Body, in reference to
the ever-living God over all, is truly set forth and shown unto us; we learn,
that to set our Souls in Order, is to get them in a readiness, or in a S^ate of
watching, or waiting an expectation against our Lord's coming and calling us,
not knowing when it will be; and that we be sure to keep in our proper Place
and Station, in our Course and Order he has set us; to be a doing and
finishing his Work which he has employed us about: That as the Son of Man left
to every Man his Work, and Commanded the Porter to watch, Mark 13. 34. so we
may have the Blessing promised and pronounced, that when he comes, he may find
us so doing.

Another sense and signification of setting in Order, is taken from what Paul
writes to Titus, 1. 5. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should
set in order the things that were wanting, In the Margent there it is left
undone. From hence it will appear, inasmuch as this Scripture was given forth
by the same Spirit, that the meaning of the Spirit when he Commanded to set our
Houses in Order, or as has been interpreted, the Soul, the Inhabitant of this
House in Order, is to set in Order the things that are wanting, or what are
left undone. That is, I suppose, and gather, to fill up and supply what is
wanting, and to do what is yet left undone. I do believe that this is the
principal meaning of the Holy Ghost in the Text. For that of setting the Soul
in a readiness, is included in this. For if there is nothing wanting in the
Soul, then it is in its proper Order, Station or Place. If there be nothing
left undone, then certainly she is upon doing and finishing the Work, which the
Lord God of Heaven has given and committed unto her for to do.

And now, set your Thoughts, O Man, to work and upon the search. As Paul did
for this Cause leave Titus in Crete, that he should set in Order the things
that are wanting; even so the everlasting God, the Creator of the ends of the
Earth, for this Cause leaves us a little longer here on the Earth, that we
should set in Order the things that are wanting. Consider then thoroughly, and
bethink your selves well, what things are now wanting to your Salvation, there
be sure to supply and fill them up before you die: and what things are left
undone, there be sure to do and perform the same. And still if ye can apprehend
any thing more, there also go and do likewise.

I am greatly afraid that Mean Tekel is not the Writing which was against
Belshazzar of old time; but also it lies against every one of us at this day. I
am sure and sensible, that it lies against my self, and so it will appear, that
it lies against all the Sons and Daughters of Men, When God shall enter into
Judgment with them, for in his sight shall no Man living be justified. This is
the Interpretation of these two words, Mean Tekel. See Dan. 5. 26. 27, when it
is applicable to common Persons. Mean, God ha^h numbered the days of thy life,
and finished them. This is certainly true, and will be found true. Tekel, Thou
art weighed in the Balance, and art found wanting. This last comes directly to
our Subject matter, and will be found true also; when the Actions of the best
Saints and Servants that were ever on this Earth, (I will not except the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who yet are all in the Kingdom of God, but
only excepted Jesus Christ the Righteous) are weighed in the Balance of his
strict and just Judgments. Their Actions are not so good as they might have
been. For all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God, Romans 3. 23. For
the Lord is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed, 1 Samuel 2. 3.
And so he knows where, and in what point such and such Actions are wanting.
Though we his Ministers and Creatures, by reason of our half imperfect and
outward Knowledge, cannot presently assign it. The Actions of all the Children
of Men will be found wanting in the Knowledge, Sight and Judgment of the Lord;
yet they should not be found wanting in our own Knowledge, Sight and Endeavor.
But we should still press and labor to come up to that State whereof Paul
speaks as to himself; I know nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby
justified. That is, he knew no sin or fault which he allowed himself in, and no
Duty which he left undone. And such a State may any Christian nowa days (by
that common Grace which God usually gives) arrive unto, if he will. Though Paul
was thus Innocent, Upright and Obedient, yet he going on to add that hereby he
was not justified; that is, before God. This confirms the truth of what was
aforesaid; that though we do to the very best that ever we can, endeavoring
and laboring to the very utmost that our Actions be not found wanting, until
they seem to us as if they were not wanting, yet still in the future Judgment
of God, they will be found wanting. The reason whereof is, For the Lord sees
not as Man sees, for Man looks on the outward appearance, but God looks on
the heart. So the Lord knows not as Man knows, for Man knows the outward
appearance, only by halves and imperfectly: But the Lord knows the inside and
throughout, even all that is to be known in any thing. For the Lord is a God of
Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. Nevertheless, the Lord does require
of, and command us to do our very best, though when we have done all that is
commanded us, we are but unprofitable Servants; and we are to use our utmost,
and continued diligence, that we be not found wanting; though after all, and at
the last, we shall be found wanting. This seems to be the turning and deciding
point; why some will be saved, and others will be condemned at the last day.
The Souls of those that shall be saved, did, whilst they were here in the Body,
and in the days of the Flesh, labor and endeavor with all their strength, and
with all their might, (as Jacob served Laban with all his might) that they
should not be found wanting. That nothing should be wanting in them, toward
obtaining their own Salvation. They did run, strive, and fight (as the
Scripture Phrases are) in doing whatever they could, if by any means they might
obtain unto the Resurrection of the dead. And so God (who does not lay upon Man
more than is right) does accept of this their good mind, and good will toward
him. He will not expect from a Creature more than he is able; so such are
received by him, they are admitted, and do enter into their Master's Joy.

But contrariwise, the Souls of them that shall be condemned, possibly they
might seek to enter in at the strait Gate; that is, use a little careless,
idle, and customary endeavor, but they did not strive, Luke 13. 24. for then
they would have entered in. Neither did they use their continued labor and
utmost diligence, that they should not be found wanting. It was a thing which
they did a little, but not much mind; for now it is evidently seen and known in
the World, that though all do pretend to serve God, and they say, that they
hope to go to Heaven; yet some do more toward it than others. Whereas the
Kingdom of Heaven will never be obtained by a parcel of lazy and outward
customary Worshippers. For from the days of John until this time, the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. Heaven and
Immortality are for those who strive, who are steadfast, unmovable, always
abounding in the Work of the Lord, the labor of such is not vain in the Lord,
1 Cor. 15. 58. who seek diligently, Heb. 11. 6. who make it their constant
business throughout their life. As in Acts 28. 24. Some believed the things
that were spoken, and some believed not. Some obey the Word, and some do not.
So it is here, some will use their utmost diligence and labor, that they be
not found wanting; and these will be accepted by God, and saved. Others again
will not use their utmost diligence and labor, that they be not found wanting;
and these will not be accepted by God, for they will be Condemned by him and
perish. They are weighed in the Balance, and are found wan^ing. And that Lot
and Portion they might have had in the Heavenly Inheritance, is divided, and
given unto others.

SERMON III.
Isaiah 38. 1. -- Set thine House in Order, for thou shall die, and not live.
IT has been already said, That to set our Souls, in Order before we die, or
before our Souls go out of our Bodies, is to take care and provide that nothing
be wanting in them. But I find and gather from out of the Scriptures of Truth,
That another main Principal and Essential thing wanting in the Souls of Men and
Women, is, that they do no^ lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so
easily beset them, Heb. 12. 1. from whence we learn, that to supply and fill up
what is here wanting, is to actually lay aside every weight and the sin which
does so easily beset us. And to resist unto Blood striving against sin, v. 4.
This expression does denote as much, as till the Blood spurts and gushes forth.
Truly to lay aside every weight and the sin that does so easily beset us, and
to resist unto Blood, striving against sin, are very great Lessons. Soon indeed
learned, so as to have the Conception, Notion, and Knowledge thereof; but very
hard to be put in practice, and to be done accordingly. Yet it may be done; for
if it had been impossible, God would not have Commanded* and Required it, for
his Commandments are not grievous and He will not lay upon Man more than is
right, that h^ should enter into Judgment with God, according as it is said in
Job. We shall indeed wish that we had done all this when we come to die. Now,
it being a Man's Prudence and Wisdom to do so throughout ones life, as he shall
indeed wish that he had done when he comes to die. And again, it being certain
that we shall indeed wish and desire when we come to die, (suppose we were to
die at this very moment, should we not indeed wish and desire it? I for my part
should, and so would others also; for through want and neglect thereof do
sensibly arise greater fears) that we had laid aside ^very weight, and the sin
that does so easily beset us. an^ that we had resisted unto Blood, striving
against sin; it follows, that it is our Duty and Wisdom, to set about that Work
instantly and presently: to endeavor and labor therein, throughout the course
of all our remaining days.

When there is too little weight, we usually say, there is somewhat wanting;
but here it is wanting in the Soul, because there is too much weight, even
because it is of that sort which should not be, viz. the weight of Sin, Guilt,
and Corruption. And I said, what is it? And he said this is an Ephah that goes
forth. He said moreover, this is wickedness, and he cast it into the midst of
the Ephah, and he cast the weight of the lead upon the mouth thereof, Zech. 5.
6, 7, 8. By this resemblance, the Holy Ghost does signify and set forth, That
wickedness or sin, is like unto a talent of lead mentioned ver. 7. or a weight
of lead, ver. 8. which is heavy, and abides upon the Soul of him that has
contracted and committed the same. This place of H^brews, 12. 1. Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, and let us run
with patience the race that is set before us, is a kind of Speech and Direction
taken from the manner and practice of Footmen. Who when they are to run a Race
for a Price or Wager, they are so far from carrying any heavy thing or luggage
in their Pockets, that on the contrary, they do usuall^ strip themselves even
of their necessary and wonted Clothes and Apparel, lest even that should be too
great a weight and hindrance unto them, And so they run either naked, or with a
light Linen Garment cast or wrapped about them, to the intent they may be as
nim^le and expedite as ever they can. And so when I reflect and consider upon
this thoroughly, and also compare with it what I find written, And the Lord
spoke unto Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor, by the coast of the land of Edom,
saying, Aaron shall be gathered unto his People. Take Aaron and E^iezer his Son
and bring them up unto Mount Hor, and strip Aaron of his Garments. And Moses
stripped Aaron of his Garments. Numb. 20. 23, 24, 24, 26, 28. though indeed it
was to put them on Eliezer his Son, yet God in commanding, and the Holy Ghost
in recording that it was so done accordingly; to strip A^ron of his Garm^n^s
before he died. Though it was not altogether so sad and Melaneholly un^o Aaron,
as now it is to a poor M^lefactor to see and feel himself stripped or
unbuttoned before his Execution. But this was also some punishment of Aaron s
sin, for he shall not enter into the land which I have given un^o the Children
of Israel, because he r^bell^d against my Word at the Waters of Meribah, v. 24.
All this does carry a Signification, Instruction, and Admonition to us upon
whom the ends of the World ar^ come for our selves or others to strip off our
Garment^ before we die. All one as we usually strip off our Garments when we go
to Bed, which is an Emblem o^ Resemblance of the Grave. Or as soon as People
are dead, they are usually stripped off from their Clothes, when they are la^d
out. But that is done by force when know not and cannot help it. But to do it
before we die, this is the Will and Requiring of the Lord God; and this
stripping off our Garments is one kind of setting our Souls in Order before we
die. As Moses stripped off Aaron's Garments (now Moses was the Minister of God)
so it is the business of the Ministers o^ God, or rather of the Ministry of his
Word to strip People off from their Garments before they die. But what kind of
Garments are they that are to be stripped off? For there is a good kind of
Garments which we read of even the Garments of Salvation and the Robe of
Righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. Are People to be stripped of these? In no wise, But
rather they are to be stripped of another sort that these may be put on. For as
Joseph of Arimathea craved the Body of Jesus, and he bought fine linen and
to^k him down, and wrapped him in the linen. And as we know the manner of us
is to bury, only to strip off such Clothes which the Person weared whilst
living, and to wrap the Body in clean or ^ine linen Cloth according as the
outward condition of the Party deceased is, whether rich or poor, or in a
Shroud or woollen Cloth: Even so God does expect that against the time and as
soon as ever we are stripped off from those kinds of Garments hereafter
mentioned, that to them it may be granted that they should be arrayed in fine
linen clean and white; for the fine^linnen is the Righteousness of Saints,
Rev. 19. 8. But those kinds of Garments, which the Ministers of God or rather
the Minstry of his Word is to strip People of, to the intent to set their Souls
in Order before they die, are of two sorts. The first we read of in Jude 23.
Hating even the Garment spotted by the Flesh.

The second or rather (both of them summoned up together) we read in Isa. 64.
6. But we are all as an unclean thing, and our Righteousness as filthy Rags.

So that the Garment spotted by the Flesh, the unclean thing, and also
Self^Righteousness, denoted by this Phrase of the Holy Ghost our Righteousness,
are the two p^i^cipal Garments (and so must be done of whatever is like unto
them) which the Soul must be stripped of before she goes out of the Body, that
she may be set in Order, and to the intent that she may be found comely, meet
and acceptable in the ^ight of God, when this Spirit of ours is to return to
the God that gave it.

It is commonly and truly said, That it is a great thing to die. And so indeed
it will appear, notwithstanding that the most and generality of People, who are
in the broad way that leads unto Destruction, make no more of it than barely
to undergo it when it comes, as if there was no more than to yield up the
Ghost, and surrender up their Breath when they can no longe^ ^old it in. In
truth there is no great matter to die as People usually die, to slip and
descend down into Hell. But to die as indeed we ought to die, (sed Revocare
Gradum superasque ascendere ad Auras, hi^ labor, hoc opus ^st) that we may
ascend up above, and be received up into the Mansions above, here is labor and
work, here is matter enough for all our life foregoing, let us do and
endeavor, and labor as much as ever we can.

If I should here go about to describe what it is, to strip off these Garments
spotted with the Flesh, to put away the unclean thing, and to renounce all our
self-Righteousness, I am apt to think that I shall pencil and set it forth in
higher Perfections and Seize than People will reach and arrive unto. And
yet let me say what I can concerning it (even according to the Ability and
Knowledge God has given me) it will come ^^^ short of what is the meaning and
requiring of God concerning it, whereby also it will be seen, Thy Word is very
pure, therefore thy Servant loves it, Psalm. 119. 140. The consequent to which
is to hate, yea and strip off the Garment spotted by the Flesh. Some may here
be apt to say, such a State of Holiness, Christianity, and fear of the Lord is
too wonderful for me, it is high, I cannot attain to it. If none will go to
Heaven but such Precise, Mortified and Self-denying People, Lord have mercy
upon us. For what will become of us* Notwithstanding this or the like
imagination and saying so frequent in the Mouths of People when they hear
strict and hard sayings drop from the Preachers Mouth, who can bear them? Yet I
say and testify again, there is no making our Calling and Election sure
(Heaven is such a great and lasting Good that we can never make too sure of it,
and Hell is so sore and abiding an Evil that nothing can be done too much to
avoid it) without coming up to these Perfections and Excellencies, and higher
degrees of Grace and Knowledge, of Holiness and Innocence which the Scriptures
do any where speak of or set forth. And truly we should purchase to our selves
a good degree and great proficiency in the Christian life, and in the Faith
which is in Christ Jesus, if we have already used the Office of a Deacon well,
2 Timothy 3. 13. That is, if we did learn and behave our selves well enough in the
lower Forms of Christ's School, as to be still coming up and making toward the
higher, yea the top and highest of all. As indeed the very top and highest
pitch of Christianity and Faith attainable here on this Earth, is set forth by
those kinds of words that lie before us, of hating even the Garment spotted by
the Flesh, of laying aside every weighs, and the sin that does so easily beset
us, of resisting unto Blood stirring against sin. Show me any stricter Gospel
Precepts, or higher Advancements toward the likeness of God and of Christ. For
this is certain, the more like unto God any one becomes, the more he does love
Good, and the more he does hate Evil. Ye that love the Lord, hate Evil, Psalm.
97. 10. Now this is an hating of Evil with a perf^ct hatred, when we do not
only hate, loath, and have indignation against Evil, but we hate every thing
that is in the least stained, tinctured, and spotted with the Evil. Nay, yet
further, this is true hating of Evil, when although the Flesh is not simply and
absolutely evil, yet it being the Ground or Soil, where this Evil the Poisonous
Herb grows and springs up, we do not only hate the Poisonous Herb it self, but
even the very Ground that bears it, and round about for its sake. W^e^ in our
Thoughts and Soul the Ground is by us accursed for its sake. That although no
Man hates his own Flesh but loves and cherishes it (as the Scripture
witnesses and God would have it so in the State of Innocence yet because of
the Body of Sin dwelling therein, and because that Evil and Corruption does
root settle and spread it self fo^th there we hate our own Flesh therefore, and
could almost destroy it; which we must not neither, though here we are
Commanded also Mortify your Members which are on the Earth. If ^hy righ^ Hand
offend thee, cut it off: if thy right Eye offend ^^ee, pluck it out. And even
we are to loath and detest those Members, which have been yielded Servants to
^nclean^ess, and to Iniquity unto Iniquity. The Flesh lusts and striveth
against the Spirit and the Spirit against the Flesh, as may be seen in the
seventh and eighth Chapter to the Romans, For when we were in the Flesh, the
motions of sins which were by the Law, did work in our Members, (and by the
like consequence of that of (...) of hating even the Ga^ment spotted by the
Flesh, we ^ught to hate our Members because of the motions of ^^s in them) to
bring forth Fruit unto death. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being
dead wherein we ^^e held, that we should serve in the n^wness of the Spirit and
not in the oldness of the Letter, Romans 7. 5, 6. For they that are after the
Flesh do mind the things of the Flesh, but they that are after the Spirit do
mind the things of the Spirit. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God,
for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed ^an be. So then they
that are in the Flesh, cannot please God. There is no need of citing more
places of Scripture (these being sufficient and express to the purpose) to show
that the Flesh is distinct, contrary and opposite unto the Spirit. And also the
reason of not only hating, but even stripping off the Garment spotted by the
Flesh, to set the Soul in Order before she goes out of the Body, will easily
appear.

By the way it is not proper nor yet a true expression to say that the Soul
does die when it goes out of the Body; for indeed it does not die but depart.
But this is certain and evident that when she goes out from the Body, she is
then stripped off from that Garment of Flesh in the general* that is, the Body.
For the Soul goes upwards and gets out from, and lays aside the Body, which
then seems as the Mantle that fell from Elijah at his going up to Heaven, and
then she becomes all and pure Spirit.

Now as aforesaid, the Flesh in it self simply, and abstractedly is not Sinful
nor Evil. For it was not so in its Original and first Creation. But after that
Adam fell into the transgression, all his Children and Descendants from his
Loins are conceived in Sin and brought forth in Iniquity. And they are polluted
in their own Blood, Ezekiel. 1^. 6. as soon as they are brought forth from their
Mothers Womb. So that this Flesh of ours is become a Seed plot of all manner of
Sin and Evil. Like Leaven, does leaven the whole lump, so it has spread and
diffused it self throughout the whole Flesh and every part thereof. From the
sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it but wounds and
bruises and putrefying sores. Indeed Man was at first the work of God's own
hands, and truly a noble Creature Yet had I planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a
right Seed, how then art thou turned into the degenerate Plant of a strange
Vine unto me? Jer. 2. 21. But since that, by his Fall he is turned topsie-turvy
over what he was then. For now he is become Universally corrupt throughout.
Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually. So
that until he is renewed again after the Image of him who Created him, which is
in Righteousness and true Holiness, he stands not only distinguished from, but
as it were in perfect contrariety unto God. Said our Savior to one of his
Disciples, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me; for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men. As if the
things which did only savor of Men, were a stink and evil smell and a smoke in
his Nose, Isa. 65. 5. which he could not endure, and would have behind and far
from him. And so it is all one of the things which savor of the World and the
things that savor of the Flesh; the infinite Holiness and Uprightness of God
is in no wise reconcilable unto them, nor yet does approve of them. For they
are all bad and naught, they being either the receptacle of Sin and Evil, or at
least they have a smell, taste and tincture thereof, which the Holy and Pure
God does not like. In this sense it is (not as some of the ignorant and foolish
Popes did from thence forbid Priests to Marry) That they that are in the Flesh,
cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. for the Flesh as it is now, is either Sinful or
Evil it self, or it has a savor of Sin and Evil. And it is the Will of God
that we should come out even from that.

By what has been aforesaid, it may be understood what it is to hate and strip
off from us the Garment spotted by the Flesh, that is, spotted by the Sin or
Evil which does usually lodge and dwell in the Flesh. And care should be all
one taken as to this, as we would not willingly have next to our Skin any
linen cloth wherein some poisonous Herb or Flower has been lately wrapped up;
or as we would not of our good will and choice wear the innermost Garments soon
and immediately afterward of one that has died of the Plague; or as we would
not drink out of a Glass before it is thoroughly washed and rinsed, in which we
knew there was immediately before yellow Arsneck or any other most deadly
Poison. As we naturally fear and avoid all these, so if we were Spiritually
minded, we would take as much heed of the World and of the Flesh, although we
are in the midst of the one, and wrapped up and encompassed about with the
other. But to be in the World and not of the World, That by these you might be
Partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the Cor^^ption that is in the
World through Lust. From whence it follows that it is impos^^ble to be a
Partaker of the Divine Nature^ unless one has first escaped the Corruption
that is in the World through Lust. So again, as long as we are in the Body, we
are in one sense in the Flesh; and accordingly the Scripture calls the time of
this life the days of our Flesh. But as long as we do not obey, yield, nor give
way unto the motions of sins that are in the Flesh; If we keep under and crush
even Concupiscence which is the beginning of Lust, and so the beginning of each
sin, or the tendency to each sin; if we make not Provision for the Flesh to
fulfill the Lusts thereof. It is not here said to satisfy the necessities
thereof, but the Lusts, which are excrescencies and superfluities and needless
things, so long we are safe enough as to the Flesh; for though we are in the
Flesh, yet we walk not after the Flesh.

The World and the Flesh for the most part in Scripture sense are taken for the
Evil thereof, for the Reasons before assigned. Because Sin and Evil has its
Root, Being and Dwelling in them, and they are the occasion thereof God has
therefore suffered, yea and placed us in the midst of them, both for our
greater Proof and Trial, to prove us to know what is in our heart, whether we
will keep his Commandments or no. By our being in the World and the Flesh, and
yet to be kept innocent and free from the Evil thereof, is just like treading
upon Coals and not be burnt; which requires much and constant speed, skill and
care. Now for a season (God having thought fit that it should be so) we are
encompassed about with and very near to manifold Temptations arising from the
World and the Flesh and the things thereof. That the Trial of our Faith,
Obedience, Holiness and Innocence might be had. Which if it be retained for
all, It is much more precious than of Gold that perishes; though it be tried
with fire, and so it will be found unto Fraise and Honor and Glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.

The Word of God is very Spiritual and Heavenly; for it does teach us (as we
may find by the Instructions scattered up and down therein) that when a great
deal of our life is spent and the day of Immortality is at hand, and we begin
to move off from the Stage of this Earth, like as when Soldiers have a mind to
draw off from besieging a City of their own accord, thinking that either they
cannot obtain or it is not worth their while to obtain it, then they draw off
their Carriages, Burdens and Instruments of War before they march off
themselves. So it is where they do it with advisedness, and deliberation, and
they have sufficient strength. Even so, many of the things of this World and of
the Flesh we cannot obtain which we would; and if we could, we cannot hold or
continue to have them; for we die and go away. Or if we could, yet they are not
worth the holding, because as yet God does not commit unto us the true Rich^s,
Luke 16. 11. that is, the true and abiding Happiness, for it is not to be had
in this World, but in the World to come wherein we seek and do expect it. Here
then is the mind that has Wisdom, to draw off our desires not only from the
Sin and Evil (for we should be perfectly listless and dead as to them. And if
Christ be in you the Body is dead because of Sin, Romans 8. 10.) But also our
desires should be drawn off utterly, even from the lawful necessary and
indifferent things of this World. We should be as if we used them not,
temperate in all things and get above them. We are commanded, not only to
commit any unclean thing. But not so much as to touch the unclean thing. Which
is standing as much at a distance from it as well as we can. So the Word of
God, which is very pure, has provided against all manner of Sin, and to
abstain from all appearance of Evil, to take this care, even as to prevent the
first beginnings, rise, and occasion of Sin or Evil.

Thus to Hate and Strip off the Garment spotted by the Flesh, as is before
explained; and to lay aside every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset
us; and to resist unto Blood striving against Sin, all those Expressions come
to one and the same thing. That is, to set up again Innocence and Holiness in
the Soul, after it had by the fall of Adam (by whose Transgression many were
made Sinners) lost and defaced them. And this is to set the Soul in Order
before we die, or before she goes out of the Body. It being a taking care that
nothing is wanting in her, as indeed it would be a very great want, if she was
not renewed again after the Image of him who created her, that is, in
Righteousness and true Holiness.

It has been aforesaid, That to set our Bodies in Order was that they might be
made free from Sin, for an Holy Body is an orderly Body: Even so it is here an
Holy Soul is an orderly Soul, or to get Holiness (which is the Image of God)
ingrafted and implanted in her, is to set the Soul in order, for then it is
meet for his Acceptance, who is the Father of Spirits and Lover of Souls.
Inasmuch as Holiness is the Image of God, and every like loves its like. With
the pure thou will show thy self pure. What sets the Body in Order, as Holiness
does that, the same Holiness does set the Soul in Order also, for they are both
united in one and make up the same Man, and they desire the same end, which is
Happiness, The High way to which is the way of Holiness. The Body indeed must
go through more Alterations, and it shall be raised up again to partake of
Happiness of Misery. According to this very same Truth and Observation, Paul
prays by the Spirit; And the very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray
God, your whole Spirit and Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is He that calls you who will do it, 1 Thessalonians 5. 23, 24. Good God? What comfortable and encouraging Words are here?
From this Place of being preserved blameless, and from what we read in Romans 6.
22. Of being made free from Sin, ye have your Fruit unto Holiness: We see
hence, that Sin and Holiness are as Incompatible Things as Darkness and Light.
They are perfectly and properly contraries; the Nature of which is to expel one
another; and one succeeds the other, for as when the Sun sets and the Light
goes off from the Earth, then Darkness comes and succeeds. And so when the Sun
arises again, it drives off Darkness from the Face of the Earth; so it is as to
Sin and Holiness: There is no arriving at Holiness without being made free from
Sin: As again when Holiness goes off or is defaced, then Sin succeeds and
creeps in of course. It is ^onsence and a contradiction to say, that People
lead an Holy Life and Conversation (although they seem outwardly Religious)
when they are yet in their Sins, or when they serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures.
For Darkness may be as truly called Light (which would be a great absurdity and
imp^ssibility) as to think or say, ^uch are an Holy People. Woe unto them that
call Evil Good and Good Evil, that put Darkness for Light and Light for
Darkness, that put Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bi^ter, Isa. 5. 20. And
whereas the divinely inspired Prophet goes on to add, Woe unto them that are
wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own sight, verse. 21. Hereby He
seems to meet tacitly with a fort of People, which are common and many now in
the World; They make up nine parts in ten in the visible Church. Who do not
care nor heartily endeavor to come clearly out of Sin; nor yet can they
gainsay and renounce Holiness quite, inasmuch as glorious things are spoken of
it, and precious Promises are made and annexed unto it. And therefore, they are
for a kind of Life, which is made up (as they fashion and imagine to
themselves) of a mixed medly of Sin and Holiness (as twilight is made up of
Darkness and Light) and they think that this will serve their turn with God; so
as they hope for his acceptance of them, although they are sinful also; because
they do love and esteem of Holiness. But God answers such by his Spirit, Woe
unto them that are wise in their own Eyes, and prudent in their own sight; as
to think to compound the matter with God. No such matter. For He that
commanded, Thou shall not sow thy Land with diverse kinds of Seeds, nor yet make
a Garment of Linsey Woolsey; when such a judicial Law was given forth of old
Time, the Holy Ghost hereby signifies even in these days, that God will never
accept of such a medly, or mixed kind of Goodness or Righteousness, as is made
up of Sin and Holiness, which is properly no Goodness or Righteousness at all.
As it is written, But they like men have transgressed the Covenant, Hos. 6. 7.
That is, it was like and such as could be expected from them. Even so this sort
of mixed medly Goodness or Righteousness, is like Man's Goodness and
Righteousness, which is a corrupt and imperfect thing at best; and that our
Righteousness spoken of in Isa. 64. 6. which is as filthy Rags, which People
are to be stripped utterly off to set their Souls in Order before they die; or
otherwise God will not accept them. For that is an offense unto him, and He
commands to get behind him, what savours of Men. But God has yet much more
clearly answered all these Imaginations and Devices of Men in that Gospel
Command and Direction, As He which has called you is Holy, so be ye Holy in
all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Be sure to take in here the Particle,
As, and then as to this Point, we will pursue the same Reasoning which the
Apostles uses in the following Verses, forasmuch then as ye know that God is
Holy, without the least mixture or tincture of Sin or evil. As Christ the Lamb
was without Blemish and without Spot, verse 19. it must follow of consequence,
that none is Holy as He which has called you is Holy, if there be a mixture or
tincture of Sin therein; and as the same Holy God our Father, who without
respect of Persons judges of every Man's Works, it follows of necessity also,
that He will never accept of such a kind of Holiness in any Man or Woman
whatever, where Sin or Evil make up any part thereof. Though here also, if in
our Holiness there should not be any tincture or savor of Sin or Evil (which
also will be washed away in the Blood of the Lamb without spot and blemish
before it is right and meet for the acceptance of God) we may be indeed amazed
and afraid, and ask the Question, who then will be saved? Remember this I
b^seech the Reader. Sin must in no wise make a part or ingredient in that kind
of Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. Or if a Man or Woman's
Holiness at the best has a tincture, smell or taste of Sin, Corruption or
Evil; here He or She are to hate even the Garment spotted by the Flesh. They
are to wish it were otherwise, though of themselves they cannot quite rinse and
wash it out, but here pray unto God, Wash me thoroughly from my Iniquity, and
cleanse me from my Sin, Psalm 51. 2. And though something may be done toward
that here on this Earth, by their working together with the Grace of God which
He gives unto them, till they in a manner empty all the Lees and Sedement out
of the Vessels. But as to the taste, smell and scent of the Cask (here with
Reverence be it spoken) Christ must give his own immediate helping hand; that
the Soul may appear before God clothed in the Righteousness of his Son. And be
found in him, not having mine own Righteousness which is of the Law, but that
which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by
Faith, not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect, but I
follow after, Phil. 3. 9, 12.

And so in the Name of God, Let us go on to Perfection, Heb. 6. 1. ^et us
attain as far as ever we can in this Life and on this Earth, and follow after
whatever we can apprehend more. Wherefore we labor, that whither present or
absent, we may be accepted of him, 2 Cor. 5. 9. Resolving still to do our Duty
in all things, and to fulfill all Righteousness, and whatsoever we can conceive
or think off, confirming all the Words of his Law and Gospel by our doing of
them; that we may have the favor and acceptance, the Peace and Reconciliation
of our God. Unto which Promise our Twelve Tribes instantly serving God Day and
Night hope to come, Acts 26. 7. And where in any other places of Scripture we
read of the more strict Rules, Directions, and Precepts, there to Copy them out
by our own Example. Am I such an one? or do I thus and thus as is there
wri^ten? As for instance when we find Paul speaking in this wi^e, I know
nothing by my self, yet I am not hereby justified. Can we say this of our
particular selves also? And so when David makes his appeal unto God, Search me
O God, and know my Heart, try me and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting, Psalm 119. 23, 24. What
earnestness of Expression is here, as much as if He should have said, do thou
discover to me any Sin or Error in me, and I will resolve to get out of it: So
fain would I to be in the way Everlasting. As thou hear or read this,
commune with thy self, and examine thy self; Wh^^her the same Mind, Desire and
earnest Endeavor be in thee also? And so when w^ read, that Paul trembling and
astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 6. This carries
Instruction to thee also, to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, with
a great awe and d^ead of him continually upon thy Heart, and to wait upon him
in thy Spirit, to know and receive from him what the Invisible God our Creator
and Governor would have thee O Man or Woman to do. And where He answers and
makes known unto thee, there always from time to time to instantly and
forthwith set upon doing the ^ame. And so on, of whatever thou can apprehend
more; for as long as thou do this there will be nothing wanting in thee;
which indeed is to set the Soul in Order before we die. It is a great thing,
and wellpleasing and acceptable unto the Lord, to answer all his requirings in
thy Heart and Conscience, and to make this return, The Lord opened my Ears, and
I was not R^bellious. Where He speaks in the still Voice of his Word and
Spirit, there to obey and do accordingly. And so indeed we might run through
all Scripture, the Book o^ Life, which is given to make us wise unto Salva^ion,
^o apply all the sayings therein to our selve^, and to ask our own Souls, How
they pe^form or do the same.

To return back to that aforementioned, Let us lay aside every weight, and the
Sin that does so easily beset us. Ye have not resisted unto Blood, striving
against Sin. Here commune with thy self, prove and examine thy self O Man. Does
thy Soul or my Soul imitate the practice and usage of Footmen and Racers, as to
lay aside every weight of Sin, Guilt and Corruption, yea the very Motions,
Inclinations and Liableness to Sin. For these last also are some weights, which
do hinder and retard the moving of our Souls and their making toward God. They
are as some clippings of her wings, and entanglements, and pr^ssings down, as
she would fly and lift up her self toward Heaven; the Habitation of the Father
of Spirits. The Footmen and Racers will sometimes strain so hard for to obtain
the Prize and win the Wager, especially when they come near to the end of the
Race that is set before them, that they will break or burst a Vein, till they
spit Blood or it gushes forth. All this Carries Instruction and Exhortation,
that we should do as much and the same for to obtain an Incorruptible Crown,
which they do to obtain a Corruptible Crown, even to resist unto Blood,
striving against Sin. Which is to part even with our Hearts Blood, which is the
very best and choicest of all, for it is the Vi^al Blood wherein our Life
consists; and so willin^ly and by choice, suffer every drop of Blood in ou^
Body to be lost or shed, as did the Captain of our Salvation (who herein left
us an Example, that we should follow his steps) rather then we will commit,
yield or consent unto Sin. This is worthy and noble indeed, not to love our
Lives unto Death, but Sacrifice up our Life even to God that gave it, when it
is in his service, and to maintain and keep our own Integrity, Uprightness and
Innocence; to preserve not so much our Honor and Reputation (as that will
follow also; for the Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance) as our
Conversation blameless, without spot or bl^mish. Or the meaning hereof may be
supposed to be to strive and fight against those Lusts which War in our
Members, till we fetch Blood of them. It is commonly said, that if you fetch
Blood of a Witch, she can never do you any harm. Why each and every Lust is an
Imp and Instrument of the Devil, and if we can so far fetch Blood of that same
Lust, as to bring out and take away the Power of that same Lust, or the thing
wherein the strength of that Lust did lie; this is to pluck out the sting, so
that the Lust cannot hurt us. As also when the Blood thereof is drained and
drawn out, that same Lust will faint and die away.

When thou art tempted to a Lust here, if thou would not be led away and
enticed by that same Lust, then mind and observe w^ll wherein that Temptation
is most tempting. And then if thou would resist and overcome the Temptation,
do thou apply all the Grace, Str^ng^h and Knowledge that is in thee against it.
^lf one was to fight against an Enemy, and He would only fl^^t on the outside
of the Hair of his Head, or scare along and aside his G^rments, or now and then
lightly touch his little finger, it might be long enough before He would kill
or dest^oy that Enemy. But if He would in good earnest, with all his Strength
and Power, have at his Head and Heart, and to that aim and lay on the de^^ly
weapon, then He may as soon dispatch him. Just so as to the first kind of
dallying, is Peoples fighting with their Lusts. They do not conquer and subdue
them, but had rather play with them, or make a show of fighting with them.
Thinking thereby to deceive God, who has commanded them to fight with these
Ama^eki^es and Canaanites within, and destroy them utte^ly. But they pretend,
they cannot; wher^as they will not, is the true cause. As to these Lusts, and
sinful Desires and carnal Affections, which War o^ rather have Habitation in
their Members; when God Commands such to fight and drive them out, but they do
only sport with them, and had rather that they tarry in them, they being like a
soft or pleasing Dalilah, Here such will not escape from what is pronounced
against them, Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord d^c^itfully, and
cursed be He that ke^pe^h back his Sword from Blood, Jer. 48 10. Thou art
Childish or in Love with thy first original corrupt state (which is not ha^ing
even the Garment spot^ed by the Flesh) if thou art afraid or unwilling by the
Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, to draw Blood of thy Sin or,
Corrup^ion, that it may languish or die away. And this thou must do
(notwithstanding all thy natural Inclinations to the contrary, for this is to
deny thy self) if thou would be a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And if thou
would willingly partake of Triumph and Exaltation, when thy Soul is slipped
and come out from this place of warfare here on Earth, and thou would
wi^ingly be presented before the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel
(this will never be without conque^ing) to receive his Acceptance, and the
Congratulati^n of those who a little before had done the same things.

But the King of Syria commanded his thirty and two Captains, that had Rule
over his Chariots, saying, fight neither with small nor great, save only with
the King of Israel, 1 Kings 22. 31. Besides the advice and directi^n aforesaid,
of not dallying or only making a show to fight, but to strike home at the Head
or Heart. This also is to be here learned and put in practice, as among the
Devils there is one Beelzebub or Prince of the Devils; so among the Sins and
Lusts, the carnal Affections and Desires within our Members. There is one
commonly Predominant and Reigning, which does app^ar forth above all the rest,
and in this sense may be called King or Prince (which signifies Chief) of the
other Sins and Lusts. It is the very Sin that does so easily beset us. As every
one does or may know the Plague of his o^n Heart, so they either do or may know
what Sin it is especially above all the rest, which they are most bent and
inclined unto. According as the Temper and Consti^ution of the Body, (which is
a Seedplot of Sin and Corruption in the General) is, whether it be excess of
Eating, secret Lust, Covetousness, Pride, Passion, or such like. Here the Lord
of Hosts commands, Michael and his Angels, (which has Rule over the
Instruments of War He makes use of) that is, his Grace, Word and Spirit which
is within thee, to fight with neither small nor great, save only with the King
of Israel; that is, to fight not so much with the Inferior Sins and Lusts, but
especially and principally with the highest and chiefest ^f them, to bring him
down; for we often hear and read (as so it was here) that to kill a King or
General in the Battle, this is to win the Fi^ld; for thereupon all the rest are
forthwith subdued and dispersed, as Sheep without a Shepherd, or as a B^dy
without a Head. Even so here it is, to vanquish or kill the chief Sin or Lust,
is to bring under and subd^e all the rest, for then they will submit and fall
of course. For it we can once get the Mastery in one Point, we shall sooner do
it in another, and so on to a third, Till every Thought is brought into
Captivity unto the Obedience of Christ. If we can and also do by the Grace,
Strength and Power given us, overcome the stronger, much more shall we the
weaker. If we do once tame the most headstrong and unr^ly Beast in us, we
shall also quickly bring into Subj^ction and due Order, all the other wild
bru^ish part of us. I have pursued mine Enemies and overtaken them, n^i^her did
I turn again till ^hey were consumed. I have wounded them that they were not
able to rise, they are fallen under my Feet. Then did I beat them as small as
Dust before the wind, I did cast them out as the Dirt in the Street, Psalm 18.
37, 38, 39, 42. This is making through and effectual Work of it. And though we
have a cunning Adversary to deal withal, the Devil and his Legions for they are
many; and He will not bring them all forth at once; for it is now seen, that by
our conquering one Sin or Lust by the help of our God, it is somewhat like
cut^ing off Hydra's Head, another presently springs up and s^cceeds in the Room
thereof. And so it is odds, that when Dominion is got over one Sin, even the
Sin that does so easily beset us, another Sin will succeed and easily beset us
also. Here we are to do with that as we did with the first, and so on, if
twenty or more should succeed one after another. For this is our business, and
our whole Life was therefore given and lent us on this Earth, to be at
perpetual War against Sin in all the several kinds and sorts thereof; and so to
wound one kind and then another, that it shall not be able to ^ise. This verily
is hard Work; for here to instance in Lust in the Time of Youth, Health and
Streng^h, it may be wounded and mortified for a Time, but it will be apt to
rise again. And so to beat them as small a Dust before the Wind, to cast them
out as the Dirt in the Stre^ts. This is sooner said then done as to all the
Sins, and motions of Sins and Lusts that are in our Members. Neither is this a
Work of one day or two, for we are many that have transgressed in this thing,
Ezra 10. 14. It is a Work of Months and Years, yea of all our Life long; for we
have many Enemies to deal withal, and it is a long Time before we can conquer
one as it should be, even so to wound it, that it shall not be able to rise.
The Method of God's working by his Grace in the Souls of Men in driving out the
Canaanites from thence is, By little and little. By little and little, I will
drive them out from ^^^ore thee, until thou be increased and inherit the Land,
^^od. 23. 30. And so it is elsewhere written, The L^^d shall increase you more
and more, Psalm 115. 14. Which He does so of his Saints and Servants till they
i^he^it the Land, that is, enter into Heaven, which is the best Land of
Inheritance.

In Exodus 23. 29. it is said, I will not drive them out before thee in one
Year, lest the Land become desolate and the Beast of the Field multiply against
thee. So it may be r^asoned and supposed, that God will not fit us quite for
Heaven in one Year, lest it should be said we live all the other Years here on
Earth to no purpose. Lest that Ig^orant Beast of the Field, Pride and Boasting,
multiply in the Soul, and it become desolate of the Graces of Humility, and
working out our Salvation with f^ar and trembling. I have re^d of an Heathen,
who came to a Christian Man to learn a Lesson of good Instruction, and says
He, when I have learned that I will come again; and accordingly a Lesson of
Instruction was given unto him, which was this, I said that I will take heed to
my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue, Psalm 39. 1. it was no less then
seventeen Years before He came again; for He had not thoroughly learned so as to
practice this Lesson sooner. But one half of this is enough for us to learn and
practice, not only in s^ve^teen, but in seventy Years, which is all the Life of
Man. The half I mean is this, I will take heed to my way^, this little is more
then many People will observe, if they were to live to the days of Methusaleh.
And if I should Preach unto ye seventy Years, I could not recommend unto ye a
better and more useful Word of Instruction, than that ye would once unfeignedly
resolve and do accordingly, to take heed to your ways that ye sin not, neither
with your Tongue, Heart or Hand, neither in Thought, Word, or Deed, nor with
any Member that ye have. Let this be the Doctrine and Use, the Drift and
Design, the Application and Benefit of all this whole foregoing Sermon.
Remember and carry this Word away with ye; I beseech ye, Take heed to your ways
that ye sin not: And I would to God that some of ye would come to me, or send
Word to me wherever I am, whither it be a Month, or Year, or seven Years
hence, (if God in whose Hand our Breath is, should suffer us to live so long)
or even in the Place of departed Souls (for they may Remember, Luke 16. 25.
what they were in such a Place, and at such a Time put in mind of and exhorted
unto by such an ones Ministry,) and then and there tell me, that you have
learned thoroughly and practiced continually that short Word of Instruction, to
take heed to your ways that ye sin not. And then indeed if ye do so, ye will be
my Beloved, my Hope, my Joy, my Crown in the Lord. I have no greater Pleasure,
tha^ that ye walk in the Truth. I have no greater Comfort in the World, and
satisfaction of my Preaching than that (notwithstanding all those several
inconveniences and loss which attend me for it, but these I matter not) ye
obey the Word which is preached and made known unto ye.

The sum of our whole Dis^ourse, and Word of Exho^tation from the foregoing
Sermon, is to this purpose and Effect. Though I am no Prophet, neither am I a
Prophet's Son, as to pretend unto immediate and extraordinary Revelations from
God, for to know more of his Secret than others; for I am as one of ye
(although perhaps I have had a little better Education, and I have given my
self up more wholly unto spiritual things, than such as follow after Worldly
Trades and Employments) yet this I gather from the sure Word of Prophecy, as
also from the common Observation of things, that after all my Preaching unto
ye, till my Strength fails on this Subject, or rather ^^til no more Words do
recur to my Mind concerning it; yet I foresee and foretell that several of ye
(perhaps one or a very few may, I am not sure of that neither) will not lay
aside every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset ye, and ye will not
resist unto Blood, striving against Sin. Yet nevertheless the Scripture cannot
be broken. That has commanded and directed ye all, yea and my self likewise,
to do so. This I teach and affirm constantly, For I gather it from out of the
same Scriptures; that until all this be done thoroughly, effectually, and
constantly, there will be something (even what is Essential, Principal and
Necessary) wanting in our Souls, and so they will not be set in order before we
die. As it is written, The Scripture foreseeing, that God would justify the
Heathen through Faith, preach^d before the Gospel unto Abraham, In thee shall
all Nations be bl^ssed. Even so in like manner the Scripture, which is very
Pure and Holy, and was given to make us wise unto Salvation, which also knows
what is the Will and Expectation and Decree of God (who is very Pure and Holy)
has chalked out Rules of the highest Perfections and Seize; though
withal it does foresee that Men and Women through Ignorance, Error, Failings,
Infirmities and Temptations will not arrive up unto, but come short of them.
However, there is no Salvation nor Assurance; nor yet well grounded Hope to be
had for Men and Women without a sincere and diligent endeavor, without an
actual pressing forward toward the mark of the high Calling which is in Christ
Jesus; even unless they follow and strive after the very highest Perf^ctions
and Seize of Christianity; even until they do indeed lay aside every
weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset them, and run with Patience the
Race that is set before them; resisting unto Blood, striving against Sin. Which
if they have not done as yet, God expects it from them; and woe be unto them if
they do it not.

As aforesaid, for this cause God does as yet leave us breathing on this Earth
(only for a very little while longer) that we should set in Order what things
are wan^ing in our Souls. That is, we should fill and make up and supply what
is yet wanting, according to what has been before spoken of. If we have been
and are a-doing this, when the Time draws nigh that we must die and be taken
off from this Earth, God will translate us up into Heaven; because we have this
Testimony, that whilst we were here, by this doing we pleased God. Which again
is done by Faith.

SERMON IV.
Isaiah 38. 1. -- Set thine House in Order, for thou shall Die, and not live.
SO much of the Duty enjoined, Set thine House in Order. Now come we to the
Reason annexed, For Thou shall die and not live.

I have composed a Sermon concerning Death and Mortality, on Hebrews, 2. 15.
which also I have caused to be Printed, and thus it now remains written for the
Generations to come, Psalm. 102. 18. This is an easy Subject to Discourse on,
because here so many things lie open, common ^^d obvious to the Knowledge of
all People whatsoever. Yet here again on the other hand, it is so much the more
hard to Preach thereon, inasmuch as Preaching the Word, should be in a somewhat
higher strain, above the level of the usual Talk and Thoughts of common People;
for it should make known such things which are not commonly known already. For
it is according to the Mind and Will of God that Knowledge should be increased,
Dan. 12. 4. So that is not barely to gratify an itching Ear, or the
Athenian-like temper which is in Mankind, in being desirous to hear or tell of
some new thing, for besides to answer the expectation of our Hearers, it is our
Duty, And new things do I declare, Isa. 42. 9. at least such as do newly spring
up in our mind, although they be old Truths. However we are also allowed of God
(having Authority for the same from his Word, and also his Apostles and
Ministers for our example hereof) both to Preach the very same things which are
commonly known and Preached already, as also to write and speak the same things
again which we have already written and spoken, in order to stir up your pure
Minds by way of Remembrance, and also to make safe and full Proof of our
Ministry. And so whilst in the Course and Order of my Ministry I do partly
Preach such things which I have Preached already, and also some other farther
Truths from week to week according as God brings the same to my Knowledge,
herein I do exactly answer and comply with that saying of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Every Scribe instructed into the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a
House-holder which brings forth out of Treasury things new and old. My
intention and design at present is only to make known what new and further
Thoughts and Truths do arise in my Mind as I Treat upon these words, Thou shall
die and not live. Of which as we speak, it may be convenient and profitable to
use this method.

1st, To handle the words simply and abstractedly, Thou shall die and not live.
2dly. To show what mighty Force, Reasoning and Exhor^ation is in this
Consideration, Thou shall die and not live, to the i^^^nt that we may set our
House, that is, all our Worldly Concerns, Body and Soul in Order, because that
we shall die and not live.
These words were not spoken and intended to Hezekiah only, but they are also
spoken and do belong unto and are for Admonition unto every Man and Woman of
every Country, Nation and Language, and of every Generation and Time, even
from Adam until the last Resurrection of the Dead, when they shall not Marry
nor be given in Marriage, and Men and Women shall be Born and Created no more.
It is hence demonstratively evident that it does belong to all, because the
reason thereof does sensibly and evidently belong to all, Thou shall die and
not live, For if any Man or Woman is exempted or privileged from Death and
from being liable unto it, then indeed these words do concern Hezekiah who
afterward died, but not him or her. But it being most certain (for nothing is
so sure as Death) that all must die, therefore of necessity these words of Isa.
38. 11. are a Command and Instruction, they are for the Learning and Admonition
of every one of us upon whom the ends of the World are come. And as Jesus
Christ spoke to his Disciples and Followers, What I say unto ye, I say unto
all, watch. From whence it does appear that that word of his did appertain to
the whole Multitude that followed him as unto the Twelve; from hence it will
appear also, that what the Lord, the Creator and Preserver of all Mankind, said
unto Hezekiah, it is as much and the very same, for we are to take and receive
it all one, as if the Lord God should speak to every Son and Daughter of Men
that were Descendants from Adam and Eve whom He bath Created and calls them all
by Names. Set your Houses severally in Order, for ye shall die and not live.

It is as certain and unavoidable that we shall die, as that we now live. We of
our selves could not possibly hinder our selves from coming forth into life and
the light of the Living. For when and as soon as we were ready and ripe for the
bringing forth, we struggled in the Womb, and the God of Nature ordered and
provides a way for our coming forth from thence, neither is it in the Knowledge
or Power of the Embryo or Infant to strangle or suffocate it self in the Womb,
or of it self (for it is done by the Mother or some other outward accident) to
pass away as the untimely Fruit of a Woman; neither has it Strength or
Understanding immediately after it is brought forth to kill or destroy it self.
And as it grows up toward Manhood, there is implanted an Instinct,
Self-Preservation and Abhorrence of Dissolution. From whence it appears on one
hand how God our invisible Creator (who during all our Infancy does bind up and
strengthen our Arms though too many know it not) for it is not the Nurse or
Mother, but God only who gives that care and compassion to the Nurse or Mother
(in administering of help and doing of benefits God acts through the Creatures)
and even he acts through them whilst they are doing of it. As he is Excell^nt
in Counsel and Wonderful in working, even so his Works are by little and
little, slow and gradual, in succession of time and by degrees. And as we could
not hinder out life in its first beginning; neither can we avoid the laying it
down after the time appointed by our Father and Creator; for we have received
it of him for such a time. Said Jesus Christ the Son of God, the Image of the
invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature (for so Paul calls him by the
Spirit) who in all things has the pre-eminence and who shall declare his
Generation (whereby is denoted the unconceivableness thereof) No Man takes my
life from me, I have Power to lay it down, and I have Power to take it up
again, this I have received of the Father. And so indeed no Man can take our
life from any of us (let Men threaten o^ say what they will; as I my self have
been sufficiently threatened but I have not feared them upon this
consideration, While they took Counsel together against me, they devised ^o
take away my life. But I trusted in thee, O Lord, I said thou art my God, my
times are in thy hand, Psalm. 31. 13, 14, 15. so that Men cannot so much as kill
the Body, unless God does first suffer it, for without his Will a Sparrow does
not so much as fall to the ground. But none of have power of laying down our
lives (unless it be in a way of Duty and the Service of God; in which it has
been sometimes suffered thus far, Luke 22. 51. as to be taken away by the hands
of wicked and violent Men; Until the time that God sends for and Requires, Luke
12. 20. this life of ours by Sickness, outward Accident Old Age, or such like.
But further, as to any Power received by us of taking up our Life again, here
we must leave Jesus Christ: for as to that we cannot follow him nor pretend to
it, none of us having received so much from the Father. And therefore the
S^ripture does so distinctly express it concerning him, Declared to be the Son
of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness (whereby is shown forth
that Holiness did help and contribute toward it) by the Resurrection from the
dead, Sometimes is said that God raised him up, having loosed the pains of
death. Because it was not possible that he should be holden by it; and
sometimes it is so expressed, that Jesus raised himself up, Destroy this
Temple, and I will build it up in three days. Observe by this Particle I, that
he would do it by his own Person, and by his own Power; which yet himself
acknowledged to have received from the Father; which he accordingly fulfilled
in the Temple of his Body.

It is a wonderful, yea a pleasant thing to consider thoroughly, how that the
invisible God our Creator, does deal with us his Creat^res, and to observe the
whole Order and Method thereof, from the first ^eginning to the very last. And
call no Man your Father upon the Earth: for one is your Father, which is in
Heaven, Matthew. 23. 9. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God Created us?
Mal. 2. 10. Thou, O Lord, art our Father: we are the Clay and thou the Potter,
and we are all the work of thine hand, Isa. 64. 8. Have thou not poured me out
as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese? Thou have clothed me with Skin and Flesh,
and have fenced me with Bones and Sinews, Job 10. 10. 11. And indeed without an
Almighty Power (who works and we see him not) that Orders, it could never
be that so Noble and Excellent a Creature should proceed from such a mean
beginning. The Fathers according to the Flesh do nothing at all toward the
infusion of the Soul (which is pure and only the Creation of God) and as for
the viler part, the Body, they do no more toward it by the act of Generation,
than the Husbandman does to make the Corn grow, by his scattering the Grain in
the Earth. They are but Instruments in the hands of God, and by the meanness of
them (if the blinded World can see so much) he does the more magnify his own
Power. He might have Created all Mankind as he did the first immediately out of
the Earth in fullness of Stature, or to grow up as Trees and Vegetables. But by
the same Wisdom whereby he made the Heavens, he has ordained this only way of
coming into the World.

How it is with us in the Womb from the Conception unto the day of our Birth,
it is thus Written, For thou have possessed my Reins. Thou have covered me in
my Mothers Womb. I will Praise thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made,
marvelous are thy works, and that my Soul knows right well. My Substance was
not hid from thee when I was made in secret and curiously wrought in the lowest
parts of the Earth. Thine Eye did see my Substance yet being unperfect, and in
thy Book all my Members were written, which in continuance were fashioned when
as yet there was none of them, Psalm. 139. 13, 14, 15, 16. How it is with us in
the very same day that we are born, we may learn from what is written, And as
for thy Nativity, in the day that thou was born, thy Navel was not cut, neither
wast thou washed in water to supple thee, thou wast not salted at all, nor
swadled at all, none Eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion unto thee, but thou were cast out in the open Field to the loathing
of thy Person in the day that thou wast born. And when I passed by these and saw
thee polluted in thy own Blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy Blood
live, yea I said when thou wast in thy Blood, live, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6. Behold
the goodness of God herein. And then how it is afterward during and throughout
those six Stages and Periods of life (which we are to run through before we
enter into Rest) Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Manhood, Declining Years and old
Age; how we grow up by little and little; and then waste and wither away by
littlle and little. For we all do fade as a leaf, Isa. 64. 6. All this we see
and know, we experience and feel, so that there is no need to describe it
farther. But first (...) after all we are created and made up, as a Building o^
a Tent to be set up for such a time, or as a Garment which will wax old and
wear away, or like a Watch o^ any other Motion only to continue so long and no
longer, even whilst the Pulse beats, and whilst the Springs and Wheels of Life
within do continue in Motion and Circulation.

I have often thought and admired within my self, how the ever-living God,
(unto whom all Flesh shall come) does summon and call for us severally through
the Postern-door and Gate of Death. And when I have enquired and my Heart has
searched diligently out of the Scriptures of Truth, what will become of us when
we come to die, searching what or what manner of thing it is to die; truly the
best and most intelligible account that I can give of it is this: I find in the
^criptures, that it is always expressed by these five or six manner of words,
Dying, Deceasing, Departing, Yielding up the Ghost, Gathering to his Fathers,
Falling asleep. All which tend to one and near the same signification, and so
it does if there be any other Phrase or Form of speech to express Death by. And
it came to pass as her Soul was in departing, for she died, Genesis 35. 8. which
was spoken of Rachel. And so when Elijah was to raise the Widows dead Son, He
streched himself upon the Child three times, and cried unto the Lord and said,
O Lord my God, I pray thee, let this Child's Soul come into him again, 1 Kings
17. 21. In the Margent there, it is, into his inward parts. Besides these two
plain and express Scriptures which do prove and confirm the matter in hand, to
this give all the Prophets and Scripture witness, That Death is nothing else
but a going out or departue of the Soul from the Body. When the Soul, or Ghost
or Spirit is yielded up and committed and returns to that God who gave it. And
when the Holy Ghost Phraseth it by falling asleep, thereby it would set forth
that little pain or difficulty which is therein. For they die in like manner,
and make no more of it than when we take our ordinary rest by sleep in our
Beds. This is commonly the Portion and distinguishing Character of the Godly
and Righteous, that they go out of this Body with Peace of Conscience and Peace
toward God; in which same sense that saying of the Disciples is true, Lord, if
he sleeps he shall do well.

Which will be so as to the future State, if it be real Sleep and perfect
Peace, and not the Slumberings only of false Presumption. But then as in Sleep
we do not speak or act, as when we are awake, nor yet do we think clearly (for
Dreaming is but a kind of confused Imagination) inasmuch as Death also does
take away the use of those faculties, which in sleep are only suspended for a
time, therefore because that in this respect and for this reason it has some
resemblance and likeness to sleep, the Spirit of God does sometimes so compare
and call it. In Death the Soul is actually gone out of the Body, but in sleep
it seems only to lie a little more still. Again, the Body is as the House or
Tenement, but the Soul is the Inhabitant or Tenant thereof; and as when that
leaves it there is nothing seen but bare Walls, and not any thing that has
life within. So the Body is evidently seen to be but a mere Trunk, Carcass or
Lump of Clay, when the Soul which is the life and did give it Beauty and ruddy
color (which also does vanish with it) is gone out and departed from it.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word,
Luke 2. 29. This one Scripture s^ews forth and confirms all those two or three
Truths ^fore-spoken of. The blessedness and desirableness of ^eparting in
Peace, that is, Peace toward God. Hereby again Death is shown to be and is
properly called a departure. According to thy Word. Hereby is shown fo^th and
gathered, that the Soul is only Tenant at Will to the Great Landlord of Heaven
and Earth, when she inhabits here in one of his little Houses or Cottages, viz.
the Body here on Earth. And it is as much as if God should say to her at first,
Soul, I allow thee to inhabit such an exact time in that little Tenement of
Clay; and when that time is expired, thou must come out of it again.

But now The S^cret of the Lord is with them that fear him, Psalm. 25. 14. It
sometimes happens that the Godly and Righteous do perceive and guess about the
time God will have them to live here on this Earth. It was revealed by the Holy
Ghost to Simeon, that he should not see Death before he had seen the Lord's
Christ. And so besides ^he example of Jacob, Moses and Aaron, and others
Registered in the Book of the Lord, I have read and heard of several of the
Saints and Servants of God, who have had it revealed unto them a considerable
time before in their foregoing life, near about what time and at what year of
life they should die, which has accordingly so came to pass. I my self have
had a forebode for several years past that I should die about the three and
thirtieth, or the three and thirtieth year and an half of my life. God knows
whether it will be so) And when the time draws nigh that Israel (and so they
that are of Israel) must die, they do with a willing mind resign and offer up
their Soul unto God as in a readiness a little before that time comes. Which is
a thing pl^asing and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh; as we see by the example and good temper of this Simeon,
who was Just and Devout, waiting for the Consolation of Israel. And so we
should wait beforehand for the Consolation which God will give unto his
Servants, if we do indeed serve him, after that we are passed through this Vale
of Tears and World of Misery.

It was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost that he should not see Death. It is
very proper and pertinent to the matter in hand, to open and explain this
manner of Speech, of seeing Death. The Infidel, Ungodly, Ig^orant or Brutish
Person may at first look upon it as a nonsensical and false kind of saying, to
see Death. For Death closes and destroys the Eye sight that it can see nothing
at all. But to answer him, Thou Fool, that which tho^ sowest is not quickened
except it die. Thou Ignorant Person, I do here say and affirm, then it is that
we see most of all when Death has destroyed all our Optics and power of
seeing, and our Eyes are sunk into our Head. I will prove and demonstrate it
from this very Similitude of Things. Do not we see more when we have the full
and whole sight of a thing, than when we look at or upon it only through a
Crevice, Hole or Chink? Do not they see more who are at full liberty in the
open Air and clear Sunshine, than they who only peep or look through the Grate
or little Window of a dark Prison? Yes they do in both instances. Even so the
Soul when she was in the Prison of the Body (bring my Soul out of Prison, Psalm.
142. 7. says the Psalmist) it only then looks through two little holes under
the Eyelids. But when this Soul is brought out of Prison, as it is by Death
and Dissolution of the Body, when the Chains and Fetters of Flesh are knocked
off, then the Soul is sight all over and throughout, and nothing at all hinders
her sight as from the place of her Habitation. At present it looks through the
two Windows or Casements of the Body, like the Mother of Sisera looking out at
a window, Judges 5. 28. for as when we look through a Perspective-Glass, the
Perspective-Glass of it self is blind and sees nothing at all: Even so the Eye
sees nothing at all but only the Soul sees through the Eye. Again, when the
Perspective-Glass is spoiled, we can see nothing through it: Even so when the
Optic Nerves are out of order, the Soul does not s^e outward things through
it, but is like a light shut up in a dark Lanthorn. From whence that fleshly
part of us called the Eye, may be properly styled the Perspective-Glass of the
Soul.

But at best here in the Body, it only looks through a hole or two; and then it
sees only the surface and outside of things. But after it is gone from the
Body, it is all sight and all light, and then it will see through and into each
Object. Now we see through a Glass darkly. For so is at present all the
material and visible Creation of God in comparison to the immate^ial and
invisible Creation. For as it is written Upon all the Glory shall be a defense,
Isa. 4. 5. In the Margent it is a covering. The Holy Ghost here alludes, that
where things are very Fine, Beautiful, Comely, Costly, Clean, here it is usual
to put something over them for a Defense or Covering, to preserve the Glory
thereof from sullying, as the custom is at this day to do over very fine
Clothes, Beds, Tapistry Hangings, rich Velvet Chairs, or such like. So I have
several times thought and I do really believe (for so much may be gathered from
the Scriptures of Truth) that we shall indeed s^e and find it so, that all this
outward visible Creation (though indeed it does seem very Beautiful and
Glorious) is but as a Defense or Covering cast over the much yet greater Glory
of the inward, invisible, imma^erial Creation of God. And furthermore, all the
Glory of this present Creation is to be done away, to usher in and make room
for the yet much greater Glory of the future Creation of God. And then it shall
be truly returned and said, Even that which was made Glorious (as so is the
present visible Creation. We may in the Spring time observe the exceeding
Beauty of Blossoms and Flowers. Why, Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed
likeone of these) had no Glory in this by reason of the Glory that excels.
For if that which was done away is Glorious (as indeed it was) much more that
which remains is Glorious, 2 Cor. 3. 10, 11. For behold I create new Heavens
and new Earth, and the former shall not ^e remembered, nor come into mind, Isa.
65. 17. For these new Heavens and new Earth shall be so exceedingly more
Glor^ous, that the present Heavens and the present Earth have no Glory (he
would tell a falsehood that should say so, for they are indeed Glorious) in this
respect by reason of the Glory that excels. And so as much as future Glory
does exceed present G^ory: so even now the inward Glory (The King's Daughter is
all Glorious within) does exceed ou^ward Glory. Nothing but such an inward
thing as the Soul^ can see, discern or apprehend what inward Glory is. Which
again, she cannot so much see, know and apprehend whilst she is in the Body as
she will when she is out of the Body, then she will see Face to Face. And
inasmuch as seeing Face to Face is more than seeing through a Glass darkly, by
certain and necessary consequence, the Soul will see more in her separated
state in the invisible World, than now she does whilst she is in the Body here
on Earth. So that marvel no more at what was aforesaid, we shall see much more
when these Eyes of ours are sunk into our Heads, than ever we did, when we had
even the best and clearest use of them. I will open my Mouth in a Parable, I
will utter dark sayings of old; one whereof has been here explained. We shall
see much, yea infinitely more when dead, than ever we did whilst living. Yea,
and we shall see Death it self.

What kind of sight is this? Now we commonly behold Death Paint^d or Pictured
upon the Walls of Churches, or upon the side of Tomb-stones, like a Skeleton of
dry Bones, with a Glass and Spade in his Hand. Whereby we living are taught and
instructed, that the Glass of our Time is always running; and that the Sexton
will dig a Grave for us as he has done for others. But away with these
Pictures (for as they have been properly called ignorant and unlearned Men's
Books, so if People abide in them and go no further, they are likely to remain
ignorant and unlearned still; not knowing of things thoroughly, as they ought
and may be known) for they do teach and in^truct, but only in half and in the
outside of a thing. That Picture or Representation of Death aforemen^ioned,
does only show and set forth the Alterations, Changes, and wh^t will befall the
Body; which is only the Shell or Husk of the Man. But to see such a Pi^^^^e, or
to conceive thereof in our mind and go no further, is not a seeing Death, as it
was appointed that old Simeon should see it. For to see the thing it self when
it approaches nigh, and is actually come, is no more than only this, as if you
should see one go out of an House to another Place, or as we see and feel our
selves, when we are upon going and moving from one place to another. Even so
Death is no more than a going or moving from out of this World into another
World; or rather in more Propriety and Truth of Expression, into another room
of the same House. For it is not another World, but another part of this World;
the Earth being but the least, even not so much as the ten thousandth part of
the Creation of God. We can better understand, than we can see what I am now
going to speak of. For when the Breath of Man goes forth in his Death, it is
not so visible as smoke that ascends up. Nay, as long as it sends forth
Breath, it lives. It rather seems to sink into, and perish in the Body, as may
be perceived after those struggles and endeavors to fetch Breath, or to
Breathe forth, Her^by is shown forth the wonderful Workmanship and contr^vance
of God; that the Soul, like the Godhead himself, is purely an invisible Being.
We are to admire and say, it is wonderful; and to believe, and be most fully
satisfied that it is so, although we cannot comprehend it. And the Angel did
wonderously, and Manoah and his Wife looked on. For it came ^o pass, when the
flame went toward Heaven from off the Altar, then the Angel of the Lord
ascended in the flame of the Altar, Judge. 13. 19, 20. Even so here it may be
reasoned and supposed (for it is a wonderful thing of God and his doing
wonderously) the thing is most true, that when we stand by the Bedside of our
dying acquaintance, we see nothing but a little struggling, gasping or such
like. And yet it comes to pass, that as the Creature lies upon his back or
side, his Soul goes up toward Heaven, it returning to the God that gave it.
And as the Angel ascended in the flame, even so the Soul expires and goes out
in the Breath, and we see it not. But the d^ceasing Soul, or rather after it is
a deceased Soul, sees it; and this is a seeing Death. The Wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof (but thou do not see it) and
can not tell, whence it comes, and whither it goes. So it may be truly
reasoned and conceived of the Soul or Spirit. The Soul did actuate the Body,
whilst it was therein; and we did Hear, See, Taste, hear and feel the
Operations and Life thereof; but we cannot tell exactly the particular Place
from whence it came (from God and Heaven in the General) neither can we tell
the particular Place where it goes, only in the General, that it is to return
to God, and to appear before him in Judgment, and from thence to go away into
Everlasting Punishment, or into Life Eternal, Mat. 25. 46. But further, as to
the exact Place, Manner, Time, we cannot tell so as to describe it particularly
as it is. Again, As thou know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the
Bones do grow in the womb of her that is with Child, even so thou know not
the works of God who makes all, Eccles. 11. 5. We know not which way the
Spirit came into the Infant whilst it was in the Womb, by Creation and Infusion
from God in the General; neither do we know which way it takes, as now we know
Roads or Paths. When the Breath of Man goes forth, and he returns to his Earth,
his Spirit or Soul ascends up above the Clouds into the upper Parts of the
World, as may be understood from the Light and ascending Nature thereof, as the
same is in Smoke or Fire. We may also perceive somewhat thereof, whilst she is
in the Body by liftings up of Spirit.

As Ecclesiastes says, Thou know not the Way of the Spirit, nor yet the
Works of God who makes all. Even so it is not to be expected, that I should so
make it known, even from the Law and the Testimony, and from the Light that is
given me from thence, and so describe what it is to see Death, as People will
find when they come severally to see and feel Death indeed. Then they shall
more clearly perceive the Truth of what has been before written, when they
shall in their individual Persons be brought down to the People of old Time. It
is well, if in our Searching and Learning thereof, we come somewhat near to the
Truth. By what has been aforesaid, a clear Apprehension, Notion or Knowledge
may be had what Death is or what it is to dye; even for the Soul to go away of
out of the Body. And because, it must after Death go to Judgment, and from
thence it shall go further into Everlasting Punishment, or into Life Eternal:
Hence does arise that doubt and fear of Soul, which of these places it shall go
away into. As to this, how to obtain the one and avoid the other, to partake of
the Blessing and escape the Cu^se, to enter into Heaven and not fall into Hell;
to go away into Happiness and pass by Misery; all Scripture is therefore given
us of God for to Teach, Instruct, and Guide us herein, even to make us wise
unto Salvation. The same and this only is or ought to be the end of all Books
or Sermons. I am sure, it is the only intent of the present Treatise.

According to the Method and Favor which God afforded unto old Simeon, we
gather hence, that it is a very great Blessing and distinguishing Mercy of God;
for he does not vouchsafe this favor unto all but only to his Elect, neither
does he deal so with every sort of People, to have this revealed and manifested
unto them, that they shall not see Death before they see the Lord's Christ. It
is reported of Julius Caesar that a little before he was Murdered in the
Senate-Hoase, that he did see the Apparition of himself in the form of a dead
Man; at which sight (although he was a Mighty Man of Valor) he was strangely
astonished and struck with fear. For so terrible was this sight of Death unto
him, that he did exceedingly fear and quake. And truly well he might; for he
was an Heathen and Infidel, and we can apprehend by the Gospel Revelation what
will becom^ of such after Death. But our good old Simeon hy having seen the
Lord's Christ before, was sufficiently forearmed and fortified against the
sight of Death. The reason whereof stands on this wise; for as when the Chick
sees the Kite or Hawk that would devour it; if she can then run under the Hens
wings into the Cub, she is safe, for as the Hen was instrumental at first to
give it Life and Being, so she will preserve it. Even so it is here, by seeing
the Lord's Christ, who is appositely called the Prince of Life, Acts 3. 15. The
faithful Soul, or the Soul that is Christ's, runs and makes to Christ who
promises and will perform it also, I will gather my Children togeth^r even as a
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, Mat. 23. 37. He shall cover thee
with his Feathers and under his wings thou shall trust, his Truth shall be thy
Shield and Buckler, Psalm. 91. 3. Then let Death and the Devil come to destroy
that Soul if they can. Here Christ is greater in Power and Might, for as much
then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself took
part of the same; that through Death he might destroy him that had the power of
Death, that is the Devil. And deliver them who through fear of Death were all
their lifetime subject to Bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Simeon was one example to
confirm this Truth; for he being by the Lord Christ delivered from the fear
thereof, was not so astonished thereat as Caesar was, or as other natural
ungodly People nowadays are. Who though they name of Christ, yet they have no
Benefit or Interest in him, they being not within the Covenant, and they have
no Share nor Lot in this matter.

Even after Death has destroyed the Body, Christ will destroy that. Now to
destroy the Destroyer, that is Salvation indeed. Which again will be effected
after it has seized and done its worst and utmost upon us. I will Ransom them
from the power of the Grave; whereby it may be understood that the Prince of
Life will as it were force and command it so; for God is greater in Power and
Might. I will Ransom them from Death. As he first brought us into Life (for it
was the Word of God that Created us; and the W^rd of God is Christ and Christ
is the Word of God) and made us liable unto Dying and Death, so he will rescue
and bring us up from it again. O Death I will be thy Plagues; O Grave I will be
thy Destruction. Death has been heretofore a Plague unto us, and the Grave
has destroyed and crumbled our Body into dust, when before it was safe and
entire Flesh and Blood. But God and Christ will in this sense Repent himself
for his Servants; and he will Plague this Plague and Destroy this Destroyer. So
that it shall be returned upon him and said, O thou Enemy, Destructions are
come to a perpetual end, Psalm. 9. 6. That is, when the very same things, which
seem to be destroyed and come to nothing, are raised up into Life and Being
again, never more to turn into Corruption, nor yet to be subject unto
Destruction. All this stands ratified and confirmed with this kind of Speech,
Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes, Hos. 13. 14. whereby is shown forth the
Immutability and ^^^edfastness of God's Council and Determination herei^. For
it is as much as if God should say, I am resolved upon it, I will never Repent
nor alter from this my Decree and Purpose.

And when all these things shall so be, then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 24. which
very words are quoted out of Isa. 25. 8. He will swallow up Death in Victory;
and the Lord God shall wipe away all Tears from all Faces, for the Lord has
spoken it. Then also those words of Isa. 38. 1. will be changed, reversed,
read, rung, or rather they will be sung backwards. For instead of, Thou shall
die and not live, then it will be returned and said to the unspeakable
rejoicing and exultation of us Creatures, Thou shall live and not die. After
Hezekiah had heard those words from Isaiah, Thou shall die and not live, he
turned his Face to the wall and wept sore. But it was just now quoted from
another place of Isaiah, the Lord God shall wipe away all Tears from off all
Faces: So that the same God who did see Hezekiah's Tears, Isa. 38. 5. will wipe
them away in a particular, eminent, and visible manner; and so of all his
Saints and Servants.

By the way, it is much better and greater Honor to have ones Name Registered
and Recorded in the Book of the Lord, or the Book of Life, than to be
Chronicled, or to be had in the greatest Esteem by the World.

I do the more willingly make known and rehearse these things unto ye, both
because they do flow from that Fo^ntain or Well of Truth which lies in our
Text; as als^ to beget in ye lovely apprehensions of God. Truly, he is a good
God whom we serve. And this is the bes^ Argument and Persuasion with Ingenious
and Grateful Minds to serve him yet more and more. To serve him yet more
ear^estly, and continually, yea and instantly. If ye hope and expect to receive
those future good things from (...) hands of God furthermore, then we beseech
you Brethren and exhort you by the Lord Jesus that as ye have received of us
how ye ought to walk and please God, so you would abound in it more and more, 1
These. 4. 1. Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean Heart,
Psalm. 73. 1. He is good to all Mankind indifferently and in the general; but
the mixed Multitude do not altogether so much discern his goodness. For if they
did, they would never carry themselves so Evil, Rebellious, and Despising
toward him as now they do. But in an especial manner God is good to such as
are of a clean Heart or clean of Heart. And here reciprocally again, those who
are of a clean Heart do behold and know the Goodness of God more than the
common sort of People do. For whereas on the other worse side, one sin retained
and dwelling in a Man, is the Root that bears Gall and Wormwood, and is the
cause of all that Alienation from and Enmity toward God (none being Enemies to
him but through their own wicked works.) So again, on the other hand, this
cleanness of heart, is like the pulling or rubbing of filth, filmn or scales
from our Eyes, in order to help our Eyesight; or in order that we may see
clearly. For as aforesaid, every like loves its like. An Holy God loves and
accepts of an Holy Soul: So here again it is, there being a proportionableness
and suitableness herein, a clean Heart knows this proposition better than
others, God is good. A clean Heart sees farther than another kind of Heart; for
it can see God through the Cloud. It can see the goodness of God not only in
the Land of the Living, but also when it walks through the Valley of the shadow
of Death, I will fear no Evil (why so?) for thou art with me, Psalm. 23. 4. A
clean Heart does see a good God, yea and a sweet God even through the darkness
and bitterness of Death.

I have read it as a saying of those whom they call the Wittier sort of
Atheists, that People in the general are afraid of Death, as Children are
afraid to walk in the dark for fear to meet Hobgoblings; which we Men know
there is no such thing; and from thence they would ground their Imaginations or
Dictates of Unbelief. But in their Answers there remains falsehood, and
miserable Comforters are they all. For as sure as we now live and fear several
things in the World, there is somewhat real also to be feared after Death; for
as there are other parts of the World besides this Earth, as Rivers, Seas, and
we may look up and behold the Stars in their Courses: So in like manner it may
be evidenced and demonstrated, that there is an immortal Spirit in Man as well
as a dying Body. But so far I will make use of that saying of theirs, That to
the Children of God, to the Heirs of Life and Immortality, although they are
partakers of Flesh and Blood, and it is this only which Death can hurt, yet to
the main and in the utmost, Death is but as a Hobgoblin, Phantasm or
Apparition. There is little reality in it; for it is not properly a thing or
Being as the Logicians and Metaphysicians say: But only a Dissolution of a
Thing and a Privation of a Being. And that is only as to the Body; which is as
the breaking of a Shell toward the hatching or bringing forth of a Chicking;
or as a Woman when she is in Travel has Pain and Anguish, till the bringing
forth of her Child, But after that is born she remembers no more the Pain or
Anguish for joy that a Child is born into the World. Even so through the Pain
and Languishing of Death the Soul is born and comes forth into the invisible
World, and she remembers no more the Pangs and Throws and Anguish she felt by
the Body dropping from her, as she came through the Gate of Death, and now she
is in an Happy and Blessed State. But this is only the favor God bears unto
his own People and the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, No Weapon that is
formed against them shall prosper, Isa. 54. 17. For though the Devil thought to
make an end of them and destroy them utterly by Sin and Death* yet they are
escaped whole and safe through them both. It is only to such who have this
Blessing and Mark of Favor from God as to see the Lord's Christ before they
see Death. It is these that d^part in Peace.

The People of that Generation did see Christ in the days of his Flesh. We of
this present Generation may see Christ in his Grace and Revelation, which is
full of Mercy, Goodness and Truth. Simeon took up the Child Jesus in his Arms
and Blessed God: Even so we may go yet nearer and farther, and take up Christ
and receive him into our Hearts. This is seeing the Lord's Christ in our days,
when we see him within us with the Eyes of Faith, or with the Eyes of our
Understanding being enlightened. When what we have heard, we have seen with our
eyes, we have looked upon and our hands have handled of the Word of Life, for
the Life was manifest and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you
Eternal Life, which was manifest unto us, or rather within us. And so Paul
says by the Spirit unto those to whom he writes, Little Children of whom I
travail in birth until Christ be formed in ye. The same is the end of all our
Preaching, to beget Christ formed in you, which is a work of time and by
degrees. And if this be done, ye will never see Death Eternal. Though ye will
for all see the first Death; for Moses is dead and the Prophets are dead; yet
ye will never be hurt by the second Death.

SERMON V
Isaiah 38. 1. -- Set thine House in Order, for tho^ shall Die, and not live.
TO see the Lord's Christ before we see Death, is to be a Partaker of the
Divine Nature, to have the Christian or Christ-like Nature formed and fashioned
within us. And that not in part or in some things only, b^^ in the whole and
throughout. And the very God (...) Peace Sanctify you wholly; and I pray God
your whole Spirit and Soul be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ. This word, wholly and whole being repeated twice here in the same
verse, does show that the Holy Ghost does lay exceeding much stress and
necessit^ thereon. As the Soul does act^ate the whole Body, eve^ so Christ
should actuate the Soul throughout and wholly, But here is the fault and
failure of the generalit^ of People, of those who call themselves Christian
whether they be of the straiter Sect of the Christian Religion, whatever it be,
or whatever they are called for they would pretend unto others and seem to
themselves to be more Holy, Real, and Sincere in their Christian Profession and
the Service of God than others. I profess truly I do not love to name the
distinguishing Names, for I would that the time were once come, as it is
drawing on in these latter days, When the Lord shall be one and his Name one;
and then all those Nicknames of the several Sorts and Sects of Christianity
will be laid aside and be used no more in our Tongue. But it has been my
Observation a long time and I seldom knew it fail that when I have came near
and beheld the Lives and Manner of Conversation of the Dissenters, who seem to
be more Religious than ordinary, who talk so much of Christ, I find that they
are for taking up Christ in some, yea perhaps in most, but not in all things.
And whereas he that keeps Christ's Sayings, shall never see Death, John 8. 51.
Yet they do not keep and obey that last Commandment which Christ Jesus is
Recorded to have given, as consequently comprehensive and of greatest
concernment of all the rest, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he
has commanded us, Matthew. 28. 20. But contrariwise several of them do break
some or more of these least Commandments and teach Men so, Matthew. 5. 19. Do not
some break or rather neglect those his lesser Commandments concerning Baptism
and the Lord's Supper; which he commanded to do in Remembrance of him. These
are lesser Commandments (which are only the possitive outward Duties or
Ordinances of Religion) in comparison to the greater things of the Law which
concern intrinsic Good or Evil, Right or Wrong. Again, does another sort
observe strictly the weightier matters of the Law, Judgment, Justice, and
Mercy? For it has been observed of those who are called Rigid Strict
Presbyterians; that they have been given unto Oppression, Injurious Dealing,
all for their own ends, an Heart they have exercised with covetous practices,
cursed Children, 2. Pet. 2. 14. And they have been noted to be Stubborn,
Perverse, Blood-thirsty and Cruel. Which is as contrary to Mercy one of the
weightier matters of the Law, as Darkness is to Light. And so that together
with their Pervereness is as diametrically opposite to Long-Suffering, the
Gentleness and M^ekness of Christ, as any thing in the World can be. Now if you
charge any of them closely and talk with them of these things, they have a
parcel of Sayings and Excuses (as indeed all Sin and Transgression has its
excuse: There being nothing so bad in the World, but somewhat may be said for
it) Distinctions and Traditions of their own whereby they would make the
Commandments of God of none effect. So it is evident, they break one of his
least Commandments and teach Men so. Which Disobedience and Prevarication of
theirs shows that Christ the Wisdom of the Father, who knew was in Man, had not
supposed against a vain and unlikely thing, such as would never happen; for
these do contrary and different unto it every day. But what is the consequence
or harm of breaking of one of the least of those his Commandments and teaching
Men so? He shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven, which there
signifies the Ministration or Profession of the Gospel. This Gospel being to
prepare us for and get us admission into Heaven. And by what follows in the
next verse, Except your Righteousness shall exceed the Right^ousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
From hence there is real grounds of fear; for it may be truly understood and
gathered, that such who break one of the least Comma^dments of Christ and teach
Men so, shall not only be called l^ast in the Kingdom of Heaven, but they shall
in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; because that the Righteousness of
this kind of People does not exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; inasmuch as these also do exactly the very same, as the Scribes and
Pharisees did, viz. break some of the Commandments of God and teach Men so.
Only with this somewhat better diversity, for the Pharisees did Tithe Anise,
Mint and Cummin, but neglected the weighter matters of the Law, Mercy,
Judgment, Faith and the Love of God; these ought they to have done, and not to
leave the other undone. But several of the better sort of those called
Christians, may perhaps observe the weightier matters of the Law, and neglect
some of the lesser Commandments; whereas indeed and in truth from the like
Reasoning of Christ it may be understood, that these ought to be done and
observed also as we^^ as the others.

I take God to Record this day (who is greater than our Hearts and knows all
things) that all along throughout my Preaching and Writing, in all my Books and
Sermons (as himself will witness herein for me at the last day of Judgment) I
have taught and affirmed constantly, and so I do again repeat and confirm it
this day, That all the Commandments of God and of Christ ought to obeyed and
observed; and not one, ^ay not the least of them ought in any wise to be
broken. Far be it from me to teach Men so, nor yet to intimate or allow, or
give the least way unto it. See Mark 7. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Though for this very
things sake, because I have declared and testified the Will and Commandment of
God to be on that wise, as he says by his Proph^t, I will be a swift Witness
against false Swearers, and against them that turn aside the Stranger from his
Right, Mal. 3. 8. For this cause my Books and Ministry has been rejected by
the Corrupt and Ig^orant Multitude of this World. As it is written, He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still, Rev. 22. 11. So if they go on still in their refusal to hear or receive
that part of God's Word which is committed to my Ministration, and in their
other Stubbornness and Reproaches (for their Lips have spoken lies, their
Tongue has muttered Perverseness, Isa. 59. 13.) I shall sooner convince them
out of the Law, take it in the whole together and not by piecemeal only, to be
Sinners and Transgressors herein, then they can convince me of having dealt
falfly in God's Covenant, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant, neither
have our steps declined from thy way, Psalm. 44. 17.

The very nature of a Covenant stands on this wise, to observe all the several
sorts thereof. Suppose we enter into a Bond to perform Covenants; and there are
for instance six Covenants mentioned in an Indenture: If one of them is broken
and not performed, and the Bond is put in suit thereupon, it will be in no wise
a good Pl^a in Law, for the Covenanter to say and allege that ^e has observed
the other five. And so when God comes to enter into Judgment and to call People
to an Account; when he shall call to the Heavens above and to the Earth that he
may judge his People. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice, Psalm. 5. 6. How they have kept his Ten
Commandments from their Youth up, or all the days and years they were on this
E^rth, for so far his Judgment will examine and reach back, as his ^oregoing
Statutes, Laws and Judgments did enjoin, Deuteronomy. 12. 1. Luke 1. 74, 75. Then God
will not accept of it as sufficient, if some should say, Lord, I have kept nine
of them, others eight, others six, others perhaps obeyed none at all from the
Heart. And so it is of all the other Commandments of God which are written any
where else in the Bible, whether of the Old o^ New Testament, they ought to be
observed all one, i^ being God's S^atute Book, whereby he governs over the
Nations of the Earth, all one as the Acts of Parliament of this Nation are kept
and done accordingly. Now as when one is Arraigned for Murder, Felony, or any
other Capital Crime, it will not avail and save him if he should plead and say
for himself, that he had obeyed and kept all the Laws of England besides. The
same holds true as to the present Account and future Judgment of God. For
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all. For he that said, do not not commit Adu^tery, said also, do not Kill;
now if thou commit no Adultery, yet if thou Kill, thou art become a
Transgressor against the Law. So he that s^id, do not worship Idols nor graven
Images, said also, do not swear vainly or falsely. He said also, do not Covet
and do no Wrong. So that if a Man swears vainly or falsely, or if he Covets and
does Wrong, although he does not worship Idols, nor graven Images, he is become
a Transgressor of the Law. So it may be reasoned concerning the keeping of some
and neglecting or transgressing of others, run them changeably throughout all
the Ten Commandments. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, especially in
the eight and ninth Chapters, Reasons very much from the nature of Covenants
and Testaments. Which as himself P^raseth it, serves unto the example and
shadow of Heavenly things, and it is else where expressly said as pertaining to
this, That though it be another Man's Covenant, yet no Man adds nor
diminishes from it. Even so it is as to God's Covenant unto Man. If we would
indeed have the Benefit and precious Promises belonging to the Covenant, we
must not in the performing and fulfilling the same on our parts, we are to add
nothing to it, nor yet should we diminish or take any thing from it. The
Covenant of God is the Word and Law of God (for so it is called in sundry
places of Scripture) and the Word and Law of God is God himself and Christ
himself. ^o that herein the saying is true, Take all, or take none. Is Christ
divided? 1 Cor. 3, 13. Or can God be divided? It is impossible as to both. Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon. Although many foolish deceived People and outward
Worshippers, who serve diverse Lusts and Pleasures, would vainly imagine and
think to divide their service one half for God and another half for the World
or their own Lusts. But herein they do greatly err, for if they would have the
Lord to be their God, he will be the Lord their God in all things, or otherwise
he will not accept of such for Servants. And if People would willingly, really,
and unfeign^dly have Christ formed within them, they must have Christ formed
within them throughout or not at all. There was a little Type and Signification
of this in what is w^itten, Now the Coat of Jesus was without Seam, wo^en from
the top throughout, John 19. 23.

The end of all our Preaching is to get Christ formed within you, for that is a
seeing the Lord's Christ before we see Death, and then we shall neither fear
Death, nor yet can Death possibly hurt us. But it was needful thus to explain
it, that Christ must be formed within us ^hroughout and not in part only. For
otherwise it may be a show and representation of Christ within, but it is not
Christ indeed no more than a^ unshapen lump of Flesh is a real Child, or no
more than a Leg or an Arm is the whole Man, or than any part is the whole. The
Works of God are always perfect and complete at the last; although at first
they may be only in beginning, growth and increase. And so it may be in the
Creation of the New, Spiritual, Divine and Christ-like Na^^re, as is the
forming and making of the Bod^ly ^art of u^. Where in truth at the very first
of all the ^^^stance is imperfect, and all the Members in con^^^uan^e are
fashioned when as yet there was none of them; as a^^ears by the Progr^ssion of
an Embryo to a real Infant or Child. And as the Carpenter or Carver now takes
any common piece of Wood and stretches out the Rule, he marketh it out with a
line, he fitteth it unto the Planes, and he works it out with a Compass, and
makes it after the Figure of a Man, according to the Beauty of a Man that it
may remain in his House, Isa. 41. 13. The Spirit of God does describe it on
this wise; and so the same God our Creator our Strength and our Redeemer; For
thou also have wrought all our Works in us, Isa. 26. 12. Or as it is in the
Margent there for us. He takes near upon the same Method and Order in the Souls
of Men, in forming and fashioning them fit for himself. Provided always, That
we be Workers together therewith, and so we receive not the Grace of God in
vain; that whilst God is a working all our works in us or for us, we be sure
our selves also to work together with him and under him. So as to comply with
and f^rward those good Motions and Thoughts he puts and infuses into our Souls
from time to time, so as to obey and do according to them. For upon our doing
or not doing of this does depend and turn the Salvation or Destruction of Men.
If we would thus give up our selves wholly and thoroughly and continually to
follow the Guidings and Leadings of our God, he would at length so order and
effect the matter unt^l every Thought in us should be brought into Captivity
unto the Obedience of Christ. By what words of Truth one single Thought (...)
brought into Captivity, another is also, by the same or like words of Truth
which God does infuse or lay before the Soul. And so it would go on and
successively till every Thought is brought into Captivity unto the Obedience of
Christ. Mark here how it is said, every Thought, and not some Thoughts only.
For less than this God will not accept of, and until this be done in him ^r her
no Man or Woman can be certain of their own Salvation or make their Calling and
Election sure.

From hence we may see by the way how vastly different from and above are God's
Thoughts over Men's Thoughts. For according to the Judgment and Estimate of the
World they are good Christians and good People, who are good only in some
things and now and then do a few good deeds. But let the same People talk what
they will in Slanders and Reproaches and false Sayings, let them speak Vanity
every one unto his Neighbor, or with flattering Lips or a double Heart, there
is no great notice taken of this. Do we not this very day see with our Eyes and
hear with our Ears, that the Strain and Course of the World goes on near at
this rate? And then farther as to Thoughts, here the Heart of every Man is
deep. It is Universally imagined that Thoughts are free, and let them have but
a fair outside Religious Conversation, (for the Multitude and Generations of
People have been outward Worshippers of God all along) they shall pass well
enough in the esteem of the World. Although in their Heart they work wickedness
and their Thoughts are Thoughts of Iniquity, Isa. 59. 7. which is thinking
things that are not equal. But in opposition and contradistinction to all this
God is not as Man but above Man. For my thoughts are not your thoughts neither
your ways my ways says the Lord: for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth,
so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. His
Word at present (much more will his future Judgment and Retribution for this is
grounded upon the other) takes notice and cognizance of every Thought, 2 Cor.
10. 5. And if this Word of God be continually Preached and made known to the
Heart and Conscience it will not let it rest and be at quiet until every
Thought is brought into Captivity unto the Obedience of Christ. His Word which
is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, does more mind what is
within than what is without the Man. O Jerusalem wash thine Heart from
wickedness, that thou may be clean, how long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge
within thee? Jer. 4. 14. Hence it appears that it is not sufficient barely to
stop the hand or cease from the outward act of wickedness, but the Heart is to
be washed from it before we can be saved. Again, how very few among the called
Christians do make a Conscience of vain Thoughts? Or to whom vain Thoughts are
a grief and a burden, so as to crush and not give way unto them when they are
so? But they abstain from them as much as ever they can. And they do not only
say so with a parcel of customary words for there is a fashionable kind of
Religious talk, when they do not feel the same inwardly, but they do not
sensibly find it so in them. And then they are mere complainers only, O my
leanness! O the Vanity and Corruption of my Heart! Or such like, but they stand
still and do not mend, nor endeavor to get rid of those vain Thoughts.

As God understands our Thoughts afar off, and has appointed his Word as a
Rule and Regulator thereof, so there is not a word in my Tongue, but lo, Lord
thou know it altogether. Here also the Law of God is perfect, converting the
Soul, Psalm. 19. 7. And as it reaches to the very bottom, so it extends unto and
gives its several Orders and Rules for the Government of and Fashioning and
Framing aright all his Thoughts, Words and Actions. As indeed it would be
useful to show it particularly. If any Man among you seems to be Religious
and bridl^th not his Tongue, bu^ deceives his own Heart, that Man's Religion
is vain. And so if People use a multitude of words in which there wants not
sin; if their Lips speak lies and their Tongue muttereth perve^seness; If they
utter Error against the Lord or lying words, Isa. 32. 7. And so it is of
Reproaches, Slanders, Back-bitings and Whisperings; if they do not make a
Conscience to refrain from every idle and vain (and much more from every false)
word; For of every idle Word that Men shall speak, they shall give account
thereof in the day of Judgment: In a word, unless they do take heed to their
ways that they offend not with their Tongue, Alas! How very few do all this
even among the Professors and Religious also? Let them make what pretenses,
appearances and show they will by going constantly to the Exercises and
Ordinances of Religion, and by observing all the Acts, Times and Seasons of
outward Worship, both in the Congregation, Family, Closet or Chamber, yet all
their Religion is vain.

Truly, there is more that goes to the making up of Good, Perfect, and thorough
Christian, than we do at first think and are aware of; and so to constitute the
Pure and Undefiled, the Sincere, Real, Inward and Universal Religion. Which
last Epithet, Universal, is fitly added as comprehensive of all the rest; as
also to distinguish and know it from the Partial Religion of the Multitude; for
theirs is a Religion in some things and not in all things. There is a great
deal more requisite to be indeed a meet Partaker of the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, than is to make one only a Member of the Visible Church here
on Earth; for to that is required no more than their coming to the place of
Worship and bringing their Bodies with them. And People will find (I do hereby
warn and testify that they do not discern it then only when it is too late and
when the door is shut) that there is more to be done, and that it is an harder
and longer work to get admission and entrance into Heaven, than barely to go to
Church or to such a Congregation every Sabbath, nay though it should be every
week day throughout their Life; or then to say their accustomary Prayers which
too many count it dull, tedious and wearisome enough. For most true it is, that
at the day of Judgment it will be seen of many, who shall not then only at that
moment, cry, Lord, Lord, but they also did say, Lord, throughout all their
foregoing life in an accustomary manner of outward Worship and Prayer; to whom
God shall Answer, I never knew ye, Depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Matthew,
7. 21. 23. Now the working iniquity signifies the doing those things which are
not Equal. And so it will be, depart from me ye that have lived in the
continued Breach of any of my least Commandments.

Even at that day of general and final Judgment (notwithstanding the present
heart-burnings, and self-justifyings of the Religious) The Lord will show who
are his, and who is Holy, and will cause him to come near unto him, even whom
he has chosen, he will cause to come near unto him, Numb. 16. 5. I do really
believe and am verily persuaded, for I gather as much from the Scriptures and
particularly from that saying of Christ, That which is highly esteemed amongst
Men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16. 15. That many People will be
damned, and go to Hell; who are now accounted and have the Character of very
Religious, Civil and Honest People, Fair Conditioned and Good Neighbors. As
again, several will be saved whom the World does revile and cast out their Name
as Evil, in like manner as their Forefathers did to the Prophets, Impoverish
and Oppress, yea it may be, Imprison and put them to Death. As it was said of
Paul, Away with this turbulent fellow, it is not fit he should live. But how
must such be ashamed to see those very same Souls had in Honor and Rewarded by
the Infinite and Glorious God, whom they made and used as the filth and
off^scouring of the World, had in Derision and a Proverb of Repro ch, and
esteemed as the contemptible ones of the Earth. The Scene will change, and
there will then appear another face of things.

I do the more willingly here put in mind of these things for two Reasons.

1 st. That you may know what to answer when your Opinion is asked concerning
such an one, of whom perhaps the Multitude is divided, and some say, He is a
good Man, and others say he deceives the People. Some say of him that he is a
Rogue, Hypocrite or deceived in his Religion. Others are apt to think that he
is Sincere, Understanding and Conscientious in his Religion. And so when you
hear a more favorable Report of another sort, that they are Good Religious
People, because they always go to Church or Meeting, and they do several good
Deeds. Here it is well for them if their Goodness and Religion is Universal.
They will not be ashamed, neither in this World nor yet in the World to come,
If they have respect unto all God's Statutes, Psalm. 119. 6. But in both these
and so in like cases, we ought to think as near as we can according to the Law
and the Testimoy and according to the Light that is in them, but let alone all
pronouncing of Judgment; for all Judgment is the Lord's. We are to suspend our
Verdict and Judge nothing before the time. For the day comes when the Lord
will manifest the Counsels of the Heart, and then shall every one have Praise
of God.

2dly. I do the more willingly put in mind of these things, to quicken, stir
up, and provoke all that shall hear or read these Lines, to give all diligence,
to use their utmost Earnestness, Strength, Labor and Endeavor, and that not
only for a fit or spurt. But continually throughout all their remaining Life,
and to be sorry that they had begun to do so no sooner, to arise up and be
saved. For truly, there is more absolutely necessary unto it then People are
aware of. It is observable, what follows immediately after, Luke 16, 15. The
Law and the Prophets were until John, since that Time the Kingdom of Heaven is
preached and every Man presses into it. So it is at this very day and has
been all along, the Kingdom of God is preached, and the Word of God is preached
for to bring People to that his Kingdom, or to bring People to Heaven. And if
you ask every Man or Woman, that ever heard a a Sermon in their Life as there
is hardly any one in this Nation, who has not heard a Sermon, unless some
ignorant Papists, who are next door to Atheists. Whither they do Hope to go to
Heaven? Every one will say that they do. But the Scripture here says, Every
Man presses into it. To explain the very sense and meaning of that Word, it
will be necessary to use this instance and similitude, suppose that we did see
or word was brought unto us, that all such an House, wherein was a great
Assembly of People were on Fire, what running and scampering would there be to
the doors? And each one would press upon another, who could get out first. The
Parallel place in Mat. 11. 12. especially the Marginal Reading thereof,
confirms this very same Acceptance and Signification of the Word, for there it
is on this wise, And from the Days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by fo^ce. In the Margent
there it is, gotten by force, and they that thrust M^n. Which last is as much
as to say, that People are for all by Nature luggish, so that they would not
run and press enough of themselves in such a Case of Necessity and Danger. But
we Ministers and Preachers of the Word must also thrust them on. For so it is,
the door of the Kingdom of Heaven stands, and is held open by the Preaching and
Ministry of the Word. But in as much as the Fathers, where are they? and do the
Prophets live for ever? Both Preachers and Hearers must dye the Death. So that
the door is not always open to them. And as to this again, the rule i^ certain
that if any one does not in this Life (which is the time o^ Probation and Trial
on this account) do things worthy to stand before the Son of Man, or to which
Heaven is promised, unless He does the Commandments of God, that He may have
right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City;
unless People bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and so except People do
things meet for Heaven before they die, they will never go to Heaven after that
they die.

As to that important Question, What we must do to be saved, or* how much we
must do to be saved? Or to get into Heaven? In these two foregoing Texts it is
said, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent take it by
force. Every Man presses into it. Strive to enter into the straight Gate, Luke
13. 24. It has been observed by the learned in that Language, that the Word,
strive, in the Original Greek, does require to put forth the utmost Strength,
even until we break a Vein and the Blood gusheth forth (which none of the Lazy
Formalists, mere outward Worshippers and nominal Christians can pretend unto)
and so again we read, That the Righteous shall scarcely be saved. And indeed
throughout the Scriptures, and the Gospel especially, there are scattered up
and down, so many true sayings of God concerning the exceeding difficulty,
danger and fear of disappointment herein, that they who have enquired and
searched diligently therein of the very Terms and Condi^ions of this Salvation,
do truly make this return upon their whole search and enquiry of this matter,
That the Kingdom of God is a Pearl of great Price, which if a Man would buy and
obtain, he must sell all that he has and give for it. Who knows this better
than our Savior Jesus Christ, who is the Author of this Salvation, and
understands upon what Terms it is to be had. So we must sell all that we have,
all Sin, Evil, and Wickedness, which is properly our own: We must part with all
the Guilt and Corruption, that is in our Nature, all that savours of Sin, or of
our selves; and so all that savours of the World or of the Devil is to be
renounced utterly, and we are to dispossess our selves thereof, in order to
have that Pearl of great Price. For less than this cannot be to make room for
Christ to be formed in us. Forasmuch as he will not dwell with any Evil, or
with a Body that is leavened or tainted with Sin. Now if People will not bid up
to the Price, which the Lord has put upon it, they must go away without it;
they have neither Part nor Lot in this matter; for their Heart is not right and
whole in the sight of God.

Behold I have told you before, and I do hereby warn People of as much before
hand, against the Time they shall see it fulfilled and found true in the valley
of Derision, that all People will not go to Heaven, who now seek to go to
Heaven. For many nowadays talk of Heaven who will never go there. For there
will be rejected at the last day* those who have Prophesied in Christ's Name,
and in his Name have cast out Devils, and in his Name have done many wonderful
Works. One may Preach throughout all his Life unto others, and be a cast-a-way
for all that. For it is equally possible for a Preacher or Minister, for a
Priest or Clergyman to be damned, as for any other Person. I am to look to
this, and to take heed to my self, least the Devil deceive me also (O the
exceeding subtlety of the old Serpent) even whi^^^ I am laying down Rules out
of the Scriptures of Truth to prevent his deceiving of others. See ye well to
it, therefore all that shall hear or read this, that now the Kingdom and Word
of God is a Preaching unto you, that every one of ye do press in thereat; and
now in these days the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the violent
take it by force; Looking diligently, least any Man fail of the Grace of God,
left there be any Fornicator or Profane Person as Esau (and so it is applicable
in like manner, if there be any Sinner in any kind) who for one Morsel of Meat
sold his Birthright; for ye know how that afterward, when he would have
inherited the Blessing he was rejected; for he found no place for Repentan^e
though he sought it carefully with Tears. And so when your Souls are shut under
Hatches by Death, then if ye would labor for H^aven, and strive for Heaven,
and ye would then do the Will of God, yet ye would be rejected, and not
accepted. Ye will find no place for Repentance, no room for seeking, nor yet
striving to enter in at the strait Gate, though ye should seek it carefully
with Tears. Ye may cry out and howl to all Eternity, Lord, Lord, open to us
when the door is shut; for ye should have pressed, and strove, and run (yea we
Ministers of the Gospel, do push and thrust ye on dull Beasts, as ye are, with
the Prick and Goad of the Word, which is committed to our Ministration) to
enter in thereat, whilst the door was open.

I have read of one, who was converted and brought over to a most Holy, Precise
and Religious kind of Life, by the Dream of a Night Vision or by a Voice
speaking unto him in his Sleep; that such an Acquaintance of his (naming him by
his Name) was really damned. Now he that had this Vision was an outward
Worshipper, Religious at the common Rate, Standard or Measure as it goes
ordinarily in the World with the Generality and Multitude. But the other Person
whilst he lived was more religious and strict, than People usu^lly are. And if
such an one should be really damned for his defects, and comings short in
matters of universal and inward Religion, how should this quicken and exhort
others and my self, as yet living, to the utmost preciseness and circumspect
walking in all things. For if I may so express it, a little preciseness and
circumspect walking in all things is much better, and beyond the utmost and
greatest preciseness and circumspect walking only in some things, as the manner
of too many is who seem to be Religious. But if such an one whom the World
accounted very Religious, should perish, Good God! What will become of us, who
are not Religious, perhaps to the tenth degree, as he was? This should indeed
stir us up so to run, that we may obtain (as we do desire it, and foolish are
they who do not endeavor all that they can after it) to be in all things what
God commands us, very circumspect and to abound in all Holy Conversation and
Godliness, as is possible for Mortal Creatures, whilst in the Flesh and in this
Life to be.

For truly, if we consider thoroughly the great displeasure God Almighty has to
Sin, as is set forth in 2 Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6. He spared not the Angels that
sinned. And how, that for one single Act of Disobedience, he entailed a Curse
on Adam and all his Posterity. Of six hundred thousand of his own People, whom
he had brought out of the Land of Egypt, there were but two only which went
into the promised Land; and Moses himself, who before had so often stood in the
gap between an enraged God and a provoking People; yet He was not admitted into
the promised Land of Canaan, because he had provoked his Spirit and spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips; hereupon misgiving and fearful thoughts have arose
in my Mind, that if Moses such a precious Servant of God; unto whom there arose
not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
Deuteronomy. 34. 10. yet if this very Man so familiar with, and beloved of God was not
admitted to enter into the promised Land, for but one unadvised Speech of his
Lips, much more may I a sinful Creature, and so may others also, tremble and
fear, that after I have done all to get into Heaven, which is the promised
Land, yet I may not be admitted there; for really my self have, and it is well
if ye have not also done many more and worse things, than to let fall one
unadvised Speech of our Lips.

I have been guilty of an Omission of Duty (which as I sensibly perceived at
the very time did shut Heaven against me, although at the very same time I went
to Worship the Lord in the Congregation, when at the very same time He
commanded and directed me to give forth Testimonies of his Law and Truth unto
the Rulers and chief of the People, who were then met together in another
Congregation for outward Worship. But through my neglect and failure herein, I
had smitings of Conscience, and Revelations of his Wrath against me in that
manner as here spoken of. Have a care of Sins of Omission; for it is these which
shut Heaven against us, as may be seen from the latter end of the twenty-fifth
Chapter of Matthew.

Truly, after all the things we have done in order to God throughout all this
our Life; after all our Prayers and hearing the Word preached; after all our
Acts of Public, Family, and Private Worship, and whatever we have done
pertaining to Religion, or what is c^mmonly called good Works, yet it is
possible and to be feared, that we may perish and miscarry for all throughout
Eternity.

Where the Psalmist Prays by the Spirit, Remember all thy Offerings, and accept
thy burnt Sacrifice. Selah. The Lord fulfill all thy Petitions, Psalm 20. 3, 5.
Thereby is shown forth and made known unto us, that if the Lord should not
remember, nor accept, nor fulfill as we are to strive earnestly with him in
Prayer on this behalf; and so it is of whatever we have done as pertaining to
God and Religion, it will not stand in stead, nor avail to the saving of the
Soul. What shall we do then? the safest way and rule is, that as Christ our
Savior says, after ye have done all things that are commanded, say, that we
are unprofitable Servants. We have done only what was our Duty to do. So in the
Name of God, let us do all things whatever we can, instantly, continually and
diligently (remember all these three Adverbs) for to find Acceptance with our
God and to get to Heaven, and to say after we have done all this, we deserve to
be rejected by him, and to be cast into Hell. My Life for yours, I will venture
my immortal Soul upon this Point. It shall never go one Jot the worse with us
for thus speaking. For after that the disobedient and Prodigal Child had said,
Father I have sinned against Heaven, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, ye^ the Father said unto his Servants, bring forth the best Robe and put
it on him, and put a Ring on his Hand (to di^tinguish him from, and to put him
into a Condi^ion above hired Servants) and Shoes on his Feet. It is no
absurdity and contradiction in things pertaining to God (though it may seem as
a Paradox and strange Doctrine to the Proud, Selfjustifying and Ignorant
P^arisee) to acknowledge and confess (for so does the Church in Isa. 64. 6.)
that our Works are not meet for God's Acceptance, and yet God will accept of
them washed over with the Blood and covered with the Righteousness of his Son.

It is a great matter and very desirable, but withal it is somewhat difficult
to hit upon (because that so many miss thereof, Who seek to enter in and shall
not be able, Luke 13. 24.) for to please and find Acceptance with Almighty God.
For we are not to think now, as we shall see and know at last, that either the
much speaking of the Heathen, nor yet the Superstition of the Jew, nor yet the
M^mbling of the Papist over his Beads (although all these do therein seek to
please God) will receive any thing from the Lord, as to future Good and
Salvation. God looks and has more respect unto the quality than the quantity
of our Services, how good they are, and not so much to the length and number of
Words. And so it is of all mere formal Prayers, Lip-labor, when the Heart is
far from God, with all the outside Acts of Worship and Religion, if the inward
parts thereof are not joined with them. Let them put away their Whoredom, and
the Carcases of their Kings far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them
for ever, Ezekiel. 43. 9. Lip-labor in Prayer is properly Whoredom; for it takes
away the Heart from God who is the right beloved, and places it upon another
wrong beloved. And so mere and only outside Worship may be truly called the
Carcases of Worship, that is, without any Soul, Life or Spirit, therein: Now as
we here learn and read, all this must be put away for God to dwell in us, and
accept of our Worship. Our Matters must be Good and Right, exactly according to
the great Rule of Righteousness in Scripture, if ever they will find the least
Acceptance or Approbation from God. For He is an Holy God, He is a God of
Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. And so our Worship is to be in
Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to Worship him. But all the
Worship besides in the World, whether Worship in Tongue or in Body, which is
all as nothing, and profits as nothing without the Heart and Spirit going along
with it; or any Worship in which there is a mixture of Error, Idolatry or
Superstition is an Abomination unto the Lord, and obtains no good from him, but
rather brings Wrath and Punishment on the deluded Worshipper. One false
Expression in a Prayer, Sermon or Service, spoils the whole Burnt-offering or
Sacrifice, as to him that offers it up, I mean as to the Preacher or Minister,
but the Hearers may separate the Precious from the Vile, and not assent unto,
but dissent from it, if any falsehood should drop out of his Mouth.

The same holds alike and equally true as to good Works. As to which the Lord
sees not as Man sees; for Man looks on the outward Appearance, but the Lord
looks on the Heart. Suppose we instance in the Duty or good Work of
Almsgiving; whereof many good things are spoken, and as to which many precious
Promises are made in Scripture. Now here it often so happens, that an
High-way-Man, or one who has abundance of Goods unjustly gotten, or a Prodigal
Spenthrift do now and then by chance, or by way of vain Humor, inconsiderately
give a Crown or a Pound to a Poor Body; when perhaps a real Servant of God, or
a good Christian does not give mo^e than a Penny, because of his impoverishment
and low Estate. The greatest sum does the most good to the poor Object,
because it is a means to furnish him with more necessaries; whereas the last is
the better Work, and more acceptable in the sight of God, who sees the Heart
and with what Mind it is. As the latter is done, only out of a sense of Duty
and in Obedience to his Commandments; but the former sort is done at random or
by chance. Or perhaps because even in the most Ungodly and Wicked, seeing that
they must unavoidably die and mee^ with God, and every one does more or less
fear some Wrath and Punishment from him for their former Sins and evil Deeds.
So they have some inward wishes and wouldings also to be at Peace with God; but
they suffer it no more to grow fur^her unto Salvation, then an addle Egg is to
a live Chicken. And so such may give Alms, and that plentifully too, like him
in Micah, thousands of Rams and ten thousand Rivers of Oil for the Sin of his
Soul, as hoping thereby to make At^onement for it, or Comm^tation, or hereby to
make some Recompense and Restitution for Goods unjustly gotten. What manifold
and vain Imaginations do lurk and lie hid in the Heart of Man? And yet all this
is besides the Mark, for it is not right in the sight of God. How fain would
they be at Peace with him, and yet they are not at Peace with him? because they
do not go the right way, nor do things thoroughly and wholly, but only by halves
and in Part. Nor do they receive Instructions from the Word of God, where they
might see how they ought to walk to please him. I have seen it quoted out of
the Turkish History, that the Great Emperor once took some goods wrongfully
from the Merchants, and being troubled in Conscience for the same upon his
Death bed, He sends for the Mufti who is their Hig^-Priest and tell him the
Case, and consults with him about building Almshouses for the Poor with the
same Money. The Mufti rather advises (and it was done so accordingly) to
restore and give it back again to the right owner, or to their Children and
Kindred. Now here, it may be thought, had not the poor Reason to curse the
Mufti; for had not they more need thereof than the Merchants who are commonly
Rich, and could better bear the loss. No, for all that in this the Mufti showed
himself a good Man. For whether the Alcoran does so direct or not, I know not;
but I am sure that herein He did speak and dictate according to the Law of God
in the Bible. If a Soul Sin and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie
unto his Neighbor, in that which was delivered unto him to keep or in
fellowship, or in a thing taken away by Violence (this was the Turkish
Emperors Case as to the Mercha^t) or deceives his Neighbor, then it shall be
because He has sinned and is guilty, that He shall restore that which He
violently took away, or the thing which He has deceitfully gotten, Lev. 6. 23.
Or if the Party be dead, then to his Kinsmen, or if there is no Kinsman, then
let the trespass be recompensed to the Lord, even to the Priest, Numb. 5. 8, 9,
and so on. If neither the Parties themselves, ^or their Children nor Kindred
were alive, for to whom Restitution was to be made, then Alms was to be done in
the very last place of all. From whence it appears, that as M^rcy is before
Sacrifice, ^o Justice and Restitution is more pleasing and acceptable in the
sight of the Lord then Almsgiving; for assuredly, He who has commanded, Thou
shall not bring the hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog into the House of
the Lord thy God for any Vow: For even both these are an abomination unto the
Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. even He will not accept of Alms out of Goods, or an
Estate unjustly gotten or holden. For I the Lord love Judgment, I hate Robbery
for Burnt-offering, Isa. 61. 8. And so God hates Robbery for Almsgiving. Will
you speak wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him, Job 13. 7. And so
will you lie, or rob, or steal, or oppress, or grasp too much because it is in
the Power of your Hand, and practice, and devise iniquity, Micah 2. 1. and
pretend it is all for God, which is Abomination and Hypocrisy. And so it holds
in like Cases, for where is the same Reason, and approves it self so to the
Hearts and Consciences of such as are unconcerned, and not partakers of the
wrong, here is the same Law. For as God has made the Hearts of the Inhabitants
of the Earth alike, Psalm 33. 14. So their Consciences are near alike, until
they become biased and dipped in the same Sin and Guilt. He that is unjust in
the least, is unjust also in much, Luke 16. 10. So it may be truly reasoned,
what is unjust in a less Matter, is unjust also in a greater Matter. And
whereas it is further, on, If ye have not been faithful in that which is
another Man's, who shall give you that which is your own? ver. 12. from this
same Similitude of words it may be again truly reasoned, that he which gives
Alms of Goods unjustly gotten, he gives away another Man's and not his own. And
so he that takes or grasps more of lands or goods than of Right or Equity do
belong to him, he also gives that which is not his own but another Man's: Do
not your Hearts and Consciences assent that these things are so. And so when
the Lord comes to judge the World with Righteousness and the People with his
Truth, Psalm. 96. 13. and the People with Equity, Psalm. 98. 9. He will lay open
many such like things as these from out of the whole Scriptures of Truth, and
applicable to all the doings of the Children of Men considered whether in
Nations, Families or single Persons.

Whatever mistakes in matters of Religion Men frame now unto themselves, or
whatever wrong imaginations they take up and receive into their Minds by which
they are acted and do act, for the Heart of every one of them is deep, yet in
all this Man may be and is deceived, but God cannot be deceived. The Lord will
recompense to each one according to his Righteousness and according to the
cleanness of his hands in his eyesight. (By the way, it is one thing to have
ones hands clean in the sight of Man, and another to be clean in the sight of
God.) With the Upright Man thou w^lt show thy self Upright (now Uprightness
signifies standing bolt upright, without inclining or leaning, or stooping or
bending any way) with the Pure thou will show thy self Pure, and with the
Froward thou will show the self Froward, Psalm. 18. 24, 26.

As Cicero the Eloquent Orator did say, Nihil tam absurdum est quod non dixerit
aliquis Philosophorum, holds true as to the Mulitude of the called Religious
and outward Worshippers. There is nothing so absurd but what some seeming
Religious People have imagined or spoken, or what some outward Worshippers or
others have not practiced. So strangely and miserably has Satan deceived and
be-fooled poor Mankind both in the general and also in their several individual
Persons. Whereas Religion as it lies in the Book of the Lord, especially the
great things of the Law of God and the things to be done by us, is the most
reasonable and conceivable thing in the World. But if we look upon it as it is
in the Lives and Manners of Men, it is altogether as perplexed and we do not
know what to make of it. To hear all their several Notions and Sayings
concerning it, to see their Divisions (for the Divisions of Reuben there was
great thought and searching of heart) to behold and observe how one is for this
thing, another for that; some are for one part of the Word of God, and others
for another; but few do care to take it whole as it lies all together. And then
farther to conceive of and see that infinite multi^ude and changes; for it is
rather so than any great variety of all the several Thoughts, Words and Actions
of all the numerous Inhabitants of the Earth, which differ from one another as
their several Faces, though it be all made of the same Lump and Clay; What
shall we say as to all? Why we are here in the Wilderness and under the Cloud.
We are in a Confusion, Perplexity and in the dark until we come into the
Sanctuary and see the end of those Men. Until we get out from the Multitude and
go into our Chamber and are still, and take up the Book of the Lord and read
and that will set us right again. Which will teach us in thy wa^, O Lord and
lead us in a plain Path, Psalm. 27. 11. Thy Word is Lamp unto my Feet, and a
Light unto my Path, Psalm. 119. 103. and will be a sure Guide through this Earth
toward Heaven.

As the Prophet Micah says, For all People will walk every one in the name of
his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever,
Micah 4. 6. So I have several times thought within my self, as I have beheld
and observed People, some going to the Church, some to such and such Meeting.
Houses, called by their several distingui^hed names, some to the Mass House,
others to the Jewish Synagogue. And so if you conceive and in mind go over
beyond the Seas, and run throughout the several Sects and Sorts in Christendom.
And then there are diverse sorts amongst the Mahometans, Jews, Proselites,
Gentiles, Greeks, Abyssines, and of all Countries of the habitable parts of the
Earth. I have read that in some places they Worship Devils or Demons. All these
vast medly of Religions does confirm the truth of this short Word of the
Prophet, All People will walk every one in the name of his God. For who Worship
the Devil, they make the Devil their God. But will all these Worshippers be
saved? No. Will then some few of all these sorts be saved? It is hard to affirm
that also. For certainly, they that Wor^ ship Devils or Demons, will not be
saved. And inasmuch as all they are cursed and will be consounded who Worship
Graven Images, Stocks, Sticks, or Stones, And Idolaters shall no^ I^herit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. but shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with Fire and B^imstone, Rev. 21. 8. So that Idolatrous Worshippers,
who are knowing or who may be knowing, and who continue therein, shall not be
saved. It does not belong to any Mortal Creature to determine who shall be
saved or who shall be damned: B^t yet in our Preaching and Ministry we may make
use of the Scripture words which say of one and of the other, He that believes
and is Baptized, shall be saved; and he that believes not, shall be dam^ed,
Mark 16. 20. All Judgment is the Lord's: For he is Judge himself, and he shall
make a right Decision among his People. And before him shall be gathered all
Nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides
his Sheep from the Goats.

They seem to run too hastily, and to stick too much in the words of the
outward Letter, who at once damn all the Heathen World from that one saying of
Peter, Neither is there Salvation in any other; for there is none other name
under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved. For such an one as
Socrates who died a real Martyr for the One God in opposition to that Error of
Polutheism so common among the Gentiles, may be saved by the name of Christ at
the last day. And so such of the Gentiles which have not the Law, but do by
Nature the things contained in the Law, Romans 2. 14. although they were before
or since Christ, or in other Countries, there is good ground of Hope from the
Mercy, Goodness and Truth of God, for they are his Creatures as well as we,
that some of these will be actually saved by the name of Jesus Christ also whom
as soon as they shall hear of, they shall obey him, Psalm. 18. 44, In the day
when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ according to the
Gospel. For indeed those Gen^iles or Mahometans did obey Jesus Christ all
along, although they never heard of his outward Name, when they did by Nature
the things contained in the Law, they having not seen any written Revelation.
But this I do Teach and Affi^m constantly, That inasmuch as Christ is become
the A^thor of Eternal Salvation to all that obey him. And to them only, For God
has Anointed him to be a Prince and a Savior; to be a Prince to give Laws for
us Subjects to obey, as well as to save us from our sins, by yielding and
complying with him we do also obey him. And inasmuch as the same Jesus Christ
has said, If thou will enter into Life keep the Commandments, Matthew. 19. 17
from hence it appears, that of all the Sorts and Sects of Christianity, such of
them and they only will be saved, who confirm all the words of his Law (which
includes both the Law of God and the Law of Christ, both the Old and New
Testame^^) to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. F^r as every one is cursed that does not
confirm all the words of the Law to do them. And as the Prophet David says,
They are cursed that err from his Commandments. And so unless they confirm that
particular Commandment of Christ to do it, Teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have Commanded you, Matthew. 28. 20. they will never be saved by
Christ. And so if they should break one of his least Commandments and teach Men
so, they will not be saved by Christ. But whosoever shall do even to the very
least and to every one of them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom
of Heaven. And this is to have Christ formed within them, and not in part but
throughout, and both Body and Soul and Spirit may be preserved blameless unto
the coming of Jesus Christ. This is to take and receive Christ in all things
and not in some things only, as the manner of many is, who call themselves
Christians, but they are not, but do lie; as all such do who name the name of
Christ, and yet do not depart from Iniquity.

I will make so far bold with those words of Scripture, Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ and thou shait be saved, which was said to the Penitent Jailer, as
to affirm, That to believe with an Historical Faith that Jesus Christ was the
Messiah sent by God, will not save any one. For suppose a Drunkard or an
Unrigh^eous Man, or a Fornicator, or any of that black Catalogue which are
excluded from the Kingdom of God in Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. should believe all that,
as none do commonly deny it, will this Historical Faith save him? In no wise.
This makes against that Error and Deceit of the Solifidians, and some
Dissenters among us have bordered upon and came near to the same Error and
Deceit. The bare name of Christ will not save any one, but it is the thing; for
several name the name of Christ who have not Christ, nor yet the thing
signified by him.

SERMON V.
Isaiah 38. 1. -- Set thine House in Order, for thou shall Die, and not live.
IT was the saying of Abigal unto David, Yet a Man is risen to pursue thee and
to seek thy Soul, but the Soul of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of Life
with the Lord thy God, 1 Samuel 25. 29. So the case stands as to us all. One is
risen up to pursue us and seek our Souls; even our Adversary the Devil (of whom
Saul was a kind of Type and Signification in Hunting after and Persecuting of
David, or rather the Devil acted through Saul in it.) As a roaring Lion walks
about seeking whom he may devour. And he has Death and Hell for his
Companions; or as two Dogs, the one to catch and the other to destroy or make
miserable. But here if we see the Lord's Christ, or have Christ formed within
us, he is appositely and truly styled the Prince of Life. So that then of
certain consequence our Souls are bound in the bundle of Life with the Lord our
God. This is a great expression containing in it self an unspeakable benefit.
Then it is that we dying Creatures, if we have seen the Lord's Christ, or have
Christ formed within us, we are bound up in the bundle of Life with the
ever-living God. So that of necessity, as fire warms all things that are next
unto it and which are capable of warmth, we must live also. For with thee is
the Fountain of Life, and in thy Light shall we see Light. So it may be truly
reasoned also, in thy life shall we have life. Then we which are alive and
remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds to meet the Lord in
the Air; and so shall we be with the Lord. But when we once see the Lord's
Christ, or rather feel him formed within us and we thus have our Souls bound
with the Lord our God in the bundle of Life with the Lord our God, then we
which are now dying and going off from the Stage of this Earth, as soon as ever
we move off from thence, The Eternal God is our Refuge and underneath are the
everlasting Arms, and he shall thrust out the Enemy before thee, Deuteronomy. 33. 27.
This Enemy is the Devil, who was before spoken of to be risen to seek our Souls.
Behold how in a wonderful manner all Scripture is consonant to it self at the
greatest distance of place, and how the goodness of God provides beforehand for
the safety and salvation of Israel, that is his People and Servants. For he
has provided everlasting Arms to reach, receive and catch the Soul in just
upon its flight and being let out from the Body. And whereas it is said. That
be rides upon the Heaven in thy help; and in his Excellency upon the Sky; so
that he is above the Prince of the power of the Air, who with his Evil Spirits
has his Residence or Habitation thereabouts. But we shall also meet the Lord
in the Air, and so we shall ever be with the Lord; To partake of his Life and
Happiness, his Good and Blefsedness. And so whilst we are thus continually
dying on this Earth, we shall thus wait till our change shall come. The word of
Instruction which does arise from hence is, that we should endeavor to be as
like God and as like Christ as ever we can in all his Communicable Attributes,
and Perfections, for so far as we are partakers of his Holiness or of his Image
and Likeness here, we shall be assuredly partakers of his Happiness and
Blessedness hereafter.

Thou shall die and not live. There is no need to insist much or enlarge
further upon that Subject, Death is common to all, for who knows not this
already? Who knows not also that we do continually from time to time haste and
approach nearer and nearer unto it? As also who knows not that we are in a
World of Transitory Perishing and Dying things; but Faith teaches and instructs
that all this is in order to that which shall remain. See Isa. 66. 22. and is
Eternal and Life for evermore. Accordingly we find and feel within our selves
(although we are subject to Mortality) yet thoughts and desires after
Immortality. Which same thoughts and desires can never be in vain, but there is
also a real Object of Immortality, though as yet it is unseen, to whom the same
do relate. There does arise in us afaintness and anguish at the thorough
consideration of the perishing nature of things; which is sensible and may be
perceived. For as when it was told Saul, To morrow thou shall be with me (that
is, in the state of the dead) then Saul fell straitway all along on the Earth,
and was sore afraid because of the words of Samuel, and there was no strength
in him. So it is at the thorough apprehension and knowledge of this thing of
perishing, Corruption and Mortality we become as of no strength, free among the
dead; and we have less strength at the thoughts before hand that Death at
length will take all strength from us. Because that things by their perishing
do seem to be vain, therefore does arise vexation of Spirit and we could wish
it were otherwise and not so. Yea, that it is not so we have assured hopes. It
is usually now reckoned an enhancement of misery, when we know better and yet
we cannot have and enjoy it, For if one had never known ^or conceived of the
worth or goodness of such a thing, the disappointment for missing thereof would
not have been so vexatious. And so here it is, God having implanted in all Men
whatsoever some knowledge and expectation of enduring Eternal and satisfactory
things (the ungodly have a little glimpse or glimmering thereof by natural
Understanding like him that was born blind who saw Men as Trees, but the Godly
have a full Light and Sight thereof by Faith) now here when every thing seems
to perish and pass away, and not a satisfy fully; there does arise Anguish,
Vexation and secret Thought in the Creature toward the Creator, as if we were
only tantalized, that is, put near what we cannot obtain, or put in expectation
of what is not at all: But it is not so with us. For only the matter is thus,
God does all things in his own order. The thing is true, though the time
appointed for it is long. God d^^^ in the life that now is and on this Earth,
give us onl^ his Perishing, Transitory and Imperfect good things. The things
that I have given them shall pass away from them, Jer. 8. 13. Which are on this
respect suitable to our condition here; for that also is Perishing, Imperfect,
Transitory and passing away. But his Abiding, Eternal, Pesrect and Satisfactory
things. O I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness, Psalm. 17. 15.
these he has reserved and will give unto such of the reasonable Inhabitants
thereof as shall be found meet and worthy after they are gone and removed off
from this Earth, in the future State, Distribution and Restitution of all
things. For we have all things here in part and by way of taste and earnest,
But when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away.

Now here on this Earth is sensibly and evidently seen Cursing, Vexation and
Re^uke in what People set their hand unto for to do, Deuteronomy. 28. 20. And the Lord
gives to some a trembling heart and a failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind, ver.
67. Neither is this only the Portion of the Children of Disobedience; but even
as a precious Saint and Servant of God could say, My Flesh and my Heart
fails, but God is the strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever. It is
sensibly seen that in Declining or Old Age, or under languishing and pining
sickness (from day even to night wilt thon make an end of me, Isa. 38. 12.)
when the Flesh is withered like a stick; it being shriveled away and there is
little more than skin and bones; when like Barzillai it cannot taste what we
eat or drink, nor hear any more the voice of singing Men and Women; when sense
can no longer relish, but it is as it were benumbed and dead as to all
Creature Comforts; when the Arm of Flesh is withered, Cursed is he that
trusts in the Arm of Flesh, and its poor helps fail, then also the heart does
evidently fail away with the Flesh, and the anguish of Spirit does so break
forth that the Spirit it self (which did heretofore sustain a man's
infirmities) can no longer pacify, and speak true and solid comfort, but then
as when the People talked of stoning David, because the Soul of all the People
was vexed, and it is before said, That he and his People lift up their Voice
and wept, until they had no more power to weep, but David encouraged himself in
the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30. 4. 5. 6. So when all these things fail and slide
away from us, in which was our Comfort and Well being as to this World; and
when con^rariwise the Rain descends, and the Floods come, and the Winds blow,
and beat upon our House. And dangerous Diseases, Poverty the Consumption of Age
and the Seeds of Mortality, like those ill-natured People to D^vid, do rhreaten
to stone us: Nay, they will certainly do it at length and try to make us
miserable, and utterly destroy and make an end of us, if either of them is
possible; Here if we can encourage our selves in the Lord our God, or say (not
with good words or Scripture Phrases only, but by way of saving and feeling
truth, God is the strength of my Heart and my Portion for ever. So that we may
be provided against the time now when our Flesh and our Heart shall fail till
they come to an utter end as to the things of this World. O then it is well
with us, and happy shall it be. We know that now the manner and practice of the
World is, that where o^e is only a Rack-renter or Tenant at Will of a good
Bargain, if the Landlord is resolved to put him out at such a time, here it is
his Wisdom and Business in the mean while to seek out and provide for himself
another good Bargain or way of Livelihood that he may be at no loss or
disappointment. This is but what is usually done every day. Why, all we
Inhabitants of the Earth are Tenants at will or Rackrenters (God having let out
to us Husbandmen this his Vineyard of the Earth and he sits above afar off, and
out of sight, and he sends his Servants to us Husbandmen, that he might receive
from the Husbandmen of the Fr^it of the ^ineyard, Mark 12. 1. But alas! Most of
them do not make so good returns thereof as he expects) to the great Landlord
of Heaven and Earth, and we must be ^^^ned out; for here we are not suffered to
continue by ^eason of Death. Is it not then our Business and Wisdom all the
mean while that we are on this Earth, that we may be received up into the
Heavens above?

This leads to the second point heretofore proposed to be spoken unto, and that
is to show what mighty force, Reasoning and Exhortation is in this
Consideration, Thou shall die and not live, to the intent that we may set all
our Worldly concerns, Body and Soul in ^rder, because that we shall die and not
live.

The whole that Man desires and would have, is Happiness and Salvation, for if
there be any other good thing which he would have or does wish for; it is all
comprehended under this word, to be Happy and to be made sure of it. One
defines Happiness, to be a gathering or heaping together of all good things.
Now if one had all the Happiness which this World can give, all the Plenty and
Variety in each thing, the Blessings of Solomon, Understanding in the first
place, and then Riches and Honor, and length of Days, even what may seem good
for the Sons of Men, and whatever his Eyes desired I kept not from them, I
withheld not my Heart from any Joy, besides that it is all Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit. For it does not at the very time give the Heart and Soul a full and
sincere satisfaction; for all those good things put together do not yield it at
the very instant of Enjoyment. But then farther, the Spirit is vexed, that if
they did fully, thoroughly and sincerely satisfy her for the time, as they do
not, that she must be at length taken away from all these things. And she being
an Immortal Essence, no^^ing but what is Immortal and Eternal also, will indeed
content and satisfy her. For in her very Thought, that can be no Happiness
which has an end. For she knows that her self, though she began to be, will
have no end; and therefore she craves earnestly and groans within her self, and
travaileth in pain, like unto that Speech of Rachel, Give me Children or else I
die; give me a Happiness abiding as long as my self and commensurate to me; or
else I had rather die, cease to be, and return unto my first nothing. But this
is impossible from the Decree of God, (who whatever he does in this kind, he
does it for ever) and it shall therefore continue in being as long as himself
is God, which is for ever and ever. As Jesus Christ, the Lover and Savior of
Souls, did once say, My Kingdom is not of this World, for then would my
Servants fight for me. So the Soul may truly say* my Happiness is not of this
World; for then would my Servants, my Faculties and Powers seek for it here.
But the former part is evident for the two reasons before assigned, because the
utmost Happiness of this World, is neither satisfactory nor yet enduring: And
the Soul would fain have that which is both. And therefore it is not worth
while to give Command or Direction to my Servants, my Powers and Faculties, my
Reason and Understanding, to be wholly employed in seeking after them. For
indeed we should be no otherwise employed about them at all, but only in
subserviency and subordination to the greater things to come.

The time would fail me to mention all those manifold Scriptures (which do most
discover the Nature of things of any Book of the World. For who can better know
the very Nature and Order of things, than the Word it self which made and
established them) which contain this very same Reasoning and Exhortation, that
the Soul is not to have her Happiness in this World, but to seek for it in God,
and what he will do for her in the World to come; let us instance in two or
three, for by the Mouth of two or three Witnesses shall every word be
established.

The first to manifest and show forth this same Truth, is Heb. 13. 14. For here
we have no continuing City, but we seek one to com^. From which words it may be
truly reasoned and inferred, for here we have no continuing Happiness, but we
seek one to come, And then if we consider Mich 2. 10. to which this place of
the Hebrews has reference, Arise ye and depart for this is not your rest. Both
these Scriptures put together confirm these two Reasons, wherefore Man's
Happiness is not of this World because that in the Hebrews says, it is not his
Rest; for all the things of this World do not give truerest and full content to
the Soul. Again, another parallel place to this is, Deuteronomy. 12. 9. For ye are not
yet come to the Rest and to the Inheritance which the Lord your God gives you,
Which though it was spoken as to the Land of Canaan as a less Type and
Signification of Heaven, and of that Rest which remains to the People of God;
yet from this same place it may be surely gathered and inferred, that it has
relation principally to that Rest which is to be had only on the other side of
the Grave, and that Inheritance I^corruptible, Undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in the Heavens for them which God gives only unto his People. And we
are not as yet come to that Rest, neither shall we ever arrive to that Rest as
long as we are on this Earth. As to this the inference is Natural and
Reasonable, seeing that we cannot have Rest here, let us seek for Rest
elsewhere. For we may sensibly observe, that our Spirits are always restless or
dissatisfied about one thing or another. The Wicked are like the troubled Sea
which cannot rest, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt, and their restlesness is
because of Sin and Guilt. The Godly also are restless, because as Job says,
The Wicked cease not from troubling them. And also we are restless because
People are not so good as they should be. Because as yet it does not go so well
with the concernments of God and his Truth, so as to reform and bring the
corrupt World into Subjection and Obedience to him as we would have it; and
because through that abundant Opposition of Satan we cannot bring our good
devices to pass; and for suchlike good reasons. As also because we are here
troubled in the Flesh as Paul speaks. For indeed Carnal things will not give
Rest; and as for Spiritual things which is indeed Life and Peace, and would
give Rest, these now we have only in part and in imperfect measure and we
apprehend them by Faith. Therefore seeing that we cannot have Rest on this
Earth, the Exhortation speaks on this wise, let us seek diligently and
endeavor earnestly to get to Heaven; for there we shall be sure of Rest.
Concerning which dyi^g Ja^ob spoke sweetly, and he saw that Rest was good, and
the Land that it was pleasant. Hereby it may be k^own that Rest is good and
pleasant by the irksomness of its contrary, restlesness.

To this purport our Savior Jesus Christ speaks, advises and directs, which I
intend as the second great Scripture to confirm the aforesaid Reasoning,
Observation and Truth. And I say unto you, make unto your selves Friends of the
Mammon of unrighteousness, that when you fail, they may receive you into
everlasting Habitations, Luke 16. 9 The whole eight verses immediately
foregoing are worthy to be read out at length; and from that Epiphonema which
is added at the summing up of and conclusion of this Parable or Rehearsal (for
probably it was a real and true story) The Children of this World are in their
Generation wiser than the Children of Light; I have often thought from these
very words, that if People would do as much for Heaven, as we evidently see
they do for the World, none would ever miss thereof. Or at least, such would
not miss thereof who do but as much toward it, as Worldlings now usually and
commonly do for the things of this World: and it is reckoned their Wisdom,
Carefulness and Commendation so to do. Which indeed it is if they do not set
their Heart and Affection too much upon it. And chiefly, if in their
Prosecution and Acquisition thereof, they make use only of those means and
things, which are lawful and right and no others. As the Heavens are bigger and
higher than the Earth, which is more than ten thousand fold in both instances;
again, as Eternity is longer than time, which is more in comparison than the
whole computation of Man's life at Seventy years is more than the twinkling of
an Eye; so much is Heaven of more worth than the Earth. And proportionably
there is so much the more Reason, why People should seek after Heaven than
Earth, and do more for Heaven, than any do now for the Things of this World.
Besides the abundant and forcible Exhortation which flows from all this; yet
this other unanswerable Argument lies against all the Ungodly and Unbelievers,
Ignorant and Slothful Persons in the World, they must all unavoidably go off
from this Earth; and, whither they will or refuse, be taken off utterly from
tne things of this Earth, and then whose will be the things which they have
provided? If they answer, their Children and Executors. But then I would put
them in mind further, that they have immortal Souls and returning Bodies. Souls
which do live the very next moment, after that their Breath goes out of their
Body; which also must be raised again, after they have been corrupted in the
Dust of the Earth. And what Care and Provision is taken beforehand as to both
of these? Did they whilst they had them, make to themselves Friends of the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when they themselves failed, or against the
Time when themselves should fail, these might receive them into Everlasting
Habitations?

But the most Men and Women will be found not to have done so much. But rather
it will be fulfilled as to the Multitude, and the much greater part of the
several Generations and Countries, what God speaks by the Prophet, They that
depart from me, shall be written in the Earth, Jer. 17. 13. which is a sad
Story, as will appear when we come to open the meaning and significancy
thereof. Though perhaps several Muck-worms and Earthly-minded Men, think that
it will not be ill with them if this only shall be their doom, because that
they love the Earth so well, that they could be contented, and not fear to have
their Names written in it.

I have read the Relation of a very Warlike and Victorious King in his Time,
who after many Battles and Conquests, and being very prosperous and successful
therein (from this Example judge none Happy or Safe before their end, but
consider the Proverb, All is well that ends well. And make no Judgment or
Conclusion concerning Providence, until the whole train, course and upshot
thereof is over.) He at length goes to make War with Tomyris Queen of the
Eastern Country, and (like that great Captain Sisera who fell by the hands of
a Woman, according to the doubtful and uncertain Events of War) He was
overthrown and slain by her and her Army. And after he was killed she commanded
his Head to be cut off, and to be cast into a large Vessel full of Blood for
the dead Head to swim therein, with uttering this apposite saying thereon, Now
Cyrus, satisfy thy self with Blood, which thou have so long thirsted after.
Not much unlike those sayings in Scripture, He that takes the Sword, shall
perish with the Sword. As their Sword has shed Blood, so give them Blood to
drink. But that aforementioned was a sore Proverb, and a severe taunting
Expression to be used to a Dead-mans Head swimming in a Vessel of Blood. Note
hence by the way, how that the Judgments and Threatenings of God are herein
fulfill^d, Thou shall become an Astonishment, a Proverb, and a Byword, and an
Hissing, Deuteronomy. 28. 37. and Jer. 24. 9. and 25. 9 for Tomyris spoke this
according to the Knowledge which God had given unto her as his Creature. In
like manner, God may at the last day of Judgment, use a like kind of saying to
the Men of this World, and to the Men of this Earth, in your Lifetime
heretofore ye did Love, Thirst after and greedily desire the Things of this
Earth, and now ye shall have enough of the Earth and make your most of it; for
your Names shall be written in the Earth. There seems to be no great matter in
this, for where is the Hurt, Inconvenience, Pain or Loss in all this? I will
soon tell ye from ou^ of the Scriptures of Truth, as also I do hereby give
warning (hear this and tremble, all ye covetous Persons, Muck-worms, and
Earthly-minded Men) we read expressly in 2 Pet. 3. 10. The Earth also and the
Works that are therein shall be burnt up; then by Consequence, all those People
whose Names shall be found written in the Earth, shall be burnt up also
together with the Earth, and the Works that are therein; as indeed another
Scripture does come in, and confirm and give Attestation unto the same. And
whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of
Fire. Now again it is certain, that whose Names shall be written in the Earth,
they will not be found written in the Book of Life, nor in Heaven, but their
Names shall be blotted out from under Heaven, and noted down with a black Coal
here on this Earth. So that of Necessity, they shall be cast into the Lake of
Fire, and be burnt up, (they being the Chaff of the Creation of God) with
unquenchable Fire. As says the Wise man, Envy thou not the Glory of a Sinner,
for thou know not what shall be hi^ end. So I now preach unto ye, do not
envy the Riches, fine Estate, or Plenty of a Man of this World, or a Man of
this Earth; who makes the World, and the good things of the Earth his main End
and principal Business; for it appears from the Scriptures of Truth what will
be their End; namely, when the Earth and the Works that are therein shall be
burnt up, themselves whose Names shall be written in the Earth (Many of whom
now call their Lands after their own Names, Psalm 89. 11.) shall be burnt up
also together with it with unquenchable Fire. For my ^art, I had rather have my
Name written in the Book of ^he Living, and be written with the Righteous,
though by Persecution and Oppression I should be stripped of all, than to have
my Name written in the Earth, although I might be Lord, Proprietor and Owner of
several thousand Acres of good Land. And so would ye also, if ye have a true
Faith and Knowledge in the revealed Decrees and Dispensations of God, and in
the Things pertaining to his Kingdom. Though withal it is to be understood, as
the same may be truly gathered from out of the same Scriptures of Truth, none
will be condemned at the last day merely or only because He was Rich in this
World; and so it is contrariwise, none will be saved merely or only because He
was Poor in this World. But People will be saved or condemned according as they
have done Good or Evil, and according as their Deeds done in the Body were
Righteous or Unrighteous, Just or Unjust, Equal or Unequal, True or False, Acts
of Duty and Obedience, or Acts of Sin, or according as they do most set their
Heart and Affections upon God, or the Things of this World.

I have heard a Man speaking on this Wise, As long as my Possessions, Goods and
Estate will serve my Time, it is well enough. Which seems to be a fit
Expression for one who has his Portion in this Life. And truly this is the
mistake the Men of the World go upon, for this makes them so eager and desirous
in compassing and obtaining them, whether by lawful or unlawful means, whether
by right or wrong, Omission of Duty or Commission of Sin. For they imagine and
say, that the good things of this Life will serve for their Time. But in this
they do greatly err; for as aforesaid, themselves have immortal Souls and
immortal Spirits, which exist and live the very first hour after they are
dislodged from the Body. And seeing that the World passes away, and the Lust
and Fashion thereof; It is hence manifest and clear, that they do not, neither
will they serve their Time. For our Time, or the Time of our selves, which is
our Souls, is to last as long as God himself, and to run parallel with the
longest Line of Eternity, even until Time shall be no more, but we are thence
launched forth, into the vast and infinite Ocean of forever and ever. Tell them
therefore, thus says the Lord God, I will make this Proverb to cease, and they
shall no more use it as a Proverb in Israel, but say unto them, the days are at
hand and the Effect of every Vision, Ezekiel. 12. 23. So when the Earth shall be
full of the Knowledge of the Lord (which also includes the Knowledge of the
Things pertaining to his Kingdom) as the Waters cover the Sea; there shall be
no more used this kind of saying in the Mouths of People, that the things of
the Earth, or the things of this World will serve their Time, so as to last as
long as themselves shall last and endure, for the one are perishing and
corruptible; but themselves, that is, their Souls are Immortal and
Incorruptible.

Indeed in this Sense they might and should serve their Time, by using and
receiving them to the Glory of God, and according to the Bounds, Rules, and
Directions of his Law, that they might be for the Benefit and not hurt of the
owners, as the Wise Man intimates; and according to this Counsel and Command of
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when ye fail they may receive you into Everlasting
Habitations.

Rich People should most of all much consider of this; so that themselves may
be hereby influenced and persuaded for to do accordingly. For these sensibly
know what a Comfort and Convenience it is, to have an Affluence and Plenty of
the good things of the Earth ready to their hand without their being forced to
drudge and labor for them. They should herein Eye the Providence and
Dispensation of God, as also apprehand, how that they are herein liable to
higher and stricter accounts, to make unto him for more Talents and Privileges
received from him. But then chiefly, they should lay deeply to Heart, that
though they now have such an advantage of Worldly Prosperity; As they find the
Comfort and acceptable Relish thereof, is it not then desirable to continue so?
And therefore, they should take Care and give Diligence, that against this
fails (for Rich People must dye, and when they die they can carry nothing away
with them, the forty-ninth Psalm is apposite and pertinent to them) to be
provided of an Happiness in the highest Heavens for evermore. Aristotle an
Heathen could say, whose saying herein will rise up in Judgment against them,
Rich People have the most Reason to serve God of any, because God has been so
good and bountiful unto them. This is an Argument which the Holy Ghost makes
use of in Scripture, from God's Kindness and Love, that they should keep in the
way of his Commandments, and not turn aside from them. But contrariwise, is it
not seen? that Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked; that the Rich and Substantial,
and Chief of the People are the greatest despisers of God, because they are
full and lack nothing. Do they not blaspheme that worthy Name by the which ye
are called? Do they not make a Mock and Jest, and Light of the Power of
Godliness and Serious Religion? Though themselves partly for Fashion sake, and
partly for Conscience Sake may just observe the form and outside thereof. Do
we not perceive them to be ashamed of the Words of Christ, and of the Gospel in
this adulterous and sinful Generation? Yea, they are ashamed and do disdain to
come into the Place where God's Word is preached in the plainness, simplicity
and meanness thereof: My Brethren, these things ought not so to be. Though
hereby it may be perceived, I had almost said, seen, that there is a Devil and
Satan who deceives the whole World, and turns even them aside (who would
seem more wise and knowing than the common sort) from the things that belong to
their Peace, or otherwise they would not as now they do, only because forsooth,
they are waxen fat, they are grown thick, they are covered with fatness, then
(Oh horrible degeneracy and ingratitude!) to forsake God which made them, and
lightly esteem the Rock of their Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. nor yet would they
lightly esteem the Word of God's Ministry, by whomsoever or wheresoever it is
faithfully and truly used and held forth; the only drift and design whereof is
to set forward the common Salvation of Mankind.

A third observable Scripture, which is to confirm and establish the Truth and
Reasoning of our whole present Discourse, as indeed it all comes to one and the
same thing, even to be provided of a well-being elsewhere; as soon and
immediately after we are deprived of a Being at all as to this Life, and on
this Earth. This Scripture is contained in all these three Verses put together:
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the Son of Man in whom there is no help.
His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, in that very day his
Thoughts perish. And then it immediately succeeds, Happy is He that has the
God of Jacob for his help, whose Hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm 146. 3, 4,
5. To say absolutely, that there was no help in Man would seem false and
untrue; for many times Man our Fellow Creature is helpful unto us in several
instances. He that gives an Alms is helpful and instrumental to preserve Life.
But as the Spirit speaks elsewhere, Her Merchandise shall be for them that
dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing, Isa. 23.
18. so as to help sufficiently, and proportionably to its need and for durable
help, in this sense, there is no help in Man. For in the Case here put, when
the Time comes that his Breath must go forth, can all the Men or Physicians in
the World help or hinder it? I trow not. Can all the Kings of the Earth with
all their Armies, protect any one whatever from a Mortal and inward Disease? In
no sort. And then the help of Man is not durable. He may help now and then for
a Time, but he cannot help always. Now seeing that we have within us an
enduring substance, a Soul which may and will be happy or miserable, which will
be saved or damned, after it is dislodged from the Body; here if she should cry
out as the Woman of Tekoah did, help O King! or as another Woman cried unto the
King of Israel, saying, Help, my Lord, O King! and He said, if the Lord do not
help, whence shall I help? Or as it is said in the Book of Job, to which of the
Saints will thou turn thee? And so if the Soul cry out for help to the
Ministers or Saints of the Lord, neither Rulers, nor Ministers, nor Saints can
afford sufficient and durable help to the saving of the Soul. See Psalm 47. 7,
8. They can no more save her after she is gone out of the Body, then they could
preserve her from going out of the Body, when the appointed and set Time is
come. Then Happy is He that has the God of Jacob for his help. In him alone is
our help, in him alone is our Salvation, and whose Hope is in the Lord his God,
or who has Hope well-grounded that God will save her; to whom God will prove
helpful, and the Object of his Desire or Hope, and not a punishing Judge, or a
Terror to us in the Day of Evil. The short of the Matter is this, and herein
is the Happiness of the Mortal Creature; if at the instant, when his Breath
goes forth, his Spirit is committed into thy Hands O God, who art ever-living.
And if when his Thoughts perish as to this World, his Soul is lodged in
Abraham's Bosom the Father of the faithful, from whose Loins we descended. For
assuredly the God of Abraham, here called the God of Jac^b for both live unto
him and are happy in him at this Day (though to our thinking Abraham is dead,
and Jacob is dead) will be that unto his Creatures and Souls (for all Souls are
his, both by Creation and Redemption) what a Breast or Bosom is to a cold
Infant, newly come out of his Mothers Womb.

The sum of all our Exhortation is to this Effect, Sceing that we must all Dye
and not Live (I have had many a shrug at the lively apprehension thereof, and
at the sense of the near approach thereof, both immediately after my Nights
Sleep, and my Noon-days Slumber) and then we shall Live again and not Dye; it
is as reasonable and natural to desire to be Happy after Death, all one as we
desire to see good in these days of our Flesh, and to pass through here as
comfortably and as pleasantly as we may. Is there any one that does not desire
to live comfortably and pleasantly in this World? No, every Mothers Son does
desire this: If we would receive into our Minds the Knowledge and Faith
thereof, God has implanted into every Man and Woman the same earnest desire
after Heaven, as now He or She has after Life and Happiness. For seeing that
by the Decree of God, and from the very order and establishment of Things, we
must live for ever (for we shall always remain in Being, although we must go
through the valley and shadow of Death, or through the Postern-Door or Gate of
Death) I say again, it is altogether as natural and reasonable to desire to be
Happy after Death, all one as it is sensibly desired to be Happy before Death.
And as in order to this, it is requisite to use such and such means: so to be
Happy after Death. It is absolutely necessary to go in the way, and to do all
those things which God has chalked out and showed in his written Word; and
there is alike and greater Reason, yea ten thousand times more as that is as
much longer and of greater concern, that we should comply with and do
thereafter. As the hungry craves after Food, the ambitious Honor, the
sensualist Pleasure, and every one desires Rest and Satisfaction, and they will
also use the common means in their Power toward having of them: So there is a
desire implanted in Man, after those good things God has promised. And it is
but reasonable, that He should do so much toward the obtaining of them, I say
infinitely more, as the Children of this World do for the things of this World,
or otherwise they will never be Children of Light, and Heirs of Life and
Immortality. But they will come short of the future great and good things of
God; for these also are set forth by the very same things in a greater degree,
than what is so earnestly followed after here. So that it is evident, where
they are believed and received, they must persuade Men; for the very same
Considerations do actually persuade, and also prevail with Men as to all other
things.

In a Word, the practice of universal Religion (which is the fear of God and
keeping his Commandments, or rather the confirming of all the Words of his Law
and Gospel by our doing of them) comes and stands enforced with such
uncontrollable Arguments, that where they are received into the Mind and
pondered in the Heart, they must of Necessity weigh down, incline and sway the
Mind toward God, and the good things pertaining to his Kingdom. And after all,
were there not a Devil and Satan, the unseen Enemy of Mankind, who yet for all
deceives the Nations, and deceives the whole World: It would be, if not
morally impossible, yet highly improbable, that not so much as one of the Sons
or Daughters of Men should perish. Whereas now by the manifold kind of
Imaginations and Excuses, which that invisible Tempter whispers and suggests to
the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience, to despise God that formed them, in
their despising the Ministration of his Word, and some way or other to turn
aside from, or deceive in that Religion which is to the saving of the Soul,
that after all the Preaching and Hearing which has been in the World, the
greater part of both Preachers and People will be cast-a-ways and perish for
ever. Things have been and are so transacted all along, that those few
Preachers which shall be saved, as also those few Hearers that shall be saved
(for there is only but a fourth Part of the Hearers of the Word Matthew. 13. and
Mark 4. that will be saved by it. And then, what will become of the Multitude
of Non-Hearers? They shall certainly perish and be destroyed without Remedy.)
But the Hearers that shall be saved will stand by and assent that it was so,
when the Preachers that shall be saved, shall make this or the like return at
the last great Day of Judgment. I have spread out my hands all the day unto a
R^bellious People, Isa. 65. 2. or as the Words are a little varied in the
Gospel, but to the same purpo^^ and signification, All day long have I
stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and gainsaying People, Romans 10. 21.
which will be found true not as to Israel only, but to the whole of Mankind, of
the several Generations and Countries.

To use the same Hezekiah's Phrase (who gave occasion to the Words of our Text,
on which so many things have been Discoursed) What shall I say, after all by
way of Practical Use, Inference and Application to the whole?

Several do object and needlessly find fault, that I do not digest and compose
my Sermons, as other Preachers do by way of Doctrine, Use and Application.
Whereas my manner of Preaching to those that understand me thoroughly, is
Doctrine, Use and Application all along, by making known plain Propositions and
Sentences of Truth; and that not so much Speculative Notional Truth, but
Practical Soul saying Truth. And in the several Sentences of this, there is
Doctrine, Use and Application. For it teaches and instructs, and Edifies; and
it is the Hearers business to apply it to their Heart and Conscience. Use and
Application is altogether as proper in the beginning of a Sermon, as toward
the end thereof.

When many things have been said upon one particular subject, it is hard to add
much more, and not say over again what has been already said. However, let us
endeavor to raise a Practical Use, or Inference, or two from the whole.

Is it so then, that we must Dye and not Live?

This may teach us in the first Place, to be in good earnest in Matters of
Religion, or upon the Evening and making up our accounts with God, with whom we
have to do, and to whom we must give them up. One says well, We should not
al^ogether live in Jest, for we shall certainly dye in Earnest. And there is
another common Proverbial Speech, That if ever People will be serious, they
will be serious upon their Deathbed. For then the Ruffling Royster, Jolly
Person, and most merry Man of the World can no longer laugh, when Death does
once begin to fix and set his Countenance, and the Pangs thereof, which are
real and sensible, have once b^gan to strike him. But now as it is written,
surely every Man walks in a vain show (in the Margent there it is, an Image)
surely they are disquieted in vain, ^salm 39. 6. So all our Life here, whether
it meet with good and pleasant things, it is all but a vain show, laughter, and
People make a Jest and Light of it; or if it be trouble and disquietude, they
are also vain. So that we are only carried from one vain extreme to another.
But when we shall die and not live, or rather enter into that State wherein we
shall Live and Die no more, then we shall meet with (...) and Realities. Says
Wisdom, All that love me, shall inherit Substance. Which being spoken in the
Future Tense, has reference to the Future State of Things. And acco^dingly, we
may observe, that as Man is endued with Wisdom or not, so he shows himself
accordingly affect^d with present things, or seeks after the things to come. A
little thing puffs up a Bubble; and Man being but a Bubble, therefore it is
that he is soon lifted up and transported. But whosoever is endued with real
Wisdom, He cannot take Pleasure in Fools Mirth, or in an Idle Jest. Who are
passed over the Festivities of Childhood and Youth, they cannot still show
themselves transported with Vanities. All the Jesting and Merriment in the
World can never make up the true Happiness, because it is not satisfactory, nor
yet enduring. And so all Jesting and Merriment is like the crackling of Thorn^
under a Pot, which make a sudden Blaze and Noise, but give no solid heat. In
the midst of Laughter the Heart is sorrowful. But if it is not so, yet all
Worldly and sensible delights are but as one single mouthful of Meat to an
hungry Man; which rather excites the Appetite further and after more than
satisfies i^. So worldly and sensible Delights raise Anguish, how insufficient
and short these things are of a true and inward satisfaction. O ye Sons of Men,
how long will ye love Vanity, and seek after Leasing, Psalm 4. 3. But it would
not be altogether so b^d, if all their Jesting and Vanity was confined to those
things only. For it is also crept into things pertaining to God and to
Religion. For besides, that there is a more gross sort of the Spirit of
profaneness, mocking and drollery at the Things pertaining to God, which is
the Abomination of Iniquity, and most provoking in his sight, there is also a
lesser kind of lesting, or rather lightness therein; which is also offensive
and displeasing to the God with whom we have to do. Of this sort, may be
conceived all that Custom, and Fashion, and Outside in Matters of Religion; or
when People go to hear the Word of God preached by such an one, only out of
Novelty and Cu^iosity. In a Word, whenever People are not so seriously and
awfully affected in the Worship of the Lord God, as they ought to be. The
Ancient Gentiles did use to have their Temples in Caves, or Grots, or Shady
Groves, that there might be a kind of Darkness in them, on purpose to beget and
raise a kind of awfulness and horror in the Worshippers toward the Objects of
their Idola^ry and Superstition. But as one observes, they borrowed all their
Superstition and kind of Worship from the Jews: So probably that might have
been in Imitation and Resemblance of the thick Darkness spoken of in 1 Kings 8.
12. which the Lord said, He would dwell in. For there was a show and
Representation thereof in the J^wish Temple made with hands. But the Holy Ghost
did hereby signify, Holiness becomes thine House for ever. So in like Manner,
it may be truly reasoned, great awfulness and seriousness, and intentness of
Mind becomes all those, who enter into any place for to Worship the Lord God,
or to hear his Word. For it is not a vain thing for them, because it is your
Life, Deuteronomy. 32. 47. People had need be serious and in good earnest about the
concernments of their Life. And through this thing they are to go to Heaven,
when they go over the Jordan of this Life to possess it. According hereto the
Scripture speaks and directs, Serve the Lord with fear and rejoice with
trembling. God is greatly to be honored in the Assembly of the Saints, and to
be had in Reverence by all them that are round about him. Wherefore we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be ^oved, let us have Grave whereby we may
serve God accept^b^y ^i^h R^v^rence and Godly Fear,

I have many times thought, what a brave World we should have, if all Ministers
and Preachers were as Godly and Holy, and did stand in God's Counsel and on his
side (as it becomes his Ambassadors) all one when they are out of their
Pulpits, as they seem when they are in them. And so if all other People were as
Good and Religious at their several Houses throughout each Weekday, as they
appear to be in the Church or Congregation on Sabbath Days, such indeed should
be the Christian Life. For though indeed (to our shame be it spoken) even the
Religious also give themselves over to a worldly kind of Spirit, and to a
worldly kind of Talk and Discourse, that they may become all things to all Men.
And when we converse with the People of the World, they cannot bear with and
relish Divine and Heavenly Things to be commonly talked of with them, but they
are Melancholy and Irksome thereat. So that we must come over to their kind of
talk, or have in a Manner no talk with them. But here it were rather to be
wished and desired that their Hearts were so renewed and sanctified, that their
chief delight was in that Discourse, which relates to their better Part, and to
that Life which shall never End. And that they did or could once come to find
more real satisfaction in what is good to the use of edifying, than in the
other kind which recreates only for the present, and is concerning those things
which in a short time are to be done away. As the Man is, so is his Talk. If he
is one of this World, whose Name shall be written in the Earth. I pray God
deliver me from that Doom, then according to our Savior's Aphorism, He speaks
of the World, They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World. But if
he does indeed belong unto Heaven, then his Conversation is in Heaven, his
Delight and his Heart is there, even before his Soul is admitted or does enter
therein. And if so, and their Affections are once set on things above, and they
know the difference, they neither do, nor yet can show forth the like rejoicing
(as the Children of this World do) at the common Accidents and little things
here below. Neither are the Children of Light therefore bereaved of all Joy and
Delight herein; for it is not taken away, but only changed and placed upon
another Object as to them. For they take more satisfaction and Pleasure in
speaking to one another of God, and of their fear toward him, and of the
things pertaining to his Kingdom, than others do in foolish Talking, and
Jesting which are not convenient, Ephesians. 5. 4. nor yet so thoroughly satisfactory
to the Heart of Man as that is. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of
your Mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may Minister
Grace unto the Hearers. Alas! How little is this observed in the ordinary
Communication and Conversation in the World? And though we know how to approve
the things that are excellent, and how to behave our selves in the solemn
Meetings for the Worship of the Lord God, even with great Awe and Dread,
thinking and saying with Jacob: How dreadful is this Place? this is no other
than the Gate of Heaven. Worship is a very solemn and serious thing; for by
this, if it be Right and Acceptable in the sight of God, it is the Gate by
which People are to enter into Heaven. Yet alas? People are not so awful and
devout, and in good earnest as they ought to be at their Worship, and they are
yet ten times worse, even ungodly, disobedient, and turning aside when they are
from it. O that we were always in all Companies, and in all places such as we
are now and then in our most solemn and near approaches to the Lord God in
Prayer, or as when we are most af^^^cted under the Ordinance of Preaching the
Word. O that Ishmael might live before thee; O that even the remainder of the
Worldly Corrupt Nature that is in us might be thus subdued, sanctified, rendered
obedient so as to live before God; that the invisible God which is over us, may
be to us at all times and in all things, All in All.

The second Practical Use and Inference which I would draw from those words,
Isaiah the Son of Amos came unto him and said unto him, Thus says the Lord, is
this, namely as it is written, all his Saints set down at thy feet every one
shall receive of thy words, Deuteronomy. 33. 3. which was literally fulfilled, when
Jesus Christ the Word of God, sat down so very often and taught the People. And
as Cornelius said of himself and of those that were there assembled. Now
therefore are we all here present before God to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God, Acts 10. 33. Even so my self and all ye that hear me
this day, should sit down before God (which may be done whilst we are Walking
and Meditating in the Field, or whether we are on a Journey, or at Work and
Labor in our general Callings, or when we lie on our Bed in our first waking
thoughts, yea in all our thoughts all the day long, whether in company or alone
we should sit down at the feet of the invisible God and in our Soul be present
before God, laying it open and spreading it in his sight. But chiefly our
selves should be in a continued sense of as much, or otherwise, all that cannot
be done by us, and this is to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long. But
to what purpose should we be thus? Even to receive of his words, to hear the
things that are commanded us of God. and to perceive and give heed unto what
very thoughts he puts into our Soul: so as to obey and do them accord^ngly. Now
here some may imagine, that one may do this a long time, and yet rece^ve no
Vision or Answer from God. Not so long neither as may be thought for. Though no
Man has seen God at any time nor heard his Voice; yet at this very day he has
three ways of speaking unto Mankind; By his written Word, by his Spirit in the
Heart and Conscience of each Man of Woman, and by his Ministers. And we should
sit down before God and be present before God for to receive and hear from him
all these ways.

It is related of Augustine, that about the time of his Conversion from a loose
debauched and wicked Life to the Christian Life, he heard a Voice speaking unto
him, Take up the Book and read. Which he did accordingly, and dipping by chance
as he thought, but by the speical direction of God, upon the four last verses
of the 13. Chapter to the Romans, they wrought a Conversion in him. Even so, as
often as we take up the Bible to read, or hear another read it, we are to look
upon it as a Letter or Epistle of the Lord God to the Inhabitan^s of the Earth.
Whereby (although he is not seen by us) yet he speaks unto us, and so we are
to receive and hear it with Reverence and Godly Fear, and with a Mind to know
what the Lord does say concerning us, and also with a Mind to obey and do
according to what the Lord does herein com^and us. And where is such a Mind as
is Willing and Obedient, Pure and Holy, Sanctified and Cleansed, there he does
put his good Spirit or Angel which shall guide us all along, to keep thee in
the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared, beware of him
and obey his Voice, provoke him not, for he will not pardon your Transgressions
(whence note that sins against Conscience are very dangerous) for my Name is in
him, Exodus 23. 20, 21. What Man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach
in the way that he shall choose, Psalm. 25. 12.

And then God does speak unto Mankind and teach them by his Word and by his
Ministers, who bring or at least they ought to bring all their Exhortation unto
the People from the former. For they Preach and make known according as God
has first made known to them by his Word and Spirit. But here, as appears both
from searching and enquiring diligently into the Scriptures of Truth, which
speak very much concerning them, but little that is good or right of them (see
Isa. 30. 10, 11. and the twenty third Chapter of Jeremiah and the thirteenth
and thirty fourth Chapters of Ezekiel. For there are whole Chapters which treat
of the Errors and Deceits of the Priests or Ministry) in one place of Jeremiah
it is said, They shall not profit the People at all. And compare all this with
the flat insipid Preaching of some; whose Ministry (according to the common
Proverbial Speech thereof) is as dead and dull as a door-nail. For it may be
perceived that it has no manner of Life, Power and Efficacy therein. This
shows that the Lord is departed from and displeased with them, and has
wi^hdrawn his Spirit from them. God himself will make a Reform among them and
thoroughly purge his Floor in these latter days which are now coming on. For
thus says the Lord, behold I am against the Shepherds, which as feed
themselves and feed not the Flock; but then he will cause them to cease from
feeding the Flock Ezekiel. 34. 8, 10. instead and in place of whom then he will
make good his word, And I will give you Pastors according to mine Heart, which
shall feed you with Knowledge and Understanding, Jer. 3. 15. when the Kingdom
of God (which there signifies the Preaching and Ministration of the Gospel)
shall be taken from you and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Ma^th. 21. 43. Say I these things as a Man, or do not the Scriptures
here alleged say so? which are fulfilled and applicable at this very day. For
the Holy Ghost in the penning and giving them forth h^th consulted for all
Persons, Times and Places. Yet in the mean while it is again here applicable,
The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever they bid
you observe, that observe and do, but do ye not after their Works, for they say
and do not. There is not a Sermon which we usually hear, but there is some
Scripture in it or somewhat according to Scripture. And seeing that all
Scripture is profitable, we may be certainly edified by that, although we throw
from it the trash or husk of what is merely Man's Invention and Composition.
Though some Pastors are Brutish and void of Knowledge and of the Life of God,
yet all are not so neither.

But to such Ministers who have the Knowledge and Life of God in them, his
Method and Promise is, The Lord God has given me the Tongue of the Learned,
that I should know how to speak a word in Season to him that is weary; he
wakeneth morning by morning, Isa. 50. 4. So he puts a seasonable and
suitable word into them for to speak out unto his People Sabbath after Sabbath,
and from one Lords day unto another; which as it is the Duty of one to utter
and declare, so it is of the other for to come to hear and receive it. Hence it
is also, though we Ministers know not other Peoples thoughts or secret doings,
or their hidden things of Dishonesty, or the things which are done of them in
secret; yet we handle that word which is a discerner of the Thoughts and
Intents of the Heart. And as God speaks concerning the secret, deep and hidden
sinful doings of some, Though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the
Sea, thence will I command the Serpent and he shall bite them, Amos 9. 3. Even
so he will guide and command the Ministry of his Word (though we his Ministers
that handle and speak it forth know not as to whom) to fetch up their secret
sins, to bite or rather prick their Heart and Conscience at the bottom whereof
the sin and guilt did before lie. And so the Lord Guides and Commands the
Ministry of his Word (Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, says your God, speak
ye comfortably to Jerusalem. To be Sons of Consolation to some, and to be Sons
of Thunder unto others. To speak such a suitable word to all the several and
promis^uous Hearers, that all may learn and all may be comforted. Some may be
convinced, some converted, some strengthened and builded up according to the
several needs of his People; and according to the several great ends for which
he in Wisdom appointed the Ministry and Preaching of the Word.

As the Apostle Paul says to the Thessalonians, But a^ touching Brotherly
Love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye your selves are taught of God
to love one another. So I need not draw any more Practical Uses and Inferences
from Isa. 38. 1. because that as Isaiah the Son of Amos came unto Hezekiah and
said unto him, Thus says the Lord, Thou shall die and not live: So the same
God the Creator of all Generations and Persons of Mankind, speaks unto them
in his written Word, in his Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences, and by his
Ministers; for by all these ways they are taught of God to set their Souls in
Order against the time they shall go out of the Body. Which will time after
time, opportunity after opportunity, morning after morning (morning after
morning he wakene^h me) and all this will furnish ye with Practical Uses and
Inferences enough on this Subject. For all these ways God will teach you what
shall be profitable for ye to know, and give an inferring what ye have to do.

And so I have done with this Text, telling ye withal, that all your remaining
business throughout your Life here on Earth and whatever other Sermons or Word
of Exhortation and Instruction ye may ever hear or read, if it is managed
aright, it is all to the same end and purpose, that ye may set your Souls in
Order, for ye shall die, that is, they shall go out of the Body. Do ye
therefore so live and set your whole Body, Soul and Spirit in Order, that when
ye die, ye may live again in Happiness and Bliss, and not in Misery and
Punishment; even that your Spirits may be severally saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus. Amen, says my Soul, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

FINIS.
Practical Books Written and Published by Richard Stafford.
OF Happiness: Wherein it is fully and particularly manifested, That the
greatest Happiness of this Life consists in the Fear of God and keeping his
Commandments, in oppo^^tion to the Pleasures of Sin, or the pretended
convenience of Disobedience.

Rules and Directions for the prevention of and Recovery out of Sickness.

A Discourse against Partial Obedience: Or that dangerous Deceit so universal
amongst them, who call themselves Christians of keeping some of the
Commandments of God and neglecting others.

Some Thoughts of the Life to Come: With a brief account of the state of
Religion, as it is now in the World.

The great Benefits of Christ to all that Believe on and Obey him: Being a
Treatise on Hebrews 2. 15. Wherein it is showed and made known how People may
be freed and delivered from that slavish fear of Death, whereby they are
subject to Bondage throughout their Lifetime: And also how they may be saved
and preserved from the Evil and Danger of Death when it shall approach nigh and
come actually upon them.

An earnest Call to all the Inhabitants of the Earth, to Turn immediately to
the Lord their God.

An Exhortation unto all Dissenters (however they are distinguished or named)
to return into the Communion of the Ch^^ch of England.

Six several Se^mons, Preached on Isaiah 38. 1. wherein that great Duty of
setting our Body and Soul in order, for we shall die, is at large opened and
explained.


