THE Great, Useful and Blessed DUTY OF A Contentment, Willingness and Desire TO
DIE: Set forth upon true and assured Grounds, in several Discourses on these
following Scriptures.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy word. For
mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30.

Into thine hand I commit my Spirit: Thou have Redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth, Psalm. 31. 5.

I have glorified thee on the Earth: I have finished the work which thou gave
me to do, John 17. 4.

By RICHARD STAFFORD, A Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Recommended as more proper and Beneficial to be given at Funerals than Gloves
or Rings,

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1700.

Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word, For
mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, Luke 2. 29, 30.
FRom these Words I shall treat (through God's Assistance, and according to the
Knowledge given me, O continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee: and
thy Righteousness to the upright in heart) of our contentment and willingness
to Die, or depart from off this Earth.

Why, Is there any need to persuade or exhort People to a Willingness and
Desire to surrender back their Spirits unto the God who gave them? This seems
to be but what is Natural and Reasonable: Yet still there is a reluctance and
backwardness in our Spirits to do this; because the Spirit is conscious of
having offended God, and is afraid to meet with him Angry, or as a God that
^aketh Vengeance. And therefore until this same God is perfectly Reconciled
unto, and at Peace with her, and he is sensible and assured thereof, the Soul
must needs be afraid and backward to come and appear before him.

A diversity is to be observed, when it is written, Into thine hand I commit my
Spirit: Thou have redeemed me O Lord God of Truth. The Psalmist does not here
say, Thou have Created me O Lord God of Truth. Though indeed this is true, yet
that is not altogether so satisfying (...) Reason for him to willingly commit
his Spirit into God's Hand, as the consideration of his having Redeemed him is.
Because that by Nature we are the Children of Wrath as well as others, and we
are shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin does our Mother conceive us. So that until
this same Sin and Iniquity (which is the Object of God's Hatred, Displeasure
and Punishment,) be done away, and we are Redeemed from it (for by his
Redeeming us we are in a state of Reconcilation again) as this is God's Act
also as well as of Creating us, we are not meet, and consequently there cannot
be a Willingness upon good and true Grounds, to give up our Spirits unto God,
or to say with old Simeon in the Text, Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in Peace.

Even this old Simeon, though he had already lived long on this Earth, yet he
would not have been so contented and desirous to have departed out of it,
unless he was to depart in Peace. Not to depart generally as most People do, in
doubt, fear and trouble, but to depart in Peace. If we could have our choice,
and it were so in our power as to be Immortal here and never to Die; as for my
part I should desire and pray unto God either to depart in Peace or not to
depart at all: For as it is said of the Son of Perdition, It would have been
good for him if he had never been Born: so it may be here affirmed of those who
do not depart in Peace, It would be good for them not to depart, or not to dye
at all. Not but that some may go off disturbedly, and yet go off safely. The
Soul may be sometimes in a state of Peace, and yet not be sensible thereof. Who
fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his Servant, and yet walks in
darkness, and have no light, Isa. 50. 10. But when one has true and assured
Grounds of Departing in Peace, as Simeon here had, there one may pray and
appeal to God for him to let our Soul depart from the Body.

What were those true and assured Grounds which Simeon had of departing in
Peace? They are contained in the following Verse, For mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation. From hence it appears, that the true and assured Ground^ for which
any one is willing and contented to Dye, is Because he has seen the Salvation
of God; or, for the committing our Spirit into the Hand of God, is, Because he
has Redeemed us.

Now to see the Salvation of God, or for God to Redeem us, do amount to near
one and the same thing: As it is written, The Kingdom of God comes not with
Observation, (in the Margent there it is, with outward show) Neither shall they
say, Lo here, or Lo there, for be^old the Kingdom of God is within you. So here
it may be reasoned and supposed, The Salvation of God is not outward, nor yet
comes with Observation, but the Salvation of God is within us. It is wrought
and accomplished within us. And thou shall call his Name Je^us, for he shall
save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1. 21. Who is a Prince and a Savior, and
the Author of E^ernal Salvation to all that obey him, and the Salvation of God.
As to all this, Christ is no otherwise a Savior, ^r does save us, or is the
Salvation of God, than as he ^oth save us from our Sins and turn us from our
^aiquities. For this is laying the Ax to the Root of ^e Tree and digging to the
very Groundwork and ^oundation, because that only by reason of Sin we be^me
liable and obnoxious to Death, Misery and Punishment. So that by certain and
necessary Consequence, (...) we are saved from Sin, then also we are saved from
^eath, Misery and Punishment. Hence again appears, that this is the Salvation
of God, to save us from our Sins, and to save us from the Guilt and Corruption
of our nature, from whence these same Sins do proceed forth. and so in those
many places of Scripture where Salvation belongs unto our God and is ascribed
unto him, (...) he is called the God of Salvation, there it is meant of ^ving
us from our Sins. Where he saves from our E^mies, Sin is the greatest Enemy;
for it is Sin in such a ^an or Woman which only makes him or her to be our
^nemy. Thou have led captivity captive, Psalm. 68. 18. that (...) God has led
Sin and Corruption (which does in^lve the Children of Men in Captivity)
Captive, by (...) having received gifts for Men. And then it follows, ^lessed
be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with Benefits: and ^imating thereby, that to
be saved from our Sins, or to ^d that Captive which before held us in
Captivity, is (...) greatest Benefit. And then it follows, Even the God of our
Salvation, Selah. He that is our God, is the God of Salvation; and unto God the
Lord belong the Issues from Death. In saving us from Sin God does save us from
Death also, inasmuch as Death is by reason of Sin. And therefore Jesus Christ
in whom was no sin, he being the Holy one of God: Therefore he should not see
corruption, and it was not possible that he should not be holden of Death, as
Peter does truly averr it. So that as God and Christ do save us from sin, unto
God do belong the Issues from Death; for there is a flowing and rising and
deliverance from that again. As health is an holding together of Temporal Life,
so Holiness or freedom from sin is the Principle and beginning of Eternal Life.
It is an act of Salvation or saving to subdue: And as to this also, we have God
speaking on this wise, He will turn again, he will have compression upon us, he
wi^ subdue our iniquities Micah 7. 19. which indeed is the greatest instance of
compassion that can be showed unto us Men, for unless God did subdue our
Iniquities we must die, perish, and be miserable for ever. Now to Subdue our
Iniquities, is to conquer and subdue the reigning Nature and Power of them, so
that they shall not involve us into the Death of Sin here nor yet into the
Damnation of Hell hereafter.

Having thus Explained what Salvation is, in order that we may the better
understand those true and assured grounds of a willingness to dye when we have
seen the Salvation of God wrought and accomplished upon and within our Souls;
Proceed we to speak (...) the Nature of Redemption, which is also another tr^
and assured Ground of committing our Spirit into the hand of God, because thou
have Redeemed us, O Lord God of Truth. The signification of which Redemption
may be Understood from what is written, Forasmu^ as ye know that ye were not
Redeemed with Corruptib^ things as Silver and Gold from your vain Conversation
receiv^ by tradition from your Fathers. And as the same Apost^ does elsewhere
phrase it, By these you might be part^kers of the Divine Nature, (which none
can be un^ be is first Redeemed from the corrupt Nature a^ from the Body of Sin
which we carry about us) having escaped the Corruption that is in the World
through lust. So that to be Redeemed from Corruption and from Lust, both which
are very much in the World, this ^s Redemption. Upon my Discoursing these
things, Examine your selves whosoever shall hear or Read these Lines, can ye thus
find and witness Redemption in your own Souls; That is, do ye feel and
Experience inwardly a Redemption in ye from that vain Conversation, which is so
much used and practiced by other People) and also a Redemption from Corruption,
and from Lust? If it is so Indeed and in Truth, then ye have purchased a good
degree in the Faith, and ye have made a considerable Advancement and
Proficiency in the Christian-Life; So that ye are in a readiness and
willingness to Commit your Spirits into the hand of God, because he has
Redeemed them.

And then in Psalm. 31. 5. He is called the Lord God of Truth, Intimating
thereby, that he does Redeem and Sanctify them by his Truth.

There is another Scripture which does clearly open the Nature of Redemption,
These were they which were ^ot defiled with Women, these were Redeemed,
(observe that) from among Men, being the first Fruits unto God and to ^he Lamb.
And in their Mouth was found no Guile, for they were without fault, before the
Throne of God, Rev. 14. 4. 5. ^t is here to be taken notice of how the
Scripture in ^his and many other places does in a wonderful manner Instruct
People in these things of Holiness, per^ection and Innocence. It is the Point
or End which ^ll Scripture does drive at and lead unto. But in this ^lace, to
be Redeemed does import to be Redeemed ^om among Men, and not to be defiled
with Women; That is, not to be Tainted or Touched with the Temptation of
either, to be freed from Lust, (Concupicence) and from the motions of Sins in
our Members, and to have in our Mouth no Guile found, and to be without fault
before the Throne of God. Such are his Redeemed and Sanctified ones.

And the Ransomed of the Lord, (elsewhere called the Redeemed of the Lord, Isa.
51. 11. shall return and com^ to Zion with Songs and Everlasting joy upon their
Head^ They shall obtain joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sigh^ing shall flee
away. Isa. 35. 10. In truth none have such Reason to be joyful as these
Redeemed of the Lord; for nothing can possibly hurt them. Not Me^ nor Devils,
nor yet Death it self; which is the mo^ Melancholy thing and of doubtful
Expectation as t^ other People, for by Death they are received into God hand,
the place of Everlasting joy.

There is yet another Scripture which Explains the Nature of Redemption, Who
gave himself for us that (...) might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify
unto him self a peculiar People zealous of good Works. Titus, 2. 1* The
Scripture is all along consonant and agreeable to (...) self, for this
Redeeming from all Iniquity, and Purifyi^ answers exactly to that place
aforementioned of being without Guile and to have no fault. A state of Innocen^
is a state of Redemption; for it is a state of Redemption from Sin, Guilt and
whatever may hurt or man the Soul miserable. It is a Redeeming from Captivit^
Bondage and Thraldom, from the Vassalage of S^tan and the Imprisonment of Hell,
which as we (...) come Obnoxious unto, only by reason of Sin, Iniqui^ and
Transgression: So as we are Redeemed from the^ we are consequently Redeemed and
saved from t^ other also.

Besides these two Grounds of having seen the Salv^tion of God and his having
Redeemed us, there is anoth^ for our willingness and contentment to dye from
wh^ is written, I have Glorified thee on the Earth, I ha^ finished the Work
which thou gave me to do, And n^ come I to thee, John 17. 4. 13. Now seeing
that who^ God did foreknow He did also Predestinate to be conf^med unto the
Image of his Son, that he might be t^ first Born amongst many Brethren: So that
we m^ assuredly Reason that every Servant of God may up^ true grounds be
willing to dye and to come unto G^ when he has before Glorified him on the
Earth, a^ finished the Work which God gave him to do; A^ now come I to thee.
Words full of consolation and rejoicing! Like as when a Servant is sent out to
such a place about his Masters Business when he has done it he returns to his
Master with rejoicing and complacency of mind. Even so God our Creator sent us
Reasonable Creatures to do his Work and Business, Wist ye not that I must be
about my Fathers Business, Luke 2. 49. Said Jesus Christ his beloved Son who
herein left us an Example that we should follow his steps. Now certainly it
must be a Satisfaction to the Creature when he has done the Work and Will and
Business of his Creator, according as it was expected from him; and
consequently the Creature can then return with more Comfortable Expectation
unto him, And now come I to thee. We cannot better and more willingly surrender
back our Spirits to the God who gave them, then when they have faithfully
performed that very same thing, for which God sent these Spirits into these
Bodies for to do. And now, O thou invisible Creator, the invisible part of us
which was by thee Created, comes to thee.

From what has been before written it appears, that there are three things
especially which upon good and true grounds, can make any one contented willing
and desirous to Dye.

First, When one has seen the Salvation of God.

Secondly, When the Lord God of truth has Redeemed us:

Thirdly, When one has Glorified God on Earth, and finisbed the Work which he
gave us to do.

It was Revealed unto Simeon by the Holy Ghost, that he should not see Death
until he had seen the Lord's Christ. And he came by the Spirit into the Temple,
and when his Parents brought in the Child Jesus to do for him after the Custom
of the Law. then took he him in his Arms and Blessed God and said, mine Eyes
have seen thy Salvation. So that Simeon his seeing the Salvation of God was
seeing Jesus Christ in the Flesh. But since the fullness of time is over and
past we cannot now see him in the Flesh here on Earth, yet we may see him in
his Grace and Revelation. But chiefly to see Christ, the Salvation of God, the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, is with the Eyes of our Understanding
being enlightened and turned inwards to see Christ within us. Little Children
of whom I travail in Birth till Christ be formed in ye; And so to have Christ
formed in us, this is to see the Salvation of God. Now this is a work of time
and succession as it is of forming the Infant, in the Womb. To have or see
Christ formed within us, is the Business and Work of our whole Life here on
Earth, which the Preaching and Ministry of the word does help unto. And when
once Christ is thoroughly formed within us, and we see the Salvation of God,
then we may be well contented, willing and Desirous to dye for this Reason. For
as when the Chick sees the Kite or Hawk which would devour it, if she can run
under the Hens wings, then she is safe; For as the Hen was at first
Instrumental to give it Life and Being, so it will still preserve it. Even so
by seeing the Lord's Christ who is the Prince of Life and the Salvation of God,
the faithful Soul who is in Covenant with him runs, and makes unto Christ, who
promises and performs it also: He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under
his Wings shall thou trust, Psalm 91. 3. and gathers his Children together
even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. Here let Death and the
Devil come and destroy that Soul if they can; Christ is greater in power and
might* Forsamuch then as the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood he also
himself took part of the same, that he through Death might Destroy him that had
the Power of Death that is the Devil: And destroy them who through fear of
Death were all their life time Subject to Bondage.

If we are first saved from Sin and Guilt, then w^ are also saved from the
wrath to come. And then w^ may be contented and willing to dye, for therefore
People are afraid to dye, Because they are afraid to fall under the wrath of
God. Now if they are sure and safe from that then Death is without any sting at
all which is Sin. And then also we shall be safe, saved and preserved from all
the Evils Plagues and Punishment^ of the World to come; So that after all the
Miseries and Irksomness of this present Life (for as there is a satiety of all
things, so at length there is a satiety even of Life it self) after all the
toil and wearisomness and labor thereof God our Creator will comfort us for
this same toil and the times of Refreshing shall come from the presence of the
Lord: Blessed be his Name for it. He does here in this valley of Tears and
place of Weeping afford us some good and Comfortable things, yet seeing that he
has appointed our time on Earth as the days of an Hireling we may willingly
and contentedly give up our Breath and commit our Spirits into his hand saying
with old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according
to thy word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Because we shall have yet
better and more Satisfactory things when we depart hence.

To be patient to Live and willing to Dye is the temper and disposition of Soul
which I desire and would endeavor at; And this my willingness to dye should
not proceed out of a Melancholy temper: Like Jonah in an Angry Mood who would
have the Lord to take his Life from him, For it was better for him to Dye than
to Live: only forsooth because he was displeased at the time that the Lord did
not destroy Nineveh, according to the word which he had Preached; But this was
only a pettish humor of his: And so others at this day upon a sudden
Affliction and Vexation are forthwith weary of the world and call to Death to
come and ease them of the present Burden, Trouble, Grief or Uneasiness. But
give me the mind that is willing to dye upon the same Reason as the Apostle
was, Having a desire to depart and to be with Christ which is far better Phil.
1. 23. Then the best condition here on Earth: when also it can truly be said To
me to dye is gain. For by Death I shall gain or get more Good, more
Satisfaction, more Comfort, more Happiness and Blessedness then ever I had on
this Earth. Then only Death is gain when to live is Christ; when we lay out our
selves and live only for Christ that is in his service and to get Christ formed
within us, then truly Death is gain; But if on the other hand People live to
themselves or for themselves as in the service of Mam mon and for Pleasure, and
they are wanton on the Earth the consequence thereof is they have nourished
their heart as in the day of Slaughter, or against the day of Slaughte^ to such
to dye is not Gain but Loss; for thereby they los^ their Pleasure, they lose
their Mammon and they receive n^ good instead thereof, but only Punishment and
wrath Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord. But it is only those who live
unto the Lord that is in his service and Obedience that Dye in the Lord. If we
mean to gain by ou^ Death that is to get and obtain more good thereby tha^ we
had here; we must do somewhat for it whilst we are in Life, according to what
the same Apostle elsewhere witnesses of himself which is also applicable to
other People who would have and enjoy the same good things, For I am now ready
to be offered and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good
Fight, I have finished my course I have kept the Faith, henceforth there is
laid up for me a^ Crown of Righteousness; which the Lord the Righteous judge
shall give me at that day, and not unto me only, but unto a^ them also that
love his appearing. The Crown of Righteousness will not be had by any one,
until he has first fought the good fight and kept the Faith. There is no
departing in peace according to the word of God, or according to the
understanding desire of the Reasonable Creature without having first seen the
Salvation of God.

The second true and assured ground of a contentment, willingness and desire to
dye is, when the Lord God of truth has Redeemed us. Sanctify them through thy
truth, Thy word is truth. And so the same God, that does Sanctify his People
through his truth, does also Redeem them through his truth, or by his word of
truth. When we are once thoroughly Redeemed and Sanctified by the truth of God,
then we may commit our Spirits into the hand of God. For then these Spirits of
ours are Redeemed and Sanctified from whatever Defilement and Corruption they
had from the Body, and from the things of this Earth; Then the Spirit returns
to God again the same as it was when he gave it. The Temple of God is Holy;
which Temple ye are. And so God expects that that Spirit which he Created Holy
(for so it was before it is defiled with the Body of Death) should be kept and
preserved Holy; but chiefly it should be Sanctified, that is, made Holy, just
as it comes to be surrendered and given back unto God. Every Like loves its
Like, and an Holy God loves an Holy Soul. The Scripture expressly affirms it,
Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord; which implies the contrary, that
with Holiness, or when the Soul is endued or clothed with Holiness, it shall
then certainly see the Lord to its endless Comfort and Rejoicing

The great and principal Business we have to do here on this Earth, and as we
are going off from it (which we do continually as soon as we are Born) is to
dye to Sin, (I dye Daily, says the Apostle) and to get Holiness ingrafted into
the Soul. As we are day after day approaching nearer and nearer unto the Grave,
here let us examine and prove our selves, whether we are yet more Dead unto Sin,
and have Holiness yet more ingrafted into our Souls; Whether as our desires
grow more languid and unaffected as to Creature Comforts and to creature
enjoyments (by having had them over and over so often already) So the same
desires are more from Sin and Vanity, and the more thirst after God: And after
the Enjoyment of him in his Kingdom so as to cry out from the real sense, bent
and inclination of our Souls, As the Heart pants after the Water Brooks, so
pants my Soul after thee O God! When we can say in truth and seelingly within
our self, there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee. And when in old Age
we cannot taste what we Eat or what we Drink, When the Keepers of the House
shall tremble and those that look out of the Windows are Darkened; when the
Grasshopper shall be a burden and desire shall fail; My Flesh and my Heart
fails, if then God is the strength of our Heart and our Portion for ever. For
so the right Consequence is, and Endeavors should be used accordingly: That as
our outward Man decays day by day, so we should be more renewed in the inward
Man. As the day approaches continually nearer and nearer when we shall
outwardly go off from this Earth, the more we should be Redeemed from the
Earth; that is, we should be Redeemed from the Evil and Defilement, and
Corruption of this Earth, before we can upon Assured grounds commit our Spirit
into the hand of God.

Besides this of being Redeemed from our vain conversation and from the
Corruption of our Nature, and of being without Guile and Fault before the
Throne of God; The chief and especial Redemption is that which was wrought and
accomplished by Jesus Christ, who in his Love and Pity has Redeemed them, and
he bare them and he carried them all the days of old Isa. 63. 9. Even Jesus
which delivered us from the wrath to come. Who bought us with a price and
purchased us with his own Blood. As God the Father Redeemed and brought up the
Israelites out of the Land of Egypt; Whereby he was in a more especial manner
their God, for the Redeemer has a right in the Redeemed: Even so God by his
Son Jesus Christ has Redeemed Mankind from Spiritual Egypt from the Slavery
and Bondage of Sin and Satan and Death. Christ has Redeemed us from the curse
of the Law, being made a curse for us. And it was this Redemption wrought and
accomplished by Jesus Christ, who was of the seed and lineage of David, whom the
Scripture therefore calls the Son of David, which David speaks of by the Spirit
and had respect unto, when he said, Into thine hand I commit my Spirit, Thou
have Redeemed me O Lord God of truth. To pursue the very same Reasoning here as
is in Acts 2 25, 30. 32. For David speaks concerning him, Thou have Redeemed
me O Lord God of truth, For being a Prophet and knowing that God had sworn with
an Oath to him, (In fulfilling of which he is here fitly called the Lord God of
truth) That of the fruit of his loins, according to the Flesh he would raise up
Christ to sit on his Throne and to Redeem Mankind by him: He seeing this before
spoke of the Redemption of Christ, Thou have Redeemed me O Lord God of truth:
It being the usual style of Prophecies to speak of that as already past which
is to come. Whereby is shown forth the immutable truth of the Eternal God, for
what he has decreed in his Eternal counsel and purpose, it is as certain as if
it was already past and fulfilled. As Abraham saw his day and was glad, so here
David saw his day and was glad. And truly well they might for says the Apostle
in the Persons of the Regenerate, for we were by Nature Children of wrath as
well as others: So that Abraham and David were Children of wrath also; And then
both of them might well be glad to foresee by Faith this Jesus Christ who was
to Redeem them from the wrath to come.

The word, Redemption, is a relative term, and does presuppose captivity,
thraldom, or the being sold; from all which Redemption does lose and set free
again. And so this Jesus Christ, traveled in the greatness of his strength and
was mighty to save, he led Captivity Captive, that is, he led even Sin and the
Devil Captive, which before did lead and hold People in captivity, who from
their inslaving Nature are here expressed not to be only Captivating Men, but
they are Captivity it self in the Abstract: Intimating thereby, that these who
are under the power of Satan, (For so the Scripture expresses it, to turn from
Darkness unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God) they are in the
utmost Captivity, yea worse than that is of those that are bound with Chains
and Fetters, although these are seen but the others are to be understood and
felt by such who are in the Bond of Iniquity. Acts 9. 23. For Sin, iniquity and
lust are as a Chain or Bond, which does hold and hamper People therein, that
they know not yea, they cannot without Christ that strengthens them, get out
and extricate themselves from it. Now as Jesus does save his People from their
sins, he does in this sense Preach deliverance to the Captives, and set at
liberty them that are bound, and Redeem them who for their Iniquities had sold
themselves, Isa. 50. 1. Even unto the Devil and Hell, the place of Damnation
and eternal Punishment. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a
show of them openly, triumphing over them. The Principalities and Powers here
meant are the Principalities of the other World, the Powers of Darkness and the
Devil who is the Prince of the Power of the Air; Here Jesus Christ is said to
have spoiled the Principality and Power of the Devil, which he has done to
such as are Christ's, for over such the Devil has no Principality or Power, and
triumphed over them in himself, so that since he has Redeemed ransomed and
preserved us from all the evil and terrible things of the future and invisible
world which we immediately enter into by Death; And then we may be willing
contended and desirous to dye, when we are assured before hand that God has by
his Son Jesus Christ Redeemed us from all the Power of the Enemy and from all
the evil things of the other World; So that nothing there shall in the least
hurt us, much less torment and make us miserable.

And thus these two Expressions, Lord let thou thy Servant depart in peace,
according to thy word, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation; Into thine hand I
commit my Spirit, thou have Redeemed me O Lord God of truth, do fall in and
meet together near to same sense and meaning even according to the requiring
and earnest desire of the reasonable Creature, who would fain not be miserable
hereafter. The one signifies to be saved and the other to be Redeemed from the
wrath to come, which are one and the same thing. The consequence again is
certain, if we are saved from the wrath to come, then we shall enjoy the
Blessedness (come ye Blessed of my Father) to come as the Scripture says,
Whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of
fire: So it may be reasoned on the other side, whosoever shall not be cast into
the Lake of fire shall enter into Life, so that if we are saved and Redeemed
from the Lake of fire, we shall enter into life and everlasting happiness. Now
seeing that the decree of God stands on this wise, we may upon very good
reasons not only say so contentedly, but also really assent unto the same in
our minds, being contented willing and desirous from the ground of our heart
that it should be so, Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, for
mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, into thine hand I ^ommit my Spirit, thou
have Redeemed me O Lord God of truth.

The third true and assured ground of a contentment, willingness and desire to
dye, is when we have glorified God on the Earth and finished the work which he
gave us (...) do. Even every one that is called by my name; For I have created
him for my Glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him, this People have I
formed for my self, they shall show forth my praise Isa. 43. 7, 21. Thou art
worthy O Lord to receive Glory and Honor and Power, for thou have Created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created, Rev. 4. 11. Herein is
my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, John 15. 8. From all these
Scriptures considered together it appears that the end and intent of God's
creating People is for his own Glory and Praise, and that he might have fruit
from them, or that they should bring forth fruit unto God. For the Son of Man
is as a Man ^aking a far journey who left his House and gave Authori^ to his
Servants and to every Man his Work, and commanded the Porter to watch, Mark 13.
34. And so it may be conceived after the same similitude of things, that
Almighty God the great Creator, who is now in Heaven the habitation of his
Holiness, which is afar off and many Millions of miles distance; But the Earth
his house or one ^art of the House of his Creation, He has left and ^ave to
the Children of Men, and gave Authority to his ^ervants, as Rulers and
Ministers have; For none are so (...) to have Authority as those who are indeed
the Ser^nts of God; And to every Man his work, and commanded the Porter to
watch, so that every Man has received his work from God for him to do and
finish on this Earth; And accordingly as he does and finisheth this work here
on Earth, he can both surrender back his spirit and also give up his account
with joy and not with grief, which would be unprofitable for him.

Now what is it to glorify God here on Earth? I an^wer in General, It is to
observe to do the statutes and ^udgements of the Lord God of our Fathers in the
Land which he gives us to possess it, all the days we live upon Earth, Deuteronomy.
12. 1. To fear God and keep his Commandments is to be our constant business and
work all our life long, but there being div^rsuies of gifts, but the same
Spirit, and there are differences of Administrations; but it is the same God
that works all in all; But the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
Man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6, 7, This spoke he signifying by what
Death he should Glorify God, John 21. 19. And so according as there are
diversities of gifts and differences of operations in People, and as one
glorifies God by his Death one way and another, another: So there are diverse
ways and different manners of Glorifying God according to the several cases,
circumstances, conditions, or rather according to the several gifts and
endowments in People.

By what Death he should Glorify God. Now in Death there is bitterness and
hardship (it being the hardest and most terrible thing in the world to dye)
from hence we gather that when we poor Creatures submit or subject our selves
to hardship or difficulty either in obedience to the Commandments of God, or
according to the decree and appointment of God, this is a glorifying God, and
God is Glorified thereby: When Christ his only begotten Son came to taste of
that bitter Cup, he says, Now is my Father glorified, but for this hour came I
into the World. In the diverse kinds of Death some are more shameful and painful
then others, as to be hanged on a Gallows or Gibbet, or to be nailed on the
Cross is more shameful and painful, than to dye of a common Disease in our Bed;
yet from hence it follows that as Jesus Christ our Lord and forerunner was made
a curse of God for us, as cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree; And as
himself, who suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow his
steps, did herein undergo both the pain and the shame, therefore the more
painful and shameful the Death is (provided always that it be in a way of duty,
and in obedience unto or keeping the Commandments of God) So much the more God
is glorified thereby. Which consideration if it be thoroughly weighed in our
minds, should make us earnestly desire Martyrdom and not to be afraid of or
decline from it. Hence it follows that to take up the Cross, yea to take up the
Cross dai^y (says Christ, He that takes not up the Cross daily, cannot be my
Disciple) Which is to cross and do contrary to our Natural Inclinations, this
also is a glori^ying God, and God is so much the more glorified; According as
so much the more the Cross is taken up

From hence again it follows on the contrary, that where a thing is easy and
customary, God is not al^ogether so much glorified thereby. To go on in a
course of outward and perfunctory Worship, when the Worshippers at the same
time commit Sin, Iniquity, Trans^ression, and Hypocrisy, God is not at all
glorified ^hereby; yea, he is rather dishonored according to that is written,
Thou that make thy boast of the law, through breaking of the law dishonourest
thou God? For the ^ame of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you, ^s
it is written. Romans 2 23. 24, And when they entered unto the heathen whither
they went, they profaned my holy ^ame, when they said to them, these are the
people of the lord and are gone forth out of his land. Ezekiel. 36. 20. And so
Hypocritical Worshippers give great occasion, (as Nathan told David, he did by
his Sins of Adultery and ^urther) to the Enemies of the Lord to Blaspheme, By
givi^g occasion to the lewd and profane sort, or to the people of the World,
to cry out and say, these be your ^eligions who do such abominable and evil
things; and it gives occasion to think as if the God, whom ^hey pretend and
outwardly seem to Worship and serve, ^ere altogether such as themselves. Psalm.
50. 21. Or as (...) his Commandments (which are Holy just and good) and
Religion did teach and allow them to do such evil and shameful things, And many
shall follow their perni^ous ways, by Reason of whom the way of truth shall be
Evil ^oken of. 2 Pet. 2. 2. In verse. 14. They are called cur^d Children, as
indeed cursed are all they that err from ^is Commandments. Instead of bringing
glory unto God, ^s they would seem by their outward Worship, like ^em that
bended the knee and cried, hail Master, and yet crucified him, so do these
Crucify the Lord of Glo^ afresh and put him to an open shame. Of such it is
said, What judgment of a long tim^ lingreth not, and their damna^ on slumbreth
not. Hypocrites are ranked in their condemnation before unbelievers. Said Jesus
Christ who to be judge of all the Earth, and therefore knows ho^ it will go at
the last day; Give him his Portion with H^ pocrites and unbelievers.

Now an Hypocrite is one who outwardly Worshi^ God (whereby he seems to be
Religious) and yet at ^ same time lives in the continued breach of his Co^
mandments. Like as a stage Player acts the Person another, then really himself
is, Even so the Hypoc^ acts the Person of another, for he seems Religious his
constant outward Worship, and to be an obedi^ Servant of God, when in truth he
is neither. If Man among you seems to be Religious and bridleth his Tongue,
but deceives his own Heart (A true scription of an Hypocrite, for none
deceives his o^ Heart so much as he; For such take up the outw^ Profession out
of some hope to go to Heaven, when t^ will not, as well as to get credit and
Reputation amo^ Men) That Man's Religion is vain. James 1. 26, S^ may be applied
and reasoned, as to the neglect or ^ ure in any other duty, For all their
seeming to be ^ligious, this or that Man's Religion is vain. And for his seeming
to be an obedient Servant of the L^ God, when he despises his Word and
Commandm^ and when he does according to his own will and ^mour, any Law or
Ordinance of God to the cont^ notwithstanding; when he transgresses this or
that ^cept according as his pleasure or profit swayes and ^clines him. Even
knowing and understanding Men ^ plainly see and discern his Hypocrisy and
Dissimula^ herein, much more will the alwise God, who is a Go^ knowledge, and
by him actions are weighed, Who sear^ the Heart and tryes the Reins to render
unto every ^ according to his ways, and according to the fruit o^doings. Men
may, yea they do deceive their own s^ and others also; But they can never
deceive God. ^ ^o the alwise God will never be imposed upon, as if ^ch did
serve and Honor him, (notwithstanding all ^eir outward Pretenses) who do in
truth dishonor him, and make his name polluted, and evil thought of and ^il
spoken of among the Heathen or ungodly sort of ^ankind.

I have heard it related concerning the Turks, that then they have promised a
thing, if they are asked to ^nfirm it further by writing, they will answer with
^dignation, Do ye think that I am a Christian to falsify ^ word, that I must be
forced to perform it by giving somewhat ^derhand. For they observe more truth
and just dealing between Man and Man when it is only by word of mouth ^en many
called Christians, but worse then heathen and ^fidels in practice, for many who
name the name of ^rist, will falsify their word and bond also when it ^ in
their power so to do. Which seems to be to the utter ^ame and reproach of
Christianity it self, but rather it is ^ the utter shame and reproach of such
false preten^ers to Christianity. Such who wrongfully take upon ^emselves the
name of Christians, do make the name ^ Christ, the Lord of Glory, evil spoken
of amongst (...)e Turks and unbelievers, and it carries a suspicion ^ if the
God and Christ (whom they seem outwardly ^ serve and worship) did teach and
allow them in ^ch falsehood and unjust dealing; which the soul of ^od hates and
his Commandments are express against ^.

Hear what the answer of God says to such, To what ^rpose is the multitude of
your sacrifices unto me, says the lord, I am full of the burnt offerings of
rams and the fat ^ fed beasts and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or ^
lambs, or of he goats, When ye come to appear before me ^ho has required this
at your hand to tread my courts; ^ing no more vain oblations, incense is an
abomination to me; ^e new moons and sabbaths and the calling of the assemblies
cannot away with: It is iniquity, even the solemn meeting ^d when ye spread
forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes ^om you, yea, when ye make many prayers
I will not hear, your hands are full of blood. Wash ye, make you clea^ put away
the evil of your doings from before mine eye^ cease to do evil, learn to do
well. Intimating hereby, the until people did actually put away the evil of
their doing and cease to do evil, all their acts of outward Worship all their
going to Church or Meeting on the Lor'ds da^ how constant soever they are
therein, all their man prayers offered up unto him every morning and eveni^ nay
if it be at noon each week day, are not pleas^ and acceptable in the sight of
the Lord; and consequent they do not at all glorify him thereby, for himself
he says that he will not receive them, that he does ^ require it at their
hands, who are sinners and works of iniquity to tread his courts, but this he
requires his saints and servants so to do; that he cannot aw^ with their
calling of the assemblies when such come i^ to the congregation, their
appointed times of Wor^ his soul hates, they are a trouble to me, I cannot be
them; all these sayings do import, they do not please G^ and conscequently they
do not glorify him.

By the way, there is no doctrine more necessary a^ useful to be continually
made known and preached the this, for it is the common and uniuersal deceit
which ^ people of this generation and Country, yea of all c(...) stendom go
upon: If they go constantly to Church Meeting upon the first day of the week,
and those the richer sort have Worship in their respective fami^ every morning
and evening, they think and say to t^ souls, all is well enough. As the fool
said in the gos^ Thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ea^,
drink and be merry, so these foolish and deceived pe^ who serve diverse lusts
and pleasures, do say to themse^ Soul, that course of Worship and Religion
aforeme^ oned will carry thee to Heaven; be quiet as to ^ further thoughts or
doubts concerning futurity, only sure to go on therein, eat, drink and be
merry; take, g^ and enjoy as much of the world and worldly comfort^ ever thou
can. But in the mean while and all along t^ not do ^rame their doings to turn
unto God. They do not fra^ or square all their doings according to the great
Rul^ ^ghteousness in Scripture. They do not put away the evil ^ their doings.
For many of their ways are contrary unto ^ different from the Word and Law of
God. Until peo^e do actually put away the evil of their doings, ^d does not
accept of their several acts of Worship. ^ We are of them that believe to the
saving of the soul, Heb. ^. 39. And so there is a sort of People who Serve and
^orship God to the saving of their Souls; that is, such ^o do it inwardly, and
who obey constantly from the ^art all the Words of God's Law and Gospel' Again,
^ere is another sort, whereof are the greater number (Broad ^he way and wide is
the gate which leads to destruction, ^d many there be who go in thereat) who
do not serve and ^orship God to the saving of their Souls; for these wor^ip him
outwardly, and they do not confirm all the ^ords of God's Gospel to do them,
and so now they are ^ble unto and will at length fall under that everla^ng
destruction which will be unto them that obey not ^e Gospel. For he is not a
Jew which is one outwardly (and it may be truly Reasoned, He is not a Christian
or ^vant of God who is one outwardly) neither is that Cir^mcision which is
outward in the flesh, but he is a Jew who one inwardly (and so he is a
Christian who is one in^ardly) and Circumcision is that of the heart in the
Spirit and ^ in the Letter; whose praise is not of Men but of God, Romans ^ 28,
29. For I say unto you, that except your Righteousness ^all exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall ^ no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5 20. And ^ it may be truly Reasoned and Applied to the
Peo^e of this Generation, Except your Religion shall exceed ^e Religion which
is according to the Standard and ^urse of this World, it will be in no wise a
Religion ^ the saving of your Souls.

Let that kind of outward Worshippers aforementioned ^editate thoroughly upon
the significancy of these follow^g Scriptures, But unto the Wicked (God says)
What have ^ou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
^venant into thy Mouth? Seeing thou hate Instruction and ^stest my Words
behind thee, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. And so this and of outward worshippers do hate
him that Rebukes in the Gate, they abhor him that speaks uprightly. Says t^
Apostle, The time will come (but I who live nearer un^ the ends of the World do
Testify, that what he the^ foretold of, is now fulfilled; for at this day the
time (...) come) that they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after the^ own
lusts shall they heap to themselves Teachers, having Itchi^ Ears, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
Which say to the Seers, see not, and to (...) Prophets, Prophecy not unto us
right things, speak unto (...) smooth things, Prophecy Deceits, Isa. 30. 10.
This day (...) this Scripture fulfilled in our Ears; for they go constan^ly to
them who speak smooth things, and Preach Deceit^ And they will not come to hear
him that Preaches rig^ things, which is verified as to the People of this
Genera^on and Country, And as to him who Writes these things for they do not
receive his Testimony, John 3. 32. But ^ject his Words, John 12. 48. Because he
speaks and pu^lisheth unto them right things. Nevertheless such wor^ as I
have truly alleged from the Scriptures, will jud^ them at the last day.

But whether they will hear or forbear, whether they w^ Read or not, these
Scriptures of Truth are again laid before them, Now we know that God hears
not sinners; but any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him (...)
hears, John 9. 31. Notwithstanding this is writt^ so plainly that every
capacity may understand it, y^ nevertheless many Men and Women (Satan acting
wi^ all deceivableness in them that perish) go on blindly a^ ignorantly for
twenty, forty or sixty years, yea throug^out all their life long in this
deceit, of being Worshi^pers of God and yet not doing his will, of hearing
(...) word and not obeying it, nor yet doing thereafter; when as the
Blessedness is to them that hear the word of God a^ keep it. Says David by the
Spirit, if I regard iniqui^ in my heart the Lord will not hear me. Now iniqui^
signifies the thing that is not equal. But too many outwa^ Worshippers do not
only regard iniquity in their hea^ but also practice it with their hand.
Nevertheless li^ the Adulterous Woman, Who eats and wipeth her mou^ and
says, I have done no wickedness, they will not cea^nor desist to offer up
their many and customary Pray^s unto God, as aforetime, and as if they had
never ^one any such thing. Such may be found amongst the ^umber of those of
whom it is written, Not every one ^at says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the king^m of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which (...)
in Heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, ^ave we not prophesied
in thy name, and in thy name cast out ^evils: And then will I profess unto
them, I never knew (...), depart from me ye that work iniquity. All will not be
^ved that go to Church or Meetings (and then where shall ^e ungodly and sinner
appear?) for of four sorts of hearers (...) the word, there is but one that
brings forth fruit ^to everlasting life. Herein also God is glorified when
^ey bring forth fruit, but he is not glorified when they (...) not bring forth
fruit, or when instead of Bringing ^rth grapes, they bring forth wild grapes.

^o ye think that the Papists do glorify God by their Mass (...) Idolatrous
Worship, or by their ignorant mumbling ^er their Beads when it is the revealed
will of God that people should pray with the Spirit and with the under^nding
also, 1 Cor 14. 15. That whole Chapter is a^inst praying in an unknown Tongue.
God is a ^irit and they that worship him, must worship him in Spi^t and in
truth: This is opposite unto and shuts out all ^eir pompous outside Worship and
carnal ordinances ^ter the institutions and Commandments of Men. For ^eir
Worship stands in diverse Washings and Bowings ^d carnal ordinances imposed on
them, who would wil^gly. always remain in their corruption and error, ^d never
let Reformation come among them; although ^ Blessed be God) many have reformed
from their ^ays.

Again, May it be thought that the Mahometans by going ^nstantly to their
mosque, and by their making a great ^y and howling in their Prayers unto the
God of Hea^n, although they are never so earnest in Prayer as they ^em to be in
tone and voice, and also by their Wa^ings before Prayer as the manner of them
is: where^ common reason would show them, that the inward ^urifying and
cleansing of the heart of the Worshippers is more required by God and more
pleasing and acceptable in his sight, then the outward washing of the^ Bodies
with water. And so with all their other rites an^ ceremonies, customs and
manners, do they glorify God ^ when all the mean while they know not nor
believ^ on Jesus Christ, by whom there is access unto the Father he being the
alone mediator between God and Man.

And so we may run over and conceive in our min^ as to all the Religions,
Superstitions and ways of Wo^ship used in the World, together with that manifo^
Error and Absurdity that is joined therewith. Do tho^ Worshippers glorify
God? It would be hard to say so^ For the Father seeks such to worship him as
worship him (...) Spirit and in Truth. And seeing that so much Error a^ Folly,
Ignorance and Vanity is crept in and intermin^led with the several Worships of
the World, especial^ among those of the Roman-Church, and that vast mult^tude
of others who do not at all name the name of Chr^ it may be thought as to them,
that in God's Sight and (...) to his Acceptance, He that Sacrifices a Lamb,
is as if ^ ^ut off a Dogs neck. He that offers an Oblation as if he ^fer'd
Swines blood. He that burns Incense, as if he bless^ an Idol. Which last is
the highest degree of provoki^ God that can be. So that such Worshippers do
rath^ displease than please God, they do rather dishonor the glorify him;
They make God more angry and furth^ off then bring him near, or reconcile him
unto the W^shippers.

But to come home and nearer to our selves, even (...) us who are called
Protestants of the pure Reformed Chur^ who come yet nearer to the Pattern
showed to us in (...) Gospel than they aforementioned. Although our Worship (...)
in some measure Spiritual and True: Yet here again a right Faith and a wrong
Conversation, a good Na^ but evil Doings will not save any of us* Nor yet is G^
glorified by the work done, or only in the outward co^ing to the Places of
Worship, for if People do therein dr^near to God with their Lips but their
Hearts are far fr^ him, if they bring only their Bodies to the place but the^
in their Souls do mind other Objects besides the Invisib^ ^od then as the Body
without the Spirit is dead, so such may be ^ore truly called carca^e Worship
than Spiritual Wor^ip; for it is the Worship of a dead Body only, or of a
^arcase without the Spirit Acting or being concerned there^. Says God, Now let
them put away their Whoredom, and the Carcases of their Kings from me, and I
will dwell in ^he midst of them for ever, Ezekiel. 43. 9, Lip labor in Pray^r or
Worship is properly Whordom, for it takes away ^he heart from God the right
beloved, and places it ^n another wrong beloved, and so it is a carkase of
Wor^hip for the reason aforeassigned: Both which God requires ^o be put away
before he will dwell in the midst of us.

Having abundantly and at large discoursed, by what kind of Worship God is not
glorified, it will easily ^ppear by what Worship he is indeed glorified. For if
^e is not glorified by mere outside Worship, as indeed he ^s not, it follows
that he is glorified by such Worship as is spiritual (which denotes inward
Worship, for if it is performed by the Spirit it must be inward, because the
Spirit is within) and true. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must
worship him in Spirit and in truth: For the Father seeks such to worship him,
and consequently he is glorified thereby, so that, to Worship God in Spirit and
in truth, is a part of our glorifying God here on Earth.

Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the Salvation of God, Pal, 50. 23. Seeing that
they who order their conversation aright, will have the Salvation of God shown
unto them it follows hence also, that they who order their conversation aright,
do glorify God, for it is only those who glorify God here on Earth, who can
come unto him with comsortable expectation and assurance of seeing, yea of
partaking his Salvation also. The words may be truly Read thus, whosoever orders
his conversation aright glorifieth me, as well as, whosoever offers praise,
glorifieth me; for none in truth can offer up praise such as acceptable with
God but he that orders his conversation aright; for praise is not seemly in
the mouth of a Sinner, neither is God pleased with the sacrifice of foots. But
they that order their conversation aright, do bri^ praise and glory unto God,
and therefore it is sutab^ for such only who have clean lips and obedient
hearts (...) offer it up, according to what is written, Take with yo^ words and
turn to the Lord, and say unto him, Take aw^ all iniquity and receive us
graciously: So will we render t^ calves of our lips; which plainly shows forth
that when people are turned to the Lord and he takes away all iniqui^ then only
they are meet and fit to offer up Prayer an^ Praises unto the most high God;
and until that be done he will not receive them graciously. Now they orde^
their conversation aright, whose Conversation is as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, or whose conversation is ordered according to the whole written word of
God, from which we are not to add nor diminish. In a word, they that fea^ God
and keep his Commandments, these do glorifi^ him.

In that day shall there be upon the bells of the Horses, Holiness unto the
Lord. So it should be written on the fore head of each of us, and it should be
ingraved in the Table of our Hearts that it may be continually in our mind and
remembrance, O Man or Woman, calling them by their several and respective
names, thou art m^ Servant, in whom I the invisible God will be glorified (...)
which should indeed engage us so to walk circumspectly and order our
conversation aright so as in truth to glorify God.

From the things that have been spoken, now let the question be asked and put
severally to the People o^ this generation, taking them one by one, How has
God been glorified in any of us throughout all the foregoing part of our Life?
I am afraid that here we should be at a stand, and we could give but a poor and
indifferent account as to that. Many people will not be able to make so good an
answer as that of the unprofitable servant (who yet for all that was doomed to
be cast into utter darkness) Lord, Thou have thine own again. For they have not
been only idle in the management thereof, but they have also wasted and
consumed the Talent that was committed unto them. Yea, those who have ^ade an
addition and improvement thereon so as to have ^ined more Talents; yet still
they have fallen short of that was the expectation of God and themselves yet
^ight have done more. For all (even they that believe ^entioned in the
foregoing verse, yea the very best Ser^ants of God in the several Generations
and Countries ^s only Son Jesus Christ the Righteous excepted) Have ^ned and
come short of the glory of God, Romans 3. 23. ^ut however let the question be
thoroughly put to our ^ouls, What fruit have we severally brought forth unto
God? Bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and so the Apostle writes to the
Colossians, The Gospel came unto ^u as it is in all the world, and brings
forth fruit as so it does in you. That is, it did make a sensible alter^tion in
their lives and manners, and it had an oper^tion and working upon them; yea
farther there was (...) visible appearance of it, for fruit is to be seen. Here
again it must be acknowledged, that even the very best ^rimitive Christians,
although they did bring forth ^me fruit, yet they did not bring forth so much
and so ^ood fruits as the Gospel would have enabled them to ^ring forth, and
themselves might have done. The fruits ^ere not answerable and equal unto what
God might and did look for and expect; which should teach and instruct us to be
upon the bringing forth fruit and good works as much as ever we can. Herein is
my Father ^orified that ye bear much fruit. (It is not said, fruit
in^efinitely, or only some fruit, but much fruit) So shall (...) be my
Disciples. So that to bring forth fruits meet for ^epentance, or to bring forth
fruits unto God by our Gospel conversation, is another part of our glorifying
God here on Earth.

It is what God looks for, Isa. 5. 4. and expects from ^s. For the Earth that
drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for
them by whom (...) is dressed receives Blessing from God, but that which
bears thorns and Briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is
to be burned. The good Trees are known from the barren by the fruit which the
one brings forth, and the other does not. In like manner the true Servants of
God may be distinguished from the barren professors of the Gospel, for as these
may be likened to such Trees only that have leaves on them, but as for the
former sort By their fruits you shall know them. The first sort do show out of
a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom; and the Gospel in them
brings forth fruit, and brings forth herbs meet for whom it is dressed; so
they bring forth fruits meet for him by whom they are dressed, and that is God;
for by his Word and Spirit they are dressed. The word and spirit is like
putting dung unto soil, so these do prune, dress and manure the hearts of
people, and gather out the stones thereof, Isa. 5. 2. A stony heart will he
take away and give them an heart of flesh, and all this is to bring forth
fruits unto God, And as is aforesaid that Hypocritical outward Worshippers do
rather dishonor than glorify God: so do those professors who bring forth wild
Grapes instead of Grapes; or who instead of being a Nobel vine and wholly a
right seed, are of a sudden turned into a degenerate plant of a strange vine.
So contrariwise when those who are indeed the Servants of the most high God, do
indeed bring forth good grapes, and good fruits, such as in truth are becoming
the Gospel of Christ, these again do as much glorify God as the other sort do
dishonor him. This appears from that aforecited Scripture, Herein is my Father
glorified that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. Intimating
there by that people may have the name of Christ's Disciples, but they are not
so indeed unless they bear much fruit. But this is yet more evident from the
following Scripture, Let your light so shine before men that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. For the good works or
good fruits of his Servants do occasion God to be glorified, that is to be well
thought off, and well spoken off, and for praise and honor to be ascribed unto
him. To pursue here the like reasoning which Moses does in Deuteronomy. 4. 6. 7, 8. So
in this case strangers and those people who as yet know not God, will be apt to
think, and say, that God himself must be a very Good and Wise and Holy and
Beneficial a being, inasmuch as they see evidently with their eyes that such
and such people who serve and ^mitate him are very Good and Wise and Holy, and
^nblameable in their conversation, and they do whatever good they can unto
others. Said one of the Ancients, This is true Religion to imitate him whom
thou Worshippest.

For to be Godly is to be like unto God, and to be like unto God is to be
Godly. And so to do good is a true resemblance and likeness unto the Godhead
in that He did good, giving us Rain from Heaven, and it is (...) likeness unto
Christ also, who went about doing good. This doing good is a bearing fruit, and
a bringing forth herbs meet for whom it is dressed. For the fruits of the Earth
and Tree do nourish and delight us, the Corn feeds us, the Barley is made
serviceable to quench our ^hirst and gratify the appetite, Wine makes glad the
heart of Man, and oil a cheerful countenance, all which are good unto the Body,
and the instance of God's doing good in Acts 14. 17. Is there assigned in
Giving us Rain from Heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food
and gladness. So that the more good any Man or Woman does, the more he or she
is like unto God and Christ. When thou see and observest any one to do good
more than ordinary and that same person seems to serve God very much this is an
evidence that he does it in sincerity and reality, and that God does indeed
command and require him so to do, and also it is an endeavor after his
likeness. The good works and good fruits which appear forth through any Man or
Woman are the actings of God through his Creatures: For it is not so much they
but Christ who dwells in them that does this or that good thing; and
therefore it is meet and right that God should have the Glory and Honor of it,
Which causes through us thanksgiving unto God, for the administration of this
service, not only supplieth the want of the Saints but is abundant also by many
thanksgivings unto God, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, As indeed such people who are
Spiritually knowing, when they see any good works, they do thereupon glorify
our father which is in Heaven; for he is indeed the author and original of
them, and thus it comes to pass that through the instrument who visible, the
invisible God is glorified thereby.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmam^ she his handy work. Even
those Creatures which ha^ no Life nor Speech nor Language, yet by their having
ha^ a Being from him, and Greatness or Beauty, they are stan^ing Monuments of
his Praise. Like as a Curious an^ well drawn Picture does always show forth the
skill (...) the Painter, although it has no Mouth to utter it fort^ Even so
those great and wonderful Works of the Crea^ on of God do declare and show
forth the Glory, H^nour and Power of God; and their Voice, though it is ^lent and
inward, is heard or rather understood wherev^ those wonderful Works of the
Creation are seen. In the sense The Sun and Moon and Stars of Light and the
H^vens of Heavens do all praise God, as in Psalm. 148. The are called upon so to
do, and they do it according^ In Ver. 5. the Reason is observable why they
should (...) it, Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he command^ and they
were Created. And so to come down to the lo^er parts of the Creation, Praise
the Lord from the Ea^ye Dragons and all Deeps; Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapo^
Stormy wind fulfilling his Word, Mountains and (...) Hills, Fruitful Trees and
all Cedars, Beasts and all C^tel, creeping things and flying Fowl. Ver. 8, 9,
10. Whi^ is the living Creation. And in the next Verse he com^ to the
reasonable understanding Creation, Kings of (...) Earth and all People, Princes
and all Judges of the Ear^ both young Men and Maidens, Old Men and Children let
them praise the Name of the Lord; for his Name alo^ is excellent, his Glory is
above the Earth and Heaven. He^ some are sullen and unthankful, and do it no
more tha^ according to outward Form; but they do it not in the common
Discourse. As to this matter the Holy Gho^ Exhorts on this wise. By him
therefore let us offer the S^crifice of Praise to God continually; that is, the
fruit of (...) lips, giving thanks to his Name. Observe that Adver^
Continually; for it is not said, only in the Congregation, or at no time but
when we are saying our Prayer^ but continually, which extends to our common
talk an^ ^scourse. Observe here again, how it is called the fruit (...) our
Lips. Intimating hereby, that offering up of Praise ^d giving thanks unto God
is the proper fruit of our Lips. (...) that if our Lips do not yield and bring
forth this ^uit, they are as barren Trees fit for the fire, and not ^r our
Master's use.

We have very often in Scriptures, which make known ^e mind of the Lord, Glory
and Honor and Praise As^ibed unto him. Now indeed God does not at all want
^lory, no more than the Sun does want Light, for with ^ee is the fountain of
Life: so with him is the fountain (...) all Glory and Excellency, and from him
is derived ^wn whatever Glory and Excellency is in any of the ^reatures. He is
infinitely happy and allsufficient in himself, he does not want the services of
Angels, much ^ss of sinful Men. If thou be Righteous what give thou him?
(...) what receives he of thine hand? or is it gain that thou ^akest thy way
perfect? all which imply a strong Negative that it is not so. But yet if God
had never Created a^y thing, there would not have been any thing to have ^iven
up and ascribe Glory unto him, nor yet to Cele^rate his Name (For the Grave
cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee, and so a state of Annihilation
cannot do it) But now since he has created all things for ^is Pleasure, and to
receive Glory from them, this thing ^of Glory is the best and most proper thing
which the Rea^onable Inhabitants of the Earth can conceive of to as^ribe up
unto God. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto ^is Name, Psalm. 29. 2. So that
it is a just debt. It is therefore accordingly given and rendered up unto him by
^ll his Saints and Servants throughout the Earth, Give ^hanks unto the Lord,
call upon his name, Make known his ^eeds among the people, sing unto him, sing
Psalms unto him ^alk you of all his wondrous works, glory ye in his holy name,
^e ye mindful always of his covenant, show forth from day to day his Salvation,
declare his glory among the Heathen, ^is mavelous works among all Nations;
for great is the Lord and greatly to be p^aised, he also is to be feared above
all Gods, glory and honor are in his presence, strength and gladness are in
his place, give unto the Lord ye kindreds of the people glory and strength.
(Now there is no giving of streng^ to him that is Almighty already, but it is
only (...) speak out that he is so) Give unto the Lord the glory d^ unto his
name, 1 Chronicles. 16. In short it is to acknowled^ and speak out of the glory of
God, and to give than^ and praise to his Holy Name. Provided always the this be
done by those who have their conversation ord^ed aright, who are of clean lips
and obedient heart for therefore it is that those cautionary expressions are
he^ necessarily intermingled and incerted in this song of prai^ Be ye mindful
always of his Covenant, he is also to be fear^ above all Gods; intimating
thereby, that unless people a^ also mindful of his Covenant and fear God above
a^ other things, they cannot then give thanks unto t^ Lord, nor yet sing Psalms
unto him, nor declare (...) glory, nor yet praise him, so as for God to be
please therewith and accept thereof. If we fear any thing ^bove God, that is
our God also, O Lord our God, oth^ Lords besides thee have had dominion over
us; but by the only will we make mention of thy name.

It is written of Abraham, Who against hope believed (...) hope, that he might
become the father of many nations, ^cording to that which was spoken, so shall
thy seed be. A^ being not weak in faith he considered not his own body no^ dead
when he was about an hundred years old, neither y^ the deadness of Sarah's
womb, he staggered not at the prom^ of God through unbelief, but was strong in
faith giving glo^ unto God, and being fully persuaded that what he had prom^sed
he was able also to perform. From all which man be gathered, that to firmly
believe and be fully pe^swaded, that such a thing shall come to pass, althoug^
according to humane reason it is unlikely to come (...) pass, provided always
that we have the word and promise of God for it, as here Abraham had; this also
(...) a giving glory unto God, when the thing seems impossible according to the
course of Nature (as it was in the instance here given) Yet here to believe
that God both ca^ and also will perform the same, this is a Giving glory unto
God; for it gives God the glory of his truth and the glory of his Almighty
power.

This thing if it be rightly and thoroughly understood, (...) Mystery both to
the people of the World, and also (...) the outward Worshippers; for as to them
at this day ^en Moses is read, and so it is when the Gospel of Christ ^ead, The
vail is upon their Hearts. The written word (...) God and the manner of the
Dispensation of his ^gdom toward us, is a Mystery. It is given unto (...)
(those of the Discipleship) to know the mysteries of the ^ngdom of Heaven, Mat.
13. 11. The mystery of God should ^nished as he has declared to his servants
the prophets (...). 10. 7. But that part of this mystery which I would (...)
just mention is, that although all Scripture was given ^nspiration of God and
is true and will be fulfilled to ^ry tittle thereof, yea the Truth and Power
and Hono^ of God do all stand engaged to fulfill all and every ^t of this same
word; and God himself has born ^ness to it both with signs and wonders and
with diverse ^acles and gifts of the Holy Ghost according to his own (...). So
that we ought to believe it all to be true, and ^t it shall all be fulfilled or
we make God a liar: if (...) believe not the Record which God gave of his Son,
^o says Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my ^ds shall not pass away. Yet
still God being willing to ^ve and exercise the faith of his Servants, and also
the mixed multitude of people concerning it, has so ^ered and suffered it to
come to pass (Behold herein (...) Wisdom and Mystery of God) that some things
^ich this his word of truth speaks of, should seem ^e falsified. They are not
falsified indeed, but only ^y seem to be so on set purpose to prove to the
ut^st degree the faith of people herein. If they do re^ their faith therein
nevertheless, then it is a giving ^ry unto God. But if an evil heart of
unbelief is in ^m, like Cleopas and those with him, who said, we ^sted it had
been he which should have Redeemed Israel, (...) seeing and hearing of his
miracles in his life time. (...) when he was put to death like a malefactor,
than (...) their hopes were blasted, their faith withered, and any might
probably say, it is all come to nothing: ^is and the like is not a giving glory
unto God. And so a root of unbelief springs up in the hea^ many, whereby they
are defiled. For there are in ^ last days many infidels in heart who say, Where
i^ promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fell asl^ things continue as
they were since the beginning of the ^tion. And so there are many, who although
they profess Christianity, partly to conform to the fa^ and custom of the
Country they live in, or for se^ ends, or to provide for and against the
doubtful uncert^ if they be of the more considering sort; yet they d^ the main
disbeleive the truth of Revealed Religion But all these do err, not knowing the
Scripture; and p^ of God, nor yet the way and manner of the dispen^ on of his
Kingdom toward us Men, for they do know thoroughly how that God does prove the
fai^ Mankind, all one as the manners of Mankind. As he prove them to know what
is in their heart, whether they keep his Commandments or no, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. So he
^ Hide his face from them to see what their end shall be they are a very
froward generation, Children in whom ^ faith, Deuteronomy. 32. 20. So he does prove
them likewise, whi^ they will give any credence to his word which says shall
be so; but in the mean while God orders and fers it to be so on set purpose,
that seemingly con^ and unexpected events happen and fall out: So the mere
natural Man would be apt to think and say, it never be so as the word and
promise of God sai^ shall be.

Examples hereof are common in Scripture. So it in the case of Abraham to whom
Jsaac was prom^ in his old Age, that Sarah his Wife laughed at the likelihood
thereof, for which she received a check reproof from the Angel who brought the
messag^ any thing too hard for the Lord? And so it wa^ to the promise of God
increasing his seed, and b^ ing them into the Land of Canaan, when they we^
danger to be murdere and destroyed in their birth in (...)pt, and afterward
when they were pursued by Ph^ and his Host, and were in peril to be all drowne^
the Red Sea, and then many of their carkases fell in ^ ^ilderness. Yet for all
these seemingly contrary events ^od did at length perform and fulfill all his
words which he had spoken unto Abraham. Throughout the ^hty ninth Psalm, are
recited up many particular cove^nts and promises which God made to David and
his ^ed. And therein also is summed up a seeming breach ^d failure of all those
several Covenants and Promises, that one might be tempted to think, how could
^vid believe God for all these? For even himself did ^ out, Lord, where are thy
former loving kindnesses ^ch thou swarest unto David in thy truth? Remember,
^d, the reproach of thy Servants, and how I do bear in ^ bosom the reproach of
all the mighty people, wherewith thine ^mies have reproached, O Lord, wherewith
they have slander(...) the footsteps of thine anointed. Intimating thereby,
that ^ enemies of the Lord were apt to reproach and ob^ unto his Servants, How
was he a God of truth ^he did fail so in his promises which he had sworn to
David in his truth? And how was he a good God ^e did not continue all his
former loving kindnesses? ^twithstanding this reproach of his enemies, Yet
David ^ all this was satisfied in his heart; yea and he did be^e that God would
perform all his Covenant which ^ has done since, he is now a doing, and will
form unto his seed for evermore. Thus much may be ^hered from that form of
praise wherewith that whole ^m is concluded, Blessed be the Lord for evermore,
A^ and Amen. A double Ratification thereof, and ^ch is as much as if David was
resolved to bless God ^, let his enemies reproach and say what they would.
another Instance hereof we have in the same David, ^ when it was told unto him
by Samuel, How that ^ day he should be King over all Israel, he did after^ds so
distrust and dis-believe it, because of the then ^kelihood thereof, as to say
in his haste all men are Liars; ^ch must extend also even to Samuel the Prophet
of the ^d. Again, when he says, My soul faints for thy Sal^on, but I hope in
thy word. Mine eyes fail for thy Salvation ^ for the word of thy Righteousness,
Psalm. 119. 81. ^. By Phrasing it on this wise it seems as if God did ^ay or
neglect to perform his Word, and bring about his Salvation; and yet for all
this the Man after Go^ own Heart did hope in his Word. Again the Prop^ Jeremiah
says boldly unto God, Will thou altogether m^ me a liar unto this People, and
as Waters that fail? (...) had sent him to foretell the Jews capitivity, but a^
he had made known this his message, the people ^ not give so much heed and
belief to it as they shou^ and partly through the delay of time between, ^ also
the prophet himself saw no great outward like li(...) thereof, that he cried
out on this wise. But at le^ The Lord has done that which he had devised, he
has full(...) his word that he had commanded in the days of old, (...) 2. 17.

Not to multiply many more instances of this k^ after that Christ had foretold,
When ye shall see Je^ lem compassed with armies, then know that the deso(...)
thereof draws nigh, Luke 21. 20. It was so long ^fore that was thoroughly
fulfilled, even forty years ^ Christ's death, that many were apt to say in
their h^ in the mean while, Where is the promise of his co^ yea when Titus
Vespatian first invested Jerusalem wit^ Armies, he went off again: So that this
word seem to be falsified, but it was not falsified, ^ came on a second time,
and than was accomp^ the total and entire desolation thereof.

We ought as firmly to believe that all Scriptu^ true as that there is a God,
or that Jesus Christ ^ Savior of Mankind; for if we believe that God ^ his
visible works of Creation do declare, then w^ to believe also that this God is
true, and than o^ quently that all Scripture is true, seeing that all(...)
pture is given by inspiration of God. And al(...) perhaps at first we may not
know how to reconci^ truth of several parts and places of Scripture with common
and daily events of the world, or wit^ lives and manners of the people, yet
this is our ^ ance and infirmity; for if we did seek out of the B^ the Lord and
read, and if we did understand throu^ we should find and perceive that
whatsoever is ^ done on the Earth by all and the several Inhab^ ^eof, It is all
but a fulfilling of the ^ame word, and ^gs do so and so come to pass that the
Scriptures ^t be fulfilled, Acts 3, 18. And those things that God ^ aforeshewed
by the mouth of all his Prophets, by ^st and his Apostles, He has so
fulfilled, is at this day ^ulfilling, and he will fulfill to the end of time,
as ^ greater things are yet to come, and as yet to be ful^d. And whereas it is
so ordered of set purpose by alwise God, that several things happen out ^ch
seem perplex and hard to be understood, this is to ^e our faith therein; and if
we hold out and retain ^ faith nevertheless, then it is a giving glory unto
God. ^e have his word and promise for it, then the more ^ believe in hope
against hope, it is yet the more giving ^ unto God. For if in things to be
believed, there was ^ manner of doubt or unlikelihood, what reward has To be
strong in faith does glorify God. So on the contrary ^elief does dishonor
him; wherefore take heed of un^ef; which notwithstanding the outward profession
^he Gospel is very common amongst Men. There is ^ot of unbelief growing in the
hearts of unregene^ people; and there is also a mixture, or rather a tin^e
thereof in the hearts of the Regenerate. Sometimes ^ in them are little
questionings within themselves ^ther these things are so, and sometimes little
^bts that they are not; which comes to pass, because the little likelihood
that sometimes appears in the ^n while, that they ever will be so, which is to
prove ^ faith.

^s to obey God and keep his Commandments is to ^ifie him. So to believe on him
and his word is to ^ifie him likewise. The several acts of faith do give ^y
unto God: yea, when we believe his word, altho^ it seems against common reason
and the outward ^ability of things in the mean while; yet here still believe
and be fully persuaded, that for all this there ^ll be yet an expected end,
this is to be strong in ^th, and to give so much the more glory unto God. We
may learn another kind of glorifying God from that ^soning of our Savior Jesus
Christ, For if ye love them that love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the
Pu^ cans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, (...) do ye more than
others, do not even the Publicans so? And (...) that reasoning of the Apostle,
For this is thank wor^ if a man for conscience toward God endure grief, suffer
wrongfully. For what glory is it if when ye be buffeted for (...) faults ye
take it patiently, but if when ye do well and (...) fer for it, this is
acceptable with God. If ye be reproached for name of Christ, happy are ye; for
the spirit of Glory and God rests upon you, on their part he is evil spoken
of, (...) on your part he is glorified. From all this may be understood that to
do those things which are not comm^ly done by other Men, or what is more than
other (...) will do, or to submit our selves to present pain (...)
inconveniency when we do not deserve it, but (...) wrongfully inflicted on us,
provided always that (...) happens to us as we are in a way of duty and (...)
for our obedience unto the Commandments of (...) then indeed this and the like
is a glorifying of G^. This of suffering wrongfully, or to suffer when we do
well a kind of taking up the Cross, and it is a going (...) and contrary to our
Natural inclinations; which as forementioned is an instance of glorifying God.
W^ does not only consist in the bare pain and inconvenie^ that the poor
Creature endures (He does not afflict (...) lingly nor grieve the Children of
men) But it is in the do^ of and obedience unto the Commandments of G^. That
is, when I had rather meet with trouble and irks^ness to my Fleshly Nature, as
I am in the service the Lord God, then avoid the same trouble or irkso^ness by
my neglecting and not doing of it. For annexing of Trouble, Pain, Loss or
Inconvenie^ which we sometimes meet with in our performing (...) keeping of
them, God does hereby the more effectu^ prove Mankind to know what is in their
heart whi^ they will keep his Commandments or no. For to me^ on here a like
Reasoning to that of our Savior (...) Christ, if in keeping the Commandments
of God it (...) all Smoothness and Ease and Pleasure and Agreeable^ to our
Nature, what reward have ye? Do not even ^^licans and Sinners of their owns
they manage and (...) ease and pleasure, and what is it, but herein they (...)
gratifying the Flesh? And how woe an a Liar. For ^g more than others, for do not
even th^ice concern^ all Mankind so? And consequently what his Reli^ven unto
God by such a kind of life? or to do (...) it is ^gs as these; for even Beasts
do those things which by n^ure and Sense they are led unto. But to do things ^e
the common level of Mankind, or to Do more then ^s, as in enduring grief,
suffering wrongfully, when ^is is in keeping and doing the Commandments of
(...) and the like, is a giving glory unto God.

(...) the several things which have been before spoken, may be instructed how
we may glorify God here on (...). It must be in keeping of and doing the
Com^dments of God; for otherwise instead of vainly and (...) thinking to
glorify him, it may be said to us at the (...) Who has required these things
at your hands? But if ^o indeed glorify God here on Earth, according to
directions and intimations aforegiven, then (which ^ld quicken, stir up and
actually persuade us to in^ly and constantly set about the glorifying God here
(...) Earth) It will be a most comfortable review and ^ing back to each of us,
just as we are going off from stage of this Earth, if we have the Testimony of
Conscience according to truth that we have glori^ God on the Earth, or that any
Glory, Honor and ^se has been given and ascribed unto God through ^y means of
any of us. Has thy Life and conver^n and thy Deeds done in the Body, and so
have mine ^fied God our Creator? By having been so ordered ^managed by us, that
when Men did see our good ^s, our Faith, Obedience and Patience, they did
^eason of them Glorify our Father which is in Heaven. ^mine and Prove your
selves herein, Have thou and thou, and so do ye ask your selves, Have I and
have ^rified God at all in my past life? And according ^he answer of your
several consciences are, if some ^ou have done it a little, others perhaps of
ye have done it at all, but certainly none of ye have done it so much as ye
might have done it, nor yet so much such of you who are enlightened and
Spiritually (...) derstanding do wish that ye had done. In the nam^ God then
and for his Glory, do it more for the tim^ come during the few and evil days
remaining of (...) several Pilgrimages here on Earth. As ye have been (...)
Instructed from the Scriptures of truth, how ye (...) to walk and glorify God,
We beseech you Brethren^ exhort you by the Lord Jesus Christ, that ye would
abound (...) in more and more. For this will be indeed a C^ Consolation to ye
severally when ye come to taste (...) bitterness of Death; it will be as so much
Wine mi^ with that Gall, if ye can toward the shutting up of (...) days, make
this appeal in truth unto God and Sing Song (for it is all rejoicing and
comfort) as Christ forerunner, the First born amongst many Brethren did, (...)
herein also left us an ensample that we should f^ his steps, I have glorified
thee on the Earth, I have f^ the work which thou gave me to do.

Proceed we now to handle these last words, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do

This Work in the general is the Working out of our S(...)tion; which or the
thing signified thereby is often (...) Scripture called a work. Now the
Scripture speak^ and according to truth; for it was given by in^tion of God who
is alwise and alknowing, and for (...) it is impossible to lie. From hence it
may be p^able to observe, how that the multitude of people and ward Worshippers
go upon a gross Error and mi^ which is very dangerous, hereby Satan acting wi^
deceivableness in them that perish; for they thin^ practice accordingly, as if
Religion and the servi^ God (through which people are to save their Souls (...)
get to Heaven) was no Work, but only a customa^ side thing, which they make not
much more of the cording to form and fashion, talk and discourse, (...) a thing
which they have been bred up and used unto themselves observe it accordingly,
for they impl^ ^rk or labor therein, and as they manage and ^der the matter
they find none in it, but herein they ^eatly err, Let God be true and every Man
a Liar. For ^wever most people apprehend and practice concern^g it, yet that
Man, who will be saved by his Reli^on, must make a work of it, yea and hard
work it is (...) climb up the Holy Hill and to get to Heaven. In^ed too many do
not take more Labor and Pains in ^eir Religion than in putting on their
Clothes, and (...) dressing and undressing themselves, which is a custom-(...)
usual thing, but there is no toil or sweat therein: (...) more do they make of
their outward Worship. But ^s alone is not sufficient to obtain the benefit and
^sired end of Religion, that is, the Salvation of their ^uls. For the Scripture
which makes wise to Salvation and ^aches the way to Heaven, does assure us that
we must ^ive if we would enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13. 24. The lord in
the original signifies Putting forth the utmost ^rength which mere outward
Worshippers do not. God is a ^warder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.
6. Which ^plyes on the other hand, that he is not a Rewarder (...) them who
seek him carelessly, or who do it only accor^ing to custom and outward fashion,
as the manner of ^any is. Be ye steadfast, unmovable always abounding in the
^ork of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor is ^t in vain in the
Lord 1 Cor. 15. 48. In this Scripture it is ^lled both a Work and a Labor, and
it imports thus ^uch, that they who make a Labor and work of it, (...) them it
will not be labor in vain. As again on the ^ther hand, to such who make no
work nor labor there^f, it will be labor in vain: I mean that little which
^uch people do in Religion (for almost all people do some^hat or other therein)
will be in vain because it will ^ot be sufficient to obtain the desired end,
which is the ^aving of their Souls. There is no going to Heaven by ^afe and
sloth, by custom or fashion. Son, Go and ^ork in my Vineyard. But thou endure
hardship as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. And not to multiply more
Scriptures to confirm the point in hand, take it for a certain truth and
affirmation as the end of things will more clearly show and manifest, That it
is a hard work and Labor to serve God accceptably with reverence and Godly
fear, and to be Religious indeed that it may become a Religion to the saving of
the Soul, as people do really work and labor when in the sweat of their face
they eat their Bread, or as it is in any hard labor of the hands; and this
must be a continued work and labor in Religion extending and running
throughout all our Life long. The labor and work of the mind is as toilsome
and difficult as that of the Body. Now the work of Righteousness (for so the
Holy Ghost calls it, Isa, 32. 17.) Or the labor of Religion or the service
of God, is purely and chiefly of the mind; it is heart work and Soul work, and
so it is labor of the Heart and labor of the Soul. And here Bodily exercise
profits nothing, but the Soul execise, that is, the lifting up her self
toward God, and that most earnest desire which she has to please him and find
acceptance with him, has the promise of that life which is to come: And here
must be labor and care that thi^ may be accepted with God. In Bodily exercise
pertaining to Religion there is but little labor or work, but in the Soul
exercise thereof, (which is the principal part and the only thing required by
God, My Son give me thy Heart) There must be labor and work to render it
acceptable and pleasing in the sight of the Lord. A for instance, when we go to
Worship, to bring our Bodies to the place, or after we are come there to sit
still and sleep, or to have our thoughts a Wandering and Roving, or to have our
eyes staring and fixed on the several outward objects, there is not much work
and labor in all this. For in the bare going to the place of Worship there is
no more labor than in Going or Walking to a place for our Recreation or
Pleasure; and then it is no^ more labor and work in sitting still there, then
in the Houses of our several Habitations. But herein consists the labor and
work of the Soul, to keep it always lifted up and fixed on the invisible God,
and to keep it close and attentive to the word preached; or when the Law and
the Prophets Acts 13. 15. The Gospel and Apostles art^ Read, than to mind only
the things which are therein spoken of and nothing else. And when the vanity
and inclination of our corrupt Nature, (this being also one device of Satan
that the word preached becomes as seed sown in ^ony ground, for it has not
entrance into and takes ^o root in the heart) would turn us aside to stare upon
^tward objects; Here again to deny our selves and ^ith Hezekiah to Turn our
face toward the wall, that we ^ay be the more attentive and earnest in our
Prayer un^ God, and in hearing his word; there is some work and ^bour in this
before we can bring our corrupt and de^tfull heart thoroughly unto it. O turn
away mine eyes ^at they behold not Vanity. And when the Worship of ^od and the
hearing his word, is Irksome and Weari^me to our corrupt Nature, (which is the
great tempta^on to ungodliness and prevails upon people of un^dly minds) And we
could spend the same tune in car^l Perambulation in the fields, In finding our
own ^leasure, or speaking our own words, at the doors or in the ^oms of our
Houses, both which the Spirit of God finds ^ult with in Isa. 58. 13. Ezekiel, 33.
30. Yet here again (...) deny our selves of this kind of pleasure and
agreeable^ess to our Nature as it is corrupt, and willingly submit ^r selves at
the same time to the Tediousness and Irksom^ss of Religious duties, there is
some labor and work ^erein, for it is of the same Nature as labor is to be
Toil^me and Irksome, for no Labor (which was inflicted (...) us as a
chastening and punishment after the fall) for the ^resent seems to be joyous
but grievous; nevertheless ^terward it Yields the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness (...) them who are exercised thereby: For afterward the Crea^ure
is inwardly satisfied because he has herein complied ^ith the ordinance of
God, and also herein he has sub^itted to some part of the punishment of God,
which (...) now sweetened unto us in Christ, In the sweat of thy ^ce shall thou
eat thy Bread. By the sweetness and comfort which both is intermixed with and
amidst honest labor, and chiefly it may be perceived after it is over; for
there (...) no such satisfaction in the world like unto the review (...)
looking back upon well spent time, the reasonable Creature may cry out,
Righteous art thou O Lord, (...) thou have punished us less than our iniquities
deser^ Herein also the Plowman, Artificer and day Labour^ will give up unto God
a better account of spending the time and the days of their life then idle
Gentry a^ Rich People, Who have lived in pleasure on the Earth, a^ have been
wanton and have nourished their hearts as in (...) day of slaughter, Who sit
down to eat and to drink and rise up to play. Here again it is to be desired
that peop^ would willingly as out of duty and obedience to the primitive
Commandment and ordinance of God, su(...) mit themselves to labor and pains
and not do it so mu^ out of necessity to get a livelihood; and that they
wou(...) submit themselves to the same labor and pains in t(...) immediate
service of God and in doing good, and (...) all this purely for God's sake, and
not as an hireling (...) hire or reward. For God more approves of such se(...)
vice and obedience as we may gather from what written, The Kings came and
fought, then fought the Kin(...) of Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo,
they (...) no gain of money, Judges 5. 19. And from the example Nehemiah who
says, Moreover from the time I was appoin^ to be their Governor in the land
of Judah, that is, twe(...) years I and my Brethren have not eaten the bread of
(...) Governor, but the former Governors that had been befo^ me, were
chargeable unto the people and had taken of them Bre(...) and Wine, beside
forty shekels of Silver, yea, even their serva^ bare Rule over the People: But
so did not I because of (...) fear of God Neh. 5. 14, 15. These things are
recorded to for ensamples, and they are written for our admon(...) tion, yea
and imitation also upon whom the ends (...) the world are come. The God of
Israel said, He the Rules over Men, must be just, Ruling in the fear of G(...)
2 Samuel 23. 3. Such should not be chargeable unto the peop(...) For whereas the
former Governors had been chargeab^ unto the people, Nehemiah would not,
because of the fear God.

But to return again from whence I have seemed to dig^ e^, As bodily labor
does by use and exercise become mo(...) Habitual and easy, so in the service of
and obedience to God it would be work and labor well bestowed to somewhat
remove and take off that Irksomness and Wearisomness that is in the same, which
is done by beginning and then continuing in this good kind of life. Hereby it
comes to pass that when people in their unregenerate state say of the Worship
and service of God, Behold what a weariness is it? Mal, 1. 13. Saying when will
the new Moon be gone that we may sell Corn, and the Sabbath that we may set
forth Wheat, Amos 8. 5. They come ^o be so changed and renewed and altered in
their mind, that they call the Sabbath a delight, not doing their own ways, nor
find their own pleasure, nor speak their own words; but they delight themselves
in the Lord, and take delight in approaching unto God. Which heretofore was
unpleasant ^o them and they were backward and hard to be brought unto it, this
is a change indeed. Formerly they grudged at every hour of time which was not
spent in pleasure, and now they grudge at every hour which is not spent in the
service of God and doing good to their immortal Souls. All other things perish
and nothing else remains ^n a Man, or avails any thing. The Grass withers,
the Flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand for ever.

There must be work and labor and succession of time, before the Soul comes to
be thus Born again and renewed in the Spirit of her mind, after that she has
been depraved by the Body, and by our corrupt sinful and sinning Nature. There
must be a great deal of hard work and labor, before we can put off and be
delivered from this Body of Sin and Death, which we carry continually about us.
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Intimating thereby, that no Mortal
Creature could do it, yet the grace of Jesus Christ could and also would do it,
for this purges out the old leaven and sinful and corrupt Nature until it
becomes whole and healthful, and than it will grow up to Blessed immortality.
There must be work and labor to lay aside every weight (for can any weight be
laid aside without some labor? in no wise) And the sin which does so easily
beset us, and to resist unto Blood striving against sin. T(...) last requires
the utmost labor and hardship. To go(...) farther and lay the Ax to the Root
of the Tree, the must be work and labor to get rid off and free fr(...) the
motions of Sin and the inclinations to Evil wh(...) are in our members. For
when we were in the flesh, (...) motions of sin which were by the law, did work
in our me(...) ers to bring forth fruit unto Death. This is the mis(...) evous
effect of those motions of sins in our members, (...) bring forth fruit unto
Death. It may be of edificati(...) and benefit to narrowly consider the Nature
of the which also will not be altogether going aside from (...) intended
matter; for to get clear from those motions sins, is one part of finishing that
work which God ga(...) us to do.

They are called the motions of sins: So that they a(...) not properly actual
sins, but the motions of sins; that (...) a motion or inclination unto sin,
like to the first sprin(...) ing forth of a Bud, or as in the breaking forth
into a S(...) or Sore: The matter and root and cause thereof from within. So
here the Law of God is perfect convert(...) the Soul; and in order to that it
would prevent the ve(...) first rise and beginnings of sin, or the motions of
sins in (...) members. For it does not only provide against the outwa(...)
breaking forth of actual transgression, but also it wou(...) suppress and
stifle and hinder the motions of sins in o(...) members. If these little ones,
that is, the motions (...) sins in our members are dashed against the stones
(as hap(...) py is he that does so) Then they can never grow in^ Presumptuous
sins, or into the great transgression. And (...) if these motions of sins are
suppressed and stifled whi(...) they are but yet working in our members, than
it (...) impossible that ever they should come forth into actua^ sins. Truly
this to do is very hard work and labou^ yet still there should be a pressing
and endeavor afte^ it.

This is the difference between the sins of the regenerate and unregenerate,
between the spot of thy Children, and which is indeed Corrupting of themselves,
Deuteronomy 32. 5 Such as are the Children of God have only some little motions and
inclinations to the same sins, which they suffer to go and proceed no farther,
not to bring forth fruit unto Death, as they would if they were not hindered and
restrained, and if care was not taken against them. For when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished brings forth
Death. But in unregenerate people these motions of sins do break forth into
outward act, and Lust in them goes forward and conceives and brings forth sin,
and sin in them is finished and brings forth Death, and involves them into
ruin of Body and destruction of Soul. As for instance in, the Regenerate it is
concupiscence, or a little inward Lust, which they are sure to let go no
farther; but in the Unregenerate, the same concupiscence issues forth into
Lasciviousness Uncleanness, Fornication and Adultery.

Even in the Regenerate concupiscence is sin, this being one kind of those
motions of sins the Apostle speaks of (...) Romans 7. And it is one on those
secret faults which David Psalm. 19. 12. Prays to be cleansed from, and also
one of ^ose Secret sins which God does set in the light of his countena^e, and
which he will bring into Judgment. Do ye think ^at the Scripture says in
vain, the Spirit that dwells in (...), lusts to envy? the Apostle speaks in
behalf of himself and of the other Regenerate, for in truth there are ^en in
them Lustings and tendencies to envy and hatred which in Unconverted people do
break forth into actual ^nvy and Hatred. And so there is likewise in the
Re^nerate motions and inclinations lustings and tend^cies to almost all manner
of sin and evil, to glutto^ and drunkenness, a longing after the Fleshpots of
Aegy^ and a secret inward liking of them by the fleshly cor^pt Nature and by
the old Man; but still and along ^ey prevent that they do not come forth into
the seve^l acts of Sin, to which again way is given by sinners ^d the Children
of disobedience.

Nevertheless it is the will of God (and accordingly ^s word which is very
pure, does direct it so) That his ^hildren and Servants should strive and
sincerely en^eavour what they can (Cursed is he that does the work of ^e Lord
deceitfully) Against all these motions of sins that are in our members, and
against these inclinations evil, and against the inward lusting and tendency
transgression. The Commandment of God is not only this wise, Cease to evil, but
extends farther, Abstain fr^ all appearance of evil: Which takes in all the
occasion beginnings, enticements and tendencies to evil. (...) as he which has
called you is Holy, so be ye Holy all manner of conversation. Now there being
in God motions to sin, nor inclinations to evil, it being Im(...) sible for God
to lie, or to commit sin or evil, it follows certain consequence that we can
never obey and (...) fill this his Commandment of being Holy as he is Holy,
(...) we get utterly rid off and clear from these motions sins and inclinations
to evil; and yet we should whatever we can that we may partake of his Holines^
we would partake of his blessedness, for without Holi^ no Man shall see the
Lord.

Again it is Commanded, Stand in aw and sin not. (...) the word of God does not
rest there, as only to pro^ against the outward act of sin, but it goes yet
far^ Mortify therefore your members that are upon the Earth. (...) if the
members are mortified upon the Earth, then there no motions of sins in these
members; according to (...) other Scriptures witness. If Christ be in you, than
i(...) Body dead because of sin, or as to sin. Now again (...) certain that in
a dead Body there are no motions of (...) at all, and it being the will of God
that Christ (...) be formed in us, Little Children of whom I travail in (...)
till Christ be formed in you. And except Christ be in y^ are reprobates; it
follows therefore that we should be (...) as to sin, and then also we should
have no motions sins in us, in which sense also it is that the Apostle (...) I
dye daily. That is, he did dye daily unto sin: He not only cease from the
outward act of sin, but also had less and less motion and inclination to sin,
unt(...) length he had no motion nor inclination to it at which is like dying
continually, until one is actu(...) dead: For as than life goes away, and
lessens by li^ and little, so in such not only the acts, but the ha(...) bit
also, yea the Life and Power of Sin goes and ^isheth away, until it becomes
none at all. This is be diligent (that is, by still laboring and
endeavor(...) after it, until we attain it, That we may be found ^m in peace
without spot and blameless, 2 Pet. 3. 14. God (...) his people in Hosea, 8. 5.
How long will it be ere they ^in to innocence? Which though it be long and he
ex^s much before they arrive unto it, yet at length ^e of his Peculiar people,
Redeemed from all iniquity, after much labor and endeavor first had and used
^rds it, attain to that measure and degree of in^ncy till they become
Israelites indeed in whom is no (...); and they arrive unto that state in this
life, (for ^ven must be begun here, though it be perfected and ^ummated
hereafter) to which God shall add and annex ^he highest Heavens, that in their
mouth was found no (...), for they are without fault before the Throne of God.
(...) die unto sin and to be alive again unto God; to ^ur after, till we
actually attain unto Holiness and ^cency of Life, is one main part of doing and
fini(...) that work which God sent us on this Earth to do. subdue the Power and
Acts, yea the very motions inclinations to sin, and to root out utterly (as far
possible) the corrupt Nature For flesh and blood shall not ^it the Kingdom of
God, neither shall in any wise enter ^in any thing that defiles. As aforesaid,
Heaven must ^egun here in us, if we will enter into Heaven here(...). And in
order to that, this is our business and (...) which God sent us on this Earth
for to do, By ^ing together with his grace, to labor and endeavor ^ever we
can, that we may become meet to be par(...) of the inheritance of the Saints in
light. His word therefore given to Build us up and give us an inheri(...)
amongst all them which are sanctified, and to make (...) a people prepared for
the Lord. This work we are ^o and finish. By the help of the same word, our ^s
are to become ready, a people prepared for lord. And while they went to buy the
Bridegroom came they that were ready, (Observe that) went in with him (...)
marriage and the door was shut. We are to be ready and prepared against what
time God shall call a summon us to appear before himself. Like as the s(...) of
the Earth grow on till they become ripe and fit their Masters use. So it is
accordingly expected (...) us, that we work together with his Grace and Sp(...)
which would work in us mightily, if we do not rebel (...) vex his Holy Spirit
that we may become meet, re(...) prepared, fit and ripe for God the great
proprietou(...) our Souls, who gathers them up to himself: He b(...) the
Father of Spirits, and accordingly the faithful speak, Into thine hand I commit
my Spirit. That they (...) become also, when our Bodies drop into the grave,
shock of Corn in its season. That when it is slipped (...) dislodged from the
Body, it may be such as himself spe(...) of, Behold mine Elect in whom my Soul
delights, (...) 42. 1. Or which is to the same benefit or significat(...) for
the Lord Jesus who is the Son of God to say, (...) ye Blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for from the foundation of the World. What
comfortable w(...) are here? We would unless we be such fools as not to k(...)
the worth thereof, give Thousands of Rams and ten T(...) sand Rivers of oil,
yea all we have in the world for assurance thereof. But though Rich people have
the vantage as to this world, they have none as to the w^ to come; for the
corruptible things of Gold and S^ (We were not Redeemed by these, but by the
precious Blood of Lamb of God) will not purchase Heaven nor yet pr(...) the
favor of God: Which is to be had by no (...) way, then that of Obedience and
Holiness. Obey my (...) and live. An Holy God loves an Holy Soul. For the fore
it was that God speaks this of Jesus Christ, Behold Servant whom I uphold, Mine
elect in whom my Soul del(...) eth. Because he than knew from the beginning
(...) his Son Jesus Christ would finish the work that God (...) him to do, as
Christ makes the return thereof the had finished it. Wherefore when he comes
into world he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, a Body have thou
prepared me: In burnt offerings and S^ fices for Sin, thou have had no
pleasure. than said I, Lo (...) (In the volume of the Book it is written of me)
T^ will O God. From which and many other places of ^pture it may be truly
Reasoned, that God has not much pleasure in outward acts of Worship, nei^r
does he so much insist upon and require them (I (...) not reprove thee for thy
Sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings, have been continually before me) as in the
doing his will. ^is is the chief thing which God requires of Man. Has (...)
Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and Sacri(...) as in obeying the voice
of the Lord? Behold, to obey is (...)r than Sacrifice, and to hearken than the
fat of Rams. ^ow this is true Christianity to imitate Christ. For as was the
first Born amongst many Brethren, so he ^self says, I have given you an
example that you should (...) I have done. Seeing therefore that Christ did all
which (...) his Father sent him about, and finished his work (...) did his
will: So we ought also severally as we his Creatures, but more especially as we
profess our ^es to be the Servants of God (For his Servants shall ^e him) Do
all which he sends us about on this Earth, (...) finish his Work and do his
Will all the days of our (...) For it is not sufficient to be good or godly for
a sea^; but the promise is, To them who by patient continu(...) in well doing,
seek for Glory and Honor and Immorta(...) Eternal Life; that toward the end
of this present (...) we may also make the like comfortable return unto (...),
I have finished the work which thou gave me to do; (...) the other Blessed
consequent may be also, And now (...) I to thee.

^o him that shall hear or Read these lines, the word ^exhortation says, Go
thou and do likewise. Be upon (...) and finishing the work which God gave thee
on (...) Earth for to do and finish. For if this should be ^ected, Woe unto us
for the day goes away, for the shadows ^he Evening are stretched out. Thou nor
yet I know (...) little sand there is the Glass of our life as yet to (...)
out, A great deal of our life is past and the day Immortality is at hand. The
night is far spent, let us before cast off the works of darkness, and let us
put on the ^our of light. I say again, Be upon the finishing part your work;
endeavor to have them polished and complete. The Church of Sardis was
admonished, Be wat^ full and strengthen the things which remain, that are re^ to
dye, for I have not found thy works perfect before G^ Now this finding fault,
does instruct us on the other ha^ that we should have our works perfect before
God, which we do endeavor with all our Heart and with all our S^ and all our
might, God himself will perfect and add u^ it, until it become acceptable in
his sight. Being confid^ of this very thing, that whatever good work he has
begu^ any of you, he will perform it until the day of the Lord ^s. And again
it is written, Lord, thou will ordain (...) for us: For thou also have wrought
all our works in us. (...) der which word, peace, the things that belong to our
pe(...) are comprehended and included, even future Salva(...) and Glory. Who
are kept by the power of God thr(...) faith unto Salvation, ready to be
revealed in the last ti^ Receiving the end of your faith even the Salvation of
(...) Souls.

I do hereby exhort the people of this my Gener(...) on and Country, to be upon
the finishing part of y^ work which God has given you severally on the E(...)
for to do. For so an entrance shall be ministered unto abundantly into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Savior Jesus Christ. Wherefore I will not be
negligent to you always in Remembrance of these things, though ye (...) them,
and be established in the present truth. Yea I think it (...) as long as I am
in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting yo^ Remembrance, knowing that
shortly I must put off this my ^bernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ (who is
the word of G^ has showed me. Moreover I will endeavor (for which sa^ reason
I desire that this profitable Book of a content^ and willingness to dye may be
Printed and Published) (...) you may be able after my decease to have these
things always remembrance. And seeing that it is but a very little while fore
that I shall certainly depart of from the Stage of (...) Earth, I commend you
to God and to the word of his gr^ which is able to build you up and to give you
an inheritan^ mong all them which are Sanctified. I commend you also the
teaching of the Spirit, Lord, evermore give us this Br^ Lord, evermore give us
the teaching of thy Spirit. anointing which we have received of him abides
you, and ye need not that any Man teach you: But as same Anointing teaches you
of all things and is truth and is lie, and even as it has taught you ye shall
abide in him, and now little Children abide in him, that when he shall ap^r, we
may have confidence and not be ashamed before him (...) his coming. As the
Apostle said, I am determined know nothing among ye, but Jesus Christ and him
cruci^. So for my part I am determined and purposed (...) pray God to enable me
that herein I may turn my ^poses into performances, and to pay my vows to the
most ^hest) To turn over a new leaf, and during the few (...) evil days
remaining of my Pilgrimage to serve God (...) more diligently and earnestly and
constantly in the ^nistry than I have heretofore, and to finish that part of
(...) Ministry which I have received, and to testify the ^spel of the grace of
God to the people of this Gene^ion. For I assuredly know that a dying hour will
come, ^d I sensibly feeling within my self a fear of Death, ^ich does hence
arise: either because I live in some re^ved or known sin, or I leave some duty
undone which ^ought to do: So that the way to take off and remove ^s same fear
and bitterness of Death in me, is, not to ^e in any manner of sin or appearance
of evil, as far ^d as often as I apprehend such a thing to be the ^mmand and
will of God that I should do. The same applicable to other people also, to live
in no sin of ^ission or commission, which if we observe accord^gly and finish
severally the work which God gave us (...) do, than at length we shall be ever
with the Lord, (...) receive the reward of so doing. Wherefore comfort ^e
marginal reading is exhort) one another with these ^ords. 1 These. 4. 18.

(...) Christ did finish the work which God the Father gave ^n to do, as he
took upon himself to be the Savior and ^edeemer of Mankind and as he was the
mediator be^een God and Man; and as he executed that threefold ^ffice of King,
Priest and Prophet. Yet have I set my ^ing upon the Holy Hill of Zion, Psalm 2.
6. The Lord has ^orn and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech, Psalm. 110. 4. For Moses truly sa^ unto the Fathers, a
Prophet shall the Lord God raise up un^ you of your Brethren like unto me, him
shall ye hear in all thin^ whatsoever he shall say unto you, Acts 3. 22. This
Peter did a(...) ply unto Christ, and as Christ did perform and fini^ these
three several Offices, he did finish the work the God gave him to do: Wherefore
himself said on the Cro^ It is finished. That is, so much and that part of the
wo^ which God had given him on this Earth for to do an^ finish, he did finish
accordingly. But as to his delive^ ing up the Kingdom to the Father, and as to
his sitting (...) the right hand of God, making intercession for us, the is not
finished as yet, nor will be finished until the en^ of the world, when time
shall be no longer.

What kind of work it was which Christ did finish, we man gather and understand
from what himself afterward d^ clares. I have manifested thy name unto the
Men which the gave me out of the world. For I have given unto them (...)
words which thou gave unto me, and they have received the^ John 17. 6, 8.
This Christ did as he was a Prophet (...) Preacher. From whence we may gather
and observ^ that to manifest the name of God to people out of the World, and to
make known the words which Go^ first gave unto us, is the best and most
excellent wo^ that one can be employed in. And however other peop^ are busied
(Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubl^ about many things, but one thing
is needful.) Yet that (...) the best employment and the best business, which
ha^ relation immediately to God himself, and is about the things partaining to
endless Life. And this is life etern^ that they might know thee the only true
God, and J^ sus Christ whom thou have sent. From hence again it a^ pears that
to manifest or make God known, or to Pu^ lish those words which contain the
knowledge of Go^ is the best of Works and Employments. Verily the art a God
that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savio^ And many times we lose the
sense of him. No^ what brings to the sight or rather apprehension of him or
what renews the knowledge of him, this is the one thing needful for the
Children of Men; for in the ^nowledge of God all their well being does consist
at ^resent, and their Life eternal in the world to come. ^ow much God himself
does require and is delighted herewith, may be understood from what is written,
For (...) desired mercy and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of God ^ore than
burnt offerings.

The world make their Estimate accordingly and think them happy whose Silver
and Gold is multiplied, or who ^ave fine and plentiful Estates. But as the
Psalmist ^ith, Thou have put gladness into my heart more than in ^e Time that
their Corn and their Wine increased. So I ^ad rather than all those good
things, to have most of ^e knowledge of God and the things pertaining to his
^ingdom; to have the manifestations of himself, other^ise then he manifests
himself unto the World, to have ^ore of his Heavenly truths Communicated and
revealed unto me. I will praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy truth (...) my
God. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me than ^ousands of Gold and Silver. I
rejoice at thy word as one ^at finds great spoil. And seeing that the secret
of the lord is with them that fear him, and he reveals his secret unto his
Prophets: I had therefore rather that his will and secret be revealed unto me,
than all the money or ^states of the Earth. For these and such like are e^dences
of his favor and loving kindness which is ^tter then life it self, in that it
reaches and extends Yet ^rther. Those who know and apprehend God by Faith, ^o
as much desire and labor to have the favor of God, ^s others do to get Riches
and the favor of great Men. ^or the favor of God in this life, is a seal and
earnest ^f his Salvation in the World to come, Who has also ^aled us, and
given the Earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, Cor. 1. 21.

To get, retain, or recover when lost the favor of God (...) a doing and
finishing that work which God gave us ^o do. For the work we have to do in this
life, is to ^erve and obey God, and to do the things that are plea^ng in his
sight, and thus to become reconciled unto ^im. Though God does hide himself
here on Earth from ^s, and is afar off in the Habitation of his Holiness, yet
we are to seek after and apprehend him by sai^ The Lord looked down from Heaven
upon the Children of M^ to see if there were any that did understand and seek
G(...) He does Command and require it, that we should obey Commandments and
serve and please him all one as if did now see him with open face, as we do our
Gove^ ours, Fathers and Masters after the Flesh. That the se^ and fear of him
that is invisible should be always biding upon our Spirits. The desire of our
Soul is to (...) and to the Remembrance of thy name. Have Faith in Go^ which
same Faith should overcome the World in all (...) Temptations, Terrors and
Allurements. We shou(...) prefer God above the Creature in all things. Althou^
God is out of sight, (his works are not) yet he shou^ be always in our mind.
When we are in company a^ in the herd of our fellow Creatures, We are than
(...) our shame be it spoken) most apt to forget God (...) Creator: But even in
the midst of them his Excelle^ should make us afraid. Yea an Holy reverential
fear a^ dread of his invisible Majesty should overshadow us a^ remain always
sensible upon our Souls. And as it is R^ corded that At the going down of the
Sun an horror of a (...) sleep fell upon Abraham. Even so toward the going
dow^ of the Sun of our life, A great horror and dread of the (...) visible God
should be yet more upon us as we come near in time when we shall actually
appear before hi^ This is to bring down God and Christ from above, the he may
be nigh unto us. For so he is, when we have (...) sense and fear of God always
remaining upon our hear^ that it shall prevail against and overcome all
Temptat^ ons, arising either from Men or from the things of the World; That as
Joseph did withstand the Temptation of his wanton Mistress with this
consideration, How (...) I do this great wickedness and sin against God? So wh^
thou art Tempted to Gluttony or Drunkenness or (...) the sin that does most
easily beset thee, here Reason wi^ thine own Soul, How can I do this wickedness
and sin ^ against God? And let this thought actually restrain the from the Sin.

It signifies or avails but little to think aright, unle^ we also do
accordingly, for Grace and Knowledge d^ increase the guilt and render yet more
inexcusable, if they are not effectual preservatives and remedies against sin.
For as it is sin in its Power and Reigning which does hurt: So likewise it must
be Grace in its Power and Reigning, which will do good and save us. Wishes and
Wouldings only toward good, will never ^ring any one to Heaven, unless they
come forth into act accordingly. Indeed we should be excellent Christians if we
would so speak and act accordingly as we think, ^esolve and purpose. If we
would continually from time ^o time turn our purposes into performances, and
our ^ood thoughts into suitable Actions. If ye know these things ^appy are ye if
ye do them; which implies on the other and, that such are miserable who approve
the things that ^e excellent, and do not follow after and practice them.

The finishing of the work which God gave us on this Earth for to do, is by his
grace and by our working to^ather with his grace to render our selves fit for
Heaven, and to be meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the ^aints in
light: To be as good and Godlike as ever we ^an; to be always a growing in
Grace and Knowledge; ^o be making further Proficiency and Seize in ^e
Christian-Life, to go forvvard and from Strength to ^trength toward Zion. And
when any are rendered ^t for Heaven and meet to be partakers of the inheri^ance
of the Saints in light, there he is to keep and pre^erve himself so, Keeping
your selves in the love of God, ^ude 21. And also in a Readiness and in a state
of Watching and Waiting against that God shall call ^r and summon ^e by Death.
Be ye therefore ready, for (...) a day and an hour that ye look not, the Son of
Man com^h. And so people should first endeavor to get themselves in a
preparation for Death and Judgment; and ^hen they have got in a preperation for
Death and ^udgment, then they are to keep and preserve themselves ^herein, and
to be ready and prepared for it yet more and more.

But some may be apt to say, How shall we be ready and prepare our selves for
Death and Judgment? I ans^ver in general, by a constant course of Righteousness
and Holiness throughout the days of our Life; which Ri(...) teousness must not
be in part only, but a Righteo^ ness in all things. It must be by answering
unto (...) complying with all the requirings of God in thy (...) and
conscience, to do and obey according to all the thoughts of Good and duty which
God at any time (...) into thy heart, and to abstain from all those moti^ to
sins and from all appearance of evil which thou any time preceivest within
thee. This again must done universally, conscientiously and constantly, un^ you
come up to that state of Holiness and Innocen^ whereof Paul witnesses, I know
nothing by my (...) yet I am not hereby justified. I Press toward the mark of
Prize of the High calling of God in Christ Jesus. And where Read any where in
Scripture of the higher attainm(...)ts in Christanity, or the description of
such as are deed the Saints and Servants of the Lord God, there us examine and
prove our selves whither they do deed belong to us? Are our selves such, as is
there (...)scribed? As we Read those many Precious Promises (...) are scattered
up and down in the Bible, do they (...) long unto us? Have we an interest and
share in the^ which we have according as we obey the several (...)cepts and
keep the sayings which are contained the^ in. Order my steps in thy word, that
no iniquity m^ have dominion over me. When we once find our wh^ Life and
Conversation ordered according to the wo^ of God's Lips, than we have finished
the work whi^ he gave us on this Earth to do.

God knows all things, and when he sees that the (...)veral reasonable
Creatures inhabiting on this Earth ha(...) finished the Work which he gave them
to do thereon than he takes them off again from the Earth. That (...) according
to his own Divine method, Such as are (...) Death, to Death; and such as are
for Captivity, to Captivity and such as area for the Sword, to the Sword, Jer.
43. 1^. Which is not only true as to what kind of Death ea^ one shall glorify
God by, but also as to the succeedin^ and after state, such as God knows and
sees to (...) meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints i^ (...)ht,
As from that hour that Disciple took her unto his ^n home: Even so the eternal
God takes such from that our (of Death and Judgment) unto his own home, ^at is,
he receives such up into the Habitation of his ^oliness, and into the mansions
of bliss. In my Fathers ^ouse are many mansions. And then truly it is that such
(...) us as are his elect and Servants, are at our own Home: (...) when we are
at home in the Body, we are absent from ^e Lord. Than only and never till then
may we be truly ^id to be at home when we come to be ever with the ^rd. Man
goes to his long home and the mourners go a^t the streets. Such again as God
shall see, know and ^dge to be worthy of stripes, who are appointed to ^eath,
or for Death, will be assigned over unto it. For by ^e time God allots to each
person upon this Earth, he ^n as well and also does actually prove and try them
^hether they will be fit for Heaven or Hell, all one as they should live out to
the period of Seventy Years. ^or as the Scripture says of Jesabel, I gave her
a space to ^pent of her Fornications and she repented not. And again, ^et
favor be showed to the wicked and he will not learn Righ^usness: in the land
of uprightness will he deal unjustly, ^d will not behold the Majesty of the
Lord. And as has ^en observed by others, that if the sinner were to live
^ernally, he would sin eternally. So it is contrariwise (...) the other better
hand, If the Godly were here to ^ve longer or eternally, they would serve God
yet longer and eternally. The case of Infants and Children dying before they
come to the knowledge of good and evil, is ^ard to be asserted aright: But it
is probable that God ^ill Judge and Recompense unto them according as ^e does
see by his infallible foreknowledge, they would ^e if they should live longer.
But for those who arrive unto years of Discretion, whither they die in youth,
Man^ood, declining years, or old Age, whither they live long ^r a little while,
by that space he gives them for Re^entance, and accordingly as they repent or
not, so will ^e deal with and Recompense unto them throughout ^ll eternity.
According to their deeds, accordingly he will ^epay. He does know and prove
them by that allowance of time, which rank and Denomination they wi^ come
under, either of Come ye Blessed, or go ye Curse^ According as they have done
Good or Evil, so the will rise up to the Resurrection of life, or to the Resu^
rection of Damnation.

Seeing that we know not how short a time God man give unto us, to prove us and
to render unto us for a^ Eternity, What manner of persons ought we to be in
(...) Holy Conversation and Godliness? How ought^ we (...) serve the Lord with
fear and trembling, To stand in aw and (...) not? For we know not how short the
time will (...) before we are snatched and taken away from hence. W^ are always
upon the brink of Eternity; but we shou^ so live whilst we are in time, as we
shall wish we ha^ done when we come to enter into Eternity. We man continued
advances and approaches toward it, w^ do move step after step every Day and
Night. Fr^ Day even to Night will thou make an end of me. A^ so from Day even
to Night, yea and from Night u^ Day God is making an end of us severally as to
the World. He is continually, and always a doin^ of it and never ceases: Like
as the Sun is always i^ motion, so when God has once Created and gave (...)
being, he is again continually bringing this being toward its end. And when
the Reasonable Creature (...) brought to its end, then he has finished that
wo^ which God gave him on this Earth for to do, For a^ aforementioned, God
takes none from this Earth befo^ he or she has finished that work which he
gave the^ hereon for to do, or he sees they would finish it, or b^ Idle
therein: And accordingly he does proportion o^ his Judgment and final
Retribution to each of them For the method of God is before he proceeds to
Rewa^ or Punishment with the inhabitants of the Earth, (...) will go down now
and see whither they have done altogeth^ according to the cry which is come to
me, and if not I wi^ know, Genesis 18. 21. And so God will go down into the Valley
of Jehoshaphat to meet with and Judge all Nation^ of every Generation, and see
whither they have done according to the report of their doings which came up
(...) the Ears of the Lord God of Sabbath. He will punish ^e World for their
Evil and the Wicked for their Iniquity. ^ut Glory, Honor and Peace to every
Man that works ^od, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile.

Seeing than that these things are so, that we must ^r all Eternity receive as
we behave our selves during ^is short time. And again knowing not how short ^is
time will be in which God will prove us, What ear^est care and diligent
endeavor should this stir up (...) us to approve our selves and be reconciled
unto God. ^his should not only influence all of us in the general ^t every Soul
in particular. It is I, and thou, and ^ch of ye, calling ye severally by your
Names that ^e so nearly concerned in this thing. Suppose thy self (...) be the
very person, whom God will call out next to ^eath and Judgment. If thou were
sure and did veri^ think that thou were the next person of all thy
Neighborhood and acquaintance whom God would call forth unto Judgment, thou
would be another kind of Person in thy living, even more Serious and Holy,
and more Godlike and Heavenly minded, more Spiritual and Pure in heart, yea
thou would yet more stand (...) aw and sin not. Thou would make have and
de^ay not to set about to fill up and supply the things that are vvanting, and
to do what as yet thou leavest un^one. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give
all diligence to make your calling and election sure. Such a valuable and
infinite good can never be made too sure of. That ye be not slothful but
followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the promises.

As it is written, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.
Even so let us search and try our vvays and examine our selves, vvhither we
have severally finished that work which God gave us to do. For now is our
Salvation nearer than when we Believed. But as we dravv nearer in time, so are
we fitter for Heaven? And have we done any thing more in finishing that work
which God gave us on this Earth for to do. Are we now more meet than we
were such a time since to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in
light? Are we become better as we grow older? And as (...) increase in
years, so do we accordingly and agreeabl^ grow in stature toward a perfect
Man in Christ Jesus Do we in course and succession of time become more God
like and more Christ-like, and do we make further proficiency and further
seize in the Christian-Life Do we grow in grace and knowledge? And
(...) we become Wiser and Better? Are we meet for Heaven? And are we sure
that if God should take avva^ any of us this moment, to have an entrance and
admission therein? Let none be too selfconceited or consider^ herein, for the
Lord may reject such confidences. Ye^ still I do hereby exhort people to use
the utmost mea^ endeavor and diligence that ye may become meet f^ Heaven and
never to give over, nor yet stand still i^ this same good work. Not as though
you had already a^ tained, or were already perfect, but ye are still to pre^
toward the mark of the high calling of God in Chri^ Jesus. To be still
Travailing and making on in the vva^ toward Sion. Although as it often
happens in our journeying to places which we were never at before, vv^ may
Err and wander: But here seek out of the Boo^ of the Lord and attend unto what
things are opene^ and alleged from thence, and thus enquire and g^ into the
right way again as soon as ever ye ca^ and so order the business that hovvever
ye go about or athvvart, yet in process of time ye may be neare^ advanced unto
the Haven and place where ye would b^

And thus ye may ask and examine your selves upon the finishing part of your
Work. If it is finished and ye are ready, expect then that God will call for
ye. Now would it be with fear, or contentedness of mind if God should hurry
thee away this very moment into the unknown and invisible World? Behold I have
told you before, Suppose now thou art finishing thy course, how it would be
with thee, even with thee, if thy course was actually finished, and thou were
to Behold Man no more with the inhabitants of the World; That is, on this Earth
and in this state of things. This is the Sum and Requiring of all Religion if
we would be such in the midst of and ^hroughout all our Life, as we think and
purpose we ^ould do upon a dying Bed, or as we shall wish we ^ad done when we
are actually in the state of the dead. For we shall than be sensible and
reflect and Remember, Luke 16. 25. All one, yea much more than we do now. Hope
we have which enters into that within the vail. And ^o we should have
continually such Thoughts and such (...) Mind, which enters within the vail of
these outward and visible things, into and amongst such things that are not
seen. We should step forth into the other World a^ thought, before we are
actually entered therein indeed; and have our Conversation in Heaven before our
Souls are admitted there. We should be no otherwise employed about present
things, then as we are in an inn; for then our thoughts are taken up Wholly and
Principally about the Place we are journeying unto: And so this Earth is but a
through fare, which we are just to pass through before we come to Heaven or
Hell.

Again as we apptoach nearer to the end of our journey and to the finishing of
our Work, See that ye walk circumspectly. Yea, with what exactness and care
should we go through with it, having continued thought and Remembrance of mind,
that each of us severally are ^o glorify God on the Earth, and to finish the
Work which he gave me to do. The same should be our labor and endeavor
accordingly.

This is certain, that Idleness, Sloth, or to live in pleasure or sensuality
(as to which the inspired Apostle ^ruly says, The Widow that lives in
pleasure, is Dead while she lives. Which also is applicable unto all other
people who do so, or who are lovers of pleasures more than ^overs of God) Nor
yet to live so as to snort out our days, (...) say and testify again, all this
is not a glorifying God on the Earth, nor yet a finishing the Work which he
gave ^s to do. The reason whereof is manifest, because all this or the like, is
for no real and good end or purpose But God gave us this life, that we should
live unto him who has Created us, To understand and seek after the Lord, To
fear God and keep his Commandments, and do good and so shall thou dwell in the
land, Psalm. 37. 3 To serve our Generation. (as I do this day in Publishing
these and many other words of truth which would be profitable unto them if they
would receive them) to be employed in doing the will of our Heavenly Father,
that whenever he comes and calls for us by Death, he may find us so doing.
Blessed are those Servants, whom when the Lord comes he shall find so doing.
Who are sure to be about that Work which God gave them on this Earth for to do
and finish. So that they are either finishing it, or they have it actually
finished. And than they may make this comfortable return when they come to the
end of their course as the forerunner^ did, even Jesus; who showed us the way
and left us an example that we should follow his steps. I have glorified thee
on the Earth, I have finished the Work which thou gave me to do. Blessed are
those Servants of the Lord God, whom when he calls for by Death, he shall
find either to be upon the finishing (I mean, who are trimming their Lamps,
Mat. 25. 7. For the wise Virgins had got their Oil long before) or rather who
shall then have actually finished the Work which he gave them on this Earth for
to do.

Blessed is he that Reads and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and
keep those things that are written therein, for the time is at hand, Rev. 1. 3.
Which may be understood as to those things also, which are truly opened and
alleged from thence.

To God only wise be Glory through Jesus Christ for ever,Amen.


