TO THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES, Of the HONORABLE House of Commons
Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Proposals of Captain Anthony Stamp, for Regulating the Abuses of
the Curra^^ Coyns, and for Raising the Price of Money, and Plate, within the
KINGDOM of ENGLAND.
HERE is humbly presented to this Honorable House, such safe and profitable
Ways as may supply the Necessity of their Majesty's; being agreeable to your
Honors late Votes, To find out such Ways and Means as may perfect your
affectionate good Intentions to their Majesty's Service, and to the
accomplishing of what is wanting to make up the gross Sum so much desired; The
Proposer has labored, out of his Zeal to the present Government, to find out
the most acceptable, easiest, and gratefulest, Ways to effect the same; and
thereupon he humbly offers his Mite into the Scale, to turn the Beam to the
Advantage of the Public, by raising of several Millions of coined Money,
without laying any manner of Burden upon their Majesty's Subjects for it,
toward defraying the great Charge this Kingdom will be at in their Wars: Which
he performs, by raising the weighty current Coin and Plate of this Realm, to a
higher Value, and that too without Damage to the Owners; and the Overpulsh
thereof accrewing over and above the intrinsic Value of the said raised Money
and Plate, is to redown unto their Majesty's toward the speedy reducing of
Ireland, and the effectual carrying on their War against France. Which ways
being put into Practice, will keep the weighty Money in this Realm from being
further transported, and melted down at home; and likewise will be the only
means to Import Foreign Gold and Silver into Their Majesty Royal Mint, to be
Coined into Money: And moreover, will redress the Complain^s ^f their Subjects,
from being longer imposed upon by the evil Practices of an innumerable Number
of wicked Persons, who have defaced and diminished their Majesty's current
Coin, both of Gold and Silver in their Clipping, Fileing, Drilling, and Washing
of the weighty Money, that the greatest art of the running Money is clipped and
light, which are sufficient Evidences in themselves to prove the Fact; and also
all the current Coyns have and are daily counterfeited with base mixed Metals,
some of them milled, and plated over, ringed about, to bear the Touch, and
others double Silvered and gilt, to the cheating of the Receivers. All which
irregular and insufferable Practices ought to be remeded, as being
dishonorable to their Majesty's, and a great Grievance to the Nation. For the
preventing of the like Abuses for the future, and to bring easily and speedily
to pass the raising of so vast a Fund, as he doubts not of; which with humble
Submission he conceives, may prove, by the Authority of this August Assembly an
additional Supply to their Majesty's Necessities; besides, it will give a
vigorous Life to the now dying Trade, and Manufacture of this Kingdom, bringing
along with it Peace, Security, and Tranquillity at home, under their now
Majesty's most Happy and Auspicious Reign.

From these weighty, needful, and pressing, Considerations, follows his
Propositions and Reasons, to make good the Sufficiency of his said Proposals.

I.
THat all the current Money, both of Gold and Silver, within this Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, which is not clipped or defaced, he humbly
proposes, may be ordered to be brought into Their Majesty's Mint, and other
places to be appointed through the Realm, to receive from thence their
Majesty's Royal Stamp to be struck upon all the said Money, denoting what each
of the several Coyns are raised in value, to pass current for in all Payments
whatsoever, by the Authority of this present Parliament; viz. Two Pence to pass
for Two Pence Half penny Four Mites, Three Pence to pass for Four Pence, a
quarter of a Thirteen-pence-half-penny to pass for Four-pence-half-penny, Four
Pence to pass for Five Pence Farthing Two Mites, Four-pence-half-penny to pass
for Six Pence, Six Pence to pass for Eight Pence, half a
Thirteen-Pence-half-penny to pass for Nine Pence, Nine Pence to pass for Twelve
Pence, Twelve Pence to pass for One Shilling and Four Pence, half a Crown to
pass for Three Shillings and Four Pence, and a Crown to pass for Six Shillings
and Eight Pence. In like manner all the Gold Coin are to be raised, viz. A
Guinea, which now goes for Twenty one Shillings and Six Pence, to pass for
Twenty Eight Shillings and Eight Pence, a half Guinea to pass for Fourteen
Shillings and Four Pence, an old broad Twenty Shilling piece, which now goes
without Authority, for Twenty three Shillings and Six Pence, to pass for Thirty
one Shillings and Four Pence, the Ten Shilling piece, which now goes for Eleven
Shillings and nine Pence, to pass for Fifteen Shillings and Eight Pence, and
the Five Shilling piece, which now goes for Five Shillings and Ten Pence half
Penny, to pass for Seven Shillings; and the old broad Twenty two Shilling
piece, which now goes, without Authority, for Twenty Five Shillings and Six
Pence, to pass for One Pound Fourteen Shillings, and the Eleven Shilling piece
to pass for Seventeen Shillings, and the Five Shillings and Six Penny piece to
pass for Eight Shillings and Six Pence.

II.
That the Owners, or bringers in of any one kind of Coin, be it Gold or Silver,
is to deliver Four into the Mint, or other places appointed, and to receive out
Three of the same kind of Coin with Their Majesty's Stamp struck thereon with
their several weights; which will then by virtue thereof be made of equal Value
to the said Four Pieces: More especially the Gold, Crown, and half Crown
pieces, are to be weighed and gaged, which ways will discover the current Money
from the Counterfeited. As for Instance, let Four Ninepences be delivered into
the Mint, etc. Which now goes for Three Shillings, the bringers in of them are
to receive out Three of the same stamped Ninepences, which are then to pass at
Twelve Pence apiece; which said Three are of equal Value to the said Four.

Le^ Four Guineas of Twenty one Shillings and Six Pence a piece, be delivered
in like manner into any one of the said places, which comes to Four Pounds Six
Shillings, they shall receive out from thence Three Guineas, which are so
stamped at Twenty Eight Shillings and Eight Pence per piece, which exactly
comes to Four Pound Six Shillings, which said Three Guineas stamped are of
equal Value and Worth to the said Four Guineas unstamped. This Proportion holds
good in all the rest of the said Coyns; as Eeight delivered, Six to be taken
out; and so is 16 to 12, 20 to 15, 32 to 24, 40 to 30, 400 to 300, 8000 to
6000, etc. The telling of this raised Money, is as easy as the Money now
passable.

III.
That Their Majesty's would be graciously pleased (for the preventing of the
future clipping, etc. of the current Coin of this Realm) to cause their Royal
Proclamation for the crying down of clipped Money from being any longer Current,
and to be refused in all Payments whatsoever; and be from thence deemed no
longer Money but Bullion. After all the weighty Money of Gold and Silver is
stamped, as aforesaid, then the said clipped Coin or Bullion (by another
Proclamation) is to be brought, or sent, in Specie, unto Their Majesty's said
Mint, to be melted down, and coined into milled Money, with their new raised
Value and Weight to be expressed in their several Coyns, not deviating from the
uniform Standard that now is, the Owners or bringers in of the said clipped
Money, shall deliver into the Office of the Mint Four Pieces of any one kind,
and they shall receive out from thence Three weighty stamped pieces of the same
Coin in full lieu thereof, being of equal Value to what the Owners received and
took them for at first; and so in proportion to greater Numbers, as in the
foregoing Paragraphs, the Owners will thereby be no Loosers for so profitable
an Exchange.

IV.
That the raising of the Current Coin of England thus, will not only bring in
all the Money both of Gold and Silver, as well the hoarded, as the running
Money, to Their Majesty's Mint, and other places appointed, to be Stamped, as
aforesaid, for no Money which has not the said Stamps are to go for no more
then they now pass for, till they have received the said Stamps; and if any of
the said Money so Stamped should afterward be Clipped, Filed, Drilled, or
Washed, and fall short of their said Weight, they are not then to pass as
Current Money, but to be refused by all Persons who are to receive the same.

V.
That if all the Current Money in England were brought into the Mint to be
melted down, to have a greater Allay added to the New Coin, and the said New
Coin raised to a higher Value then the present Coin now goes for, as some
Person has proposed in Print so to do, purposely to raise Their Majesty's great
Sums of Money thereby; now if this Project were to take effect, it would draw a
greater Evil upon the Kingdom then the Clipped, Light and False, Money does; and
the reason thereof is, such Money will be easily Counterfeited with the same
fineness, because the Gold and Silver is not as yet raised to a higher Value,
which will encourage, increase, and enrich, Numbers of Unlawful Coyners, to the
Impoverishing of this Kingdom. But the raising of the Current Money to a higher
Value above the Intrinsic, is both Honorable, Safe, and very Profitable, to
Their Majesty's, and likewise Beneficial to Their Subjects.

VI.
That if all the Current Coin of Gold and Silver were promiscuously brouht into
the Mint to be melted down, and new Coined to the new raised Value, it would in
all probability take up above Two Years time to have the same performed, which
Their Majesty's most Urgent Occasions cannot permit of, though it is the
Proposer's chief Aim to have the Current Money to be Milled, which is a work of
time, but the broad and weighty Money first to be Stamped, together with all
the Plate hereafter mentioned, which will bring in speedily, as he doubts not
of, several Millions of Money over and above all Charges, in regard there is an
extraordinary Necessity, that a Bountiful Supply should be given to Their
Majesty's, in carrying Vigorously on their Chargeable Wars, which will not only
be a Safeguard unto this Nation, but the Preservation of the Protestant
Religion both at home and abroad, and the Established Laws of the Kingdom from
being Invaded, which will give great Encouragement unto Trade and Manufacture.

VII.
That if the Clipping, Fileing, Drilling, and Washing, of the Current Money of
England be not timely stopped, in some few Years there will not be found
amongst all the running Money one broad Piece but what will be Clipped, the
Guineas Filed, Drilled, and Washed, and all the rest of the Money made light,
he humbly Conceives, there is no better way to prevent these grand Abuses, but
by raising the said Money to a higher Value, as is humbly Proposed.

VIII.
That all the Plate in this Kingdom be brought or sent to convenient places
appointed, in all the Cities and great Towns, whereby every piece of Plate,
great or small, may receive Their Majesty's Royal Stamp to be struck upon each
Plate of them, and the Owners of the said Plate to pay unto Their Majesty's for
the said Stamp Fiveteen Pence per Ounce, being one Penny less to the said new
raised Value upon Money, which Plate so stamped, at any time shall be exchanged
at Their Majesty's Mint, for ready Money, to the full new raised Value,
according to the weight of the said Plate; and the Goldsmiths, and others,
which Sell Plate, the Buyers are to allow again to the Goldsmiths the said
Fiveteen Pence per Ounce for the said Stamp, till the said bought Plate are
brought to the Mint to be Sold as aforesaid; so the Owners of any Plate thus,
can be no loosers thereby, therefore the Money and Plate ought to be raised to
the said Value, for the Supplying the great Necessities of the Kingdom.

IX.
That in regard the Goldsmiths having stocks of Plate by them, should have a
Twelve Months time, or more, given them to pay Quarterly into Their Majesty's
for all their Plate so Stamped.

X.
That the Wyer-drawers are to pay Their Majesty's for every Ounce of fine
Silver they work into Wire, Eighteen Pence per Ounce, and for every Ounce of
Gilded Wire to pay Twenty One Pence, and for every Ounce of right Gold Wire
Twenty Two Shillings. The Gold-beaters are to pay in like manner unto Their
Majesty's, Eighteen Pence per Ounce for fine Silver, and Twenty Two Shillings
per Ounce of fine Gold which they work into Leaves, in regard their Work is not
Stampable.

XI.
That Their Majesty's would be graciously pleased to Order the Buying up of all
Bullion, Foreign Coin both of Gold and Silver, together with the Ingots,
grained Sand, and Dust-Gold, (at the Current Price,) which shall be brought
into this Realm, by reason the Current Coin and Plate are raised to so high a
Value, which will be a means that great plenty of Gold and Silver will be
Imported, about Two Thirds thereof to be Coined according to the new raised
Value, and the other Third to be Sold in the Mint Office to the several
Artificers that work therein, after their own Stock is wrought off, and
disposed of, at the usual Price, saving the Wyer-drawers, and Gold-beaters,
whose Work cannot be stamped, whereby these said Artificers may maintain
themselves and Families, as formerly.

XII.
That the raising of the Plate and Money of this Realm thus, will, (being
forthwith put into practice,) speedily raise Their Majesty's a vast Fund of
Money without any damage to the Owners, by reason the said Plate and Money is
not taken from them, but remains with them at a higher Value, for all Silver
and Gold, Coined, or not Coined, are here raised to their Values, so that the
unlawful Coyners cannot Counterfeit the Current Coin of this Kingdom with the
Royal Metals, for they will be loosers and no gainers by it, for should they
add any greater Allay to debase, (any manner of way,) the Money they make,
which by Weighing and Gaging before mentioned, will presently discover the
Counterfeited Money from the Current, therefore the raising of Money and Plate
to the said Value ought to be allowed of.

XIII.
For if the Current Money and Plate be not raised thus, Their Majesty's would
be insufferable loosers, to change all the Clipped and Light Money in England
and Wales, and give out in lieu thereof Weighty Money, purposely to the Benefit
of Their Majesty's Subjects, whereby this Pestilential Evil, which has so long
overspread the Land, may be healed, and the Lives of Hundreds saved that would
else follow that abominable Trade of Clipping, Fileing, Drilling, Washing, and
Counterfeiting, of the Current Money of this Kingdom, who being discovered, and
taken, are by the Law put to Death for the same, for there is hardly a Sessions
at the Old Bailey, or Assizes in the Country, but there do more or less of
these Notorious Offenders suffer. Now for all these warnings they still go on,
and wonderfully multiply in their Numbers, their Charge so little to set up,
their Profit great, and their Trade being presently learned, which cannot be
prevented but by the raising the Price thus upon Money and Plate, which
undoubtedly will prove an easement to Their Majesty's Subjects in Their Public
Taxes.

XIV.
For had an Act of Parliament been made in the Reign of King Charles the First,
that no Clipped Money should pass Current in Buying and Selling, nor to be
received in Payments of Money, there would have been little loss to the Crown,
for then there was scarce Ten Clipped Pieces to Three Thousand now, besides in
all the former Kings Reigns, till King Charles the Second, all the Gold was
Weighed, and not otherwise taken, purposely to prevent the Washing of them
light; and ever since the last Civil Wars in England Gold passes without
Weighing, insomuch, that there is hardly to be found one old Piece of Gold but
what is extremely diminished in Weight by Washing, unless hoarded up, and the
Guineas begin to fall into the like Distemper by Fileing, Drilling, and
Washing, of them light; and for preventing of the like Evil Practices, there is
a Necessity, that all Pieces of Gold after they are Stamped, as aforesaid, all
Receivers, or Changers of Gold, should Weigh and Gage their Pieces to see that
they agree to the said Stamp, and this way will hinder the making of Gold
light; and likewise the Crown and Half Crown Pieces of Silver to be also
Weighed and Gaged, will also prevent the Counterfeiting of Money for the
future. Now for all these Weighty Reasons given, the Current Money and Plate
ought to be raised to the said Value.

These Proposals and Reasons for Regulating the Current Coin, and for the
raising the Value of Money and Plate of this Kingdom, is humbly Offered to the
Consideration of this Honorable Assembly, to do therein as their great Wisdoms
shall think fit, for so Public a Service to Their Majesty's, and Kingdom, as
it will be, without Damage or Charge to any.

London Printed, and Sold by Obediah Blagrave at the Bare in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.


