SERMON I. ON Phil. IV. 11. For I have Learned in whatsoever State 1 am,
therewith to be Content.
THE Drift and Design of all Preaching the Word is, that People may cease to do
Evil and Learn to do well, as much as ever they can. And inasmuch as a great
deal of sin is occasioned through distrust, murmuring, concerning the exceeding
Sinfulness and Provocation whereof ye may read in several places in the Book of
Numbers, our Hearts fretting against the Lord: (The Foolishness of Man
perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord Coveteousness and
such like. And on the other hand, that we may finish our Course with joy, even
when Bonds and Afflictions abide us in every place. And the several severe and
harsh dispensations of Providence which befall us (they being so many Exercises
and Trials whereby God holds his Servants in warfare here on Earth) do not move
us, nor yet hinder us, but that we may Nevertheless finish the Ministry which
we have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God;
And that no outward thing whatever which shall happen unto Men, may hinder them
in the discharge of, and finishing that work which God has appointed them
severally on this Earth for to do; That ye may trust in the Lord and do Good,
so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed. And perform
every tittle of your respective Duties in whatever Vocation or Calling, Trade
or Employment, State or Condition of Life God has placed ye in, Come
Prosperity or Adversity, whether ye receive Good, or Evil things from the Hands
of God, That ye may still in all the several Periods and Stages of your ensuing
life, whether it be up Hill or on smooth Ground, in dirty or clean way drive at
these two ends, eschew Evil and do Good, bearing the same still in Mind and
Practicing the same, These and such like are the reasons of my choice to
Discourse on this Subject, For I have Learned in whatsoever State I am in,
therewith to be Content.

They are the Words of St. Paul, which he brings in upon the occasion of an Act
of Liberality which the Philippians showed toward him; which they would have
done before, but they lacked opportunity, and at last they did it. Thus much is
signified from those words immediately foregoing our Text. But I rejoiced in
the Lord Greath, that now at the last your care of me has flourished again;
wherein ye also were careful but ye lacked opportunity. No that I speak in
respect of want. Which words do carry an Innuendo, Intimation or Meaning, tho
he does not affirm it plainly through modesty and shame by Nature, which does
usually accompany that condition of his want. Or rather, he does afterward so
express himself, that wha^ would be want to others was none to him; Because by
this excellent Grace of Contentation he had so made it that want was as it were
no want unto him. Not that I speak in respect of want, (Why should he use this
Phras^ and Manner of Speech unless there was something in it. In verse 16. He
speaks out plainly, Ye sent once and again unto my necessity) For I have
Learned in whatsoever Stat^ I am in therewith to be Content.

Brethren, It is no new or strange thing for the Saint and Servants of God to
be in Want, Need, or Poverty for this is what happened to others of former
Generation^ and in other Countries. A remarkable Instance and Example whereof
was the Apostle Paul as he gives us her^ to understand, as also in other
places of his Epistles. No^ there cried a certain Woman of the Wives of the
Sons of the Prophets unto Elisha, saying, thy Servant, my Husband i^ Dead, and
thou know that thy Servant did fear the Lord and the Creditor is come to
take unto him my two Sons to be Bondmen, whereupon Elisha did work a Miracle to
pay that debt, 2 Kings 4. 1. Here was one that did fear the Lord and yet was in
debt. The time would fail me to tell of all those his Servants and Prophets
that were under the Old Testament Dispensation, of Christ and the Apostles, and
the Poor Saints (to whom it is said in an eminent manner, the Gospel is
Preached) who have been since that time in the World, who were but Poor and Low
in Estate as to this Worlds Goods. The Patriarch Jacob was hardly put to his
shifts, and yet he found sustenance by the Providence or providing of Almighty
God; which he does intimate and most thankfully acknowledge upon his Death Bed,
God before whom my Fathers. Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me
all along unto this Day. Genesis 48. 15. This answered unto that Vow, which he
Vowed in the times of his Travels and Pilgrimage, we read in Genesis 28. 20. If
God will be with me in the way that I go, and will give me Bread to Eat and
Raiment to put on, so that I come again to my Fathers House in. Peace, then
shall the Lord be my God. Which kind of Expression then uttered, did carry with
it some kind of fear and distrust, as also therein was contained Prayer, Trust
and Confidence. The Patriarch Goes on to add, The Angel which redeemed me from
all Evil, Genesis 48. 16. Notwithstanding his saying of this, Nevertheless, he did
meet with Afflictions and Weariness; But the Angel of the Lord, even at the
very same time did preserve him from the Evil of those Afflictions; and
afterward redeemed him utterly from the afflictions and troubles themselves.
Here it may be asked, What is the Evil of Afflictions? It is either sin, or to
be made miserable by them; which the true Saint or Servant of God is not, nor
yet does he give way unto the other, in whatever affliction does befall or
happen unto him. It is an excellent Character that is left recorded of Job,
that amidst all his Griefs and Calamities: In all this Job sinned not, nor
charged God foolishly, Job 1. 22. And so it is with every one of us, that do
serve and fear him. God does not so much preserve us from Afflictions and
Troubles; for he does suffer, yea, and order them to fall upon us: But then it
is, that he does redeem us from all Evil, when amidst and under the Pain, Smart
and Vexation of them, In all this we sin not, nor yet leave Duty undone, nor
yet charge God foolishly. So that no hard thoughts do arise in our minds, nor
yet do our hearts fret against the Lord.

But even unto this day when Moses is Read (and so it is at this Day, when the
Gospel of Christ is Read) the Veil is upon their Heart, 2 Cor. 3. 15. Seeing
many things, but thou observest not, Isa. 42, 20. And so People read many
things in the Scriptures, the Book of the Lord, but they Observe them not. They
do not confer experiences in their own Souls, and commune and search with their
own Spirit how it is there. The Lord has given me that knowledge, even from
the times of my Youth, and the days of my former Years, that what I did Read in
that Book, I should apply unto my self. And I remember particularly, that above
ten Years since, when I was in my Chamber and still, as it is written, Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think that ye have Eternal Life, John 5. 39. Of
which Salvation the Prophets have enquired and searched diligently, searching
what, or what manner of time, the Spirit of Christ did signify- 1 Pet. 1. 10.
11. So it was, That not upon the outward customary or cursory reading, but upon
the searching (Mark that) yea upon the searching Diligently of the Scriptures
I found, how that the whole Current and Stream of the Promises and good things
of God were therein declared, and made unto the Poor and Needy.

For the Needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of the Poor shall
not perish for ever, Psalm. 9. 18. For the Oppression of the Poor, for the
Sighing of the Needy, now will I arise says the Lord, I will set him in Safety
from him that puffs at him Psalm. 12. 5. I know that the Lord will maintain
the Cause of the Afflicted, and the Right of the Poor, Psalm. 140. 12. When the
Poor and Needy seek Water and there is none, I the Lord will hear them, I the
God of Jacob will not forsake them, Isa. 41. 17^ Says Jesus Christ, The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel unto
the Poor, Luke. 4. 18. Blessed be ye Poor, for your is the Kingdom of God,
Luke, 6. 20. Has not God chosen the Poor of this World, Rich in Faith, and
Heirs of the Kingdom which he has Promised to them that Love him, James. 2, 5.
There are Innumerable other places of Scripture to the same purpose. But
Observe here the Limitation and Restriction; for the divinely Inspired Apostle
does not here say, the Lord has chosen all the Poor of this World, but only
those, who (as the Words immediately following add) are Rich in Faith and Heirs
of the Kingdom which he has Promised to them that Love him. So that none of
the good things before or hereafter mentioned, do belong to such Poor as are
Ungodly, Ignorant or Sinners.

Again, in the same Scriptures of Truth, there are many Evil things spoken
against the Rich of the People. But ye have despised the Poor. Do not Rich Men
oppress you, and draw you before the Judgment Seat? Do they not Blaspheme that
Worthy Name by the which ye are called? James. 2, 6, 7. Go to now ye Rich Men,
Weep and Howl for your Miseries that shall come upon you. Your Riches are
corrupted and your Garments are moth eaten. Your Gold and Silver is Cankered,
and the Rust of them shall be a witness against you and shall eat your Flesh as
it were Fire. Ye have heaped Treasure together for the last Days: ye have
lived in pleasure on the Earth, ye have Nourished your Hearts as in a Day of
Slaughter, James, 5, 1, 2, 5. Woe unto you that are Rich, for you have received
your Consolation, Luke. 6. 24. Woe unto them that join House to House that lay,
Field to Field -- Therefore Hell has enlarged her self and opened her Mouth
without measure: And their Glory, and their Multitude, and their Pomp, and he
that rejoices, shall descend into it, Isa. 5. 8, 14. Now the Scripture says
nothing in vain; for all of it, even to every tittle must be fulfilled; and
that Woe which is therein Pronounced against them, and hangs over their Head,
will at length fall down upon them in Punishment and Misery. They are enclosed
in their own fat, with their Mouth they speak proudly. -- Deliver my Soul
(says David by the Spirit) from the Wicked, which is thy Sword, from Men which
are thy Hand, O Lord, from Men of the World, which have their Portion in this
Life, and whose Belly thou fillest with thy hid Treasure. They are full of
Children, and leave the rest of their Substance to their Babes, Psalm. 17. 10,
14. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, Verily, I say unto you, that a Rich Man
shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And again I say unto you, It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, then for a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of God, Mat. 19, 23, 24. Therefore shall the Lord of
Hosts, send among his fat ones leanness -- Behold the Lord of Hosts, shall lop
the Bough with Terror, and the High ones of Stature shall be hewn down, and
the Haughty shall be Humbled, Isa. 10. 16, 33. The Lord of Hosts has Purposed
it, to Stain the Pride of all Glory, and to bring into contempt all the
Honorable of the Earth, Isa. 23. 9. How much she has Glorified her self, and
lived deliciously, so much Torment and Sorrow give her, Rev. 18, 7. The Lord
God has Sworn by himself, says the Lord God of Hosts, I abhor the Excellency
of Jacob, and hate his Palaces, Amos. 6, 1. Here God (whose thoughts are not
your thoughts Isa. 55, 8. declares his abhorrence and hatred against them, whom
the World Loves and Respects, Flatters and endeavors to please. Surely Men of
Low degree are Vanity, and Men of High degree are a lie, Psalm. 62, 9. Observe
here that Blunt expression, and plain English (if we may so say) of the Holy
Ghost, Men of High degree are a lie. Which seems to intimate forth, that that
opinion or Estimation, which other People have of them, or they of themselves,
as if there were some what in them, which were more, above, or better then
other Men, is a mere lie and Falsehood. Yet now our Flesh (speaking of those in
Debt and Poverty) is as the Flesh of our Brethren, (who were more Rich and
Wealthy) our Children as their Children Neh. 5, 5. God has made of one Blood
all Nations of Men, Acts. 17, 26. Which includes High and Low, Rich and Poor
alike. So it is in God's account now, and as to the future Judgment he will
make concerning them. Will he esteem thy Riches, no not thy Gold, nor all the
forces of Strength, Job. 36, 19. That accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor
regards the Rich more then the Poor, for they are all the Work of his Hands,
Job, 34, 19. O that there were the same God-like mind in my kindred according
to the Flesh; for as to them and some others, this following Scripture is
Literally fulfilled in me, Our So^ exceedingly filled with the Scorning of
those that are at Ease, and with the contempt of the Proud, Psalm 123. 4. Indeed
it is fit and Requisite, that there should be some order and Distinction
amongst Men and Women in the World; but then on the other hand, for any one
whatever, to have hi^ Heart lifted up above his Brethren, Deuteronomy. 17, 20. Or to
despise the Poor, James, 2, 6. is a Sinful and Wrong extreme

The Lord sees not as Man sees, For Man looks on the outward Appearance,
but the Lord looks on the Heart, 1 Samuel 16, 7. If there be Beauty or Gayety
without, Man has ^ Wonderful conceit of him, as of some goodly one; but i^ the
Heart (which is as manifest in God's Sight, as the outward Face is in ours) be
evil, notwithstanding the fine outside such an one is as much hated and
abhorred (It is his own Phrase in Amos 6, 8.) in God's Sight, as the most
abject and contemptible Fellow is in ours. For thou will save the afflicted
People, but wilt bring down High looks, P^^l, 18, 27. In the former Part of
this Verse is Favor and Mercy to the Poor and Afflicted, but in the latter
part thereof, is Terror and Evil to the Rich and High minded. God's thoughts
are contrary to Man's thoughts; for he speaks in favor and comfort of the Poor,
whom the World abhors and despises. On the other hand, he speaks Terror,
and to Humble those (as may be seen in Isa. 10. 33. aforequoted) who are so
much flattered and whose Persons are had in Admiration because of advantage,
Jude 16. The significancy of all which they shall feel, who do not mind these
things, nor take due warning. The Scripture runs thus all a long, when it
mentions that difference of outward State and Condition, of Poor and Rich,
promising good things to the former sort, and denouncing evil things to the
latter sort. And Abraham said to the Rich Man, Son, Remember that thou in thy
Life Time Receivedst thy Good things, and likewise Lazarus Evil Things, but now
he is Comforted, and thou art Tormented, Luke 16, 25.

Now to make known how I did apply all this to my self, which the Reader may
apply to himself also; for in the application and bringing it home to our
selves, there is the Use and Godly Edification. I say, that Considering all
these things together, and weighing them in my mind; For I do believe, and am
persuaded, that it is as certainly true, and will be so in the times of the
Restitution of all things, as, now I am sure that I write these lines; hereupon
God knows that I Lie not, I did wish and desire, that I my self might be
brought into the condition of the Poor and Needy, to the intent that I might
come in for a share, and to be a partaker of those Precious Promises, which
throughout the Scripture God has made unto them.

As God commanded Hosea to take a Wife of Whoredoms, so I was directed, and for
which same Reason also I did afterward, viz. On the seventh Day of the seventh
Month, 1694. Marry a Maiden, Ezekiel. 44. 22. as Poor in outward State and
Condition, as Poor well could be; for she and her Parents were in the very next
degree, to open and downright Beggary. But I made choice of such an one the
rather, Thinking that hereby I might make more sure of Partaking of those
Precious Promises aforementioned and that hereby I should obtain a better
Resurrection in the future State of things.

Marvel not at this; for it is somewhat like that Mind which was also in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3. 5. Who though h^ was Rich, yet for our sakes he became Poor,
that we through his Poverty might be Rich, And so though I was in a Moderate
Condition, yet I Voluntarily (of mine own free choice, and not out of any
Imprudent Management) became Poor for the Gospel's sake, and for the better
making known the Truth as it is in Jesus. The like may any one else do,
Provided it be in good Works, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19. and in Acts o^ Alms giving to
their Power, yea and beyond their Power, 2 Cor. 8. 3. but not in Pride or
Pleasure, Prodigality o^ Vain Things, or in what is Sin, Foolish or Unlawful;
for such who become Poor any of these ways will not receive any thing from the
Lord, but Wrath and Punishment,

But my first Wish and Desire of this Nature, was some Considerable time before
I had ever known. what Want o^ Need was in all my foregoing Life, which I have
Experienced since, and may yet again. I did not then know nor in the least
apprehend, how or after what manner, or by what I should be involved, into
Poverty* which God has Since showed to me, That is to say By Publishing of,
and Suffering for God's Eternal Truth (which is the best of Works) and by the
oppression of Man, Pfal. 119, 134 which has arose upon that occasion. Although
this sam^ Truth has occasioned to me Poverty, Imprisonments 2 Cor. 11. 23.
Trouble and Sorrow, But I will Hope continually and Praise thee yet more and
more. For I believe still tha^ at Length it will have the Contrary Good
Effects, and ^ shall yet Praise thee upon the Psaltery, even thy Truth, O m^
God. Psalm. 71. 14, 21. Which will be, if either I should live on this Earth to
see it Obeyed. For there is an Obedienc^ Nevertheless due to the Truth, as may
be gathered from Romans 2, 8. Gal. 3, 1. although in both those places People
obey it not. Or rather it will be when my Work shall be Rewarded, in the time
of the Restitution of all Things for my bringing it forth, and for my Suffering
for it.

I Do hereby take this occasion and opportunity, to Praise the Lord for his
Goodness, and to declare his Wonders (for ^ am as a Wonder unto many, Psalm. 71,
7.) Even to thank and Exalt his Holy Name for Granting my desire in this thing;
for it Springs into my Soul, as some Comfortable Evidence (though Strangers,
and Natural People cannot preceive and discern it) that I am indeed an Heir of
Salvation, in that I have lived by his Grace and good Providence here on Earth,
and was in the same Low Estate, Psalm: 136, 23. For the same and like Reasons,
as his Elect, and Servants of former Generations. Whose are the Promises of
better things, then those which pertain to the Life that now is, even to that
which is to come. According as his Divine Power has given unto us, all Things
that pertain to Life and Godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Although the former Sort were
Poor, Low and Mean, yet they were Sufficient to that End: According as his
Divine Wisdom and Goodness thought expedient. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all
that is within me Bless his Holy Name. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and forget not
all his benefits; which aforementioned I esteem and receive as such: Although
the Natural Man discerns it not, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The Ignorant Person and
Unbeliever do not apprehend any in it, but they call it my Misfortune Ruin and
Misery. But I know whom I have believed, and I lay hold on that Promise, They
shall not be Ashamed that Wait for me, Isa. 49. 23. And although in this
present life, where neither the Judgment written, Ps. 149. 9. is Executed, nor
yet the Reward promised is Actually given, many of the Servants of God, have
been Liable to shame and disappointment from the World; Yet the answer of God,
says unto them on this Wise, for further Hope and Encouragement, But Israel
shall be Saved in the Lord, with an Everlasting Salvation. Ye shall not be
ashamed, nor Confounded World without End, Isa. 45, 17. At long Run, it shall
not be thus; but in the End of Time, all things that are written in the
Scriptures, shall be fulfilled and found True.

As also hereby I have been taught and experienced with the Apostle Paul in the
Text: (One calls the School of Afflictions the best School; and the wisdom of
God says as to this, It is good for a Man that he bear his Yoke in his Youth,
Lam. 3. 27.) I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound every where
and in all things, I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both to
abound and to suffer need. I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me.

And because of what Christ says, For there is nothing hid which shall not be
manifested, neither was any thing kept secret but that it should come abroad,
Mark 4. 32. Therefore from this being the mind of Christ, I think it both
proper and convenient to declare and make known, what condition, I one of his
Ministers and Members have been brought into, as I was in the Ministration of
his word and suffering for the same. I being once in great Anguish of Spirit
with Tears in mine Eyes, like Hagar in the Wilderness, When the Water was spent
in the Bottle, Genesis 21. 15. Being at a considerable distance from my Native
Country, when almost all my Money was gone, and I did not know where to have
more, and then I had most need of it; I thereupon fell down upon my knees to
God. And there I Poured out my complaint before him and showed him my trouble.
And as it is commanded and directed in the Gospel, Be careful for nothing, but
in every thing with Prayer and Supplication, with Thansgiving let your requests
be made known unto God, Phil. 46. Accordingly I did then make known my Requests
unto him, and then within less than a quarter of an hour, I perceived a still
Voice speaking to my Soul on this wise, Thou have made known thy Requests unto
God, go forth and do the same unto his Servants. This was one of the most
sensible Answers, and Return to Prayer that ever I perceived and observed in
all my Lifetime, and was somewhat like that which we read in Dan. 9. 21, 22,
23. And thereupon I went forth the day following, and made known my Requests
unto them, and asked for the Alms and willing Contribution of Christian People;
and of the two first which I ever made application unto, I had rather a matter
of Bo^nty and Liberality, than a common Almsgiving, being received by them
with a great deal of courteousness and civility. And from thenceforth for well
nigh two years and an half (Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed me his
kindness in a strong and populous City) I subsisted, and was fed by a wonderful
and continued train and course of Providence, according to that usual method
thereof He that had gathered much, had nothing over; and he that had gathered
little, had no lack, 2 Cor. 8. 15. It being agreeable with the wisdom and ways
of God, to do nothing which is superfluous, or more than needs must; nor yet is
he wanting in what means are absolutely necessary: And so I had just sufficient
for my several needs, and not much more nor yet less; and it was reached forth
unto me by the visible hand of Invisible Providence just at the time, or a
little before as I had occasion. Herein I found that Scripture literally
fulfilled in me, When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord will
take me up, Psalm. 27. 10. The Holy Spirit by speaking after that manner, does
presuppose that the Servants of God may be reduced to such kind of straits and
exigencies, for the Scripture says nothing in vain. And so when my Father and
Mother-in-Law did forsake me and withold Maintenance, then the Lord did take
me up and provide for me by the good will and ministration of his Servants,
Blessed be his Name for it. Thus in this Poor, Low, Beggarly (that is, a
condition of asking) Estate, I have learned to be content, and in all things I
have been instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to
suffer want. By the way it is better, and rather to be chosen to be a Beggar,
than to be unjust or unrighteous, for we read of one Beggar, namely Lazarus,
who went to Heaven, but the Scripture says expressly, Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Yea, of what was
extended toward me by way of Alms I had a sweet relish and enjoyment thereof,
because I did Eye the goodness of God in and through it: And hereby a proof and
trial was had of Peoples subjection and obedience to the commands of the
Gospel. Said the Author thereof, Christ Jesus, The Poor are suffered to be with
you always, that whenever you will, you may do them good.

As the Apostle Paul does thus write in his own Person unto the Phillippians,
as in our Text, and so he does in many other places of his Epistles, so it does
in no wise derogate or vary from the Gravity, Seriousness, or Usefulness of
sound Preaching or Writing, for the Minister to declare his own Experiences
unto the Hearers; for they, by comparing theirs with the same, may be Profited
and Edified hereby. That according to what is written, It may be the same with
them also, Those things which ye have both Learned and Received, and heard and
seen in me, (says Paul to the Phillippians) do, and the God of Peace shall be
with you, Phil. 4. 9.

It is an easy matter to be content with a Plentiful, Prosperous and Abounding
State; but here is the Virtue and the Praise, if People can be and are content
with, as that amidst and under these Evil things, they will not charge God
foolishly, nor suffer their hearts to fret against him; nor yet will they sin,
nor put forth their hands to Iniquity. Although thereby they might be delivered
and freed from them.

Contentment does denote an even and smooth temper of mind, a Calmness and
Tranquillity of Spirit, in opposition to those liftings up and castings down,
or when it is like the troubled Sea and cannot rest. Again, It is Peace and not
Stupidity or Ignorance. It rubs and goes on through this Earth, and does not
lie still in sloth and deadness. I mean, when a Man knows thoroughly the Nature
of things and therewith is content; but he is somewhat beyond the blockishness
and sense of a Beast; which is content with its condition, because it knows
nothing better. As also the Soul, though it is content with what outward things
she has, is not therefore Idle or Unprofitable, but travels and makes toward
the Father of Spirits. A certain Heathen Poet has described it on this wise,
That she is almost content with the present, but yet does attempt and try after
greater things. And indeed, if we confine our selves only to such things which
are Just, Lawful and Right, then indeed it is both the Duty, and also very
consistent with a Servant of the Lord; To be up and be doing, and so far
endeavoring after them, as they do not hinder from better and more Precious
things. This also comes within that Aphorism, or Rule of the same Apostle,
through whom the Spirit of God has made known the Words of our Text, Art thou
called being a Servant? Care not for it, but if thou may be made free, use
it rather, 1 Cor. 7. 21.

Thus having in some measure explained the Nature of Christian Contentment, or
at least so far hinted and intimated concerning it; That the Reader may gather
and understand the residue thereof, Proceed we now to lay down some Arguments
and Reasons to enforce the observance thereof, or to beget the same mind in ye
also, as before is said. Those things which ye have both learned and received,
and heard and seen in his Apostle Paul, do, and the God of Peace, (under which
word Contentment is included) shall be with you.

The First and greatest Argument for Contentment or Contentation, to me seems
to be, in knowing and considering thoroughly our own Creature state; and that
the will of God does Order and Overruled all things in this World. This
Consideration is two fold. It would be proper therefore to speak somewhat of
them severally, and then connect and join them together, and then show what
influence and efficacy this double Consideration has to make us hold our
Peace; Submit our selves to God, James 4. 7. and to learn in whatsoever state
we are therewith to be content.

In the First place, O Man, know thine own Creature State, how thou were at
first made by God, and how that now thou art a Creature in his hands, and
purely at his Government, Rule, and Disposal. One would think, this were the
easiest thing in the World to be understood, but yet it remains a Mystery, and
does puzzle the apprehensions of People; for even unto this day, when Moses or
the Prophets, or the Gospel is read, the veil is upon their hearts; and an
Invisible God is an Unknown God to the multitude and generality of Mankind, in
what is called this Christian Nation. For either because they see not God, or
rather they do forget him. Thence it is that they do not look unto the Rock
from whence they were hewn nor have Respect unto the hole from whence they were
dug; even so as to eye continually, and have respect, Which signifies
looking back unto their Maker, and so as to see him that is invisible; Which
holds our Soul in Life, and suffers not our feet to be moved, Psalm. 66. 9.
In the Margent there it is puts, which does relate to the initial Act of our
Creation, as the Word holds does denote the continuance thereof all the while
we are in Life. Both which are very proper and significative of what our
Invisible Maker and Creator does unto us. For indeed he does first put our Soul
in Life, and then holds it therein, all the days which on this Earth it is in
the Body. Like as when Elijah raised the dead Child, he cried unto the Lord,
and said, O Lord, my God, I pray thee, let this Child's Soul come into him
again, 1 Kings 4. 6. By comparing of all which together, we come to know the
truth and the manner of our being in this Life, more than ever any Heathen
could attain unto by mere reason, by having it thus revealed unto us, how that
God at first puts, and then holds, and at length causes the Soul to depart
from this Body; and in the Resurrection he will let our Souls come into our
Bodies again. In the aforesaid place of Psalm. 66. 9. it is added, And suffers
not our feet to be moved. Now the feet are the Instruments of our moving to and
fro; so that we may gather from hence that all our Actions or Motions are
ordered by God according to what the Scripture elsewhere says plainly, in
diverse places, Man's goings are of the Lord, How can a man then understand his
own way, Prove. 20. O Lord, I know that the way of a Man is not in himself; it
is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. The steps of a
good Man are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way, Psalm. 37. 23.
Here it is expressed by goings and steps, which take in all, and extend even to
the very least Motions of his; for so are steps, and so it is as to all of them
particularly and severally. But by that Phrase of Jeremiah, O Lord, I know, is
imported forth that his Saints and Servants do live in a continued sense and
knowledge of as much; which brutish Men, and Ignorant Persons, and Unbelievers
do not. For the Truth is, As in him we live, move, and have our Being, so our
several Actions and Doings are ordered of the Lord, though too many do not see
and discern it. Thou broughtest us into the Net, thou laidst Affliction upon
our Loins, Psalm. 66. 11. I have much thought of this Scripture, when I have
been for the Word and Truth of God cast into Prison, where was cross-barrs of
Iron, and Wood, which did exactly resemble a Net. Here again Carnal and
Ignorant Persons, and Unbelievers, will say and reply, That such brought
themselves into Trouble and Afflictions, and they think nothing of God herein.
But here again, Let God be true, and themselves Liars; that thou might be
justified in thy Saying, and overcom^ (the Imaginations and Talk of People)
when thou judge. For David here says thus by the Spirit, and ascribes it up
immediately to God himself; Thou broughtest us into the Net, thou laidst
Affliction upon our Loins. For indeed he does herein speak as one that had a
through Knowledge and Understanding of, and insight into this Matter.

And it may be conceived after this manner; the same Lord who si^teth on his
Throne, and all the Host of Heaven (who also Order and Dispose of Things here
on Earth) stood by him on his Right and on his left. And the Lord said, Who
shall go and persuade Ahab that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-Gilead? And one
said on this manner, and another said on that manner. And there came forth a
Spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade him. And the Lord
said unto him, wherewith? And he said, I will go forth, and I will be a Lying
Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. And he said, Thou shall persuade him,
and prevail also; go forth, and do so; 1 Kings 22. 19, 20, 28. Why after the
same similitude of things, yea after the very same manner does the Lord, who
looks from Heaven, he beholds all the Sons of Men from the place of his
Habitation, He looks upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth, he fashioneth
their hearts alike, he considers all their Works, Psalm. 33. 14, 15. And so he
does Order and Overruled, and dispose of all their ways and Works. For thus
much may be understood; that he our God, or an Evil Spirit from the Lord acts
in every Man and Woman by Thoughts or Imaginations. By Thoughts I mean such as
are true and good. By Imaginations I intend such as are false or evil. And
these Thoughts or Imaginations are the immediate Forerunners, Principles, or
Causes of Action. But here take heed how thou affirmest too far, for let no Man
say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with
Evil, neither tempts he any Man, James, 1. 13. So do not thou say, that God
acts in Man or Woman by false or evil Imaginations, for God cannot be the
Author of Falsehood or Evil; neither does he tempt or act any Man to it. All
this is true, but yet this difficulty may be well understood and reconciled
from the aforecited, 1 Kings 22: for there it is said, All the Host of Heaven
stood before him on his right Hand, and on his left. So that there were good
and true Spirits which probably stood on his right Hand; and evil and false
Spirits which stood on his left Hand. But as an Earthly King does this or that
thing by his Ministers or Officers, so the Everlasting God, the Creator of the
Ends of the Earth, whom the Scripture styles a great King, (as so indeed he is)
does act and work through and by his created Beings; that is, by his Angels or
Spirits. He sends forth and commands his good Angels or Spirits. He permits or
suffers the evil Angels or Spirits. And one of these two sorts does actuate, or
Act in all the Children of Men, according as we read of the Prince of the Power
of the Air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of Disobedience. True
it is, Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and can not look on
Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. Nor yet is he the Efficient Cause or Author of sin or
Evil. But yet as He gives to all Life and Breath, and all things, Acts 17. 25.
And he has Created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were Created,
Rev. 4. 11. And so he does uphold and govern all things, that they cannot move
or act without him; Therefore of necessity he must be so far concerned in sin
or evil (for he suffers that, as he did the manners of the Israelites Forty
Years in the Wilderness) as is before explained. For though it has been a
puzzling thing unto Divines to assign, how that nothing has been, nor yet can
be done in the World, but what is the Will of God that the same should have
been done, for otherwise it was impossible and had never been done, and yet in
all this, to keep his Holiness unstained from the Sin or Evil; That he is not
in the least a Partaker with and sharer thereof, and that the Will of God is
Holy, and Just, and Good; but too many things have been done on this Earth
which are Unholy, Unjust and Evil. But yet by Ascribing Greatness unto our God,
how he at first made and contains all things, By lifting up our Eyes on high,
and beholding who has created all these things, that brings out their Host
by Number, he calls them all by their Names, by the Greatness of his might,
for that he is strong in Power, not one fails: By knowing how that he is
Sovereign and Infinitely above all other things. By knowing how that the same
God, Who made Man at first upright, but he sought out many Inventions: So in
the very beginning he made the Devil and all his Legions of Spirits Good
Creatures at first, for that is the return made upon the several parts of the
Creation. And God saw that it was Good. But the Devil and his Angels became
Evil of themselves, and sinned, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and kept not their first Estate,
Jude 6. And now they are the Black Fountain beneath, from whence do spring up
all Sin or Evil. But God (who now suffers it all, and overrules it for the
Great Ends of his Glory) is high, and as much exalted above it all, as the Sun
in the Firmament shining in its brightness, is above a Quagmire, Dunghill, or
dark hole of the Earth. For all the Sin or Evil which has been, now is, or
shall ever be, does no more Impair, Lessen, or Darken his Holiness, then the
other now does, as to the bright Beams of the Sun. Take and consider all this
together into our understandings, with the other Divine Truths which relate to
this matter, and they do all most clearly open and unfold this mystery, How God
does suffer sin and yet is not the Author thereof; and how all things both
Animate and Inanimate do his will; and yet Nevertheless His Will, like his
Commandment, Is Holy, Just and Good. So that though the Committing of Sin is
not according to the will of God in which he is well pleased; yet it is the
will of God barely to suffer, and then afterward to Punish it. For
Notwithstanding all that is here said, still there is a fault, Evil deserving
and willfulness in the reasonable Creature, in Committing Sin or Evil, or in
speaking Falsehood; and upon that fault and evil deserving of theirs, the future
Punishment of God is righteously founded.

Here we should remember our Creature State, How that Angels and Devils, Men
and Beasts, Birds and Fishes, Things with life or without life, visible or
invisible, they are all but Creatures, or Instruments in the Hands of God, for
to do whatever his hand or his Counsel has determined or suffered to be done.
For of a Truth against thy Holy Child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel were
gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy Hand and thy Counsel determined
before to be done, Act. 4. 27 28. In like manner it may be reasoned and applied
of the whose Creation of God, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor, stormy Wind
fulfilling his Word, Psalm. 148. 8. So all the living Creatures in all their
Actings and Movings, do agree and meet herein, for to do Whatsoever thy Hand
and thy Counsel determined before to be done. So the Devil and his Legions, and
all those People in the flesh, our Fellow Creatures, they are all but
Instruments in the Hands of God (for the Devil Acted through Herod and Pontius
Pilate, in putting Christ to Death) for to do Whatsoever thy Hand and thy
Counsel determined before to be done. And so all those Afflictions, Trials and
Temptations, are to be looked upon, which do befall any of the Children of Men.
David could say concerning Shimei, Let him alone, let him Curse, for the Lord
has bidden him, 2 Samuel 6. 11. Abisha did call him a dead Dog for thus doing.
And here we may make use of this Parallel and Similitude, we should not be like
unto Ignorant and Angry Dogs to bite the stone, without having respect unto him
that flings it. So alas! We are too apt to blame, and to have indignation at
that Fellow Creature of ours, or outward Accident, whom, or which we suppose to
be the cause of our Affliction, Loss, or Disappointment. But here we should
rather be silent and submit, take it with the Spirit of meekness and willing
resignation for the Lord has bidden him, or he has given Commission and Leave
to such an Evil or Lying Spirit, to Act through Incarnate or visible
Instruments such afflicting things against us. As in good things, It is not
such a Man, but Christ who dwells in him, does the same, so in evil things
the Devil Acts through such who do evil. And over and above all things, we may
look up to the Great Invisible God, who Overrules and Determines all for the
Great Ends of his own Glory. Who will make all things work together for Good,
to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his Purpose,
Romans 8. 28.

The consideration of all this put together should make us to lay our hand upon
our mouth, to have a care least we reply against God. Shall the thing formed
say unto him that forme^ it, why have thou made me thus? Shall the Creature
Governed by him and dependant on him, say, Why have thou suffered or ordered it
to be thus or thus with me, which I do not like, or I had rather it was
otherwise. Has not the Potter Power over the clay of the same lump, to make
ou^ Vessel to Honor and another to Dishonor? Is it not Lawful for the Good
Man of the House, for the Lord and Governor of the World, To do what he will
with his own? Sha^^ we receive Good at the Hands of God, and shall we not
receiv^ Evil? The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away; Blessed be the Name
of the Lord. For the Lord will not cast off for ever; But though He cause
grief, yet will He have Compassion according to the Multitude of his mercies;
for He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Lam. 3. 31,
32, 33. These and such like things are written and scattered up and down here
and there in the Book of the Lord for our Comfort and Contentment. Be still and
know that I am God. That he is our Creator, and we are pure and mere Creatures
in his hands. We may perceive a manifest diversity between his own Omnipotency,
or Almightiness (if I may so express it) and our own impotency, inability and
weakness. For it is evident and experienced, that there are many things which
we would ^ave, and yet we cannot obtain, which we endeavor after, and yet
cannot accomplish. As our Bodily motion is confined to such a degree, beyond
which we cannot move faster: Our strength is also limited to such a Pitch, that
we can lift so much and no more. So we may perceive as to all our other Powers
of Action, that they are determined and limited on every side. There is none
who in this mortal and imperfect state has all his desires, or every thing
according to his mind, even as he would have. God is to be eyed and observed in
this thing also, and it is meet to be said unto him, It is the Lord, let him do
with me what seems him Good. It was a Good Resigned and Contented Temper and
Disposition of David, when he said, If I shall find favor in the Eyes of the
Lord, He will bring me up again, and show me both it (the Ark) and his
Habitation. But if He thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am I,
let him do to me as seems Good unto him, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. Even so in all
the difficulties and doubts of our Life, amidst all fears and troubles, we
should refer them all unto God. Commit thy way unto the Lord, (the Marginal
read^ng is, Roll thy way upon the Lord) trust also in him and he shall bring it
to pass: Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him, Psalm. 37. 5, 7. And under
the Gospel it is commanded, Casting all your care upon him, for He cares for
you, 1 Pet. 5. 7.

And thou shall remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee in the
Wilderness; where thou have seen how, that as a Man bareth his Son, so did the
Lord bare thee in all the way that thou wentest, This expression of the Holy
Ghost seems to allude unto a Man carrying a Suckling, or Infant in his Arms,
which cannot go of it self, but must go whither it is carried, and it knows
not. Even so we are as B^bes and Sucklings unto God; And he does so carry us
his Creatures in this Life and through this Wilderness of the Earth, though too
many do not see, know and discern as much. For the Lords Portion is his People,
Jacob is the Lot of his I^heri^ance. He led him about, He instructed him, He
kept him as the Apple of his Eye. As an Eagle stirs up her Nest, fluttereth
over her Young, sprea^^^h abroad her Wings, takes them and bears them on her
Wings. (Behold, what a fit Comparison here is to resemble and set forth, how
the Invisible Creator does brood over his visible Creatures and take care of
them: Like as we read of in the beginning, And the Spirit of God, moved upon
the Face of the Waters, Genesis 1. 2. Even so ever since his Spirit, yea, his own
Being and Himself does Encompass and contain and over-shadow the Face of all
his Creation, He upholding all things by the Word of his Power) so the Lord
alone did lead him, and there was no strange God in him. He made him ride on
the High Places of the Earth, that he might eat the Increase of the Fields, and
He made him to suck Honey out of the Rock* and Oil out of the flinty Rock.
Butter of Kine, and Milk of Sheep, with fat of Lambs, and Rams, of the Breed
Bashan; and Goats, with the fat of Kidneys, of Wheat, and thou did drink the
Pure Blood of the Grape, Deuteronomy. 32. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. From all which we may
see, that even the least things pertaining to Life and to the Body (the husk
and shell of the Soul) are ordered by God our Maker, and then much more does he
take care and dispose of things for that, even the better and more enduring
substance within us.

I have often thought as to the several Passages, Occurrences, and Things which
I meet withal in the course of mine own Life, both as to what is past or
present, some of which I do remember, but what is to come God only knows; That
as when Peter was let out of Prison by the Angel who bid him follow me, when
they were past the first and second Ward, they came unto the Iron Gate that
le^deth unto the City, which opened to them of his own accord, Acts 12. 10.
From that last, I have thus several times concluded and reasoned within m^
self, that if such, or such a thing which I have a desire or coveting after,
were indeed the mind or will of God, that it should be done for me or had by
me; why then, as Peter did follow the Angel, so if I did use the common means
and endeavors after it, viz. such means as are true and prudent, lawful and
right and no others, as after they had past the first and second ward, the Iron
Gate opened to them of his own accord. So although there may be some mean
difficulty and opposition, which may be rubbed over and got through, yet at
length away would open of its own accord, to Perfect and Consummate the same
thing, That we may actually and indeed obtain it, or arrive at the place where
we would be. Whither or no I have guessed at, or rather found out the very
Truth as it stands in the Nature and Connection of things, the Lord knows. But I
protest by your rejoicing, which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord; I Protest, by
my Trouble and Vexation of Spirit, which I have sometimes about wordly and
outward things, this same is a mighty Word of Consolation and Contentment unto
me, in the several Expectations which I have framed and raised to my self, and
in the several Disappointments which I have met withal throughout this life,
centring still upon this Foundation and Point, The Will of the Lord be done,
and let me willingly submit unto that same his will, whatever it is or shall be.

These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have Peace, in the
World ye shall have Tribulation, but be of Good Cheer, I have ^vercome the
World, John 16. 33. Is not this very same thing felt and experienced at this
Day? For does not all the Tribulation, Trouble and Vexation arise from the
World and from the things thereof? It is so^^ very deed with me as I think off,
and am busied in the things and concernments thereof, but when again, I lift up
my heart above all the thoughts thereof, then it becomes Calm and Peaceable,
Smooth and Clear, as the upper Region of the Air, which is above all Winds,
Storms, Tempests, or Clouds. For the Knowledge of God and the great things of
Eternity, does swallow up, darken and obscure all the little things of this
lower World, as the Sun shining in its Brightness at Midday, does make, so
that we do not then perceive any Light of Moon or Stars, albeit they are then
equally fixed in the Firmament, and give their faintlight all one as at night
time

There is no such help in the World toward Contentment, as to have the
Knowledge of God; Especially to know and conceive of him as has been just now
explained. The Apostle Paul does intimate that some of the Christians dwelling
at Corinth to whom he Writes, Had not the Knowledge of God, I speak this to
your shame, 1 Cor. 15. 34. As truly it is to the shame of all who Name, or
profess the Name of Christ to be found without it. But it must be supposed,
yea, It is most certain and evident, that Paul himself had the Knowledge of
God. For otherwise, as he could never have wrote so many true and excellent
things concerning God. And it was by this Knowledge of God (even, as he is the
Creator, Governor and Disposer of all things) that he had thereby Learned in
whatsoever State he was therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased,
and I ^^ow how to abound, etc.

By what has been aforesaid, this Lesson may be somewhat Learned, in
whatsoever State, Thou O Man, art in, therewith to be Content. And that ye may
come to this Knowledge, both to be abased and how to abound, Be sure to take in
the Knowledge of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and then this Lesson is
easily Learned, as also the other Knowledge will be soon attained unto. But
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. So here it is, in the first place, know God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, as He, or they are to be Known; and then all the other will
fall in of Course. For then according to the Words of our Text, Every where,
and in all things, ye will be instrusted both to be full and to be hungry, both
to abound and to suffer need.

There is no need to use many more Words, to show and inculcate the same. But
as it is Written, And this is Life Eternal, that they might know thee, the only
true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: Even so this is the Sweetness
and Comfort, the Peace and Satisfaction, the Quiet and Smoothness (...) ness of
this present Temporal Life. To know thee, the only true God (as He is Supreme
Lord, Governor and Disposer of all things) and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
the Eternal Word, whereby God is more seen and manifest unto our Souls. Alas!
when we are amidst trouble, Vexation and Restlessness of Spirit, it is most
commonly because we forget God, and behave our selves falsely in his Covenant*
But did we know and see him with the Eyes of our Understanding being
enlightened? Were our Hearts pure and upright before him? How sweetly and
contentedly might we live, under the Apprehension and Care, and Protection of
this Good God above; All one, yea, and much more then Subjects under a Lawful
and Excellent Prince, Children under a Loving and Good, a Just and Wise Father;
and as Servants under the best of Masters. For God does approve himself more so
toward his Creatures, then all those Relations whatever, according to the
Flesh.

At that day shall a Man look unto his Maker, and his Eyes have Respect unto
the Holy one of Israel, Isa. 17. 7. And so when the Invisible, God is to us All
in All; when we see him in all our ways, and in all our goings, in all our
Doings and Actions which are ordered by him. As one does well express it, When
we have wandered all our Ways, Death comes and shuts up the Story of our Days.
Even so all our Ways, Goings, Doings and Actions, that we Creatures are
concerned in, it is all, but Whatever thy hand and thy Counsel determined
before to be done; This lays in the surest base and best Foundation for
Patience and Contentment. I do write the same things over again, which to you
it is safe, That ye may come to the perfect knowledge, and have the continued
remembrance of this same Great Truth.

This Duty of Contentment springs up as a Natural Result: and Consequence to
what we all owe unto him, viz. That we should obey God. It is often inculcated
and commanded in Scripture, that we should obey the Voice of God, or that man
should obey God: Yea, it is the drift, design and tendency of the whole
Scripture. As also of all our Preaching, that ye may obey God and keep his
Commandments in all things. Now that our own will should be brought under and
given up to the Will of God, that our Spirit should be subject unto the Father
of Spirits, this is an essential part and act of obedience unto God, and herein
also Contentment does consist. Be silent, O all flesh before the Lord, for he
is raised up out of his Holy Habitation, Zech. 2. 13. And so to be silent and
to hold our Peace, and to take it quietly whatever it be, to humble our selves
under the mighty hand of God, Here is the mind that has wisdom, here is the
Faith and Patience of the Saints; This is the very temper and disposition of
the Servants of the Lord God.

Now for the use and application of the foregoing discourse, let him, who shall
hear or read these lines see well to it, that the same mind be in him also.
Whenever we hear good and right things spoken of, there let our Hearts and
Consciences be upon the work, upon the examination and application of it all to
our selves. At the time and place of hearing, How find thou it, O man or
woman to be with (...) How do such and such good things belong to thee? Can
thou find an Interest, Propriety and share in them? Is the blessing thine? Why
really, here is the Life and Benefit of all Preaching and Hearing, when we can
say in truth (and without deceit or a lie) of the good things of God, that they
are mine. When our Souls can Echo back, as we hear him Named, that saying of
Thomas, one of the twelve Disciples, My Lord, and my God. Thomas spoke thus,
after he had reached his hand, and thrust it into the side of Jesus Christ who
was the Word. And so Proportionabl^, more is the comfort and rejoicing when the
words of God reach not our outside only, but our inside also; and then that
Inhabitant which is within (the Soul and Conscience) does answer thereupon, My
Lord, and my God, here is both Edification and Comfort in this, as also it is a
most Quickening and Powerful Exhortation to do all things, whereby we may
please and approve our selves unto our beloved. There are more comfortable
words to the same purpose in this very same 20th of John, Go to my Brethren and
say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your
God. Hereby in a most eminent manner, he shows himself to be the first born
amongst man^ Brethren, having infinitely greater Privilege and Prerogative
with the Father. For by expres^ing it on that wise, My God and your God, He
does as it were in the first place single out God to himself; and then he
communicates him forth unto us. If we may here use such Plainness of Speech, as
the Holy Ghost does elsewhere upon like occasions; It is like carving for ones
self in the first place, and then helping others. And I am sure, there is none
of his disciples and followers do in the least grudge or think much, that Jesus
our forerunner (whom our Soul loves) should thus in all things have the
Pre-eminence; especially since that he has Purc^ased a Church with his own
blood, he has the assured pr^mise, that he shall see the travel of his soul,
he has obtained of God such inexpres^^ble Privileges for poor mankind, whose
Portion before was folly and misery, shame and Death: and thus it is that he
does convey forth through his own Life as a Pipe or Conduit, his Goodness,
^rier^s^ip and Love to u^, whom he vouchsases to call brethren. Here is the
sufficient rejoicing and satisfaction to the reasonable creature (who does know
and conceive of these things) and as much as can be expected on this side of
heaven. To have the hope and Assurance, that our Creator is our Father, and God
is our God; when we can say so in the Congregation and Communion if Saints; and
each of us particularly has the voice of God witnessing from within our
selves, that ^e is our God. For as he is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
so he is likewise the God of all his Saints and servants by their several
respective Names, who do the works of Abraham; and then the necessary
consequence is, that all things are ours, if he is our God, who is the ^reato^
Proprietor and Disposer of all things; who has promised and will perform it;
The Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good thing will be withold from them
that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84 11.

Here some may be apt to think, all this is very good; But what is it to the
D^ct^ine of Contentment? It does pertain and relate thereto, for as there is a
certain Band and Connection, which ties and knits all the several visible Parts
of the Creation together. So it is, as to the invisible and future things of
God and of his Kingdom. There is a certain Subordination and Connection of one
to another, or one goes before another, and so indeed there is of all the
Graces and Gifts of the Spirit, and of all the Duties pertaining to Religion.
As in the Natural Body of ours, there are Ligatures and Strings, Nerves,
Arteries and Sinews, Which do hold the Bones and the several Parts together: So
likewise it is the very same as to the invisible Works of God, and what
pertains to the Souls of Men. In the last quoted place out of the Psalmist it
is said. The Lord will give Grace and Glory, the one before the other; the one
here and the other hereafter. And as the Blessing and Good Things of God given
here in hand, and in this Life are expressed throughout all the Old Testament
by the Word Peace, that is to say, Peace of Mind and Conscience, of Soul and
Spirit. (Which also is confirmed and often mentioned again in the Gospel, with
this Addition and Improvement to it. The Peace of God which passes all
understanding) What is all this for? So much promised by God and so much
desired by his Saints? But because that this same thing of Peace was an Earnest
and Assurance, a forerunner and certain token of the future and enduring
blessedness, which God would give unto them in the unseen State. Now under the
word Peace, Contentment is also included and contained; for they both signify
near the same. But only Peace is much more comprehensive and extensive then
Contentment. Inasmuch as Peace chiefly relates to inward Spiritual and Eternal
Things; and Contentment is as pertaining to out ward and Temporal things. But
seeing that to the well Being and Happiness of the whole Man, there must of
necessity be a Connection of all things together, in order to render any one in
a Good State and Condition. So that as Grace is a Pledge and Forerunner of
Glory, true and perfect Peace is a sure Token of Eternal Salvation: So as it is
written, Who has Sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts,
2 Cor. 1. 12. Even so this Christian Contentment aforementioned and
afore-treated of is an Earnest and Seal before hand of that Rest which
remains for the People of God. So that in order to arrive unto and partake of
that rest hereafter, we must come unto and have Contentment here. Unto which
promise our Twelve Tribes instantly serving God Day and Night, hope to come,
Act. 26. 7. As this is the End of all our Religious assembling our selves
together, to worship the Lord and hear his word, to set us one step yet nearer
to it; So there being a promise left us of entering into his Rest, If you would
indeed not come short thereof but enter therein, you must of necessity do all
the Mean and Preparatory Acts toward it. See therefore well to it, that ye
have either Learned already, or do for the time to come, Learn in whatsoever
State ye are in, therewith to be content.

Written by RICHARD STAFFORD* and Printed at London, School.


