The Second PART OF THE APOLOGY OF Socrates Christianus; OR, A Plain
Declaration of the Authority, by which he acts; freely offered to the
Consideration of all Serious, Considerate, and unprejudiced Christians.

IT was not to Conceal my own Name, that I assumed that of Socrates Christianus
at the first: For that I never did my self, or desired my Printer should, from
any who desired to know it. But having long since purposed never to Print my
Name with any thing I should Publish (unless for special necessary Cause) I
assumed that upon Occasion of the Manner of Writing I then used: And that I
have resumed it again now, was not without special Cause from the Complete
Agreement observable between his Case and my own. His Apology Consists of two
Parts: In the one he refells the Lies, Calumnies and False Accusations brought
against him by three Principal Adversaries; Melitus Patron of the Poets
(generally Latitudinarians) Anytus of the, Craftsmen and Politici (a Proper
Name of the same Sect) and Lycon of the Orators and Sophisters (as truly
Latitudinarian as any.) These were the Men, who raised the Clamours, and
stirred up the People against Socrates; and have all revived to act their part
in my Case. But I thought it sufficient to refell their False Reports and
Calumnies without noting the Persons, since they have not appeared openly, but
under hand against me. And this part I hope I have done to the Satisfaction of
all Honest, Impartial, and Intelligent Persons: As for the rest, their Weakness
is to be pitied, and their Rashness and Reproaches to be born with Patience
upon the Encouragements of the Religion we Profess, till Mrs. Experience
convince them of their Error, and how much they are abused.

In the other part he declares by what Authority he did those things which he
did; and that no less than Divine Authority; That it was a Duty imposed upon
him by God; that he was by God Appointed to the Care and Oversight of the
City, and constituted Supervisor thereof. It is now near Seven Years since I,
being to fulfill all Righteousness in receiving Commission (such as could be had
here) from Men, was solemnly demanded in the Presence of the People, to Answer
this important Question: Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the Holy
Ghost, to take upon yon this Office and Ministration, to serve God for the
Promotion of His Glory, and the edifying of hit People? Which I should never
have answered in the Affirmative as I did, had I not been fully so persuaded;
or had I had any doubt either concerning such Motions in general, or of such
special Motion in my own Case, and to that very Service, I was then to engage
in. And being well satisfied of such a Divine Call, I durst not refuse it for
any Scruples at the other; Nor do I think fit to desert that Service now, for
any Defect of Humane Authority I have since discovered; though I confess I
would not have refused to have had those Defects supplied by competent Ordinary
Authority, notwithstanding any Temporal Laws against it, if it might have been
upon such Terms, as I could have submitted to. But since that could not be, I
am well satisfied with that, which is most Necessary and Essential, and as much
besides, as the Legal Clergy of this Nation can pretend to.

But if the Case be as I take it to be, there will appear more in it, than, for
ought I know, any Man else in this Nation can pretend to. Almighty God had
appropriated the Priesthood under the Law to the Tribe of Levi, yet Samuel, who
was not of that Tribe, Ministered before the Lord, Girded with a Linen Ephod, 1 Samuel 2.18. and offered Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 7, 9, 17. It was indeed an
Extraordinary Case: His Mother had dedicated him to the Lord, and the Lord
accepted him. He, who obliges others to his Ordinance, does not thereby always
oblige himself: And he that grants a General Commission to many, may
notwithstanding grant a special Commission to one, if he pleases, upon a
special Occasion. I presume not to say this is my Case; or how far it is so, I
leave that to others to judge upon due Consideration of the Particulars I have
to relate. And I hope Socrates Christianus may sind as much Credit with true
Christians, as Socrates Philosophus with Infidels and Apostates.

What my Mother did for me, I cannot say; but she was a Woman of Parts and
Piety, and all I remember of her is only part of a Prayer she taught me, That
God would make me an Instrument of much Good in his Church, and in the Common
Wealth; but this I might have said, When my Father and Mother forsake me, the
Lord takes me up. For I remember neither; yet this I remember very well, that
when I was a Boy the very Names of Wisdom and Virtue were Precious to me: But
no particular instructions do I remember, to which any such Impressions might
be imputed. Though I was studiously inclined and loved Retirement, yet was I
always very ready to appear and Act for the Service of the Public, or of my
Friends; and, when but fifteen years of Age, went to serve the King with as
much Sincerity and Pure Zeal as any one could. Before I was twenty, I applied
my self with much Gust and great Satisfaction to the Reading of the Ancient
Christians, the Ancient Philosophers, and the Spiritual Writers. And when I was
about thirty I knew experimentally the Mystery of Socrates his Genius: And
while I heedfully observed that Conduct, I lived in a Blessed Condition; All my
Affairs succeeded with admirable Ease, as in a manner done and dispatched to my
Hand; and I had such Answers to my Prayers for People in Difficult and
Dangerous Cases, as were little less than Miraculous. But I never did any thing
contrary, though with all the Consideration and Care I could use, and the best
Advice of Friends I could get, but it proved very unsuccessful and unhappy. But
in this my Notices were somewhat different from those of Socrates; for they
were as well To some Actions, especially to Prayer, as From some others. And
once I was so unhappy in Disobedience to one of those, that it was like the Sin
of Adam to me, and the In-lett to all the Unhappiness, which has since
befallen my Family; and I had presently upon it as sensible Notice of it, as if
it had been a Sentence declared against me: And much of that Favor has ever
since been withheld front me.

Before this, near forty years since, I think it was, or rather more, that in
the next Parish, where was a great Family of my Relations, I persuaded and
prevailed to have THE HOLY COMMUNION Celebrated Monthly, which was rarely then
any where else in the Nation, above once, or twice, or thrice at the most in
the Year. Afterward when I removed to another Parish, where I was both Lord of
the Manor and (as we call it) Patron of the Church, I not only continued
Monthly Communions, but at last brought it to Weekly; and it so continued till
I had occasion to remove thence for my Health to a City, where it was then so
Celebrated. Nor was I satisfied with this, but being frequently at London, I
wrote to the then Archbishop Sancroft, that it might be Ordered to be Daily in
one or two Churches about London. And my Letter was well taken by the good man,
though it was not done, whatever it was that hindered it. But at last, when I
had little or no Hopes of what I had so long Desired, it pleased God to grant
me my desire in a Surprising manner.

I had brought back a Person, who had been Ordained according to the present
Church of England, from the Dissenters, to frequent the Early Communion at St.
Laurences; and I had sent to the place, where he was ordained, and had a
Certificate of his Ordination from the Register; but not in the least then
thinking of what after followed. But returning one Morning from that Early
Communion with him and some other Devout People, I overheard one of them saying
something of the Comfort and Benefit they found in it: Whereupon, I replied,
Ay, what would ye say to have it so every day? And when several of them
declared how glad they should be of such an Opportunity, I replied again, that
if they were in good earnest, I knew how it might be; for there was one in the
Company, who to my knowledge was in Orders according to the Church of England,
and would, I doubted not, be willing to Officiate. And thereupon we agreed to
meet at his House at Night, and there farther agreed to begin the next Morning
that DAILY COMMUNION, which has been continued ever since with many as
surprising Steps under the same Sacred Conduct, by which it was at first begun.
This was in Autumn 1692.

I had before this left off my Profession of the Law: After that had received a
Providential Qietus, as I apprehend it, from some other things, wherein I had,
Socrates-like, endeavored to serve my Country: And I had also forsaken the
World, and settled all my Estate upon my Wife and Children, as absolutely as I
could, without any Reservation whatever, casting my self wholly upon the
Providence of God, without any thoughts of any thing more than a Solitary
Retirement: And I have by that Providence ever since been so provided for and
Conducted, as to me has been far beyond all the Enjoyments of the World, and
all Human Wisdom whatever. Our little Society was begun upon these three
Principles; To meet every day early at the Holy Communion; To follow the
Example of the Ancient Christians, as near as we can; and, To avoid all
Offense, as much as we may. It was begun at his House who did first officiate:
but after a little time, settle in another, mean and dispicable, but very
convenient Place, and where we enjoyed that Serenity and Satisfaction, which is
not commonly to be met with in Princes Courts, or the Palaces of Great Persons
in the World.

But it was not long before the Person who did officiate, was removed from us,
and I my self brought into such Circumstances, that I neither could, unless I
would let the Work I had been so much concerned for, so long promoting, and was
so far engaged in, fall to the ground, nor durst refuse to take Orders, to
which I was invited, and not only led by a surprising External Conduct, but
also obliged by several Internal Motions, both correcting my Reluctance, and
encouraging my Submission. And after I had done this, and had begun to
officiate my self, it was not long before we were as unexpectedly and
surprizingly led from our private Lodgings, to perform that solemn Service in a
Public Church, and of one of the greatest Parishes, of the City, but without
the Walls: And after some time, to another, just within the Walls, something
less, but much more to our Satisfaction, by reason of its Privacy. But neither
were we permitted to continue long there; Nor could we obtain the use of any
other, by any Means we could use, but in the very Heart of the City: And both
the Services being more than I was able to perform, we had no other expedient,
but were forced to meet daily at eight of the Clock at Bow, and then to walk
thence along Cheap Side to St. Matthews, as if on purpose, that what we did,
might the more be taken Notice of, whether we would or no. And then I began to
be sensible what our Business was, to which were led by so many surprising
Steps of such a Secret Conduct; viz. to bear a Tacit Testimony for God against
the common wilful Neglect of that Solemn Worship, which we there performed, in
all other Parts of the Nation.

It was my desire to restore this Holy Worship of the Christian Sacrifice, not
only to its due Frequency, but also to its just Integrity, which had been much
deformed and disordered by Cranmer and his Foreign Agents, though I knew not
then by whom, or what Practices it was done, only perceived that it was so; and
therefore Composed a Form as near as I could to the Mind of the Ancients, but
taking in all the Common Form; and had a few Copies Printed, which we used,
while we continued at our Private Lodgings. But this I could not expect would
be permitted to be used in a Public Church; and therefore I was forced to use
the Common Form, only supplying what I could from other parts, and restoring
what had been disordered, to the proper places. And yet this was not easily
permitted, till being Questioned for it, I was to make my Defense, the same
good Providence, which had ordered the Buisness all along, brought (as
seasonably as unexpectedly) to my hand one of those Book, which were Composed
for the Church of Scotland; under the Inspection, and with the Approbation of
the English Bishops, in the Reign of King Charles 1. as completely agreeable to
my mind, as as if I had done it my self; and not long after, the first and only
true English Liturgy, composed by the English Clergy in the Reign of K. Edw. 6.
but wickedly deformed by Cranmer and his Foreigners, and his deformed
Changeling, Schismatically obtruded upon the Church, by the Parliament, without
the Consent of the Clergy in the Convocation, instead of it, which was the
Original, from which that for Scotland was taken. Upon sight of the first of
those, I printed my Defense, which I had before sent only in writing to the
Archbishop; and not long after, when I had met with the other, The Liturgy of
the Ancients represented, as near as well might be, in English Forms; with a
Preface concerning the Restitution of the most Solemn part of the Christian
Worship, to its Integrity and just Frequency: and presented it to the
Archbishop, Bishop of London, etc. used it in the Church, and offered to stand
a Trial with any that would question me for it, notwithstanding the Statutes of
1 Eliz. and 14, Car. 2. against it.

But there I continued the use of it between two and three Years, and might
undoubtedly have done so till this day, if I had thought fit: but that I did
not, considering how unworthily and shamefully it was neglected by the Clergy:
there being in the first Church we used no less than three in Priests Orders,
and not one of them ever came to join with us, unless the Reader once or twice
at the most: and there, after their Preaching and Printing for frequent
Communion, they not only after some time, put a stop to our daily Communion,
but reduced their own from weekly to monthly: In the next Church we had, we
never had any of the Clergy, but once two, who came upon a special Occasion:
and then again after some time, upon some little Temporal Consideration, we had
Warning given to remove within a time limited. In the third place indeed, the
Dr. lived at a great distance; but he was always kind to us: but then it became
more known, we had Communicants, who came frequently from all Parts, and for
some time seldom so few as thirty daily, and on the Lord's Day and other
Holy Days, a considerable Number; but not above three or four times any of the
Clergy; but on the contrary upon Holy Days, another Communion was set up at Bow
he Archbishops peculiar, in opposition, as I supposed, to it; and others
falling off, till we were not ordinarily above twenty, I began to think we had
done our Business, and finished our Testimony; and considering this Neglect, I
wished for a Discharge from that Public Place, fearing it might be but
exposing of such Holy things, if continued much longer; yet did not think fit
to leave that Station without either some Prohibition to proceed, or such
Invitation to some other as might satisfy me to do it: and such an one we had
soon after, and a very considerable one indeed: but the only Effect of it was
first a Satisfactory Discharge from that Public Service, and next a Review of
the Reformation, for which I had a Commodious Retirement, and other
Considerable Advantages; and Motives sufficient before I left the City. And of
the Observations I made upon that Review in Relation both to Church and State,
I gave some Account to such as I thought most proper.

And here again we had another Admirable Evidence of that Wise and Gracious
Providence, by which this Work had been ordered all along: For we had certainly
been involved in much Trouble and Difficulties, had not the same infallible
Providence both foreseen it from the beginning, and as seasonably and
sufficiently provided for it. But the several Manifestations of a Divine
Conduct over us to this time, are more than need to be related, or can be so
sensibly understood by such as were not concerned in them, or have had no
Experience of the like. Nor perhaps was it necessary that it should ail be so
manifest to any other as, to my self, who was to Act, and yet do nothing which
needed any Extraordinary Authority, or Attestation for the Satisfaction of such
as were concerned in what I did. But it seems to have been providentially
ordered, that so much should be so manifest to me, as is sufficient not only to
satisfy such Scruples as might be raised in my own Mind, but also to answer the
Objections of others.

The Principal Objections are against my Performance of the Office of
Priesthood without other Ordinary Authority, than what I my self now think not
sufficient. But to the Political Clergy, who make this Objection, I answer; 1.
That for Ordinary Authority I have as much as themselves: 2. That that was
sufficient for some purposes, and particularly for a tacit Testimony against
them: 3. That I have besides what does satisfy my self; and that, whether
Ordinary or Extraordinary, is sufficient for them: And to all others, that I
take not this Office of my self, but was called of God, as Samuel was; first
Dedicated to his Service by particular Dedication (if not by my Mother, which
might be too, for ought I know) however, by my self, which is not less, and
accepted by him; and this manifested by an Extraordinary Concurrence of various
Causes, many of them in a surprising and yet orderly and necessary manner, to
the producing of such just, reasonable and necessary Effects, as our Daily
Communion; my Engaging in that Service; our Performance of it under such a
Conduct from despicable private Lodgings to the very Heart of the City; and
then there, for so long time, a sufficient time, without any Interruption,
notwithstanding the Laws against the Form I was known to use, Then my Discharge
in due season, and to my Satisfaction; and our Conduct thence to a convenient
Place of Retirement; with seasonable Provision for unsuspected Difficulties;
and our Reduction back again, etc. so many Circumstances so orderly concurring,
as can no more be accounted for without a Providence, than an orderly Composure
of proper Letters, into a Verse or Sentence without the Skill of a Compositor
and a Founder: and besides, all this Structure built upon the Foundation of a
Constant Disposition of so many years Continuance, to what neither any thing in
Nature, nor any Temporal Prospect was any Motive or Inducement: and farther
yet, my Acceptance of the Office not without such special Internal Motions, as
I had had Experience of many years before, to what the Laws of the Land
require, so that I could with clear Conscience answer the Questions to be
proposed to me. The Concurrence of all these, 1. Of such a Disposition of so
many years Continuance; 2. Of so many External Providential Occurrences, so
necessary, so orderly succeeding, and in so surprising a manner and 3ly. Such
Internal Motions: And all to the same just, and reasonable, and necessary End;
is to me so Satisfactory an Evidence, as I can hardly think can be rejected by
any one, who does not disbelieve either a Divine Providence, or at least, one
of the Chief Principles of the Gospel; but think sufficient for Caution to all
considerate Persons, and for Conviction before God of such as presume to oppose
or despise it.

If my Commission be defective in the Ordinary Conveyance, whose Fault is that?
But may not that Defect be supplied by what is Extraordinary? Is God's Hand
shortened? Has our Savior limited his Power by His Commission to the Twelve?
How then came Paul to be an Apostle? Is there not as much need now here, as
there was in the days of Samuel then? Consult Bishop Andrews, Consult Bishop
Tailor, Consult Dr. Sherlock, Dean of St. Paul's Famous Cathedral, in the
Principal City of the Nation, in his last Chapter of Religious Assemblies, and
others that might be named. Are not many Teachers either shamefully Ignorant of
the most Solemn and peculiar Part of the Christian Worship, or notoriously
self-condemned here, and in danger to be damned hereafter for their
unfaithfulness, and wilful Neglect of what they know? And is not such an
Admonition highly necessary in such a Case and very suitable to the Methods of
the Divine Wisdom and Providence?

And for the rest of my Business, what is it, but what is a Common and Ordinary
Duty? The Service of God, The Service of my Country, the Reformation of
Manners; the Preservation of Peace by removing the Seeds of Dissension, and
great Occasions of Wars, and making that impregnable which is now indefensible;
the Restoration of the Genuine Primitive Christianity; Healing the Breaches of
the Church of Christ, and promoting the Restitution of its Rights by Assertion
of Truth, necessary Truth, and such Truth as all my Adversaries are not able to
gainsay or resist. Nay, does not their very Dealings with me at the same time
both discover them to be of the Spirit of the False Prophets, and Attest and
Confirm My Mission, as a true Disciple of Christ? This is My Business to assert
and bear My Testimony to the Truths of God in such Manner and Order as he is
pleased to order and direct; and those not any New Revelations, but the Truths
once delivered to the Saints, and received by the Churches; Catholic Truths,
opposed by none but Heretics, and Schismatics, and False Teachers, who
corrupt the Doctrine of the Gospel, to gratify their own Lusts, and to please
the People; who can unconcernedly behold the Growth of all Sects, even of'
Infidelity and Apostasy, and notorious Opposition of all revealed Religion
under the Notion of Deism and Socinianism, except only such as they think (like
themselves) aim Chiesly at their Cathedrals and Preferments. This is their
Diana for which they are concerned; and for which they can easily join and
combine with Infidels, and Deists, and Commonwealths Men, to secure that
against such as they think may lay Claim to it: And so they can but secure
that, they can willingly enough give up one part of the rest to the State, and
the remainder to the Sects; nay be well appaid to have their Pastoral Charge
performed by them, so they may but quietly enjoy the Revenues and Profits to
themselves; and upon Confidence of such Assistants without either Shame, or
Scruple of Conscience, or Fear of Scandal, hold such Charges at inconsistent
distances, as good Christians heretofore would have dreaded to undertake but
one of them. And certainly their so great Concern in the one Case, and so
little Concern in all others of Religion (of which the instances which might be
given are undeniable and notorious) is so scandalous, that it is not to be
doubted, but it is one of the greatest Temptations to Atheism and Deism that is
in this Nation: For the Scandals of the most grossly Scandalous is nothing so
effectually Scandalous, as such as appears under Sheeps Clothing.

It was my plain Reproof of these things, and charging them with Filthy Lucre,
that first provoked an Angry Letter to my self, then the Appeal sent me in a
Penny-Post Cover, then that false and foolish Letter, elsewhere mentioned, and
at last that Religious and Loyal Combination of Latitudinarians with Deists and
Commonwealths Men, of like Concern in the State, as the others in the Church;
and all that Noise and Clamor, wherewith the People have been abused, the King
affronted, and all good and solid Methods, and the Advantages, which the good
Providence of God had put into our hands at this time, for a Happy Settlement
of a lasting Peace both in Church and State, madly disturbed, and the Peace of
the Nation greatly endangered, unless more Prudent Counsels and better Courses
be taken in time. And indeed what Mischiefs may not reasonably be expected from
a Combination of two such Factions; if they be but a little animated at the
first, either by Authority, or, which is more to them, by an inconsiderate,
well meaning, abused People! Of the One we have had Experience enough within
our own Memory; and they have given the Nation a fair Warning of what they
would be at now again, by a bold attempt to suppress the Anuual Memorial of it,
by a very Virtuous and Religious Preacher of Mr. Toland's Club upon the
Thirtieth of January, which I hear is sometimes visited by a like Virtuous
Chair Man of the same Party in his Chair; A very proper and seasonable
Preparative for so furious reviving the old Pretense, from which that day at
last became so Memorable. The Other is as very a Faction too; and that appears
by like Practices to promote their own Designs, in keeping the Convocation from
sitting and acting: For did they not know that the greatest part of the Clergy
of this Church are against what they would have, and in Matters of no small
Moment, they would never be guilty of so foul a Practice. And that it is done
by their Persuasion or Misinformation and Encouragement, does likewise appear
by the Answer to the Letter to a Convocation Man.

And how foul a thing this is, will appear, if the Manifold Evils apparent in
it, besides what may be latent and not yet discovered, be well considered: 1.
It is a Betraying of the Rights of the Church of Christ, and Essential Rights,
as to its being one Body and a formed Society: 2. It is a Betraying of the
Rights of their own Order, and Rights absolutely Necessary for the Discharge of
their Duty in common to Consult and Advise concerning the Great and common
Concerns of the Church. 3. And this is done at a time of as great need as ever,
of an Assembly of the Clergy; when Immorality is grown to that height, that all
the Bishops of England did not dare to bring in a Bill, drawn at their own
Request, and perused by able Counsel, and all the Judges then in Town, into the
Parliament to suppress it; and to that Impudence that a Notorious Scandalous
Cause, and of one in Great place, has not only been defended in the Courts of
Law in Westminster, but at last brought by Appeal before the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and no notice of the Scandal, though undeniable, taken by all or
any of the Bishops, as if there was nothing of Discipline left in the Church of
England: and Impiety to that height and Impudence, that one of their Lordships
has complained to me that they are put to prove their Creed, and the fifth
Chapter of St. Matthew: But a greater instance than this I have lately given in
my Letter to Sir R. C. which has produced only a more notorious Confirmation
of it. 4. This Antichristian Treachery is so peculiar to this Faction, that I
know no Sect besides themselves that is guilty of it: Nay what they deny to
their own Brethren, they themselves will not deny to any of the Dissenters, nor
so much as to the Quakers, though Constantly, Annually Notorious and complained
of, 5. It is an injury to the whole Body of the Clergy of the Church of
England, joined with Abuse and Mockery (in Effect;) and repeated and continued
for many years together: For what else is it never to let them Sit and Act,
when they are so often Called and Assembled?

Nor, 6. Are the Mischiefs to the State and Government, less than these to the
Church. They betray the State into Sin by encouraging a Usurpation, which is
one of the greatest Acts of Sacrilege that can be; and that by as Gross and
Pernicious an Heresy, condemned by all Parties but their own Faction; and
besides are charged with Schism by a Considerable Part of the Church of
England, who make out sufficiently by strength of Argument, what they want in
number of Persons. But of such Latitude are their Principles, that they
comprehend as great Matters as all this, as justifiable, or excusable enough,
for attaining their End, and therefore one of them, Melitus himself, who first
began the Clamours, could tell me, Do you think that King William will part
with such a Flower in His Crown? Yea, say I, why not? and with his Crown too
for just and necessary Cause, if he be indeed a Christian. But they who are
themselves so much for getting and keeping, that they can strain their
Consciences for it, cannot easily believe that others will be persuaded to part
with what they have once gotten, upon any Terms or Consideration. Such Flowers
to the Eye of a worldly minded Man, are to a Christian indeed no better than
Weeds, stinking Weeds, and are really Poisonous Weeds in their Effects. And
certainly it is no more consistent with the Duty of a faithful Pastor of
Christ's Flock, than of a good Subject and true Friend to his Country, to
suffer his Prince to take such Poison without Warning. But what wonder if they,
who make no scruple to betray the Rights of Christ's Kingdom, make as little to
expose their Prince and Country too to danger for their own Ends? And what else
do they, who encourage a Prince, whose Title is doubtful, or it may be, none at
all in the Judgment of his Neighbors, to do and continue what is offensive to
so considerable a part of his Subjects, and cast the Odium of their own Evil
Counsels upon his Will and Pleasure, to the Prejudice and Scandal of his
Government? The English are an Active and Bold People, and as sensible of the
Violations of their Rights as any: And when they are free from Wars abroad, are
not like to be very quiet at Home, upon such Occasions and Provocations. And
Rights of the Church have in the English Laws been always heretofore as
carefully provided for as any, and particularly in the Corronation Oath. And
the Rights of the Convocation, which are well vindicated in a Learned Book
lately published, are so well understood by many Learned Men of this Church,
that I wondered that none did it before, or that the Universities and the
Clergy of the several Diocesses, did not by some Public Instruments, declare
their Judgments, or at least revive the Ancient good Custom of Communicatory
Letters in much use, when under Heathen Emperors they could not enjoy the
Liberty of Synods to Consult of the Common Concerns of the Church. But I hear
of another coming out; and more may reasonably be expected if this Course be
still continued. Surely it is time both for the Clergy, and for the Commons of
England, the Commons, I say, not their Trustees, especially such as are
notoriously known to have made a Trade of their Employment, to look about them;
for I do not apprehend that the Christian Religion and the true English
Government can be in greater Danger than from two such Factions in Combination.

The One is so full of the Spirit of the World, and so temporizing and
compliant to the Powers of the World, and with their Prudentials, which is
nothing else but the Wisdom of the World, such corrupters of the Simplicity and
Generosity of the Christian Religion, in their Explications, and Betrayers of
Souls and States into Sin, that if the other prevail to get the Power into
their hands, there is little doubt to be made of their Compliance, whatever the
Religion be which they set up; be it Deism, Socinianism, or whatever else. I
know one of them, who objected such Matters of Conscience against his
Acceptance of a Preferment proposed to him, that I could not in Conscience
persuade him to accept it, and yet soon after he did accept it, and holds it
too to this day, with another of it self, a sufficient Charge for any man of
Conscience to undertake. I have known the same Person very warmly reprove a
Master of a Family for not allowing his Family the Use of such Pomps and
Vanities of the World, as he thought renounced in their Baptism, very
disagreeable to the Example and Precepts of our Savior, his Apostles, and the
Primitive Christians, and of evil Consequence to the living of most People; and
thereby encourage them to live in Disobedience to his Grief, and their Shame
and Prejudice. And yet this Man passes for a good Man. To the Author of the
Appeal, It looks like Madness to attach a Religion, when it becomes the
Religion of the Country; when it has the Establishment of the Laws of the
Constitutions: And in his Wisdom, such Zeal for the Souls that Newgate could
not escape their Diligence, is an Aggravation of a Crime of the Priests; and
such a Crime it is as such good Men are little guilty of; and might be ashamed
to mention a Matter so reproachful to themselves. Such Prudentials as these
have been noted by others in their late Patriarch, and may easily be traced to
their Original, in their Protopatriarch himself. And such Agreement there is in
some of their Principles with Mr. Hobbe's, and such kindness have they commonly
showed to one of the most Active Promoters of Socinianism, that their
Compliance and Officiousness to the other Faction, if they succeed, is not to
be questioned.

And for the other Faction, which lay concealed for a time among many Honest
well-meaning Men in the long Parliament, and has lain concealed among many
such, called Whiggs, in the late Reigns, it presently appeared after this King
came in, how they stood affected to Religion; and is now since the Peace
apparent enough, how they stand affected to the Government too: Both might
easily be perceived by such as have had Admittance to the Calves Head Club, and
to Mr. Toland's Clubs before now: But now appear barefaced enough, so that
they are no Mysteries. And the Whiggs are now commonly reputed the veriest
Knaves of the Nation by many Honest Men, who were heretofore taken to be of
their Party. While I was writing this, I took notice in a Booksellers-Shop of
this Title of a Book, A brief History of the Times, which opening at page 40. I
cast my Eye upon these Words: The Plot-Faction Designed the Ruin of the late
King; and to compass it by leaving him neither Money, Power, Credit, nor
Friends. And when I had looked farther into it, I observed such Agreement
between what is there related, then to have been, and what I am satisfied now
is in Agitation, as do mutually confirm the Truth each of other, and does fully
satisfy me of the Mystery of the late Pretense and Clamours of the growth of
Popery, to be no other than to Affront the King (as I was told expressly by a
Person lately deceased, who had as much reason to know as any one I know) to
lessen his Reputation with his Confederates abroad, and the Affections of the
People to him at Home; to draw their Hearts to themselves, and Abuse and Amuse
them with that Pretense, while they compass their own Designs of reducing
Religion to Deism, and the true English Government to a Commonwealth, most like
to end in Anarchy and Confusion, as it did before. And whosoever shall well
consider that Book (which I Confess I had never seen before) will there find
such Truths so unanswerably asserted, as will both satisfy him concerning the
Truth of what I say here, and make him more cautious and more wise than to be
any more imposed upon by so wicked, and gross an Abuse and Deceit, but rather
turn his Indignation against such Impostors and Disturbers of the Peace of his
Country.

These things I take to be all Truths, and such Truths, as I thought my self
obliged to declare: I have endeavored faithfully to discharge my Duty; and now
leave it freely to others to judge as they think fit, and to the Consequences
of their own Judgment. Nor have I written any thing here out of ill will to
any, but out of good will to my Country, and even to those very Persons, who
may be thought to be most particularly and most sharply reproved; and in due
order to them, to whom I have performed my Duty before in private; whose
Reformation I desire; but not Confusion, other than truly Penitential. And such
Fruits as these, are they, by which according to our Savior's Rule, the Tree
is to be known.

I know no Sin more Epidemical and common in this Nation at this time among
such as make Profession of Religion, than that, which by the Punishment
denounced in the Gospel, seems one of the greatest, Disowning or not owning
Christ or his Words, for Fear, or Shame, or worldly Compliance: And none more
notoriously Guilty than Latitudinarian and Nemine contradicente Professors. It
was in my Mind, when I was Writing the Letter now Published, that should
Almighty God let lose some of their Consciences upon them, we should soon have
more Hamdens amongst them. Nor should I have mentioned it now but to prevent so
great a Mischief, and put them in mind to consider the things which belong to
their Peace in time, confess their Faults, give Glory to God, and expiate their
Former Miscarriages by so much the more generous Acts of Christian Magnanimity
upon all Occasions hence forward.

To such as are apt to Assault me with their spiteful Argumentum ad Hominem
concerning my Authority, when they have well considered what I have to say to
for my self, I shall recommend to their Consideration for their own selves what
is well said in an ill History of the Reformation upon the Questions in the
Book of Ordination: And with that I shall Conclude, as follows, An 1550. in
the Abstract p. 118. which the Reader may see more at large in the History, p.
145.

There were some Sponsions promised, as a Covenant, to which the Ordination was
a Seal: The first of these was, That the Persons that came to receive Orders,
professed that they believed they were inwardly moved to it by the Holy Ghost.
If this were well considered, it would no doubt put many that thirst after
Sacred Offices to a stand; who, if they examine themselves well, dare not
pretend to that, concerning which, perhaps they know nothing, but that they
have it not: and if they make the Answer prescribed in the Book, without
feeling any such Motion in their Heart, they do publicly Lie to God, and
against the Holy Ghost, and have no reason to expect a Blessing on Orders so
obtained. But too many consider that only as a Ceremony in Law, necessary to
make them capable of some Place of Profit, and not as the Dedication of their
Lives and Labors to God, and to the gaining of Souls. It were happy for the
Church, if Bishops would not think it enough barely to put these Questions, but
would use great strictness in examining beforehand the Motives that set on
those who come to be Ordained. Another Sponsion is, that the Priests shall
teach the People, committed to their Charge, and exhort them both in private
and public, and Visit the Sick. By this they plight their Faith to God, for
the care of Souls, to be managed by them in Person, and upon that they must
find the Pastoral Care to be a Load indeed: and so will neither desert their
Flocks, nor hire them out to weak, and perhaps Scandalous Mercenaries. In which
the faultiness of some have brought a blemish on this Church, and given scandal
to many, who could not have been so easily persuaded to divide from it, if it
had not been, that they were prejudiced by such gross and public Abuses.

FINIS.

