REFLECTIONS UPON THE OCCURRENCES OF THE LAST YEAR. From 5 Nov. 1688. to 5 Nov.
1689. WHEREIN, The Happy Progress of the late Revolution, and Unhappy Progress
of Affairs since, are Considered; The Original of the latter discovered, and
the proper Means for Remedy, Proposed and Recommended.

PROVE. XXVII. 5, 6. Open Rebuke is better than secret Love: Faithful are the
Wounds of a Friend; but the Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful.

London, Printed in the Year, 1689.

Advertisement.
THese Papers, though in Print, were not Printed for vulgar View; but for the
use of such as are principally concerned in them; and therefore in number
proportionable to that intention. They contain a search into a dangerous Sore,
which cannot faithfully be performed without some smart to the Patient. And in
such case, they who are wise will not rage and storm at the Hand which touches
them, but consider that it is but what is necessary to prevent greater Mischief
in time. Perhaps the Operation might have been performed more tenderly by
others, but more faithfully it could not have been done by any. If any blame it
as a Work of too much Officiousness, for one thus to obtrude himself before he
be sent for; it must be remembered, that he had some concern in, as well as for
the Safety of the Patient: And were it not so, yet the good Samaritan for his
good Office in supplying the neglect of the Priest and the Levite, was not
censured, but approved by the Great Physician, our Lord and Savior. If after
all, any one will be troublesome, he is hereby admonished to be wise, and
consider first, how he will clear himself before the supreme Judge, who will
certainly take Cognizance of the Cause, and give Righteous Judgment upon each.
For, for his Service it was done, and to him the Success is entirely committed.

The Reader is desired to strike out,
IN some Copies, page 1. line 4. from two notable, etc. to Deliverances were,
l. 8. and instead thereof, to insert after the word November, l. 12. And in
this, that they were Deliverances from Conspiracies, of the same inveterate
Enemies, though at so great a distance of time, and of quite different Form and
Contrivance; the first secret, underground, and in the dark; the other,
barefaced, above-board, and visible to the World. And to read, p. 9. l. 31.
had not then, p. 11. l. 33. among them, p. 17. l. 26. Predecessors of the last
race, in p. 18. l. 24. Nati. p. 21. l. 21. by any, p. 32. l. 2. systematical.
Other mere literal Faults being left to his own Observation.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE OCCURRENCES OF THE LAST YEAR.
WE are now by the course of Time and Providence of God, brought to an United,
Solemn Anniversary Commemoration of two great Deliverances of this Nation, from
two notable Conspiracies of our inveterate Enemies; the one secret, and under
ground in the dark; the other barefaced, above-board, and visible to the World:
And the Deliverances were, one of our Ancestors, but in them of our selves,
about one Age, that is, 84 years since; the other of our own selves, commencing
in the Princes Arrival, but one year since: But both concurring in the same
happy and memorable Day of the Fifth of November. Almighty God of his Infinite
Goodness and Wisdom, was pleased, not only to renew his Mercies to us; to do it
when, considering the corrupt and vicious State of the Nation, we had great
reason, rather to fear some severe Judgment; to do it in such a Manner, as
might make his Divine Power and Efficacy in it the more apparent; but to do it
with such Circumstances of Time, as might mind us also of his former Mercies,
of his long continued Favor, and the constancy of his Providence over us, the
more to endear his Goodness to us, and to oblige us the more effectually to
himself. The Year, that of Eighty Eight, to mind us of the famous Eighty Eight,
one Hundred Years before, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when the Wind and
the Sea, by his Divine Direction, fought for us against a supposed Invincible
Armado. And the Day of the PRINCE's Landing determined, by the remarkable
Motion of the Wind, under the same Divine Direction, to the very day of the
Fifth of November, to mind us of the Deliverance in the Reign of King James the
First, upon the same day, from one of the most Barbarous and Hellish
Conspiracies that the World has known. And, certainly they must be very dull
and stupid Souls, who by such Admonitions as these, are not provoked to
Consider with Admiration and raised Affections, the observable Course of the
Divine Providence, in preserving this Nation from such various and continual
Machinations of the Antichristian Faction; not only during the long Reign of
four and forty Years of that Queen, but for this full 130 Years; from her
Accession to the Crown, unto this late Revolution.

As these Circumstances of the Time invite us to look backward upon the former
course of Divine Providence, in the Occurrences of this Nation, so there is
another Circumstance in our late Deliverance, which does no less excite our
Consideration, and oblige us to look forward upon what has since occurred in
the space of this one Year last past: And that is the eminent and wonderful
Manner of the Revolution.

The Deliverance it self was so full fraught, with Mercies and Favors from
Heaven, that every Circumstance had some special obliging Favor in it; and
this of the manner, more than one. It was no small favor, that it was effected
with so much Ease to us, and with the Effusion of so little Blood, especially
considering the general Corruption of the manners of all sorts of People among
us, which not only deserved, but seemed to need and require a Purgation: But
the Merciful God, it seems, was pleased, first to try whether there was so much
Ingenuity left among us, as to be wrought upon by his more gentle method of so
surprising a Mercy and eminent Deliverance, which if it be not, will certainly
aggravate the sin of the Nation, and in all probability, increase and hasten
some remarkable Judgment upon it.

But that which I principally intend here, is, that it was carried on with a
high Hand, like that of the Children of Israel, in so powerful and eminent a
manner, a certain Dread and Terror going before, as makes the Providence of God
visible, his Power known, and gives a great Indication of his special Presence
(by his Invisible Ministers) in it. This is such a special Favor, and
produeeth such special Obligations upon us, as must needs highly aggravate the
Crime of any unsuitable Return, as not only Notorious Ingratitude for an
extraordinary Benefit, but a kind of contempt, or slighting of so great a
Benefactor to his Face. Behold, I send my Angel before thee, to keep thee in
the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared, Says God to
Moses, and then subjoyns this Caution: Beware of him, and obey his Voice,
provoke him not: for he will not pardon your Transgressions; for my Name is in
him, Exodus 23.20, 21. This was our Case: And as such an Obligation requires a
special Prospect, Care and Caution for the future, to avoid all Offense against
it; so the powerful and successful Progress of that Deliverance, must needs
make the Departure of those Powers, or but Suspension of so eminent a Favor,
soon felt, and easy to be perceived, and thereby give a plain Admonition of
some Offense committed. And whether this be not our Case, is a matter of great
Importance, and requiring our most serious and deepest Consideration.

The Deliverance in the Manner and Progress of it, was so surprising and
amazing, as the like is hardly to be met with in any History, since that of the
Israelites; and yet it will not be easy to determine, which is most to be
admired, the smooth, uninterrupted, prosperous and successful Progress of it,
or the unaccountable Stop, which seems to have been put to that success; and
the strange, slow, impedited, and unprosperous Course of our Affairs since: How
all things did visibly concur to promote that, but the course of our Affairs
since has been retarded we know not how! Only this we plainly see, all is at a
stand, or moves slowly, like Pharaoh's Chariots, when their Wheels were off; or
as I have heard of a Cart bewitched, which before was drawn easily loaded, by
four or five Horses, but of a sudden, became almost unmovable, in plain
Ground, and half unloaded, by a much greater strength: So have all things gone
with us, as if they were Enchanted, for the greatest part of this year. And so
sudden and great an Alteration, does of it self deserve and provoke our
Consideration; but the dangerous Consequences thereof, which have already
occurred, or are within view, much more.

The late wonderful Revolution which is looked upon as our Deliverance, was
Completed, if we compute from the Arrival of the Prince, to the Exit of King
James, within the space of forty three days; and if we extend it to the day
when the Prince was Proclaimed King, it amounts but to one hundred days: But
upon Christmas day He was Addressed to by the Lords, and two days after, by the
Members of the former Parliaments, and the Aldermen and Common Council of the
City, to take upon him the Administration of Public Affairs, both Civil and
Military, and the Disposal of the Public Revenue, and to take into his
particular care, the then present Condition of Ireland. All which, the day
following, He accepted and undertook.

Among those four things recommended in general to the Prince, and undertaken
by him, were some things comprehended, which could not then be completely done
by him; as the Constitution of Civil Officers, and of Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, and other Officers in the Militia. All that could then be done by
him in these matters, was only to consider, and resolve upon fit Persons for
these Employments, to be Authorized as soon as might be. But this was a matter
of some Consequence to be settled as soon as might be, as in other respects, so
more particularly, that the more Forces might have been the sooner spared for
Ireland. For considering the Disposition of the People, the ordinary Militia
being in good hands, would have been sufficient for the Security of this
Nation. But, whatever was the matter, neither were the Civil Magistrates in the
several Counties, that is, the Justices of Peace, nor the Militia, settled in
many Months after.

And for Ireland, the Consequence of the speedy securing or reducing of that
Nation, was very great; not only for the Security, Ease, and Benefit of this,
but moreover and especially, in order to the common Design of the Confederates,
that we might have been in a condition to have Attacqued the common Enemy on
the one side, as they did on the other; which we being animated by Success, and
our Enemies under no ordinary Consternation, might have brought the common
Design to perfection; and which is of higher Consideration, have produced what
the Providence of God had put an Opportunity into our Hands to do, directed us
to, and was ready to have conducted us to perform. And how dismal may be the
Consequence of this failure, if it proceeded from any neglect in us, as God
alone completely knows, so I am unwilling to declare what I suspect, nor
perhaps is it fit for me to do it. But thus much of the Matter of Fact in this
case, is certain and commonly known, that the Arms and Ammunition which were
sent, whenever that was, but to that one poor Town of Londonderry, which shut
up their Gates the ninth of December, declared for the Prince of Aurange, and
the Protestant Religion, and immediately sent hither for speedy Relief, Arrived
not there till the twentieth of March, nor the Forees sent with Cunningham and
Richards till the fifteenth of April; and then instead of Relief, by deserting
the Service, proved only a Discouragement to them. And though some others came
near the seventh of June, yet were not those poor Creatures actually relieved
till the thirtieth of July; when from seven Thousand five hundred brave
Regimented Men, they were reduced to about four Thousand three Hundred; though
nothing appears, why that might not have been done full as well, six Weeks
before.

Proportionable to this, for the Relief of that Town, was the Progress of our
Affairs for the Reducing of that Kingdom. That which might with ease have been
done at first, grew daily more and more difficult; the Difficulties increasing
faster than our Preparations; insomuch, that March 8. King William speaking to
the Lords and Commons, concerning the deplorble Condition of Ireland, declared,
That he thought it not advisable to attempt the reducing of it with less than
Twenty Thousand Horse and Foot. Difficulties should, and usually do excite
generous Spirits to the more vigorous Action: And this, no doubt, was the
Intention of this King in that Speech: Notwithstanding long it was ere we could
be ready to transport our Forces; and when all things were expected to be ready
for that purpose, how they answered the General's expectations, must be left to
his own Observation, and the more particular Examination of them, who are not
only concerned, but are in Place and Authority to do it; it being commonly
believed, they were not so well as ought to have been. And when they were at
last Transported, which was not till about the middle of August, it seems they
were not such as the General thought fit to engage with the Enemy, though so
lately baffled before Londonderry; especially their Carriages not coming to
him before the 24th of September; nor have they to this day, done any
considerable Service.

And whereas it is likely, the wary old General might decline any Engagement,
in daily Expectation of the Danish Supplies to have been with him long since,
yet so unhappily has that also fallen out, that the Expectation of them, has
proved only a Disappointment to us, and perhaps a greater Disappointment than
ever their Service may repair. Besides, the Season of the year is now so far
gone, that they are more like to prove a burden this Winter, than any advantage
to us. And what may now become not only of Ireland, but of the Forces we have
already sent thither, is very doubtful; so that we have in a manner, already
lost all the Expense of this Summer, and are in danger to lose a great part of
our Forces also.

And now, if from Land we descend to take a Prospect of the Progress of our
Affairs at Sea, we shall still find all alike: The two famous Nations for
Action at Sea, not only baffled by the sole Power of France, but our losses in
Men by Sickness and Mortalities greater than by Fight, and in our Merchandise
and Trade, not less than our Expenses: And, as if the Power of our Enemies were
not enough to annoy us, after all, (if the Complaints of our Merchants and
their Mariners be true) our Ships have been made a Prey by those who should
have been their Guard and Convoy, and were employed for that Purpose.

And if we return again to Land, and consider the State of the Country, we
shall there find all our Country Commodities at so low a Rate, as will hardly
pay Wages and other necessary charges, besides reasonable Maintenance of the
Families: And this Condition made harder by Taxes already granted and Levied,
and those unsuccessfully spent, and more expected. And such a Disappointment of
the great Expectation, which was generally conceived of a happy change of
Affairs, must needs produce an unhappy change in Men's minds.

And if we apply our selves to consider the Proceedings of our Councils, the
great Council of the Nation, and the King's Privy Council, we may there more
easily find the Original Root, Occasions and Authors of all these Mischiefs,
than any such sound Resolutions or Counsels, as ever were, or are likely either
to have prevented, or now to redress the same. A bold Speech, this I confess it
is; but being said, not maliciously out of any evil Principle or Design, but
out of Zeal for the common Safety, and other good Ends, nor of particular
Persons, I doubt not but the Evidence of Truth, and the Consciences of most,
will excuse and acquit me. And yet I must be bold to say, there are some things
passed, of which none of them all who were present, or concerned, can acquit or
excuse themselves.

Such was one of the first Acts of the Convention, the Form of their Order for
the Thanksgiving. And if any one dare presume to excuse that as a small matter,
I dare be bold to say, he has but little sense of the Majesty of God concerned
in it, of his extraordinary Mercy and Goodness in the Deliverance, of the
dangerous Consequence of such a fault in the beginning of their Consul-rations,
or what an Indication it was of an unhappy Temper and Disposition prevalent in
that Assembly. But had the Form been altogether faultless, to order a solemn
Thanksgiving to God, and never after do any real Act of Gratitude for his
Honor and Service, when profane Swearing, and other Impieties and Wickedness
were grown to that height of Impudence and Presumption, is such a thing, as
would be resented with Indignation by a mortal Man, and was more likely to
provoke a suspension at least of the Favors of Providence we enjoyed, than a
continuance thereof. But of that more elsewhere.

One of the next things they did, was the ordering of a Committee for the
business of Ireland: But, what have they done ever since in that business?
Either nothing at all, or nothing to the purpose, as the Event, and what I have
before taken notice of, does plainly show and demonstrate. And yet it is plain,
there wanted not matter enough proper for their consideration. There were
English Protestants enough in Ireland, to have defended themselves, and secured
that Kingdom, had they not been disarmed, and their Arms contrary to Law, put
into the hands of Papists; and notwithstanding that, had they but had Arms sent
them in time; And had they needed some small Body of men at first, to whom they
might have repaired, we had more in Arms and Pay here than we needed, and
therefore, not only refused many who offered their Service, but Disbanded many
of those we had. We had Ships also at the same charge, whether employed upon
that Service or any other. Why then were not Men and Arms too, sent them in
time, while our Men were Animated with Success, and the Irish under a
Consternation? Why not we as forward as the French? And why, instead of sending
to them, were so many of the Irish who had been in Arms here, suffered to
return, and not rather employed in some Service of the Confederates, at least
of the Emperor against the Turk, if they might not have been trusted against
the French? And when by our neglect at first, there was need of a greater
Force, if we had then Men enough in Arms, why were not more raised at home, of
those who before had offered themselves, of those who were Disbanded, and of
those who were forced from their Estates in Ireland, and wanted Maintenance
here? But we must send for Foreigners without consent of Parliament, and so
inour the blame we cast upon others; and send for such, which must protract the
time, when we might as well have been certainly provided at home much sooner?
And whereas all this may seem to have been managed either for the real Service
of King James, or for a color, to bring in a Foreign Force for the Security of
such as having been true, neither to Him, nor to their Country, durst now trust
neither, but endeavored to impose upon the present King, and under the old
pretense of his Service, get into their own hands a power to enslave their
Country; it had been worth the Enquiry, how it was serviceable to the present
Settlement? and who were the Advisers and principal Agents in it? And certainly
such matters as this had been no improper nor unusual Business, for the
Consideration of a Parliament.

The next and greatest matter of all, of civil Consideration, was the long
Debate about the Abdication. This took them up little less than three Weeks
time. And though there was reason enough to declare the Departure of King James
under his Circumstances, an Abdication of the Government, he having before
notoriously endeavored the Subversion of the Constitution, actually, in diverse
great Instances, Violated the Fundamental Laws, given just cause of War to the
Prince, and of Defense and Vindication of their Rights, to the People; and
after all, by recalling the Writs for a Parliament, refused a legal
Determination of the matters in Question, all which make it plainly, rather the
flight of a Criminal from Justice, than of an innocent Man Metus causa and cum
Animo revertendi; and a Cession or Dereliction of the Government in Fact, which
his deliberate Violations declare he had before Deserted in Affection; yet as
if they indeed laid the whole stress upon the Departure; and the other matters
charged against King James were not criminal or punishable, so much as in his
Ministers, Counselors, and Accomplices, or at least doubted their own
Authority as a Parliament, not one of those, who by their wicked Counsels and
Compliances, betrayed not only their Country, but their King himself, whom they
pretended to serve, into such mischiefs as were like to have been fatal to
both, (whatever yet may come of it) has yet been brought to condign
Punishment, or so much as called in Question upon a fair Trial; quite contrary
to all the Practice of our Ancestors; who always punished the Counselors,
Ministers and Agents in such Miscarriages, but rarely the Prince himself,
unless in extraordinary cases directly tending to the Destruction or Subversion
of the Government, as this did.

And whereas upon such a Revolution, one of the most necessary things to be
done, especially when meeting with such Opposition as this has, and is yet
like to do, is to Remove as much as may be all Occasions of Difference, and
Unite all Parties in a firm Agreement, for a Mutual Assistance in civil
Matters, such has been the Jealousies, Animosities, and preposterous Zeal of
many, that a great part of the most sober and serious People of this Nation,
are to this day, kept out of the Service of their Country, and the most
debauched and profligate freely let in; and let in with the grossest
Profanation of Sacred things, that has, I think, been known in any Christian
Nation; and no expedient can yet be agreed on, though in a matter of so great
Importance.

And to sum up all that belongs to this Consideration of the Parliament, in one
Word, they have been all along infested with a Spirit of Division, so prevalent
upon them, that they have scarce done one brave and clever Action, nor so much
as enquired to any purpose, into the Causes, and principal Authors of the evil
Management of our Affairs, ever since they met.

Should we come nearer to the King himself, and enquire into the more secret
Proceedings of his Privy Council, and great Ministers of State, it is possible
we should come so much the nearer yet, to the Fountain head of much of this
Unhappiness: For it must all have been either the Effect or Disappointment of
their Counsels. But such an Enquiry is a business so proper for the grand
Inquest of the Nation, that it is fit to be left to them to do it effectually.

But as for the King himself, this is apparent to the World, that the
embroiled, if not lost condition of Ireland, and the loss of this Summers
Assistance to His Confederates, is a great Eclipse and Diminution of that
Honor, which the success of his former Proceedings had acquired; and was of so
great Importance to him for the farther Progress of His Affairs.

But I need not proceed farther on so ungrateful a subject; the Instances I
have already produced, are sufficient to show a great and unhappy Change in the
Course and Progress of our Affairs, from so smooth and prosperous, that
formidable Armies could give no check or interruption, but vanished like Smoke
before the Wind, to so rough and disturbed, and that so universal in all, that
neither Abroad nor at Home, at Sea or at Land, in Country or in Council, do we
find any cheerful face of Affairs, but every where Rubs, Impediments, Failures
and Disappointments, and our way fenced up that we cannot pass.

So great a change as this, is enough to move the curiosity of an unconcerned
Spectator to enquire into the true Causes of it, much more ought our own
concern to move us to do it, with no less care and diligence, than a skilful
and faithful Chyrurgeon would use, in the search of some dangerous Wound or
Sore. Nor would it be hard to discover the particular, immediate Causes of many
of these things; but to rest in them, would prove but a shallow and superficial
Speculation; and the Application of means for the redress of them alone, could
not be expected to have better effect than the application of a Plaster to a
deep and ulcerous Wound. Here is so great a concurrence of so many and various
evil Symptoms, and particular immediate Causes conspiring to cross and
disappoint us, as is a plain Indication of some more secret and powerful common
cause influencing all. They are men of no very clear, (but clouded) Minds, or
of no very strict Observation, who having any considerable time been conversant
with Men and Business in the World, do not feel in themselves, and perceive in
others, that the most minute concerns of men, are under the Conduct and Regimen
of certain invisible Powers. Though Providence and Industry often succeed, yet
we see them often defeated; and lucky and unlucky Hits, as we call them, and
those many times unaccountable, prevail above and against both; and that not
once or twice, but in a long course together. And had we but the understanding
of Balaam's Ass, we might discern, that an Angel of the Lord is standing in our
way to stop our Progress; and that this great change, is indeed Mutatio dextrae
Altissimi. Israel has sinned and transgressed, and therefore cannot prosper:
Our strength is departed from us, and we are become like other men: Neither
will it return, unless the cursed thing be found out and removed. This
therefore is our business, which this change of success loudly calls us to, to
find out the Sin that keeps good things from us, and to dissipate the Cloud
that intercepts the benign Influences of Heaven. And to that end, it will be
fit to return to that Period of the Revolutien, the Exit of King James, and the
Arrival of the Prince at the Roval Palace, and the confines of the Metropolis
of the Nation, and consider what Indications have since occurred.

Here he was met and attended by most of the Nobility, and a numerous concourse
of the Gentry and People of all Ranks and Qualities, from all parts of the
Nation. And the very next Lord's Day, were the following ADMONITIONS very
sealonably given to him, and to all then present, from the Pulpit; and soon
after by his Highnes's special Command, to all others from the Press, by a
Person of great Name, who having showed from the amazing Concurrence of
Providence in the late Revolution, that it was the LORD's DOING, he makes some
Reflections upon it.

One whereof he thus Expresses:

P. 22. If we will carry on, and perfect this Mavelous WORK OF GOD, we must
study to be such, that God may not repent him of the good which he seems to
have prepared for us. While we are under such a happy Influence of Heaven, we
must not RAISE UP SUCH AN INTERPOSITION between it and us, as may not only make
us lose this happy Opportunity, but turn it to a Curse by the ill use we may
make of it.

Another he Expresses in these Words:

P. 20. If this WORK OF GOD possess us with the Veneration which is due to it,
We ought NOT TO STOP THE COURSE OF IT, till it has had its full Effect; nor to
DAUB matters by slight and palliating Remedies. We see now before us the most
GLORIOUS BEGINNING of a noble Change of the whole face of Affairs, both with
relation to Religion, and the Peace of Europe, that we could have wished for.
It is so far beyond our Hopes, that we durst scarce let our Wishes go so far:
We may, if we are not wanting to our selves, and to the Conjunctures before us,
hope to see that which may be according to the Prophetic Style, termed a New
Heaven, and a New Earth. But if a Spirit of Jealousy and Murmuring, of
Impatience and Faction, and of returning back to that out of which God has so
signally extricated us, grows up; so that instead of reaping the Fruits that we
have now in Prospect, we have not Souls big enough, nor Hearts good enough to
carry this on to Perfection, then we may justly fear our being DEIVERED UP to
all those Evils from which we will not be healed, etc. And a little after,
There is scarce any INDICATION more certain of the Sins of a Nation being grown
up to that height, that it must be destroyed, than the MISCARRIAGE of so great
a Deliverance as God has wrought for us, which will be an Eternal Blot on the
Wisdom of the Nation, etc.

Again: P. 24. In order to the preventing the return of the like Evils, We must
avoid the RELAPSING into the like Sins. It is neither the Union nor Wisdom of
Councils, nor the Strength of Fleets or Armies, that will secure us from the
Judgments of God, which we may expect will fall upon us with an extraordinary
redoubling, of seven times heavier than any thing that we have yet seen or
known, if those that are filthy, will be filthy still. -- If Men think that
their Fears are over, and that therefore they may give themselves up to work
Wickedness without Restraint; then we may justly expect a return of the like,
if not of greater Miseries.

And toward the Conclusion: P. 31. If in all that we do, we take not Care to
have God ever on our Sides, it will be easy for him to blast all Councils, and
to defeat even the greatest and best laid Designs. We have now before our Eyes
one of the signallest Instances that is in any History, of the Instability of
all humane things, etc. Perhaps, some may imagine that we are safe, because we
cannot be dashed on the same Rock, about which we see so great a Shipwreck: But
alas! If we provoke God to hide his Face, and to withdraw his Protection from
us, his Ways are past finding out: He can bring Ruin and Destruction on us
from that Hand, from which perhaps we apprehend the least. If Prosperity and
Success blow any up, and make them forget God, and all the Vows that they made
to him, he will never want Means and Methods to make them return to themselves,
and to remember him.

To these I will subjoyn one more delivered by the same Person upon the solemn
Occasion of the Coronation, in these Words:

Page 3. Those who are raised up to a high Eminence of Dignity, are so much the
more accountable both to God and Man, not only for all the Ill, which either
they themselves, or others acting in their Name, or by their Example may have
done; but likewise for all the Good which they might have done, but did not.
And as they have much to answer for to God, so likewise men expect much from
them. etc.

These are all truths, and so plain truths, that there needed no extraordinary
Spirit of Prophecy to reveal them: and yet I doubt not but we may say truly,
This spoke he not of himself, but being ordered to preach on such occasion, he
prophesied. If we believe that this great work was the work of God, in whose
hand are the hearts of all men, why should we question but he who directed the
Wind at Sea, directed also now at their arrival here, the motions of this man's
heart to so seasonable and necessary Admonitions for the farther promotion of
that work, which he had so eminently favored hitherto? And the great change in
the progress of affairs, which we have since seen, confirms the same, inasmuch
as it shows the Admonitions to have been not a little necessary. And if that be
so, it is the more likely that some Miscarriage there has been, contrary not
only to certain Duties, but to some such particular express Admonition; which
is a great aggravation of that fault, which has had the unhappy effect to
raise up such an Interposition between the happy Influence of Heaven and us.

The next thing then to be enquired is whose, and what this Miscarriage may be?
The persons concerned in the Success and Management both were the Prince
himself, his Counselors, Ministers, and those about him, and among them he
especially who gave those Admonitions, the Convention, the Army and the Navy;
in the Success alone the people of these Nations, the Church of England, and
the Confederates beyond Sea, whose Design is as much affected with it as the
concern of any other. But whoever else might be concerned in the Fault, because
the Prince was not only principally concerned in the Success and Management
both, but had before been made so glorious an Instrument that nothing could
stop his Advance, it is not reasonable to believe that he should have been at
all deserted by the propitious Powers of Heaven, without some Offense given by
himself, either by his own Act or Neglect, or by Participation with some other.
And to discover that, what it might be, is a matter of great importance, and
requires no less Fidelity in any man to endeavor it, than Skill to do it
effectually; Fidelity to God, to himself now King, to his Country, and Good
Will to a most just and honorable Cause, and to all concerned in it. And all
this I hope is ground enough for plain dealing,

I cannot think of this King without thinking also of his Predecessors in the
Throne of these Kingdoms, from whom he is personally descended, and now
succeeds in their Estate: Had he been only personally descended from them, he
had not been so far concerned in the Fate of their Family; but having now
accepted their Seat and Right, he thereby succeeds in their Obligations, and
must either discharge their Debt by Reformation of what they have in that
Capacity done amiss, or bear their Iniquity, and succeed also in their
Punishment. They had all the Favor of Providence in their access to the
Throne, and some of them in a special manner, even beyond their Expectation or
Hope; but none more than this. But they all deserted imprudently the Conduct,
and ungratefully the Service of that benign Providence, and following their own
ways, were thereupon deserted by it, and Rehoboam-like left to the unsound and
pernicious Counsels of Flatterers, and unfaithful self-seeking Favorites, who
for their own sinister ends divided the Common Cause, and set up a Separate
Interest of Prerogative against Law, and King against the People, and turned
the Court and Church into a Combined Faction. This has been the Stumbling
Stone and Rock of Offense to all the former; and I know not any thing that can
be more dangerous to this, and if he be not well aware of it, to the remainder
of that Royal Family, if not to Monarchy it self in this Nation.

This is a matter of so great consequence for the Peace and Prosperity both of
King and People to be well understood, that it deserves a more particular
consideration. And these two Observations will make it very plain and apparent.
1. It is certain that by the Constitution of our Government the King can
legally do very little, but by the Advice of some legal Council. The Councils,
by whose Advice he is to proceed, are 1. The Great Council of the Kingdom, the
Parliament. 2. The Lords, who are Conciliarii Nati. 3. The Kings Council for
matters of Law, anciently consisting of other and more persons, besides the
Judges and Sergeants, than now are consulted with: And 4. The Privy Council.
But Secret Cabals and Cabinet Councils of Favorites are neither agreeable to
the English Constitution, nor have been ever successful, but always pernicious
and destructive, to such Kings as have most relied on them. In what is done by
advice of Legal Council, the King is always, and ought to be, excused, and the
advisers answerable for it: But what is done by illegal Councils, is imputed to
the King himself, and usually produces Discontents in the people. And of this
was K. Chapter II. very sensible, when in his Declaration Apr. 20 1679. he tells
the Privy Council, He is sorry for the ill success he has found in this
course, and sensible of the ill posture of affairs, from that, and some unhappy
Accidents, which have raised great Jealousies and Dissatisfaction among his
good Subjects, and thereby left the Crown and Government in a condition too
weak for those dangers we have reason to fear both at home and abroad. And then
declaring his Hopes that those evils may be prevented by a course of wise and
steady Councels for the future, and these Kingdoms grow again to make such a
figure as they have formerly done in the World, and as they may always do, if
our UNION and CONDVCT were equal to our Force; and his Resolution to that end
to lay aside the use he had made of any single Ministry or private Advisers,
and to constitute such a Privy Council, as for number and choice may be fit,
and to govern by constant Advice of such a Council together with the frequent
use of his great Council of Parliament; he adds, which he takes to be the true
Ancient Constitution of this State and Government. The mode was before, and
soon taken up again, to draw the Orders, matters of greatest moment being first
resolved in a private Cabal, as made by the King in Council, instead of by
advice of the Council; and to prefix the Names of all present, instead of each,
who consented to them, subscribing his own; so that none could be charged with
what was done but the King himself; which was no less prejudicial to the King
and Kingdom, than contrary to ancient custom and the good Polity of our
Ancestors.

The other observation is this: What at first, and for some time, was ordered
by the Assemblies of Christians, the Clergy in process of time assumed to
themselves to order alone: and what was then done by the Common Council of the
Clergy, the Bishops afterward assumed to themselves alone with their
Chancellors. And in some ages after the Bishops of Rome made the like
Encroachments upon the Right of all, especially in matters of most advantage,
as the disposing of Bishoprics, etc. At last Hen. 8. with us perceiving the
injustice of the Papal usurpations, instead of restoring things to the right
and original Institution, so far prevailed with his Parliament, as to get all
annexed to the Crown. And no doubt this was thought a special acquest, and much
for the advantage of the King and his Successors: but it proved like ill gotten
goods, a pernicious morsel. For it soon excited the most aspiring of the Clergy
to seek by Flatteries to obtain their Favor, who had the disposal of the great
Preferments of the Church. This soon produced false Notions concerning the
Royal Power; and the interest of those who designed that Profession made those
Notions easily swallowed without much examination; till at last the very youth
in the Universities were levened with them: and being so early seasoned
therewith, they could not but take deep root in many honest and well-meaning
persons. Again, this must needs have the like influence upon Kings, who are of
themselves as apt to assume, as Flatterers are to attribute, whatever tends to
the enlargement of their Power. On the other side, the greatest part of the
Nation, that is all, who have no temptation to Flattery, well knowing their own
Rights, could not be wheadled out of them with mistaken Names and groundless
Notions. And from these two Roots have sprung that combined Faction, which has
so long and often occasioned the shaking this Throne with such violent
concussions, and will undoubtedly overturn it, if things be not restored in
time to their right order.

And to prevent so great a mischief, it may be farther serviceable to observe
the Difference between this Faction, or the Factious Church of England, and the
true Church of England. For as the Church of Rome arrogates to it self the Name
and Title of Catholic, and excludes all others who are not of that Communion,
from any right to it, and yet is it self at best, but a part of that which is
indeed the Catholic Church; so the great Zealots for this Faction, under the
Name of the Church of England, will hardly deign the Name of Church of England
men, to any who run not to the same excess with themselves; though if the
matter be rightly computed, they will not be found so great a part of those who
do justly come under that denomination, much less of the People and Strength of
this Nation, as they may seem to some, and would be thought to be. For of
those, who are not inferior to any either in Conformity to the Church, both in
Doctrine and Worship, and that not out of any sneaking or crafty compliance,
but judgment and choice; or in true Loyalty and Fidelity to the King in his
Just and Legal Rights; they are as little inferior in Number or Interest, who
notwithstanding, preferring Christianity it self before any particular Church,
and a complete genuine Loyalty to the entire State and Constitution, before a
partial pretended Loyalty to any party in it, do not think themselves obliged,
either by any Duty to the present Church, to neglect the great Duties of
Christianity, Charity, and reasonable condescension in things indifferent; or
by my Reverence to Ancestors, to neglect what is necessary at this time, as
well for Peace and Unity, as for supply and improvement of what they themselves
had begun, and declare was not then complete and perfect: Or lastly, by any
partial Loyalty, or even Oath of Fidelity to the King (which extends but to his
just Rights, and those too for the benefit of the whole, so that he cannot
alienate or alter them at his own pleasure) to desert the Rights of their
Country, and the confessed true ancient Constitution of the State and
Government. And these solid Principles being grounded upon Truth and Justice,
wherein another great part of the Nation is equally concerned, must needs
prevail at last against the false pretenses of a violent Faction, which has no
other support but Ambition, Avarice and Animosity, animated by the Favor or
Compliance of flattered, easy, and deceived Prince, though they create no
little disturbance for some time, for the enjoyment of their great beloved
Diana. Besides, if we consider the tendency of the Motions of the Divine
Providence at this time, it is not likely that our Lord will much longer suffer
such unprofitable Servants in his Vineyard, but spue out the Laodicean Faction
out of his mouth, unless they speedily mend their manners. But to return

The Arm of God, that is his Divine Providence, was not less apparent in that
Revolution, which restored King Charles II. than in this, which has brought
this King to the Throne; nor less obliging. Nor were the opportunities then
less than now, which were put into his hands to have made himself and these
Kingdoms happy; but he insensible of that Illustrious Providence, and
regardless of his Word, gave up himself to Sensuality, aerie phansies, and
crafty Policies, and most ungratefully by an evil example, transfused a torrent
of all kind of Vice, Fraud, Injustice, Profaneness, Contempt of Religion, and
all manner of impudent Wickedness, all over the Nation. And all this descended
as a charge upon his Successor, either to be expunged and discharged by solemn
Humiliation and effectual Reformation, or to be answered and born by himself in
the Measure of Punishment and Affliction to be laid upon him. But this was a
matter which had too much of the Influences and Approbation of his own party,
to be checked or restrained by him. On the contrary, it was by him aggravated
with additions of such violences and barefaced bold illegal attempts, and
those for so ungrateful an end, the restitution of the Romish Abominations, as
his Brother had either more consideration, or less courage, than ever to
venture upon, till the Land cast him out; those very Persons, who had basely
betrayed him into those mischiefs, by pretenses of Loyalty, and magnifying
Prerogative above the Law and the Truth, and by flatterring Addresses, being
many as forward as any to conspire against him, when their own Interest was
touched, and others to come into the prevailing Party; and will likewise
betray, whoever they are, who shall trust or rely upon them.

This was the State, in which the Prince at his Arrival found this Kingdom: And
if this was the Mavelous work of God to bring him hither, we may easily
perceive from hence what was the Princes Work for which he was brought. Shall
we think it was to drive out Popery and Arbitrariness, that we might enjoy our
Rights, and therewith the greater Liberty to profane a purer Religion, and by
impudent violation of it, bring all Religion into contempt? No, no, these were
but such accessions of the Principal Evil, as made way for the ejection of that
unhappy deluded Prince, as well for neglect of his Duty, in not restraining the
over-spreading Impiety and Wickedness of the Nation, as for his own additional
transgressions. And if after all it be not now reformed, it will certainly
prove such a Canker and Root of bitterness, as will soon grow up to produce the
like evil fruit again of it self, without any such additionals. For can any one
imagine that the Abominations of Debauchery and Impiety can be less offensive
to the most Holy God, than the Abominations of Popery? Or that the Popish
Superstitions, Errors, and Impostures, can be more offensive to him than
impudent and presumptious violation, and notorious profanation of a purer
Religion, and open contempt of all? If not, then the Reformation of those
Impieties and Wickedness, which have overspread the Nation, but especially the
Nobility and Gentry, and most of all the Army, which soon submitted to him, was
a special and principal part of his Work, which he was conducted, and as it
were, led by the hand to do. And therefore plainly without more saying, by
neglect of this was the Fault committed: In this was the stop put to the course
of this Work of God: This was the Good, which might have been done but was not,
and is therefore to be accounted for both to God and Man: This neglect it being
one of the great sins of the former Kings, was therefore now a Relapse into the
same: This was a neglect, of Care to have God ever on our side: And by this was
the Interposition raised between the happy influence of Heaven and us: A fault
committed against a great Duty, after so admirable a Divine Conduct to it, and
so many express and weighty Cautions and Admonitions.

And yet this is not all, for the same Divine Providence, which so seasonably
gave him these Adminitions by one, as seasonably sent him a Specimen of a
Delaration against Debauchery by another, with no mean Motives closely couched
in a short Letter. It was Composed according to the Princes Authority, and the
State of Affairs as it then was, the expressions of command directed only to
the Armies and Soldiery, who were properly subject to his Command, what had
respect to the Civil Magistrate or future Parliament, in expressions only of
hope and expectation. And as much as this might have been done by any General
of an Army; but God with the success, he had given to him, had given him also
that Authority and Respect in the minds of all men, which would have extended
the Effect of such a Declaration to those to whom it was not directed; and he
would also undoubtedly, had the Prince but first declared, and then showed his
Resolution by destributing his Favors according to men's Conformity thereunto,
have made all as quietly comply therewith, as he made the Army submit to his
Power, and have made this second achievement no less Glorious to him than the
former, not only for confirmation, but augmentation also of his Honor and
Authority. His very Presence should have dispersed the Wickedness of this
Nation; and the Divine Presence should have continued with him, and have given
him Rest and Happiness. But here was the Fault, an unhappy, though I hope not
yet fatal, fault committed.

The Wise Governor of the World, whom he calls out to any special Service,
them he usually, if not always, leads to some special Trial of their Fidelity;
wherein, if they acquit themselves well, he makes them afterward very happy and
prosperous, but if ill, either wholly lays them aside, or leaves them to great
difficulties, till they recover themselves by Repentance, and some very
generous Act of Fidelity. This Declaration was presented to him the same day in
the morning, on which the Lords in the afternoon presented him with an Address
to accept of the Administration till a free Parliament could be assembled. That
both these proposals were presented to him on the same day, was not without the
Disposal of the Divine Providence. The one was for the Honor and Service of
God, the other in appearance for his own Honor; and both made up a plain
complete Trial. And the latter he accepted; but the former has been neglected
to this day. The cause of such neglect is principally either the Fascination of
Prosperity, which disposes men to forget God, or the Deceitfulness of Worldly
Wisdom, which betrays them to forsake him, and apply themselves to ordinary
sensible means to secure what they do in fact prefer before him. When these two
meet they make a strong Temptation; but against both he had the fresh
Experience of the Favor of God, and of the irresistible Power of the Divine
Providence over him, and making all things easy and plain before him; and this
made the fault the greater and more inexcusable.

Nor is this so small and inconsiderable a matter as sensual men may be apt to
think it, which possibly may be the better perceived if we take notice more
distinctly of the several particular Ingredients comprehended in it, and how
aptly certain like particulars, of which the unhappiness of this Change is
composed, do correspond to them. And first, if we consider it only as a Neglect
of Duty and Desertion for the present of a principal part of the Work, to which
he was led in so extraordinary a manner by the propitious Providence of God, is
it not as plain that that propitious Providence, which before made his Progress
so exceeding smooth, easy, and successful, has in like manner since either
deserted, or so neglected his affairs, that all have either gone back, stood
still, or proceeded very slowly. Secondly, as this Neglect was also a matter of
Unfaithfulness in his Lords Service, in which he was as a special Instrument,
employed and entrusted; so never was Unfaithfulness more notorious, than in the
occurrences of this last year, in such as were employed and entrusted under
him, as is commonly believed, and shall be discovered in its causes hereafter.
Thirdly, it was a Neglect of his Honor, who had conferred by so extraordinary
success, so much Honor and Reputation upon him; and such change of success is
usually attended with proportionable diminution of Honor and Reputation.
Lastly, here was (the Root of all) a Desertion of Dependence and Trust in that
potent Providence, which had favored him hitherto in so extraordinary a
manner, and recourse to deceitful Worldly Wisdom. It was the Unhappiness of
King James I. that after an admirable Deliverance from an horrid Popish
Conspiracy ready for execution, he applied himself first to connivance, and at
last to association with Papists for his security; which contrary to his
expectation proved the Original of all the mischiefs, which have since befallen
his Family: So likewise this Prince, after as great an experience of the Divine
Providence over him, lest the Kingdom should return to King James, thought to
deal wisely with them, and (after Hushai's advice) defer this great Work, first
till the Kingdom should be settled, and then when he was Proclaimed King, till
Ireland should be reduced, and he should have sufficient Power (an Arm of
Flesh) to do it effectually, and in the mean time try what effect a good
example and kindness, intrusting them with Offices and Employments in State,
Army and Navy, would have upon such vicious people in the end, which in like
manner, contrary to his expectation, has proved the Original of all the
Impediments and Disappointments in his affairs. O that my people had hearkened
unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon have subdued their
Enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversaries. The Haters of the Lord
(the Profane and Debauched) should have submitted themselves unto him: but
their time should have endured for ever. Psalm. 81.13. Now would the Lord have
established thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever. 1 Samuel 13.13.

This was the Root of the Miscarriage: Have thou not procured this unto thy
self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, when he led thee by the way?
Jer. 2.17. From hence has plainly proceeded this great change of the former
prosperous course of Affairs into so disturbed, impedited and unsuccessful,
even by a natural Chain of Causes after the first breach, but those moved and
promoted (by the Divine Permission) by other invisible Powers than those which
gave that great success before. The presence of so favorable a Providence,
ought to have been answered with a proportionable Magnanimity, Resolution and
Constancy, in dependence upon that Divine Power; but in such a case, to stoop
to compliance to those, who ought to have been awed and subdued, is
dishonorable, and a great offense to those Divine Powers: And if those be once
provoked to withdraw, a man sinks presently under the Power of them, who
otherwise should have been subject to him. And by this Fault without doubt, and
his acceptance of their State, did this Prince enter into the Fate of his
Ancestors of this Nation, and will be daily more and more involved therein,
until it either prove fatal to him, or he by Repentance and some Magnanimous
and resolute change of his course and methods, extricate himself.

And it is very observable that he not only fell by the same Sin, but fell into
the very same Faction, which for the four last Reigns successively, have by
their Flatteries of Princes for their private advantage, and provocations of
the people by Tricks, illegal Projects and Practices, brought all those
mischiefs which we have seen and felt, upon both: Whereas both civil Prudence,
and Duty to God, i. e. Fidelity to the Conduct of his Providence, required that
he should have maintained the Reputation and Authority he was raised to, made
himself Umpire of all Parties, restrained the Excesses, and discouraged the
Insolences of each, and with a mixture of Authority and equal Kindness to all,
reduced them as near as might be to a Union, at least to a mutual agreement in
matters of common concern. But by the course of Affairs, he seems to have been
rather passive than active in the management thereof; and what Counsels
prevailed therein may by the same also be perceived.

Nor was it only into the same Faction that he fell, but into the hands of
those very Persons, who in the Reign of King Charles the Second (for under King
James they were overtopp'd by others) were the principal Advisers and Managers
in those illegal Projects, and now being conscious of their own Guilt and
Desert, have by themselves and their tools, not only hitherto obstructed
Justice, upon the betrayers of their King and Country, to the great
disparagement of the present Settlement, but animated such a mungrel party, and
therewith filled many Offices of the Revenue, Army and Navy, as are real and
hearty neither to this nor the former King, but intending only their own safety
or advantage, are disposed to act, as in a doubtful case, so as may best serve
their turn, which ever prevail. And from this sort of people have proceeded
most of the Rubs and Difficulties in our Proceedings; and among such, it could
not be hard for some of the Agents of King James to creep in.

But as when men do not closely and fully follow the Divine Conduct, if they be
but a little deserted by it, and left to themselves, they are immediately
exposed to various miscarriages; so there was another miscarriage of his
Ancestors, into whibh he likewise fell, if what is commonly affirmed and
believed is true, which proved a great inlet unto all sorts, and the very worst
of men, into Offices and Employments, and that was permitting the Sale of
Offices and Places; or granting them at the solicitation of such as did it for
money; and which is worse yet, such as were strangers, and utterly unacquainted
with Persons and their Qualities. This could not but expose very considerable
Places to the Agents, not only of King James, but of the French King, to be
purchased with his money (which of late is become more common here than ever)
no dout but for his own advantage. He is believed to have been a good Chapman
to those who were before in places to do him but some particular service; and
therefore to get in such as were entirely at his service, he would undoubtedly
be much more liberal; but especially under such a juncture of affairs, when the
Purchase of our Diversion in Ireland but for this last Summer, was worth for
ought I know as much as half his Kingdom.

Now from such people as by these means might be, and undoubtedly were, let
into places of great importance, what can be expected less than all
Unfaithfulness and Treachery imaginable? and what less from that, than such
Success and Disappointments as we have met with? And what is a more natural
product of that, especially when it proceeds either immediately or originally
from a man's own oversight or miscarriage, than Dishonor and Contempt? or a
juster provocation of the Divine Majesty to cause or permit it to befall them,
than their neglect of his Honor and Service? He pours Contempt upon Princes,
and weakeneth the strength of the Mighty, Job 12.21. Psalm. 107.40. They that
honor me I will honor, but they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. So easily can the most Wise and Powerful God, when he pleases,
cause a just punishment in all circumstances of Men's Miscarriages to proceed
even naturally from some small insensible beginning in their own actions. Thine
own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee:
Know therefore and see, etc. Jer. 2.19.

And yet to give some gentle admonitions, that there was more than merely
natural in it, he was pleased to intermix some occurrences of a distinguishing
Previdence. Such was that brave, undaunted, and admirably successful Resistance
of all the Assaults of King James his Force in a close Siege, for near Twelve
Weeks together, by those poor unexperienced and undisciplined, but sober and
serious people of Londonderry: Such the magnanimous and successful Attacks of
the Irish Forces by those of Inniskiling: Whereas the Famous General Schomberg,
with all his disciplined Forces of the old Army, and his experienced and lately
successful Foreign Forces, had not the power to hurt or attack the Irish Army,
which lay encamped so long together almost by his side: And such was that in
Scotland, when one single new-raised Regiment bore the brunt, and defeated the
same Force which before had beaten the General there with several Regiments of
the old Army.

And it is very observable to this purpose, how little serviceable either to
King James in England, or to King Williliam in Ireland, those poor creatures of
that dissolute Army have been; whose provoking sins, by a generous mixture of
Authority, and Encouragement to reform, might have been restrained at first,
and in a great measure cured, to the Honor of God, and greater Service in this
Cause? But on the contrary, many of them there, languishing in their
Iniquities, and Corporal Sickness together, have only helped to consume our
Provisions, and are daily consumed by Death, and swallowed up of the Earth; the
Merciful God being constrained to purge the Land by degrees by his severer
methods, while inconsiderate men neglect to be the Instruments of his milder. A
pitiful and deplorable Case indeed; which I cannot think on without sad
Reflections upon him to whom this matter was so early recommended, with no
inconsiderable, though very plain admonitions relating to his Station.

And I do the rather take notice of this here, because this Person was, of all
Men, next to the Prince himself, concerned in this matter, in regard as well of
the Circumstances he then was in, as of that special Recommendation of a matter
of so great consequence to his care. Whoever was the Person by whom it was
recommended, it was undoubtedly by the secret direction of the same Providence
which directed his Admonitions, and no less obliged him, than those did them to
whom they were delivered. If he did faithfully discharge the Duty of his
Circumstances as he ought, he has the less to answer for: but then that is an
unhappy Ingredient in this case. But if he did not, but instead of the
personal, plain and powerful Admonitions and Persuasions of a judicious and
faithful Divine, he took up with the prudential Considerations of a Statesman
or Politician; and instead of imminding the Prince of his great Duty of
attendance to the Conduct of that powerful Providence which attended him, and
of exciting him to a magnanimous prosecution of that glorious work to which it
led him; he prudentially misled him to stop at the Bait which lay in his way,
and daubing, even stoop to raise such as opposed him, and by compliance,
animate a mungrel Party; he disabled the Prince by lowering his Authority, has
unhappily retarded, if not deseated a principal part of the Glorious Work which
God had laid before us, and must be accountable both to God and Man for all the
Good he might have done, and did not, and for all the Evil which has followed
upon this neglect; and the more, because contrary to his own Admonitions.

True Divinity is much different from the Notional, Schismatical and Polemick,
in which a man may be very ready, and have besides a great furniture of other
Reading, Oratory, and all kind of Polite Learning, as they call it, enough to
make him look big, and be admired in the World, and yet be very unskilful in
the other. It is a Divine Wisdom, a quick Understanding in the Fear of the
Lord, not to be learned in Schools, but taught of God, a Divine Ray cast into,
and kindly received in a well purified Soul; which gives it a clear, distinct
Sight, and true Estimate of the different value and worth of things; an
Abhorrence of what is really Evil, a Contempt of what is splendid and gaudy,
but empty and vain, the Pomps and Vanities of the World; and a just Esteem of
all that is really Good, according to their different degrees: of God above
all, and therefore with a great care and concern for his Honor and Service; of
the blessed Creatures above us, that they may be gratified, and not grieved or
offended; and of the Souls of Men, that they may be rescued from Perdition; but
of the Temporal Concerns of Men, as they are subservient to this: directs it to
act as a Child of Light, discerning what is acceptable to the Lord, and what is
displeasing to him. It is not to be attained by Men, whose affections are
intaglned in the things of the World, nor constantly enjoyed by such as are
immersed in the business of it: and yet without it, no man, let his Natural
Parts, his acquired Accomplishments, his Degree in Holy Orders, and his
Preferments in the Church be what they will, can be a true Divine; but is in
truth so much the greater Impostor, appearing in Habit and External Form what
he really is not; a carnal, sensual or animal man at the best, not having the
good Spirit, but in many things obnoxious to the Impressions and Deceits of the
subtle Evil one; and therefore most dangerous to Princes and Persons concerned
in the great Affairs of the World, to be relied on. But this I intend only for
a general Caution, not to reflect upon any particular person, much less upon
him before mentioned: for I do not know how he may have behaved himself.

But of those about the King, they who have been accessory to this Summer's ill
Success, especially by evil Counsels, or Recommendations of evil Men, may be
best known to himself. It is true, at his first coming he was under a great
disadvantage, that he had not so full knowledge of persons as was necessary for
the State of his Affairs: but such has been the business which since has been
in agitation, as cannot but have given him a competent Experimental Knowledge
of those who have been concerned in the most important parts thereof. If he do
but consider the Success of his Affairs, and then recollect by whom, and whose
Counsel or Recommendation they were managed, he may in a good measure perceive
the Disposition of the persons, and what they designed or aimed at.

Of the Parliament I have already mentioned some things with respect to the
unsuccessful and retarded course of our Proceedings: We are now enquiring into
the Original and first Cause of this great Change, which is not to be imputed
to the King only: The Parliament also have been Principals in it, and that by
great and notorious defects of Religion, Gratitude and Piety toward God; and
of Justice, Charity, Providence, and Unanimity and Courage for their Country.
They are the Representative Body of the Nation: To them it belonged to have
well considered the admirable Mercy and Favor of God in our late Deliverance,
and to have made return of real Gratitude, and not put off that with a
superficial Formality; to have well considered the defiled and sinful State of
the Nation, as well as the State of its Affairs, and to have endeavored the
Recovery of the Favor and Blessing of God upon those, by an essectual
Purgation and Reformation of that; and to have begun with some good Orders for
correction of the Profaneness and dissolute Manners of their own Members; which
had been an Act of Charity and Providence for the good of their Country and of
themselves, as well as of Religion and Gratitude to God. For his Blessing is
not to be expected upon their Consultations now, till the Impieties and
Wickedness of their own Members be reformed or removed. And to them it belonged
also to have made some Examples by Justice upon the Betrayers of the Rights of
their Country, as well to assert the Justice of their own Proceedings against
the late King, as to prevent encouragement to the like Practices for the future
by their Connivance. And to them it belonged to have made a timely Enquiry into
the Mismanagement of Affairs, whether by Ministers, Counselors, Officers, or
by the King himself; and to have plainly, that is, faithfully represented the
same to the King, and desired Redress of what had been done amiss by himself,
and proceeded against the rest according to their desert. This was their Duty:
This had been like a true English Parliament: And this doing, we might have
expected God's Blessing: For he favors not the Wicked nor Fools, who mind not
their own business. But such a Pusillanimity and Baseness has possessed our
Parliaments of late, since the dissolute Manners were so encouroged by Chapter II.
that they have been more apt to complement away the Rights of their Country, to
gratify the Humor of the King, and the Safety and Honor of the King himself,
to please his Minions and Favorites, than do any honest, faithful and generous
Act for the preservation and real benefit of either.

Before I quite leave the Parliament it may be fit to remember the Bishops, who
make a part thereof, and in this case deserve a special Consideration. They are
the Chief Governors of this Church: To them it belongs by their Office to take
care of the Manners of the People, to be concerned at great, common and
notorious National Sins, to admonish and importune the Civil Magistrate; and
being moreover Members of Parliament, to propose and promote good Laws, for the
Correction and Reformation thereof. And all matters of Religion do so
peculiarly belong to their Care, that the Neglects before mentioned in the King
and in the Parliament, are with no less Reason, but rather more especially
chargeable upon them. And it is an ill sign of the great prevalence of Impiety
and Wickedness in the State or Parliament it self, if they durst not, or of
Laodicean Coldness and insensibility in themselves, if they would not; for
certain it is they did not do in their station in the House, what so singular a
Mercy of God, the so sinful State of the Nation, this late great Change we have
suffered in the course of our Affairs, and the present cloudy Face of things do
so plainly require. Such a Neglect at such a time as this, may justly move us
to reflect upon former times, and the many and great Advantages, Opportunities,
Occasions and Provocations they have long had to do Good both at home and
abroad; and considering notwithstanding how little has been done, to suspect
that Constantiue's Poison has some Lethargick or Narcotick Virtue in it to
benum the Nerves, and stupifie the Spirits and Life of Zeal and Devotion in
such as taste but a little too deep of it. And of this, to what is already
mentioned, I will add Two fresh Instances of my own knowledge: the one of a
great Clergyman, who having well providod for himself in the World before
elsewhere, and besides gotten good Preferment here, could yet permit, though
admonished of it, the Propagation of Religion among his own Countrymen to go a
begging here for so small a Relief and Assistance as he himself might very well
have supplied: The other of some Dignified Persons of considerable Note in the
Church, who when a well affected Layman out of pity to Forty or Fifty Thousand
Souls, had considered and proposed to have the Care of so great a Parish
committed to some man of a Primitive Christian Disposition, who contenting
himself with a reasonable share of the Profits, would have distributed the rest
among as many young Curates as it would maintain, whereby both the needs of the
people might have been better supplied, and those Persons by their mutual
advices and assistance in such a Work, the better fitted and prepared for the
Cure of Souls in Parishes of their own, yet were pleased to interpose for the
Presentation, and so far as to obtain it at least from another Competitor in no
commendable manner, for one who had at that time a good Parsonage, a good
Lecture, and a good Prebend, as a Preferment for him.

Such Scuffling for Preferments in the Church is a great Scandal to many
ingenious Lay-Spectators, to suspect the Sincerity of those who take upon them
to be Preachers of the Gospel, and yet discover so little of the Power and
Effects thereof in their own Actions. And this cannot but greatly obstruct the
good effect of all their Preaching upon such. It is also a great Temptation to
one of the greatest and most common immediate causes of most of our Mischiess,
both public and private, Over-valuation and Greediness of the Supersluities of
the things of this World, which all their Preaching can never cure, while it is
daily confirmed and heightened, by such Examples. And from the same root does
proceed all that Pharizaical Zeal for the Church, and Jealousy and Dread of
the least alteration, though never so reasonable and necessary, in many, who
show little sense of Religion in any thing else, which has long disturbed both
Church and State, and does at this time expose both to danger. These things
being observed, together with so great coldness in the weighty matters of the
Law, cannot but cool the affections of their best friends to them; and avert
the favor both of God and Man from them. This therefore we may reasonably look
upon as one of the Original and Provoking Causes of this Stop and Change of the
late Happy course of Affairs. Thou say I am rich and increased with Goods,
and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind? Be zealous therefore and repent.

Concerning our Judges and Civil Magistrates I have little to say: Our Courts
of Justice are so well filled with such Persons, as the Profession of the Law
does not afford better than most of them are; only few of those who are in were
more worthily preferred, than one, whom I need not name, was unworthily left
out. His personal Worth does well qualify him for that Service; and his
singular Merit, in his generous appearing for the Service of his Country, in
occasions of greatest difficulty, did most justly claim it: and however it came
to pass, certainly no man of Virtue and Ingenuity would ever oppose it.

But because Corruption and Abuses in great Places, besides other mischiefs are
of pernicious consequence by their Example, I think fit to take notice of one
which deserves Correction, because it not only concerns diverse great Lords, but
is obstinately persisted in contrary to the Opinion and Advice of Mr. Attorney
himself. And if the Lords will pass by such an abuse to themselves, I know not
what people of inferior Quality may expect in time. It is the needless and
illegal Charge they are put to, before they can be inserted into the Commission
of the Peace of any County for Custos Protulorum. I need but name it.

As to the Army and Navy, the Seamen are generally honest, and true to their
Country and the Protestant Religion, and many among them sober and serious
people; but a great part of their Officers, and the Land Army, who were nearer
the influence of the evil Examples at the Court, are generally so dissolute and
debauched, that it is not to be believed that God will ever be with them, or
prosper them, but rather by degrees waste and consume them, till he has wholly
purged the Land of them; and therefore so unhappy a Company of people amongst
us, must needs make us unprosperous and unsuccessful, till they be either
destroyed or reformed.

Concerning the Body of the People of England, though the unhappy effects of
the pernicious Examples at Court have reached all Ranks and Degrees amongst us,
yet have they been most prevalent upon such as were nearer in degree or
converse to it; so that the lower Ranks of men, which are most numerous, and
the strength of the Nation, though not wholly escaped, have yet been least
corrupted by them; and were but the Examples of Virtue in our great men now,
but any way proportionable to what their Examples of Vice have been for so long
past, I do not doubt but they would soon appear again as considerable as
heretofore they have done. So that there is little to be noted in them, but
what is derived from those above them, and is plainly to be imputed, not more
to their neglect of good Examples, good Laws, and good Execution, than to the
energy of their wicked, profane, and impious Examples. And these being besides
only Passive, and concerned only in the Success, not in the Management of the
Affairs, are not so much to be considered in the case. Nor shall I say any
thing of our Confederates beyond Sea. And therefore to draw up the conclusion

The CONCLUSION.
AS almost all the Wickedness of the former Reigns proceeded originally from
those Kings, and Judgment has been begun first to be executed upon them; so
has likewise the Fault, whereby that great Work, whereof this King was called
out to be the Glorious Instrument in these Nations, has been hitherto
interrupted, plainly proceeded from himself. For by Neglect, through prudential
Connivance, of the Duty to which he was led, and through politic Compliance,
of the Authority to which he was raised, by so manifest a Divine Conduct, he
did not so much engage to himself, as animate against his Interest, that party
which first opposed his ascent to the Throne, and afterward by pernicious
Counsels, and underhand Dealings, as is believed, imposed upon him,
disappointed his Proceedings, weakened his Reputation, and entangled him in
their Snares; which yet, had he steadily followed the Divine Conduct, must have
stooped, and quietly submitted to him.

And now if we look forward, there are but two ways before him, one plain and
direct, the other devious, dangerous, full of precipices and certain mischiefs;
Via Lucis, and Via Tenebrarum; the Right Way, which he left; and this which he
has unhappily chosen, wherein if he proceeds, he is like to fall into one of
these Inconveniences: Either to be dangerously undermined by K. James his
Party, of which are many of the Faction before mentioned, tho they have sworn
Fidelity to him; or else to be irrecoverably engaged with the old Instruments
of Arbitrariness, who considering how ill they have deserved of their Country,
can think of no better expedient to cover their own former illegal Projects,
then drawing the present King into a participation with themselves in the like.

The natural tendency of this Way to those ends, is very apparent upon a humane
consideration; and if we consider it with respect to the Divine Providence, as
we have great reason to expect upon the considerations before mentioned, some
Divine Judgment upon it, so none can be more agreeable to the Divine Methods in
such a case, than one of those I have now mentioned, that is, either to give
him up to those Rehoboam-Counsels, which have been so pernicious to his
Predecessors in this Throne; or to permit things to be brought to an
aequilibrium between the two Princes; and by the one way, or other, put an end
to that Family and Government, which notwithstanding all the methods, which
have been used to reduce them to a sense of their Duty, do still continue so
unprositable to his Service, as some of them have before been Obstacles and
pernicious Adversaries to it, which yet stands undischarged upon account
against their Successors.

But I hope and doubt not but the other direct and safe way is still open for
him to return unto, only being now somewhat more difficult, it will require,
and deservedly, so much the greater Resolution. And this I take to be the way:
First, to be careful to use all approved means for the Recovery af the Divine
Favor; and then to apply to the use of such Humane Means, as true Wisdom and
solid Policy direct and require. But it must be in this Order, or else he will
never recover the like prosperous Success; but whatever alterations in
Ministers or Politics he shall make without that, will either prove
unsuccessful, or prove so to him, he shall have but little enjoyment of it.

For the Recovery of the Divine Favor in this case it will be absolutely
necessary,

1. To settle, by good consideration of the many express Declarations and
parallel Examples in the Sa. Scripture, a right and firm Judgment; 1. That
whatever were the immediate apparent Causes of the former happy Success, and of
the ill success since, yet that the Principal, hegemonical Cause in both was
from God. 2. That the Provoking Cause of this great Change must have been no
small Sin. 3. That there can be no hope of recovery of the Divine Favor and
former Prosperous Condition, but by effectual removal of that Sin, whatever it
be. 4. That of all the Sins, which have been noted for the greatest
Provocations of the like Judgments heretofore, there are none so likely to
have had such unhappy effect in this case at that which is so often expressed
in the Sacred Scripture by the phrase of the Heart being lifted up, with its
consequence of forgetting God. As in those great Cautions Deuteronomy. 8.14. and
17.10. and in those remarkable Examples, even of Hezechiah, 2 Chr. 32.25. that
he rendered not again to the Lord according to the Benefit done unto him: for
his Heart was lifted up; therefore there was Wrath upon him, and upon Juda and
Jerusalem: And of Vzziah, 2 Chr. 26.16. When he was strong, his heart was
lifted up to his destruction. and Desertion or Neglect of the Special Work
wherein one is employed; of which Saul is a remarkable Example. Lastly, that
there can be no removal of these Sins without great Humiliation upon
contemplation of the Ingratitude, and dangerous consequence thereof, and a
Resolute Return to the deserted or neglected Duty, and therefore

2. To set resolvedly to the Work of an Effectual Reformation of this People,
whom God has subjected to him, and committed to his Charge, to be delivered
from the Slavery of their Souls to Satan by impudent Sins, as well as of their
Persons and Estates to Tyrants by Usurpation; Which may by the same Divine
Favor, which will not then be wanting to his own Work, be easily effected. 1.
By a plain Declaration of his Resolution, commanding a strict Execution of the
Laws in force for that purpose. Which is one great part of the Regal Office. 2.
By a steady use of his own immediate Authority, excluding and rejecting from
his Counsels, Service and Presence, all such as obstinately refuse Obedience
and Conformity to so just, reasonable and necessary Commands and Resolutions.
And this must be done, not superficially, but with great Resolution and
Constancy, and the greater by reason of the Failure before committed; even to
the hazard of his Kingdom (if there was occasion) for his sake, who has raised
him to the Throne, and can when he pleases, as soon remove him from it, and
lay him and his Honor in the Dust. Such a Resolution once declared will half
do the Work: But it must be steadily pursued, and impartial, without Indulgence
to any: for that would be to prefer a Creature before the Creator, and would
prove very pernicious. Besides, such Fools and Madmen, as are profane, or
glory in their Shame; and such impotent Bruits, as have not the Command of
themselves to abstain from scandalous Sins, are not fit to be admittend into
the Service or Favor of a virtuous and generous Prince. 3. By passing and even
recommending such other good Laws, as are necessary for supply of the Defects
of those we have already. This is the way to recover God's Blessing: and this
will strengthen him with the Hearts and Hands of the best and most considerable
part of the Nation. And this being done, he may with Confidence, and without
Delay, proceed to

2. The Proper Human Means; and 1. Such as are, and always will be, necessary
to strengthen his Kingdom at home in the Hearts of the People. Which is to be
done by good Government, and avoiding those known Inconveniences into which his
late Predecessors of this Age so unhappily fell. But more particularly, 1. By
Justice, (a great part of that Righteousness, by which the Throne is
established,) both to the Community, and to each Individual, without
Usurpation, Encroachments, or Oppression, either by himself, or his Favorites,
or Officers. 2. By Faithfulness in the Discharge of the Regal Office, directing
all his Counsels and Actions for the common Interest of the Nation, as his End,
and according to the true Constitution of the State and Government, as his Rule
This is plainly his Duty, and that, for which, and with which, he is entrusted
as King, as is very apparent in all the parts of the Constitution, let
Sycophants and Flatterers say what they can to the contrary. And to this
purpose three great Faults of the late Reigns are constantly to be avoided: 1.
The Use of any single Ministry of Favorites, or Private Advisers in Cabals; so
that nothing be done but by Advice of a Legal well-chosen Privy Council, and
under the Hands of those who advise it. 2. As well the long Continuance, as
long Intermission of Parliaments, which are both equally inconsistent with the
Statutes in force for Annual Parliaments; and of equally pernicious
Consequence. 3. The Corruption of Members of Parliament by Pensions, Places,
and Promises; which is such a Breech of Trust on both sides, as is odious both
to God and Man, and equal to what in private matter is commonly reputed the
basest Knavery that can be.

3. By Prudence and Industry in ordering all, as to this End, and by this Rule,
so for the best Advantage upon all occasions; As, 1. In the choice of fit
Persons for Employments. 2. In Inspection into their Behavior. 3. In provident
Management of the Revenue and Contribution, that no unnecessary charge be laid
upon the People. 4. In conferring of Honors, wherein great faults have been
committed in the late Reigns. And in many other particulars not necessary here
to be expressed.

By these means he may make both himself and these Kingdoms happy. For it is
certain, unless I have been long in a great mistake, that both the true
Constitution of this State and Government is as well composed, both for Prince
and People, as any in the World; and the People as well disposed to be happily
and easily governed by it, as any upon the face of the Earth, by any Government
whatever. But it was the unhappiness of the last Race of Kings to be so imposed
upon by Flatterers, that they never well understood either; or were carried
away contrary to their own sense or reason, as they plainly were in many things.

2. But besides these things which are of constant use to be observed at all
times, there may be some things now specially requisite, or advisable for the
present State of Affairs: And such among others, I humbly conceive may be,

1. A fair Dismission for the present, till things be better settled, both from
the Privy Council, and from the Management of Affairs relating to Ireland, of
all such Persons, as either he himself has known to be unhappy in their
Counsels to himself; or are commonly believed by others to have been concerned
in any illegal Practices, or Projects in the late Reigns; or have incurred the
ill Opinion of the present Parliament: And to make choice of such other
understanding Men of unspotted Integrity, though of inferior Quality, as are
least suspected of Partiality to any Faction.

2. A Dissolution of the present Parliament, and new Writs to be speedily sent
out to summon another to sit at as short a day as may be; to confirm the Acts
of this, and to put an end to all doubts concerning the Authority of it.

3. Execution of Justice upon the Disturbers of the present Settlement.

4. A Review of those Counsels and Proceedings which have given such
disturbance in Scotland, and a speedy Restitution of matters there, to the true
Constitution of that Kingdom.

5. A just Inspection into the Accounts of all the Money before given, and a
good Management of the Remainder of that, and of this lately given, for speedy
Preparation for the next Spring, to recover, if possible, the Reputation and
Advantages lost the last Summer.

The Life of Man is short and uncertain; of Kings more uncertain, but of this
King, by reason of his corporal Infirmity, most of all. He has therefore cause
to be the more provident in the Management of the Opportunities and great
Talents, with which he is entrusted both by God and Man; and of which he must
shortly give account, so as that he may do it with Joy, and not with Grief.
Every wise man will make it his chief care to direct all his Actions to the
attainment of his greatest personal Perfection, and of his Enjoyment of the
most excellent Being. The same ought to be the care of those who have any Power
over others, to help them as much as may be to do the like. And this is more
especially the part of a Wise and Good King; and the ready way to make himself
and the People under him, happy here, as well as hereafter. It will make him
King of Men, of more than Men, that is, Christians; not of Brutes and Devils:
and of a whole Nation, not only of a Party or Faction. And for this, no labor
ought to be spared, no Difficulties or Dangers feared; otherwise King James
will rise in Judgment and condemn Him.

FINIS.

