A LETTER TO A LADY, Concerning the due Improvement of her Advantages of
Celibacie, Portion, and Maturity of Age and Judgment: Which may serve
indifferently for Men under the same Circumstances.
Madam,
THE Consideration of the Circumstances, which the Good Providence of God
(which is over all his Works, and extends to the most minute Concerns of the
Children of Men) has put you in, in this World; and of the Principles of
Grace, which he has planted in you, has excited in me, first, The Affections
of Good Will to you, and Desires and Wishes, that you may wisely improve the
same, and go on to Perfection; and then some Thoughts of Endeavors to assist
you, and offer you my Service in faithful Admonitions and Advices in order
thereunto.

The Circumstances, which I intend, are, 1. A State of Celibacie, or single
Life; and of Freedom from the Incumberances and Distractions, and Avocations
and Diversions of a Married State. 2. A plentiful Portion of the Things of this
World; and Freedom from the Necessities of Labor for a Livelihood: And, 3. an
Age of Maturity and Growth, not only above the Crudities of Youth, but above
the Prevalence of the Affections of Flesh and Blood, through Experience, and
the Exercise of Reason, and the kind Influences and Irradiations of Grace.

And upon the Consideration of these, I must immind you, and desire you to
consider, and ruminate upon it: 1. That you are no self-subsistent Being, but a
dependent Creature, in your Natural State; and besides, you are not your own,
you are bought with a Price, and redeemed out of a State of miserable Slavery,
in order to be translated into a glorious and blessed State in the Kingdom of
Heaven; if you suffer not your self to be cheated, allured or frighted, out of
it; but fight the good Fight, and strive lawfully. 2. That these Advantages are
Talents committed to your Management and Improvement; and that you have a Lord,
(this Lord who has bought you, and redeemed you) to whom you must give Account
for the same; you must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and receive
the things done in the Body, according to that you have done, whether it be
Good or Bad, 2 Cor. 5.10.3. That you live, not only in a Wicked World, but in a
more than ordinary degenerate Age, and wicked Generation, wherein not only the
Manners, but the Sentiments and Notions of Men, and even such as should be
Teachers, and Examples of Righteousness and Holiness, are greatly corrupted,
much after the manner that they were among the Jews, at our Savior's Coming in
the Flesh. 4. That the Wisdom of the World is Foolishness with God; and
therefore, if we will be wise indeed, we must not be conformed unto it, but be
transformed by the Renewing of our Mind, that we may prove, and curiously
discern, in those things which the blind World cannot see, what is that good,
and acceptable, and perfect Will of God; that after we have escaped the gross
Pollutions, we be not ensnared with more subtle Tentations. 5. That our Savior
has distinguished Two sorts of his Disciples: one of those who build upon the
Sand, who make great Profession, but do nothing; the other of those, who do
whatsoever he commands: and that the Terms of the Gospel are such, That without
forsaking all, and taking up the Cross, (whereof bearing Reproach, and Censures
of the World, and even of Friends and Relations, is but the first step) there
is no being his Disciple; no Purchase of the hidden Treasure, and Pearl of
great Price, without selling all for it. 6. That the Goodness and Favors of
God, and the Greatness of his Reward hereafter, do infinitely exceed all that
we can do or suffer for Him here: nay, the very Foretastes here do far exceed
all the Enjoyments of this World, and more than countervail all that we can
part with or suffer here. 7. That of the Good things of this World, there is a
far nobler Use to be made by the Wise, than Enjoyment of them, viz. by
Sacrificing that to the Service and Honor of our Lord, as the Spiritual
Free-will-Offerings of the Gospel. 8. That such Miscarriages and Improvidence,
as shall not utterly exclude from the Kingdom of Heaven, may yet be Matter of
much Ingratitude to our Lord, great Hindrances of Grace and Comfort here, and
Occasions of Loss, and of Diminution of Reward hereafter.

When you have well considered and digested these Truths, till they have
stirred up the Grace of God in you, that you may abound in good Spirits, good
Resolution, and quick Understanding in the Fear of the Lord, it will be fit
then to consider, How these Talents and Advantages may be best employed, and
improved for the Honor and Service of your Lord, and the Advancement of your
self in Holiness and Comfort here, and Happiness and Glory hereafter.

And, first, the State and Condition of Celibacie, whether of Virginity or
Widow-hood, when it comes to be Voluntary, and of Choice and Preference, (to
which our wise Governor, by his secret Conduct, does often bring Souls by
degrees) has the Approbation of our Savior, of the Holy Scriptures, and has
always been esteemed very Honorable in the Christian Church, and believed to
be Matter of great Reward hereafter. It is true, it is not Matter of strict
Obligation to all; nor could it be; because inconsistent with the Propagation
of Mankind; but very often when Souls are come to good Maturity in Spiritual
things, they have such evident Calls to it, both by the special Providence, and
by Motions of the Grace of God, as lay a special Obligation upon Them, and
which They cannot break through; but they run themselves into the Briers, and
into inextricable Difficulties, which makes them experiment the Accomplishment
of St. Paul's Prediction; whereof I have known diverse remarkable Examples. It
is therefore both Prudence, and a noble Act of Gratitude and Devotion, upon
true Principles, to embrace and follow St. Paul's Advice and Resolution, upon
mature Deliberation of the Case, 1 Cor. 7.1, 8, 25, 26, 29. and what he so
earnestly presses elsewhere, to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God. It must be upon right Principles, and for a right End,
which is expressed by St. Paul, by taking care for the things of the Lord, how
you may please the Lord, v. 32. and v. 35. for that which is comely, and that
you may attend upon the Lord without distraction: for otherwise, neither will
it be accepted with God, who looks principally at the Heart and Intention; nor
will it be like to continue with any Comfort and good Success to your self: And
it must be employed to that end; by Abstraction from unnecessary Visits,
unprofitable Conversation, and impertinent Employments, and Retirement for
Spiritual Exercises, the Worship of God in Public, and Works of Charity to Men.

And this brings us to the Consideration of the Second of those Advantages
beforementioned, your Talent of the Portion of the Things of this World, which
you have received. The True Use of External things is, in my Apprehension, as
little understood in this Age as ever. The Advice, which I would recommend
concerning it, is this, to exercise your self to need as little of the World as
may be: This is done by Abstinence from the Use of all that can well be spared,
and is not very necessary. And it has these Advantages to recommend it. 1. It
is a Means to acquire a more absolute Dominion of the Soul over the Body. 2.
When it is done for that Purpose, and in order to the more complete Subjection
of the whole Man to God; it is an Act of the great Business of our Lives, and a
reasonable Sacrifice, acceptable to God. 3. It will come into Account for
Recompense and Augmentation of Reward hereafter. 4. It will make our Lives more
easy, and more easily provided for here. 5. It is an Imitation and
Recommendation of the Example of our Savior, and his Disciples of old, and a
Payment of due Honor and Respect to them. 6. It is a kind of fighting the
Lord's Battles, by opposing a very considerable Stratagem of the Enemy, viz. to
distract and incumber us with Cares about Unnecessary things, by raising
Emulation in Peoples Minds for them: whereas, whoever in Fact does contribute
to the Recommendation of these things, does the Devil's Work, exposing his
Wares, promoting his Policies, and encouraging and heightening that Emulation;
whatever he may pretend or intend for the Service of God. 7. It does promote us
to the nearest Approaches to the Angelick State, that our Mortality can bear.
8. It is a ready way to obtain more excellent Enjoyments of Spiritual
Consolations, Graces, and Fore-tastes of Heaven while we live upon Earth.

Secondly, As we must be provident that our Master's Talent be not wasted, so
we must be prudent and studious that it may be well employed, and improved for
our Master's Service; that if we be Rich in this World, we be proportionably
Rich toward God; Rich in good Works, Rich in Treasure laid up in Heaven, where
even a Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple, in the Name of a Disciple, shall
be remembered and rewarded. This is a Matter so abundantly inculcated in the
Gospel, and in the Exhortations and Examples of the Christians of after-Ages,
declaring the Danger of Riches, and directing how to use and bestow them in
order to Perfection and Happiness hereafter; recommending Contempt of the
World, and Heavenly-mindedness; and obliging all Christians, at their first
Initiation by Baptism, to renounce the World, and the Pomps and Vanities
thereof; that the Glosses, Shifts, and Evasions, wherewith too many of our
Teachers impose upon themselves, abuse others, and, as the Pharisees
heretofore, make the Word of God, the Precepts of the Gospel, and the
illustrious Examples, if not of our Savior Himself, yet of his Saints,
designed, no less than the Precepts, for our Instruction, not only of none
effect, but even slighted, despised, contemned and reproached, as Monkery and
Melancholy, or calculated only for Times of Persecution, (though Times of
Prosperity do most need such Admonitions) that if well considered it is a sad
Instance of the Degeneracy and Corruption of this Age, and does deserve good
Consideration, and great Resolution, that we be not carried away with the
Stream, if not to Destruction; yet to the Obstruction of our Graces, and to our
Loss, and diminution of that full Reward hereafter, which is of far greater
Concern to us than this World, and all that is therein. But to a Person of your
Parts, and Progress in the study of Religion, and disposition to it, I hope I
need not farther enlarge upon it. And for the Practice of it, I know not what
can be proposed more proper than the PROPOSAL, whereof a few Copies were lately
Printed, and one of them is here enclosed.

The Third Advantage does greatly inhance the Obligations of the other Two, by
setting such Persons above the Excuses of such, as have not yet arrived to that
Maturity of Judgment and Command of themselves; and by qualifying Them for the
good Use and Improvement of them for the Service of God, and their own Benefit
and Advancement in Grace and Virtue here, and Happiness hereafter.

Against this, which has been said, Flesh and Blood (if we consult with Them)
will certainly Object, and the Spirit, which rules in the Children of
Disobedience (if we will hearken to Him) will as certainly Suggest, all that
can with any Color or Appearance be alleged. But if you will adhere to
Reason, if you will believe the Revelation of the Scripture, if you will attend
to our Savior's Admonitions and Example, and if you will gratefully embrace
and faithfully follow the Conduct of the good Spirit; the first will satisfy
you that Future things of great Importance and Duration, are to be preferred
before mean and transitory Enjoyments; and to be secured at any Rate, though
with Loss and Suffering here: The Apostle will inform you, That the Sufferings
of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory, which shall
be revealed in us, (Romans 8.18.) and that our light Affliction, which is but for
a Moment, works for us a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory, 2
Cor. 4.17. Our Savior will assure you, That the straight way of the Cross, is
the highway to the Crown; and that not only what is given for Him, but also
what is forsaken for Him, shall be rewarded and recompensed hereafter, and even
in this present time an Hundred fold, Mar. 10.30. full and overflowing Measure,
Luke 6.38. and he has furnished you with an Answer to all that can be said,
though out of the Mouth of an Apostle, Get thee behind me Satan; thou art an
Offense unto me; for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of men, Mat. 16.23. for, in such Case, it is not they that spoke, but
the Spirit of Satan and of the World, that spaketh in them, ( v. Mat. 10.20.)
And that Blessed Spirit will enlighten your Mind to discern, and after it has
tried your Fidelity, give you experimental Fore-tastes to Feel, and at last
conduct you to the Possession and full Fruition of that transcendent Bliss,
which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of
Man the things that God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. the
very Fore-tastes whereof do often render the Enjoyments of this World, not only
mean and despicable, but tedious, nauseous, and a Burden to experienced and
holy Souls. Christianity is indeed a Mystery, and a Riddle, to exclude unworthy
Souls: but it is a Rich Treasure, and a Precious Jewel, to such as will come up
to the Price of it. True Christians, as to themselves, may laugh in their
Sleeves at the Enjoyments of others: but Charity makes them pity and
commiserate their Blindness and Error. Wherefore, save your selves from this
untoward Generation, and come out from among them, and be ye separate, says
the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you; And will be
a Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.

This is what it pleased God to put into my Mind for your Service, and for his
Service; and I wish it a happy Success for both. Be wise, look to your Call,
and neglect not the Admonition.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe PROPOSAL mentioned in this Letter, is, For the Accommodation of some
Devout Women, with such mean, but convenient Habitation, Work, Wages, and
Relief, that they may have Time and Strength for the Worship of GOD, both in
Public and Private, and Freedom of Mind for Meditation, and Religious
Exercises, while their Hands are Employed for Maintenance of the Body; and that
while they enjoy the benefit of such Accommodations for their own Souls, their
Benefactors, and the Church and Nation may be benefited by their constant
Prayers.

The Author has Written also a short Discourse concerning the Antiquity,
Divine Approbation, and high Esteem, which has always been had in the
Catholic Church, of a Religious Life Abstracted from the World; but it is not
yet Printed.

He has also begun to put his Proposal into Practice, having, for that
purpose, procured a Friend to take a Lease of a convenient House of near 40 l.
per Annum; his Design therein being to give an Experiment and Example of the
great Use and Benefit thereof, and not merely the Accommodation of one Twenty
Women. This he has begun in hope and confidence that there is yet so much real
Piety and Charity left in this City, and especially in this Sex, as not to
suffer such a Proposal to come to nothing for want of Supplies, and become a
Public Testimony of the Barrenness and Insincerity of the Religion professed
amongst us, as another Good Work begun by him for the Restitution of the most
Solemn Christian Worship to its Integrity and just Frequency of a Daily
Celebration, in proper Places, has been for some time. And he wishes that
People may be awakened by these Warnings, and extricate themselves out of the
Enchantments of the World, lest they provoke some sweeping Judgment to clear
the Land of such degenerate and fruitless Plants, as well as the grosser Weeds.

Printed for the Religious Society of Single Women.


