Mr. STEPHENS's SERMON Preached Before the HONORABLE House of Commons, January
30th. 1699/1700.

Advertisement.
THE Honorable Auditory before whom the following Sermon was Preached, having
expressed their mislike, I never designed to have had it Printed: But since it
is stolen uncorrectly into the World, without my Privity, I hope it will not be
imputed as a Crime, that I amend the Errata of the Press.

Will. Stephens.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the HONORABLE House of Commons, January the 30th.
1699/1700. Being an Anniversary SERMON for the DAY.

By WILLIAM STEPHENS, B. D. Rector of Sutton in Surry.

Corrected by the Author.

LONDON: Printed: And are to be Sold by A. Baldwin, at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane, 1700.

THE EDITOR TO THE PREACHER.
SIR,
SINCE the Printer informed me, that he will make a Second Impression of your
Sermon, I thought it might be fit to offer you some Satisfaction for Printing
it without your Consent. For although I was told, that you were obstinate in
refusing to Print it, yet I thought it might be useful to the Public, and no
ways disserviceable to You to Publish it.

Wherefore, having gotten a Copy, I gave it to a Printer, only with this
Charge, that he should make the Impression as Cheap as he could, for as I
observed, that the Preaching of it made you some Enemies, so I concluded that
the Printing of it might Gain You some Friends; because the Misrepresentations
which were given Abroad concerning it would vanish away.

And as to the Reflection which was made upon You by a Supposititious
Clergyman, I Appeal my Ld. A. Bp. of Canterbury, if he did not receive
Satisfaction from a Worthy Member of Parliament, being a Man of unspotted
Reputation, that what was objected against You by the Reflecter as to your
flying from a suspected Prosecution, was wholly False and Scandalous.

SIR, I wish you well, and am Yours, etc.

TITUS III. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to
obey Magistrates; and to be ready to every good Work.


TO understand the Reason of this, and suchlike Admonitions, which frequently
occur in the Apostle's Writings, Two Things may be premised:

I. That about the Time of our Savior Christ, there arose one Judas of Galilee
(who is mentioned Acts 5.37.) preaching Seditrous Doctrines to the People, and
teaching, (as St. Jerome in his Comment on my Text observes,) That they ought to
own no Sovereign Prince, but God alone: And if they paid their Tithes to the
Priest, they were discharged from paying Tribute to the Emperor. And upon this
Account it was (as St. Jerome believed) that the Pharisees asked our Savior
that captious Question, Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or no? Matthew.
22.17. Now to this Account Anastasius Nicenus adds, That the Followers of this
Judas were very numerous, and called by the Name of Gallileans, and commonly
looked upon as Men ill affected to the Roman Government: Particularly, because,
when they offered Sacrifice, they refused to make Supplication for the Emperor
and People of Rome; upon which Account it is thought that Pilate, the Roman
Deputy of Judea, came upon them whilst they were sacrificing, and putting them
to the sword; mingled their blood with the blood of the sacrifices; as you may
read, Luke 13.1.

And from hence it was, that our Savior Christ and his Disciples were
suspected of favoring Seditious Doctrines, because they came out of Galilee,
as is observed by St. Chrisostom, in his 23d. Homile on the Romans, wherein he
says, That great Reports were spread abroad, as if the Disciples were a
Factious, Seditious People, and designing against the Government. It must also
be confessed, that many of the Jews, who were converted to the Christian Faith,
were not sufficiently respectful to the higher Powers which God's Providence
had set over them: For which Mr. Calvin gives this Reason, Since the Powers
that were then in Being opposed themselves to our Savior Christ, they thought
them unworthy of Respect and Honor.

Now what has been said concerning the Gallilean Persuasion, shows the Reason
why the Apostles do so frequently in their Letters direct the Christian
Churches to Loyalty, or a due Submission to Magistrates.

1. To clear themselves from the false and scandalous Imputation of having
imbibed the Doctrine of Judas the Gallilean. And, 2. To undeceive all those
that had been perverted by that seditious Doctrine.
II. The Second Thing I would premise, is, That about the Time when St. Paul
wrote this Epistle, the People of Crete (which was Titus his Diocese) were
unruly and mutinous. Grotius says, That they were always a factious People; and
for that Reason St. Paul wrote to Titus, their Bishop, to put them in mind to
be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to be ready
to every good Work.

I. I shall take Occasion from hence, First, To make a just Comment upon the
Text. II. To set forth the Reasons and Grounds upon which the Apostles founded
their Doctrine of Obedience to Civil Magistrates. And, III. To apply these
Reasons in Conjunction with the Occasion of this Day's Humiliation. And,
I. First, It may be observed, That St. Paul does not direct Titus to teach the
Doctrine of Civil Obedience as a new Thing, but only to refresh their Memories
therewith, to put them in mind, etc. For Men cannot be supposed ignorant of the
absolute Necessity of Government, to the Defense and Support of Society; which
were, in effect, to suppose, that 'twere better to lead the Lives of Beasts
than Men, and that the World were willing to lie under the continual Calamity
of War and Opression, filled only with a Rout of Fools and Madmen. 'Twere to
suppose every single Person willing to expose himself to the uncontrolled
World, and bid defiance to the unbounded Power, Rage, and Malice of Mankind. We
cannot but see our selves linked together by Common Wants into Public
Societies, and that these Societies cannot subsist, unless they are upheld by
the Power of Government, whose Wisdom and Justice must appear by a due
Administration of good Laws: And from hence we cannot but see a Necessity of
Principalities and Powers, of Superior and Inferior Magistrates, without whom
Laws can be neither made nor executed. From whence it is very visible, that
Subjection to a good Government is as much our Interest as it is our Duty. This
was evident to the Pythagorean Sect of old, who would not suffer the Blood of
any Creature to be shed for their use, but yet allowed the Sword of the
Magistrate to cut off Malefactors.

The following Words in my Text, are, Principalities and Powers. Now the Word
in the Original signifying something which is Prime and Principal, must denote
the Supreme Established Power, from whence Inferior Authorities are derived,
and is the same with the higher Powers mentioned Romans 13.1. But because St.
Paul speaks of Principalities and Powers in the Plural Number, it is likely that
he alludes to the Distinction (which was so common among the Romans) of the
greater and lesser Powers, the former of which, during the Commonwealth, were
the Consuls, Pretors, and Censors; all which Powers, in St. Paul's Time, were
vested in the Emperor, and made up the Imperial Dignity. The lesser Powers were
all those derived from hence, and were subordinate hereunto. And this
Distinction was so nicely observed among the Romans, that Julius Caesar
punished a Tribune, because he suffered himself to be styled one of the higher
Powers. Sueton.

But in the Text it must be observed, that our Obedience becomes due, not only
to the Supreme, but Inferior Authorities; for the Cretans, to whom Titus
preached the Gospel, were part of a Roman Province, governed by inferior
Officers, deputed from Rome, who were the Magistrates they were exhorted to
obey. For tho the superior and inferior Powers differ greatly, if compared
among themselves; yet, with respect to the Subjects Obedience, they are to be
regarded alike; so that we cannot wilfully disobey the Inferior, without
affronting the Sovereign Authority. If then the Cretans would obey the Emperor,
it must be by Submission to the Ordinances and Officers which he had appointed
to their Island; and if they behaved themselves suitably to these Magistrates,
they discharged their Duty to the Imperial Power which deputed them.

We see that a large Family cannot be governed by the Personal Presence of the
Master, much less can an Empire; so that there will be need to call in to the
Prince's Assistance, such Persons into whom he may diffuse some measure of his
Political Soul, and thereby unite them as Members to his own Body-Politick;
whereupon they are to be treated as the Hands, Arms and Eyes of Majesty: And
hence Titus admonished them, not only to be subject to Principalities and
Powers, but to obey Magistrates.

II. The Second Thing I proposed to speak to, were the Reasons upon which the
Apostles grounded their Doctrine of Civil Obedience; which are Two:

The one is given by St. Paul, who teaches, That, Every Soul should be subject
to the higher Powers, because The Magistrate is the Minister of God to us for
good, Romans 13.1, 4.

The Second Reason is given by St. Peter, viz. Because all Governments and
Governors do arise from our own Consent, Submit your selves (says the
Apostle) to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the
King as supreme, etc. Where note, That the King is called the Ordinance, or
Creature of Man, because the Sovereign Power it self is vested in Men,
according to Humane Compact: And from hence our Subjection is urged by the
Apostle St. Peter, in his 1 st Epist. 2 d Chapter, Verse 13.

1. To begin with St. Paul's Argument, who calls Magistracy a Divine Ordinance,
because of the excellent Use of it, whereby good Magistrates resemble the
Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, in securing to all Men their Rights and
Properties; in preserving the Peace, Health and Safety of Societies, both with
respect to Body and Soul. But to be more particular.

1. The Preservation of Property was the first benefit for which Magistracy was
designed. Now Property is originally attained by the Labor of either Body or
Mind; for supposing the Earth to have been common to its First Inhabitants, it
will follow that whoever took the Pains to cultivate any part of it, and lay up
necessary Stores for his use, had by this his Industry made himself the true
Proprietor thereof. And could we suppose this New Proprietor to be as well
guarded, as that Man we read of in the Gospel, who was well Armed, and kept his
Palace and Goods in Peace, yet it may likewise be supposed, (as it there
follows) that if a stronger than he shall come upon him, he will take from him
all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divide his Spoils. And this uncertain
condition of Property shows the reason of Men's uniting into Societies, and
setting up Forms of Government, which is for Mutual Defense and Preservation of
Property: And that, not only for the benefit of the present Possessors, but of
Future Generations. So that, what becomes a Man's own, either by Labor, Gift
or Purchase, may with Safety be enjoyed by himself, and also conveied down to
his Posterity.

2. Life and Limbs are ours by the Gift of God. And these Properties are liable
to be invaded and destroyed: Though they cannot (like other Goods) be transferred
to the use of the Spoiler. And since there is so much Variance and Malice,
Pride and Strife among Mankind, what ill offices may not one Man apprehend from
another? But when destructive Malice, a Fiend of Hell, shall transform it self
into an Angel of Light, and persuade Men that they are then inspired with the
Spirit of God, when they are possessed by the Apollyon, the great Enemy and
Destroyer of Mankind, when under the Pretense of Religion it self, Men shall
exert their sharpest Malice, not only against the Possessions and Liberties,
but against the Lives of one another; how great need is there of the
Magistrates interposing Power to disarm them of their Spiritual as well as
Carnal Weapons of Warfare, to take away the Ball of Contention from among them,
and the power of evil-doing from all Contending Parties? And,

3. In this the Magistrate is God's Minister to us for good, not only with
respect to the Preservation of our Liberties and Lives from Destruction, but of
our Souls from Sin; for whilst this Just Liberty, this Natural Right of
worshipping God, according to that Knowledge He has given us, is supported by
Law, no Man is forced into hypocritical Compliances, contrary to the Direction
of his Conscience, but every one may worship the One True God in singleness of
Heart; whereas on the other hand, if in Matters of Religion, Force be suffered
to take the Place of Reason, all Religions will be alike, and (as Colors in
the Dark) undistinguishable.

And although the Magistrate can bestow no Divine Grace upon the Souls of Men, yet
whilst by punishing Vice, Immoral Practices are restrained, he prevents the
overflowing of Sin in a Land. And if ceasing to do Evil, be one step toward
learning to do well, whilst the Civil Powers restrain us from Immoralities,
they turn us out of the Broad way of Perdition into the Paths of Righteousness
and Peace.

From hence then it appears, That they who are wanting in their Submission and
Assistance to the Civil Ministry of God, are false to their own Interest, as
well as that of their Posterity. Whereas on the other hand, he who is ready to
every good work which may support this Divine Ministry to us for good, will be
sure, in the Performance of his Duty, to find his Account.

Let us then take a View of our Goods and Chattels, Houses and Lands, Wives and
Children; let us consider the Blessings of Health, Safety and Liberty: Let us
think how to preserve our Lives from Destruction, our Souls from Sin: Whether
we Eat or Drink, or Sleep or Wake, or whatever we do with Comfort or Safety, we
hereby discover our Continual Obligation to the good Magistrates Care over us,
whereby we are put in mind to be subject, etc.

2. The other Reason of Submission given by St. Peter, is, Because all
Governments and Governors arise from the Peoples Consent. They are the
Ordinances and Appointments of Men, the Creatures of Humane Compact. For we do
not find That God did appoint any Form of Political Government for a Pattern to
be followed by any Society now in Being upon the Earth. We see no such Rule in
the Book of Nature; Nor do we read in Scripture of any particular Polity
prescribed to all, or any People, now imbodied in the World. We read there,
That all Governments and Governors are appointed by God's Providence, By me
Kings Reign, etc. But we find no Particular Administration, no Particular
Family, or Single Person, now in Being, ordained to Government by Divine
Precept: But each Magistrate and Magistracy is left to the Ordinance and
Appointment of those Men who have joined themselves together in Society.

The great Variety we see in Civil Government, shows, That they are all the
Effects of Humane Contrivance, and suited to the Several Interests of the
Respective Societies: Thus the Ancient Charter of the Neighboring City,
Containing all those useful and necessary Powers, by which so great a Body is
governed, Was it not the wise Contrivance of their Ancestors? And did it not
receive its Establishment from the Principalities and Powers of the Realm? And
the Great Charter of the Realm it self is no more than the wise Ordinance of
our Forefathers? And the Dates of its Royal Confirmations are still remaining
among us. And as several smaller Societies have their Free Customs distinct
from one another; so in different Nations there are various Lodgments, even of
the Sovereign Power, which appear to be the Effects of Free Will: because in
every rational Government, something may be observed which is peculiar and
distinguishing.

Furthermore, Have we not seen the forms of Government even in the same Nations
changed from what they formerly had been? As in Sweden, France, and Denmark.
And have not our eyes beheld of late Years, the Legal Form of the English
Monarchy degenerated into Tyranny, and again recovered, through God's Blessing,
together with the Courage and Conduct of the Man of his own Right Hand, who by
restoring our Ancient Liberties, justly recommended himself to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm by the Free Consent of the People?

Nor was it otherwise of old, when Moses was by Meekness and Miracle
recommended of God to be the Father of his Country. For tho by a Divine Power
he wrought out Israel's Deliverance from Egypt by Conducting them into the
Wilderness, yet there was no Form of Government established among the Tribes
till Jethro made a Visit to his Son in Law Moses, to whose Counsel it was owing
that a sound Polity was set up in the Land of Israel. For instead of the whole
burden of the Government lying upon Moses, which Jethro told him was not good,
he directs him to provide out of all the People, able men, such as fear God,
Men of truth, hating Covetousness, and place such over them to be Rulers over
Thousands, Rulers of Hundreds, Rulers of Fifties and Rulers of Tens, And let
them Judge the People at all seasons. And it shall be (says Jethro) that every
great matter they shall bring unto thee, but every small matter they shall
judge: Exodus 18, 17, 21, 22. Thus the burden of the Civil Government should sit
easy upon the Governors, and the People should receive a quick dispatch of
their Affairs.

Moses (as you read) follows this advice, and joins himself with the Tribes of
Israel in the choice of Persons fit for this Administration, as will appear by
comparing the 25th verse of the forecited Chapter with the first Chapter of
Deuteronomy. In the former verse we read that Moses chose able Men out of Israel and
made them Heads over the People. But the latter place shows that the Peoples
Consent was had in the election of these Officers. For so Moses Repeats the
Circumstances of that Action, Deuteronomy. 1.9. etc. And I spoke unto you at that time
saying, I am not able to bare you my self alone, etc. take ye therefore wise
Men and understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them Rulers
over you. From hence it appears. 1. That the Old Constitution of Israel's
Government, was the Contrivance of Jethro an Heathen, and the Magistrates who
were in the Administration were chosen by the Joint Consent of Moses, and the
People. And, 2. That no one Person, tho never so able, so Wise, and Valiant as
Moses, is sufficient to Govern a Nation without the Advice and joint Assistance
of Inferior Magistrates. Much less such a Man who has no pretense to the
Spirit and Character of this Divine Legislator.


It has been thought by some, that a great Conqueror might form a Civil
Government in a conquered Nation, without the Consent of the People by the sole
Power of own Will. And suppose it were so, then that Government, would be an
Humane Ordinance, because the Conqueror is but a Man. But I deny it to be
possible for any Conqueror, tho never so great, to make himself a King over any
People without their Consent. For to let pass what our Histories tell us of the
Capitulations which followed the respective Conquest of the Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, before they erected any Form of Government in this Land. Let us
suppose that a Great General, with a powerful Foreign Army, should so far over
run a Nation that the People thereof could not be able to make any considerable
Resistance; in such a Case the Relations of Lord and Slave are actually
introduced by the Conquest. The Conquerors are Lords and the Natives Slaves:
But then this State is a State of War still, but no Political or Civil
Constitution. The Absolute Lord and his Slave are as yet, upon no civil Terms
with one another, no Obligations have as yet passed between them, but they are
both left to their own Wills; and if the Lord may take away the Life of his
Slave, the Slave is under no Obligation of dealing otherwise with his Lord. So
that if this Great General intends to rule in Peace over the Conquered People
he will find himself constrained to enter into some Terms of Compact with them,
upon which they are willing to accept him for the Head of their Government, and
Oblige themselves to obey him. But put the Case that a Nation, to avoid present
Destruction, would Consent to make themselves Legal Slaves, this can no more
oblige them than an honest Man is bound to keep Promise with a barbarous
Highway-man; for iniquity cannot be established by a Law, much less can it bind
Posterity, of whose Lives and Liberties they had no Right to dispose. And
Consequently, they may justly restore themselves to a State of Freedom when
ever they are able.

And if a mighty Conqueror cannot attain a Civil Power over a Conquered People
without their Consent, how shall he obtain it over his own Conquering Nation,
without their free Concurrence? Did this Victorious People leave their Native
Country, with all the Liberties they enjoyed therein, to follow their Chief
into a Foreign Land, wherein they hoped to find a better Settlement for
themselves and Posterity; would they endure all the Hardships of War, and by
their Sweat and Blood purchase an entire Conquest that they might be reduced to
the miserable Condition of the Conquered People? that is, to become Slaves to
their General. I allow, that this Chief may by the help of his own People, make
himself owned by the Conquered upon advantageous Terms. But by what invisible
power shall he gain to be (I will not say absolute Master but even) the Civil
Head over his new settled Colony? It can be nothing else but their own free
Consent which can Invest him with a Political Headship over them. And then, how
great Reason have they to Pay a due Submission to that Ordinance which
themselves have made, and to submit to Principalities and Powers which were
their own Appointment, and for their own Benefit?

III. Having thus set forth the Apostolical Grounds of Civil Obedience, I crave
leave to make some improvement of them: First By way of General Application,
for to insist on the dismal Effects of this Days Tragedy (with which you have
been Annually acquainted all your Lives) would be superfluous Labor. And
therefore I shall rather endeavor to offer some Cautions which may probably
prevent the like Mischiefs for the future. But,

1 st. The Apostolical Reasons of Obedience being duly considered, may serve to
allay the Fears and Jealousies of some Good Men, who have conceived, That a
National Government has not so sure a Foundation as is necessary, if it be
only bottomed upon Humane Compact: Because Men's Minds being subject to frequent
Alterations, all Governments will, as they think, be very unsteady.

And it must be acknowledged, That in all dubious Matters, wherein the Judgment
cannot come to a Determination, the Minds of Men will be unsettled. So likewise
in smaller matters, scarce worthy of serious Deliberation, Men will act
differently. Nay, in Matters of Moment, some Men may suffer themselves to be
Carried away by unaccountable Capricio's: But yet none of these things can any
ways endanger a Constitution settled upon the Foundations before mentioned.

First, Because a Good Government is a Matter of so necessary Importance, that
no Man in his Wits can doubt, whether he shall concur to its Support or not. And

Secondly, The Compact by which all Governors are introduced, is evermore
Solemn and Deliberate; and attended with the strongest Tie to the Sovereign
Power by which it is possible for a man to ratify the Solemn Obligations he has
Contracted. For such a Bond is, The Oath of the Lord; by which the Allegiance
of the Subject is confirmed. And if a Deliberate Compact, freely entered into,
upon the wisest and strongest Motives of Advantage, confirmed by Solemn Oaths
and Promises, be not a sufficient Establishment, it is hard to say what is such.
And notwithstanding some Men may suffer themselves to be carried away from a
Useful and Necessary Establishment, by Reasonings contrary to the General
Stream of a Nation, it cannot be presumed that the Number and Abilities of such
Men will ever be sufficient to unhinge any tolerable Administration of a
Government thus Established.

Indeed, Nothing but an Absolute Necessity, and such as is visible in an
extraordinary manner, will be effectual to work a Change in any Settled
Constitution, such an One, as renders Mankind fully satisfied, without the
least remaining Scruple, that the Government then in Being, is not the
Ordinance of God to them for Good.

2. From what has been said it also appears, That no Man's Pretense to the
Membership of any pure Apostolic Church, can excuse, much less warrant his
Disaffection to that Government which God's Providence, and Man's Consent have
set over a People for their Good.

I speak this to take away that Scandal which some have endeavored to fix upon
the Church of England; as if she had laid any Obligation upon her Sons, in
Opposition to the Present Constitution: Whereas the contrary Truth is
Self-Evident. For does not our Church, in Her Sixth Article, receive all the
Books of the New Testament, as they are commonly received, and account them
Canonical? Is not my Text part of that Canon? And are not all our Bishops and
Clergy thereby obliged, as much as Titus was, to put their Hearers in mind of
their Subjection to Principalities and Powers? Or can we pretend to be Members
of an Apostolical Church, if we carry our selves unseemly toward such a
Government, whose Administration directly tends to our Common Good, and was
also our own Ordinance and Appointment, which are the Apostolical Reasons of
Civil Obedience?

I speak not this, as if by Virtue of the Ministerial Function we could pretend
to prescribe Forms of Civil Government to Nations, to determine the Regalia of
Princes, or the subordinate Powers of inferior Magistrates. The Book of God
does not furnish us with Abilities for this Work, much less require it of us.
It injoins us to make Peace among our Neighbors, by endeavoring to incline
Men's Minds to a peaceable Temper; but it does not enable us to judge the least
Point of Legal Right which is in Controversy between them; much less does it
teach us to determine the Rights, Titles or Powers of Princes and Magistrates;
but yet it injoins us to put men in mind to be ready to every good work, which
may contribute to support a Good Government.

Thirdly, From the Doctrine already set forth, in Conjunction with the
Misfortunes of that Sovereign Prince which are this Day called to Remembrance,
arises matter of Caution to Two sorts of People.

First, To all those who have the Honor to share the Public Administration,
that they make it their Equal Care that the Government which at present we
enjoy, may be always the Ministry of God to us for good. For such an
Administration applies the Text in the most sensible manner, convincing every
one that he ought to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, and to be ready to every good work.

It is well known, That the Character of a Good Prince is raised so high in the
Holy Scripture, that such are called Gods upon Earth; to admonish them of that
continual overflowing Kindness, that universal Beneficence, that tender Care
and Concern for their Peoples Welfare, which their High Office requires. And
from the Scriptures we are also informed, That the kind Providence of God are
immediately conveied to Men by his holy Angels, who are therefore called
Ministering Spirits, Hebrews 1.14. and are most especially employed in Works of
Deliverance. By their Means Lot was delivered out of Sodom, Isaac from the Arm
that was stretched forth to make him a Sacrifice, Israel was conducted through
the Wilderness to Canaan, Elijah delivered from Famine, and at last carried
from Earth to Heaven. By their Means Daniel was delivered from the Lions, and
the Three Israelites from the fiery Furnace. These were the Heralds who first
Published the Redemption of the World by our Savior Jesus Christ, who likewise
delivered Peter from his Chains, Paul and Silas from their Imprisonment.
Whereby a Pattern is set up to the Ministry of a Great and Good Prince; who are
hereby directed to Cultivate and Adorn that Deliverance which their Great
Master has wrought out for his People.

First, By being the first Messengers and Promoters of those Methods which may
for ever hereafter secure our Liberties from danger of Relapse.

Secondly By a diligent avoiding of all those Methods by which the Glory of
former Princes has been Eclipsed, and the Hearts of their People alienated from
them.

The subordinate Ministry is the Visible Majesty of the King, whereby he is
made known to his People, and more especially in time of Peace; For, tho during
a War, the Personal Courage and Conduct of a Great Prince is made very Public,
whilst his Person is Exposed to the View of Multitudes; yet when Peace shall
restore him to a more Private State of Life, His Personal Endowments, tho never
so Illustrious in themselves, cannot become Visible to the Body of a People,
any other way than by the constant Care and Conduct, the Great Diligence and
Public Spirit of those to whom he has committed the Trust of His People's
Welfare: The want of this Necessary Concern for Public Good, did, in some
measure, assist in bringing on that Tragical Scene, which is this Day
Commemorated. As it is commonly seen, that Men in a Private Condition of Life
are reduced to Great Miseries, by the Maladministration of those to whom they
had committed their private Trusts.

But when a Public Ministry shall join together Hearts and Hands, only to
promote the Public Weal, without the least Design of warping the Princes
Favor toward any one Party of Men, which like the Light of the Sun, and
Breathings of the Air, is designed for Common Comfort and Refreshment, no
Jealousies, Fears or Disaffections can arise; 'twill then be impossible for the
most wicked and malicious to disturb the Public Peace, but the King's Throne
will be established in righteousness, and the Voice of the People will be, O
King live for ever.

Secondly, A Second Caution affects all those who are concerned for the Body of
the People, that they let slip no Opportunity wherein Public Advantages are
offered to them. The Supreme Magistrate is the greatest Minister of God to us
for good: But God himself is not wont to enforce His Kindness upon us; but
expects our own Concurrence for our own Behoof: And when a Gracious Prince
shall make it appear, both by Words and Facts, that He cannot have any separate
Interest from that of his People; When He shows himself ready to every good
work which is esteemed beneficial to His People, though his Compliance therewith
may be Complicated with some Circumstances of Self-Denial, 'twould be a Matter
of sad Reflection, if the Public Weal should not be improved by the Advantages
which so Good and Gracious an Inclination administers unto us. An Unanimous
Consent in any Matter of Public Benefit will certainly procure it. To know
what is good for us, is to attain it.

There is also One Rule which our Savior Christ has left with us, tending to
the Improvement of Knowledge, which when reduced to Practice, will suffer no
man to be ignorant of what is good and fit to be done; it is only to carry a
single Eye about us, according to what is said, Matthew. 6.22. The light of the
Body is the Eye, if therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole body shall be full
of Light: If the Eye of a man be carried on singly (without any biasing
Affection) toward either Public or Private Good, he will certainly discover
the Good which he looked for. But if in the Search after Public Weal, any
Private By-Ends be aimed at, if a Private Love to our Selves, or a Particular
Resentment against any Persons or Parties, shall overruled, if either the
Admiration or Disesteem of others, shall incline Men to refuse Good Provisions,
or embrace Suspicious Proposals, if any thing besides a sincere Desire to
promote the Public Weal, shall bear Sway in a Public Council, it is no strange
thing if Darkness shall be called Light, and Light Darkness

It may also be observed, That amongst the many Qualifications which have
recommended our Holy Religion, no one has more forced its way among Serious and
Considering Men, than Its being so admirably adapted to the Happiness of
Mankind, and the Good of Societies.

Unbelievers have denied its Miracles, and its Mysteries have been disputed and
derided by Skeptical and Profane Men. But the greatest Opposers of the
Christian Name, can neither Deny nor Dispute the Real Tendency of Meekness,
Moderation, Punctual Justice, and Universal Good Will, to make men live well
one with another, doing to others as we would have them to do to us, and loving
our very enemies, leave no Room either for Private Oppression, or Public
Disturbance. The Spirit of this Religion will not suffer us to perpetuate
Animosities, or carry on Suspicions too far: To think that Men who have once
been in the wrong, can never be convinced, never repent of their Errors: 'Twill
suffer no Suspicions to hinder from a due Consideration of any Proposals in
behalf of Public Good, from whatever Quarter they may come: Where the single
Eye is thus directed in a Strait Line toward the Public Weal, the Whole Body
of such a Council will be full of Light, whereby they will certainly discover
the things which belong to our Peace. These things can never be hid, when a
Prince and People are thus in Quest of them.

God forbid therefore, That this Day of solemn Humiliation should be made Use
of to flatter Princes with Notions of Arbitrary Power, by drawing any
Conclusions from the Ancient Government of Gods peculiar People, which may
Color over Modern Tyranny.

God forbid! That the Roman Imperial Power in the hands of Claudius or Nero,
should be owned as God's Ministry, under which the Apostles of Christ suffered
Martyrdom. To entertain People with the Melancholy Thoughts of Fetters and
Chains, which when laid upon them by ill Princes, yet they must not endeavor
to remove under Penalty of Eternal Damnation, tends only to exasperate Humane
Nature, and make way for such another Day of Humiliation as that we are now
Celebrating: Which, may Divine Goodness, for ever prevent! God forbid, that
this day should be made use of to continue Heats and Animosities among us,
which ought long since to have been buried in Oblivion. Especially when the
Tragical Scene of this Day, was not then the Act of the whole Nation, and few
Spectators of it, scarce any Actors in it, are now remaining.

But since the Condition of the Greatest Men upon Earth is subject to such
Fatal Catastrophe's, as that was which this Day brings to mind. I cannot but
Lament the unhappy Fate of those Princes who are born in Purple and bred in
Luxury, encompassed with Flatterers, and so intoxicated with the Gaudy
Ornaments of Power, as to forget the End for which they were elevated, and made
Gods upon Earth. They little consider that this Greatness is supported by the
Inheritance of the Gentleman, the Hazard of the Merchant, and the Sweat of the
Labourer; who readily Contribute out of their small stock to support a
Government they themselves have set up. Who are contented to part with their
Natural Liberty to those who formerly (it may be) were their Equals, for their
Common Good and Protection; which is the only End of Government. A due
reflection hereon would make them first of all adore the Goodness of God whose
Providence has so distinguished them, and also love and cherish that Society
of Men, who has raised them to so high a Station, and submitted themselves and
their Fortunes, in a great measure, to their Discretion. Then the World would
see the best Men in the highest Places, Senates in Authority, Magistrates in
Esteem, and the Temple of Virtue the only Passage to that of Honor. Ambition
and Corruption will be out of Countenance, and the World will Triumph in an
undisturbed Felicity. The Prince will be happy in the Reverence and Esteem of
his People, and the People safe in the Generosity of the Prince.

All this and more we may expect from His Majesty's most Happy Reign, who was
not (like others) nursed up in Flattery, but tasted early of the Cup of
Affliction, that his Greatness might be owing to his own Courage, Virtue and
Integrity, and not the Uncertain Gift of Fortune. Wise by Nature, improved by
Early Adversity, and consummated by long Experience in all the Paths of
Greatness; a Prince Loved and Obeyed by his own Subjects, Honored by his
Allies, Dreaded by his Enemies, and will be Admired by late Posterity.

Nor do I here insist upon His Great Performances in the Art of War, in which
other Princes have had their share, and are often themselves the wretched
Trophy's, erected upon the Tears of miserable Men. But in his early Years, to
restore his Native Country, and since that, the Liberties of Three most Potent
Nations, are Glories Peculiar to Himself, and cannot be Equaled by the
Exploits of the most Renowned Chiefs, either of the Assyrian, Grecian, or
Roman Monarchs. And to Consummate all the Felicity that can happen to
Mortal-Man, it has been a Particular Honor reserved by Providence for Him
alone, that as wherever He sat his Foot, Slavery fled before Him like a
Phantome, so in His Dominions and under His Protection, are almost all the
remains of Liberty now known in the World.

Not that I speak this, or any thing else I have here said, for your
Information, (for I know from what Honorable Assembly I ought to receive
Instruction) but as my Text directed me, for your Remembrance.

FINIS.

