A Statute against Drunkenness, Viz. 4. Jacobus 5. The penalty of a Drunkard,
etc.
WHereas the loathsome and odious Sin of Drunkenness is of late grown into
common use within this Realm, being the Root and Foundation of many other
enormous Sins, as Bloodshed, Stabbing, Murder, Swearing, Fornication, Adultery,
and such like; to the great dishonor of God, and of our Nation; the overthrow
of many good Arts and Manual Trades; the disabling of diverse Workmen; and the
general Impoverishing of many good Subjects, abusively wasting the good
Creatures of God:

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
That all and every person or persons, which shall be Drunk, and of the same
offense of Drunkenness shall be lawfully convicted, shall for every such
offense, forfeit, and loose five shillings of lawfully Money of England, to be
paid within one week next after his, her, or their conviction thereof, to the
hands of the Churchwardens of that Parish, where the offense shall be
committed, who shall be accomptable therefore to the use of the poor of the
same Parish: And if the said person or persons so convicted, shall refuse, or
neglect to pay the said forfeiture, as aforesaid, then the same shall be from
time to time, levied of the Goods of every such person or persons so refusing
or neglecting to pay the same, by Warrant or Precept from the same Court, Judge
or Justices, before whom the same conviction shall be: And if the offender or
offenders be not able to pay the said sum of five shillings, then the offender
or offenders shall be committed to the Stocks for every offense, there to
remain by the space of six hours.

And it is further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons, being once lawfully convicted of the said offense of Drunkenness,
shall after that be again lawfully convicted of the like offense of
Drunkenness; That then every person and persons so secondly convicted of the
said offense of Drunkenness, shall be bounden with two sureties to our
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, His Heirs, and Successors, in one
Recognisance or Obligation of ten pounds, with condition to be from thence
forth of good behavior.

A Statute against Swearing, 21 Jacob. 20. None shall profanely Swear or Curse.
FOrasmuch as all profane Swearing and Cursing is forbidden by the Word of
God; Be it therefore enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, That
no person or persons, shall from henceforth profanely Swear or Curse: And that
if any person or persons, shall at any time or times hereafter offend herein,
either in the hearing of any Justice of Peace of the County, or of any Major,
Justice of Peace, Bailiff, or head Officer of any City or Town Corporate,
where such offense is, or shall be committed, or shall thereof be convicted by
the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by confession of the party, before any such
Justice of Peace of the County, or head Officer, or Justice of the Peace in the
City or Town Corporate, where such offense is or shall be committed; to which
end, every Justice of Peace, and every such head Officer, shall have power by
this Act, to minister the same Oath; That then every such offender shall for
every time so offending, forfeit, and pay to the use of the poor of that
Parish, where the same offense is or shall be committed, the sum of twelve
pence; and it shall also be lawful for the Constable, Churchwardens, and
Overseers of the poor of that Parish, by Warrant from such Justice of Peace or
head Officer, to leavy the same sum and sums of Money, by destresse and sale of
the offenders Goods, rendering to the party the overplus: And in defect of such
distress, the offenders, if he or she, be above the age of twelve years, shall
by Warrant from such Justice of the Peaee, or head Officer, be set in the
Stocks by three whole hours; but if the offender be under the age of twelve
year, and shall not forthwith pay the said sum of twelve pence, then he or she
by Warrant of such Justice of Peace, or head Officer, shall be whipped by the
Constable or by the Parents, or Master in his presence.


