SOME OBSERVATIONS AND ANNOTATIONS Upon the Apologeticall Narration, Humbly
submitted to the Honorable HOUSES of PARLIAMENT; The most Reverend and Learned
DIVINES OF THE ASSEMBLY, And all the Protestant Churches here in this Island,
and abroad.

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Meredith, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Crane. 1643.

TO The Right Reverend, and Learned DIVINES, THE AUTHORS OF THE Apologeticall
Narration.
Right Reverend and dear Brethren,
THE high esteem I have ever had of your Persons, and the great holiness of
your lives (desiring ever to be such my self, as I esteem you to be, except
only in your particular opinions, wherein ye dissent from all Protestant, yea,
all Christian Churches in this World) had almost hindered me, from the
publishing of these Considerations upon your Apologeticall Narration;
esteeming, That it was not for any particular man, such as I am, to oppose
himself to such a number of grave Divines, of so great learning, and so
apparent Piety: But on the other part, considering, that you, as my self, are
but men, subject to humane frailty, that ye know but in part, and consequently
may err in part, I thought, that this, which is in question betwixt you, and
all the Churches in the Christian World, might be a part of your aberration in
part, and of that which we know in part; And upon this consideration, esteemed
it no less a part of my duty, and Christian liberty, as a man, to oppose my
self to five men, then for five men to oppose themselves to the common opinion
of five hundred thousand, to so many learned, so many holy Divines, hundreds,
and thousands for one of you, no ways inferior to the learned, and best
amongst you; And not only to particular men, and Divines, but to so many, yea
and those the most pure, and most Reformed Churches of the World, amongst whom
there have been found so many thousands who have sealed Christ's Truth with the
loss of their goods, imprisonment of their bodies, by the exile of their
Persons, yea, with their dearest blood, and lievs, who if they wrought not
miracles, at the least God declared his Almighty Power in working miracles
about them, and upholding them; (Men of so great worth, that the world was not
worthy of them: And howsoever these Motives be great, yet wrought they not so
much upon me as this, That I am persuaded in my conscience, that your opinion
of Independency, etc. if it were admitted (pardon my expression till I be
better instructed by you, or some others) could not but prove the root of all
sort of Schism, and Heresy, and consequently the utter overthrow of Christ's
Universal Militant Church here upon Earth. Besides all these considerations, I
had many more, and amongst the rest, your hard expressions against them that
love, and pity you, your apparent resolution in desiring a Toleration of your
Religion, and consequently of a Separation from our Churches, which howsoever
they have power to hinder you, yet condescend to be suppliants to you, that you
will entertain union, and communion with them. I may add to all these your
undervaluing of the Parliaments great Favors toward you; for ye know,
Brethren, how they (notwithstanding all this, and your former Separation from
all other Christian Churches) having taken to heart your hard usage in those
evil times ye speak of, (howsoever in respect of your number ye be very few,
yea hardly the hundredth part, yea not so much as one part of the Divines of
this Kingdom, in respect of your Separation) invited you most lovingly to be
Members of this present Assembly of the most learned, holy, and reverend
Divines of both Kingdoms; whereof, had not they given you the capacity, ye had
been altogether incapable: And not only that, but also having resolved to send
two Divines from hence with their Commissioners to Scotland, they honored one
of you with this high favor (the greatest they could confer upon you at that
time) and so in effect did honor you with the half of the honor, which
belonged to all the Divines of the Kingdom; And yet notwithstanding all these
great testifications of so great, and tender affections toward you, ye five
men, five Members of the Assembly, (by whose Counsel, and Instigation, or upon
what Motives we know not) joined your selves in a particular Combination,
without the knowledge of either Parliament or Assembly, to draw up and publish
unto the World an Apologeticall Narration, as ye term it, containing in
effect, (howsoever ye name it) a singular desire of Separation from them, that
so cherish you, with some unworthy Nicknames, ye put upon them, who style you
by no worse names, then Brethren. By such proceedings, what else have ye done,
but erected an Assembly in the Assembly, a particular Assembly in a public
Assembly, by private Authority against public Authority, taking private
Resolutions against all public Resolutions, whatsoever might be concluded
either in Parliament, or Assembly; and in one word, an Assembly to overthrow
the Assembly? These reasons joined together with sundry others, made me to
think more then I say, and to suspect that ye would say more then ye say. And
therefore, laying all particular affections aside, I resolved my self to
publish these following Considerations, and Annotations upon this your
Apologeticall Narration; which truly I do not out of any spleen against you
(God knows it) for never one of you, ever offended me; yea, I may say, that I
love you all from my heart, and that in writing of this, my soul is, as it
were, rent in two parts, my understanding carrying it one way, and my will
another; Christ's verity forcing the one, and your singular piety alluring the
other: But I must conclude, That it is better to follow God then man, what ever
he be, or may appear to be; and that the will, that is but a blind faculty,
must let it self be led by the light of the understanding, which is the eye of
the soul. And as I write not out of spleen, so may I attest him, who sees all
things, that I do it not to gain any man's affection, or favor, much less in
hope of any other worldly ends; and that if I did it to gain any man's love, or
friendship, I am as much desirous of yours, as any others: No such ends moved
me: But if I have any knowledge of my self at this present, at the writing of
this Answer (which yet I know is not such as it should be) I may say, That my
main aim has been Gods glory, and the edification of weak Brethren, who may
have been misled by your most learned Discourse; esteeming, that during the
rest of my Pilgrimage, which cannot be long, having no other thing to do, I
shall do well to do this, and so improve my Talent to his glory, the
Edification of his Church, and the Salvation of my own Soul, and so I remain

Your very loving Brother in Christ, A. S.

Some General CONSIDERATIONS Upon the Apologeticall Narration.
I.
WHether in any Ecclesiastical or Political Assembly of the Christian World,
wherein things are carried by plurality of voices, it be ordinary for any
inconsiderable number thereof, to join in a particular combination among
themselves; and therein to take particular resolutions, to publish them unto
the world; and so to anticipate upon the resolutions of the whole Assembly.

II.
Whether in taking such resolutions, they should not consequently resolve
themselves to quit the Assembly, and to appear as Parties? And if any man or
men should do so, either in this Parliament, or this Assembly; if a connivence
at such a matter should not be reputed for an act of great favor, love, and
extraordinary tender affection toward them?

III.
Whether such an inconsiderable member, in so doing, may not be refused by the
parties, as incompetent Judges.

IIII.
Whether this Apologeticall Narration was necessary, when ye found the
calumnies, mistakes, misapprehensions of your opinions, and mists, that had
gathered about you, or were rather cast upon your persons, in your absence,
begin by your presence again, and the blessing of God upon you, to scatter and
vanish, without speaking a word for your selves or cause? And if the honor the
Parliament showed you, in calling you to be Members of the Assembly, was not
sufficient enough, to justify your persons from all sort of aspersions and
calumnies, without any Apology? Whether after the dissipation of such Clouds,
and such a justification, this Apology was rather necessary, then before, when
ye were under the cloud, and not justified?

V.
Whether this your Apologeticall Narration, wherein ye blame all Protestant
Churshes, as not having the power of godliness, and the profession thereof,
with difference from carnal and formal Christians, advanced and held forth
among them, as among you, be seasonable, when the Church of God and this
Kingdom stand in need of their Brotherly Assistance; and particularly of that
of the Scots (against whom it is commonly thought to be particularly intended)
who at this very time so unseasonable, according to their duty, hazard their
Lives and Estates for Gods Church, all this Kingdom, and you also?

VI.
Whether (as it is observed by sundry men of learning, and as ye have noted
your selves) ye should not have done better, to have sit down your opinions by
way of Theses, and so manifested unto us, wherein ye agree, or disagree with
us, or from us? the Brownists, Anabaptists, and these whom ye pretend to hold
the same Tenets with you, in old and new England, and the Netherlands, then in
a Rhetorical and Oratorius way, endeavor in the most part of your Book, to
publish your great Sufferings, and extraordinary Piety, and so to move us all
to compassion, and ravish us into admiration, as if ye meant rather to
persuade, then to prove them?

VII.
Many also are very desirous to know, whether this Apologeticall Narration
published by you five alone, be published in the name of you five alone, or of
all those also, or apart of those, whom ye pretend to hold your Tenets? to the
end we may know in what esteem to have it. And if in the name of you five
only, the Penners and Contrivers thereof; Whether ye five can arrogate a power
unto your selves, to maintain these Tenets, as the constant opinion of all your
Churches, having no general Confession of their Faith thereabout? If in the
name of all the rest, we desire ye would show your Commission from all your
Churches, by what authority ye do it? Or if ye do it without Commission and
Authority from them, if that be not to assume unto your selves a greater
Authoritative power, then that ye call Presbyteriall? yea, then ever was the
Episcopal?

VIII.
It were also not amiss ye should declare, Whether ye desire a Toleration for
you five alone in your Religion, or for all the rest? Item, If a Toleration in
public, in erecting of Churches apart? or to live quietly without troubling of
the State? as for the last, appearingly, ye may have it unsought; but for the
rest, the Parliament is wise enough, and knows what is convenient for the
Church of God and the State.

IX.
And because your whole draught of this Book tends evermore unto a Toleration,
and consequently unto some Separation; I would willingly know of you? What
things are to be tolerated, or not tolerated in Religion? not in private
persons, but in Conseciations? And particularly, when the whole Kingdom is
joined in one Religion? What sort of new Consociations of diverse Religions, it
may in good conscience tolerate and receive into it? Item, Upon what ground
Churches may, in good conscience, make Separation from other Churches, that
desire Union and Communion with them? Whether they that aim at a Toleration and
Separation, be not rather bound to tolerate some small pretended defects, not
approved by those from whom they desire to separate themselves; (and
especially, when they that are so desirous of Separation, are not pressed to be
Actors in any thing against their conscience) then to separate themselves from
a Church, that testifies a great desire to reform the defects, pretended to be
in it? Whether it were not better for them, that aim at Toleration and
Separation, to stay in the Church, and to join all their endeavors with their
Brethren, to reform abuses, then by Separation to let the Church of God perish
in abuses? Whether they do not better, that stay in the Church to reform it,
when it may be reformed, then who quit it, for fear to be deformed in it?

ANNOTATIONS Upon the INSCRIPTION Of this BOOK
[An Apologeticall Narration.]
ALL Apologies presuppose some Accusation, which here appears none; or if it be
intended, as an Apologeticall answer to what has been written against your
Opinions; it comes very short, weak, and slender, and no way satisfactory to
their Arguments.

Neither is it a mere Apologeticall Narration, but also a grievous Accusation
against all our Churches, as destitute of the power of godliness, etc. So it
is a mistake in the very Title of the Book, which is either untrue, or
inadoequate to the subject whereof it treats.

[Humbly submitted] So humbly submitted to the honorable Houses of Parliament,
as if they submit not themselves to your desires, in granting you a Toleration
(for any thing I can see) ye seem no ways minded to submit your selves to
theirs. It seems also very probable, That being Divines, ye should rather first
have consulted with the Assembly of Divines, your Brethren, then so ex abrupto,
gone to the Civil Magistrate, that arrogates not to himself, any directive
power in matters of Religion: This should have testified more Brotherly and
Christian Charity, then here it does of political humility: And it is more
convenient to the spirit and power of godliness; that the spirit of Prophets,
in such matters, should be subject unto Prophets, then unto the spirit of the
Civil Magistrate; who, for this effect, has convocate an Assembly of
Prophets, and would not undertake it himself. So this is a submission, That
this most just and severe Tribunal, and most Sacred refuge, and Asylum of
mis-judged innocence, requires not of you.

[By Thomas Goodwin, etc.] We have hereupon already expressed in the Epistle,
and in our seventh observation, what many Learned and good men desire, and what
may be their judgment hereupon about you five.

Page 1. Now Members of the Assembly of Divines] and this also we have touched
in our Epistle, and upon [humbly submitted.]

Notes upon the first Page.
Sect. 1.

Our ears, etc.] Here begins this Apologeticall Narration; which, from this
unto the ninth Section, Page the fifth, has little or nothing material,
touching the questions in controversy betwixt our Brethren and us: Only it
contains a Narration of their godly ways, whereupon they have never been
challenged by their Brethren, that ever I could hear of.

[filled with exclamations] What can be these exclamations or exclamators, we
know not, and therefore answers not.

Sect. 2. And now, etc.] It may seem very probable to reasonable men, 1. That
it should have been more seasonable, To have made this appearance into public
light, before your entrance into the Assembly, then so many Months after. 2.
Before your Brethren, in submitting your spirit of Prophets unto that of the
whole Assembly, then in this extraordinary way, unparalelled by any like unto
it in the world. 3. To have sought of them a Testimony, then after this way, to
take it at your own hand, and give it unto your selves.

[lain under so dark a cloud] Ye avow hereafter, that it is vanished away; so
ye lose your pains, in taking away a cloud, that is no more: See our fourth
observation.

[The Supreme Judicatory, severe Tribunal, the most Sacred Refuge, and Asylum
for mistaken, and mis-judged innocence.] The Parliament indeed is all this, in
civil causes, but it pretends no directive power in matters of Religion, by
teaching, or preaching, or judging of controversies of Religion; nor any
executive power, that is intrinsecall unto the Church, as in the Vocation,
Deposition, and Suspension of Ministers, in Ecclesiastical Censures, in
Excommunication, etc. which are merely spiritual; but only an executive,
coercitive, and external power; which is not in, but about the Church, and for
the Church, whereby it compels refractory men to obey the Church: And this
authority belongs actually, and in effect, in actu exercito (as they say) and
jure in re, to true Christian Magistrates; but to others potentially, in actu
signate, and jure in rem only, till they become true Christians. In virtue of
this Authority, when Parties pretend to be offended by the Church, or if the
Church judge any thing amiss, he may command the Church to revise and
reexamine its judgment, and to reform it, if it contains any thing amiss.
And in this sense, Constantine the Great, refusing an unjust and exorbitant
power, that the Counsel gave to him, said very wisely; Vos in Ecclessa, ego
extra Ecclesiam Episcopus, For he was no Ecclesiastical Minister, Overseer, or
Controller, but Gods Minister in the State, for the weal of his Church in the
State; which was not formally of the State, howsoever materially it was in the
State: Wherefore if your meaning here be, That the Parliament should judge of
the questions in debate, betwixt you and your Brethren; ye go against the
Parliaments intention, which esteeming it self, to have no calling of God
thereunto, very wisely did convocate an Assembly of Divines to that effect:
Neither believe I, that ye will grant unto it and the Assembly both, such an
authority; or if ye grant it, I doubt, if ye will submit your selves unto it:
And indeed, to grant them such a power, were nothing else, but to join your
selves with the Arminians, who granted it to the Civil Magistrate, when they
thought to have had him for them; and afterward repented themselves, when they
found him against them.

Sect. 3. Page 2. [The most, etc.] To this Paragraph I have nothing to say, but
that it is the judgment of many very judicious and godly Divines, That a
Pastor is bound to stay with his Flock, so long as he is not pressed to be an
Actor in any thing against his conscience; which many good men have done in
this Kingdom, and in so doing upheld many others.

Sect. 4. Page 2. [Neither, etc.] Here I note two things. 1. Ye call other
Churches, your Neighbor Churches; if so, they are your sister Churches; And
then how is it, That ye will not admit all the Members of their Churches, unto
your Communion, at the Table of the Lord? Will ye, or dare ye, communicate with
them, or not? If ye dare, how dare ye not admit them all unto your Communion?
If ye dare not, how can ye hold them for Brethren, with whom ye dare not eat or
drink, at that spiritual Feast of Brotherly Love and Charity? 2. Ye tell us,
That for fear of violence and persecution, ye made choice of a voluntary exile.
If this be said to excuse your departure, I have nothing to say; But if it be
to blame them, that notwithstanding all persecution, remained in their
stations, I remit the Reader to the third Section: only I add this, That
they, who notwithstanding their personal persecutions remained in their
Stations, in confirming others, are no less to be commended then ye: Neither
is the Soldier less valourous, that stands by his Colors, fighting
constantly, and courageously to death, then he that leaves them, flying away,
upon any imminent danger whatsoever, whatever his affection be unto the cause:
And if they all had fled away, what might have become of the poor Church of God
in this Kingdom? it might been, that ere now, Impius haec tam culta novalia
miles haberet, Barbarus has segetes. Praised be God, that it pleased him in his
mercy to uphold those men in these dangers, that they might be a means of
upholding the Members of his Church here. Yea, who knows, if in such corrupt
times, many things were not rather to have been tolerated, which then could not
be amended, then their Stations to have been deserted, so they had not been
Actors in ill doing? Neither was the watchfulness of those times so great, but
that many good men might enjoy, and enjoyed in effect the Ordinances of Christ.
And howbeit it had been so; yet was it not necessary therefore to make a
Schism, in quiting the Communion of all other Churches abroad. Many Divines
hold also, That the Minister of Christ ought not to fly away for his personal
persecution, but for that only of his flock.

Sect. 5. page 3. [This being, etc.] In this and the next Section, ye seem to
come to the question in controversy, viz. Unto Ecclesiastical Government; but
it contains nothing probative of your opinion, but only narrative of your
enquiry, and holy proceedings therein; which ye willingly desire to persuade,
that it has been the most holy that could be found by flesh and blood, in any
juncture of time that may fall out, as wanting no helps that could further it,
and having no impediments that could hinder it. Your helps were first, Gods
Word; Secondly, The Discipline of the Reformed Churches; Thirdly, That of the
Non-Conformists; Fourthly, That of New England; Fifthly, The example and
president of the Shipwreck of the Brownists; Sixthly, The reason ye had to be
true to your consciences. The impediments or hindrances ye could have, were,
first worldly temptations; secondly, aims; thirdly, education; fourthly,
engagement to other Churches, from which all ye were free. But this Enumeration
is imperfect; for the grace of God which is the principal help, without which
we can do nothing, is here omitted. But let us examine them all according to
the order that ye have set them down.

[We looked upon the Word of Christ, as impartially, and unprejudicedly, as men
made of flesh and blood are like to do in any juncture of time, that may fall
out.] This is much: As for us Brethren, being but men made of flesh and blood;
we know that we know but in part; that we do but in part the good, we have
power to do; for we have power to do more good then we do, that we may omit
much evil, that we do; that of both we know very little, in respect of that we
know not, For the heart of man is deceitful, and who can know it: And as for
others, we know much less then of our selves, not knowing their hearts,
temptations, ayms, intentions, or their sins, repentance, backslidings, their
falls, or uprising; but least of all of men possible in junctures of time to
come, that God can create; for what know ye or we, Brethren, what may be? And
therefore, we dare not be so bold, as to compare our selves with others in time
present; much less with those that be possible in junctures of time to come,
in esteeming our selves as good, or better, then they may be: And therefore, I
esteem that your comparison proceeds rather of flesh and blood, then of the
spirit of God. We wish indeed, we were the best of all men, but we esteem not
our selves the best; Oh, that we might be but in the number of good men. We
wish, we could say as much as ye; but again, we dare not, being conscious of
our own infirmity, that we are but flesh and blood.

But ye seem to prove it, by removing of hindrances, as first, Of Temptations
of the place ye went unto, your condition and company, which left you as freely
to be guided by Gods Word, as the Needle touched with the Loadstone is in the
compass.

But this is an imperfect Enumeration of Temptations: It contains only some
external, and yet not all, as those, that proceed from the Devil, and omit
internal Temptations, whereof ye purge not your selves sufficiently: But left
that company you in such a condition? Medied it self no more in a business of
so great consequence, in establishing a new Government, to which it was to
submit it self? Did it so let it self be led by the nose? Had it no more
interest in the business? It is too much: Only I add, it is one of the
greatest Temptations, that a man can fall into, to esteem himself without
Temptations; and that such a man, in such a case, should not need to say, Lead
us not into Temptation: And was this no Temptation, that ye went out of your
Country with some miscontentment in it; that ye found your selves so
consociated, that ye might frame your Government to your present estate and
condition, as was requisite in such a company; that shuning too much one
extremity, because of your sufferings, ye should presently run into the other.
Neither was this extravagant power a small temptation, Nunquam satis fida
potentia, ubi uimia est.

[ We had (say ye) of all men, the greatest reason to be true to our own
consciences in what we should embrace.]

This Brethren cannot be said, without a high esteem of your selves, and great
undervaluing of others: Have not other men as good reason as ye, to be true
unto their consciences, since they are all bound under the pain of eternal
condemnation to that duty? What greater reason then this, can ye have? Have not
these (whom ye call Presbyterians) who were condemned to death, for that
Discipline, ready to be executed, who afterward were exiled into foreign
Countries, wherein they ended their lives; who were men of no less learning,
abilities, and holiness of life, then any of your profession, had they not (I
say) as great reason to be true to their consciences, as ye can have?

Afterward in this Paragraph ye remove all ayms and ends, that might make you
byas. [ We had (say ye) no new Commonwealths to rear, etc.] As much may all
Schismatics say; Neither can every man have new Commonwealths to rear;
neither can these of New England say so: And as for you five, your number was
too small; and howsoever, ye had not Kingdoms in your eye, yet had every one of
you, one in his heart, to subdue: Tunc omnia jura renebis, cum poteris Rex esse
tui: Hoc regnum sibi quisque dat: This is a Kingdom, which every man by Gods
grace, may take and give to himself, without any material Arms, or Armies: And
howbeit, ye have no State ends, nevertheless, as ye have very many good men,
so have ye very many good Statesmen among you, yea, more then those that
maintain Presbyterian Discipline in regard of your number: But what Republikes
had the Protestants in France or Scotland, to rear, or worldly Kingdoms to
subdue more then ye?

Your mould (of Church Government) will be coexistent (say ye) with the peace
of any form of civil Government on earth] that may be true of yours; but not
of ours; for it cannot comply with that of the Turks; and we confess
ingenuously, that for any thing we know, yours will comply a great deal more
with State, and State ayms, then ever S. Peter, S. Paul, or we could do;
howsoever, ours submits it self willingly to all sort of just Government,
that is of God. Neither requires the Parliament any thing more of the Church
of GOD.

Howbeit, ye had No preferment or worldly respects to shape your opinions for];
yet praised be God, your Ministers have no want, but as great abundance of
worldly means, as any of your Brethren that stand for Presbyteriall Government.
But what preferment or worldly respects, could Calvin or Beza have had, who for
the purity of Doctrine, and of Discipline, introduced this Presbyteriall
Government, whereby both themselves, and all they that should thereafter
profess the Gospel, were deprived of all hopes of future preferment, and
worldly respects? What preferment or worldly respects could they have, that
refused them, when they were offered unto them, and preferred death and
perpetual exile, before good fat Bishoprics? We know King James his round
answer, when some asked him, wherefore he preferred not good men to Bishoprics
in Scotland? The Devil an honest man (says he) will accept them. And what
greater preferment have they, who at this present travel to bring in
Presbyteriall Government? Are they richer then before they were? Are they to be
in greater places, then Ministers of the Word? Truly I may say something that
I have seen: Some of them sundry times, so exhausted their sickly bodies, with
pains in this Cause, that sundry times they lost their health, and fell sick;
but for worldly profit and preferment, I never heard of it.

How great a fortune made Calvin with it? Who as it is known, and faithfully
related by those who did write his life, sundry times refused worldly means, in
a very fair and honorable way offered unto him; and whose Inventory after his
death, hardly could amount to 40 pounds?

We had (say ye) nothing else to do but simply and singly to consider how to
worship God acceptably. Answ. So much may many others say. But most truly, may
as much be said of our first Parents in Paradise, yet they gave themselves some
other thing to do: Besides all this, ye are too peremptorious, ye five, to
speak in the name of all the rest; for howsoever, every one of you, may answer
for one, viz. for himself; yet can none of you, nor ye all; answer for all
those of your profession, since their hearts are unknown to you, and ye have no
warrant from them.

Sect. 6. page 4. We were not engaged by Education, etc.] And yet it is a
blessing of God, by Education to be engaged to good, and bred in a true
Doctrine and Ecclesiastical Discipline: Neither esteem I, that it was a curse
to the People of God, to have been bred in his Covenant: Neither think ye it, a
curse to yours, to have been bred amongst you.

Ye suppose that other Reformed Churches, might not see in all things: So
suppose we of you, and that with greater reason, being but five men, not
comparable with so many lights of the World, of whom ye make your selves judges.

And yet ye esteem wrong in esteeming, that their intention was most spent in
the Reformation of Doctrine. 1. For that is indirectly to accuse them of
negligence, in reforming of Discipline. 2. Because their Consultations, and
Epistles, sent to sundry Churches abroad, testifies the contrary. 3. Because
the French tia vell very much about their Discipline, and have reformed sundry
things therein. 4 And have a great many more helps, then ye to frame it, to
Gods Word; for it is expressly enjoined, every Church Ruler, to read it
diligently: Once every three months it is read in their Consistory; and what
ever any man finds defectuous in it, is represented to the Synod wherein
there are so many of the learned, most judicious, and holy Divines of the
whole Kingdom; by whom after due Examination, by Common-advice, in the fear of
the Lord, at may much better be reformed, then by the advice of one Independent
Minister, and two or three Ruling Elders in their particular Congregation: And
to think that one of you, can see more, then so many learned and Godly men,
gathered in the fear of the Lord, cannot be thought without too good opinion of
your selves. 5. Besides all this, a good Discipline, may very well be
established, by men of less holiness of life, so be it, they have greater
abilities, for the gift of constituting a good Discipline, is not a gift proper
to a good man, but to a good Church Officer it is not Gratia grarum faciens,
sed gratis data; not a saving gift or grace that makes us gracious or
acceptable to God, but graciously given or bestowed upon us; not to save our
selves, but other men, as the gift of Prophecy; for a man in preaching and
ruling, may save others, and damn himself. And a man may be a very good Prophet
or Ruler in the Church, if he have the abilities thereunto, and exercise them
well; and an ill man, if he let not himself be taught and ruled: So we may say,
a man may be a good Citizen, a good King, a good Soldier, or a good Cobbler,
but an ill man.

Ye grant, that In Doctrine they had a most happy hand: but wherefore may ye
not judge them, as well to have had an happy hand in Discipline? Was Gods hand
more deficient to them in the one, then in the other? Or had they less
abilities? Or used they not their abilities? What reason rather for the one,
then for the other? Had they more Kingdoms to subdue then ye? Or any other
political ayms? Or greater temptations then ye?

In the same Paragraph, ye propound your Obtervations: viz. That that
Government, viz. Presbyteriall has been accompanied with more peace then
yours; and it is very true, for who can tell, how many Schisms and Heresies
your Government is subject unto? What Divisions and immortal hatreds it has
bred in New England? etc. 2. If it has more peace, then it is such, as it
should be, and obtains its adequate end, which is the external peace of the
Church.

Ye add, That the power of godliness had not bin advanced amongst the^, at in
this Island. From whence ye seem to infer, that it is not so good as yours.
Ans. 1. As for your Antecedent; it is too bold to make your selves Judges of
the power of godliness in other Churches, and to judge your selves the holiest
of all others.

But ye prove it by their own Confession: Answ. Brethren ye do not well to take
advantage upon other men's Humility for to depresse them, and extol your
selves; They do well to think soberly of themselves: So do not ye in esteeming
so highly of your selves, and so meanly of them. 2. And the French are very
courteous and civil, but the more courteous and civil they be, the more
discourteous, and uncivil be ye, that take advantage by their courteousnesse
and civilitie, to depresse them under your selves. 3. They have also this
defect, that they have too many complements: But they say also, Let compliments
ne doibvent point estre pris au pied de la lettre, Complements must not be
taken literally. It seems ye have not much traveled amongst them, or remarked
well the fashion of the Country.

But put the case, your Antecedent were as true as it is false: yet your
Consequence is naught, because of many captions and sophistications it
contains; only I will touch two, the first is fallacia non causae, ut
causae, a fallacious argumentation which brings a false and apparent cause,
for the true cause of the effect, or a false effect for the true effect of the
cause; for if there were a greater power of godliness amongst you, then in
other Churches, the cause thereof, should not be the fault of the Government,
but of the Devil, of those that govern, or are governed; not because your
Discipline is better then ours, or ours worse then yours; But 1. because the
Devil evermore assaults more the true Church, the true Doctrine, and true
Discipline, then the corrupted Church, her corrupted Doctrine or Discipline; to
the end, that thereby he may calumniate them all, imputing craftily to the
Church of God, to the true Doctrine and Discipline, that which should be
imputed to himself. Or 2. Because that the Governors or Rulers of the Church,
put not the Discipline duly in execution: Or 3. Because they that should be
governed, will not obey the truth.

3. Put the case the Antecedent were true, and there were no such captious
argumentation: Yet from hence, should it not follow that Independent, but that
Episcopal Government should be better then the Presbyterian; because the power
of godliness acknowledged by strangers, to be greater here, then with them,
was not in Holland, or in New England, under Independency; but in old England,
not under Independent (which has never here been received) but dependent, viz.
Episcopal Government, that could not endure Indepency, but persecuted it: So
Brethren, here according to your fashion, you prove that which ye intend least
to prove, wherein ordinarily ye are very unfortunate: And if this ye prove, it
is another Sophistication, commonly called fallacia ignorationis elenchi, and
(...), when ye prove one question or conclusion for another.

Ye had (said ye) the light of old Non-conformists, and their draughts of
Discipline: But ye condemned all, as Sovereign Judges, And that much more
commended to us, because (say ye) they were our own: Here ye manifest a
temptation, which ye concealed before.

Ye had the fatal miscarriages and shipwreck of those of the Separation, whom
ye say, we call Brownists: But so call not ye them, because ye symbolize more
with them, and had rather call us Calvinians, with the Papist, then them
Brownists, with us, as they merit; because of the Author of their Sect.

Afterward, in the last part of this Paragraph, ye come to the examples of
New England, improved (as ye say) to a better Edition, and greater refinement;
whom ye extol very highly, in comparing them with our father Abraham, and yet
ye stood (say ye) as unengaged Spectators. So then your Religion in this point
was in abstractione praecisionis, abstracted and separated from all Religion,
without all Religion, and to live as Spectators: This your Religion in this
point, was very speculative, and if it were in any other matter then that of
Religion, we might justly say, Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici.

We resolved not (say ye) to take up our Religion, by, or from any part.
Neither could ye, being so abstract from all parties, for ye dissented from all
the World; ye held all the World for parties, and made your selves Judges of
all the World, till ye had made choice of your new Religion: If this Method in
making choice of Religion, be good and honest, then all those that are bred in
your Religion, should do so; which as I believe, ye will no ways grant.

Upon this Section, wherein ye so much extol your New-England-men, I must say
something of those that stood for Presbyterian Government: And not to insist
upon this, how some of them, as the Histories relate, had the gift of
Prophecy? What miracles, or at least, mavelous things, were done by, or
about them, in the time of their Imprisonment, and afterward, in their Exile
for that Cause: How God extraordinarily poured forth his Judgments upon those
that were instruments of their vexation; and afterward, extraordinarily
delivered them, upon their repentance: How some of them, in strange Countries,
extraordinarily got the Language of the Country in three months, so as to be
able to Preach: How the people flockt about them in their houses: How
powerfully they preached twice a day; which was thought insupportable to humane
nature, in respect of the violence of their action; and that not for one day,
but all the days of their lives, to the admiration of many thousands: How the
Papists themselves (howsoever ordinarily in their speeches they condemned all
Huguenots to hell) yet excepted them, because of the holiness of their lives:
How they were never out of Prayers, Meditation or Preaching, as sundry eye
witnesses here can testify: How all the Priests and Doctors, even the
learned of them, that were sent to the place where they were, to hinder the
conversion of the Papists, were converted themselves: Only I will say one word
of some, who, not above four or five years ago, undertook a Voyage for a new
Plantation in America, in as great a Wilderness, as any of your
New-England-men, and that with far less worldly means, only for Gods Service;
These men, I say, being about the number of one hundred and twenty in one
Bottom, and some thousands of miles on their way, it pleased God that a Tempest
so violent seized them, as in it they lost their Rudder, spent all their Masts
save one, and sprung three Leaks, whereby the water came in in such abundance,
that, notwithstanding their extraordinary diligence at the Pumps, as also their
indefatigable pains in lading it out by Buckets, hardly could they save the
Ship from sinking under them: And yet in this case, ever hoping against hope,
the Tempest continuing, it pleased him, who commands the Winds and Tempests,
by the same Tempest to bring them back to the very Port they set out of, and
after wards made them Judges of those that had unjustly judged them; and
instruments, with the rest of the Kingdom, for the establishing of the
Presbyteriall Government in greater purity there, from whence it was almost
cast out. What these men's lives were, the world can with no less admiration
wonder at, then at their wondrous deliverance. And yet for all this, will I not
compare these men with any men in the World, in any juncture of time, that may
fall out. As I honor their gifts, so do I other men's also; but which of them
all, be the best men, or most impartial Judges, he knows best, who knows the
hearts of all men.

Sect. 7. In this Section, ye give out your judgment of other Churches; and in
the next, viz. 8o. other Churches judgment of you: I believe ye understand
those of the Netherlands.

Ye acknowledge the Churches under Episcopal Government in England, and under
Presbyteriall in France, Holland, and Scotland, for true Churches, and their
Ministry, for a true Ministry.

But here I desire, with many others, to know what ye understand by true
Churches, and a true Ministry? Whether a Metaphysicall, Logical, or a Moral
verity?

If ye understand that they be true Churches, Veritate Metaphysica Entis and
Transcendentali, such as Du Plessis, and many of our Divines grant unto the
Romish Church; viz. That she is a true Church, (as a Pocky whore, is a true
Woman) howsoever her flesh be so consumed with corruption, that she cannot
live, but must die of it, and that none can touch her, without danger of being
infected with her sickness; for she is an Harlot and a Whore, howsoever
clothed with Scarlet: We thank you for your favor: Ye hold us in the same
Categorie with Rome.

If ye hold us a true Church, veritate logica, and morally, for a pure Church;
wherefore desire ye a Toleration? Wherefore will ye not join with us, and
communicate, as Brethren, with us?

But ye add a little after the middle part of this Section, That ye both did,
and would hold, a Communion, with all those Churches, as with the Churches of
Christ.

But what communion is this, ye hold with these, rather then with Papists,
Brownists, Anabaptists in England, and the Lutherans?

If ye say in Doctrine; that Union is not external, since ye testify it not,
by your external Communion in the Sacraments with us; for ye will not admit
all those to your Communion, that we admit to ours: 2. Neither will those of
New England, whom ye cry up, and extol so highly, admit those of our Church to
their Communion, or to be Members of their Churches, unless of late, they have
changed their opinion; and ye, and they temporize in conforming your opinions
to the times, and commensurate them to Political ayms for Toleration. 3.
Neither know we, whether they will communicate with us; at least their Writings
and Letters, from New England, which heretofore we have seen, testify no such
thing; so that in this ye dissent from them, unless they within this year,
dissent from themselves. 4. By the same reason, ye may communicate with
Schismatics, and men that are excommunicated amongst your selves for their ill
life, viz. drunkards, blasphemous persons, etc. 5. By the same reason ye
communicate with some Papists in profession, that believe all that we believe
in Doctrine; 6. And with them all, and all Heretics in part, because they
agree in part, in the Doctrine, with us.

If it be replied, That they with whom they communicate, must also be of good
life; I duply, then it is not a mere Communion in Doctrine, but in some other
thing beside, viz. In good life. And then 2. If they have both sound Doctrine,
and be of a good life; or have Faith, which causes good Doctrine, and Charity
the cause of a good life: Wherefore desire ye a Toleration, to make a Sect
apart, or what desire ye more, to make up one Church with them?

But howsoever ye pretend this real Profession of Communion with us, yet ye
overthrow it by your restriction afterward, viz. To such as ye know to be
Godly, that came to visit you in your exile: But ye will not admit all the
Members of our Churches, but such as ye only judge, not we, to be Members of
our Church.

Ye say in the same Section, That ye Baptize your Children in our Parishionell
Congregations: Wherefore then will ye not as well communicate at the Lords
Table with us all? And if so, Wherefore will ye not likewise admit us all to
your Communion?

In the 8.. [And as we always, etc.] In this Paragraph, or Section, ye show
the judgment of foreign Churches concerning you, how ye both mutually gave,
and received the right ^^^ds of fellowship: How they gave you Churches to
Preach in, some Privileges, a maintenance annually for your Ministers, etc.]
So here in England hitherto ye have had liberty to Preach in our Churches, and
may have, if ye will, and some of you have some Benefices: But if ye go on,
aiming at a Toleration, and consequently, at some Separation, as we have
showed, I doubt if ye shall, or should have any annual allowance at all, or
Churches to Preach in, as before you had. Moreover, we know not, upon what
grounds ye were tolerated in the Netherlands; whether it was not in
consideration of your precedent afflictions, hoping that ye might submit your
selves to Presbyteriall Government in your own Country, if it were well
established; or in favor of some Merchants; by public or private authority,
Ecclesiastical or Civil, or other ways. Only we say, That many Sects are
tolerated there: Neither howbeit ye were tolerated in the Netherlands, Polonia
or Germany. where many Religions are tolerated and permitted out of Civil
respects, Is it equitable, ye should be tolerated here, where there is one
only Religion professed, and one Government, as we shall see hereafter.

In the 9.10.11.12.13.14. ye give account of your Practices in public Worship,
Church Officers, matter of Government and Censures, and your directive
principles in all this: Hence in the 15.16.17.18.19.20.21. ye infer your
Conclusion of Independencie of every particular Congregation. As for the parts
of your public worship, we consent with you.

In your Church Officers, ye acknowledge with us four; viz. Pastors, Teachers,
Ruling Elders, and Deacons. But ye lash us a little with your Parenthesis about
our Ruling Elders. [With us not Lay, but Ecclesiastique persons, separated to
that service.] Here ye seem to accuse the Reformed Churches in France, the
Netherlands, Scotland, etc. as if they all esteemed them Lay, and not
Ecclesiastical Persons. If this be your mind, it is a great mistake in you;
and we can produce their writings to the contrary; if not, we know not, to
what end, ye inserted this particular Parenthesis. As ye therefore inserted
yours, so do we ours [but not Preachers, or Teachers of the Word:] And
therefore we desire to know of you, if Ruling Elders have power to teach; as it
is maintained by other Independents; and if they Preach or Teach, how they can
be distinguished from Preachers, and Teachers? For all Charges receive their
unity, and distinction from their Acts, and Ends: Wherefore, if the Ruling
Elder Preach, or Teach, which is the Act, and End of the Preacher, and Teacher,
he must have the same Office with Preachers, and Teachers. 2. The Apostle also
distinguishes them, 1 Cor. 12. Wherefore then confound ye them?

Ye add in this 9. Section concerning Excommunication upon obstinacy and
impenitency, this Parenthesis, as worthy of some particular observation, [which
we bless God we never used] as if your Churches were so pure, that not one man
should deserve it: We cannot say so much of our Churches: Neither can your
Brethren of New England say so much of theirs: We know, that some have been
Independenters, as we our selves have heard from their own mouths, that now
are become Anabaptists: And whether such men merited it, or not, judge ye: If
they merited it, ye have been very partial, and unjust, in not using of it: So
that proceeds not from want of demerits, in the persons to be punished, but of
justice in the Rulers to execute it.

Neither do we deny, but a number of very holy persons may be gathered
together, who may so carry themselves for some time, as not to commit any
great offense with pertinacie, to deserve Excommunication, if the choice be
good. But to say, that it may last long so in Populous Congregations, and in a
great number of Churches, ye may tell us this news, when your Churches are
multiplied, and become as Populous, and have endured as long as ours. We could
tell wonders also of our Churches in some parts, in the beginning of the
Reformation: But the question is not, who lives, holiest, but whose Discipline
is most conform unto Gods Word?

Your Directive Principles were three. 1. Gods Word, and the Law of Nature
fully known. 2. Not to make your present judgment, and practice a binding Law
unto your selves, for the future. 3. In matters of greatest moment, and
controversy, ye still thosed to practice safely, and so as ye had reason to
judge, that all sorts, or most of all the Churches did acknowledge warrantable,
although they make additaments thereunto.

We agree with you in these principles in general; 11. p. 9.
and nevertheless we must touch a word in passing, of that, which we observe
in every one of them, and in every Paragraph. And first, in the 11.. about the
midst thereof, where ye say, That in Gods Word ye found Principles enough, not
only fundamental, and essential to the being of a Church, but superstructory
also to the welbeing of it, and those to you clear and certain. We know not
what ye call Fundamental, and Essential, unto a Church; for the Essences of
things are unknown unto us; Yea, the most part of the Philosophers themselves,
who dispute about Essences, confess, that we know the Essence of nothing, but
that only of man, which they say is animal rationale; and yet, in this they
dissent, and many say, that this is but an accidental expression of his Being:
If ye cannot then declare us the Fundament, and Essence of the Church, ye are
barbarous to us, and speak in a Language, as unknown to us, as unto your selves.

Again, we desire to know, What ye understand here, by the Being of a Church:
whether her internal, or external Being? In Doctrine and Holiness? or in
Discipline? If the first, it is not to the purpose; for we have no Dispute here
with you about the internal Being, or Doctrine of the Church, as ye confess
your selves, but about her external Being, or Discipline: And in this also we
confess our ignorance, that we know not wherein consists its Essence or
Being; and that we cannot distinguish it well from its Accidents, or
Superstructories, till ye teach us; and therefore desire you to avoid those
obscure terms, and to give it us in some cleerer.

Ye add, That they will serve to preserve your Churches in peace: whereof ye
were not content, Sect. 6, saying, That howsoever Presbyteriall Government
obtained this end, yet it differenced them not from carnal Christians.

In your third Directory Principle, Sect. 13. Page 11. ye go very subtillie to
work, by Metaphysicall Abstractions, as Philosophers, in abstracting their
Genericall degrees of Essences from the special; and their Specificall from
their Individual: For ye take some thing, wherein we all consent; but not all,
to the end there may be something, wherein ye dissent from us all. And so did
the Arminians in their Confession of Faith, wherein they abstracted a degree of
consent, amongst the most part of Christians, yea with the Socinians, who deny
the Trinity, and the Incarnation of the Son of God; and left that, wherein
they dissented, as indifferent.

But this cannot hold; For howsoever, that, wherein, ye agree with us, be safe;
yet is not that so safe, wherein ye dissent from us all. Neither is it safe for
so few men to dissent From all the World, unless they have very strong reasons
for their dissent; and principally, when the point wherein they dissent, is
not of great importance: For the less it is, the greater is the Schism.

Besides this in this Directory Principle, howsoever ye seem to defer, and
attribute very much to all Churches, in following their common Practices; yet
ye give them nothing at all; for ye submit their judgment to your own; and
whatsoever, they hold commonly against you, ye call it an Additament; so that
ye are not ready in any thing to assent with them, unless they first assent
unto you, which is a very prudent, and subtle Principle, as well to direct them
by you, as you by them.

3. This Principle also cannot hold. 1. For in virtue thereof, ye have as well
Union and Communion with Socinians, Arrians, Anabaptists, Papists, Jesuits,
and other Heretics, as with us; (howbeit not so much) for ye consent with them
all, in some common Principles, as with us: And so, as for your dissent in
particular Principles from them, ye may separate and do separate your selves in
effect from them; so must ye do from us, unless ye show us some other reason
of External Union, and Separation, then yet you do.

Before I quit this Paragraph, or Section, I must pray the Reader to note your
subtle way of disputing, how ye choose some things, wherein you, and we agree,
calling the test Additaments; to the end ye may not be bound to prove any
thing. But this subtlety is sowed but with white thread, so as it evidentlie
appears to all men, and will serve you for nothing. 1. For either these
Additaments are conform, or repugnant to Gods Word, or indifferent? If conform,
wherefore reject ye them? If repugnant, ye are bound to prove it by the Word,
how they are condemned by it? If indifferent, ye have no reason to condemn
them, or for them, to be such eager Suitors for a Toleration of a contrary
practice. 2. Item, If that which we have more then these common Principles, be
an Additament, what be those, that ye hold instead of them? For ye remain not
within the Limits of bare Abstractions, and Precisions, but proceed farther to
some particular Positive Principles in your practice, for every Negation is
founded in some Affirmation, and sin is not a mere Negation of good; but also
includes something, Positivelie contrary to good, either Physically or
Morally, Really, or by reason.

14. p. 11. Ye bring some Instances of this Principle; 1. About the
qualification of the Members of the Church, and promiscuous receiving of good
and bad: And say, That ye choose the better part, viz. the good, and not the
bad; which ye suppose to be the practice of all Protestant Churches: So ye must
judge all Infants, born in the Church, and admitted to Baptism amongst you, to
be good, and to have some portion of Christ, before they have the use of reason
to know Christ; and so to be regenerate, when they are generated, or to consort
your selves with the Anabaptists here in England, in excluding Children from
Baptism, till they have the use of reason, and profess Faith; for in
Independencie, and all other things, they agree with you, as they themselves
avow. But of this question, about the Members of the Church, we shall, God
willing, hear more hereafter, in a particular question.

Ten lines after, ye say, That the Rules, which ye gave up your judgments
unto, to judge those ye received in amongst you by, were of that Latitude, as
would take in any Member of Christ, the meanest, in whom there may be supposed
to be the least of Christ, Page 11, 12.

If this be understood, of the receiving of men to the Church, absolutely; or
of their first entry therein, we have answered already; and by the grace of
God, shall answer more hereafter: If of the reception of them, to the Lords
Table; I answer, That the true Reformed Churches in Scotland, France, the
Netherlands, etc. receive no man to the Lords Table, whom they judge to be
profane, or scandalous, none but such, as give an account of their Faith, and
testify it by external Confession, and Profession in Doctrine, and
Sanctification: If any Preacher, or the Consistory of Ruling Elders do other
ways, it is not by rule, or their ordinary practice, but through their
negligence, which, when it is known, is condemned by all. We wish, that none
come to the Communion of Christ's Body, amongst us, but such, as have, and feel
some measure of Christ in themselves: But who has this measure of Christ; It
is hard for any mortal man to know it, but he only that has it: It is
likewise hard to know, what measure of Grace is requisite, to make up a member
of Christ, or of his Church. Some of the Casuists, esteem, that it suffices a
Roman Catholic, explicit (as they call it,) expressly, clearly, and plainly,
to believe this only Article, I believe, what the Church believes: Others
esteem it not enough, and therefore add this Article: I believe also, That the
Church cannot err: Others think this yet not enough, for they wish Christians
to believe this one more, viz. I believe there is a God. Some add one more,
viz. That they must believe Gods Providence, etc. We believe, that men are
bound to believe all Divine Truths, revealed in Scripture, as necessary to
Salvation; and to believe them by a justifying Faith: But what be these, that
be absolutely necessary to Salvation: What are these Fundamentalia,
Essentialia, and Superstructories: How may they be distinguished one from
another? What is maximum quod sic, and minimum quod non: Or minimum quod sic
and maximum quod non? Or your least of Christ, whereupon a man may be admitted
to be a Member of Christ, we cannot define it: We leave the Decision to more
subtle Spirits, and to our Brethren, who use those terms, and who, upon this
minimum quod sic, or least bit of Christ, do found the Reception of Christ's
Members into the Church. We esteem their Disputes too subtle, in the practice
of Christianity, in judging others: And wish with the Apostle rather, every
man to examine and try himself; For this directive Principle, we esteem surer
then that of our Brethren. We esteem that such a Confession of Faith, and
desire of Communion, as ordinarily is professed by them, who are admitted in
Protestant Churches, may suffice.

Here in the second Instance of set Form of Prayers, our Brethren note with a
Parenthesis, that they condemn not others, who approve set Forms of Prayers
prescribed, and the Liturgis: But whether these of New England, and others of
their Profession will not condemn them in this, we know not. I wish that this
were not added rather in a compliance with the present time, then otherwise.

Item, They tell us, That the framing of Prayers, and Sermons out of their own
Gifts, are the Fruits of Christ's Ascension. But why not also of his death, and
Resurrection? Since he did merit this by his death.

In their third Instance about Government, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, we
care not, what they say. The practice of the Orthodox Churches is this: They
have diverse Ecclesiastical Senats, or Courts, wherein some are coordinate, and
others subordinated one to another. The loweest is their Consistory, or Session
of the Pastors, and the Ruling Elders, in one Parish Church: Then they have
their Classes, which some call Colloques, others Presbyteries, made of all the
Preachers of all the Parish Churches, belonging to such Colloques, every one of
them, accompanied with one Elder of his Church. 3. Their Provincial Synods,
made up of all the Ministers of the Province, accompanied every one of them
with one or two ruling Elders. 4. The National Synod, compounded of a certain
number of Ministers, and Ruling Elders, according to the exigence of time,
place, and other occasions, and circumstances, Delegate from all the Provinces,
or Provincial Synods. In the Consistory, or Senate of the Parish Church they
judge only of things that be proper unto it, and of less importance; that
have no great difficulty. In the Colloque, of that, which is common to all the
Churches of that Colloque; and of business of greater importance, that cannot
be judged, or well determined in a Parish Church. In a Provincial Synod, of
that, which is common to all the Churches of the Province, and other things of
great importance, and all cases, that cannot so soundly, or so surely be
determined in the former Assemblies. In a National, of that, which is common
to all the Churches of the whole Kingdom; and others, that cannot be determined
in the precedent Assemblies, as of matters of Appeal, etc.

Item, From the first, if any of the Parties find themselves grieved by its
judgment, they may appeal to the second, as from the second, to the third, and
from the third to the fourth. And all these Judgments and Proceedings are
without money, charges, pecuniarie mulcts, or fines. And as their ayms are
spiritual, so be their punishments that they inflict upon their Delinquents.
Their punishments are censures, Suspension from the Lords Table, and their
greater Excommunication, which ordinarily are never inflicted upon whole
Churches, as our Brethren unjustly would challenge us, but on particular
Persons: If they had read the Discipline of the Scots, French, Netherlands. and
other Reformed Churches, they needed not here have troubled themselves and us
with so many mistakes: Or if they have read them, they deal not fairly with us.
In some Churches, particular, or Parochial Senates, or Consistories, have
power to suspend from their Communion those that be Members thereof; yea also
to Excommunicate them, (from the which sentence nevertheless they may appeal
unto the Superior Senate or Judicatorie) and that for some particular reasons.

But this question, God willing, we shall hereafter more fully discuss. Only
I note in passing, that our Brethren, First, are here too sparing of Titles to
some, and too liberal to others: They name Cartwright, only Cartwright, but
Baynes, holy Baynes, in the same line, as if they would Canonize the one,
making him Saint Baynes, (which we condemn in the Pope) and esteem the other
profane, or of the vulgar, and dregs of Divines, which, as it is said with
reverence and respect of the one, so it cannot be said, without disparagement
of the other. As for the distinction of Ecclesiae, in Primas, and Ortas, it
requires a particular Question apart.

They say, 1. Every Church has a full and entire power complete within it
self, till it should be challenged to err grossly. Page 14. 15.


Either by a complete Power ye understand a Power absosolutely complete, or in
its own kind or sort: If ye understand the first, it must be Independent, for
if it depend upon a Superior to rectify it, whereunto it must give an account
of its judgment, and submit it self; in that regard, it is not complete, full,
or entire. If of a Power complete in its own kind or nature, ye say nothing,
but what we say, since it is our opinion, That every Particular Congregation
has a complete Power in it self, such as is due to such a Congregation,
dependent upon that of Classes, and Synods (in case of Appeal) whereby it may
be challenged to err grossly: If it be so, Wherefore contest ye with us, who
give you no subject of quarrel, as not dissenting from you in that particular?

Page 14. 2o, they say, That they claim not an independent power in every
Congregation, to give an account, or to be subject to no others. Answ. Then
your power is dependent upon some others; then it must give an account, and be
subject to some other: If subject to some others, then that other is superior;
And what say we more? only we say that there is a subordination betwixt
superior and inferior Ecclesiastical Judicatories, which ye hold here to be
juris divini; we, partim divini, partim naturalis aut mixti. I pray you,
Brethren, agree these two Propositions, how a Church can have a full and
complete Government, and yet not independent; it should seem to me, that either
you contradict not us, or contradict your selves within the compass of two
lines.

Page 14. 3o, they deny, That by the Institution of Christ, or his Apostles,
the Combination of the Elders of many Churches should be the first, complete,
and entire seat of Church Power, over each Church so combined. Here ye
attribute unto our Churches an opinion, That they own not as their own; viz.
That the Combination of Elders of many Churches is the first Seat of
Church Power; for they hold the contrary, viz. That the first Seat of
Government is in Parochial Churches, since there the parties debates their
cause, in first Instances; if ye say that by first, ye understand the
principal; then ye cannot deny, but that Senate or Assembly, whereunto
Particular Congregations are subject, whose judgment, according to Gods Word,
they must obey, and of whose judgment their judgments depend, must be the
principal Seat of Church Power; for that is principal, whereof the other
depends, and to which the other is subject.

Neither say we, That it is the complete, and entire Seat of all
Ecclesiastical Judgment; since in things of less concernment, and that only
belong to Particular Congregations, we hold the Eldership of that Congregation
may judge, and sometimes judges in effect completely, and entirely.

But ye propound a tacit Objection: The Eldership so combined cannot challenge
authority over the Churches they feed not.

Answ. 1. We have answered, That our Eldership challenges no such authority to
it self. 2. That this argument strikes no less at your judgments of
Neighbor Churches against Particular Congregations, then at that of combined
Elderships, against a Particular Church; since your Neighbor Churches feed no
more that particular Congregation, then our combined Elderships a particular
Church.

2. We deny that our Classes, and Synods, or (as ye call them) combined
Presbyteries, or Elderships, feed not particular Congregations, for they govern
them, which is a certain sort of feeding, due to Elders; and in this
signification Kings, Princes, and Dukes are called Pastors, or feeders of their
People, because they rule them, Jor. 6.3. and 12 10.

But to bring more light to this captious Proposition, and all fallacious
Arguments that may be grounded hereupon, here I will more fully declare, in
what sense these Propositions may be true, or false, viz. 1. The combined
Eldership has power to feed, rule, and teach the Church, or all Particular
Churches. 2. The combined Eldership feeds, or rules all Particular Churches.
3. The Elders of the combined Eldership have power to feed, or rule Particular
Churches.

And for this effect, note, 1. That the feeding, or teaching of the Church may
be taken, either in actu secundo, for actual feeding, or the exercise of the
power of feeding, as when a Preacher teaches actually, etc. 2. In actu primo,
for the moral power, which Ministers have to teach in virtue of their
Vocation, and Mission to their Charge, and Admission into it. So the Power to
feed (howsoever it signify formally the Actum primum, as ruling Actum
secundum) may be taken in Actu primo, for the Power, that a Minister has to
feed; or in Actu secundo, for the Act of feeding, proceeding from the power, or
first act. 3. Item, in Actu signato, when a power, or an act is signified to
belong to a thing, that exercises not the act; as when a King commands, but
puts it not in execution: or in actu exercito, when it is exercised: so
particular Officers have the power, in actu exercito, which the King, and
superior Judges, and Magistrates have in actu signato.

3. That the Ministers, or Elders of the Eldership may be considered in quality
of a collective body of Elders; or severally every one apart; which the
Schoolmen call ordinarily collective, and distributive. If severally, then
either Absolutely, without any relation to the collective body of the
Eldership, and in quality of particular Ministers of their own Particular
Churches; or with some relation, or respect to the collective body, or
combination of the Eldership, viz. as parts thereof.

4. The whole collective body of the Eldership may be taken, either formally,
as it is a collection of sundry Elders, according to the Order established in
the Church, representing many Churches combined, and consociated, from which
they have their Commissions; or materially in quality of Ministers, or Elders,
of whom the Consociation, or Combination, or Synod, or Classical Assembly of
Elders is compounded.

5. Both the collective body, or consociation of Elders, which is a
representative body of many Churches, as also every particular real Church,
and the whole Militant Church, may be considered (as other things) aut ut Totum
simpliciter, aut ut Totum, and totaliter; either as a Total, or Totally, as a
Whole or wholly; so may we say of omne, it may be taken simpliciter pro omne,
vel pro Omni, and omnino, vel omni modo: this word All, may be taken absolutely
for all, or for all, considered all manner of ways, or altogether.

Then a Totum is taken totaliter, or totally, or a whole thing wholly, and this
word All, all ways, when it is taken, according to all the Modifications, that
it can have; As for example, Peter is a Totum, or a Whole-man, when he is lying
in his Bed at Rome, he is Totus Romae, all, or whole at Rome; but not
Totaliter, totally, not wholly, or all ways; for he may sit, and stand at
Rome; and when he is lying, he is not according to these other ways, and
Modifications, viz. standing, etc. Yea, I may say, that it is impossible, That
at one time a Totum be, or exist in one place totum, and totaliter. i. e.
Secundum omnes suos modes possibiles, multi enim divisim sunt possibiles sed
conjunctim incompossibiles; A whole thing cannot be wholly, or all ways, or
according to all its possible Modifications; for many of them severally, or
apart are possible, which conjunctly are incompossible, (if I may so express
my self) or rather impossible: So a man may be white, and he may be black; but
he cannot be white, and black together, for these two qualities, being
contrary, are impossible, or incompatible one with another.

If then feeding either by way of teaching, or ruling; or the power to feed, be
taken in actu primo, viz. for the faculty to feed, this Proposition, The
combined Eldership or a Classical, or Synodall Assembly, and every particular
Elder considered apart, and separated from the combined Presbyteries have power
to feed, teach, or rule, all particular Churches, is true. And as for the
particular Elders (which may seem the most absurd) it appears clearly; for if
they had it not how could ye, or they, Preach in sundry, and diverse particular
Churches, as ye do, out of your own particular Churches? If it be answered,
that ye do it only Occasionally, and not Ordinarily:

I reply, That before ye can do it either Occasionally, or Ordinarily, ye must
have a power to do it absolutely; for actus secundus supponit primum, the
second act supposes the first; or all actions suppose some active power, from
whence they proceed; for a man, that is no Minister can neither Preach
Ordinarily, nor Occasionally.

Item, It is a certain Maxim in Logic, that a Part in modo ad Totum argument
amur affirmative, ut, est homo albus, Ergo, est homo. We argue from a modified
part, or taken with some limitation, or modification to the whole; as if I say,
this is a white man; Ergo, this is a man: So I say, this man may Preach
occasionally; Ergo, this man may Preach, or have Authority to Preach; For
Power or Authority to Preach, is Totum in modo, and Power, or Authority to
Preach occasionally, or ordinarily, are parts in modo.

If it be objected, That if every particular Minister has Power or Authority
to Preach in every Church, or Congregation, then every Minister is an
universal Pastor, as the Apostles: But so it is not. Ergo.

Answ. I deny the Consequence of the first Proposition, for an Apostle not
only has an universal Vocation to teach all particular Churches, and Flocks,
but also to teach all particular, and ordinary Pastors, or Ministers of all
particular Churches, and Flocks. 2. Item, The Vocation of the Apostles was
immediately from God. 3. They were infallible in Doctrine. 4. Endowed with
extraordinary Gifts. 5. They had no particular Mission, to restrain them to
any particular Church; And these four last Conditions were most conveniently
annexed unto the Universalitie of their Charge, which cannot be said of
ordinary, and particular Ministers.

If it be replied, At least they differ not from them in the Universalitie of
their Charge, but only in some Accidents, as in Infallibility, some
extraordinary Gifts, etc. that are merely Extrinsecall unto the Charge, and to
the Universalitie thereof.

I answer, First, That these Accidents are not merely Extrinsecall unto the
Universalitie of the Apostolical Charge, but Intrinsecally annexed unto it, by
Gods Ordinance, by Congruitie, and Morally; since it could not be Universally
exercised without them.

Secondly, For the better clearing of this, I observe, That to the Charge of a
Minister, three things are necessary. 1. A general Vocation to Preach, and
that not unlike to that, which Masters of Arts, and Doctors receive in
Universities, with this clause, Hic, and ubique terrarum, to Teach here, and
through all the World. 2. A special Mission, either 1. by God alone; or 2. or
also from the Representative Church. 3. A particular Election, and Admission,
whereby the Minister is elected by a Real particular Church, and so admitted
therein to exercise his Charge.

The first of these three is common to the Apostles, with all ordinary
Ministers: The second is universal in the Apostles, for Christ sent them to
teach all Nations, and sitted them with gifts convenient thereunto; But it is
particular in Particular, and Ordinary Ministers, for orders sake, and that
jure divine, as many learned, and godly Divines hold: The third, jure divine,
should be universal, in respect of the Apostles; for every Particular Church
was bound to admit the Apostles, in case they would have preached amongst them;
and if any should have refused them, yet in virtue of their general Vocation,
and universal Mission from God, they had power, and Authority to Preach among
them, and in them all; But in Particular, and Ordinary Ministers it is only
Particular, and not Universal; for neither does every Particular Church choose,
elect, or admit every Ordinary Minister to be its Minister, neither is it bound
so to do.

The first of these three is the remote foundation, or the remote, and
principal cause of the Power, and Authority that a Minister has to Preach,
or to rule the Church of God: The second and third are the next, and immediate
foundation, or cause thereof, or conditio sine qua non; viz. The universal
Mission, and Admission of Ministers, is the immediate cause of their universal
Power, and Authority; but the particular Mission, and Admission is the
immediate cause of the Power, and Authority of Particular Ministers: And as we
never find the Philosophers Particularia, without their Vniversalia in
Particularibus inclusa, never a Genus but in some Species, nor a Species but in
some Individuum, by whose Differences their indifferent Nature is limited, and
determined; No more find we over this vast, and general Vocation in Ordinary
Ministers without this Particular Mission of some Representative Church, and
Admission in, and by some Real, and Particular Church, or at least it should
not be; for without this consent Election, and Admission, a Minister is no more
its Minister, then a Man is a Woman's Husband without her consent. Neither can a
Man be married to a Woman in general, or to an Individuam vagam, but to this,
or that Particular Woman, with whom he contracteth: No more can a Preacher be
sent to Preach to the Church in general, or to Particular Churches
indefinitely, viz. Unto quaedam Ecclesia, but to this Church distinctly.

1. And so I answer, that a Particular and Ordinary Minister is differenced
from an Universal Minister, or an Apostle by the Particularitie of his charge,
in virtue of his Particular Mission, which he has of God, by a Representative
Church, and of his Particular Election, and Admission, which depend upon that
Particular Real Church, whose Minister he is, and not in virtue of his
general Vocation, which is common unto both, Nam Principium convenientiae non
est Principium differentiae, That wherein things do agree cannot distinguish,
or make them differ. 2. Every particular, or Ordinary Minister may feed, teach,
and rule all the Church, but not always, Totam militantem Ecclesiam, sed non
totaliter, All particular Churches, but not particularly, for (as we have said)
he may teach in every Church, because he may Preach in them, being invited
thereunto; but he cannot Teach in them all, always, in every particular way,
by way of a Particular, and Ordinary Mission, and Admission, as their
Particular Pastor: For neither is he called to Teach in them all, neither can
he rule them all conjunctim in one time, but one only Ordinarily, and two, or
three Extraordinarily in case of some urgent necessity. 3. Yea, we may say,
That a Particular Minister cannot evermore, neither does he evermore feed his
own Particular Church, totam, and totaliter, the whole Church, wholly, as
Experience teaches us, but sometimes he feeds it one way, sometimes another,
sometimes in teaching, sometimes in ruling, etc. 4. It may be said, That the
consociated, or combined Presbyteries, and Presbyters rule all the Churches,
from which they have Commission. 1. In quality of Particular Ministers, as we
have already declared. 2. In a Particular way in virtue of their Commission
from Particular Churches, in whose name they appear, and in virtue of their
Admission in a Classical or Synodall Assembly; but not in sensu diviso, every
one apart, for if they dissent in their voices from the major part of the
Assembly, they feed no Church at all, at least actually, and in actu exercito,
howsoever they may be said to rule them all, that be subject to that Assembly,
potentia, and in actu signato. 5. The whole collective, or combined
Presbytery, or Eldership, being-taken collectively, or as combined, rules
many Particular Churches, that are subject unto it. I say being taken, as
combined or collective; for if the Presbyters of the Assembly be taken
distributive; they are not an Assembly, not a Collection, or Combination of
Presbyters formally, but several Presbyters apart, and diverse unities, which
are the matter of this combination, and consociation in the Assembly. 6. Those
whole combined Presbyteries, qua tota, sed non qua tataliter considerata, as
whole, or totals, but not considered totally, feed in any Particular Churches:
The first part is certain, for they judge of Points of Doctrine, and Discipline
already, revealed in Holy Scripture, and give us new Ecclesiastical Laws of
things indifferent, and so Teach, and Rule the Churches, which is nothing else
but to Feed them. 7. Yet these combined Presbyteries being considered totally,
viz. according to every respect, every part, every modification, and
determination they can have, rule them not; for every one of the Combined
Presbyteries have not this Power; For as we have said, 2.3 4. or 5, etc. may
dissent from the major part, and in that case they rule not in the Assembly,
muchlesse rule they out of the Assembly, being considered, as Material parts
thereof, and the reason is because, Non quic quid convenit Toti per accidens,
aggregato, confuso, vel ordinato, id convenit singulu partibus; it is not
needful that whatsoever belongs, or is attributed to the collective body,
should be attributed to every part thereof, so ten is twice five, which cannot
be said of five, which is a part of ten; for it is not twice, but once five. 8.
Neither can these combined Presbyteries, or Elderships taken materially. 1.
i.e. before their combination feed many Churches, as when they are combined;
for in that sense they are not formally a combination, or a collective body,
but the matter thereof, and therefore to them cannot belong that, which
belongs unto the collective body formally, or in virtue of its form. 9. The
collective, or combined body of diverse Presbyteries feeds not many real
Particular Churches in actu exercito, as if they exercised actually the act of
feeding them in a particular way, as their Particular, and Ordinary Ministers
do; but in actu signato, in signifying and representing unto them all, in
virtue of their Commissions, by their Judgments, and Laws, what should be done
by them all; which these Particular Ministers do in actu exercito, and in a
more special way: And the reason of this is, because, if it were not so we
should confound the charge of combined Presbyteries, with that of one
Presbyter. 10. This Proposition may yet receive this sense; All the combined
Presbyteries feed all the particular Churches, that they represent. 1. All the
Presbyters together feed, and rule all Churches together as combined. 2. In
this combination, or collection of Presbyters, or Elders, every one of the
Presbyters, or Elders, feeds his own Church. 3. All the collective body of
combined Elders feed every Church apart; as we said before. 4. Every Presbyter,
or Elder in this combination rules all Churches, as we have declared it also.
1 Eth. ad Nicomach. c. 1.
So the Philosophers in expounding that Maxim, Bonum est, quod omnia appetunt,
that is good which all things desire, give us almost the like interpretations,
viz. 1. All good things taken collectively, are those, that all desirers taken
collectively do desire. 2. That every one in this collection of desirers
desires his own good in the collection of all good; as a man, man's good; a
horse, that which is good for a horse, etc. 3. That the whole collection of
desirers desires every good, as it serves for every part, and so for the
total, or whole, that consists of the parts. 4. That every desirer apart
desires, or loves the whole collection of good, insomuch as in that
collection of good, it finds its own good.
But none of these senses approved by us, can serve our Bethren. More might
here have been said, and I hope that others, God willing, shall say more; But
this may suffice for one Annotation, and I am assured, will sufficiently
dissolve all their Arguments hitherto, founded upon this Proposition.

About the end of this 15. Ye say [That this challenge of all spiritual power
from Christ, had need have a clear pattent from Christ,] and that noted by a
Particular Parenthesis, as very considerable; so had your Independent, and
Omnipotent power within your Particular Congregations: Neither do our Synods
challenge all power, but a Ministerial Power, such as we have already
expounded: Neither needs it any Pattent expressly, and formally from Christ: It
suffices that it have one from Nature, for that suffices to bind us all unto
obedience; for Christ as Mediator, and head of the Church is not represented
unto us in Scripture as Author of Nature, but of Grace, For the Law was given
by Moses, but grace, and truth came by Jesus Christ, who is Mediator of a
better Covenant; Neither came he to abrogate, or destroy, but to fulfill, and
to accomplish the Law; The Author of grace poseth not, but presupposes the Law
of Nature; And yet we can show a Pattent for it, not only from the Law of
Nature, which should suffice, but also from the Law of Grace, in the Old, and
New Testament.

Immediately after ye say, That nothing was written upon this Subject before
the Books set forth by two Divines of Scotland, one of England, and others of
Holland. Here ye mistake, for we can produce you sundry others of good note,
here Printed at London; we are sorry ye have not seen them, or disdained to
read them. If there were not many written before those, it was in pity of
your afflictions, whereunto good Divines would not add new affliction; Neither
thought they your Party so considerable; Neither were your Opinions much known
or published abroad, being only written in English, and not in Latin, except
by one, or two of your Divines, for any thing I know: Neither thought they that
ye were so averse from their Discipline, as ye appear in this Assembly, but
that ye suffered only for not conforming your selves unto Episcopal
Government: But whatever they have written, I know not what this can serve to
the purpose, unless it be to declare, That whatsoever helps ye had heretofore,
yet ye were destitute of those writings, whereby ye might have received farther
light concerning Presbyteriall Government; and I pray God ye make good use of
them.

In the 16.. at the end of the 16. Page Ye travel to remove an Objection, viz.
That in Congregationall Government (such as is amongst you) there is no allowed
sufficient remedy for miscarriages, though never so gross; no relief for
wrongful Sentences, or Persons injured thereby; no room for Complaints: No
Powerful, or Effectual means to reduce a Church, or Churches, that fall into
Heresy, or Schism, etc.

To avoid this Objection, ye relate us an History 17. and what ye did upon such
an emergent case: But ye show us no Law, that ever ye had amongst you, whereby
ye might bring any remedy against such a miscarriage before that it fell out.
2. Neither read we of any such Law, or remedy in your Books, before this. 3.
Your Divines, and the Members of your Churches, with whom we conversed, showed
no remedy amongst you for such inconveniences. 4. They gave us no answer unto
this Objection, save only this, That God has ordained no remedies in such
Cases; Yea, that if Churches should fall away from Christ, and with the Jews,
call him an Impostor, and the Trinity with Servet a three headed Cat, and deny
the Incarnation of the Son of God, they should be tolerated; Yea more, That the
Civil Magistrate should punish no man for his Religion, be it never so bad, or
blasphemous; and that it must be left to God; And this gives us reason to
think, That these Reasons, within these two years, have made you to refine your
Opinion, and to mould some new Solutions, and to suite your Opinions more close
to the current of the time, then you were wont to do. If therefore we speak
after them, it is their fault, and not ours; it may be, that your Opinion be
not common to you all, but to you five alone.

The sum of the History is, A Minister was suddenly deposed by his Flock,
whereupon some Churches did take offense, and all their Churches consented in
this Principle, That Churches, 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Timothy 5.22.
as well as particular men, are bound to give no offense, neither to Jew, nor
Gentile, nor the Churches of God they live among: Item, That in virtue of the
same, or like Law of not partaking in other men's sins, the Churches offended,
may, and ought, upon the Impenitency of those Churches, persisting in their
error, and miscarriage, to pronounce that heavy sentence against them, of
withdrawing, and renouncing all Christian Communion with them, until they do
repent; And further to declare, and protest this, with the causes thereof, to
all Christian Churches of Christ, that they may do the like.

In this Narration it appears. 1. That this Church offending, before this
emergent Case, knew not so much, for if she had, it is not credible, that she
would, against all charity, and the common order of all Churches, have
committed so great a scandal.

2. This remedy is not sufficient, nor satisfactory. 1. Because all Churches,
according to your Tenets, be equal in Authority, Independent one of another,
and par in parcm non habet Imperium, none has power, or Authority over his
equal; how then could any Church bind another to any such account, but out of
its freewill, as a party may do to its party.

3. Because since other Churches were, or pretended to be offended in such a
proceeding, they could not judge in it; for then they should have been both
judge, and party in one cause, which cannot be granted to those, that have no
Authoritative Power one over another, as when a private man offends the
State, and we our God.

4. What if many Churches, yea all the Churches, should offend one, should that
one Church gather all the rest together, judge them all, and in case of not
submitting themselves to her judgment, separate her self from them all? If so,
we should have Separations, and Schisms enough, which should be continued to
all Posterity to come.

5. What if Churches were so remote one from another, that they could not
easily meet together upon every occasion? Then there should be no remedy, or at
least no easy remedy.

6. What if the Offense were small, should so many Churches for every trifle
gather together, and put themselves to so great cost, and trouble?

7. What if the Churches in their Judgments should differ one from another, in
such a case should they all by Schisms separate themselves one from another?

8. This sort of Government gives no more Power, or Authority to a thousand
Churches over one, then to a Tincker, yea to the Hangman over a thousand, for
he may desire them all, out of charity, to give an account of their Judgment,
in case he be offended by them; Neither see I what more our Brethren grant to
all the Churches of the World over one.

But the Presbyteriall Government is subject to none of these inconveniences,
for the collective, or combined Eldership, having an authoritative Power, all
men, and Churches thereof, are bound by Law, and Covenant to submit themselves
thereunto: Every man knows their set times of meeting, wherein sundry matters
are dispatched, and all things carried by plurality of voices, without any
Schism, or Separation.

9. This Government is a Power, wherein the Party is judged if he will, and so
the judgment of the Judges suspended upon the judgment of the Party judged,
which is most ridiculous, without any example in Ecclesiastical, or Civil
Judicatories; a judgment indeed not very unlike to that which is related of a
merry man, who said he had the best, and most obedient wife of the whole World,
because (says he) she wills nothing but what I will, and as all men wondered
at it, (knowing her to be the most disobedient) yea (says he) but I must first
will what she wills, else she wills nothing, that I will.

10. This sort of Government is unjust, and unreasonable, for not only the
Party judges its Party, but also it inflicteth the same punishment, viz.
Separation, upon all offending Churches, what ever be the offense, great, or
small in case of Non-satisfaction, whereas all punishments should be
commensurate unto the several offenses.

11. And so ye seem to approve the opinion of the Stoics, who held all sins to
be equal, since ye inflict the same punishment upon them all.

12. Not only this Discipline cannot easily be put in execution in great
Kingdoms, as England, wherein all the Churches offended, cannot so easily meet
together, but also 13. Because the person offended after he has represented
his grievances unto one Church, and that Church having received satisfaction,
it may go to another, and that Church likewise having received satisfaction, it
may go to another, and so continually in infinitum to the Worlds end, evermore
taking those Churches for the Party that judge it, which is most absurd and
foolish.

14. What if the Party offended be poor, and have not the means to post up and
down from Neighbour-Church to Neighbour-Church, to pray them to make the
offending Church to give an account of her Judgment, muchlesse to attend upon
their uncertain conveniencie: Here will be found true, Pauper ubique jacet,
whereas in Presbyteriall Government the Party offended may easily be
redressed, and get satisfaction, as not having need so to post up and down, to
be at so great charges, or to attend their conveniencie, for by a simple Appeal
he may bind the Church offending, to appear at the day appointed.

15. What if there should fall out an hundred such Offenses in a small time?
Must so many Churches evermore gather together for every one of them apart?

16. What if Churches be poor, and cannot be at so great expense? Then in that
case, it should seem, there is no order to meet with Offenses.

And as for those precepts, 1 Cor. 10. and 1 Timothy 5. The first of them is not a
Rule of Government, or ruling of the Church, but a general command, common to
all Christians, whereby the Apostle forewarnes the Corinthians in things
indifferent, not to give any occasion of Offense unto the Church of God, or to
any other; but therein to comply with all men, as he does himself: From whence
ye cannot draw a Rule, or Law of ruling the Church, or how the Church should
take order with such Offenders; so that it shows, indeed, every man's duty
toward the Church, in things indifferent; but not the Churches duty toward
every one of them, in judging or ruling. Ye might as well have proved it from
this Principle, Fly from all evil; or from that, We must love God above all
things, and our Neighbor as our selves: neither see I any greater connection
that it has with the one, then with the other. And truly I cannot
sufficiently admire, how out of that Principle, Give no offense, ne to any man,
ye can infer this conclusion, Ergo, a Church offended may make a Church
offending to give an account of her judgment before all the world; and in case
of impenitency, pronounce a Sentence of withdrawing, and renouncing all
Christian Communion with her; and further to declare it to all other Churches.

No more can it be inferred of the other, viz. Be not partakers in other men's
sins; for the Apostle there gives rules about the Vocation of Ministers,
forbids Timothy to receive any man rashly into the Ministry, least in so
doing he be the cause of an unlawful Vocation, because, says he, verse. 24.
their sin, and incapacity will soon appear to all men. But how is it possible
out of this to spin out the former Couclusion?

18. Page 17, ye prove your former Conclusion thus: 1. For that ye saw no
further authority in Scripture in proceedings purcly Ecclesiastical, of one or
many sister Churches toward another whole Church, or Churches offending. 2.
Because no other Authority can rationally be put in execution without the
Magistrates power.

Answ. 1. Ye saw no more in Scripture; yea, but saw ye your own Conclusion in
Scripture? 2. Truly we see no Word of God for it; and if we take it not upon
your word, we shall never take it. 3. If ye see no Scripture for it, yet others
may see. 4. Ye may, if ye will, see it in the ordinary Practice of the Church
of the Jews in the old Testament, which is not abrogated in the New, since it
is not Ceremonial, but grounded in the Law of Nature: Ye may see it in the
History of the New Testament, in the judgment given out at the Synod of
Jerusalem, concerning the business of Antiochia; which I hope, ye shall see
clearly demonstrated to you by a better hand, before it be long.

6. It may be proved by the Law of Nature, which is a praecognitum to
Scripture, and supposed by Scripture; for Grace is not destructory of Nature,
but a Superstructory above Nature: So that when Scripture contains nothing
contradictory to the Dictats of Nature, we are bound to believe them, unless
we will misbelieve God, who is no less the Author of Nature, and of the
Dictats thereof, then of Grace.

2. Because no other Authority can rationally be put in execution, without the
Civil Magistrates power.

Answ. 1. Our Brethren here, as every where else, stand very stiffly to
Negations; They never prove any positive Doctrine; and it is known in the
Schools, how easy a thing it is to deny all things, and to prove nothing: If
they had that to prove, wherein they agree with us, I suppose they should have
more to do, then we to prove that, wherein they disagree from us.

But to take away all mistakes, and captious Evasions, we suppose that our
Churches arrogate to themselves no Imperial, or Magisteriall, but only a
Ministerial Power, or Authority. 2. That it is merely Spiritual, consisting
1. in the Creation, Suspension, and Deposition of Church Officers. 2. in
determining matters of Doctrine. 3. in making of Ecclesiastical Laws,
concerning things indifferent. 4. in Ecclesiastical Censures, as in
Suspension, Excommunication, etc.

They prove, That no more can rationally be put in execution, viz. then to call
an offending Church to an account; and in case of her impenitency, to declare
it to all other Churches.

Answ. We deny the Assumption. They prove it, for that Christ gave no power to
Churches to excommunicate their neighbor Churches.

Answ. 1. This is again another mistake in our Brethren, for they suppose, that
we excommunicate whole Churches, which we never do. 2. Neither believe I, that
they can bring us any examples of it: The reason why we do not so, is, Because
whole Churches ordinarily amongst us, contemn not the superior Ecclesiastical
Power, viz. of Synods, being bound by their Oath, and Covenant, to observe, and
maintain the Order of the Church. 3. And therefore we have no Ecclesiastical
Laws concerning such cases, for Lex est ordinatio rationis, and Laws are not
made of things that never fall out, or of things that fall out extraordinarily,
but of things that are ordinary 4 Much less think I, that ever any such case
did fall out in any one of the Reformed Churches. Item, it is another mistake,
to suppose, that there is no Excommunication, but in giving the offender over
to Satan: That is indeed the highest degree of Excommunication, but not all the
degrees of it; for there is another less, and inferior, viz. in separating
him from Ecclesiastical Communion: And so it is yet another mistake in you to
think, that in declaring your non-Communion with other Churches, ye do not
excommunicate them; for what is Excommunication, but a privation of communion;
the very word it self teaches us all this.

6. If any such Case should extraordinarily fall out, how can it be denied, but
that the particular Church offending might be excommunicated by the rest of the
Churches offended, if the offense should deserve it. 1. For we find nothing in
Scripture to the contrary. 2. For there is the same reason for the
Excommunication of whole Churches, as of particular persons, viz. the taking
away of scandal, and the conversion of the sinner, 1 Cor. 5.5. 2 Cor. 2.7. 2
These. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.20. and that such a contagion infect not others, 1 Cor. 5,
6, 7. And if a particular man may be excommunicated for denying, and
blaspheming of Christ, wherefore shall not a particular Church be
excommunicated for the like sin? Neither can their number and consociation
excuse them, but rather aggravateth the sin; for the more offenders there be,
the greater is the offense, and the greater should the punishment be.

3. If a Church compounded of ten persons may excommunicate four of their own
number, wherefore also may not ten thousand Churches excommunicate this
inconsiderable Church, compounded of ten persons, for the same reasons that it
excommunicateth four persons? has God given more power to ten persons over
four, then to all the persons, and Churches in the Kingdom, yea in all the
Christian world, over these miserable, and wretched persons, who (it may be)
deny the Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, and maintain all sort of
impieties?

4. If God in Heaven, and in his Scripture declare a Church excommunicated,
wherefore shall not his Churches upon Earth also declare it excommunicated,
when they learn it in his Word? Are not the Churches of God as well bound to
ratify his Sentence here upon Earth, as he to ratify theirs in Heaven?

5. We have some examples of it in the Old Testament; for the people of God
(say some of our Divines) excommunicated Amalck; for proof whereof, they bring
the Targum, Cant. 2. Contriverunt Amalek per diram imprecationem, They bruised
Amalek by the fearful cursing of the Lord. So did they the Samaritans, because
of the building of their Temple upon the Mount Garizim. They brought (as
Drusius, and after him Weemse, relate it) 300 Priests, 300 Trumpets, 300 Books
of the Law, and 300 Boys; They blew with Trumpets, and the Levites singing,
accursed the Cutthaans in the Name of Totragammaton, or Jehova, and with curses
both the superior, and inferior house of Judgment; and they said, Cursed is
be, who cateth the bread of the Cutthaean. These Curses they wrote upon Tables,
and sealed them, and sent them through all Israel, who multiplied also this
great Anathema upon them; from whence proceeded a great hatred betwixt them, as
we read in the Gospel.

If in virtue of a small offense one Church may pronounce that dreadful
Sentence of non-Communion, against many Churches, wherefore may not many
Churches pronounce Sentence of great Excommunication against one small Church,
for a great sin? since crescentibus delictis crescunt poenae.

Besides all this, I deny the consequence; for howbeit God had not ordained
Excommunication, viz. the greater, which here ye understand, yet might there be
some other remedy found by the light of Nature.

But ye add, p. 18. That your Sentence of non-Communication will be as
effectual as the greater Excommunication.

This cannot be, 1. Because, if the offender have any grace, the greater will
terrify him more. 2. Because in your way the Sentence may seem unjust, in
punishing all offenses, and Offenders, greater and smaller with the like
Spiritual penalties. 3. Your way cannot so well awe Churches, and keep them in
their duties; for since ye attribute no authoritative power, or authority to
all the Churches of Christ over any particular Church, but judge them all to be
equal amongst themselves, and one to all; as if a part were equal to its
total, and pars esset aequalis Toti, and Totum non esset majus quilibet sua
part, as if the part were equal to its whole, and the whole were no greater
then its part, viz. a whole man's body then his toe; a particular Church may
think her self no ways bound to obey any other Church, or Churches: and much
less will ten Churches think themselves bound to obey one; for Obediecce is a
virtue in Inferiors toward their Superiors: But if all Churches be equal,
there can neither be Superiors, nor Inferiors, and consequently no obedience,
or disobedience.

4. If a particular Church, in your way, desire to be obeyed by forty
Churches, pretending her self to be offended by their proceedings, they may
think her bold, in calling them to an account, and that the spirits of Prophets
should be subject to Prophets, one rather to twenty, or two thousand, then
twenty, or two thousand to one.

5. In our way, a Church offending may esteem her offense greater, and fear it
more, since she may judge her self to offend two Authorities, 1. that of God,
and 2. that which he has given unto the Church: but in yours she cannot think
her offense so great, since she conceives her self to offend one authority, or
authoritative Power only, viz. that of God; for ye acknowledge no
authoritative power in the Church, or Churches, and so your way breeds a
plain contempt of all Church Authority.

6. In denying an authoritative power, the offender may think you too busy
bodies in intermedling your selves with other folks matters, which concerns you
not so much; whereas, if ye granted an authoritative power unto her, it should
be her own proper business, in virtue of her authoritative power received from
God.

So also our way is more efficacious in the Churches offended; 1. in breeding a
greater detestation of sin: 2. in making them to shun and avoid more the
company of the offender. 3. in making them to conceive the Sentence to be more
just, etc.

Item, if this your way be as efficacious, ye need no other power, in your
particular Congregations, over particular persons; a simple admonition, without
any authoritative power, may suffice you.

Ye yet say, That your way is more brotherly in proceeding without an
Authoritative power.

Answ. God in the Old Testament ordained an Authoritative power in the Church,
and yet they were all Brethren; and he knew well enough what power was
convenient for Brethren.

2. So likewise in particular Congregations we are all Brethren, neither yet
will ye banish out of them all Authority.

3. 2 Kin 6.21. 1 Cor 14, 15 2 Cor. 6 13. and 12.14. Gal 4 19. 1 These 2.11 1 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. Phil 2.10. 1 Ioh. 2.1.28 and 3.7 and 4.4.
The Ministers, and the Elders are not only our Brethren, but also our
Fathers; Ergo, they must as well use paternall authority over us, as brotherly
charity toward us.

4. So also combined Presbyteries, or (as it were) Fathers of simple
Presbyteries, because of their greater power to judge.

5. The like of this Government has never been heard of in the world, neither
in State, nor Commonwealth before; and therefore seems it to us to be
repugnant unto the Law of Nature; for what else is the Law of Nature, but the
common consent of all men? How absurd therefore is that Government, so
destitute of all authority? have the sheep as great authoirty, as the
Sheepherd? if so, it is as good to be a sheep as a Sheepherd.

6. If an Authoritative power cannot hold in the Church, or among Churches,
because that we are all Brethren, and Sisters, no more can it hold in the State
betwixt King, and Subject; the father, and the son; the master, and the
servant; for we are all Brethren in Christ: so this Foundation, or Groundwork,
will destroy all sort of Political, and Domestical Authority. Our Brethren
would do well also to consider, whether their Grounds, or those of our
Government, will better consist with the Authority of the civil Magistrate;
for, according to this reason, a King in a State should have no power at all
over his Brother.

7. In the State there be diverse Judicatories, Superior, and Inferior,
wherein the Superior has an authoritative power over the inferior. Ergo, in
the Church, since there is the same reason for both, viz. reparation of the
offense taken at inferior Judicatories.

But because ye will seem to be much addicted to the civil Magistrate, as if
your Ecclesiastical Government were altogether subordinate unto his power, and
blame us, as not giving him his due, which ye note by a particular Parenthesis,
as if ye would have us to take particular notice of it; Therefore, before we
end this Section, we shall be very willing to do it. In saying that the
Presbyteriall Excommunication is no more effectual then your Sentence of
non-Communion, without the Magistrates Power, ye add this Parenthesis [To
which we give as much, and [as we think] more then the Principles of the
Presbyteriall Government will suffer them to yield.] By whose counsel, or for
what end this Parenthesis is inserted, and such a comparison made. I know not;
If ye have no Political ayms, I am assured ye comply very much with Policy. If
ye grant him so much, ye would do well to declare how much, and wherein, and
not to feed him with generalities, and Platonicall Idees, as abstract here from
all matter, as ye professed formerly your Church Government was abstracted from
all other Governments. It is a Maxim in Philosophy, and in Rhetoric both,
That Sermones generales non movent; and praised be God that the King and
Parliament are wise, and will not feed upon so abstract forms. As for us, since
ye keep your selves upon such generalities, it is impossible to us to answer
any thing in particular, unless we guess at your meaning: In general
therefore we say, 1. That amongst men well bred, all comparisons are odious. 2.
That either ye give unto the civil Magistrate only his due, or something
more: if only his due, ye lay a very heavy aspersion upon all Presbyterians,
as if they were not good Subjects, in denying him a part of his due: If more,
who gave you the power to do so? 3. Either ye grant him more in Civil, or in
Spiritual matters: In Civil matters ye cannot; for ye can grant him no more,
then he has by the Laws of the Land, whereunto we are all equally subject; and
therefore must grant him as much one, as another: If in Spiritual matters, we
grant him his external power, as we declared in the beginning. And for
intrinsecall Spiritual power, 1. It is not in your power to grant him any at
all; neither can ye give him more Spiritual obedience then Scripture
permits you, or give him a part of the Spiritual power that ye have
received of God; for that were, to lay upon another the burden, that God has
laid upon you, and so serve God by a Proctor. 2. It is only in God, who is
King in this Spiritual Kingdom, Master in this House, and a Father in this
Family, who can give power therein to any man: we dare not be so bold: If ye
pretend to do it; I say with the Comic Poet, de te largitor puer, be liberal
upon your own purse. 4 If ye will do so, look how Authoritative is your power,
who take Authority over Gods Ordinance, and dispose of it, as if it were your
own: so do not the Presbyterians. 5. The Civil Magistrate acknowledges
himself to be a Political, and no Ecclesiastical person, since he is neither
Pastor, nor Doctor, nor Ruling Elder in Christ's Church; and therefore
arrogateth no Spiritual Authority to himself 6. We desire to know of you,
Brethren, what ye understand here by the Magistrate, Whether the Supreme, or
Subaltern? If the Supreme, whether the King, or Parliament? and principally at
this time: If the Subaltern, we ask of you, Whether every Justice of Peace
shall, or can judge of all Ecclesiastical matters? And if he cannot, whether
he can be a competent Judge? 7. What if the Civil Magistrate be a Papist? what
if some of the Kings Council be Papists, or Heterodox, as some in the
beginning of this Parliament were? will ye grant that they judge in matters of
Religion? So the Turk, the Antichrist, and Pagans, shall judge in matters of
Religion, amongst their Protestant Subjects: If so, our Protestants in France,
in Polonia, and otherwhere, are in a very fair way; Its pity but such a Maxim
should have been published in Queen Mary's time, and at Saint Bartholomews day
in France, at that Butchery, or Massacre of Protestants. 8. The Apostle, 1 Cor.
6. finds fault with the Christians, that did plead before Infidels in civil
matters: what then would he not have said, if godly men would have pleaded
before them, and submitted matters of Religion unto their judgment? 9. This
power that ye grant to the Magistrate, is either Internal, or External, in
regard of the Church: If External we grant it, as well as ye: If Internal;
then he must be an Ecclesiastical Person. And then 10. It should follow, That
a Sovereign Prince should as well be Sovereign in the Church, as in the State;
and so Internal head of both; which is derogatory to Christ's Royalty, as our
Doctors have sundry times clearly demonstrated it against the Jesuits, and
other Papists. 11. Women, that are commanded to be silent in the Church, should
rule it, and command men in it, since they may be Sovereign Princes in it, and
over it and so Leglise tomberoit on quenvillo: And if it be replied, wherefore
may they not as well rule the Church, as the State, as some Independenters, and
some Women, here in London, have maintained, in presence of their Preacher,
uncontradicted by him, or any of that Profession there. I answer, 1. Because
the Church or Kingdom of Heaven, is not a Kingdom of this Word. 2. Because God
forbideth the one in Scripture, but not the other. 12. Christ's Kingdom, viz.
His Church which is not of this World, should be subject to the Kings and
Kingdoms of this World. 13. Yea, the Apostles should have been subject unto
worldly Kings in Church Government, and so they should not have been the first
Officers in the Church; but the King should have been above them, which is no
less, then clearly to contradict. Saint Paul, Eph^s. 4. where he calls them
the first. 14 So woe Idly Princes could not be judged by any Church Officers,
for if they were supreme Judges, inferior Officers could not judge them. 15. A
King usurping, or invading a Kingdom, should usurp Soveraigntie in the Church.
And 16. if he were a Tyrant, and obtained it jure belli, by the Sword, he
should make himself Head of the Church by the Sword, which seems a very
strange Conquest of Ecclesiastical Authority. 17. If a Prince should buy a
Principality, and the Soveraigntie thereof, he should consequently buy the
charge to be supreme Ruler, or to be above the Church, as ye call it; so it
should be a good Conquest, by good Simony. 18. So if a wicked Prince, should
invade a good Prince, against Gods Will, then he should be Head of Christ's
Church, or supreme Judge over it, against Christ's Will, and that by an ordinary
way, yea, jure divino, by Christ's Ordinance; if jure divino they be above the
Church, as ye say. 19. If a Prince were perpetually mad, his perpetual
madness should no more hinder him from being supreme Judge in the Church, then
Prince in the State. 20. If a Prince were supreme Judge alone, then should he
alone judge, yea, without his Counsel, as some Princes do arrogate unto
themselves; and there should be the same Disputes about the Princes supreme
Authority in the Church, that are about it in the State. 21. God will have no
man to be a Judge in his Church, but after examination, 1 Timothy 3. muchlesse a
supreme Judge in it: But Kings are not examined, whether they have the
capacity to rule, or not; and if the Prince be a little child, how can he
have the capacity, or abide an examination. 22. If a King have any other, or
more intrinsecall Authority over the Church, then all Protestant Churches in
France, Holland, and Scotland; grant him, or then we have declared, we pray you
show us, what it is, and wherein it consists: Whether he has it in quality
of a King, of a Christian, or of a Christian King? If he has it, in quality
of a King, or as a King, then all Kings have it, yea, N^ro, and Julian the
Apostate; Nam quod alicui comunit qua tali communit omni. And then I pray you,
whether ye will admit such a Prince to judge of the Controversies of your
Religion? If in quality of a Christian, then all Christians have it, for the
same reason, yea every Cobbler as well as any King, or Prince, since they be
all Christians. 3. If as a Christian Prince, then all Princes should have it:
But so it is not; For what if we had a Christian Prince, who were a Lutheran,
an Anabaptist, a Sociman, or a Papist? I cannot believe that ye would permit
such Christian Princes to judge, muchlesse to be supreme Judges in your
Religion: If ye say that ye understand an Orthodox Prince? What if he had one,
or two errors, would ye yet permit him to judge of Ecclesiastical matters?
Then who should judge, whether he were Orthodox, or not? Whether ye, or we?
What if there were a hundred diverse Sects in any Kingdom, Then he could only
judge of that Sect, which he should profess, and of no other: Or if he should
judge of all, he should condemn them all, but his own. If by the supreme
Magistrate, ye understand a Parliament, then to judge every one of your
differences, when ever any man challenges the Church of an unjust judgment,
or appealeth from it, we must gather a Parliament: Which if the King and
Parliament find expedient, I have nothing to say against it; yet every man may
judge, whether the dispatch of business can be so quick and cheap, as in the
Presbyterian way? What if Parliament men be of different Religions, shall they
of one Religion judge of the other Religion.

I might bring more Arguments, and prosecute them all more fully; but this may
suffice for Annotations: Only this I add. 1. That it is not equitable that ye
five be believed upon your simple word, in so great an Aspersion, as ye lay
upon so many Churches, yea all the best Reformed Churches, without any proof:
If heretofore they gave you the right hand of fellowship, I doubt if after so
criminal an accusation, they will continue it to you any longer. And here I
cannot sufficiently admire you, in pretending your Church Government to be so
complete, and perfect, and yet stand insomuch need of the Civil Magistrate.

2. I pray the Reader to consider diligently. 20. Page 20, 21. How by that
Speech it appears. 1. That that Church pretended to have offended, did
arrogate in disposing of her Minister, a power altogether independent from all
other, both of the Civil Magistrate, and of all other Churches; Otherwise
that expression should have been impertinent. viz. That it was the most to be
abhorred Maxim, that any Religion has ever made profession of; and therefore
of all other, the most contradictory, and dishonorable to that of
Christianity, that a single, and particular society of men, professing the
name of Christ, and pretending to be endowed with a power from Christ, to judge
them, that are of the same body, and society within themselves, should further
arrogate unto themselves an exemption from giving an account or being
censurable by any other, either Christian Magistrate above them, or Neighbor
Churches about them. For if she pretended no such power and exemption, to what
purpose such an expression?

2. That in this Ecclesiastical Judgment, that is intrinsecall to the Church,
they acknowledge the Civil Magistrate to be above them, but all the Churches
of the Christian World nothing but about them, whereof much may be said. Here
ye symbolize with Erastus in many things.

3. Ye may collect, that such a most abhorred Maxim was not the Maxim of that
Church alone, but of some others also, for it is not credible, that she would
have stood out alone in a Maxim so repugnant to the Tenets of all other
Churches, and after wards submitted her self unto their judgment.

4. Ye may see by the event and success of this business, a correction of
that Maxim, wherewith they were tinctured before.

5. How God in his most wise Providence has forced those good men, out of mere
necessity, to come nearer unto Presbyteriall Government, then formerly.

6. But we know not, whether they of New England, will stand fast to them in
this decision.

If we knew all the Circumstances of that proceeding, we might (it may be) say
much more, then upon such a superficial, and unwilling Relation as ye make, we
can say here.

Again, I pray you note, That they acknowledge their Churches to be bound to
give an account, and to be censurable by the Christian Magistrate, and
Neighbor Churches, in their judgments. From whence I infer: Ergo, Their power
is not full perfect, and complete, within themselves, but receives some
correction, and perfection from that of the Civil Magistrate above them, or
Neighbor Churches about them; But what is this, but an authoritative power to
correct them, and to inflict on them spiritual punishments. viz. Censures, in
commanding them to satisfy the Party offended, and to consesse their fault:
Neither do the Presbyterians pretend to inflict any corporal punishment, or
pecuniary mulcts, since the aim of their Government is spiritual, viz. To save
the soul, not to kill the body, or empty the purse by catching men's money.

. 22. Page 22. Ye give an account of your proceedings since your return to your
Country: And here again, ye term the Reformation of the Protestant Churches
by the name of Calvinian, as if this name in this matter pleased you above all
others; yet will we not retaliate it unto you, in calling your Churches
Goodwinians, Nyans, Bridgians, Burroughesians, Sympsonians, or Good-Ny
Bridg-Burrough-Sympsonians, for we take no pleasure in such fictions.

Afterward ye give your five judgments, about that Reformation, viz. That our
Churches stand in need of a further Reformation. 1. But stand not yours in need
of some further Reformation also? 2. Neither is it in question, whether our
Churches stand in need of any further Reformation? But whether they stand in
need of that, which ye call Reformation? And if it be not rather a Deformation,
then a Reformation of the Church of Christ?

The Reasons of this your judgment, are grounded upon mere Possibilities, and
generalities as we shall see God willing hereafter.

The first is, Because it may be thought, that they coming new out of Popery,
and the founders of that Reformation not having Apostolic infallibitie might
not be fully perfect the first day.

Answ. 1. It may be, but a poss^ ad ^ss^ non valet consequentia: 2. It
follows not, it may be: Ergo, It is. Neither will ye permit us to argue in
this manner, Master Goodwin, Master Nays, etc. opinion may be false: Ergo, It
is false. 3. Muchlesse may it be thought, or imagined: Ergo, It is so. For we
think all your Tenets, wherein ye dissent from us, are false, and untrue;
Neither will ye grant it for all our thoughts: No more will we grant you what
ye pretend for all your thoughts, unless ye bring us some better reason; for
many men's thoughts be erroneous, as yours in this particular. 4. Your Argument
is a Genere ad Specicm affirmative, ye argue affirmatively from a generality
to a particular. viz. It might not be fully perfect or imperfect: Ergo, In this
or that point it was not perfect, or imperfect. 5. Neither is it needful to a
perfect Reformation, in Doctrine, or Discipline, that we have an Apostolical
perfection, that is Personal, or tied unto our Person; but Scripturall, viz.
Revealed in Scripture, which we have, not of one, but of many Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles. 6. This expression of yours, viz. Might not be fully
perfect the first d^^, is ambiguous, and may be taken either Negative in
putting the negation (not) before the principal Verb, viz. might; or
Infinite, in putting of it, after the Verb, might, before the infinity Verb,
be: In the first way, the sense of it is this,

They that come new from Popery, without Apostolical infallibility, cannot be
perfect the first day, or it was not possible they should be perfect the first
day, and so it is evidently false; for it should imply a contradiction that any
man, or Church could have a perfect Doctrine, or Discipline without an
Apostolical infallibility, or a long time.

In the second way, the sense is this,

They that come new from Popery, without Apostolical infallibility may not be
perfect, or it is possible they be not perfect, the first day; and so it is
true: But as it is possible they be not perfect; so is it possible by Gods
mercy they be perfect: And so the Argument will proceed a posse ad esse,
whereof Logicians say, Non valet consequentia. So your Argument is naught: Of
these two Propositions the first is Negative, and the last Infinite: They
differ as,

Non possibile est esse
Possibile est non esse.
The one has the Mood, or Modification Negative, the other the Subject, or
Dictum Negative; the one is true, and the other false, as ye may see in these
Examples.

It was not possible to Adam before his fall to fall: False. It was possible to
Adam before his fall not to fall: True. So. It is not possible that Peter
sleep: False. It is possible that Peter sleep not: True.
Neither does time contribute so much, neither has it any influence upon true
Religion, which is a gift of God; Faith is not acquired by our labor, but
infused into our understanding by Gods Mercy. And yet we have had more time,
and a greater number of able men then ye, to perfect our Reformation. And as it
was possible, that the Reformation of our Church was not perfect the first day.
So may it be possible that yours be not perfect, neither the first, nor the
last day.

But ye grant us, 5. Page 4. That the first Reformers in Protestant Churches
had a most happy hand in the Reformation of Doctrine, and that in the
beginning, and without any Apostolical infallibility; wherefore I pray then,
might they not also have it as well in Discipline, or Government? I remit the
Reader to that Section and my Annotation thereupon.

2. Your second Reason is grounded not only upon possibilities, but also upon
hope, for it may be hopefully conceived (say ye) that God in his infinite mercy
and purpose reserved, and provided some better thing for this Nation, when it
should come to be reformed, that the other Churches might not be made perfect
without it, as the Apostle speaks.

Answ. 1. This is but a possibile est esse, it may be, quod nihil ponit in
esse, that makes nothing to be: The question is not what may be; but what is
in effect. 2. And as it may be, so may it not be. 3. It is not so much as a may
be of any thing, that is to be, but a may be, or a possible hope of a thing,
that may be: O how far is this Reason from proving the thing to be. 4 And as
for that Text of the Apostle, Heb. 11.48. Ye abuse mightily the place of
Scripture, or are abused; for it is not to be understood of you, or of your, or
our Reformation; but of the coming of Christ, and the vocation of the Gentiles;
for howsoever the Fathers in the old Testament received the Promises; yet
received they not the accomplishment, or performance of them, viz. Christ
manifested in the flesh, who is that better thing, reserved unto us, whereof
the Apostle speaks there, otherwise we should have perished.

23, 24 25, 26, 27. Contains an Enumeration of our Brethrens grievances,
whereof they have mentioned many heretofore. 1. The mistaking, and
misapprehension of their Opinions, wherein they might seem to differ.

We have answered already. 1. It is not a mistake, nor misapprehension to take
and apprehend an opinion as it is propounded by the Party, as we have done. 2.
We answer, That if we mistake, or misapprehend any opinion, it is not that of
all Independents. 3. It is a great mistake in you to imagine; that ye be all of
one opinion; For ye five, who are the Authors of this Book cannot agree among
your selves, how muchlesse with others. 4. And we are assured, that ye cannot
but mistake one another. 5. Here also must be noted your Parenthesis [wherein
we might seem to differ.] Then your differences from us were not real, but
apparent: If so, wherefore then will ye not really agree, and join your selves
in Union and Communion with us? And truly so it is, either they are not real,
or they are really ridiculous.

Page 23. Your second grievance is, that ye are grievously calumniated with
reproaches of Schism: Schism is a Pertinacious Separation from the true
Church after sufficient conviction: And as Heresy, as Heresy, is repugnant to
Faith so is Schism to Charity; the one quitteth the unity of the Faith, the
other the union in Charity: And as Heresy is evermore accompanied with
pertinacy after sufficient conviction: So is Schism also.

If therefore the Synod, or any other Assembly, or any of your Brethren should
convict you sufficiently, and afterward, ye should separate your selves, or
desire a separation from us, I think that no man could deny you to be
Schismatics; neither believe I, in such a case, that ye would, or could
honestly deny i^ your selves; But so long as the Synod, or some others does it
not, I dare say nothing: As for my self, I believe truly, that ye be very
Learned, Pious, and honest Men; and howsoever ye may fail by infirmity, yet
believe I not, that ye err out of malice; and consequently, that ye are no
Schismatics hitherto. And I hope, and am consident, that God will not permit,
that so good, and godly men fall away from his Church. And this I say by moral
probability, because of the good opinion I have conceived of you, by good men's
relations, and some observation of your carriages, in the small conversation I
have had with some of you. If therefore any men out of too much zeal, or others
out of malice, have uttered any such aspersion, it is in your power, by
entertaining of a Fraternall union with us to give them the ly, as I hope in
Gods mercy ye will do.

. 24. Page 24 25. But ye prove, That ye are not or cannot be Schismatics by
three Reasons: The first is, If ye be Schismatics, or culpable of Schism,
Either it must relate, say you, to a differing from the former Ecclesiastical
Government of this Church established, and then who is not involved in it, as
well as we? Or to that Constitution, and Government, that is yet to come; and
until that be agreed on, established, and declared, and actually exist, there
can be no guilt, or imputation of Schism from it: But none of these are true,
as ye have confirmed it: Ergo.

Answ. Howsoever I hold you not yet for Schismatics; yet can I not think, that
ye prove it well: For that dis-junctive proposition may be denied, as not
containing a full enumeration of all the Causes, or Reasons of Schism; for a
Church may be Schismatic, not only for her Separation from this, or that
Church, but much more for her Separation from all Churches, as your Accusers
may say of you, viz. That ye have quitted the Communion of all other Churches,
as well Protestants, as Papists; and that in case ye could not, or would not
join in union with Churches ruled by Episcopal Government, ye might have
joined your selves with other Reformed Churches, with which the Church of
England entertained Union, and Communion; so that the greater your Separation
was, the greater was your Schism. Yet can it not be said, that it was a
Schism formally, but materially, for it had not the essential form, or that
which we conceive, as the essential form of a Schism, viz. Conviction, and
Pertinacy, without the which Schism no more can be made up, then Heresy: For
it is Forma quae dat esse rei, the Form that gives being to a thing. Only it
had the matter, or material cause of a Schism, viz. The Separation from all
Churches, which cannot make up a Schism formally, no more then a man's body
alone, which is his matteriall cause, can formally make up a Man.

2. Men may yet be called Schismatics, Materialiter and Dispositive,
matterially, and dispositively, or as having the disposition to Schism, when
they cannot actually resist an actual Government, but are resolved without any
sufficient cause to resist, or control that Government, that they judge, will
be established by them, who according to Gods ordinary Providence have power to
do it. And so your Party may yet say, that ye be culpable, and guilty of
Schism materially, and by way of disposition, if they see you aim at any
Toleration, which is the next way to Separation: So they may Answer unto the
confirmations of both the parts of your dis-junctive Proposition in denying
both your Assumptions; for many there be, who separated not themselves from all
Protestant Churches, and that are not minded to oppose the form of Government,
that is to be established, much less to be suitors for Toleration.

Your second Reason to free your selves from the calumny of Schism, is this in
substance. 24. Page 24.

If ye had been guided by the spirit of Schism, ye had made up a Party, when
ye had the occasion. But so did ye not, when ye had the occasion: Ergo.
Ye prove the connection of your first Proposition: Because such are practices
of those, that are led by the spirit of Schism.

Ye prove the Assumption. 1. Because, that howsoever, ye had great
provocations, viz. 1. Misunderstandings of your opinions. 2. Incitements to
this State, not to allow you the peaceable practices of your consciences, which
the Reformed Churches abroad allowed you. 3. Calumnies in Print. 4. Heightened
with this prejudice, that ye were ashamed of your opinions, or able to say
little for them. 5. Books printed against your opinions, yet ye did it not. 2.
Because, that having the occasion of manifold advantages to make, and increase
a Party, ye have not in the least sort attempted it.

Ye prove that ye had manifold advantages. 1. Because ye found the spirits of
the people of this Kingdom, that profess or pretend to the power of
godliness, ready to take any impressions, and to be cast in any mould, that
has but the appearance of a stricter way. 2. Because that the mists gathered
about you, begun to scatter. 3. Because ye published not your opinions by
Preaching, although ye had the Pulpits free; nor in Print, although the Presses
were more free, then the Pulpits.

Answ. Your Party will deny the Assumption; for if ye, and the rest of your
Party made it not up, how is it made up in this Kingdom?

As for the proof of your Provocations: We have answered already to the first:
The third and fourth, we allow it not, if any man has done so. To the second
we shall answer hereafter. And as for the fifth, good Sheepherds could not
without an abominable prevarication, but write against yours, and all other
men's Innovations, when they saw so many Sects multiplied, and Woolfs creeping
in so fast into Christ's Sheepfold, to devour the flock. 2. If ye blame our
faithful Ministers for maintaining the Truth already received, what shall we
say of your folks, who have first published Books against the Truth. 3. What
shall we say of those of your Colleagues, who heretofore preached your Tenets
with great offense here in public? And who still run busily up and down, to
make Proselytes.

To the second proof your Assumption.

1. We have already answered, that it is made, but how we know not. 2. What
were those people that profess, and pretend to any power of godliness, so
ready to take any impression, and to make a Party, ye tell not? We wish to
know, whether they be Brownists, Anabaptists, or of what other Sect? 3. Your
Covenant obliges you to declare it unto the Parliament however, ye reveal it
not unto us. 4. Certainly true Professors of godliness are not so susceptible
of any impressions, much less to become factious. 5. And therefore ye add
well (or pretend) for such men pretend only to godliness, but have renounced
(in effect) the power thereof.
Here we see, howsoever ye pretend not to be Statesmen, yet ye know as much of
it as the Presbyterians.

Your second occasion was the dissipations of mists, etc. If so, and only so;
then what needed this Apologeticall Narration?

25. Page 25. To the third occasion, whether ye had the Pulpits so free, or
feared to have them less free afterward, I dispute not, ye know that well
enough: Only this I know, That some of your Brethren having given themselves
liberty to speak somewhat freely in favor of your opinions, were afterward
discountenanced, and became more prudent, and circumspect in venting of
themselves. If ye printed not your opinions, it may be, ye deal more prudently
in teaching them in private, then in publishing them in Print. And here ye show
how your Charity is grown cold; for in the beginning when so many mists were
gathered about you, for fear of Schism out of meet Charity, ye abstained from
writing, and now, when they are scattered ye write.

Your third Grievance is the reproach of that proud, and insolent title of
Independency.

Answ. Ye decline that proud Title, but will no ways quit the thing signified
by the Title, in that, ye maintain the Independency of every one of your
Churches from all Ecclesiastical Authority, or Authoritative Power of any
Ecclesiastical Assembly; yea, some of your Profession say, That it belongs not
to the Magistrate to punish any man for his Religion, be it never so odious,
and wicked, as we have heard from their own mouths. So that there is another
new Independency.

If it be replied here, That I did prove before, that ye acknowledge some
Ecclesiastical Authority, whereunto your particular Churches are subject.

I answer, It is but by necessary consequence, that they must hold it, and not
interminis, or expressly that they believe it; for they deny interminis, what
they must grant by consequence: It is drawn out of the evasions, that they
bring against our Reasons, whereby, whilst they seek to escape, they are
caught.

Page 4. Your fourth Grievance, whereof ye complain, and bewall your selves, is
Brownisme together with all their Opinions, wherewith ye are traduced.

Answ. But ye disclaim not Brownisme, and their Opinions, absolutely, but with
a restriction and secundum quid, viz. As they have stated, and maintained them.
2. By another limitation, viz. That ye differ much from them, not in re, sed in
modo rei: It may be, ye hold, and maintain the same opinions, but not the same
way. And yet ye sympathize very much with them, in puining untoward names upon
us, but not upon them.

There also ye declare what ye confess, and believe, viz. The truth to lie in
a middle way betwixt Brownisme, and the Authoritative Presbyteriall Government.

Answ. But this is nothing, but your error: Verity consists not in the
middle of this, or that which ye imagine, but in a conformity of our
conceptions with their object, and due measure; which in this matter, is only
Gods Word revealed in the holy Scriptures; and according to this rule I take
Presbyterian Government, rather to be the middle betwixt Popish Tyranny, and
Independent Anarchy.

25. Page 25. Your fifth Grievance is Some incitements to this State, not to
allow us (say ye) the peaceable practices of our Consciences, which the
Reformed Churches abroad allowed us.

Answ. If any man incited the State not to allow you a peaceable practice of
your new Religion, they did according to their conscience, as your New England
men do with those of our Religion; and as some say, that some of you five would
do with us.

Their Reasons might have been these.

1. Because it cannot but open a door to all sorts of erroneous Opinions. 2. It
is dangerous for the State, it may breed factions and divisions betwixt all
persons of whatsoever relation, betwixt the Magistrate, and the Subject, the
Husband, and the Wife, the Father, and the Son, Brethren, Sisters, the Master,
and the Servant; when the one is of one Religion, or Ecclesiastical
Government, and the other of another, as ye have experimented: The Son may
refuse to receive any communion with the Father, and the Brother with the
Brother, and so dissolve all natural, civil, and domestical bands of
Society. 3. No State in Christendom, where there is one only Religion
established, will admit the public exercise of any other, or endure a Schism
in that, which is already received: Wherefore then should it be done here? 4.
If it be granted to our Brethren, I cannot see how it can well be denied to
other Sects.
If it be said, That other Sects differ more from us, then they do; it is all
one, Magis and minus non mutant Speciem, in matter of Toleration; for then all
must be tolerated, howsoever some more, some less: And some of our Brethren
grant all the Argument: And if we distinguish so, ye must declare, and expound
clearly, what Sects, and what Opinions are to be tolerated, and what not, which
will be a question inextricable, which no mortal man, appearingly, is able
distinctly to determine.

And some may say, The less the difference be, the less need is there for a
Toleration to be granted to such a Sect: For the less it be, the greater is
the Schism.

5. God in the Old Testament granted no Toleration of diverse Religions, or
Disciplines; and the New Testament requires no less union amongst Christians,
then the old amongst the Jews. 6. Either our Brethren do assent to our
Doctrine, and are resolved likewise to assent to the Discipline, which God
willing shall be established by common consent, or do not: If they grant the
first, what need they any other Toleration, then the rest? If the second, it
would be first discussed, wherein they are resolved to dissent; and afterward
considered, whether it be of so great importance, that in consideration
thereof, they dare not, in good Conscience, entertain communion with us. 7.
They are not pressed to be Actors in any thing against their Consciences: Ergo,
They need not to be suitors for a Toleration; or if they be, it may justly be
refused. 8. It is against the nature of the Communion of Saints, to live in
Sects apart, without communicating at the Lords Table, which very hardly will
be avoided, if Toleration be granted. 9. Because the Scripture exhorts us
evermore unto unity, which cannot be easily procured by a Toleration of Sects,
which cannot but daily beget new Schisms and Divisions. 10. Because there was
greater difference amongst the Members of the Church of Corinth in the rim of
Saint Paul, and yet they communicated together; yea, the Apostle exhorted them
unto mutual communion, and forbearance of Sects, and Divisions. 11. Because
the Opinion of our Brethren symbolizeth too much with that of the Donatists,
who separated themselves from other Churches, under pretext, that they were not
so holy as their own: Neither is it unlike to the Convents and Monasteries
amongst the Papists; for as they all profess one Doctrine with the Romish
Church, and yet every Order has its own Discipline; that of S. Francis one,
that of S. Dominick another; and in every Order one General, and in every
Monastery one Abbot, Prior or President; So all your Churches believe one
Doctrine together with us, and every one of your Churches has one Minister, as
their Convents a particular Abbot or Prior. Ye only differ in this, That ye
have no General, or any thing answerable thereunto to keep you in unity and
conformity. 12. It is the Civil Magistrates part to take away Heresies,
Superstitions, and Corruptions in manners after the examples of the Kings of
Juda: Wherefore then is not his duty likewise to take away all Schisms, which
are the highway to Heresy, and consequently to deny Toleration, which is a
way to both. 13. We have but one God, one Christ, and one Lord, one Spirit, we
are one Body, we have one Faith, and one Baptism, whereby we enter into the
Church: Wherefore shall we not have one Communion, whereby to be spiritually
fed, and one Discipline to be ruled by? 14. If Churches have Disciplines, or
Governments different in their Species, then the Churches must be different in
their Species also; for all Collective bodies, or Consociations that are
governed, are differenced by their different Governments, as we see in Civil
Government, in the Constitution, and Distinction of States, Kingdoms, and
Republikes: Wherefore as many diverse Governments, as there be in Churches, as
many different Species of Churches must we admit of, I speak here of the Church
considered according to her visible form, but the consequent is false, since
there is but one Church. Ergo. 15. Neither Christ nor his Apostles, ever
granted any Toleration to diverse Sects and Governments in the Church; wherefore
then will ye be Suitors for that, which they never granted? 16. Yea, your
New England men ( whose ways and practices in Government (ye say) are improved
to a better Edition, and greater refinement, whom ye compare with our Father
Abraham, Page 5. tolerated not their Brethren, who did hazard their lives in
that voyage, but made them go again, as our Father Abraham, to seek out some
new Habitations in strange Countries, yea, in strange Wildernesses, for
themselves, and their seed after them; yea, they would not so much as some very
godly and learned Divine relates in his learned Book against Toleration) as
receive some men, otherwise approved by themselves, both for their life and
Doctrine, to live in any corner of New England, howsoever here they were in
danger to be persecuted for Non-conformitie; And that me ly, because they
differed a little from them in point of Discipline. How then can our Brethren
of that profession be Suitors for a Toleration in Old England, where they are
no more persecuted, when as those of their profession refused it to those of
New England in time of great persecution? Is it not to be feared, That if they
had the upper hand over us here, as there, they should send us all to some Isle
of Dogs, as they have done others? 17. Besides all this, the Scripture
forbids all such Toleration, Reve. 2 20 1 Cor 1.12.
as that of Jezabel; There must be no such speeches amongst us, as I am of
Paul, I of Apollos, I of Cephas; nor that some are Calvinians, as ye term us,
some Independenters, some Brownists, some Anabaptists, etc. We must all be
Christ's, we must all think, and speak the same things, Verse. 10. Otherwise men
are carnal: 1 Cor. 3.3. 1 Cor. 11.16, 18, 19, 20. Heb 10.25. Gal. 5.12.
Neither has the Church of God a custom to be contentious: Neither permits
the Apostle Schisms: We must not quit our mutual meetings, as others do, and
as must be done in a public Toleration. They that trouble the Church must be
cut off. 18. Such a Toleration cannot but expose our Churches unto the
calumnies of Papists, who evermore object unto Protestants the innumerable
number of their Sects, whereas they pretend to be nothing but one Church. 19.
Of such a Toleration follows all we formerly deduced out of Independency. 20.
If it be granted, it cannot but be thought, that it has been granted, or
rather extorted by force of Reason, and that all the Assembly were not able to
answer our Brethrens, whereas indeed their Opinion, and Demands are against all
Reason, as sundry of themselves could not deny, and had nothing to say, save
only that it was Gods Ordinance, which yet they never could show out of Gods
Word: On the contrary, if it be refused, it will help to confirm the Churches,
and the people in the Truth. 21. Neither can it but overthrow all sort of
Ecclesiastical Government; for a man being censured in one Church, may fly to
another; and being again suspended in that other, from thence to another, and
so scorn all the Churches of God, and their Censures; And so this order by
necessary consequence will breed all sort of disorder.
I omit here many other Reasons, taken 1. From the Efficient cause of
Toleration, as they who can permit, or Tolerate Shismes: Whether mortal^ men
have received any power of God, either jure divino, or naturally to dispense
with Gods Ordinances, and to permit that which he forbids. 2. From the
object of it, viz. If it be good, or ill, for such as the object is, such must
the Toleration, or permission be. 3. From the Form, viz. If it be consonant
unto Scripture, or not. For if it be not, it must be ill, since Scripture must
be the rule of all acts of Christian duties. 4. From the End, for if the End be
ill, it is ill; yea, howsoever it be good, yet is it not good to permit ill for
a good end, as the Apostle teaches us; for howsoever God may do it, yet cannot
we do it; For he who did draw light out of darkness, can draw, good out of sin
yea, more good out of sin, then is the ill that it contains in it self; So
cannot we. 5. From the Obligation that lies upon us, to do all the good we
can: and consequently, not only to forbear sin our selves, but also to hinder
others from sin, since it strikes at Gods honor, which we are bound to
maintain against all men. 6. From the Obligation, that lies upon us, not to be
partakers in other men's sins, in approving, or not hindering them in, so far
forth as lies in us; For the power of hindering sin, is not given us for
nothing, but for its End, which is its Act, viz. To hinder it actually. 7. From
the Obstatles; For God has dealt so mercifully with the tate here, that there
is no Force greater then it self, to compel it, to permit, or tolerate many
Sects, Shismes, or Heresies; So that the fewer the Obstacles be found, the
greater will the sin of a Toleration be found: But we fear to be to long upon
this point.


Your sixth Grievance, Our silence was interpreted, that we were either ashamed
of our Opinions, or able to say little for them.

Answ. If any man has uttered any such expressions out of malice, or contempt
of your Persons, they are to be blamed: If out of zeal to the Truth, and of
the good Opinion they have of you, I believe ye will not blame them; for all
good men esteem you to be very godly men, and no men of learning know you; but
they know you to be very learned men, as some of your Books testify
abundantly: But if little can be said to the purpose, for that cause which ye
main tain, what marvel is it, That ye can say little for it? Neither can
honest men doubt, but an ill man can and will say more for it, then all ye sive
can say, so soon as ye have considered it more profoundly: And the better men
ye be, the less ye will have to say. Ye are not so able to maintain an ill
cause, as an ill man.

Your seventh Grievance. Books have been written (say ye again) to prepossesse
against what are presupposed our Tenets.

Answ. Not what are your five Teners, but of those who have written upon that
Subject; If yours be different from theirs, so soon as ye shall clearly declare
them, they may receive an answer; And therefore it was nor to prepossesse them,
etc. But to keep them in possession of the truth already received.

Afterward ye give Reasons of your silence. 1. Because (say ye) it is the
second blow, that makes the quarrel, etc.

Answ. 1. We are assured that ye have given the first, second, and third blow,
as it may easily appear by your Books, and Sermons here at London, as we have
already answered. For the Books of the Divines that wrote against your
Opinions, were only Answers unto Arguments of those of your Party. So then ye
have made the quarrel. 2. This Reason, as it hindered you in the beginning, so
should it at this present.

Your second Reason is, Your conscientious apprebension of the danger of
rending the godly Protestant Party.

Answ. Wherefore then did it not hinder you from Printing of this Apologeticall
Narration? as we said before.

Your third Reason is, The conjurements of many Honorable, Wise, and godly
Personages of both the Houses of Parliament.

Answ. If their Conjurements have so long been so effectual with you, how have
they been now of late so inefficacious, that they could not hinder the Printing
of this Book? How augment ye now this unhappy difference?

4. Reason. The Declarations of the Parliament about the Union of Protestants
against Popery, their respect to tender Consciences, as might prevent
oppressions which had formerly been.

5. Your Covenant. 6. And your duly respect to a peaceable Reformation. To
these three, I answer as unto the third.

7. The hopeful expectation of an happy latitude, and agreement.

Answ. The agreement may be happy, if ye will, and so ye may obtain what ye
might hopefully expect. 1. For I hope ye shall be freed from all oppressions,
like to those ye formerly suffered under. 2. That ye may possess your
Consciences in place. 3. That ye shall not be compelled to any external
Confession, contrary to your present Tenets. 4. Much less to be Actors in any
thing against your Conscience. And thus far your hopeful expectation might
have been well grounded. But if ye expected a Toleration for all Sects, or that
we should have received your Opinions, ye hoped more, then ye had ground for.

Now, whereas in the two last lines, ye submit this Declaration of your
judgment, to the due, and orderly agitation of this Assembly; whereof (say ye)
both Houses were pleased to make us Members.

The Reader will do well to consider how cautiously ye speak here. 1. Ye submit
this Declaration of your judgment, not to the judgment of the Assembly, as if
the Spirit of Prophets should be subject unto Prophets; But only to the
Agitation of the Assembly, and so ye seem no ways minded to submit your selves
unto the Assemblies judgment, as all the rest of the Members thereof, and of
this Church too. 2. Neither submit ye it simply to the Agitation, but to the
due and orderly Agitation of this Assembly, as if before ye had observed some
undue; or unorderly Agitation of business in it, or feared it hereafter.

Truly this undue restriction might very well have been omitted, for it is
holden for a certain and undoubted Maxim amongst all Protestants, That the
Church has no absolute power in her Judgments; That she cannot obliege us to
do any ill; And that we are not bound to obey her unjust Ordinances, and
Commands; But that it is better to obey God, then men.

This Submission is very feriall, and worthy to be presented to some idle
fellows: Ye will permit the Assembly from Morning till Evening to agitate, and
dispute your Opinions, as if they had no other thing to do, neither here, or at
home; A great submission, indeed of your judgments, which ye cannot refuse to
the ordinariest Mechanic in the World; for since it is publiei juris
published, they will assubject your judgment unto theirs, by way of Agitation,
or disputing of it amongst themselves, as much as all the Divines of England,
yea, whether ye will or not.

Again, Since both Houses were pleased to make you Members of that Assembly,
was not that a sufficient Justification, and Vindication of your Persons from
all calumnies spread against you, and already scattered without speaking a word
for your selves? 24. Page 24. Truly it is to be supposed, that the two Houses
would never recommend men thither, either ignorant, or vicious, but the
learnedest, and godliest of the Kingdom; so this your Apology is unseasonable:
Only this needs an Apology, That being Members of the Assembly, ye will not
submit your selves unto the Assembly of Divines, but take odd ways, proper to
you five alone, to publish particular Apologies, and desire a particular
Toleration, which no other Members of the Assembly do. But as for this,
transeat cum coeteris crroribus. It suffices that ye see extraordinary
testimonies of the Parliaments, and Assemblies most tender affection toward
you; how they have tolerated much in you, the like whereof has not yet been
tolerated in any Member, either of Parliament, or of the Assembly; and all to
the end, to chase away all pannick fears from your minds, and pretended
disadvantages, which ye did forcsee, 26.

26. Page 28. Howsoever ye commend much the Parliament, and declare, That ye
grant more to the Civil Magistrate, then the principles of Presbyteriall
Government will suffer them to yield; Yet even here ye rap him over the
Knuckles, as if in making you Members of the Assembly, he should have been
partial, in placing you there with so many disadvantages; yea (as ye say) And
therein also upon all sorts of disadvantages, which we could not but foresee,
both in number, abilities of learning, Authority, the stream of public
interest, Trusting God both with our selves, and his own Truth.

Answ. I maintain that the Parliament has done you no wrong, for ye were not
forced to sit there; If there be so great disadvantages, ye might have chosen,
whether you would have sit there at all, or not. All rational men think it a
great favor, which ye esteem so great a disadvantage.

And as for the Number. 1. Think ye that the Parliament ought to have put in
such a Number of you, that agree not in your opinions amongst your selves, as
might have over-swayed all the Divines of the Kingdom, to the end that ye might
afterward have compelled us all to quit the Kingdom, as your Friends of
New England have done to others? 2. Were ye to be compared in number with the
rest of the Divines in this Kingdom, who are hundreds for one of you? Justice
consists not in an Arithmeticall, but in a Geometrical propertion, which
here has been observed toward you; and that with more equity then Justice. 3.
Neither did the Parliament hinder you, to call as many Divines of your
Profession, as pleased you to consult with apart. 4. Neither need ye so great a
number in the Assembly; for ye seem not (for any thing we can see) resolved to
submit your selves, or to acquiesse with any plurality of voices, either of
Parliament, or Assembly; wherefore then desire ye so great a number?

As for Abilities in Learning. 1. Ye might also have had with you, if it had
pleased you, as many learned men as ye could find. 2. Neither believe I, that
any others of your Profession could prudently take such a business in hand
without you: Who ever knows you, knows well ye want no abilities to dispute
your opinion in any Assembly in Europe: Men of learning, and of wisdom
therefore think, that you speak this rather out of modesty, then otherwise.

What ye understand by Authority, I know not; it cannot be Ecclesiastical,
since ye acknowledge none in the Church: Then it must be political, and
namely, that of the King, and Parliament, since that no other at this present,
have power over you; and then I could wish, ye had spoken more considerately.

Public interest, Either this must be taken of public interest in Religion;
and then it 1o, or should be our sole aim; and it is no disadvantage for you,
That both the Parliament, and the Assembly, be led by this Interest: Or in
State, and then ye wrong both the Parliament, and the Assembly, as if they
measured Religion by Worldly Ends, and Interests, wherein in ye are not to be
believed. Neither will we retaliate unto you, that you may have some further
Interests yet, that we know not of.

And consequently ye need not to fear for your Persons, as if ye were in
danger, or had subject to fear persecution, as in former time.

27. Page 28. Ye excuse your selves from false Doctrine, whereof no man
accuses you.

28. Ye tell us, that the Difference betwixt you, and us, is not so great; the
less it is, the less should ye be suitors for a Toleration; and if ye
obtained it, the greater should be your Schism.

28. Page 30. Here also ye excuse your selves, that ye have not made a
Scholastique Relation of your Judgment, whereunto we have already answered;
and in so doing your opinions remaining less known, hardly can they be
distinctlie refuted.

28. Page 39, 30. Afterward ye require two things of the Parliament, That it
will look upon you under no other Notion, or Character, then as those, who do
as little differ from the Reformed Churches, and your Brethren; yea, far less,
then they do from what themselves were three years past, or then the
generality of this Kingdom from it self of late. 2. Ye require an allowance of
a latitude to some lesser differences with peaceablenesse.

Answ. And we pray you, do, as they have done, to the end, the Parliament may
look upon you, as they do upon them. 1. They never condemned all the Protestant
Churches, as ye do. 2. They never desired a Toleration, to make a Separation,
as ye do. 3. Either they approved not the ill of the times past, but patiently
endured it according to their light, hoping and praying to God for better,
without Schism. 4. Or approved it: but when it pleased God in his mercy to
illuminate them, they disapproved what before they had approved of, and changed
from worse to better; which if ye do, O what a joy shall it be unto them, and
to us all, and what a contentment may it bring unto your selves?

And finally, As for the latitude and tolerance ye sue for, it is unjust, and
most pernicious, both to Christ's Church, and the Kingdom, as we have hear
already clearly demonstrated.

FINIS.

