TO THE PARLIAMENT Of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND; The
humble Petition of Sir John Stawell
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioner has met of late with several Papers, which have, at the
Parliament Door, been preferred unto you; The one Entitled Reasons for the
establishment of public Sales: The other a Petition of William Lawrence of
Edinburgh Esquire; with reasons thereunto annexed, why the Petitioners Purchase
ought not to be questioned by Sir JOHN STAWELL: There being but little of truth
contained in either of them; He humbly conceives their principal ends are but
to dishonor two Great, and Honorable Courts, who have done your Petitioner
Justice: The one as unto his Life, The other as unto his Estate: To retard the
proceedings of the Committee, to whom you have been pleased to referr his late
Petition; And utterly to extinguish those hopes, he for the present conceives,
of being restored to your favor, and a right understanding, after his very
great losses, and long sufferings.

Wherefore your Petitioner most humbly prays, That since he has made his
humble addresses unto you, without reflections upon persons, or cause given to
irritate those passions which appears in the expressions in those Papers; You
will be pleased to permit the proof of his Petition, according to the rule
prescribed by the Committee, and receive hereafter, as there shall be cause,
such a further manifestation of his wrong, as may give some light to works of
darkness, answer those Objections now made, and give further satisfaction, as
your Honors shall please to require,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. JOHN STAWELL.


