PHINEHAS: OR, THE Common Duty of all Men.

And the Special Duty of Magistrates, To be Zealous and Active in the Execution
of Laws AGAINST Scandalous Sins and Debauchery; And of that in Particular,
against Profane Cursing and Swearing.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Smith, at the Angel near Lincoln's Inn Back-Gate.
And are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, at the Oxford-Armes in Warwick Lane,
1695.

PHINEHAS: OR, The Common Duty of all Men, AND THE Special Duty of Magistrates,
Concerning the Execution of the LAWS, etc.
THAT Sobriety, Virtue, and Piety, are absolutely necessary in a People, for
the Good and Well-Being of a Community, as they are in particular Persons for
their own Well-Being; and, on the contrary, that Luxury, Vice, and Impiety, are
as Pernicious and Destructive to both; is not only certain in it self, but
easily apparent to any Man of Reason and unprejudiced Judgment, who will apply
his Mind to a serious Consideration of the Nature, Effects, and Consequences
thereof; of the Experience of all Ages, legible in the Histories of all
Nations; and of the Judgment of Persons and People most Famed for Wisdom in all
Nations of the World, legible in their Laws, and other Writings.

And for the Securing and Procuring of this Good, and for Avoiding or Removing
the contrary Evil, that GOOD LAWS are no less necessary for Communities, than
Good Instructions for particular Persons, is likewise certain in it self, and
also easy to be understood, both from the Consideration of the Nature of Man
corrupted and prone to Evil, and from common Experience, and the Judgment of
the Wisest of Men in all Ages and Parts of the World.

Again, It is as certain and evident, that no Laws, be they never so Good, are
sufficient of themselves for these Purposes, unless they be duly and constantly
Executed: Nay, That it is better to have none at all, than not to have them
Executed: For, as the Violation of Laws is a Contempt of Authority, so the
Neglect of the Execution is a Prostitution of it, exposing the Government, and
tending to the Dissolution of it, and to habituate and harden the People the
more in Wickedness and Disobedience.

And from hence it is very plain, That such as have little Care or Concern for
the EXECUTION of the LAWS, for the Purposes before said, have but little Care or
Concern for the Good of their Country, or Good Will to it; and, therefore, do
not deserve any Respect from their Country, but to be looked upon as unnatural
Beasts and Monsters, unworthy to Live in a Civil Society, and much more
unworthy to be Chosen into any Place of Authority or Honor in it; as, on the
other side, they who are Studious, Active and Industrious to promote the
Execution of Good Laws, are justly to be accounted and esteemed, by all Men, as
principal Friends and Benefactors to their Country, and as best deserving
Preferment, Authority and Honor amongst them: and all such as are for the
Choice or Promotion of any Persons, upon other Considerations, as of their
Estates or Treatments, etc. without Regard to this, are to be looked upon as
Brutes, Suckers, or Evil Members in the Community.

This, Natural Reason, Experience, and common Humanity, do dictate to us: But
we are to remember, that this is a Christian State, and if we be what we
profess, sincere and honest Christians indeed, we must know, that a Christian
is a Man and more, Partaker of the Divine Nature, as far transcending that of a
mere Natural Man, as that which is peculiar to Man does that which is common to
him with Brutes, and filling him with Reverence and Devotion to God, and Zeal
for his Honor and Service, and with Love and Good Will to Men, and a Readiness
to all Acts of Charity and Benificence.

A good Christian will be good in all Relations; a good Parent, a good Child; a
good Master, a good Servant; a good Magistrate, a good Subject; a good
Neighbor, a good Citizen, and a good Commonwealths Man. He that is not so,
does Dishonor his Profession, and shall receive the greater Damnation for
that, besides his other Sins. And he that is so indeed, will not think it
enough to live peaceably, and enjoy the Benefit of the Protection of the Laws;
but will always desire, and will likewise endeavor, the Good of his Country,
whenever he is called to it; and then, certainly, is he implicitly called to
it, whenever he meets with any Opportunity to serve it, and particularly in
this Matter, of Promoting the Execution of the Laws. Then is the Admonition,
Whatever thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy might, Eccles. 9.10. to be
remembered and put in Practice. And, Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord
deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. to be remembered for a Warning. This all are obliged to
do, as I shall further show hereafter; but because the MAGISTRATES are,
moreover, under other and more special Obligations by the Places they hold, and
the Oaths they take, I shall first consider those.

The Office of Magistrates is a Great Trust reposed in them, first and
originally by God Himself. They are his Ministers, for the Good of his People,
and he will require an Account of them, how they have behaved themselves in the
Discharge of it. Though he permits the Choice to Men, yet will he Judge all at
last. And therefore they may do well to have much in their Minds the Charge of
Jehoshaphet to his Judges, 2 Chr. 19.6. Take heed what ye do: for ye judge not
for Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore, now let
the Fear of the Lord be upon you. Take heed, and do it: for there is no
Iniquity with the Lord our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Bribes.
v. 9. Thus shall ye do in the Fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a perfect
heart. v. 11. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the Good. But more
immediately,

It is a Public Trust reposed in them by their Country, by the Hand of their
Prince. And if the Nonperformance, or Neglect, or Breach of a Trust between
Man and Man be a thing so odious and infamous, as it is commonly reputed,
certainly the Neglect of a Public Trust, reposed in them by their King and
Country, is really much more to be condemned.

The due Performance and Discharge of this Trust and Charge is a principle Part
of the Allegiance and Fidelity which they owe to their King and Country, and
of true Loyalty. And therefore, whoever pretend to those things, and refuse or
neglect the complete Discharge of this Trust, when Occasion is offered, are
mere Pretenders to what they are not, and are to be esteemed no better than
Knaves and Cheats, who seek to serve themselves, under specious Pretenses and
Appearances. And such are all who pretend highly to those things, and yet, at
the same time, make no Scruple to transgress the Laws, whether they be in any
Authority or not; they are plainly, either Knaves, that would abuse both their
King and Country by their Pretenses; or Fools, that understand not themselves,
or what they do; and do not deserve any Respect from any Men of Sense, that are
Lovers of their Country.

Thus far the very Acceptance of such an Office of Trust does oblige; but with
us they are moreover obliged by Solemn Oath; nay, doubly obliged; for they must
take Two Oaths at their Entrance upon their Office: The Oath of Allegiance or
Fidelity, whereby that Allegiance and Fidelity which they were before obliged
to keep and perform, as they are Members of the Community, they are now farther
obliged, by Solemn Oath, to keep and perform inviolable: And every
Transgression or Neglect of this Duty becomes doubly culpable by Breach of
Duty, and by Breach of Oath and Perjury.

And the Perjury is double too: For besides the more general Oath of
Allegiance, there is another Oath more especially concerning the Office of
Justice of the Peace, which has been anciently to the like Effect that now it
is. It comprehends in few Words a Summary of their Duty; as follows,

You shall Swear, That as Justice of the Peace in the County of N. in all
Articles in the King's Commission to you directed, You shall do Equal Right to
the Poor, and to the Rich, after your Cunning, Wit, and Power, and after the
Laws and Customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made, etc.

In which Words, there are three things observable. 1. The Duty, or the Matter
of the Obligation. And that is 1. In General, to do Right, or Justice. 2. More
especially to do Equal Right, without Respect of Persons, to the Poor, and to
the Rich. 2. The Extent or Limitation of it; and that is Threefold. 1. Within a
certain County. It is limited to the County expressed in the Commission; but
extends to the whole Country. And the Obligation is of the same extent with
the Authority. 2. Within the Articles of the Commission. It is in all the
Articles in the King's Commission; but limited to them. 3. In the Rule; it must
be after the Laws, Customs, and Statutes of the Realm. And, 3. The Manner, and
that is after the Cunning, Wit, and Power of the Justice, according to the best
of his Understanding, Skill, and Ability.

What is more briefly and summarily comprised in the Oath, is more fully and
particularly expressed and set out in the Commission; which begins thus;

Know, Ye, That we have assigned you jointly and severally, and every one of
you, our Justices, to conserve our Peace in the County of N. and to keep and
cause to be kept in our said County, as well within Liberties as without, All
Ordinances and Statutes made for the Good of our Peace, and the Conservation
thereof, and for the quiet Rule and Government of our People, in all and every
the Articles thereof, according to the Force, Form, and Effect thereof: And to
Chastise and Punish all Persons in our said County offending against the Form
of these Ordinances or Statutes, or any of them, as according to the Form of
these Ordinances and Statutes is to be done, etc.

Here, in the Beginning of the Commission, we have the End for which it is
Granted; and that is, to keep the Peace, and to keep and cause to be kept All
Ordinances and Statutes, etc. and the Means, by which they are to cause them to
be kept; and that is, to Chastise and Punish All Persons Offending. But, first,
they are to keep them Themselves; and that is a good Means to induce others to
do the like, by giving them a good Example. But such Magistrates as make no
Scruple to break any of the LAWS, which they are Sworn to keep, and to cause
all others to keep, do in effect teach all others to despise the Government,
and their own Authority; and to make light of their Oaths, and so, as much as
in them is, dissolve all the Bond and Ties of Government; and are therefore
utterly unworthy to hold any Place in it. The Consequence of Occasions to the
People, to show any Dis-respect to the Public Authority, though it be but in
Instances of what may be thought lesser Offenses at the first, is more
pernicious to any Government, than the Breaches of the Laws in greater
Instances, when duly punished.

But as they must first keep them Themselves, so must they cause them to be
kept by Others, by Punishment of All Persons Offending. This is that Equal
Right to the Poor, and to the Rich, that Impartial Justice which they oblige
themselves to do by Solemn Oath. It must be done upon All Offenders, Omnes in
Comitatu praedicto delinquentes; All, without Exception. All are subject to
these Laws, be their Estate or Quality what it will. And if I be entrusted by
the King, and Sworn to God, to Execute the Laws, I must Execute them upon All
Persons, be they who they will, Civil, Military, or Ecclesiastical, who presume
to transgress them, and thereby subject themselves to the Authority with which
I am invested and entrusted. Be he my Equal, or be he my Superior in any other
Respect, yet if he trangress these LAWS, which I am bound to Execute, and
within the Limits and Extent of my Jurisdiction, I am bound to Execute them
upon him; though, in all other Respects, I must treat him according to his
Quality. Even Privilege of Parliament extends not to some Crimes. And though
the final Determination may not belong to me, yet if any mean Acts, such as
Enquiry, Examination, Commitment, etc. in order to further Punishment, do, I
must Execute the Laws so far as I am authorized. And here it may be noted, That
Partiality, or wilful Connivance, or Indulgence to any in their Offenses,
against the Laws, is of like evil Consequence with the Magistrates taking
Liberty to themselves to transgress. It encourages hope of Impunity, and so
tends to frustrate the very End of Punishment, which is, to deterr others from
the like Offenses.

If these things were well considered, Men would neither be so forward to
undertake so great and weighty a Charge, much greater than they are aware of,
as many are; nor so easily satisfy themselves in any Neglect of their Duty,
after they are once so engaged in it, as too many do. If they did well consider
it, they would either never be persuaded to engage in it, or resolve to
discharge it faithfully, whatever it cost them; and, to that end, spare no
Pains, by Study, by Conversation, and by constant and diligent Attendance to
Business with others, to qualify themselves for it. For though no Man is
obliged further than he is able, so that he be sincere and faithful in doing
the best he can: yet the Commission supposes a Competence of Knowledge and
Skill in all that are Commissioned: And they that are conscious to themselves,
that they are not in some sort qualified, and yet will undertake it, will have
nothing to excuse them, if they commit any great Miscarriage: But such, as with
a good Design to serve God and their Country, do engage in it, and though
sensible of some Deficience, and that they are not so completely qualified as
they would be, yet are diligent, both to improve themselves, and to discharge
their Duty upon all Occasions, in the best manner that they can, need not doubt
of the Acceptance and Blessing of God upon them. And this I must say, for their
Encouragement, if they be Persons of Conscience and Religion, and undertake it
with pure Intention, and good Design, and with Resolution to be Faithful in it,
and do act accordingly, that as they do at the same Instant enter into a new
Relation to Almighty God, and become his Ministers, so they are admitted to the
Privilege of a Special Providence; and, besides a special Providence over them
here, if they continue Faithful to the last, will have a special Reward of
their Fidelity hereafter.

Besides Magistrates, there are other inferior Officers; as Constables, and
Churchwardens, who are under special Obligations by Oath, to be assisting in
this Business. But there is no occasion to say any thing of them in particular,
more than this, That their Neglects are aggravated by an Addition of Perjury.
And, therefore, to return to the common Obligations upon All;

If Good Laws be necessary, if Execution of them be necessary, if Magistrates
be necessary for that, then must also Knowledge of the Offenses committed
against the Laws be necessary to the Magistrates: And because they are seldom
committed in the Presence of Magistrates, due INFORMATION by those who have
sufficient Knowledge of any such, is likewise necessary, as the very Foundation
upon which the due Execution of the Laws does depend. From whence it does
follow plainly, That if Wickedness does abound in a Nation, all they are
involved in the National Guilt who do not faithfully do their part for the
Correction and Reformation of it; and that is, All they, who having any
sufficient Knowledge of any particular of the Offenses, do not give due
Information thereof to some proper Magistrate, unless the Offender will
otherwise be brought to do what is requisite. This is evident of it self to any
Man of Sense and Reason; and it is further confirmed by the Authority of the
Sacred Scriptures, with respect, both to the particular Persons Offending, and
to the Land, and whole Community of the Nation. Thou shall not hate thy Brother
in thy heart. Thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin
upon him, Lev. 19.17. where hating signifies any defect of Love, and not hating
implies a Duty of Love and Charity comprised in this Precept. It is an
excellent Direction which is given by our Savior, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. for our
Dealing with Offenders. So that the first thing to be intended and endeavored,
is the Good of the Offender, the Gaining of our Brother. But if he be
incorrigible by private Admonition, then must Application be made to Authority,
not only for his Correction, but for the Removing or Preventing so much of the
Evil from the Nation, and to avoid any Participation in the common Guilt. But
it is further to be considered, that it is not only the Person Offending, the
Person privy to the Offense, and the whole Community that is concerned in it,
but, (which is, and ought to be, to all who have any Sense of Religion, more
than all) the Honor of God, whose Laws are contemned. And if Devotion, in such
case, be not enough to incite to Action; Sense and Apprehension of Judgment,
for Neglect of Duty, if there be cause for that, possibly may. And if the Zeal
of Phinehas, in the Cause of God, was so acceptable, that it procured the
Averting of Judgment from the People, and a Blessing upon himself; the Neglect
of Duty, and Unfaithfulness of a Person in such a Case, may provoke Judgment,
either here, at least to be left out to partake in some common Judgment, or
hereafter. Conceilment, in some Cases, is Criminal, and Punishable by the Laws
of Men; but in many others it may be culpable by the Laws of God, and bring
Judgment upon the Guilty; and the Ancient Christians did punish it according to
the Nature of the Crime or Offense conceiled: And, if I be not much mistaken,
it is an epidemical Sin in this Nation at this time: for instance, What is more
common at the Tables of Noble Men and Gentlemen, and in all Companies, than
Profanation of the Holy Name of GOD? and, What more rare to be met with than
any Prosecution, or so much as Reproof for the same? And if we enquire into the
Reasons, we shall find none but what are reducible to Fear, or Shame; which are
more horrid Sins than is commonly apprehended. The Fear of Man brings a
Snare: but whosoever puts his Trust in the Lord shall be safe, says Solomon.
But it is a dismal Snare, which is detected in the Revelations, where we find
the Fearful placed in the Front with Unbelievers, Abominable, and the rest that
shall have their part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev.
21.8. and to the same effect it is which our Savior says, Mar. 8.38.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my Words, in this adulterous and
sinful Generation, of him also the Son of Man shall be ashamed, when he comes
in the Glory of his Father, with the holy Angels. And if the Cases be justly
examined, the difference of the Temptations of those who lapsed in the Times of
Persecution, and of those who fear, or are ashamed to open their Mouths in the
Cause of God now, when they have the Laws on their side, I do not see any
reason to think the Sin of these ever a jot less than that of those, which,
amongst the Ancient Christians, was reckoned one of the first Rank. And if this
be so, what a load of Guilt does lie upon this Nation upon the score of this
one particular. So that both the Greatness of the Sin in it self, and the
Greatness of the Guilt already contracted upon the Nation by this
Unfaithfulness, both to God, and to our Country, are such as may reasonably
move considerate Persons to beware of them, that they do not, by any Neglect,
partake in them. Besides, the Promises of the Gospel to such as suffer for
Righteousness sake, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. 1 Pet. 4.15. are such as greatly
aggravate the Sin of such a Neglect, and of the Neglect of such an Occasion of
acquiring a Title to such Promises, were the Sufferings certain, and much
greater than can reasonably be feared now. But a great part of the Suffering
now to be feared is but a Bugbear, and has nothing real in it, that is the
Reproach of being Informer. It is true, the usual Practice of Informers, for
Malice or Lucre, has brought an evil Name upon what is not only a thing
indifferent in its own Nature, but well used, both Lawful, Necessary, and
Commendable When Men do it not out of Malice, or for Lucre, but for the real
Good of the Offender, of the Community, and for the Honor and Service of God,
this is an Act of Charity, and Virtue, and truly Honorable.

This which I have said concerning the Obligations of all, who have any
Knowledge of any Offenses against the Laws, to give Information thereof to such
as have Authority to correct and punish the same, is no less Obligatory upon
all in Authority to proceed, according to their Information. Nay, if they,
through Fear or Shame, (which does too often happen; through the Impudence of
this most wicked Generation) neglect their Duty therein, their Guilt is much
greater, they having, in a manner, the Law in their own hand, and being so
especially obliged, as before is showed.

And here I shall recommend one Consideration more to all such as truly and
cordially desire to discharge the Duty, not only of common Humanity, or of a
civil State, but of Christians indeed: they must consider farther, that though
this be a Christian State, yet is the whole Nation in a very sinful State, and
has great reason to fear some very severe Judgment of God for the Punishment
and Correction thereof. If we well consider the Judgments of God threatened,
both in the Old and the New Testament, and the severe Judgments of God executed
upon the Nation of the Jews, which were his peculiar People, and now are, and
have been for many Ages, a Monument of his Judgments to all others; upon the
Seven Churches of Asia, so Famous heretofore; upon the former flourishing other
Greek Churches, now under miserable Slavery; upon the Bohemian Church, which
was one of the first and best Reformed Churches; and others; and then consider
the present The O^ spreading (...) full Groth^ Sin and W^edness in (...)
Nation, (...) the approa^ of Gods Ju^ments, briefly no^ in the Ad^nition
^cerning (...) Public F^.
State of this Church and Nation, how little any of these have exceeded us in
Wickedness; and how little Effect either the Judgments or the Mercies of God
have had upon us, toward a Reformation; We may see great reason to expect the
like Judgments near approaching now, and no reason to hope to escape the same,
without a very considerable Reformation of that horrid Wickedness which is
daily committed by a great part; to say nothing of the Pride and Vanity, the
Covetousness and Wordly-mindedness, the Formality and Luke-warmness, and other
Decays of genuine Christian Piety and Virtue, even in Professors of Religion,
which are things out of the reach of Humane Laws.

The former Considerations manifest a general Obligation upon all, to use their
best Endeavors for the Good of their Country, and our selves, but this a more
special Obligation to be active upon Necessity, for Preservation from imminent
Judgment and Destruction, or great Calamity, that we be not surprised in it:
for it is very plain and evident, that the greatest part of the Nation is at
this time, from the highest to the lowest, under such a spirit of Slumber,
Senselesness, and Carelessness, as does usually preceed such surprising
Judgments, and whereof our Savior gave great Warning, as we may read, Luke
17.24, 36. (which is to be understood, not only of his Goming at the last great
Day, but also of his Coming in Judgment upon particular Nations and Churches)
and in other places of the Gospels. But in the Severest of his Judgments the
Merciful and Gracious God does always, by a distinguishing Providence, which is
noted by our Savior, and is very observable in all the Prophetic
Denunciations of Judgments, and in the Execution thereof, secure a Remnant of
such as sincerely fear Him, and seek to avert his Judgments. So that there is
great Encouragement for those who will take Warning, and endeavor to be of
that Number, whatever become of the rest. But if they endeavor that as they
ought, there is hopes that Judgment may be averted from all. For, to pass by
other Reasons, what we have seen effected by the Zeal and Activity of one Man,
we may well hope may much more be effected by the Zeal and concurrent Activity
of many. In the Sacred History we have a remarkable Instance of the Judgments
of God and the fierce Anger of the Lord turned away from the Children of Israel
by the Courage and Activity of one, Phinehas, while he was Zealous for God's
Sake among them, so that the Plague was stayed from them, that he consumed them
not in his Jealousy. Because he was Zealous for God, and thereby made an
Atonement for the Children of Israel, he at once both pacified the Wrath of
God, and so averted his Judgment from them, and also obtained a special
Glorious Promise and Blessing of God for himself, and his Posterity, as we may
see, Numb. 25.

There are other Duties incumbent upon all, in respect of the Judgments of God,
which we have great Reason to fear; as Repentance, and Reformation of our
selves, and Mourning and Supplication for the Sins of the Nation, and frequent
and earnest Prayers for the Averting of those Judgments: but that which here
was to be considered, is only the Promotion of a Reformation by a vigorous and
steady Execution of Laws; which respects both this, and all the rest of the
Obligations before mentioned; of this more might be said; but these things well
considered, I suppose sufficient, as to the Execution of the Laws in general:
But I must add a few things concerning one in particular, which was the
Occasion of this Discourse. It is,

The Late ACT for the more effectual Suppressing Profane CURSING and SWEARING,
To this Effect.
THat if any Person, after 24 June, 1695. profanely Swear or Curse in the
Presence of any Justice of the Peace, or Head Officer of the Place where the
Offense is committed, or shall be thereof convicted by the Oath of One Witness,
or by his own Contession before such Justice or Officer, be shall for every
such Offense Pay to the Use of the Poor of the Parish, where the Offense is
committed, if Servant, Day-Labourer, Common Soldier, or Common Seaman, One
Shilling, and every other Person Two Shillings; and for a Second Offense after
Conviction, double; and for a Third, treble. 2. That upon Neglect or Refusal to
Pay, any such Justice or Officer shall send his Warrant to the Constable,
Tything-Man, Churchwarden, or Overseer of the Poor of the Parish, where the
Offense is committed, to Levy the Sum forfeited to the Use of the Poor of the
Parish; and in case no Distress can be had, to set the Offender, if above the
Age of Sixteen, in the Stocks by the space of one Hour, for a single Offense;
and for more than one Offense, at the same time, two Hours: but if under that
Age, unless he Pay forthwith, to cause him to be Whipped by the Constable, or by
the Parent, Guardian, or Master of the Offender, in the Presence of the
Constable. 3. That if the Justice or Officer wilfully or wittingly omit the
Pertormance of this Duty in the Execution of this Act, be shall Forfeit Five
Pounds, one Moiety to the Use of the Informer. 4. That if any Suit be brought
against any Justice, Officer, or Person, for any thing done in pursuance of
this Act, the Defendant may Plead the General Issue, and give the Special
Matter in Evidence, and shall have treble Costs, upon Verdict for him, or the
Plaintiffs Nonsuit or Discontinuance. 5. Proviso that the Proof be within ten
Days next after the Offense committed. 6. That the Act be Read in all Churches
and Public Chapels immediately after Morning Prayer on Four Sundays, viz.
next after June 24. September. 29. Dec. 25. and March 25. under pain of Twenty
Shillings for every Omission. 7. That the Justice or Head-Officer Register all
Convictions at the time, and Certify the same at the next General Quarter
Sessions, to be kept upon Record, to be seen without Fee.


The Design of this ACT, Is to punish, correct and suppress two common Offenses
against the Two great Commandments of God. The one, viz. Profane SWEARING, is
a Crime immediately against the Sacred Majesty and Holiness of Almighty God; a
Crime, for which the Punishment here prescribed is no way proportionable,
either in respect of God, or Man; and, therefore, ought the more strictly to be
Executed: A Crime against the Common Parent, Lord, and Great Benefactor of
Mankind; and, therefore, ought, by all Men, much more to be resented than any
Indignity offered to our Natural Parents, or to any Humane Benefactors; which,
to neglect, is usually reputed great Baseness: A Crime of the greatest
Inconsiderateness, Vanity, and Baseness of Mind; Inconsiderateness, so to
transgress the Laws of God and Man; to give Example of Disorder, and Violation
of Laws to others; to contradict himself, his Profession of Belief of a Deity,
and the Christian Religion, and his Pretense to Loyalty, and Regard to his
Country; to expose his Reputation, and, by his own Example, to provoke the
Indignation of others, and encourage Rudeness, Dis-respect, and Affronts to
himself; and all this, with so much Vanity as many do, upon so mean a Motive as
an affected Ornament of Speech and Gallantry, which is, to Glory in his Shame:
and, besides, with so much Baseness of Spirit, as many do, even contrary to the
Dictates of their Conscience, in Compliance with such inconsiderate and vain
Persons, for fear of Reproach, little Censures, or Contempt from them: or
through Impotence, which cannot overcome so unreasonable a Habit, or evil
Custom: Lastly, A Crime so Unnatural, and entirely Diabolical, without any
Natural Disposition to it, but merely of Diabolical Impression, that the Common
Swearer may reasonably be reputed an^ Associate with that Cursed Profane
Company of Witches, and Confederates with the Devil, and ought to be abhorred
by all Sober People, and Punished in the next degree to that accursed Crew. And
if we farther consider how common this Diabolical and Abominable Sin is amongst
us, not only among the Ruder and Baser Sort, as they are reputed, but even
among those who have had, what is commonly reputed, the greatest Advantage of
Education; and how impudent, to be looked upon as a matter of Gallantry, and to
be gloried in; we must conclude it, if we will judge impartially, the Shame of
the State in these late Reigns, the Shame of the Magistrates, the Shame of the
Clergy, and the Shame of the People and Nation; and one of those Impieties for
which the Land Mourns, Jer. 23.10. And if, besides all the Obligations
beforementioned to Execute the Laws in general against all Offenses, all that
is here said concerning this in Particular be not sufficient to raise
Indignation and Zeal in all, both Magistrates and People, and every one, as
they have Occasion, for the Suppression and Extirpation of so Unnatural,
Diabolical, and Abominable a Crime, I must leave them to bear their Iniquity by
the Judgment of God. If a Soul Sin, and hear the Voice of Swearing, and is a
Witness whether he has seen or known of it, if he do not utter it, then he
shall bear his Iniquity, Levit. 5.1.

But these things, I hope, will be more largely pressed by the Clergy, when the
ACT is read in the Church, as it is ordered to be four times in the Year, under
a certain Penalty. For, certainly, it would be doubly Shameful, if their
Preaching, with such Assistance of the Civil Authority, should not be able to
suppress so impious, so unreasonable, so unnatural and diabolical a Crime,
which has so little Temptation in Nature, or from any Natural Disposition to
strengthen or support it: and I cannot think any Man fit to hold a Cure of
Souls, who will permit any such Crime committed in his Parish to escape
unpunished, if he know it, or can have Proof to convict the Offender. And, to
that purpose, it will be necessary, not only to Preach against the Sin, but
also to press the Duty of Information to suppress it.

If any Member of Parliament should presume upon his Privilege, it is to be
remembered: 1. That Information to a Magistrate against a Member of Parliament
for this Offense, is no Breach of Privilege. 2. Nor is a Warrant by a Justice
of the Peace to demand the Forfeiture. 3. Or a Demand of the Forfeiture by an
Officer, according to his Warrant. But if the Forfeiture be not paid, the
Magistrate may make another Warrant to distrain when the Time of Privilege is
out, or, in the mean time, upon just Occasion send up the Warrant, with the
Constables or Churchwardens Return, to the Parliament. And this may be very
fit to be done when the Offense is committed with such aggravating
Circumstances, as manifest it to be done wilfully and presumptuously: For that
being a Contempt of the Laws, and, by Consequence, of the Authority by which
they are made; and which is far above all, of the Sacred Majesty of Almighty
God, whose Ministers, Legislators, and Magistrates are, it is very fit to be
well considered, whether such a Person be fit to be permitted to sit in
Parliament, or to be admitted to any Public Employment in a Christian State?

To conclude, What from these Principles is demonstrated necessary to be done,
is from Experience, and particularly of what was done in the late Usurpation,
very evident that it is practicable, and may he done again. We have seen this
abominable Sin of Profane Swearing and Cursing, and the Profanation of the
(...)'s Day, and those Brutish Sins of Drunkenness, and notorious Debauchery,
so suppressed in those times in all Places of the Nation, that nothing can be
more Scandalous in a Legal Government, than that they should have revived under
it to such a Growth and Impudence. If the Restoration of the Legal Government
produce such Effects, as the Restoration of such Licentiousness, Wickedness,
and Debauchery, and no better, it is not like to recommend it either to God, or
to Man; but be a Temptation to Man, as well as a Provocation to God, to concur
to a Change; and therefore it concerns both the Governors, and all who wish
well to the Government, to look well to it; to remember what Revolutions and
Confusions have proceeded in other States from such Occasions, and take care,
by an effectual Reformation, to prevent the like here in time. And if that will
not, the present Example of our potent Neighbor and Enemy ought to move us to
a Godly Jealousy, lest he not only get the Palm of Victory, but also take our
Crown from us, by the Favor of God, if he be found more forward, active,
resolute and faithful in the Reformation of such Wickedness amongst his People,
than we, who pretend to a more Reformed Religion, are here. Nay, our very
Public Confessions, His Majesty's Letter to the Bishops of 13 Feb, 1689/90.
and His Proclamation 21 Jan. 1691/2. may rise in Judgment against us, as
Evidence of our Unfaithfulness in the Service of God, of our Trifling with his
Holy Majesty, and wilful Neglect of known and acknowledged Duty. And that
wicked Practice which was used to interrupt that Hopeful Reformation begun upon
Her Majesty's Letter to the Justices of Mtddlesex, 9 July, 1691. and the
Indignity done to Her, certainly will receive a just Recompense of Reward.
These things may bring Evil upon the whole, but especially upon them, at whose
door the Fault does lie: But true Zeal for this Service may prevent the Evil
from the whole, but especially from them, who are Faithful therein.

FINIS.

