SIR PHILLIP STAPLETON HIS WORTHY SPEECH In the House of COMMONS in PARLIAMENT,
Ian. 15. 1641.

Concerning the Accusation of the Lord DIGBY and Colonel LVNSFORD of High
Treason.

London, Printed for JOHN THOMAS, 1641.

Sir Philip Stapleton his Speech in Parliament the 5. of Ian. 1641, Concerning
the Accusation of High Treason of Colonel Lunsford and the Lord Digby.
Mr. Speaker,
IT is the continual practice of the Devil after any of his works of
darkness and maliciousness intended against God and his Christ, is discovered
and annihilated by the special power of Divine Providence, to practice new,
being always striving to increase his own Kingdom, always winning to
himself fresh Instruments to yield to his suggestions and temptations and
execute the same.

I am now to speak concerning this new treachery and Conspiracy endeavored to
be practiced by two eminent persons, that have especially the one of them,
obtained the favor no tonely of their Prince, but applauded for their better
parts by most of his Majesty's Subjects, the Lord Digby and Col. Lunsford; The
first had the Honor to fit in this House as a Member thereof, so well approved
was he both of his King and Country, none more fervent against evil doers at
the first then himself seemed to be both by his Speeches and disputes, but in
heart always as it seems favoring the Bishops, and their cause, although it
seemed but a little, yet increasing daily more and more, grew to such strength
in his opinion concerning his own worth, that he adventured to take part with
the Earl of S^raford, trusting too much on the same, so high is pride, that ^t
length he presumed to oppose and set himself against the proceedings of the
whole House, against the said Earl, obstinately r fusing to be admonished
concerning the same, and yet keeping his friends, many of the Lords, was by his
Majesty as a Baron called to their house, and aspiring yet higher, obtained his
Princes favor not being yet acquainted with his secret intentions, by which
means, too confident of his safety, and security in his designs, adventured
openly to comply with the public Enemies both of King, and Country, as
especially now with this other person of whom ^am to speak, this Colonel,
being by his Majesty advanced to that dignity and trust, could not to content
himself, but immitating the water Toade, seeing the shadow of a horse seem
bigger then it self, sweld, to compare with the same, and so bur^ even so this
Gentleman having obtained first this place of Command, and afterward
Lieutenant of the (...), and being found of such a malignont (...) was unfit
and incapable for that great (...) and therefore removed, taking the same a
great dishonor to his worth, now endeavors by traiterous and desperate
a^^tions, to defend himself, and be revenged of his pretended adversaries, and
to that purpose they have between them jointly raised arms against the State,
met together in peaceable consultations for the good of Church and Common
wealth.

Mr. Speaker.

These attempts made by these persons are of dangerous consequence, and this
their insurrection by taking up of Arms without warrant both from his Royal
Majesty and this High Court of Parliament, only to do mischief in raising
sedition and contention thereby to preserve themselves from being called to an
account for their desperate actions, and disloyal taking up Arms, will prove
harder to appease and suppress then any troubles we have yet suffered.


Mr. Speaker,
I conceive quick dispatch in our intentions for the apprehending and
suppressing these persons, is the only means to prevent future danger; And to
that purpose I desire to present to your considerations these particulars.

1. That Warrants may issue forth for the speedy and private apprehending of
them in what places soever they shall be found, and immediately to bring them
before the House.

2. If this cannot be effected, to Issue forth Proclamations for their calling
in within a certain time prefixed, under penalty of being prosecuted and
proceeded against as Traitors to their King, and Country.

3. That warrants be forthwith sent for the gaurding and securing of all the
Ports of this Kingdom, and for the intercepting of all Packets, or Letters
intended to be coveighd into Farraign Kingdoms or any brought from thence
hither.

4. That Order be sent down into the several Counties of this Kingdom, where
it is suspected either of these persons have any Friends, or Favorites
well-wishers to their cause, with command to the Sheriffs, and several
Officers of such Counties to stand upon their guard, and to raise Force for
their own defense and saiety, and to endeavor by all means possible to
apprehend and suppress them and such of their Conspiracy as shall be taken,
presently to be sent up to this house to be examined and proscecuted according
as they shall be found.

5. That order may be made by the Parliament that no Officer that shall be
found to have a hand in this plot, may be employed in any service of public
Command, either for Ireland, or any otther of his Majesty's Dominions, or any
private affairs of this Kingdom.

6. That we may with out further delay proceed to sentence against all
delinquents by this Honorable house accused for any crime whatsoever, in whose
d^fence, or for whose cause these persons now accused pretend to take up Arms.

7. That his Majesty may be moved graciously to be pleased to declare himself
against these persons and all others that do any ways pretend to his
authority or warrant for what they do.

8. And lastly, his Majesty may be moved to avert his intended Journey for
Portsmouth, for the safety and security of his Royal Person, till such time as
their dangers be removed, and the Peace and Unity of all his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects be procured and settled.

And thus Mr. Speaker, having presented such things to this House, which I
humbly conceive to be necessary to suppress and prevent this new danger
threatened by these two disaffected and Malecontented persons, the Lord Digby
and Colonel Lunsford, I leave the same to the further consideration of this
Honorable House, desiring from my heart, that it would please God to end all
the troubles and distempers of this Commonwealth, and that this High Court of
PARLIAMENT may prove the firm settlement of all things amiss both in Church
and State.


FINIS.

