THE ROYAL LAW CONTENDED FOR OR, Some Brief Grounds serving to prove that the
Ten Commandments are yet in full force, and shall so remain till Heaven and
Earth pass away.

ALSO The Seventh Day Sabbath, proved from the Beginning, from the Law, from
the Prophets, from Christ, from his Apostles, to be a duty yet incumbent upon
Saints and Sinners.

By a Lover of Peace with Truth Edward Stennet.

They that forsake the Law praise the wicked, but such as keep the Law contend
with them, Prove. 28.4.

Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man, Eccles. 12.13.

The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath; therefore the Son
of man is Lord even of the Sabbath, Mark. 2.27, 28.

Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments, Psalm.
119.6.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1658.

TO ALL That truly fear the LORD, and tremble at his Word.
IT was not in the least my purpose to expose the ensuing discourse to public
view, but to communicate it only to some private Christian friends, as a
reason of the hope that is in me, in relation to the Law of the Lord. I being
in a good measure, sensible of my own weakness and unfitnes^ for such a work,
but the Lord was pleased to bless these my weak endeavors with the successes
of conviction to some, and refreshment to others of his dear servants, who were
my encouragers (after solemn waiting upon our Heavenly Father) unto this,
which I can truly say, I was dead unto; although I was and am persuaded that
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against the truth therein contained, but my
weakness in the management of it was the great obstruction. But I am willing to
press after a likeness to Jesus Christ, who made himself of no reputation, and
to learn of him who was meek and lowly in heart.

I am not so conceited to present this Treatise as a thing that is rare or new,
either to the Saints or World, for if they will look about them, they may see
this truth in a better dress and luster; but it may be the tender Lambs and
Sucking-Babes of Jesus Christ may better understand my stammering tongue then
those that speak more distinctly, and that is one main encouragement to me I do
profess in the presence of him who tryes the heart and reins; Light has broak
forth since I wrote these papers about the Law in general, and the Sabbath in
particular: it being five or six months since they were written, yet
notwithstanding I am now encouraged by the Lord I trust, and by his people, (to
speak this on the house top which was spoken to me in secret,) because so many
of the Lords people are so deluded that they have rejected the Law of God, and
live in a weekly profanation of his Holy Sabbath, thinking that Christ abolisht
the whole Law at his death, though Christ utterly denis it, and would have none
to harbor such a thought, Mat. 5.17. although many of the men of this opinion
may be good, yet it makes their error not one Jote the better. For this flows
from their carnality and not their spirituality; for the carnal mind is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. But because truth
springs up out of the earth, and righteousness looks down from Heaven, and the
ancient honorable institution of Jehovah now begins to shine with such
clearness, that it cannot be razed out of the tables, and therefore all is cast
away together, which is such an invention as would not have been thought on by
many, I am certain, if Sabbath Light had been concealed.

The two ancient institutions of the Lord in Paradise were Marriage and the
Sabbath, both which are called and esteemed honorable, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is
honorable in all; and in Isay 58.13. the Sabbath is called the Holy of the
Lord, honorable; and Christ leads us to the beginning of them both, when the
question was whether men might put away their wives for every fault, the answer
is, that Moses did but suffer it to be so, because of the hardness of their
hearts, but from the beginning it was not so, Mat. 19.34, 35.36, 37. and when
the Pharisees were so ignorant, that they thought works of mercy were not to be
done upon the Sabbath day, Christ leads them to the first institution of it,
and tells them it was made for man, Mark. 2.24, 27. Both these institutions were
made for the good and benefit of man in his Paradise estate, which is
sufficient proof for their duration. Paul says, that the man was not created
for the woman, but the woman for the man, 1 Cor. 11.9. and our blessed Lord of
the Sabbath says that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
Sabbath.

Then Christians be noble spirited and search the Scriptures with all readiness
of mind and with hearts longing after truth; get as remote from earth and
earthly things as you can, and into the secret chamber of your beloved, and
when you are the most transported from earth to heaven in near and close
communion with him, then try and judge by his word and spirit, weighing
Scripture with Scripture in an equal balance, and be as cautious in taking up
objections against this truth, as you are of being in the practice of it. It Is
sad to see, and that which wounds my spirit much, that persons professing
godliness should be so inconsiderate as to catch at any thing that comes next
to hand, to strike at that which a differing Saint affirms is truth, without
considering the weight of what is offered, or whither their own objections lead
them; I have seen more gall and wormwood at the bottom of those objections that
have been made against the Sabbath, then ever I saw in any objections against
any other command, and even some Christians are so weak that all passes for
current that flows from a man that is good, and able, but where are those virgin
spirits that are redeemed from the earth, and from among men that lay persons,
interests and customs by, whilst they judge between truth and error, where
ever they are, they are men which will follow the Lamb, when others are left
behind. They will not be affrighted at the seventh day Sabbath, because
nicknamed, and called the Jews Sabbath no more then they are at the God of the
Jews; they will not refuse to keep the Sabbath because a man was stoned, any
more then they will refuse Jehovah to be their God, because those that worship
strange Gods were to be put to death: and if they be told they go back to the
Law, they can answer, blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may
have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in through the gate into the
City, when the breakers of the Law are left without. Rev. 22.14, 15. Do you
therefore that fear the Lord and think upon his name, lie down at his feet and
cry earnestly for his spirit to lead you into all truth; that you may not kick
against the pricks in this chastising day, wherein the Lord is teaching his
people out of his Law, and fitting them for the Kingdom of glory, which is at
the door. Now the Lord is discovering every part and piece of Babylon, that the
Saints may know the better how to reward her; but because the Saints begin to
own the Lord as King and Lawgiver, the Dragon is wroth, and knows that this
will destroy his Kingdom, and so would endeavor to persuade persons that the
Law of God is abolished, well knowing that if he could persuade them to abelief
of this, they will soon say there is nothing to be done till Christ come in
person.

I would not make too large a gate to so small a City, but shall hasten to a
conclusion with a word to the little remnant that keep the Sabbath according to
the Commandment. Precious Brethren, you are under great and precious promises
for your encoutagement, though your opposers are great and numerous. I think
often of what is said of Asher, Deuteronomy. 33.24, 25.
Let Asher be blessed with children, let him be acceptable to his brethren, and
let him dip his foot in oil, his shoes shall be Iron and Brass, and as is his
days, so shall his strength be. Asher seems to hold forth the remnant that the
Lord will use in the latter days to tread down the wicked withal; and Ashers
bread shall be fat, yea he shall yield Royal dainties, Genesis 49.20. and if you
my Brethren, fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, ye shall do
well; though your Brethren frown upon you at present, yet you shall be
acceptable unto them: and what if your work be difficult, if your strength be
suitable, you need not complain; you may tread upon Scorpions if your shoes be
Iron and Brass; your feet will be like Hinds feet if they be dipped in oil, which
will cause you to run without weariness, and walk without fainting;

So he prays, Who is only through grace a servant of CHRIST, though unworthy
to be so called, EDWARD STENNET.

Some Brief Grounds, serving to prove that the Ten Commandments are yet in full
force, and shall so remain till Heaven and Earth pass away.
FIrst, The matter of the Ten Commandments was written in the Heart of Adam
before his fall, as does appear Genesis 1.27. God created man in his own Image, in
the Image of God created he him. Eccles. 7.29. God has made man upright, but
he sought out many inventions. And the Apostle plainly asserts, that the
Gentiles, which had not the Law, (in the letter of it) did by nature the things
contained in the Law, which shows the work of the Law written in their
hearts, Romans 2.14, 15. Now if the Gentiles had the work of the Law written in
their bearts, in their sinful state, doubtless they had it in more perfection
in their state of innocence, as considered in Adam; for the letter of the Law
was added, because of transgression, Gal. 2.19. Now if there were transgression
before the letter of the Law was added, that implies there was a Law before;
and in that the letter of the Law is said to be added, it implies that the
matter of it was in being before, but much worn out by sin; and that is one
reason why the Lord was pleased to add the letter.

Let it be considered how it can stand with Scripture, or right reason, that
Jesus Christ should abrogate this Law; did Christ blot out this Law out of the
hearts of all men by his death? Romans 2.15.
then all men have not the Law of Nature to guide them; for we cannot be so
gross as to imagine that the Law is put into their hearts upon a new account,
for that were to bring all men under the new Covenant.

2. God spoke all these Commandments unto the people, and they heard his voice,
Deuteronomy. 5.22, 23, 24. with great Majesty and Glory, and he added no more; and he
wrote them upon two Tables of Stone, and delivered them unto Moses; all which
holds forth their perpetuity, they are spoken by God, they are wrote by him in
Tables of Stone; so was never any Ceremony. Job desires that his words were
graven with a pen of Iron and Lead, in a rock of stone for ever, Chap. 19.24.

3. After the first tables were broke, which I suppose did signify the
Israelites breaking of the first Covenant; for Moses brake them upon that
account, Behold the Ark as it stands under the mercy feat.
they having made a Golden Calf, and so had broke the Commandment: Moses was
then commanded to hew two Tables like unto the first, and God wrote the same
words again upon them, Deuteronomy. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. and they only of all the Laws were
put into the Ark; and when the Ark is set in its proper place between the
Cherubims, there is nothing in it but the two Tables, 1 Kings 8.9. Now the Ark
was a Type of Christ, and the putting the Law into it did signify the putting
of it into the heart of Christ, Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. Thy Law is in my heart: and
from thence they are transcribed into the hearts of the seed of Christ,
according to the new Covenant, Jer. 31.33. Where God promises to put his Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts. Now what Law is this that
must be put in the heart, when the Law of sacrifice is abolished? Heb. 10.6, 7,
8, 9. compared with that forementioned in the Psalms, that this is the Law
that is here spoken of is manifest, if we consider first how proper and
suitable it is for the heart of a believer. Paul calls it the Law of his mind,
Romans 7.23. and in 22. he professes he delights in the Law of God after the
inward man; and God says, he will put his Law in the heart, and write it
there; 2 Cor. 3.2, 3.
both which phrases hold it forth to be the same Law that was wrote by God, and
put into the Ark: man's heart is the Tables, and God himself is the writer, the
matter written is the Law: and hear what Wisdom says to this, Prove. 7.1, 2,
3. My son keep my words, and lay up my commandments within thee, keep my
commandments and live, and my Law as the apple of thy eye, bind them upon thy
fingers, write them upon the table of thine heart. Now what Laws are these but
the Table-Laws, which were then in being, and Wisdoms son is to have them writ
upon the fleshly Tables of his heart.

4. When God promises to exalt his firstborn higher then the Kings of the
Earth, and that his Covenant should stand fast with him, Psalm, 89.28, 29. and
that his seed should endure for ever, and his Throne as the days of Heaven:
yet he says, If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments, if
they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, verse. 30, 31. Then will
I visit their transgression with a rod, and their iniquity with stripes, verse.
32. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take away, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. Mark it, this Covenant was with Christ, (though with
David in the Type) in the behalf of all the seed: and chastisements must be the
portion of the seed, if they break the Law of God, though his Covenant stand
fast: now as this Covenant reaches all the seed, so does the Law, and the
punishment for the breach of it; and if so, then what Law is it that reaches
all the seed, if not the Law of the Ten Commandments, with those Laws which
are comprehended in them.

5. These Commandments are eminently distinguished and marked out from all the
Ceremonial Laws, both to show their eminency and perpetuity, they are said to
be the work of God, Exodus 32.16. and the Psalmist says, The works of his hands
are verity and judgment; and these works are called, all his Commandments,
Psalm. 111.7. and they are Ten, Deuteronomy. 4.13. Exodus 34.28.
And therefore I conceive Wisedoms son is to bind them upon his fingers, to
show the number of them, there being for each finger one, and that both hands
might be active in them. And Zachary and Elizabeth are said to walk in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, Luke 1.6. They are distinguished from
the Cerimonial Ordinances, and called, all the Commandments; to set forth their
number, as before is said, and their eminency, and therefore they are so
frequently called in the Scripture, The Commandments of God, distinct from the
other Laws, which were shadowy in the time of the Law of shadow.^. [As these
places of Scripture, besides many others, do show, viz. Deuteronomy. 5.31. and 6.11.
and 7.11. Deuteronomy. 8.11. and 11.1. and 30.16. 1 Kin. 2.3. and 8.58. 2 Chro. 19.10.
Neh. 1.7. and 10.29. etc.] and distinct from the testimony of Jesus in clear
Gospel times, Rev. 12.17. Where, note, the dragons war is with the remnant of
the Woman's seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of
Jesus; and again here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith
of Jesus, Rev. 14.12. And when the man would know what he should do to be
saved, Christ told him that he knew the Commandments. A cloud of witnesses
would come in if need were for the confirmation of them. But further observe
what the Scripture says to their duration; the Psalmist says, All his
Commandments are sure, they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth
and uprightness, Psalm 111.7, 8. Note it, all his Commandments, which are the
works of his hands, as aforesaid, these all stand fast for ever and ever, that
is not only in the time of the ministration of the letter, which was in a sense
for ever, but for ever and ever, that is, under both ministrations, that of the
letter, and that of the spirit in Old Testament times, and in the New; and
search and see if you can find any word that does speak of any thing that is
said to abide, or stand fast for ever and ever, which comes short of the time
aforesaid. And when God hides his face from the house of Jacob, then is the
time that the Testimony is bound up, and the Law is sealed among the disciples,
Esaias. 8.16, 17. Clearly relating to the time, that the Jews rejected the
Gospel, and the disciples are commanded to make use of the Law, as well as the
Testimony, to try the Doctrines of others by, verse. 20. all which shows the
perpetuity of this Law of God, which will further appear if we consider,

What our Lord says in Matthew. 5.17, 18. Think not that I came to destroy the
Law or the Prophets, I came not to destroy but to fulfill. But the question will
be, what Law this is? To me it appears to be the Law of the Ten Commandments;
for these reasons:

1. First, because this comes in as the motive, to provoke his disciples to let
their lights shine in the world, that men might see their good works, and
glorify their Father which is in Heaven, verse. 16. Therefore it must be such a
Law as the doing of it holds forth good works to public view.

2. It is such a Law as Christ professes he came not to destroy; but the
Ceremonial Law he did destroy in this very sense, so that none are to be in the
practice of it; he blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against
us, and contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross,
Col. 2.14.

3. Destroying of the Law is here put in direct opposition to fulfilling of it;
to destroy is to take out of the way, or to blot out, as before: but to fulfill
the Law, is to do that which is contained in the Law; therefore says Christ to
John (when he went to be baptized) It becomes us to fulfill all righteousness,
(that is, to perform it.) Matthew. 3.15. and the Apostle says, That love is the
fulfilling of the Law; what Law? why this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, and the like, Romans 13.8.9. Love works
no evil to his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law, verse.
10. So that to fulfill the Law of the Ten Commandments is not to blot them out,
or make them void, that were to destroy them; which Christ came not to do, but
on the contrary to do the things contained in them, which he did exactly in his
life, and so was offered up a Lamb without spot.

4. This is such a Law as must stand in force every jot and title of it till
Heaven and Earth pass away, Matthew. 5, 19. but Heaven and Earth are not yet
passed away, therefore this Law stands firm: but because it is said in the
Text, Till all be fulfilled, hence some affirm, that all was fulfilled at the
death of Christ, and this fulfilling of it holds forth the abrogating of it.
But did Heaven and Earth pass away then? or did Christ by his taking upon him
all that guilt which was due to us, and by his perfect fulfilling of it in his
walk, take us from our obedience? God forbid; because Christ fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law, must not we fulfill it? Even as Archippus was to
fulfill his ministry, Col. 4.17. which would be absurd to think, that that was
to put it to an end.
The Apostle says, that for this end Christ dyed, Romans 8.3, 4. saying, For
what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sent
forth his son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh but after the spirit. But what is the fulfilling of the
righteousness of the Law? First to do the righteous things contained in the
Law, and in this sense every true believer does fulfill the Law, though his
compleatness be in Christ; for love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10.
so that the commanding power of the Law is such a just measure, that every one
that loves, acts his part toward the fulfilling of it.

Lastly it further appears to be the Ten Commandments, by the use Christ makes
of what he had before asserted; Whosoever therefore shall break one of the
least of these Commendments, and shall teach men so, shall be called least in
the Kingdom of Heaven, verse. 19. that is, forasmuch as this Law must stand,
till Heaven and Earth pass: and I came not to destroy it; therefore beware of
breaking of it, for whosoever you are that break any any part of it, and shall
teach men so, you shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever
shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the Kingdom of
Heaven. To prevent further mistakes, he repeateth the Law in many particulars,
and gives the sense, showing how far their righteousness should exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, verse. 20. By all which it plainly
appears, that this Law which Christ came not to destroy, is the Law of the Ten
Commandments, or the Laws that were comprehended in them.

6. The Apostle confirms and establishes this Law after the death of Christ,
as plainly appears Romans 3. the drift of which Chap, is to set Jews and Gentiles
in a like condition by nature; all breakers of the Law of God, and so become
guilty before him, verse. 19. and that therefore no flesh could be justified by
the deeds of the Law; the Law being for another purpose to convince of sin,
verse. 20. or to bring sin to the knowledge; he proves that Jews and Gentiles,
circumcised and uncircumcised, are justified by and through faith, and not by
any Law of works, verse. 27, 28, 29, 30. But lest the Gentiles should think,
because they could not be justified by the works of the Law, that therefore
they might look upon the Law as a thing done away or made void: he puts this
question to the uncircumcised Gentiles, Do we then make void the Law through
faith, God forbid; yea we establish the Law: He puts this question out of
question, whether the Law be in force to believing Gentiles or no, with a God
forbid; which shows the greatness of his zeal against such a persuasion; it
being the same answer which he gives to another gross question, whether we
should continue in sin that grace might abound, and as if that were not enough
he adds to it, yea we establish the Law.

7. This same Apostle does prove, that the Law was in force at the time of his
conversion; he says, he had not known sin but by the Law; he had not known
lust, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet, Romans 7.7. He was alive
without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, sin revived and he dyed,
verse. 9. that is, not without the letter of it, for that he had, and did in a
great measure conform to it, but without powerful convictions for sin by the
Law: and in this sense when the Commandment came sin revived, and he dies that
before was alive in his own apprehension. For without the Law sin was dead,
verse. 8. and by the Law is the knowledge of sin; and sin taking occasion by the
Commandment, deceived him, and by it slew him. Wherefore the Law is holy, the
Commandment is holy, just and good, verse. 11.12. not that the holy and just Law
was made death unto him, God forbid; but sin, that it might appear sin by this
good Law wrought death in him, that by the Commandment sin might appear
exceeding sinful, verse. 13. And if so, then this Law did not dye with the body
of Christ; though we are dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that we should
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter; and that we
should be married to another, even him, who is raised from the dead; we being
dead to that spirit of bondage, in whith we were held, that we set our
obedience to the Law, no longer in the room of Christ as our head and husband;
Christ by his blood, having purchased us from that power that the Law had over
us by reason of sin. So that our service is not to satisfy the Law, as a woman
serves to please her husband, that we are dead to: but we are not dead to serve
in newness of spirit, in obedience to Christ as our husband, verse. 4, 5, 6. In
this sense the Apostle delights in the Law of God, after the inward man, verse.
22. Though another Law in his members stood in great opposition to it, verse.
23. Mind this chap. well, and it will appear so plain, that he that runs may
read, that the Apostle intends no such thing as to take us from our obedience
to the Law, nor yet the abrogating of the Law. But on the contrary,

8. The same Apostle urges the Law in the very letter of it unto the Ephesians,
Chap. 6.1, 2, 3. Children, says he, obey your Parents, for this is right;
Honor thy father and thy mother, which is the first Commandment with promise.
He proves his exhortation to be right from the Commandment, and he takes notice
of the order of the Commandments; it is the first Commandment of that second
Table, and it has a promise annexed to it, he speaks in the present tense:
he does not say it was the first Commandment, but it is the first with promise,
that thy days may be long on the earth; he urges the promise to them for their
encouragement, and to prevent mistakes, he shows the extent of it, that it was
not only to the Jews that they should live long in the land of Canaan; but to
the Gentiles also: therefore the interpretation is large, that thy days may be
long on the earth.

9. James gives a full confirmation to what I am treating of, chap. 2.9. He
convinces them of sin by this Law, in having the faith of Jesus Christ with
respect of persons, as appears by verse. 10.11. For whosoever shall keep the
whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all: he shows what Law
he means, and how it is that he that offends in one point is guilty of all;
because, He that says, do not commit adultery, says also, do not kill; now if
thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of
the Law. And John says, Whosoever commits sin transgresses also the Law,
for sin is the transgressionof the Law, chap. 3.4. and in the next verse he
explains what Law he means; and says, it was such transgression that Christ
was manifest to take away: now if this Law of God was done away by the death of
Christ, sin could not be a transgression of it so long after; neither could any
be convinced of sin by it, because it was not: but the Apostle says, whosoever
commits sin, transgresses the Law; which shows it was in force then, and not
only so, but that likewise it should so remain.

10. Let it be considered whether that this opinion that the Law is done away,
does not clash with redemption it self. The Apostle states all men under the
Law, and by breaking of it they came under the curse, Gal. 3.10. And Christ was
made under the curse to redeem his people, from under the curse of the Law,
verse. 13. that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through
faith, verse. 14. Now if we were not under the commanding power, we could not be
under the curse, (for that follows disobedience) and if so then Christ was not
made a curse for us; neither can the blessing of Abraham come upon the Gentiles
upon that account, if the Jews were only under the Law, and under the curse of
it. Christ dying to redeem them from the curse, could not bring the blessing of
Abraham upon the Gentiles. And again the Apostle says, that Christ was made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. Now if we were not under the Law, we could
not be redeemed by Christ's being under the Law, nor receive the adoption of
sons thereby; but it is manifest that every one is under the commanding power
of the Law, and by nature under the curse; and Christ has only redeemed his
people from the curse, but that they are redeemed from their obedience to the
Law of God: I find no Scripture that says so, but on the contrary.

11. God complains of the blindness of his servants, and of the deafness of
his messengers that he sent, Isay. 42.19, 20. and their blindness and deafness
appears in this, that they did not hear, nor understand Gods design in the gift
of his Son; that it was not to destroy his Law, or to slight it, but to
magnify it and make it honorable, verse 2. Before it was in Tables of stone,
but now in the fleshly Tables of the heart; service was done from a spirit of
bondage, but now from a spirit of adoption: and in this sense I conceive the
Law is said to be magnified and made honorable, and upon this account that God
is well pleased for his righteousness sake, that is I conceive for his sons
sake.

12. This opinion, that the whole Law is abolished, does pull up true
Magistracy by the roots; the office of rulers being for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. But if the statute and
judgments be not in force, there is no corporal punishment to be inflicted
upon any though thieves, murderers, or the like; and so there is no room for
the Magisterial power at all, but men are left in this respect as the beasts of
the field, to shift one among another as well as they can. But the Apostle
says, The Law is made for the Lawless and disobedient, for ungodly and for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers of
mothers, for man-flayers, 1 Timothy 1.9, 10. Now this is the Law of penalties,
that is manifest in that it is said, it was not made for a righteous man, but
the Ten Commandments were for the righteous: for the Psalmist says, Oh how I
love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day, Psalm. 119.97. Make me to go in
the path of thy Commandments, for therein do I delight, verse. 35.

And how shall we have Governers as at the first, and Counselors as at the
beginning, Isay. 1.26. if they have no Law to govern by; If any say we shall
have Laws from Christ, and shall not need those Laws that were for the
Commonwealth of Israel: to that I answer, I know no word of God that does give
us ground to believe for any other Laws or Scripture, then what we have; and
suppose that God should revive his work in this nation, and bring his enemies
under, and put opportunity into the hands of his Saints, to choose men fearing
God and hating covetousness, to rule the Nation while the Lambs army march on.
What could they do if the Scripture were not their Statute-book, if they should
turn Lawmakers, would not that be their sin, there being no Warrant in the
Scripture for it? And would it not bring all into confusion again, and make
another Babel? For the great question which is to be resolved in the latter
days, will be, Who is our Statute-maker? Which the Saints put out of question,
Isay. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Statute-maker, the Lord is
our King, he will save us, (and not King Omri with his Statutes, Mic. 6.16.)
And when the Saints come to own this truth in good earnest, their opposits
tacklings will be loosed, they shall neither strengthen their mast, nor spread
their sails, verse. 23. and Malachi tells us, what Laws our King has made,
which the Saints are to own, when the day of the Lord burns as an oven all the
proud, and the Sun of righteonsness arises upon all that fear him, when they
shall tread down the wicked with so much ease, that they shall be as ashes
under the soles of their feet, so that it shall be counted the Lords doings.
And in the day that the Lord shall do this, Remember ye the Law of Moses my
servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel with the Statutes
and judgments, Chap. 4.3, 4.

I shall now endeavor to answer some objections which are usually brought
against this truth, though several of them are partly answered in the grounds
aforementioned; I shall therefore say the less, and begin to speak something to
that Scripture in 2 Cor. 3. on which the objecters do chiefly build their
persuasion, and indeed at the first glance thereon without comparing of it with
other Scriptures, it has more color for such a purpose then all the
Scriptures that ever I heard brought: from which Scripture this is objected,
That the Ten Commandments were the ministration of death and of the letter, and
are done away.

Answer. That they were the ministration of death and of the letter is granted,
for the Scripture says so, but the Scripture does not say they are done away:
as will appear, if we consider the drift of the Apostle, he endeavors to
show the difference between the ministration of the spirit and of the letter,
verse. 6. the one being a bare reading of the Law, from which no life was
communicated to those that heard it, verse. 14, 15. and in verse. 9. the Apostle
calls it the ministration of condemnation, that is, it lays open sin, and the
curse for sin, but it is the Gospel ministration which holds forth
justification and strength against sin; not that the Ten Commandments in
themselves were death to any. God forbid. as the Apostle says in Romans 7.13.
But sin when it is finished brings forth death, and the Commandments preach
death to the transgressers of them, so that they are called the ministration of
death and condemnation, because man has broken them, and so is under the curse
of them, which Christ has delivered believers from, 3.13. and the ministration
of it is really done away, that is, as I said before, The reading of the Law by
a Typical priesthood, which the Jews would have set up in the room and place of
the ministration of the spirit: and whereas they lived under the hearing of the
bare letter of the Law, which gave no strength to perform, we live under the
hearing of the Gospel, which is spirit and life, John 6.36. But that the matter
of the Law or commanding power of it should be done away, this Scripture does
not in the least prove, but it is used in the hand of the spirit to convince of
sin. This the same Apostle proves Romans 7.7. Who, says he, had not known sin
but by the Law, he had not known lust except the Law had said thou shall not
covet: this will appear evident if you consider the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
verses of this Chap.

Obj. 2. Another Scripture is frequently urged, Acts 7.37. A Prophet shall the
Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you
hear. From which it is concluded, that we are to hearken only to Christ, and
not to Moses.

Answ. If by hearing of Christ you mean, hearing only what he spoke with his
own lips when he was on earth, then we are not to hear his Apostles; but if you
mean by hearing of him is to hear what he spoke upon earth, and what he spoke
by his spirit in his Apostles, then why are we not to hear what he spoke by his
spirit to his Prophets: seeing we are built upon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Christ being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians 21.20. And if such
who are of this persuasion, would be true to their principle to hear Christ,
hear him what he says, Luke 16.31. They have Moses and the Prophets let them
hear them. For if they will not believe Moses and the Prophets they will not
believe, though one rise from the dead. And he counsels to keep the
Commandments, Matthew. 19.17, 18. and reproves for the breach of them; as also
for the making of them void by traditions, Matthew. 15.6. as might be made appear
by many other Scriptures. Therefore there is nothing of weight in this
objection to shake the thing asserted.

Obj. 3. Moses was faithful over his house as a servant, so Christ is faithful
over his house as a son. Now if Christ has not given us all the Laws that we
are to observe, this is to make Christ less faithful then Moses.

Answ. Doubtless Christ as a son is faithful over his house, as Moses was
faithful over his house as a servant. But we are to consider, what was Moses
his house, and what is Christ's house; Moses his house, I conceive, was the
Tabernacle: his faithfulness did appear, in that he did all things according to
the pattern showed to him in the mount. Christ's house are the Saints the true
Tabernacle which the Lord has pitched and not man, Heb. 8.2, 5. of which the
other was a shadow. And as Moses as a servant gave forth ordinances for his
house, so Christ as a son has given out ordinances for his house: but the Ten
Commandments are a Law which belongs to men as they are men, though they be no
part of Christ's house, it being, as before is proved, the Law written in their
very hearts.

Obj. 4. But when certain of the Sect of the Pharisees arose, and said it was
needful to be circumcised, and keep the Law of Moses, the Apostle proves them
to be tempters of God, in putting a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which
they nor their Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15.5, 10.

Answ. Are the Ten Commandments such a yoke, as is not to be born? Is it a yoke
to have no other God but Jehovah, and to abstain from murder, theft, adultery,
and the like? For so it must be, if you judge that the whole Law is here
slighted. But the thing in difference here is, whether such and such laws are
to be kept or no? and the stress that is laid upon the keeping of them, namely
the pressing of them as things without which they could not be saved, as verse.
1. and therefore the Apostle in answer to this, shows that the Gentiles had
received the Gospel, and did believe, God having given to them the Holy Ghost,
and put no difference between them and the Jews, purifying their hearts by
faith, verse. 7, 8, 9. and that through the grace of Jesus Christ both sews and
Gentiles should be saved, verse. 11. and as the Apostle opposes the keeping of
these Laws for such a purpose as to be sared thereby, so the bare keeping of
them is forbidden: and therefore says James ver. 19, 20. My sentence is that
we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned unto God, but that
we write unto them that they abstain from pollutions of Idols, and from
fornication, from things strangled and from blood. So that the Apostles
judgment is, that the Gentiles should keep some part of the Law. And therefore
the question was not, Whether any part of the Law should be kept? and the
reason seems to be in verse. 20. why they would write no more, for Moses of old
time has in every City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogue ever
Sabbath day. So the Apostles and Elders write verse. 24. For as much as we have
heard, that certain men that went out from us have troubled you with words
subverting your souls, saying you must be circumcised and keep the Law, to whom
we gave no such Commandment. Now can we be so gross as to think, that is
subverting men's souls, and contrary to the commandments of the Apostles and
Elders, to bid them love the Lord their God with all their hearts, and with all
their strength, and to worship him alone, and not take his name in vain, and
the like? for this is to keep the Law. But the difference was about other Laws
as well as circumcision, and they are as really forbid to keep them, as they
are forbid circumcision: and therefore it cannot be the Law of the Ten
Commandments, but the Law of shadows, as is manifest, Chap. 21. when Paul came
to Jerusalem, the brethren told him, that it was reported, that he taught all
the Jews which were among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, that they
ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs,
verse. 21. therefore they counsel Paul to purify himself with some others, that
it might be seen that he walked orderly and kept the Law, verse. 24. But as
touching the Gentiles which believe we have written and concluded that they
observe no such things, verse. 25. so that it is very clear that it is
circumcision and the customs that is here called the Law of Moses, which the
Gentiles were commanded not to keep, but to think the Gentiles should be
forbidden to keep that Law of God that was written in their natures, is
abominable, and contrary both to Scripture and reason.

Obj. 5. But the Scripture says, Cast out the Bondwoman with her son, for the
son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the Freewoman, which
Bondwoman was an Allegory of the Covenant from mount Sinai, and therefore to
be cast out.

Answ. The Apostle is here showing how impossible it is for works and grace to
stand together in point of justification; for this people were seeking to be
justified by the works of the Law. He shows the difference betwixt the two
Covenants, one of works gendering to bondage, the righteousness of the Law
being this, that the man that does these things should live in them, Romans 10.5.
the other of grace or free promise, without any respect to man's righteousness:
he shows the sons of the Covenants are like unto their mothers; the sons of the
one Covenant are born after the flesh, the sons of the other by promise, and
that those that are born after the flesh, persecute those that are born after
the spirit. Nevertheless what says the Scripture? Cast out the Bondwoman and
her son; For the son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the
Freewoman. That is, The Covenant of works with those that seek to be justified
thereby, Christ being the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.4. But if we should understand the Ten Commandments in
themselves, to be the Bondwoman, then it is impossible for them that keep them
to be heirs or children of the promise, but they must be cast out as children
of the Bondwoman, which is very erroneous, and contrary to the current of
Scriptures. For the doers of the Law are justified before God, Romans 2.13.
though not for doing. And mark how the Apostle forbids this notion, Romans 3.31.
Do we then make void the Law through faith? God forbid. Shall we continue in
sin or transgress the Law, that grace may abound? God forbid, Romans 6. Is the
Law sin? God forbid, Romans 7.7. Was the Law which was good made death unto me?
God forbid, 13. Shall we transgress the Law because we are not under the
condemning power of it? (Christ having redeemed us from it) God forbid, Romans
6.15. Certainly the Scripture did foresee how apt men would be to slight and
make void the Law of God under specious pretenses, as their being believers,
and Gentiles which had not the Law given to them, but that they are under grace
and the like. But if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law,
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision. Romans 2.26.

Consider these Queres, 1. If the whole Law was done away by the death of
Christ, why did the Apostle spend so much time to prove that by the works of
the Law none could be justified, Gal. 3. seeing there was no Law to work upon?
Had it not been a nearer way to have told them that the Law was abolished?

2. If the whole Law was done away at the death of Christ, how can any part of
it be now in force? If it be said it is upon a new account, show me any one Law
that Christ has once destroyed, and again revived; seeing the Apostle says if
he should build again the things that he destroyed, he should make himself a
transgressor, Gal. 2.14.

3. What Scripture is it that proves that we have any one of the Ten
Commandments given out upon a new account?

4. If the whole Law be done away, what Law is there for the punishment of evil
doers, thieves, murderers, and the like?

5. If the Ten Commandments were to be abolished, how is it that the Lord has
annexed so many great and precious promises unto the keeping of them, and
delighting in them? as in Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3, 4. and many other places which do of
right belong unto such as keep the Commandments, Rev. 27.14.

6. How is it that the Apostle says, the Law is good if a man use it lawfully,
1 Timothy, 1 8. if at the same time there was no Low?

7. If the Law was done away at the death of Christ, when was it given again
upon a new account? If before his death in the 5. of Matthew. then how is it that
the Law that was given on Sinai stood in force till his death? Could they stand
both in force at once. If not till after the death of Christ, then when was it
given out? seeing we find not any of the Commandments so much as mentioned for
a long time after the death of Christ. Can we think the Saints and the world
were left without Law?

8. How is it that we contend for Governors as at the first, and Counselors as
at the beginning? seeing there is no Law for them to rule and govern by, if
this doctrine be true that the whole Law is done away?

Thus I have endeavored in a weak measure to prove that the Ten Commandments
are not only in force to unbelievers, but also to believers. But believers are
not under the Law, so as to be justified or condemned by it; not under it as a
Covenant of works and ministration of death, but under it as it is a righteous
rule of life, a holy, just and good Law, so they are under it, and do delight
in it, Romans 7.22. Psalm. 119.70, 72, 97. 1 Cor. 9.21.

It is time for the Lord to work, for they have made void thy thy Law. Psalm.
119.122.

Therefore I love thy Commandments above Gold, yea above fine Gold, verse. 127.

Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right, and I
hate every false way, verse. 128.

The seventh day is the Sabbath.
NOw if the Ten Commandments be in force every jot and title of them, it must
necessarily follow that the Seventh day is the Sabbath, and is to be observed
according to the commandment. But because there is much opposition against this
truth, I shall offer something in particular to it, which may tend to the
clearing of it.

First, it was instituted by God before the fall of man, as appears in Genesis
1.31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.
But when men had sinned, God changes his voice, and then the ground is cursed
for his sake, Chap. 3.17. Further, God was six days upon his work of creation,
and rested not until the seventh day: now betwixt the end of the sixth day and
the beginning of the seventh, there is no interval or space of time, Chap.
1.31. Chap. 2.2. then why should it be thought that the Sabbath was a shadow to
hold forth rest by faith in Christ, seeing Adam had not sinned, and so had no
need of a Savior? and why should we run into such imaginations, concerning the
cause of Gods instituting the Sabbath, seeing God so plainly declares it
himself? namely, that He blessed the seventh day and sanctified it, because
that in it he rested from all his works which God created and made, Chap. 2.3.

2. The reason that the Lord gives when he commanded the observation of the
seventh day is, as before, because that in six days the Lord made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day, wherefore
the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed it, Exodus 20.11. and it is as a
motive to provoke man to follow the Lords example from the beginning both in
work and rest. Six days, says the Lord, thou shall labor and do all thy
work, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall
do no manner of works. And if thou would know a reason, why thou should do
so, it is because I the Lord thy God did so. And truly to me its clear that one
main reason, why the Lord took so much time as six days to create all things
in, and rested the seventh day, was to show man an example, and what he ought
to do. Doubtless God could have made all things in a moment, but six days he
works, and rests the seventh day, that man might do the same, and thereby not
only hold forth the creating power of God, and the method that he was pleased
to take in the creation, but also his great mercy in instructing and commanding
man to work six days, and rest the seventh that he might be refreshed.

3. It plainly appears, that this institution was in force and to be observed
from the beginning, though no mention is made of the Patriarks observing of it,
no more then of their sacrificings and doing many other things, which is judged
they did, notwithstanding we hear nothing of them. But consider God rested the
seventh day and sanctified it: now to profane that which God sanctifies
doubtless is a sin; and had they done servile work upon the Sabbath they had
profaned it, Nehem. 13.16, 17. and what the Lord said to Peter in another
case, may be rightly said in this, (viz.) What God has sanctified that call
not thou common or unclean, Act. 10.15. and the Lord when he gives forth this
command, says, Remember the Sabbath, to note the importance of it, and the
antiquity of it, it being no new thing but from the beginning, and that the
Lord urges in verse 11. as the cause why it was to be observed. Israel observed
the Sabbath before the giving of the Law on mount Sinai, as appears Exodus
16.23, 25, 26. But mark what Nehemiah says to this, Chap. 9.13. Thou came
down also upon mount Sinai, and speak with them from Heaven, and gave them
right judgments, and true Laws, good Statutes and Commandments, and made
known also unto them thy holy Sabbath, verse. 14. Mark, this commandment is
singled out from all the rest, and is said to be made known to them, which
shows it was in being before, though its probable they might lose the
observation of it, by reason of their hard bondage in Egypt; but however its
plain that they had need of the knowledge of the Sabbath, and God makes it
known unto them, and Christ leads us plainly to the first institution of it,
The Sabbath says he, was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. He points
to the making of it and for whom it was made, not for the Jews only as Jews but
for man before any distinction was of Jew and Gentile; and in that it was made
for that man which was the public person or representative of whole mankind
it was made for all men, Adam standing as a public person before his fall.

4. Our Lord Jesus does show the true end of Gods giving the Sabbath, and also
how it ought to be kept, and shows the Pharisees their mistake in the
observation of it, they being so rigid that they would not suffer good works
and works of mercy to be done, though there were necessity for the doing of
them: as will appear if we consider these Scriptures following; The Pharisees
ask Christ, If it were lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? that they might
accuse him, Matthew. 12.10. and his answer is this, What man is there among you
that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the Sabbath day will he
not lay hold on it and lift it out? verse. 11. How much then is a man better
then a sheep? wherefore it is lawful to do well on the Sabbath days, verse. 12.
Mark. 34. Again the Pharisees told Christ that his disciples did that which was
not lawful, because they pull the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, Mark.
2.24. But mind the answer of Christ, Have ye not read what David did when he
was an hungry and had need, how he entered into the house of God, and did eat
the Shewbread, which is not lawful for any to eat but the Priests? ver. 25.26.
Matthew. 12.3, 4. Or have ye not read in the Law, that the Priests in the Temple
profane the Sabbath days and are blameless? verse. 5. It was not unlawful to
pluck the ears of Corn when they went through their neighbors field, for that
they might do by the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 23.25. and that the Pharisees knew very
well; but they thought it was unlawful because they did it upon the Sabbath
day: but mark the answer of Christ how he cleared the disciples, it was
unlawful for David to eat the Shewbread, but he was an hungry and had need,
and therefore to be excused; for if the disciples had pulled the ears of Corn
(when they had no need) upon the Sabbath day, it had been doing of needless
work, and so had been unlawful: but the Text says they were an hungry,
therefore they might do it, it being a work of mercy as David's was; and the
same may be said of the Priests profaning the Sabbath, who notwithstanding are
said to be blameless, their preparing the sacrifices was allowed, which work in
it self would have been counted a servile work, but that it was for such a
merciful end, (viz,) the sins of the people: therefore says Christ, had ye
known what this means I will have mercy and not sacrifice, you would not have
condemned the guiltless, verse. 7. Clearly proving that the Sabbath was to be
observed (but not so as to break another command, to neglect mercy which the
Pharisees would do, Mat. 23 23.) and that his disciples in having mercy to
their bodies were no Sabbath Breakers.

Further observe what Christ says, Mark. 2.27. The Sabbath was made for man,
and not man for the Sabbath; the Pharisees made themselves slaves and bondmen,
by making the Sabbath a yoke (whereas it should have been a delight, Isay.
58.13.) by superstitious outside performances, as though man had been made for
the Sabbath; but Christ tells them it was made for man, that is, for the good
and benefit of man that man might rest from his own labors and be refreshed,
[as the Lord was, Exodus 31.17.] and thus you see how clearly our Lord has
given the sense of this Law: it is lawful to do well upon the Sabbath day, to
visit the sick and to heal them, and to do works of mercy to our own and
others bodies, the Sabbath being made for man.

5. Jesus Christ declares himself to be Lord even of the Sabbath day, Matthew.
12.8. and he takes his title thus, the Sabbath, says he, was made for man, and
not man for the Sabbath, therefore the son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath
day, Mark 2.27. and here seems to be two things from whence Christ takes this
title: First, the Sabbath was made for man, that is as before was said, Christ
being Lord of the Sabbath does no more make it void then his being Lord of the
Supper, and Lord of the Harvest, does make the Supper and the Harvest void.
for Adam and so for all men, being made for him before his fall; now Christ
being the son of man, the chief man or second Adam, the man of Gods right hand,
the heir of all things is of right Lord even of the Sabbath. 2. The Sabbath was
made for man, that is, for the good of man and in mercy to man, as is said
before, therefore Christ being the Author of all good, the giver of all mercy,
he is Lord of it and therefore Christ does not slight the Sabbath (as some do
imagine) by saying he is Lord of it, as though he were not to keep it, or that
his intent were to change it; that were to strip himself of his title, or else
to entitule himself Lord of that which was not: but in that it is said Christ
is Lord of the Sabbath, it proves the Sabbath to be in force, as Christ proves
the resurrection, Mark. 12.26, 27. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
the God of Jacob: he is not the God of the dead but of the living; so Christ is
Lord of the Sabbath day, he is not Lord of dead Types, and shadows or of that
which is not in being, but he is Lord of the lively Oracles, of which I
conceive the Sabbath is one, Act. 7.38.

Obj. But did not Christ break the Sabbath and teach men so to do in bidding
the impotent man take up his bed and walk, it being unlawful to carry a burden
upon the Sabbath day?

Answ. The Scribes and Pharisees said so indeed, and that his bed was a
burden, but they were very unfit Judges, they being ignorant of the right
observing of the Sabbath, and sought likewise to take advantage against Christ
in his words and actions; their saying the man's bed was a burden, and that it
was unlawful for him to carry it does prove no more that so it was, then their
saying that the disciples brake the Sabbath in plucking the ears of Corn, and
Christ in healing the diseased: but was not this a work of mercy, the man
having lien lame so long in the porch now being cured? Was it not meet that he
should be released from the place, and take his bed with him to lie upon at
night? for its likely he had no other. And who can say that his bed was a
burden, for in some Countries that which they call their bed is no heavier
then a good Cloak or Coat; but consider what gross wickedness naturally flows
from this opinion. The objecters themselves and all must acknowledge that the
whole Law was in force till the death of Christ, the very shadows till he
nailed them to his Cross; then the fourth Commandment doubtless was in full
force: now to say that Christ brake it, and taught men so, is to say, Christ
sinned and taught men to sin; for sin is the transgression of the Law, and this
roots up redemption by Christ; for if Christ was a sinner he could not be a
Savior, he had not been a meet-offering for the sins of others if he had been
a sinner himself; but he was offered up a Lamb without spot, [ Heb. 7.26. 1
Pet. 1.19.] and was made sin for us, that knew no sin, [2 Cor. 5.2.] And
therefore this objection is so gross that every sincere heart that sees the
tendency of it will not touch it; and indeed I had not mentioned it here, but
that many through weakness have taken it up as a sufficient ground to prove the
making void the Sabbath, for want of looking into the bottom of it.

6 Another ground to prove the Sabbath yet to be in force may be taken from the
words of Christ to his disciples, Matt. 24.20. But pray ye that your flight be
not in winter, nor on the Sabbath day; which is part of the answer Christ gave
them when they came privately to him to ask him when the destruction of the
Temple should be, the signs of his coming and the end of the world. It is
generally conceived that this part of Christ's answer, relates to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and indeed that is the shortest time that can be
thought it relates unto, as does appear by the question which was asked him;
but suppose it so, does it not plainly appear from hence, that the Sabbath was
to remain in full force, after the death of Christ? The destruction of
Jerusalem being about 40. years after the death of Christ, and yet he commands
his disciples to pray that their flight be not in the winter, neither on the
Sabbath day; now can we think that Christ would lay such a foundation for
superstition, as though the Sabbath was to be at the ruin of Jerusalem, when it
was to cease at his death: or can we think-that Christ would teach his
disciples to pray false, or to pray that their flight should not be on the
Sabbath, when indeed there was to be no Sabbath; this is gross to imagine, but
as sure as winter was to remain winter, so the Sabbath was to remain the
Sabbath, and if their flight had been upon it, it would have been the more
tedious, it being a day of rest and refreshment, to them wherein they used to
rejoice and praise the Lord, as it appears by that Psalm or song for the
Sabbath day, Psalm. 92. But although this Scripture looks to the destruction of
Jerusalem, yet I conceive it looks further, even to that distress that
Jerusalem shall be in at the second coming of Christ, and that for these
reasons;

First, those things that Christ spoke of, were accomplished in a measure in
the Apostles days, and yet they are not completely fulfilled; for instance,
Christ told his disciples that they should be delivered up to be killed, and
they should be hated of all Nations for his name sake; this was in the Apostles
days and has been since, and false Prophets did arise then, and so they have
since then, verse. 4.11. So that those things which Christ spoke looked to
several times, and therefore I conceive he says in verse. 24. Verily I say unto
you this generation shall not pass till all these things be fulfilled; and so
I judge, what he spoke concerning Jerusalem had not only respect to that
destruction that came upon it in that generation, but also to that great
calamity that should be upon it in the last days.

2. This will more plainly appear, if we consider the words of Christ, But pray
ye that your flight be not in the winter nor on the Sabbath day, for then shall
be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this
time, no nor ever shall be, ver. 21. Now with this compare, Zach. 14.2. For I
will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall be
taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished. and at the 2. verse it is
said, then shall the Lord go forth and fight against those nations as when he
fought in the day of battle, and his feet shall stand in that day upon the
mount of Olives, verse. 4. With this compare, Dan. 12.1. And at that time shall
Michael stand up the great Prince which stands for the children of thy
people, and there shall be a time of trouble such as never was since there was
a nation even to that same time, and at that time thy people shall be
delivered, every one that shall be found written in the book, and many of them
that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and contempt, ver. 2. Now if that destruction of Jerusalem produced such great
trouble as never was, nor ever should be again; how is it that there shall be
such great trouble as never was since there was a nation? when Michael stands
up to deliver his people every one that is written in the book, and Jerusalem
is taken and the houses rifled, and women ravished, when the Lord comes forth
to fight against those nations, and his feet shall stand upon the mount of
Olives, according to that in Acts 1.11. So shall he come in like manner as ye
have seen him go into Heaven, and when the seventh Angel poures out his vial,
Rev. 16.17, 18. which time I conceive is one and the same with that in Zach.
and Dan. and the Angel is Michael the great Prince which Daniel speaks of,
whose feet shall stand upon the mount of Olives, then is the time of great
trouble, and such an earthquake as was not since men were upon the face of the
earth so mighty an earthquake and so great; so that to me it appears that
these three Scriptures do corespond with the words of Christ pointing out the
same time: and if so then the Sabbath shall remain till the coming of Christ,
and so shall stand till Heaven and Earth pass, according to that in Matthew. 5.
and for ever and ever, according to that in Psalm. 111.8. and the destruction of
Jerusalem seems to be a Type of that great destruction that shall be at Christ's
appearance: and as Jerusalem was taken when some from all Nations were gathered
together, as history reports, and on the Sabbath day it was destroyed; so it
appears that the strength of the Saints will be gathered together to Jerusalem,
because all Nations will gather against it, and Jerusalems straights will be
upon the Sabbath day, as seems to appear by the words of Christ, for then,
says he, shall be great tribulation such as never was; (then when,) why when
their flight shall be upon the Sabbath day, and this great tribulation is when
Jerusalem shall be taken, the houses rifled, and the women ravished, as was
said before; at which time Michael shall stand up and fight against those
Nations, as when he fought in the day of battle, and the slain of the Lord
shall be many, even from one end of the earth even to the other, Jer. 25.31,
32, 33. and the mount of Olives shall cleave in the midst thereof, Zach. 14.4.
and there shall be a very great valley, unto which the Saints shall flee, verse.
5. then shall the Sabbath be swallowed up in the great Sabbath or thousand
years, that glorious and holy rest which the Saints shall enter into and live
and reign with Christ a thousand years, verse. 9. and 20. Rev. 10.4.

7. Another ground is taken from the practice of Christ's disciples after his
death, Luke 23.5, 6. And they returned and prepared spices and ointments, and
rested the Sabbath day according to the Commandment. Some say if we do observe
the Sabbath we must do all those sacrifices which the Jews did upon it, but at
this time the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom,
and the shadows were done away by the body of Christ, and yet they kept the
Sabbath, and not through fear or ignorance, but according to the Commandment,
which is to rest from their labors, and so they did; for the Text says, they
returned and rested, there is no sacrifice expressed in the Commandment. The
stranger and the cattle was to rest the Sabbath, Exo. 20.10. so that the
Sabbath was commanded and observed before any of those sacrifices were
commanded to be offered upon it, but because the Jews did such service upon the
Sabbath day as they were a typical people, it does not follow that this was any
part of the Commandment, and therefore we are to rest as those disciples did,
according to the Commandment: and it is remarkable that the Holy Ghost should
leave this upon record, which would not have been I am persuaded, had the
Sabbath then been abolisht; he does not only say they returned and rested the
Sabbath day, but to prevent all mistakes least it should be thought they did it
ignorantly or superstitiously, or for fear of the Jews, he says they did it
groundedly (that is) according to the commandment.

Obj. But the disciples were met together upon the first day of the week, and
Christ appeared to them, John 20.9.

Answ. It is true they were assembled together on the same day at even being
the first day of the week, and the door shut, and the cause is laid down why so
they were; namely for fear of the Jews: and some of the disciples, as I said
before, kept the Sabbath the day before, and I think we cannot reasonably
imagine but those did that were together on the first day, for they did
frequently correspond together, that is manifest; but what does their being
together on the first day at even, and Christ's appearing to them prove for the
observation of the first day, more then his appearing to them eight days after,
and his appearing to them the third time early in the morning when they were a
fishing, Joh. 24.4 5. for the observation of these days? It was necessary that
Christ should appear to his disciples on the first day of the week, that his
word might be fulfilled of his arising the third day, and that they might
boldly witness the same.

Obj. But the disciples came together on the first day of the week, and did
break bread, and Paul taught unto them, Act. 20.

Answ. This is all the meeting or preaching that ever we find was upon the
first day, except the disciples being together for fear of the Jews, mentioned
before that meeting, was at evening; so this seems to be, because when they
came together Paul preached with them and continued his speech until midnight;
it is not likely then that they observed the day and came together in the
morning, seeing he continued his speech so long. And secondly, as we have the
cause of the disciples being together with their doors shut, so we have the
cause of this meeting; Paul was ready to depart on the morrow, verse. 7. upon an
extraordinary occasion, Paul having many things to communicate to them, as
appears by his discoursing with them till midnight, and talking till break of
day, verse. 11. But that which makes the Objecters lay such stress upon this
Text, is because the disciples came together to break bread, which they judge
to be the Lords Supper. Suppose it were so, what does this make for the
observation of the first day, more then Christ's first instituting the supper
upon the fifth day of the week (as is generally conceived,) does make for the
observation of it? But there is no proof that this was the Supper of the Lord
that they came to partake of, but it seems to be such breaking of bread as the
margin of some Bibles refers unto. Acts the 2.46. They continued daily with one
accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their
meat with gladness of heart. (So Luc. 24.30 35.) And it is explained what
breaking of bread it was verse. 11. where it is said when he was come up again
and had broken bread and eaten, and talked a good while till break of the day
he departed: here is eating and talking, it is not solemnized as the Supper of
the Lord: But some would have this common breaking of bread, and the other in
verse 7. to be the Supper; it is very unlikely that here should be two sorts of
breaking of bread at one time by the same persons, and yet nothing spoke
distinctly by which we might know the one from the other, so that the most that
can be said, is but a supposition; it cannot be proved that this was the Lords
Supper. And how weak a ground this is for the observation of this day as a
Sabbath, or more then any other day, or to limite the administration of the
Supper to this day, I leave to the truly wise in heart to judge.

Obj. But the Church had their gatherings upon the first day of the week, from
which it appears that it was the day that they met together upon, 1 Cor. 16.2.

Answ. The words are these, Upon the first day of the week let every one lay by
him in store, as God has prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I
come. Here is no proof for their meeting together, but rather on the contrary
every one of them was to lay by him in store as God had prospered him; no
public gathering but private laying up; but because the Apostle says in the
close of the verse, that there be no gatherings when I come, therefore it is
thought the Scripture cannot be so understood, because it would not prevent
gatherings: but is this fair when a Text of Scripture stands alone to put such
a sense upon it, as does plainly contradict the very letter of it, when it
says, let every one of you lay by him in store? then to say the meaning is to
have public gatherings and but one store, and would not the end of the
Apostle be fully answered, namely, to have no gatherings if each of them did
lay by them in a store (as God had prospered them in the world,) ready against
the Apostle came, they knowing of his coming? and when he came was it not as
easy to carry it with them to him, as for us to carry our Bibles to a meeting,
and what need would there be then of gatherings? And this way [of giving would
not be Pharisee-like, but according to the words of Christ, Mat. 6.11. Take
heed that you do not your alms before men to be seen of them, otherwise you
have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven; but when thou do thine
alms let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, verse. 3. that thine
alms may be in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret himself shall
reward thee openly, ver. 4.

Obj. But John was in the spirit upon the Lords day, (and had that glorious
revelation upon it) which is conceived to be the first day of the week, Rev. 1
10.

Answ. It is true, John was in the spirit on the Lords day, but the question
will be what day that was; if any one of the seven it must be the Sabbath, for
no other day is so called but it; God calls it his Holy Day, Isay. 58.13. and
Christ says he is Lord even of the Sabbath day; and if so, then it is his day,
for he is Lord of it, and that by way of eminency, not as some would have it to
show that he is Lord of every day, but as it is the Sabbath; for so it is said
the Son of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath day. So that this notion that the
Lords day is the first day, is merely taken up on trust one from another,
without one word in the Scripture to prove it so.

Ob. But it will be yet objected by those that are for no Sabbath, from the
words of the Apostle, Col. 2.16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in
drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ; from whence it
is concluded that the Sabbath was but a shadow, The Apostle speaks here of such
Sabbaths as were a shadow of things to come, but the seventh day Sabbath was in
commemoration of something past to wit the work of creation, as appears in the
Commandments.
and none are to be judged for not observing of it.

Answ. There were Holy Days and Sabbaths besides the seventh day Sabbath, or
the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, for so it is called in the commandment, as
does appear in Levit. 23.39. now because it is employed in the words of the
Apostle that Sabbaths were shadows and done away by the body of Christ, does it
therefore follow that all Sabbaths were so, any more then where the words of
the Apostle implies that men shall be saved, proves that all men shall be
saved; and if we consider the verses before it will plainly appear that the
Apostle is not speaking of any of the Ten Commandments: in the 15. verse the
Apostle is speaking to the Gentiles, showing how they were dead in their sins,
and in the uncircumcision of their flesh, but now quickened by Christ and all
their trespasses forgiven them. In the 14. verse he shows what further benefit
they had by the death of Christ, bloting out the handwriting of Ordinances,
which was against us, and contrary to us, he took it out of the way nailing it
to his cross; and the Scripture upon which the objection is bottomed, has its
dependence upon this, and comes in with a therefore let no man judge you in
meats and drinks, and so forth; as though the Apostle had said, forasmuch as
Christ has blotted out and nailed to his cross those ordinances that were
against you which are Gentiles, you are not to be judged for the
nonperformance of them. Now the Ten Commandments were never against the
Gentiles nor contrary to them, for the same Apostle says the matter of them
was written in their hearts, as was said before, and they did by nature the
things contained in them, and therefore they were not contrary to them; but
circumcision and other ordinances stood as a wall against the Gentiles, which
Christ brake down by taking them out of the way and nailing them to his cross,
having abolisht in his flesh the enmity even the Law of Commandments contained
in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man so making peace that
he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Gross, having slain the
enmity thereby, Ephesians. 2.15, 16. So that it is clear the Apostle is speaking of
such Commandments as are contained in Ordinances, and not those Commandments
that are so eminently distinguished from Ordinances; but those Ordinances which
were against the Gentiles and made them and the Jews two, as meats and drinks,
New Mons and Holy Days, and Sabbath days, Christ by his blood having taken
these away has made them one; but that the Ten Commandments should be struck
at there is no color in this Scripture for it, or that the Sabbath should only
be taken out from them, and nailed to the Cross with New Mons, meats and
drinks, and other shadows and Ordinances, which were against man, when as
Christ says the Sabbath was made for man; so that in this place there is no
proof for the abrogating of this Command of God.

Ob. But how is it that the Apostle says Romans 14.5, 6. that one man observes
one day above another, another observes every day alike, and yet he does not
blame either of them.

Answ. I make no doubt but if the controversy here had been about the Sabbath,
whether it were to be observed or no? but it would have been plainly expressed
and not past over so slightly: but the Apostle is speaking of indifferent
things, which men were not to be judged for their doing or not doing, and not
of Commandments. But because it is said that some esteem every day alike,
therefore some conclude that this takes in the Sabbath day; but we must compare
Scripture with Scripture, and find out such a sense as may bring them into a
harmony, and sometimes interpret general terms by restrictive Scriptures: for
instance, Christ bids his disciples go preach the Gospel to every Creature; we
must understand it thus, to every creature that is in a capacity to hear the
Gospel: The Apostle says that every Creature of God is good and nothing to be
refused; now some are poison and are to be refused, but his meaning is every
Creature that is eatable is good and not to be refused. So here every day is
alike, that is every working day, which God has made alike, but the seventh
day he has sanctified and made it a Sabbath of rest, and so not like the
other; and this interpretation is according to the Scripture, Exodus 16.4.
Behold I will rain bread from Heaven for you, and the people shall go out and
gather a certain rate every day: and in verse 12. They gathered every morning
every man according to his eating, yet on the Sabbath day there was none to
gather. And in our common speech it is so, we call the six days every day; men
say, we work every day or we travil so far every day, when they mean only the
six days that they count working days. So the Apostle speaking to them that
kept the Sabbath speaks in the same language, and we have no ground to think
otherwise, for there is no Scripture that we find before this that has any
seeming dislike against the observation of the Sabbath, but much on the
contrary.

Obj. Ye observe days and years and times and months, I am afraid of you least
I have bestowed upon you labor in vain, Gal. 4.10, 11.

Answ. This cannot be understood that the Apostle here strikes at the mere
observation of days, a thing of such dangerous consequence, for he would not
have them judged that observed one day above another, in Romans 14.5, 6. and in
this place he himself judges these as persons that had so far degenerated that
he was afraid that he had bestowed upon them labor in vain, but it is manifest
that these Galatians were gone back to circumcision, and so were debtors to the
whole Law seeking justification thereby, Chap. 5.2, 3, 4. and so they observed
days and years according to the Law that was a shadow of good things to come,
solemnizing the days and months and years with those things that were appointed
for them, as burnt-offerings, meat offerings, the waving of the sheaf, the
Passover and unleavened bread, and the like, as you may see at large. Lev.
23.8, 9, 10, 11. and so on; for they could not be said to observe times and
months and years, according to the Law, except they did such service; and this
gave the Apostle just ground to fear that he had bestowed on them labor in
vain: But to imagine that to observe the Sabbath according to the Commandment,
or to observe a day voluntarily to the Lord, is so dangerous, is contrary both
to Scripture and reason.

Obj. We which believe are entered into rest which the Sabbath was but a Type
of, as appears by the words of the Apostle, Heb. 4.3.

Answ. If eternal rest by faith be the Antitype of the Sabbath, the Sabbath
ceased to be in force to every man, so soon as they believed: which is
ridiculous to think and contrary to the current of Scriptures; but the Apostle
says, We which do believe do enter into rest, for he that is entered into his
rest is ceased from his own works, as God did from his, verse. 10. Let us labor
therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the example of
unbelief, verse. 11. Mind this Chap. well and I am persuaded you will see that
the drift of the Apostle in mentioning the seventh day here is but to amplify,
and set forth that perfect rest which they that believe do and shall enjoy, of
which the Land of Canaan was but a Type, and to show that Gods rest was before
the Land of Canaan, verse. 4. and that yet there remains a rest to the people of
God: and as God did rest the seventh day from all his works, so they that enter
into rest do cease from their own works, as God did from his; and this is not
as soon as men believe, for the Apostle provokes himself and others to labor:
to enter into it which were believers, and therefore if you will have the
Sabbath a Type from this Scripture, though it is no where so called, it must be
a Type of eternal rest which Saints do enter into when they cease from their
own works, as God did from his, and that will not be till they lay down this
Tabernacle, which will not hurt the thing asserted: And indeed I cannot deny
but the Sabbath is an earnest of that rest, and Saints that are spiritual in
the observation of it find it so, and of great use to put them in mind of that
glorious rest, as the bread and wine in the Supper of the Lord puts us in mind
of the sufferings of Christ; so this being a day of rest and delight, being
stripped of all worldly encumbrances, and devoted to the Lord to pray unto him,
and to praise his Holy Name, and to meditate upon Heaven and Heavenly glory.

Obj. But many say if the Sabbath be in force, then the penalty must needs be
so, and then those that do not keep it must be stoned; therefore this opinion
is dangerous, and will lead Saints to destroy one another.

Answ. This is a very ghastly objection, but indeed it is a very weak one; I do
not find that any more then one was stoned, and it was for presumptious
breaking of the Sabbath: but suppose that penalty be in force, every Saint is
not a Magistrate to put it in execution; if a Saint should kill a man, Saints
as they are Saints are not to execute him, all that they can do is to endeavor
his repentance, but it belongs to the true Magistrate to inflict the
punishment: and the penal Laws of God take hold of presumptious sinners, not
for sins of ignorance; and therefore it is not to be thought that any
punishment will be inflicted upon any for breach of the Sabbath till it be
universally acknowledged; so then if God has annexed death to the breakers of
it, doubtless it will be just, but we find in Nehemiahs time that although they
had made a market day of the Sabbath, Treading of Wine-presses, lading of
Ashes, and selling of all manner of provisions upon it, yet he does but contend
with them, he contends with both Jews and Gentiles, the Nobles of Judah and the
men of Tire, but inflicts no punishment upon either, Nehe. 13.15, 16, 17, 21.
But what a strange thing is this that men should count it a dangerous opinion,
to hold that the Sabbath is not in force because of the penalty; suppose it be
so, the same may be said of the rest of the Commandments: for instance the
first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods but me; he that worshipped
a strange God was to be put to death: now shall we not own this Commandment,
because the breakers of it were so punished; again, he that sheddeth man's
blood, by man shall his blood be shed: now is there any danger in the owning of
this command, Thou shall do no murder, because the punishment is in force too;
again, the fifth Commandment is Honor thy father and thy mother, but he that
cursed father or me; there was to be put to death: now shall we not honor
father and mother, and so shall we break this Commandment, because this
punishment belongs to the breakers of it? So that this objection is of no
weight nor use at all, except it be as a bears-skin put upon the truth to
afright children away, least they should look into it.

Obj. But we do not find any of the Apostles urge this command in any of their
Epistles, namely, Or as it is in the margin of some Bibles, that Law which said
do not commit Adultery, said do not kill; so that the 10. Commandments are
distinguished from other Laws, and they are all of them to be kept, because the
same Lawmakers does by one and the same Law command one as well as the other.
that the Sabbath day should be observed.

Answ. Neither do we find that the Apostles urged the 1.2. or 3. Command in
particular as laid down in the Table, but they are frequently urged in the
general, as in Romans 7.12. Chapter 13.8, 9, 10. and generals comprehend particulars:
and James says, Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point is guilty of all; and he proves it thus, because he that says do not
commit adultery, says also do not kill: now if thou commit no adultery, yet if
thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of the Law. The same argument may be
drawn for the thing in hand, he that says do not commit adultery, says also
keep the Sabbath; now if thou commit no adultery, yet if thou break the
Sabbath, thou art become a transgressor of the Law, Chap. 2.10, 11. And Paul
says, Circumcision is nothing nor uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping
of the Commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7.19. John says in his first Epistle Chap.
5.2, 3. By this we know that we love the Children of God when we love God and
keep his Commandments, for this is the love of God that we keep his
Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous; and if the Apostles had
not spoke a word to this command in general nor in particular, it is no ground
for us to lay it by, except the observation of it were forbidden, because it is
so plainly commanded by God, explained by Christ, observed by his disciples
both before and after his death, as was said before, and will further appear by
and by.

Obj. We do not find that any of the Churches kept the Sabbath.

Answ. That is no proof that they did not keep it, but it is clear that the
Church of Jerusalem kept it, though it is not plainly expressed, for they were so
zealous for the very customs, that Paul is counseled to purify himself, least
they should be offended at him, Act. 21.21, 24. now if they were for the
observation of those things that were but shadows, there is no doubt but they
were very strict for the observation of the Sabbath; and if there were such
offense taken against Paul for preaching against circumcision and the customs,
we need not question but if the Sabbath had been preached against, but we
should have heard a great noise of it in the Scriptures, and seen strong
convincing reasons why it was abolisht; and it is as clear that the Apostles
kept the Sabbath since the resurrection of Christ as before. Paul went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath day and sat down, and after the reading of the Law
preached the Gospel, Act. 13.14, 15. and told them of the ignorance of those
that dwelt at Jerusalem; of the voice of the Prophets which were read every
Sabbath day, verse. 27. and the Gentiles besought him that these words might be
taught to them the next Sabbath, verse. 42. And the next Sabbath came almost the
whole City together to hear the word of God, verse. 44. So that its clear that
the Sabbath was Paul's resting day and preaching day both to Jews and Gentiles,
that being the day that the Gentiles used to hear, and though they had a desire
to hear the same words again, yet it must be next Sabbath; and Paul fulfils
their desire and preaches to them the next Sabbath, and almost the whole City
came to hear. Can we think that if there had been no Sabbath, that Paul would
have countenanced them so in their ignorance? Or if the first day had been a
day that were observed, would he not have told them so? and that they might
have heard the word before the next Sabbath: And when Paul came to Philippi a
Gentile City, mind what is said, Act. 15.12, 13. We were in that City abiding
certain days, and on the Sabbath day we went out of the City by a river side
where prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down and spoke unto the women
that resorted thither; The seventh day has its title still, as is said by the
spirit in the Acts, speaking of certain days; this is singled out and called
the Sabbath day with an account how they spent it, and the blessing they
received upon it, they resorted to the place of prayer and there they preached;
and Lydias heart the Lord opened to attend to the words of Paul. And in Act.
17.2. it is said, That Paul, as his manner was, went in unto them, and three
Sabbath days reasoned with them out of the Scriptures. And when Paul came to
Corinth, which was a Gentile City, he found Aquila a Jew and his wife
Priscilla, and because they were of the same craft he abode with them, and
wrought, for by their occupation they were Tent-makers, and he reasoned in the
Synagogue every Sabbath day, and persuaded the Jews and Greeks, Act. 18.2, 3,
4. So that its manifest that the Greeks kept the Sabbath as well as the Jews,
and that though Paul wrought at his trade and made Tents, yet he rested every
Sabbath day; and as we have an account how he spent his time, namely in working
at his trade, so we have an account how he spent this time to wit the Sabbath.
Now if it be such a strong argument for the observation of the first day,
because Paul preached upon it once; what is this for the observation of the
seventh day, that Paul did not only preach constantly upon it? but where ever
the Spirit speaks of it he calls it the Sabbath day, without the least hint
that so he did to condescend to the weakness of others. And let it be showed by
the Scripture that the Apostles did countenance and own any shadow that was
done away, so as they owned and countenanced the keeping of the Sabbath; and
therefore we may follow the Apostles as they followed the Lord in this matter,
though we have not a express word that the Churches kept it. And indeed I think
I may say in this case as the Apostles said in another case, that it would have
been superflous for the Apostles to have told any people in their time that
such or such a Church kept the Sabbath; it being a truth not so much as
questioned that we hear of, but Jew and Gentiles both observed it. But now I
cease answering objections, having spoak to those that are the most material of
them that I have heard, and I shall proceed to another ground.

8. Consider the bondage and slavery that both man and beast would be in if
this doctrine were received for truth, would it no^ how ever have this tendency
to bring the world more into Atheism? For men would not allow themselves, nor
servants time to rest in, nor to hear the word of God if they were persuaded
that there were no Sabbath; yea and the greatest part of Saints are left to the
mercy of mercyless men, most of them being children and wives and servants, and
they cannot challenge a day in seven, nor a day in seventy, as their right to
rest upon and to worship the Lord in from any command of God if this doctrine
be true that the Sabbath is abolisht; and what is this but to bring a yoke of
bondage upon us, that neither we nor our fathers were able to bear; we should
not so much as take notice of the time how it goes in probability, for the way
of numbering is by sevens. But some will say it is good to observe one day in
seven, if it be not a constant day, that will be confessed for one to observe
one day, and another to observe another day; others are for a seventh day to be
constantly observed: but why not the seventh day which God has commanded, for
the seventh day is the Sabbath; it plainly appears that there is something of
the Table Law yet upon the Table of the hearts of most men though much worn out
by much transgression, for men generally plead to have one day in seven to rest
in, and yet because of custom they contend against this Holy Just Law of God
that was made in mercy for man. I am persuaded in my very heart and that not
without good ground, that if the seventh day had been observed as the first day
is, that no man that owns the Scripture would have questioned whether it ought
to be observed or no? or at least no opposition would have been made against
it; and when all is said, custom and worldly interest are the two great things
that stand in opposition to it.

9. And lastly, Consider those great and precious promises made to them that
keep the Sabbath according to the inside and spirituality of it; not that we
are so to spiritualize it as to make void the letter, but according to the
letter as Christ does: for instance Ye have heard, says Christ, it has been
said of old time, thou shall not commit adultery; but I say unto you whosoever
looks on a woman and lusts after her has committed adultery with her in
his heart, Mat. 5.28. Now if it be adultery to lust, doubtless it is to act,
and this is forbidden in the Commandment, for the Commandment is, thou shall
not commit adultery; but Christ unfolds this Commandment, and gives such a
sense of it as the Scribes and Pharisees understood not. Again the sixth
Commandment is, Thou shall do no murder; and John says, Whosoever hates his
brother is a murderer, 1 John 3.15. Now all murder was forbidden in the
command; but this was not understood to be murder, but John opens the
spirituality of the command: and the same may be said of the fourth command,
Remember the Sabbath to keep it Holy; all servile work is forbidden in it, and
that the Pharisees understood; but they did not understand that works of mercy,
as curing the sick, healing the diseased, might be done upon it: neither did
they understand that inward and spiritual rest that was held out in the
command, as appears by the words of the Lord, Isay. 58.13, 14. If thou turn
away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure upon my Holy day, and
call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord honorable, and shall honor
him not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words. So that the Saints are not only to cease from outward work in
their callings, but also from works that are inward and spiritually wicked,
that so the Sabbath might be a delight unto them, the Holy of the Lord
honorable. And mark the promise that it is to such Sabbath keepers, verse. 14.
Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and will feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy father, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. First, they shall
delight themselves in the Lord, and that will make the Sabbath a delight.
Secondly, they shall ride upon the high places of the earth; the high places of
the earth holds forth (as I conceive) the great opposition whether of great and
mighty men, or great walled Cities, according to that in Deuteronomy. 1.28. it has an
allusion to Isreal's subduing the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy 32.13. thou shall ride
upon them that is subdue and conquer them, as Psalm. 45.4. Psalm. 66.12. They
shall tread upon their high places: as in Deu. 33.39. They shall be as ashes
under the soles of their feet, Mal. 4.3. Now when did the Lords people do such
work as this since this prophecy? or is it not yet to be fulfilled?

Again consider what the Lord says, Isay 56.6, 7. Also the sons of the
stranger that join themselves to the Lord to serve him, and to love the name of
the Lord to be his servants, every one that keeps the Sabbath from polluting
it, and takes hold of my Covenant, even them will I bring to my Holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of prayer; their burnt-offerings and their
sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine Altar, for mine house shall be called an
house of prayer for all people. By the sons of the strangers I understand is
here meant Gentiles, who were strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel and a
far off, but now made nigh by the blood of Christ, and so they join themselves
to the Lord and serve him, and love the name of the Lord; these are such as
keep the Sabbath, and take hold of Gods Covenant, and it is such a Sabbath as
may be poluted, and therefore not Christ as some would have it; now the
promises that are made to these strangers, do look at clear Gospel times.

They shall be brought into Gods Holy Mountain and there be made joyful, when
its so mountainous that its the house of prayer for all people or for all
nations, as Christ says Mar. 11.17. Isay 56.8. again in verse 2. Blessed be the
man that does this, and the son of man that lays hold on it that keeps the
Sabbath from poluting it, and keeps his hand from doing any evil; thus says
the Lord unto the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, and choose the things that
please me, and take hold on my Covenant, even unto them will I give in my house
a name and a place better then of sons and daughters; I will give them an
everlasting name that shall not be cut off, verse. 2, 4, 5. The Eunuchs are
such as care for things that please the Lord, when the married cares for the
things that please his wife, 1 Cor. 7.32, 33. or according to that in Rev.
14.4. These are they that were not defilled with women, for they are Virgins,
these are they that follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; they sing as it were
a new song, and yet it is old, its the song of Moses the servant of God, and
the song of the Lamb. Rev. 15.2, 3. And when two parts shall be cut off and
dye, Zech. 13.8. the Eunuchs that keep the Sabbath shall have an everlasting
name, which shall not be cut off.

Now let us not think it incredible that the Sabbath should be yet in force,
because it has been so long laid by; it has been so with other truths and so
with this before now, it seemed to be so out of knowledge with Israel in the
wilderness, that when the people had gathered twice as much Manna on the sixth
day, they did not understand the meaning of it, but the Nobles came and told
Moses, Exodus 16.22. and Moses told them the thing that the Lord had said, that
to morrow was the rest of the Holy Sabbath: And also after their coming out of
Babylon when they had built the house of God and set it in order, placing the
Priests and Levits, and had chosen faithful men to distribute the maintenance
to their brethren, Neh. 13.10, 13. In a word their reformation was much about
the light of ours, and is confessed by the enlightened that it was a Type of
this reformation that the Lord has begun amongst us in these Isles, namely in
bringing his people our of Babylon, and building up of Sion; and indeed as
their sins and ours are alike in many things so in this, namely, in breaking
the fourth Commandment; for Nehemiah says in Chap. 13.15. That in those days
he saw in Judah some treading Winepresses on the Sabbath, and lading of Asses,
and bringing of Sheafs, as also Wine-grapes and Figs, and all manner of
burdens which they brought into Jerusalem upon the Sabbath day, and he
testified against them in the day wherein they sold victuals: notwithstanding
all the reformation yet this was seen in Judah, they had laid by the
observation of the Sabbath, and had made it a common working Market Day, as you
may see at large in that Chap. It was not in vain therefore that the Lord said,
Remember the Sabbath, he foreseeing how it would be slighted and forgotten,
not only by those that were brought out of litteral Babylon, but also by those
that should be brought out of spiritual Babylon in the latter days: but when
the day of the Lord burns as an oven, it will be remembered to some purpose,
Mal. 4.4. In the mean time the Lord is stirring up some of his poor babes and
sucklings, such he is pleased usually to discover truth unto at the first
breaking; out of it, and they are to contend for it though in much weakness.

But a word to the beginning and ending of the Sabbath, there are various
apprehensions about it, which for brevity sake I shall omit; the Scripture is
plain, that from evening, to evening, is the set time; or from the going down
of the Sun, to the going down of the Sun: this is clear from the beginning,
Genesis 1.5. The evening and the morning was the first day: evening and morning
make a complete natural day, and the evening goes before the morning, because
the darkness was before the light, verse. 1, 2, 3.

Obj. But some will say it is not said the evening and the morning was the
seventh day.

Answ. If the evening and the morning be the sixth day, the evening and the
morning must needs be the seventh day, unless we should think that the seventh
day has no night belonging to it; some think that the reason why no mention is
made of the evening of the seventh day, is, because the Sabbath is a day of joy
and delight, or an earnest of the new Jerusalem state wherein shall be no
night, Rev. 21.25. Night does frequently in the Scripture hold forth a stare of
affliction, but the Sabbath is a holy sanctified time, on it the Creator
rested and was refreshed, and commanded the observation of it that his
creatures might be refreshed.

Nehemiah's practice is sufficient proof for the beginning of the Sabbath at
evening, Chap. 13.19. who when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, he
commanded them to be shut till after the Sabbath. And if you would know when
the evening begins the Evangelist does inform you, Mark. 1.32. At even when the
Sun did set they brought unto him all that were diseased; when the Sun does set
then begins the evening, then begins the holy rest or seventh day Sabbath; and
so the disciples of Christ began the Sabbath, and so the Lords ancient people
celebrate the Sabbath unto this day.

But what confusion are they in who say the Sabbath was changed from the
seventh day to the first day, and yet observe neither but pare of the first day
and part of the second day, for they begin their Sabbath at midnight when a
good part of the first day is spent, and they end at midnight when a good part
of the second day is spent, and yet they will have this to be a Sabbath, yea
and a first day Sabbath, and will highly charge a man to be an offender if he
work one hour upon the first day, though themselves work five; and thus we see
how Antichrist has changed times as well as Laws, Dan. 7.28. a first day
Sabbath in stead of the seventh day Sabbath, in stead of from even to evening,
from midnight to midnight, when most are fast a sleep, being insensible of the
beginning of their Sabbath, or of the ending of it.

But blessed be the Lord that he has revealed this his ancient, useful,
honorable truth, to wit, the Holy seventh day Sabbath, notwithstanding all the
inventions of Antichrist to bury it in oblivion, and that he is pleased to
separate a remnant, that are resolved to search and try their ways, and to turn
unto him, to follow him in the ways of his precepts, (notwithstanding the
dragons wrath,) who will not take things upon trust, nor go upon the legs of
men, but will try all things, and hold fast that which is good, for they are
virgins, and the Lamb they will follow though their company be small and their
charges great: they will not be afraid of the Sabbath because it was given to
the Jews, no more then they are afraid of the Adoption, and the glory, and the
promises, and the other nine lively Oracles, which were all given to the Jews,
Romans 9.4. And this I may modestly say to the praise of the Lord of the Sabbath,
and without boasting, that if the Saints did know how the Lord delights to meet
with his people in this way of obedience in celebrating the Sabbath, they would
soon call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord honorable, and honor him
by ceasing from their own works, as God did from his, and do those works which
are suitable for the blessed season. But I shall say no more at present save
only this, that who ever they are that would follow the Lord in this
appointment of his, they must labor much in the strength of his spirit to get
this world under them, for it stands in direct opposition to earthly men, and
earthly principles; therefore pray with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.36. Incline
mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

FINIS.

