King David's CASE Applied To King James AND King William; IN A SERMON Preached
at Christ-Church, Dublin, on the Fifth of November, 1691.

By John Stearne, Curate of St. Nicholas within the Walls; and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable Sir Charles Porter, Lord High Chancellor, and One of the Lords
Justices of Ireland.

If your delight be in Thrones and Scepters, O ye Kings of the People, honor
Wisdom, that ye may Reign for evermore.

Wisdom of Solomon VI. XXI. DVBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook on Ormonde-Key, and
are to be sold by Elishal Dolson at the Stationers-Arms in Castle-street, and
by Robert Thornton, in Capel-street. 1691.

A SERMON ON Psalm IV. Ver. 2, 3, 4.
O Ye Sons of men, how long will ye turn my Glory into Shame? how long will ye
love Vanity, and seek after leasing?

But Know that the Lord has set a part him that is Godly for himself: the
Lord will hear when I call unto him.

Stand in aw and sin not: Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be
Still.

GOdliness supports the Throne; and more sets off a Crown than all its Jewels:
it makes a King safe in the Protection of Heaven; Strikes his Enemies with
Terror; and in his Subjects raises an Expectation of many glorious Days under
his blessed Reign. Such Royal Virtues enriched the soul of Henry the VII.
(Emperor of Germany) that (as a very faithful Historian informs the world)
ab uno ipso laborantis Imperil modela speraretur, it might have been reasonably
expected that by him alone the whole Body of the languishing Empire should have
been restored to an healthful State. And did not the many and great Military,
Civil and Religious Accomplishments (well known unto more than the Christian
World, in the famed Achievements) of our present Monarch, bear up the linking
Hearts of all our Protestant Kingdoms, with the justest Hopes of seeing (one
happy day) all the Miseries that oppressed or threatened our Church and State
seasonably removed or prevented by his Successful Arm? And, according to such
an Expectation, the careful Providence of God (the All wise Disposer of Crowns
and Scepters) has been so signally displayed in a long Series of Mercies to
him; in carrying on and in completing that truly Christian Work; that a man
must be either wilfully blind, in not observing, or basely ungrateful, in not
acknowledging that his Royal Person was the Chief Instrument of God in that
surprising Revolution, which is deservedly the Joy of the present Generation,
and which will be the Wonder of future Ages. The sudden News of such a
Deliverer's Coming into England, on this memorable Day, was I conceive, to
many, (as the Angel's Message was unto the Shepherds, at our Savior's Comlng
into the World) Good tidings of great Joy. for, as if he had been a greater
Light made to rule the Day of our Deliverance, he still grew stronger as he
advanced; and with his prevailing Beams soon dispel'd those Clouds which had
long hung over our Heads, making all black and melancholy round about Us. Yet
(as the inconstant Jews presently forgot God their Savior and lightly esteemed
Moses his Servant whom he had chosen to conduct them, with Wonders, toward
Canaan) how soon did too many repine at the forward and almost uninterrupted
Approaches of their own Happiness, and Slander the Footsteps of their great
Deliverer? Such is the uneasy humor of some that they are always discontented
under their Oppressions, and yet always undervalue the relieving Hand; so that
neither a Popish, nor a Protestant King, nor yet a most merciful God can please
them. Such dissatisfied Creatures were the Men that both by secret and open
Methods opposed our Royal Psalmist. Though God had excluded Saul for his
wickedness and given his Kingdom to a Neighbor that was better than He; and
though David was anointed by Samuel at Gods express Command, yet how many in the
Kingdom of Israel joined their Endeavors with Readiness Malice, to obstruct
David's just Accession to the Crown? And, when Saul was fallen ingloriously on
the Mountains of Gilboa, how many labored to promote the Interest of his
Family and to disturb King David in his Possession? Not only Foreign Nations
(the Jebusites and Philistines, the Moabites, Syrians and Amalekites) set
themselves against him; but (as if there had been a joynt-conspiracy to cross
the six'd Resolve of Heaven) a considerable Number of the Jews complied with
Abner's design, to place Readiness Son upon the Throne. This (as many Judicious
Expositers do conclude) was the special Occasion upon which David composed the
present Psalm. In the first Verse he appeals to God as the Witness, Judge and
Defender of his righteous Cause; gratefully owns his past Mercies to him in the
Day of Trouble and humbly prays for future; and then in our Text addresses his
Speech unto the Sons of Men by a double earnest Interrogation (implying at once
the greatness of his own Concern and of their Folly in opposing him) How long
will ye turn my Glory into Shame? how long will ye love Vanity, and seek after
lies? How long will ye think to deprive me of that Honor which God's Goodness
has conferred upon me? How long will ye look upon me as an Ambitious Usurper
and expose me as such unto the scorn and contempt of the people? How long will
ye make it your Business and Satisfaction to contrive, encourage and carry on
such traitorous Counsels, Designs and Plots against my Life and Crown, as will
most certainly prove vain Devices and lying Imaginations; most grossly
disappointing all your big Hopes of compassing my ruin in the end? God has
already often heard my Prayer, and enlarged me when I was in Distress; and
therefore he will hear me when I call upon him hereafter to confound your
Devices. Be not therefore, O ye Sons of Men! any longer so bold and foolish as
to persist in such unsuccessfull and and unjust Attempts; but know (assuredly)
that I am so far from ambitiouslly aspiring unto the Throne of Israel that God
has qualified me (by his holy Oil) for the Government of that People, over whom
he has wonderfully set me apart, or in an extraordinary manner made me King;
that I may Act for himself, for his Honor in promoting his true Religion in
the Land; and thereby advance the Happiness of all his People committed to my
Charge.

Having thus acquainted you with the most probable Occasion of this Psalm; and
given you a very natural Explication of our Text in particular; I shall not any
further enlarge upon the words as relating to K. David and his Enemies, either
in Readiness or his own Court; but raise from them one Proposition of more general
concernment; and fairly apply it to the Double Blessing which we ought to
celebrate this remarkable Day; Namely, the great deliverance of our three
Kingdoms from Popery by the timely Discovery of the Gun-Powder-Treason, to the
peaceful K. James the First; and the great Deliverance of the same Kingdoms,
from the same misery, by the seasonable coming of King William the Third into
England: For though his Landing was designed on the Fourth of this Month,
Providence deferred it 'till the Fifth; as if the Birth of so great a Prince
(of the Ancient and most Illustrious House of Nassaw) and his Marriage with so
great a Princess as our now Most Gracious Queen, had already suficiently
signalized one Day to after Ages; or as if it would make us more mindful of
God's mercies to us on the Fifth of November, by delivering us twice from
Popery on the same day; in the Years 1605. and 1688. A Year as wonderful for
God's bringing safely King William's Navy to the salvation of England, as the
Year 1588 was for God's destroying the King of Spain's Armada, which (as if it
had been really Invincible) proudly threatened England with a most dreadful
Invasion. So that three days especially in this Month of November deserve a
more particular Remark in our Reformed Kingdoms. The Fourth on which (in the
Year 1650) God with an hopeful Prince of Orange blesled, not only the United
Provinces (for such a Blessing was too great for one particular State) but the
whole Protestaut world; and on which also (in the year 1677) God blessed the
same Prince of Orange with a Royal Consort: The Seventeenth, on which the Light
of the Gospel, after the black Night of Queen Mary's Reign began to shine forth
in the Glorious Rising of Queen Elizabeth; And the Fifth, on which a most
Horrid Work of Darkness was designed for the final Extinction of the same
Blessed Light, but, was (at the very Midnight immediately foregoing) most
happily discovered, by the wonderful Providence and Mercy of God to her
Successor, as well in the defense of the truly Catholic and Apostolic Faith,
as in the English Throne, K. James the First. The History of this Damnable
Plot, and this unexpected Disappointment to the bloody Hopes of Rome, will
ensily come under this one Proposition, which (according to my Promise) I now
raise from the two first Verses of my Text.

Though Godly Kings (wonderfully set apart by God) do answer Gods expectation in
making his true Religion their principal Care, yet the Sons of Men do often
vainly endeavor to appose their Persons and to disturb their Government.

What can be more evident to all the world than the Truth of this Assertion in
the many Contrivances and Designs against K. James, both before and after his
coming to the Crown of England?

Should I particularly acquaint you with all the illegal, base Methods which
the Enemies of that Crowned Head took, to hinder his succeeding in the Throne
of England, my discourse would soon swell beyond the ordinary limits of a
Sermon. Therefore (considering especially that most of this Honorable Auditory
are no strangers to the transactions of our own Kingdoms) I shall be content
to take notice but of one Historical Passage in relation to K. James, which may
be sufficient to demonstrate how vainly the Sons of Men contrived and
endeavored to turn his Glory into Shame.

This day will tell you that I mean the Gun-Powder-Treason: A Wickedness so
detestable to all that have not cast of Humanity, and so great in it self,
that it neither needs, nor will easily allow of any Aggravation. But the more
Universal and Cruel It was in the Intention of our Enemies, the more gratefully
should we acknowledge the merciful Providence of Almighty God in delivering
from it (as on this day) K. James, with the three Estates of the Realm of
England, assembled in Parliament; to the Glory of his Name and the Preservation
of the Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms.

When many secret Plots had been laid in vain and many open Attempts had proved
unsuccessful; when neither the thundering Curses of Four Holy Fathers ( Paul
the IV. Pius the V. Gregory XIII. and Sixtus the V.) nor the great
Condescension of Pope Pius the IV. could prevail: when neither the Spanish
Armada nor the Italian Arts could speed against the Providence of Heaven (which
carefully preserved the Learned and Religious Queen Elizabeth, to the forty
fifth Year of her Reign, and the sixty ninth of her Age) Pope Clement the VIII
(wisely foreseeing the vanity of striving against a Monarch that was so much
the delight and care of Heaven) thought it the most politic way, to provide
timely against any other Heretick's succeeding in the Throne of England. And
the more effectually to compass this Design of His Holiness, two Breves were
speedily dispatched into England; strictly enjoining both the Clergy and Laity
not to suffer any but a sworn Papist to take Possession of the Crown, after Q.
Elizabeth's death; or (which was the same) not to let K. James be King of
England. From this Command of the Pope, the Gun-Powder-Treason (or the Plot of
blowing up the Parliament house) (according to Camden and other good
Historians) took its Rise; for these Breves had so powerfully wrought upon
Catesby (the Contriver) that (although his Holiness's Design had been long
negotiated in vain) he could never be quiet; nor content to be damned alone:
but having by the ready Assistance of the Devil, luckily hit upon this
compendious method of destruction by Gunpowder; and thinking the Plot of some
of his party against the King's particular life, but a pitiful under taking,
and not any considerable service to the Catholic Cause; he brought several,
(by degrees) into his own Conspiracy. A design which (as we learn from the
Consession of Guido Faux (the person that boldly undertook to lay the lighted
Match unto the Trains of Gunpowder) Catesby judged most, proper, because it
was sit that Justice and Punishment should be executed in that Place where
their Religion had been (in their opinion) unjustly suppressed by Penal Laws.
But were the Jesuits unconcerned in a Plot for Murdering an Heretical King and
People? No certainly: it had fixed an eternal Blot upon their Character, had
they been idle when their great Master the Devil (who was a Murderer from the
Beginning) was close at Work: These siery Spirits therefore (besides other
Encouragement and Assistance) assured the Laity of a plenary Absolution; soon
removed the Scruple of their tender Consciences about destroying the Righteous
with the Wicked (Catholics and Heretics together) and more strictly obliged
them All to perform their Oath of Secrecy and Perseverance in the great
Undertaking, by their own addred Sacrament. All this being done; and all the
necessary Materials (not for building but) for blowing up the Parliament House
(being at length conveyed into a convenient, hired Cellar, the joyful Day drew
near: but the Letter sent unto a Noble Lord, from one of the Conspirators (to
diswade him from appearing in the Parliament house, on the fifth of November,
and upon a deliberate, repeated Review of which the Gunpowder Plot was happily
discovered) was mistaken in telling him, that God and Man concurred at this time
to punish the Iniquity of the Times. The Sons of Men indeed, were ready; but
God (with a watchful Eye of Mercy and Compassion) saw the nearness of our
danger, and all the Plotting of our Enemies? It Is God's time and Prerogative to
save in the greatest extremity of Danger: to save Isaac from the very Altar,
Daniel from the Den of Lions; and the three Children from the burning fiery
Furnace. Such a Deliverance looks like the Deliverance of a God; and such a
seasonable Salvation does most magnify his Power, his Wisdom and his Mercy. So
far was the Merciless Project for an utter Extirpation of the Protestant
Religion, carried on with all imaginable Secrecy, that for all the frustrated
Attempts in Q. Elizabeth's Reign toward a Resetlement of Rome's Supremacy in
England, Her overjoyed Agents promised themselves now an ample Recompense and
Satisfaction, in their effecting this Masterpiece of Villainy, that might
Supersede the Labor of any other Treasonable Contrivances. But, tho, Rome had
brought the Mighty Work unto the Birth, She wanted Strength to bring forth. How
vain is the Devil's and the Jesuit's Consult! how unsuccessfully do they Club
for the Ruin of a Kingdom when Heaven is pleased to Thwart their Destructive
Designs! They may confidently say (as in the forementioned Letter to the Lord
Mount-eagle) Men shall receive a Terrible Blow, and yet shall not see who hurt
them; They may pray for the Success of any Bloody Design against all they Damn
for Heretics (as the Gunpowder Traitors did) Prosper, O Lord, their Pains
that labor in this Cause, day and night; Let Heresy vanish like Smoke, and
let the Memory of it perish with a Crack; all this while that God unto whom
nothing is secret, to whom the darkness and light are both alike, beholds all
their Revengfull Labors; sees every Step they silently advance in their
Designs; and laughs at their Folly. He hears their Uncharitable Prayers; but it
is to disappoint them, for the Salvation of his Anointed, and the Happiness of
his People. Many Devices are in their Hearts; but the Counsel of the Lord, and
that alone shall stand; even when the Wicked fall by their own Coxtrivances; as
the Gunpowder Traitors did: Some of them (among whom was Catesby, the Subtle
Inventer of the Plot) being Disabled by the Providential Blowing up of
Gunpowder it self, which they were preparing for the Destruction of others; as
if this had been purposely designed to make them more sensible of their lately
intended Mischief: Some being actually killed in their hasty Flight, upon the
Unexpected Discovery of their Bloody Purpose; particularly, by One Shot, both
Catesby and Percy; from whose Dwelling the Powder was brought undiscovered,
into the Cellar under the Parliament, House: And others, being apprehended,
experienced how Benesicial the Plot won'd be (as their Confessors told them) in
the Consequences of it; as Beneficial as being fairly Hanged for Treason. Thus
was The Lord known by the Judgment which he Executed; By trapping thus the
Wicked in the works of their own Hands. And since God did so opportunely
deliver our Forefathers, at the very Midnight before that Morning in which
they were appointed for the Slaughter, by so Great, Surprising and Wonderful a
Mercy all the Sons of After Generations should be Confirmed in a Comfortable
Hope of God's Favor toward them, when their Enemies seem to be in the
greatest probability of compassing their Destruction: For God is the same
yssterday, to day and for ever: his Hand is not shortened that he cannot save
Now, as well as in Former Ages, Godly Kings and States professing his Holy and
Eternal Truth. In Extreme Distress therefore, let the Resolution of every one
of us be (like that of Eliphaz in the book of Job) I will seck unto God and
unto God will I commit my Cause: unto God who does great things and
unsearchable; marvelous things without number: who disappointeth the Devices of
the Crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their Emerprise: he takes the
wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel of the froward is carried
headlong: but he saves the poor from the Sword and from the hand of the
Mighty. God does often give such a Deliverance to his People as is joined with
the Consusion of their Enemies: The same Sea opened a Way for the Israelites
and a Grave for the Egyptians. So that the Plots of the Wicked are vain; not
only because they are commonly frustrated in their Hopes of ruining, by them,
Religious Kings and States; but also, because they prove in the end most
destrnctive, of their own Temporal as well as Eternal Happiness. Thus though the
Gunpowder Traitors said (in effect) among themselves, Come and let us root
them out that they may be no more a People; that the very Name of Protestant
may be no more in Remembrance; yet they imagined such a Mischievous Device as
they were not able to perform: they dug a Pit and sunk into the midst of it
themselves: Their Intended Mischief against the Lord's Anointed, like Arrows
shot against Heaven, returned upon their own Heads, and their Wickedness fell
upon their own Pates. So perished those Discontented Gentlemen; and so let all
their Enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love thee be joyful and glad in
thee; and let all such as delight in thy Salvation say always, the Lord be
praised.

That this Duty of Thanksgiving may be more cheerfully performed, let Us now
(our Proposition raised from the two first Verses of our Text being dispatched)
take into Our Consideration the Third Verse (containing the Royal Psalmist's
Exhortation, inferred from his foregoing Address to God and Man) and Apply it
to the Case of all such as are disaffected to the present Government Stand in
awe and sin not: Commune with your own Heart upon your Bed and be still.

When we are withdrawn from the Distracting Noise and Hurry of the world; and
the Stillness of Night favour's our Recollected Thoughts, we are well disposed
for a Solemn Meditation on the most weighty Matters; for a serions Reflection
on our own ways; on our Duty to God and the King. At such a Season therefore
does the Psalmist advise his Enemies (who had long in vain opposed his
Government) to reason with themselves about the wickedness of their Undutiful
Carriage toward him; and to have an awful Regard to the Omnipresent,
Omniscient and Almighty God, as a special means to keep them from sinning
against his Anointed; for Plots carried on against Godly Kings, God interprets
as Acted against his Divine Majesty, whose Vicegerents they are in this lower
World. Such is King David's Confidence in the Justice of his Cause, that he
seems willing to referr the whole matter unto their own Consciences: would they
but lay aside all Passion, Pride, Revenge' or Private Interest; and give
themselves time to judge calmly of things according to Reason and Equity; he
does not in the least doubt, but that upon such a deliberate Communing with
themselves about the Folly of their Proceedings, they would soon be still or
desist from all Traitorous Designs and Seditious Practices.

Here then, let us a little while reason together, about a quiet Submission to
that Mighty Monarch whose Glory too many have vainly endeavored to turn into
Shame; though God has wonderfully set him apart for the Preservation of his
People and the True Religion, in more than our own Kingdoms,

For the Restoration and Security of the Romish Worship, many Plots against
King James the First, both in Scotland and in England were Contrived and
Carried on. but Heaven disappointed all. And as the like Reason (or Pretense
rather) engaged the Sons of Men in the Last Reign, to make use of the most
Unjust Methods and most Lamentable Shifts to put King William for everby the
Succession; so the same God did not only enable him to Conquer all those
Difficulties, but has also since, Confirmed him in the Possession of the Throne
by a Compleater Victory over his Enemies. The Hand of God has been so visible
in cutting off many of them; in driving others round the Nation; and in
scattering some from one Kingdom to another, that some of themselves have
heavily cursed their Pretended Heir to our three Kingdoms, as one Great Cause
of all their Miseries. The Prince of Wales indeed sounds like an Immediate Heir
to the Crown of England; but that Adopted Child of Royal Grace might have been
as properly called King of Salom as Prince of Wales; for we know neither his
Father, nor Mother, nor Descent; neither his Beginning of Days, nor (since he
is got into France) are we like to hear of his End of Life. So that (to borrow
the Expression of a Learned Paraphrast concerning Melthizedeck) he stands in
Story as a kind of Immortal Prince, without any Successor. Though this Cheat was
too gross to pass with the more Discerning People, yet certainly it might, in
time, have made a good After-Game for a great part of the Nation; and the
longer such an Imposture had kept Possession in the Minds of Men, it would have
been removed with greater Difficulty. Timely, therefore, did the Prince of
Orange (too Wise to be Imposed on by a Pack of Women, Knaves and Jesuits; and
too Brave and Daring to be frightened out of his Undoubted Right by any Hunslow
Campaigns) Resolve upon and prepare for the Deliverance of three Kingdoms from
Popery and Slavery: and on this Noted Day he came: He came the Great Defender
of our Faith, and all that is dear to us in Mortality. And since Almighty God
has been so Prodigiously Merciful to these Nations as to raise up such a Mighty
Deliverer for us in the Day of our Distress, let us (when we are out of the
Throng of Worldly Concerns) consider with our selves how little Reason we have
to be Dissatisfied under the Present Government; or rather how highly our
Careful Monarch has obliged us all to study to be quiet and do our own business
and so, make his Reign easy unto him and a Blessing unto our selves.

The Sun has not twice gone his Annual Round since God and King William went
forth with our Army to Battle and to Victory: And can we already forget what
Miseries we Suffered and what we Feared? Had not the All-Wise God put a timely
stop to the Violent Proceedings of some Bigoted Papists (who strongly
influenced the whole Party) we might easily have foreseen that our Nation (in a
short time) would have groaned under all those Miseries which our Brethren (of
the Reformed Churches abroad) have suffered under the Unmerciful Powers of
France. We cannot surely but remember, when men imagined craftily against us;
and Gravely laid their Heads together in a Mock-Parliament House, to undo us
with One Consent; when they said (and were as good as their word) Come and let
us take to our selves the Houses of God in Possession: And is it a Grateful
Return for a Deliverance from such Inveterate and Implacable Enemies, and the
Restoration of our Pure Public Worship, for any to continue still so foolish
as to imitate the peevish Israelites. who desired a Deliverance from Egypt, and
when they were Delivered as earnestly wished to return unto their old Slavery.
O ye Sons of Men! How long will ye live Dissatisfied, as if you prayed for
nothing more than to have our Holy Altars again abused by Superstition and
Idolatry? how long will ye love Vanity? As if you would be glad once more to
see this House of God sinely Dressed with Babies and Pictures; the
Entertainment and Diversion of Children and Fools. Men should consider that as
Relapses in the Natural Body are commonly more Fatal than the First Disease,
so, should we again fall under Popery, our Last Estate would be worse that the
First. And shall any endeavor to bring upon themselves and others their Former
Miseries, with an Unsupportable Addition of New Calamities? Let us therefore be
so Truly Wise as to Commune with our own Hearts about these things; and be
still under the Present Dispensation of Providence. Surely (whatsoever may be
the Opinions of any Interested Persons in our own Kingdoms) Foreign Nations
will Condemn us for perfect Madmen, if we do not, in this our day, so consider
the Things that belong unto our Peace, as to sit still under our own Vines and
Fig Trees, and cheerfully eat the Fruit of our own, and of our Royal Master's
Labors. Since we have the greatest reason to address unto our King as St. Paul
did to his most Noble Faelix, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great Quietness, and
very Worthy Deeds are done unto this Nation by thy Providence, we accept it
always, and in all places with all thankfulness; Seeing we are obliged unto so
Just an Acknowledgment, surely we should be so far from harboring any
Seditious Murmurings or Disloyal Thoughts, that we should rather every night
(before we give any Sleep unto our Eyes or Slumber to our Eyelids upon our
Bed) earnestly beg a Blessing upon that Royal Person through whose most Generous
Affection, most Undaunted Courage and most Prudent Conduct we all (under God)
do dwell in Safety all the Day, and lie down in Peace at Night. Should any
Dissatisfied Persons object against this, that since the Papists Live and are
Mighty, it is in vain for any Preachers to talk of dwelling safely; I reply to
such in our Savior's words, why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? Since
God has at sundry time, and in diverse manners delivered their Fathers and
themselves from a great Death; from the Lion and from the Bear, they ought with
the United Strength of Faith and Reason, to conclude that (if they put their
Trust in him) he will yet deliver them from every Uncircumsised Philistine. And
I would have them consider moreover (as a full Answer to all such Unreasonable
Murmurings) that it is not their Business to understand the Deep Intrigues of
State; and that it must be a very Impertinent Boldness to enquire into the
Secret Reasons of them: let them therefore mind what more nearly concerns them,
and (particularly) at this time, the Generous Spirit and Quiet Carriage of
Mephibosheth under the loss of his own Estate; as it is written for our
Instruction in the 2. Sam. 19.30. When the King had given part of his Estate to
the Treacherous Ziba, saying, Thou and Ziba divide the Land: Mephibosheth (in
the Transport of his Unmanageable Joy, at the General Happiness of the Nation,
upon King David's returning home from Battle) does not only consent to what
King David granted unto Ziba (his Malicious Enemy) but (as if the Safety of a
King, on the Preservation of whose Royal Person the Public Welfare did depend,
had been a sufficient Portion for any Loyal, Affectionate Subject) he thus
resigns his whole Estate; Yea, let him (let even Ziba that labored to take
away my Life and Reputation) take all, seeing that my Lord the King is come
again in Peace to his own House. The Application of this Historical Passage
being very easy, I hope you will make it unto your selves: for I cannot allow
my self the Liberty of any further Enlargement. To close all therefore; Since
we have now such a Godly Protestant King and such a Pious Protestant Queen upon
the Throne, as our Kingdoms have never enjoyed together: Since God has Signally
Blessed with many Victories (shall I say, or with one continued Conquest) our
Glorious General (whose Immortal Actions, not only the Present Generation but
late Posterity (after all that their Gratitude can perform) must leave to be
Completely Rewarded in a rieher world, when God shall have put all Enemies
under his Feet; even the Last Enemy that shall be destroyed, Death it self;) In
a word, Since God has Mercifully Answered all our Prayers, and Disappointed all
our Unreasonable Fears and Jealousies; let not the harsh, Ungrateful Voice of
Murmuring interrupt our more sweet, acceptable Acclamatinons of Joy: but Stand
in awe, and sin not against God or his Anointed; Commune with your own Hearts
upon your Beds and be Still.

FINIS

