To Sir Richard Cocks.
Sir Richard,
AS I am a Commoner of England, it is, as I told you before, my Right and my
Duty to take notice, and complain to the House of Commons, of all, or any such
matters of public concern as are proper for the Inquiry or Consideration of
that House. And as I am a Christian, I am much more obliged to use that Right,
and discharge that Duty, when they are such as do affront, or do Contempt to
the Christian Religion, which is the Religion of the Nation, and so Essential a
part of this Constitution, that it is one of the Fundamental Principles of our
Laws, that whatever Laws are enacted in any thing contrary to this Religion,
they are so far void and null. This is the common Right and Duty of every
Commoner of England. But besides all this, I have been for some Years, by the
special Providence of Almighty God, engaged in his more immediate Service, and
without limitation to any special Charge; so that wherever I have opportunity
for his Service, I am obliged faithfully to discharge it. And besides all this,
I am obliged by Oath to be faithful to the present King, which I intend, by the
Grace of God, faithfully to perform, tho for special, and, I think, good
reasons, I refuse to take it again. These are great Obligations, and such as I
cannot discharge without taking notice and complaining of what I observe
greatly amiss in both Houses of Parliament. And I shall do it first to you, as
my proper Representative; and by you desire it may be represented to the House,
as you will answer it to your Country, for which you serve.

In your House I observe such abominable Impiety, and Contempt of Religion, as
greater has rarely been known: I have heard it complained of by Members of the
House, that a Man can hardly mention any thing of God or Religion there, but he
shall be in danger to be ridiculed or laughed at. And when I have asked, why no
body moved the House that some of them might be called to the Bar, and made
Examples, the common Answer has been, It would be to no purpose. Which is the
Shame of the whole Horse, and notorious Evidence of their Impudence and
Ignorance of what becomes such Assemblies, in one part of them; and of such
Baseness, as makes them unworthy of the Name of Christians in the rest; as if
the generous Discharge of so great and noble a Duty, was not of it self a thing
to great purpose; as if the Fearful, or such as are ashamed of Christ, or his
Words, are not to have their part with Infidels and Unbelievers; that is, with
such as the rest of their Fellow Members of whom they complain; as if their
Baseness might not reasonably be imputed by the others to Infidelity and
Disbelief of the Religion, which they profess, to the Scandal of Religion, and
Hardening those poor Creatures in their Impiety. It is no wonder if the whole
Nation abound in Infidelity, and all kind of Wickedness, when there is no more
Religion in those who should correct it among the Commons, and the
Latitudinarian Bishops among the Lords. And now I appeal to the Consciencies of
all, who have any Sense of Religion, and to the dreadful Tribunal of Almighty
God, whether these things be not true, and whether there be not more danger to
the Nation from such a House of Commons, and such Bishops, than from Popery,
and from all the Priests and Jesuits in the Nation, if they were as many more
as they are.

And where there is no more Fear of God, it is no wonder if there be not that
Honor and Respect for the King, that there ought to be: Freedom of Debates in
Parliament is undoubtedly the Right of the Subject: but if under pretense of
Freedom of Debates any Members shall do acts of Insolence and Disrespect to the
King, that is no part of their Right, but a Violation of Duty to the King, and
tending to the Dissolution of the Government, and ought to be corrected.

That your late Votes, grounded upon a false and foolish Letter to a Member of
Parliament, was such, is believed by many, to get an advantage against the
King; and to prevent that, it is likely many did comply in their Votes, who did
not see any other reason for it; and the Choice of the Chairman for that
Committee, a Person, who was turned out of her Service by the late good Queen,
has declared openly in your Lobby to my self, that he thought Vice ought to be
encouraged, and is reported to have expressed no little disrespect to the King
in your House before now, is a considerable Aggravation of the Indignity. How
such things can be consistent either with Conscience and Religion, Civil Duty
to our Country, and one of the best Governments in the World, or their Oaths of
Fidelity to the King, I do not understand: nor so much as (...) common Prudence
for themselves and their own Rights The King has showed himself a Prince of
great Courage, and of as great Prudence and Conduct. Almighty God has by him,
as his Instrument, in Confederacy with diverse of the chief Catholic Princes,
vouchsafed us a happy Peace, if we have the Discretion to use it as we ought,
and as becomes Persons sensible of his Goodness and of the respect they ought
to have for his Instuments in it. But I doubt these Politicians do but
egregiously befool themselves with a vain Conceit and Presumption of having the
Purse of the Nation. For certainly the King has as little need of them, as
they have of him: and by such Politics they do but provoke the just
Indignation, not only of a wise Prince, but of all honest and faithful
Subjects; and most of all, of those Confederates, who, if this King should die,
as he must one day, may, by the just Judgment of God, enter into a Confederacy
of themselves to correct their Ingratitude and Folly. Nay, should the King but
dissolve this Parliament, and in a Declaration set out such Reasons as he may
for that, and for Calling of another, their little Politics with themselves
might probably be soon in the dirt. The Pretense of the There are other more
proper, natural, and effectual Means to remove all Fear of Popery, than such
Violence of Factions: of which the King cannot but know something.
Growth of Popery has been made use of to so ill purpose heretofore; has so
little ground at this time, more than what proceeds from the Negligence of the
Clergy in assisting condemned Persons, and visiting the Sick, and the Obstinacy
and Unconcernedness of a Party of Prudential Latitudinarian Bishops, for what
does more properly belong to their Charge, and particularly for mending their
Cause, and making that sound, which is indefensible at present; and is raised,
I believe, so unseasonably to serve and support a lame and tottering Cause,
that it is like to prove the Shame and Confusion both of it, and of those who
make use of such indirect Means for that purpose. Let me but know who were the
Composers of that Letter, and had the Impudence and Folly to call me (as it is
commonly understood) Madman Convert, (two Lies at once) and I do not doubt but
to give you such Account of the whole matter, as will sufficiently satisfy
both the House and all honest and wise Men in the Nation. What I have more to
say, I shall reserve till I see what Use is made of this. I hope the House will
consider what is to be done, both to expiate that provoking Wickedness against
God, and to correct, as they deserve, all Indignities done to the King: and you
shall always find me ready, in what belongs to me, to serve both, and my
Country, in the best manner I can.

Your Humble Servant Edward Stephens.


