THE TRUE WAY Of Uniting the People of God In These NATIONS. Opened in a Sermon
Preached in the Chapel at White Hall, Jan. 1. 1659.

By PETER STERRY.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1660.

TO THE Christian Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Thought not of troubling the Press with this Sermon, until I had that Task
imposed upon me by some worthy Persons, and Honorable Members of this present
Parliament, who were Auditors. When I have been meditating upon the Works of
God with us in these Days, that Scripture has come into my mind, which our
Savior propounds to his Apostles, as a Cure of their Ambition, and a quickening
Cordial for their Mutual Love: The first shall be last, and the last shall be
first. As the Apothecary beats his rich Spices very Compositio perfecta per
minimas parts.
small to the finest powder, then turns them often over from top to bottom, from
the bottom to the top again; that so he may make a perfect mixture of them into
one Body. Thus the Lord beats and bruiseth his People in these Nations; thus
he raises up, and casts down; he sets them up over the heads, he lays them
low under the feet of each other by many Changes, and Vicissitudes. The end of
all is, that He may hide Pride, Ambition, and the Love of this World from our
Eyes; that He may work us through Humility, Meekness, and Mutual love unto the
Unity of the Spirit, and the sweet Fellowship of one Mystical Body in our Lord
Jesus.

The little pleasure which I take in, as also the little profit, which for the
most part redounds from Verbal Apologies have made me long silent, while thou
may perhaps have read, or heard reported words, as having proceeded from me
in a public Sermon, which were absolutely untrue both for the form of
Expression, and the Sense. It seems not unfit upon this occasion of appearing
in Print, nor improper for my present Subject, to give thee this Account of my
self.

First, It appears to me a very vain thing for any person in this world to
determine with an infallible Assurance the state of any person in the next
world without a particular, infallible, and extraordinary Revelation from
Heaven in the case, which I never pretended to.

Secondly, According to my poor measure of Understanding in the Gospel, nothing
can more fundamentally subvert the whole Mystery of Christ together with all
Evangelical, Spiritual Principles, and Truths; nothing can more directly oppose
the Supreme Design of the Father, the Peace and Comfort of all his Children;
than to join any Creature with our Lord Jesus in the Great Work of his
Mediation, a principal part whereof his Intercession is, the value, and Virtue
of which Part, as of the whole Mediation, consists in this, That our Lord Jesus,
our only and ever blessed Mediator, and Intercessor is the only, true, Eternal
God, of one undivided Essence with the Father, and in all things equal to Him.

I humbly entreat thee, Christian Reader, to judge of me according to these
Maxims, and to believe that I never did, and through Grace hope, that I never
shall express any thing unsuitable to them.

But it is good for us to say to all in all Cases, as St. Paul says to the
Galatians: You have not Injury is (...), the privation of some good: but the
good things of a good man can never be taken from him. Maxi. Tyr.
injured me: I am as you are, be you as I am. I am as you are; I set my soul in
your souls stead. Be you as I am, in the fellowship of the same Grace, and Love
of the Father; in the Unity of the same Spirit through our Lord Jesus, in whom
I am for his sake

Thy Servant PETER STERRY.

A Sermon Preached in White Hall Chapel on the Lords day in the afternoon,
January, 1. 1659.
Psalm. 134.3. the latter part of the verse. For there the Lord has commanded
the Blessing, and Life for evermore.


THe Subject of this Psalm is the Unity of Brethren. In the first verse you
have a Contemplation of the Beauty, Profit, or Pleasantness of this Unity with
a high Admiration: Behold how good, and how pleasant is is for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity! This is illustrated by a double Similitude. The first
is taken from the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the
Beard, even Aarons Beard, that went down to the Skirt of his Garment. This
costly Ointment was a figure of the Holy Ghost poured forth upon our Lord Jesus
our true high Priest, and from him, as from the Head running down upon his
whole Mystical Body, and going down even to the lowest Member of Christ, which
is but as the Skirt of his Garment. This Annoynting makes them all One Spirit,
and from this unity of the Spirit, as from a rich Ointment, goes forth a sweet
savor of Love, Spiritual Delight, and Joy into the Nostrils of God the Father,
our Lord Jesus, the Holy Angels, and all the Saints. This is the sense of the
second verse. In the third verse you have the second Similitude borrowed from
the Dew of Hermon, and that Dew that descends upon the Mountains of Sion. As
these Hills ow all their freshness, and flourishing to the Dew, or Rain, that
comes down from Heaven upon them: so does all the Beauty, Pleasantness,
Fruitfulness of the Saints proceed from the Unity of the Spirit. After this
comes in the Conclusion of the Psalm, which like a full Close in Music, brings
a fullness of Blessings along with it: There the Lord has commanded the
Blessing, even Life for evermore. There, that is, where Brethren dwell together
in Unity, there God has commanded Blessing, the fullness of all blessings,
which according to the Language of the Jews, and the Holy Scriptures is wont to
be expressed by the single term of Life. Together with all this goes the
Establishment, and Everlastingness of these Blessings, Life for evermore.

It is manifest by what has been spoken, that the Brethren here mentioned are
the Brethren of our Lord Jesus, the Children of God his Father, and their
Father. For among these Brethren alone is the true Unity, every Unity of every
other sort of men being only a Conspiracy, and Combination of Enmity; and upon
the Unity of these Brethren alone is founded the Everlastingness of Life and
Blessing.

The Doctrine which I shall from these words insist upon is this. That God has
there ordained Establishment, and a Lastingness of Blessing, where his People
dwell together in Unity.

I shall satisfy my self with one full, and clear Scripture for the opening,
and proving of this point, 1. John 4.16. God is Love, he that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God dwells in him.

There is a threefold Love.

First, There is Love in the Fountain which is the Love of God to us, the
Riches of free Grace. Secondly, There is Love in the Reflection, our Love to
God, the same divine Love returning back again to its Original, and carrying
our Hearts along with it; as the Beam or heat of the Sun reflected, and cast
back from the Wall toward the Sun again. Thirdly, There is Love in the
Rebound, in the Out-spreadings, and Over-flowings of it upon all the Saints
first, upon al Mankind, and upon all the Creatures according to its due
proportions.

A Saint dwells in this Love, as an Island in a Sea, He sees all things coming
to him, as Merchandise conveyed to him over this Sea of Love. All his way of
commerce with all is by this Sea of Love. Nay more, a Believer dwells in the
Fountain of this Love, in the Heart of God, and this is his own Fountain, from
whence his streams of Love go abroad into the Streets.

Now he that thus dwells in Love, as St. John says, dwells in God. What
Life, what Blessings does he enjoy, who has God for his dwelling place? Where
the Holy man says in the Psalms, That He had fainted if He had not hoped to
have seen the Goodness of God in the Land of the Living; some Divines, both
Jewish and Christian understand there God to be that Land of the Living. There
is a Scripture not unsuitable to this Exposition; Esa. 61.11. As the Earth
brings forth her bud, and as the Garden causes the things that are sown in
it to spring forth: so the Lord God will cause Righteousness, and Praise to
spring up before all the Nations. Hear this al you that have chosen Christ; you
that groan under the burden of Sin; you, that are hitherto in your Sins. God
invites you all to the Riches of his free Grace. He calls aloud to you, allures,
compels you to turn to the Habitation of his free Grace, to dwell in Love, that
Love, which makes him All Love to you, which will make you All Love to Him, and
to every thing, that bears any Image or Mark of Him. Now consider the
Encouragement. Say not, I am unworthy of this Love; I am incapable of it; I
shall be unfruitful, uncomfortable under it. For if once thou come to dwell in
this Love, thou dwell in God, who is that Earth, that Garden, which has the
Seeds of al Righteousness, Truth, Holiness, Consolation, Joy, Glory sown in
himself, and will make them to bud, and spring forth in thee before thine own
Eyes, and before all the Nations.

What Establishment of all Blessings has he, who dwelling in Love, dwells in
God? He has a City, which has a Foundation, even the Rock of Ages for a
Foundation to it. Thus much for the Proof, and Opening of the Point.

USE 1.
The first Use which I intend of this point is for Conviction. If the Lord have
there ordained Blessings, and Establishment of Blessings, where the People of
God dwell together in Unity: let then the People of God in the midst of us be
convinced of the Evil of their Divisions so, as to mourn over them, to repent
of them, and to endeavor, every one in his own heart and place, an amendment.
Esa. 7.9. God tells the Jews; If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established. You may as well read it according to the Hebrew; It is because ye
shall not be established. This was spoken to Judah, when Syria, and Ephraim had
taken evil Counsel against it, saying; Let us go up, and vex it, and make a
breach in it, v. 6. The same God now cries aloud in the midst of us; that, If
we will not believe, and love one another, surely we shall not be established.
If all entreaty, persuasions, commands, chastenings, sufferings, will not bring
us to love one another: surely it is, because it is in the Design, and Counsel
of the Lord, that we shall not be established.

I shall divide this Use into Two Heads. First I shall show you, Why we should
mourn over our Divisions. Secondly, I shall set before you, What those things
are in our Divisions, over which we are to mourn.


The first Head.
First I shall show you several Reasons, Why we should repent of our want of
Unity, and our manifold great breaches of Charity.

Reason 1.
It was the Dying Charge of our Lord Jesus, that we love one another. In these
dying Discourses, which our Lord Jesus had with his Disciples upon the
administering of his Body, and Blood to them in the Sacrament, immediately
before his Sufferings he gives them this Command with a peculiar, and strong
impression upon it; John 13.34. A new Commandment I give unto you, that ye
love one another; then he doubles the Command with a Reason, and a Rule annexed
to it, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another; You have it again
urged in such a manner, as if this were the only Command, which their Savior
left with them, as if this Command were peculiarly his own, coming from his
Heart, as having its Root there, and having his Heart in it, as Living, and
joying after an especial manner in it; Joh. 15.12. This is my Commandment (in
the same sense, in which before he had said, A new Commandment) that ye love
one another, as I have loved you. Greater love than this has no man, that a
man lay down his life for his Friend. How strongly does our Savior press this
Command of love? How high does he wind it up? Yet a fourth time we have it so
brought in, as if all the Discourses of Christ, his Truths, and his Commands
were aimed at this, as the End of all, and wrapped up in this, as the Perfection
of all, John 15.17. These things I command ye, that ye love one another.

St. Paul tells us in his Epistle to the Hebrews (if it be his) that a man's
Testament no man disanuls, and he signifies the reason in saying, that every
Testament is confirmed by the Death of the Testator. This is the Testament, and
last Will of our Lord Jesus confirmed and sealed to us by his most precious
Blood, and Death; that we love one another. What grief, what a shame ought it
to be to us, that while we hate one another in our Hearts, revile one another
with our Tongues, with our Hands are active, with our Feet are swift (Oh the
horror of it!) to shed the Blood one of another: we do with those Hearts,
Tongues, Hands, and Feet, which have their Life by the Death of Christ, disanul
and make void that Death of his, go diriectly contrary to the end of it, offer
despite to, trample upon his Heart-blood, as a common thing, as weak, and
worthless?

Reason 2.
The Lord himself makes this a Mark, and Character of his Disciples, that they
love one another. John 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye love one another. Have we the Mark of Christ, and of the Lamb,
which is Love: or rather the Mark of the Beast and of Antichrist upon our
Hearts, Foreheads, and Hands by our Babel-Confusions, Divisions, and Enmities?
Are we the Brood of the Dove, the Holy Spirit, or the Seed of the Serpent
rather? Do we show our selves Christians, or Devils, the Children of him, who
has his name of Devil, and Satan from accusing the Brethren, from Slanders and
Hatred, who was a Murderer from the Beginning? Do not we make our selves
Murderers like him, as of the same Seed, while we hate one another, while we
carry Swords, and Fire in our Tongues, I would they were not in our Hands also,
to destroy one another?

How was Jesus Christ Glorified in his Saints of old in the Primitive times,
when the Heathen cried out with admiration: See these Christians, how they love
one another! But how should our Hears now faint, and break with in us to hear
the reproaches of al round about us, while they cry: See the Saints, how
endlessly they fall out, and fight one with another! how eagerly they tear one
another in pieces for the prey, and the spoil!

Reason 3.
We have been joined together in one common Faith; we have Prayed together; we
have taken sweet advice together in the House of God, in the presence of the
Lord, concerning these things, at the beginning of these times. The Heathen
ever esteemed these things, to have eaten of one Bread, to have sat at one
Hearth, and warmed our selves at one Fire, to have been partakers of one Table,
as sacred pledges of an inviolable Friendship. Shall then Christians have no
respect to these things, that they have by their common Faith eaten of one
Bread, and that Bread the Lord Jesus; that they have by their joint Prayers
warmed themselves at the same fires of the Love, and Riches of the Father, and
Christ; that they have been partakers in their Counsel, and Communion of the
same Table, yea the same Altar, which is Christ risen from the Dead? Shall
these things be Pledges, and Ties of friendship among Christians, which have no
force, no value in them, like the Cords with which the Mad men in the Gospel
were bound, which they broke, as fast as they were bound with them returning to
their wildness, and to converse among the Tombs?

There is a Mysterious Fable among the Poets of the Teeth of a Serpent, which
being sown, immediately sprung up into armed men, that as immediately destroyed
one another. What fear, what confusions, what repentings ought to arise out of
this Consideration, that our Faith, Prayers, Spiritual Communion should prove
such Teeth, a Serpentine Seed, out of which indeed we are grown up into the
strength, and Powers of this World, like armed men, which we presently make use
of, so soon as we are sprung up into them, to our mutual Ruin?

Reason 4.
The Lord Jesus suffers greatly by our Divisions. A Wound is described to be a
violent separation of the parts of the body one from another; Solutio Continui.
Sickness is the Disagreement of the Humors in the body fighting one with
another. The nearer any of these Parts, or Humors are in place, or influence to
the Heart the more grievous is the Wound, or Sickness. While the Members of
Jesus Christ, which are so near to his Heart, are by the violence of their
Divisions separated, and torn asunder; What Wounds are made upon the Body, and
Spirit, and Heart of the Lord Jesus? O! all you, that pass by, that look on,
nay that are actors in these things, is it nothing to you, the grief, and pain,
which Jesus Christ feels?

The Jews say that their Messiah lies sick in Paradise of the wounds, which the
Children of Israel have given him by their sins. Alas! how true it is that our
Messiah, our blessed Savior, who is our only Paradise, while he is indeed in
Himself, and to Himself an Eternal Paradise, yet in the midst of us, and by the
virtue of his Relation to us lies bleeding, sick, and dying of the wounds,
which he receives by our Contentions, and Enmity. Thus we blast our own
Paradise, and turn it into a Wilderness. If Jesus Christ suffer thus much in
us, and from us; shall we have no bowels, no fellow feeling to suffer together
with him?

It was a Heavenly Resolution in that Father, who said, If my Wife, and
Children were hanging upon my Arms, and Legs; if my aged Parents laid their
bodies weeping in my way to keep me from going to die for the Testimony of
Jesus: I would throw away my Wife, and Children from me; I would go over the
aged bodies of my dearest Parents. But behold a quite contrary Image of things!
Jesus Christ hangs upon your Arms, and Legs, and Hearts, he lays his bleeding
Body, his glorified Person in our way: yet we cast him off violently from us,
we go trampling over him to pierce the bodies, and spirits one of another. Can
we cast our eye upon these Bleedings, and Breakings of the Heart of Christ
caused by our Divisions, and not wish, that our heads were Fountains of Water
to weep day, and night for the Breaches of his People? Can we hear him crying
out from Heaven, as he did to Saul? O! all ye Believers of England why pierce
ye me; behold and see, if any sorrow, any sufferings were ever like unto mine,
who suffer in you all, and for you all. Which of you suffers, and I am not
sick, and burn? Can we hear this, and not let our Weapons fall out of our hands,
and fall down weeping in the embraces one of another at the Feet of our Lord
Jesus? If we see not these things, which I have urged, as Spiritual truths, it
is, because there is very little of the Light of Christ in us. If we be not
tenderly affected with them, it is, because we have very little of the Life of
Christ.

Reason 5.
Our Divisions keep off Blessings, and Establishment from us. Yea they multiply
our Confusions, and consume us. Jesus Christ is a precious and sure
Cornerstone, to whom coming we grow up altogether into one Building, to a
Temple to the Lord. The Corner Stone unites the parts of the Building, and so
becomes the strength of it. Jesus Christ is first a principle of Unity, then of
Strength, Establishment, and Beauty. When Unity is gone nothing can come, but
Deformity, Dissolution, and Desolation. St. Paul warns the Galatians, and all
us in them, that, If we bite, and devour one another, we should take heed, that
we be not consumed one of another, Galat. 5.15. Let us not deceive our selves
by thinking, that we are the stronger party, and may safely bite, or devour the
weaker. The Spirit of God clearly signifies the danger of being al of us,
strong, and weak mutually consumed by one another, if we bite and devour one
another. Woe unto us, that instead of being, as a faggot, whose band is entire,
the least stick whereof cannot be broken by reason of the united strength of
the whole; we have a fire kindled upon us, which has burnt our Band, that we
consume the faster; while every one by his own Heat, not only consumes himself,
but increases the flame in all the rest, and hastens the end of all!

But besides this Solomon has a Proverb, which I humbly pray, that it prove
not a Prophecy concerning us: The Beginning of strife is as the letting out of
Waters. I know the common interpretation of this Scripture, yet may I without
wresting apply it to this sense also. The People of God in these nations are,
as a little Meadow encompassed on every side with a stormy Sea of raging Spirits
at home, and abroad. The only Sea-wall, that defends this Meadow from these
multitudes of waters roaring round about it, is, the Unity of these Brethren in
one Spirit. If the least breach be in this our Seawall, and not suddenly made
up: How will that Sea of domestic Enemies, and foraign Nations break in with
its waves foaming, and roaring upon us, until it have overwhelmed us so, that
our place shall know us no more?

To conclude this first part of my Use, God promises by Zachariah to pour out
upon his Children, a Spirit of Grace, that they shall see him, whom they have
pierced, and mourn over him. O! that the Lord would at this day fulfill this
Scripture in the midst of these Nations; that he would pour forth upon all the
Members of Christ in England, Scotland, and Ireland, such an Enlightening
Spirit, such a Melting Spirit of Grace; that they may see whom they have
pierced, even their own Heart, their own Life, the Lord Jesus in their own
Bosoms, and in the Bosoms of their Brethren, while they pierce one another;
that they may see, how they pour Coals of fire raked from Hell below upon the
Head, and into the Bosom of that Body of His, of which they are al
fellow members, and that having our Eyes opened to see this, our hearts might
be touched to mourn kindly over this Jesus, over our selves, and over each
other, in Him!

The second Head.
Thus I have shown Why we should mourn Now it. follows to let you know, What we
should mourn for.

I shall divide this into four Particulars.

First Let us mourn for the Causes of these Divisions. St. James teaches us,
Jam. 4.1. that Wars, and Fighting among us are from hence, even of our Lusts.
Let every one now go home into his own Soul, and where he finds Covetousness,
Ambition, Self-love, Love of Pleasure, Love of this World, or any other Lust,
let him bring it forth before the Lord, and say; This is that Firebrand, which
I have brought to kindle or increase this flame of Contention, that devours us.
Then let him give no rest to himself; until he have quenched this Firebrand,
and contributed to the quenching of the universal Burnings, by repentant Tears,
and the Blood of Christ.

1 Cor. 3.3. St. Paul thus expostulates: For ye are Carnal. For whereas there
are amongst you Envying, and Strife, and Divisions; are ye not Carnal and walk
as men? See the Reason of our Divisions, our want of Spirituality, our
Carnality. O that there were a man, whose voice were heard in the ears of the
Lord, saying; If I had been Spiritual, if I had walked in the Image and
Likeness of God, according to the virtues of God, according to the Divine
Nature: I might have been that poor wise man spoken of by Solomon, that might
have Saved the City of God among us, from these Desolations by its Divisions.
But now, Alas! I have been carnal, and walked, as a man. I have been so far
from suffering injury, that I have done wrong. Instead of Believing all things
for Good, I have been swift to hear, and to believe Evil, and have rejoiced in
the Evil of others, which I have heard. When I should have born my own Burden
my self, and have born my Brother's burden too: I have cast the whole weight of
my own burden upon others; til they have been oppressed with it; but have
refused to touch their burdens with my little Finger. In the place of blessing
those, who cursed, and praying for those, that persecuted me, and this way
heaping Coals of the Fire of a Spiritual Love from Heaven upon their Heads:
Have I not cursed those, who have blessed, persecuted those who have prayed for
me, and as I have thought any man mine Enemy, called for a Fire of wrath, and
Vengeance from Hell to take hold of him? This, this Carnality in my Heart, and
Life is that Seed, out of which Strife, and War are grown up to this Height,
and Greatness. The Living Viper carries a mortal poison about with him: but
being dead, as Physicians say, makes an excellent Antidote, and Cordial. By
being alive in the flesh, and in Carnal Principles we are become a generation
of Vipers. O! that our Hearts broken, and Spirits mortified through an
Evangelical Repentance, and a lively Faith in the Cross of Christ, might now
through the Grace, and Spirit of Christ become saving Antidotes, or reviving
Cordials to the poor dying cause of God, Interest of his People, and the whole
Three Nations!

Secondly, Let us grieve for having ministered any Occasion to our Contentions.
The Fire is lodged in the Flint, and comes forth from that; but it is the
striking of the Steel upon the Flint, which makes it to fly out. Perhaps the
Fire of Strife has come forth from other Spirits: but if my want of care, and
caution, my want of exactness, and integrity, my failing in prudence and
tenderness have made me, as the Steel, which by striking upon another man's
Spirit has drawn forth sparks of Fire; or if I by my Over-credulity, or
Incredulity; by my slackness, or have have been, as Tinder to receive and
cherish those Sparks, which otherwise might have dyed: I am not to hold my self
guiltless, but to repent of this also, as a Sore Evil among the Saints, while
they live under the Sun. Moses fell in the Wilderness only for the
unadvisedness of his words from impatience, and hastiness of Spirit under the
greatest provocations.

Thirdly, We are to weep for our having been Actors in our Divisions. Who can
wash his hands in Innocence, and say, that, he has not been in some kind an
Accessory in the Guilt of our confusions, although he has been no Principal?
Have thou not contributed to them by advising, abbetting, encouraging,
countenancing of them; at least by withdrawing that Bar, which thou might
have put in their way by thy Counsel, Assistance, and Interest? Have thou not
been pleasing thy self to think of making out thine own Interest by the public
Discord, by a violent, and bloody Change; when thou should like Curtius, have
cast thy self with that, which was dearest to thee into the Gulf to have stopped
the flowing forth of these waters of strife; or, like Paul been ready to have
offered thy self up upon this service of Love, to have become a Sacrifice for
the Peace of the Church, and Nation?

Fourthly, Let us weep, and bleed for this, if we have been the Authors of
these Differences Solomon brings this in, as the Highest, and Last of those
things, which the Lord most eminently hates, and which are the greatest
Abomination to him; He that sows Discord among Brethren; Prove. 6.15. This is a
Scarlet, and Crimson sin indeed. What can make it white? This covers the Soul
all over with Spots of Blood, Blood dropped from the Hearts of thousands of men,
of many Excellent, and precious Persons, one of whom was worth ten thousand, as
was said of David. What shall wash out these spots? It is only the Blood of
God, which can wash out these bloody spots, and make these Crimson sins white.
So far, as any of us find any of this guilt upon himself; let him take up this
Lamentation, and say; I am guilty of the Blood of all these: and I, whether
shall I cause my guilt to go, where shall I make my shame to hide it self? Go
thy ways to the Cross of Christ. Let thy Spiritual mournings formed in thee
by a Spirit of Faith be, as Nails to fasten thee, and thy Shame to the Cross
with the dead body of the Lord Jesus. Go thy ways to the Grave of thy Savior,
to his Blood, to his Spirit. Bury thy self and thy guilt together with Christ
in his Grave; wash in the Laver of his Blood; cast thy self into the Fountain
of his Spirit. So come forth a New man, without Spot, through the Resurrection
of the Lord from the Dead. Now contribute to the asswaging of these flames, by
Rivers of living waters flowing forth from the Fountains of the Holy Ghost
opened within thee.

When Peter had denied Christ with Oaths, and Curses, Jesus looked upon him,
and he went out and wept bitterly. When Jesus was risen from the Dead, his
chief care was of Peter. At his first appearance; Go, says he, tell my
Disciples, and Peter. Let our Lord Jesus look forth with a full Eye of free
Grace upon us. So shall he open and awaken a Spiritual Eye in us, to see, how
we have with Cursings denied, and divided one from another, that is, from Him
in each other. Then shall we go into our several retirements and weep over our
Breaches. Then shall we come forth, and in our Exaltations have the most earning
bowels toward our most delinquent, and dejected Brethren: that when we are
raised, we may raise them also. Thus much for the first Use of Conviction.

USE 2.
Exhortation. Let us study, and endeavor the uniting of the People of God. The
Glory of Christ consists in this, that He is a Mediator, and a Reconciler. His
Father loves him for this, that he delights to lay down his life to this end,
to break down the Partition-wal, to blot out the Handwriting of Ordinances, to
reconcile God to men, Men to Men. Let us in this be followers of the Lord
Jesus, in making it our Joy, and Glory, in thinking it worth the parting with
our dearest Enjoyments, Estates, and Lives to break down the Partition-walls
between the Saints, and recoucile them one to another. We read in the Prophet
Esaias of those who are called: The makers up of Breaches; the Builders up of the
wast places of old. What wast places, what Desolations have there been of many
years in Church and State, which have all arisen from our Breaches? When a
Generation of men shall arise, who shall make it their work to be The Makers up
of Breaches: these alone will prove the Builders up of the wast places of old. I
shall humbly offer to the Daughter of my people three Ways of making up our
Breaches, and of uniting us.

The first Way.
Exalt Jesus Christ,, as the Head of the Union. Cant. 6. The Church of Christ
is twice said to be Terrible, as an Army with Banners, verse 4. and ver. 10.
When Believers are united in one Compact, and Harmonious Body, as an Army: they
are a strength to themselves, and a Terror to all their Enemies Invisible, or
visible. But then they must have Banners, unto which they must be gathered, and
under which they may be united. What are these Banners? The Name of God, that
is, the Manifestation of God in the face of Christ, Psalm. 20.5. Christ himself
figured out, Psalm. 60.4. The Love of Christ, Cant. 2.4. These are the Banners,
under which the Saints are formed into one Body, as an Heavenly Host. But who
shall be the Standard Bearer, to display these Banners, to lift them up, and to
hold them forth? Canticles, 5.10. Jesus Christ is said to be the Chiefest among
ten thousand. You may in the margent of your Bibles see, that it is read
according to the Hebrew; the Standard bearer among ten thousand. The Love of
Christ, the Truths of Christ, the Manifestations of God in Christ, the Person
of Christ, as they are displayed, and held forth to us by the Immediate
Presence, and Appearance of the Lord Jesus in the Spirit; these are our
Banners, and this is the Standard Bearer among the Thousands, and ten Thousands
of the Saints. This is the Head of the Union.

For this you have the Decree of God expressly set down by the Spirit of
Prophecy in good old Jacob, Genesis 49.10. To him shall the Gathering of the
People be, that is, to Jesus Christ. Through the Changes of these times how
many Banners have been set up? On how many Standard-bearers have we cast our
Eyes, several Principles and Persons, several Opinions in Religion, or ways in
Worship, diverse Forms of Governments, diverse Parties, hoping, that to these the
People would be gathered together? But instead of Unity, and Beauty, there has
been Burning, and a Breach. From whence has this been? Has it not been from
hence, that this is the Ordinance of God, this is the Eternal Decree concerning
our Lord Jesus; that to Him the Gathering of the People shall be?

I have known a man, who through these Revolutions, and hours of Temptation,
when he has thought to be clean, his own Clothes have defiled him; when he
has washed himself in the Blood of Christ, he has been again rouled in the
miry Pit, as Job speaks. This man in the nights of his Guilt, Shame, or
Sufferings has had this Voice come to the Ears of his Spirit once, yea twice
he heard it: Seek not thine own Things, but the Things of Jesus Christ. When
thine heart is turned entirely to the Lord Jesus, the Vail, the Darkening,
Disguising, and Dividing Vail shall be taken off. This Voice came to him nor for
his sake alone, but for yours also, and all the Saints.

John 11.25. Jesus says to Martha I am the Resurrection and the Life. You the
Honorable Members of this present High Court of Parliament, you also have
received Rebukes from the Lord, whatever the Counsels of Men have been
concerning you. A Resurrection is agreed by Philosophers and Divines to be a
Supernatural Effect, the work of an Almighty hand, the undeniable Argument of a
God. Twice have you been scatterred as Dust by the Wind; Twice have you been,
as the Dead Men lying in our Streets. Twice has the Lord by a mighty Voice,
which has rent the Rocks, said to you; Return again; Twice have you been
gathered together, like scattered Dust into a Living and Glorious Body, as by a
double Resurrection from the Dead. O! that it may now appear, that Jesus has
been this Resurrection, that he is the Root, out of which you are now the third
time sprung up; that it is He, who is risen in you. Then are you risen unto
Honor, and not unto Shame. Then shall you exalt Jesus Christ in his Members,
Truth, and Love; in the Presence, and Out-shinings of His Heavenly Person; as
the Head of your Union. So shall he be in the midst of you a Head of Union to
the Saints, and to these Nations. You shall go forth, as his Angels to gather
his Saints from the four winds, to which they are dispersed; and to Him in you
shall the gathering of the People be. Suffer him then to display his Banners
freely, choose him for your only Standard bearer. Sin no more against him, who
has thus wonderfully appeared unto you Twice, lest a worse scattering, and
death come upon you. This is the First Way of Union.

The Second Way.
Cherish the Spirit, as the only Band of Union. Ephesians. 4.3. Endeavoring to keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. The Unity of the Spirit is the
Bond of Peace, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body.
To make way for that which I am to say of the Spirit, I have two Cautions to
interpose to prevent Objections.

First, I intend not any thing that I shall plead for the Spirit as a pretense
to the Flesh. I humbly conceive a fleshly licentiousness justified by the name
of the Spirit to be, if not that sin it self, yet the next step to the sin
against the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, I would not have the Glory, which I give to the Spirit interpreted,
as a laying aside of the Ordinances, or a reflection upon the Forms of
Godliness. While we have the Life of Christ in these Earthly Bodies, and the
manifestations of the Spirit in this flesh: Ordinances and outward Forms will be
of necessary use. Only these Rules are carefully to be observed. First, That
our Ordinances and outward Forms flow naturally, kindly, and freely from the
Spirit. Secondly, That we behold them in the Light, and enjoy them in the Life
of the Spirit. Thirdly, That we rest not in them, but make use of them to grow
up through them into the invisible and Heavenly things themselves. I have
premised this to the Second Way, which I have propounded for the uniting of the
People of God, which is this: Fix no Principle of Union among the Saints, but
only the Holy Spirit. This one Spirit is that which baptizeth us into one body,
and by its unity preserves us in the Bond of Peace. Give me leave to insert
here three Observations; Two of which I have often heard made upon these Times;
One my self have made upon my self.

Obs. 1. As the Spirit in the simplicity, and liberty of it has been held
forth, and asserted in our Supreme Counsels, and Forces, for the Bond of our
Union: so they have prospered; they have not been only as stars in a cloudy
night, now appearing for a little while, and then suddenly lost; but as the
Stars in the Revelation, held clearly forth, held unmovably fast in the right
hand of Jesus Christ. But when they have declined this Interest, when they have
disowned, or confined this Spirit; as God is said to have set an ambush in the
midst of Edom, Moab, and Ammon, when they came against Jehoshaphat, that they
divided and destroyed one another: so, as by an invisible ambush from Heaven,
have they been broken to pieces.

Obs. 2. When any persons have fixed to themselves any thing visible, any thing
besides this invisible anointing, the blessed Spirit, for a principle of Unity:
a dividing, wrathful, desolating Spirit has sprung up into the midst of them.
All pretended Bonds of Union in this kind have been like the Formal names of
Christ, and Paul in the mouths of the Sons of Sheva, instead of casting out,
they conjure up a fierce, and fiery Spirit. These are the Observations which I
have heard made by others upon these Times.

Obs. 3. That which I have observed in my self is this: While I at any time in
any measure have been backsliding, and warping from the simplicity, and purity
of the Spirit, unto Sensuality, or Formality of any kind: I have found those
satisfactions which I have sought, like Jonahs Gourd; a worm sent into them, by
which they have been unexpectedly eaten, and withered.

What would I infer from all this? Thus much, That We should set up the Spirit
alone, as the Principle of our Unity, and so of our Prosperity; and so much the
rather in that the day of the Spirit is upon us, when, as the Father has been
glorified in the Son, so the Father and the Son will have their full, and final
Glory in the Spirit. How long is it, since our Lord Jesus told us, that the
Father sought such Worshippers, as should worship him in Spirit, and Truth;
opposing the Spirit to the Letter, Truth to the Shadows, and figures of Divine
Things? The Psalmist reciting the story of the Patriarks, and the Israelites in
the Wilderness has this passage, Psalm. 105. ver. 14, 15. He reproved Kings for
their sakes, (then we interpose, saying, but the sentence follows as a dreadful
admonition upon occasion of that example fixed there from the mouth of God for
all Powers to the end of the World.) Touch not my Prophets, do mine anointed no
harm. The Spirit is this anointing. This Anointing is that, which makes
Prophets, as it does Kings, and Priests to God. It has been for this
Anointing's sake, for these Anointed Ones, that the Lord has reproved Princes
in the midst of us, and gone before us through this Wilderness Es. 4.5. It is
spoken of the last days: God will create upon the Assemblies of Mount Sion a
Cloud by day, and a shining fire by night: for upon all the Glory shall be a
Defense. Would you know, what this Glory is, that thus shall be a Defense upon
all the Assemblies in the times of the Gospel? St. Peter tells us, 1 Pet. 4.14.
The Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you. You, to whom God has given
Spiritual Senses, and in whom he keeps those hitherto exercised, and awake: see
the glory, which rests upon us, which is our Pillar of a cloud by day, and our
shining flame of fire by night, the Holy Spirit. This has been, this alone is
our Guide, our Defense, our Resting place, our Glory is the midst of all the
Nations. Say not, how shall we discern this Spirit? As a Cloud by day, and a
Fire by night: so will the Lord make him evident to the seeing Eye, and to
every one that waits for him.

To conclude this Particular; In the Bowels of Christ, and by the Consolations
of this Spirit, as I am able, I earnestly beseech all, that call upon the Name
of the Lord Jesus in these Nations, together with their Leaders, and Rulers;
that for their Brethren sake, and for the Peace of Jerusalem, they would
cherish, advance, contend for this Band of Unity, and Peace, the blessed Spirit
in four things. First, In the Person of the Spirit Himself. Secondly, In
Spiritual Worshippers. Thirdly, In Spiritual Worships. Fourthly, In Spiritual
Appearances flowing forth through the Person of the Spirit, upon Spiritual
Worshippers, in their Spiritual Worship; that the Purity of the Spirit be not
stained, nor the Liberty of the Spirit restrained in these Particulars, which
make that true Mount Sion, that Heavenly Jerusalem, that Church of the
Firstborn, where alone Brethren dwell together in Unity, and where God has
appointed the Blessing, and Life for evermore.

The Third Way.
This is the last Way of Uniting; to Sweeten one another unto a Union. I shall
point you here to one Instance of many: Be ready to forgive, be apt to pardon
one another. To move you to this, and direct you in this, I shall set before you
three examples; Joseph, David, Jesus Christ.

First, Joseph had received as great injuries from his Brethren, as can be
imagined. Out of envy, and malice they designed his death, sold him from his
Fathers house into the hands of strangers, to be a Bond-slave for his whole
life. He becomes great, sees his Brethren lying at his Feet, entirely at his
Mercy, the power of a mighty Nation in his hand to avenge himself of them at
his pleasure without the least fear of any Evil returning to himself by it. Yet
now he prevents their asking of pardon by pardoning them first, and freely. He
sweetens the Pardon by owning the Dearness of the Relation between himself, and
them, at the very first Discovery of himself to them, saying with Embraces, and
Tears; I am your Brother Joseph. He lightens the burden of their Guilt, and
Shame by a sweet Interpretation of all into a Divine Design: You intended it
for Evil, but God has turned it to Good: You designed Dissolutions, and
Desolations; but God has by it brought forth to me a wonderful Increase of
Power, Authority, and Glory. This is the Example of Joseph. Let us go and do
the like. Let the sight of Jesus in the midst of our Brethren, and a respect to
God our Father, and their Father prevail as much with us, as the presence of
Benjamin, and the remembrance of his old Father Jacob did with him. Genesis 45.4,
5. How moving are those words: Come near, I pray you. Be not angry or grieved,
that you sold me into Egypt? But how melting is that, after Jacob's death, when
his Brethren sent to him, saying; Forgive us now the trespass of the Servants
of the God of thy Fathers. And Joseph wept, when they spoke unto him, Genesis
50.17.

Secondly, Shimei had reviled David in his low Estate with the bitterest
Reproaches, and blackest Crimes of Blood, and Death. At his return Abishai
moves to have him put to Death. David replies: What have I to do with you, ye
Sons of Zerviah? Ye are always adversaries to me. Shall then any man be put to
Death this day in Israel? For do not I know, that I am this day King in Israel?
2 Samuel 19.22. How good, how great, how like to God is this in David to make the
day of his Power a Day of Grace, to make use of the Establishment of his
Greatness to pardon the greatest Crimes committed against him?

Lastly, Jesus Christ in the case of Mary Magdalen upon occasion of a Parable
put to Simon, gives the account of his Way with Men in that Maxim: He, to whom
much is forgiven, will love much. This is Christ's way, O! that this were
Christians way of subduing their Brethren, and the People to them, of winning
Love: To forgive much. This is the Divine way of making our Brethren Captives
in a noble War of Love and binding them to us in Golden Chains of Affection: To
forgive much. It is said, that we should make a Golden Bridge for a flying
Enemy. By retaining our Anger we force our Brethren to retain their Enmity. So
we bring upon our selves the Danger of a Desperate Enemy. But by pardoning
freely, speedily, sweetly, we make a Golden Bridge for our Brethren to pass over
from their Enmity to Love. When we have an offending Brother at our Mercy, let
us think we hear Jesus Christ from Heaven pleading for him, as Paul did for
Onesimus to Philemon: Receive him, that is, my Bowels; once unprofitable, but
now by mine, and thy pardoning him made profitable, and faithful to thee, and
to me.

I shall wind up al with that of St. John, who, when he was very old went up
into the Pulpit, and said no more, but, Little Children Love one another,
thrice over. So he came down again. We are Children having all the same Father.
Therefore once let us love one another. We are little Children, apt to fall out.
Therefore a second time, Let us love one another. We are little Children al of
us subject to failing, faults, and falls. Therefore a third time let us love
one another. Let us love one another, by that Twofold measure; Freely forgiving
one another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you; Ephesians. 4.32. Receiving
one another into the Glory of God, as Christ also has received us, Romans 15.7.
There is a Divine Speech reported of Constantine the Great: If I should see an
Eminent Christian committing a great Crime I would cover him with my purple
Robe, to hide his shame even from mine own Eyes. You, who have bin great
sinners, thus has Christ received you. You, who are grear sinners, thus stands
Christ this day, this hour, this moment, while you are hearing these words,
Ready, longing to receive you, to cover all your Guilt, and Shame with the Robe
of the Righteousness, and Glory of God in Himself. Thus let us receive one
another into the Glory of God; hiding all our mutual shame in the Brightness of
our Father's, and our Savior's Glory.

FINIS.
Books Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of LONDON, at the Exchange.
Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light. 2 Christ in Travel. 3 A Lifting up for
the Cast-down. 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The
great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The Great
Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office. 11 Satan's power to Tempt, and Christ's Love to, and
Care of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through
Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, and
in-being of Christ in all Believers. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints
Hiding place, etc. 19 Christ Coming, etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel
Ordinances. 21 Grace and Love beyond Gifts.
New Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson, VIZ.
1 Of Unbelief; or the want of readiness to lay hold on the comfort given by
Christ. 2 Not going to Christ for Life and Salvation is an exceeding great Sin,
yet Pardonable. 3 Of Faith, Or, That believing is receiving Christ; And
receiving Christ is Believing. 4 Of Covetousness
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto,
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England. Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the sevententh of John. Ten Books of the
Application of Redemption by the Effectual Work of the Word, and Spirit of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners to God.
Mr. Buroughs WORKS. viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's call to all those that are Weary and Heavy Laden to come to him for
Rest. 2 Christ the Great Teacher of Souls that come to him. 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only Easy way to Heaven. 5 The
excellency of holy Courage. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A Treatise
of Earthly-Mindedness. 11 Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea. 12. The Evil of
Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Precious Faith. 14 Of Hope. 15 Of
Walking by Faith.
Dr. Hills WORKS.
The Kings Trial at the High Court of Justjce. Wise Virgin, Published by Mr.
Thomas Weld, of New England. Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Disease and
Cure: Discovering the Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz.
Self-denial and Faith. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first Epistle of
Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in Essex. Mr.
Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward
of Ipswich. An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr.
Ward. The Discipline of the Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod
there. Mr. Brightman on the Revelation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel,
by John Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr Loves Case, containing
his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. A Congregational Church is a Catholic
Visible Church. By Samuel Stone in New England. A Treatise of Politic Powers.
Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians. Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr.
Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in
Parliament time. Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortallity of Man's Soul.
The Anatomist Anatomized. The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech Woodwards Sacred
Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter. Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: Being a
Sermon by Mr. Herle, before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon,
being a Pattern of Repentance Englands Deliverance. By Peter Sterry. The Way of
God with his People in these Nations. By Peter Sterry. Mr. Sympson's sermon at
Westminster Mr. Feaks sermon before the Lord Major. The Best and Worst
Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. A sermon. A Sacred Panegyric. By Stephen
Marshal. A sermon. The Craft and Cruelty of the Churches Adversaries. By
Matthew Newcomen of Dedham. A sermon. Clows Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation.
Mr. Stephen Marshals New WORKS VIZ.
1 Of Christ's Intercession, or of sins of Infirmity. 2 The high Privilege of
believers, They are the Sons of God. 3 Faith the Means to feed on Christ 4
Self-Denial. 5 The Saints Duty to keep their Hearts, etc. 6 The Mystery of
spiritual Life.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper and A. Cole, etc.
1 Idea of Practical Physic in twelve Books. 2 Sennertus thirteen Books of
Natural Philosophy. 3 Sennertus two Treatises. 1 Of the Pox. 2 Of the Gout. 4
Twenty four Books of the Practice of Physic, being the Works of that Learned
and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius. 5 Riolanus Anatomy. 6 Vestingus Anatomy
of the Body of Man. 7 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galens Method
of Physic. 8 The English Physician Enlarged. 9 A Directory for Midwives, or a
Guide for Women. 10 Galens Art of Physic. 11 New Method both of studying and
Practicing Physic. 12 A Treatise of the Rickets. 13 Medicaments for the Poor,
Or Physic for the Common People. 14 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet
without Physic.
The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin. The London
Dispensatory in twelves, a small Pocket Book in Latin,

