A Plain Discovery OF The UNRIGHTEOUS JUDGE And FALSE ACCUSER.

Wherein is soberly, and in the fear of the Lord brought to light, and tendered
to the examination of the Upright in Heart, the Spirit of that Pamphlet,
entitled, The LEPER Cleansed: Published by Richard Ballamy of Tiverton.

As also, A clear Vindication of the PRINCIPLES and PRACTICES of the people by
him charged, from those Reproaches therein heaped upon them, under the notion
of ANABAPTISTS.

Published by Robert Steed: and Abraham Cheer, Servants of Christ, among his
despised People.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause, seems just; but his
neighbor comes and searches him. Job 13.7. Will thou speak wickedly for God,
and talk deceitfully for him? Job 31.35, 36, 37. -- And that mine adversary had
written a book; surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a
crown to me: I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a pri^^e would
I go near unto him. Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1658.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
IT is not without a multitude of disadvantages on our hand, that the ensuing
Defense comes into open view, arising, not only from the Reproach that is on
us, and the weakness that is in us of saying any thing worthy of the cause,
which in the main we desire to plead; but withal (to say no worse) from the
infirmity of the age we live in: the generality of men being led into the
affecting and dislike of things, rather by tradition, and upon the credit of
such as they reverence, then upon a right judgment of matters in their own
evidence. Yet are we not discouraged from sending this Testimony forth, though
it has neither Patron, nor Approbation; but only Truth to be its Shield and
Buckler: being clear in this, that it was not an Affectation to appear in
public, that has led us forth to this Undertaking; but a necessity of
vindicating the Churches of Christ that we walk withal, from such notorious
slanders: as also, of delivering the Readers of that Pamphlet from the manifest
abuse it puts upon them, exposing them to a temptation of giving credit to very
many untruths and mis-representations of things, and therein to a disgust
against the Way, and all that walk therein: which is the main design thereof.

The Book was indeed by many thought unworthy of an Answer, for a time; but
seeing it grew into repute by the countenance of some that are accounted men of
worth, who scattered it abroad as an undoubted Evidence of Truth; we have
thought good to give men a warning at present against such artifices to
deceive, that for the future they may be the more cautious of giving credit to
invectives of this nature, which will not be much our care hereafter, to make
Replies unto; as having it in our hearts to expect many such trials from men of
perverse minds, apostatizing from the Truth in this hour of temptation.

That the presenting this to thee, comes to our lot who dwell at some distance
from the place where these affairs were transacted, is occasioned from our
observation, how that the Reproach of this, falls heavier upon us in the
Countries, then it does on them in that Town, where the advantages of informing
the Enquirers, and clearing the accused, are at hand: by reason whereof, that
people being less sensible, have been the less careful of performing this
service, which might seem more properly appertaining unto them.

Yet neither does our distance of place render us incapable of giving thee the
true state of things, in that our selves were eye and ear-witnesses to the
Proceedings of that Congregation in the two principal matters of fact he
insisteth on, (viz.) with William Facy, and this Richard Bellamy; and for the
other Occurrences, have taken all possible care to obtain such a perfect
account of things in the naked truth of them, as might render us capable of
giving forth the Narrative with all exactness.

In the whole, however we had in our eye the Readers accommodation, and
therefore endeavored to be as brief as possible, in matters that may be so
expressed; yet may it not be reasonable to think, we can clear our selves from
such an heap of slanders, in as few words as he may cast them on us;
especially, we have been enforced to be somewhat large in giving our
understanding about what he lays down as grounds from Scripture, convincing him
of Infants right to Baptism, which he offers as a main hinge on which he turned
from us; and thence loads us with the common name of Infamy, that we pass under
among the sons of men. Our Method is to follow our Accuser step by step;
wherein we repeat his words: and have willingly omitted nothing that deserves
an Answer, although it be against our selves: in the whole, being desirous to
approve our selves to him that searches the hearts: with him we leave the
undertaking, to dispose of it and us, and at his pleasure: to him be Glory for
ever.

Amen.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 4. for Act. 2.34. read 39. page 9. line 49. for hating, read
suiting.

A plain Discovery of the Unrighteous Judge, and false Accuser.
To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, whom these may concern:
Greeting.
Precious and Beloved,
IT is not our purpose to entertain ye with the Narrative of the manner of our
receiving the truths of Christ in which we stand, or of the preparations of
Spirit, the Lord has given in order to this work and by the help of this
attire to allure your pious minds to our Cause and Persons. These vails have
sometimes (it may be) obtained their ends, but being grown the common vizour of
every il-favored cause; we judge them not only impertinent to the matter in
question, but also unfit for us to publish of our selves; and no less unmeet to
be imposed on you whom we write unto as ignorant and simple; but (...) as such
who can discern the things that differ in their own qualities.

Richard Bellamy, since he was cast out of Comunion with us at Tiverton, (or
whoever he be personated by him) has printed his book against us* Called, The
Leper Cleansed. The title page tells you, of what the book is comprehensive.
Therein amongst several laudable matters spoken of himself, he pretends to lay
open the Anabaptists, and their unchristian ways, and wiles to deceive; and
seems desirous to be thought a person able to make great discoveries and
conquests, as having been througly versed in the Doctrine and Practices of the
whole body of that party by his nigh two years converse with them in society
amongst our Brethren in Tiverton. But all these terrible flourishes
notwithstanding, we herewith tender this man and his writings against us to
your examination, and the true state of our Doctrine, Way, and Practice, as it
stands accused and judged by him. And if indeed we be convicted for cunning
deceivers, liars in wait, hypocrites, enemies to Godliness, enemies to
Magistracy and Ministry, as he has informed the world, then indeed leave us,
as he has persuaded you: But if these appear to be the unrighteous accusations
of a person puffed up, at best, with the heat of his own passions, then take
heed and beware of that spirit which has acted this man, and led him aside
according to the pride of his own heart, to play both the unrighteous Judge,
and false Accuser, against the way of God wherein we stand.

Friends, We intend not in this defense to justify any evil person, or matter
for our advantage; we are assured we have in hand, a cause of God that needs
not, save to be stated in its own simplicity: wherein we shall endeavor to be
faithful with you, being made willing by the grace of God to stand and fall
with it. The persons of men we shall not care to overvalue, or presume to
detract, but as men stand approved or disapproved of the truth to give them
their due: and particularly for this our Judge and Accuser, we shall cast
behind us the filth of his invectives without retaliation; his impertinencies
and absurdities, as much as may be, we shall pass over with silence, that what
may be found in him to bear upon the mayn cause, may be dealt withal.

Accuser.

It may seem strange to all that know me, to see me in print: and if any that
see me thus appear, judge that it is my mayn business to vindicate my self,
they are mistaken; I am partly driven to this by the irregular proceedings of
those who have judged me at an offender, and yet would not give me liberty to
speak for my self: so that I am enforced to speak this way, or to justify them
by my silence: but that which most of all prevails with me, is, First to give
glory to God-in acknowledging his mercy, who has opened my eyes, and showed me
the error of my way. 2. I judge it my duty to labor to undeceive all the simple
and plain hearted. 3. I think it as necessary to discover the hypocrisy of
some that ly in wait to deceive, and by cunning insinuations and pretenses to
draw aside many souls, to their own loss, if not to their destruction.

Answer.

It is not much that we should think needful to speak to this paragraph: only
whereas he begins, It may seem strange to all that know me, to see me in print;
In this the Accuser speaks right, for we have ground to judge, he does but
personate the contrivance of other men.

Who have judged me as an offender, and yet would not give me liberty to speak
for my self. We shall hereafter meet our Accuser in this his false allegation
in its due place.

I think it as necessary to discover the hypocrisy of some that ly in wait to
deceive, etc. Whom he intends under these expressions; as hypocrites, liars in
wait, etc. he manifests in the title page; how well he proves us to be such,
appears by the sequel of his book, where we shall have full opportunity to
examine it. He proceeds.

Accuser.

It is notoriously known to all the Inhabitants of Tyverton, that I was deeply
engaged in that way, which is commonly known by the name of Anabaptists; yea so
far as that I thought I was bound to oppose all that dissented from that way as
being antichristian: and so zealous was I to promote that interest, that I
forsook my relations, and left my fathers house, not caring for any society,
but such as were for that way; refusing to join in prayer with such as differed
from me in that, though otherwise godly: thus I continued for the space of nigh
two years, but at last God was pleased to cause me to reflect upon my self and
ways, and by some special providence (of which by and by I shall give an
account) he made me willing to stand upon the ways and see, and enquire for the
way of the Lord; for until this time I was so filled with prejudice against
the public Ministry, that I refused all conferences and debates, with any
(though offered with never so much mildness) concerning the way in which I was;
or if I did at any time admit of any, it was to defend, and not to examine it.

Answer.

All this rash and uneven walking while under this profession, that this man
makes discovery of himself in (for we should not have judged it worth the while
to have given such a character of him) it easily appears to have sprung from
the youthful vanity and lightness of his own spirit, not from any priaciple
owned among us; nor was the observation of it any comfort to us, in that he was
several times reproved for sundry of those very things.

Accuser.

But now God having put some check upon my spirit, I began to lay things in the
balance; and observing another people in this place, walking under Ordinances,
and joined with the public Ministry: such thoughts as these would come in
sometimes; We say we are in the way of God and they say they are in the way of
God: may not I all this while be mistaken? Though I often opposed such thoughts
as these, yet they returned upon me by my observation, for I could not but take
notice* that those I walked withal, were looser, both in their Principles and
Practices, then those I dissented from.

Answer.

Then I began to lay things in the balance, etc. Those unsteady revolutions of
thoughts, always learning, never coming to the acknowledgment of the truth;
argue a mind unstable as water and therefore cannot excel. I could not but
take notice that those I walked with, were looser both in their Principles and
Practices then those I dissented from. We shall not in this place insist on the
weakness of the Argument, urged from the practices of some persons, to the
error of their profession. But to the general charge, we say: That, if to
state the everlasting Covenant, made and given by the Lord himself for the
redemption of sinners, and the efficacy of the Ministration thereof upon the
free grace of God in Christ alone; and so stated, to minister the same, for the
calling and gathering of the elect, the true seed in that Covenant given unto
Christ, for the bringing them into visible communion with Christ their head,
and each with other: If to require a proof of the truth of this work before
admission into such visible communion and fellowship, with an pen profession
upon such admission to take up the cross of Christ, and follow him, in doing
and suffering his whole will, as himself requires: Mat. 16.24. Luke 14.26.
If to administer such Gospel. Ordinances, as import the peculiar privileges
of the children and family of the Son of God, to persons so approved, and no
others: If to acknowledge and believe the everlasting Kingdom and Priesthood of
Jesus Christ, in providing for, governing and perfecting his people, although a
feeble flock; and therefore set at naught by them that are full and at ease: If
while these principles and the like unto them, are in our eye, the mark we
contend to reach unto (yet through the infirmity of our flesh, finding our
selves to our grief often beneath them) by the grace of God in his Ordinances,
in bearing one another burdens, in admonition and exhortation with patience,
whiles there is hope, and other spiritual proceedings, as the cause requires;
our manifold weaknesses notwithstanding, such indulgence and grace we obtain
with and from our God, that not only support is ministered, but also (to the
praise of his admired goodness be it said) a progress is made among us from
faith to faith: and this further token of his presence we find among us: That
usually the most carnal, worldly, and unruly, are soonest offended: but the
sober and humble hearted rejoice with us. If these principles and practices,
and the just consequences attending them, commonly avowed by us, be looser then
what the accuser does embrace, and in his own person follow, the day of trial
will make evident.

Accuser.

I found them slight in their thoughts of the Sabbath, and that they observed
that day rather out of policy, then out of conscience; not so much to sanctify
the name of God, as to keep their hearers from attending the public Ministry.
They spoke slightly of those that walked strictly and closely with God in duty,
saying, that all the Religion of such lay in duties but theirs was spiritual. I
further observed that their families were without prayer generally their
children without instruction: and surely their constant neglect of duties in
their families, made me grow very careless of mine in private. The
consideration of these things made me begin to enquire, whether this were the
truth I professed: from henceforth I resolved to consider what was objected
against the way I was in, and to weigh the Arguments I had slighted, because I
saw many serious godly people did live in the profession and practice of that
which I opposed, etc.

Answer.

I found them slight in their thoughts of the Sabbath, etc. What wormwood and
gall has he mingled to us in this desperate and bold accusation and judgment,
it being full well known to all observers, that both in preaching, printing and
practice, all the Baptized congregations with whom we have communion in
England, Scotland and Ireland, do hold out a constant profession, that in
conscience to the Lord, we do hold our selves bound to keep the first day of
the week, called the Lords day, holy to the Lord; and that the right
celebration of this day consists in a spiritual communion with God, our own
souls, and each with other in all Gospel Ordinances, and other Christian
offices, of goodness and mercy to man and beast, as opportunity and Christian
prudence shall require. And this young man well knows, that this very
congregation in Tiverton proceeded with a member as worthy of just censure,
only for that his servant, though without his knowledge, took a cloth upon this
day out of the rack where it was on drying; and moreover, himself was present
when the Church appointed it as their judgment to meet together constantly
about six of the clock in the morning, to the end that the day might be spent
more entirely for the Lord.

They speak slightly of those that walked strictly and closely with God in
duties saying, that all the Religion of such lay in duties; bus theirs was
spiritual. That there is a Pharisaical strictness in polishing the outward-man
by the traditions and inventions of men, and not of Christ; and a formal
strictness in the letter of a command, and both these desperate enemies to the
Gospel of Christ, we affirm; but we loath, abhor, and detest, the application
of these expressions, to the flighting of any duties, or exercises of
godliness, or any persons that in faith and a good conscience, walk closely
with God in them. That our selves might be built up, and be helpful each to
build up other in the faithful exercise thereof without distraction, has been
one main motive to draw us into the union and communion in which by the grace
of God we stand, and is a part of that promise, which we through the Lords
assistance (the God in Covenant with us) do declare and undertake when we
receive the right hand of visible fellowship together. As for the ground of
this man's report in this particular, after the most diligent search that could
be made, we can find out no just color he has for such an accusation, but
that himself has used the like expressions of some, as hypocrites and
formalists, etc. whom he now cleaves unto: for which he was then faithfully
reproved.

Their families without prayer generally their children without instruction,
etc. What shall we reply to this bold man? the Lord knows we condemn, abhor
and detest the guilt of this accusation, we faithfully exhort unto these
Christian duties, we reprove their neglect; and are in a readiness to pass
public censures upon the careless and wilful transgressors of them, as
persons offending against plain precepts: The Lord knows we long and labor
to have our houses as churches of Christ, and our children in submission with
all gravity, brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; yet being
jealous that several in Tiverton, and elsewhere, may not have been so careful in
the performance of their duty in these things, as the law of the Lord requires
of them, we shall take occasion, even from the reproach cast upon us by the
accuser, to make a more strict enquiry after all neglects of that kind,
trusting the Lord will help us to bear yet a more effectual testimony against
them, and help them and us unto a more through reformation.

Because I saw many serious godly people did live in the profession and
practice of that which I opposed. We acknowledge this passage to have more
resemblance of grace in it, then most we can find in all the book besides. As
for his tossing and running from place to place upon matter of disputes, and
one while railing on this party, and then as fiercely reviling others, it is
the common badg of the drunken spirit of this perverse generation; but to
ponder the paths of the truly Godly upon well-digested and clear evidences of
the grace of God dwelling in their hearts, we cannot but commend, and put a due
estimate upon: and we know that this very consideration, has been an
introductive to a farther work of God, which has not left some precious souls
till they have taken up the visible profession of the Gospel in which we stand.
But let us beware that while we be tender to the Godly, we prove not cruel to
Christ and to our own souls: the godly in all ages have been liable to said
mistakes, and stiffly persisted in them, notwithstanding they wanted not such
as have admonished them of their miscarriages: we can hardly be strangers to
this truth, while the presses and the pulpits in the three nations, breath out
such sharp contentions among our opposites themselves, in sundry points of
great moment; and therefore let us follow the godly as they follow Christ, and
no farther; and withal, take heed of making out a judgment while we are
prejudiced with personal infirmities, or entangled, with wordly advantages or
disadvantages, but draw our selves and the matter in question, into a naked
simplicity before the Lord, to receive the pure impressions of
Scripture-authority, as the supreme judge of all controversies, and no other.
But mark the condition of the person, our judge and accuser, before and since
his defection, as his own pen has painted him forth, that notwithstanding his
pretensions of seeking and finding God, you will find the man not so much in
the joy and love of a spirit bettered by his change, as in the old gall of a
deadly bitterness from first to last.

Accuser.

And upon serious inquiring into the word, and earnest seeking of God, it
pleased the Lord to satisfy me in the truth, and in particular touching these
two controverted truths. (1.) That the Covenant of grace stands now in force to
the children of believers under the Gospel. (2.) That this is a sufficient
ground by Gods appointment why the children of believers should be baptized.
This is evident from many Scriptures in the New Testament, which the
Anabaptists have endeavored often to obscure. I shall only mention one which
was useful to me, Acts 2.34. The promise is to you, and to your children. The
Anabaptists have labored to darken this truth by persuading the world to
believe that children have no right to the promise till they are actually
called, which they would infer from the last clause of the fore mentioned Text.
But by considering, I saw their mistake in the Text [call] has no relation to
children, but to them afar off.

Answer.

We account it not our concernment, nor worth our while, to inform the Reader,
with what might be truly said to discover the falsehood of the accusers
plausible insinuation, by what direct means, and with what mature
consideration he digested those grounds of satisfaction: but letting him pass
with his desired applause, shall only crave the exercise of Christian patience
while we follow him, laying down in plainness our persuasions about the
severals by him hinted at in this point of Baptism; he first gives you two
propositions as the ground of his satisfaction.

First, that the Covenant of grace stands now in force to the children of
believers under the Gospel. Secondly, that this is a sufficient ground by Gods
appointment why they should be baptized. Many mistakes usually perplex the
point in question for want of a right understanding of the terms made use of:
which inconvenience we shall endeavor to remove out of the way, before we go
farther: and the term or expression that comes first to hand to be explained
is [the Covenant of Grace.] This term is applied to signify,

1. The Covenant of Grace in its own nature, singly, and universally considered.

2. It Is applied to singifie the manner of its administration, according to
divine institution.

As to the first signification the Covenant of Grace signifies. That great
mystery of the mercy of God in Christ, wherein the Father has established
Jesus Christ his Son, the head of all things, and given unto him a blessed seed
of the Sons of Men, to be by him, and with him heirs of the glorious
inheritance of the grace of God, and the blessed consequences thereof, against
all possibilities of miscarriage, according to his eternal purpose. This
Covenant was by the Lord himself first published to man in Paradise, Genesis 3.15.
I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. This Covenant
is spoken by the Prophet David, Psalm. 2.7. I will declare the decree, the Lord
has said unto me; Thou art my Son, this day have 1 begotten thee. Verse. 8.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thins inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Verse. 9. Thou shall break them
mith a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces as a potters vessel. This
Covenant, is it which Isaiah publishes and preaches, Chap. 42. and 49. and
elswere frequently. This Covenant God calls his everlasting Covenant, being
still one and the same immutable from everlasting to everlasting. This Covenant
was it which at sundry times, and after diverse manners, under diverse signs,
figures, and types, by promises and prophecies was renewed and ratified with
the blessed Patriarchs, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Sem, Melchisedeck, and with
the Fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; with Moses, with David the king, and
with the Prophets, before the coming of Christ: and it is the same Covenant,
which openly and plainly was brough: to light, and revealed in all the
mysteries of it by John the Baptist, the Lord Jesus, and his Apostles, which
still continues to be ministered in the Church, and shall continue without
change to the worlds end. This Covenant has one Spiritual Father, which is
Christ, Isaiah 9.6. The mighty Ged, the everlasting Father; and one spiritual
seed, Psalm, 22.30. A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted to the Lord
for a Generation.

The Covenant of grace as it signifies the manner of administration, according
to divine appointment, may be thus described. The Covenant ministering.
It does contain the whole and every part of that instituted worship, whereby
God does ordinarily bring about, the purposes of the everlasting Covenant, that
is, to set Christ upon his throne, and to gather to him the seed given him by
his Father: And the Covenant of grace under this acceptance is not one and the
same always, but has passed under many great alterations and changes: the
Lord hating his ordinances and appointmens, to the persons, seasons, and
works, which he had to do, as it seemed good to his heavenly wisdom: and
therefore all the force and authority of the Covenant of grace, considered
under this head, to wit, according to the administration of it, depends
entirely upon the law of its institution, and is in force as that law
directs, and not otherwise.

And the Covenant of grace in this sense stands distinguished in Scripture,
under two known heads, respecting two seasons, the season before the ascension
of the Son of God, and the season which followed after.

The administration of the Covenant of grace, The ministering before Christ.
before the coming of the Son of God, passed under very great alterations and
changes, for the first two thousand years from Adam to Abraham, the ordinances
and form of worship then in practice, and other occasional figures, having
respect unto the mystery of the everlasting Covenant, and the chosen and
rejected seeds therein considered, was a ministry dignified, with as eminent
and glorious saints, as any the book of God records: and although this
ministry were also for the nature of it, the same with the law of Moses, and
proportioned to it, and afterward fell in with it, yet in all this long track
of time, there was no distinguishing ordinance to be administered to infants of
believers, or any known doctrine to that purpose, notwithstanding the
far-fetcht notions, which some have wandered after, to find it out from that
passage of the Sons of God and daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. Which very probably
was found in the family of holy Seth, in that time of universal corruption of
all mankind. Nor in that other of the saving of Noah, and his family, in the
Arc; neither of which nor any other thing, was, or was deemed to be an
ordinance established in the Church, to be administered in infancy.

True it is, at circumcision it began, and by the law of Moses circumcision was
taken in with the other institutions which went before it, and there it
received its full enstalment, and became the head-ordinance of the Levitical
ministry. This administration of the Covenant of grace is usually called in
Scripture the old Covenant, or the first Covenant. Heb. 8.7. For if that first
Covenant had been faultlesse, etc. Ver. 13. In that he says a new Covenant, he
has made the first old. It is also usually called the law, Romans 4.13, 14, For
the promise that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to
his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith: for if they
which are of the law, (to wit, the people of the old Covenant) be heirs, faith
is made void. (to wit, the people of the new Covenant,) And Heb. 10.1. The law
having a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things,
etc. Gal. 4.21. Ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?

This Covenant, while it stood, although it were very glorious, yet the Spirit
of God never exalted it in dignity above the degree of an Handmaid, appointed
for the time being to minister to the everlasting Covenant, and then to be
utterly cast out of the Church, together with her seed according to the flesh,
whom the Apostle calls servants, and not sons, Gal. 4.7. All which we have
prophetically, yet plainly and fully instanced in the family of Abrahans, under
the type of the Gospel Church, under the persons of Hagar and Ishmael, Genesis
21.10, 11, 12. Cast out this bondwoman, and her sen; for the son of this bond
woman shall not be heir with my son, with Isaac, etc. The mystery of this
Scripture the Apostle unvaileth at large, Gal. 4.22, -- 31. Where he shows
that the two women, verse. 24. under an allegory, are the two Covenants, the
bondage Covenant, and the free Covenant, verse. 25, 26. that is, the law and the
Gospel; and that the Isaacs were the true seed of the Gospel-administration,
ver s. 28. called the children of the promise: and says the Apostle, such was
himself, and all the Churches of Galatia, to whom he wrote, verse. 31. Not borne
after the flesh as was Ishmael, verse. 23. but borne where there were no
possibilities of nature, to bring forth a seed: even by the power of God, and
spirit of adoption, verse. 5, 6, 7. By a mother which in the other respect was
altogether barren and desolate. verse. 27. Rejoice thou barren that bear not,
etc. that is, she was in no such mariage-Covenant, whereby children should be
brought forth unto her, as were the children of the former marriage-Covenant;
but in that respect being left absolutely destitute, should yet have many more
children, then that Covenant had which brought forth children by fleshly
generation.

Again, this old administration, the Spirit of God. Heb. 8.5. Termed a service
unto the example and shadow of heavenly things. And Chap. 9. verse 9. a figure
for the time then present. And in Chap. 7. v. 19. and cha. 10. v. 1. That it
made nothing perfect. And that it was by the Lord Jesus blotted out as an
handwriting of ordinances, that was against us, which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2, 24. There ended that
Covenant; there expired the law, the force and authority upon which that
administration stood. And there was the prophecy, Genesis 21.10. of casting out
the seed according to the flesh (never more to claim a privilege upon that
account) absolutely accomplished and fulfilled. And thenceforth the children of
the promise are counted for the seed, Romans 9.8.

Two hard shifts are made use of by some to avoid the evidence of these, and
the like scriptures against infaint-baptisme, which might be alleged to the
same effect.

First, Genesis 24. and Gal. 4. Tends only to prove, that the legal Covenant and
carnal seed, as it stood privileged by that Covenant, was to give way to the
free Gospel Covenant.

To this we say, Abraham, in the letter of circumcision, had with them an
eminent renovation, and ratification of the everlasting covenant; yet were both
of one and the same nature, authority, and use, John 7.23. Acts 15.5. Although
not given together; as neither were the ordinances of sacrificing; and all
alike signified, and served unto the same heavenly mystery of the grace of God
in Jesus Christ.

We close with them herein,

We say that the exclusion of the seed,

It is also suggested,

To which we say, visible Churches unto, both in their doctrine and practice:
and that also upon occasion of the corruptions, which by the imposing of the
legal covenant and natural seed had invaded them, as is most evident to have
been the case, Acts 15.5. -- 10. If no such matter at all concerning invisible
faints, any otherwise considered then in visible Church Order, be to be found
in the scope and intention of the Apostle; which also is evident: Then let no
person give up their reason and understanding to such impertinent and
incoherent interpretations, against the plain drift of the Spirit of God, and
the work of reformation therein pursued. And thus much of the Covenant of
Grace, before the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh: wherein we would not be
understood, in what has been said touching the abrogation of the legal
covenant, to teach the abrogation of any moral Doctrine or Precept.

The last administration of the covenant of grace, The ministry by Christ.
usually called the new covenant, is that which was established by Jesus Christ
at his coming, which was altogether of another nature to that which went before
it. This was not a covenant ministering or serving to any doctrine above or
beyond it self, as was the other, Heb. 10.1. But this was the mystery of the
grace of God it self plainly administered: a mystery hid from ages and
generations, Golos. 1.26. Ephesians. 3.8, 9. It was under a veil or behind a
curtain till Christ himself came to reveal it; and the whole scope of the
doctrine preached by Christ and his Apostles, runs quite beside the pretented
priveledg of the seed after the flesh, and is placed upon the seed after the
spirit, as being indeed the true seed, who were really stated by God in the
privilege of the everlasting covenant through their new birth, and not
otherwise. Mark the preaching and practice of John the Baptist, Matthew. 3.8, 9.
Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance, and think not to say within
your selves, We have Abraham to our father. Observe the doctrine of Christ,
upon what foundation he builds the Gospel Church, Matthew. 16.18. Upon the
profession of actual faith in the Son of God. The birth-priviledg cannot be
squared by this rule, to have a place in this building. Again, Isaiah 54.13.
Prophesying of the Gospel Church, says, And all thy children shall be taught
of God, is applied by Christ, John 6.44, 45. with this introduction, No man can
come to me except the father which sent me draw him, etc. There is no coming
unto Christ, nor sonship in the Church upon birth-priviledge any longer. Again,
Luke 14.26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father, etc. he cannot be
my disciple; here is no room for birth-priviledg to make disciples to Christ,
or upon that title to come unto him. Gospelpriviledges are a part of the
Gospel-inheritance, and follow Gospelsonship. If sous, then heirs. Gal. 4.7.
Romans 8.17. Now Gospel-sons are not born such, of the will of the flesh, but of
the will of God; Of his own will begat he us, James 1.18. And therefore the
visible profession hereof must be the common principle to constitute visible
children of the Gospel Covenant, under the administration of Jesus Christ, by
whom grace and truth was administered, not flesh and figure.

Thus much of the first term, that came to hand in our opponents first
proposition [the Covenant of Grace.] The next expression to be explained, is
[stands now in force.] It seems to us an hard kind of expression, to say,
That the Covenant of Grace stands now in force: as if it were capable of being
or not being in force, with respect to seasons: but thus we understand our
opponents meaning by this term, that it signifies a person to be comprised,
and stated in the covenant of grace by God.

Another expression craving explanation, is, [the children of believers under
the Gospel] which in our opponents intention, we take not to be such children
as were begotten unto the faith by believers, and in that respect came under
that appellation, of which we read, 1 Cor. 4.15. 3 Epist. Joh. ver. 4. But we
understand it of the children begotten of the bodies of believers; and in the
same sense and no other, we our selves crave to be understood throughout this
Reply, by the terms of carnal, or natural seed, seed after the flesh, seed of
the birth-priviledge: which caution we premise, that these terms made use of by
us be not applied to signify some evil qualification.

The second proposition needoth not to have any thing farther said unto, it
being dependant upon the first, and must stand and fall with it.

These things premised, we return answer to these his two propositions, viz.
(1) that the Covenant of grace stands now in force to the children of believers
under the Gospel. (2) That this is a sufficient ground by Gods appointment, why
children of believers should be baptized.

And first, We say, If by this term [the Covenant of Grace] in his first
proposition, be meant the Covenant of Grace in our first acceptance of it; and
by [the children of believers under the Gospel] be meant their natural seed, as
before explained: Then we deny the first Proposition, because the Covenant of
grace in that sense, is not in force to any, upon any other consideration, then
as they are in Christ. Then also is the second Proposition to be denied;
because God has made no such appointment, that Baptism should be administered
to persons upon the single ground of election.

If the Covenant of grace be meant of the covenant of grace ministering,
according to our second acceptance: then, if it be also meant to be in force
etc. by virtue of some institution, appointed of God before the coming of
Christ; we deny the second proposition, that that is any sufficient ground by
Gods appointment of Baptizing infants now; such institutions being vanished
with the other shadows.

If by the Covenant of Grace, be meant the Covenant of grace as it is now
ministered since the coming of Christ; we also deny the same proposition in this
particular, that there can be found no such appointment instituted by Christ,
or any of his Apostles, for the baptising of the children of believers.

Last of all, we say, That the Covenant of Grace is always in force to the
elect as such, called or uncalled, infants or aged; it is also in force to all
sorts of persons, as it is a doctrine by Gods appointment to be published, for
the calling of sinners to repentance: but we utterly deny that there is any
thing at all in force by the covenant of grace, or by any appointment of God,
for the baptizing of infants.

The ordinance of Baptism, is a part of the instituted worship of the Gospel,
and all the force and authority that it has upon the Conscience in point of
practice, is to be derived from the plain and express law and word of God, by
which it is made an Ordinance of the gospel: and that in point of practice must
be the Rule not to be swerved from. God has been very jealous of all his
Ordinances, to keep them exactly to his own methods and manner, in the practice
of them: and the nature of man is very presumptuous to be interposing and
meddling. Let us not forget that of Heb. 8.5. Exodus 25.9. -- 40. See that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount: all
instituted worship, must be conformed to the heavenly pattern.

But to follow our opponent in the proof of his propositions. This is evident
(says he) from many Scriptures in the New Testament, and so gives you an
instance in that one, Acts 2.39. and then fairly leaves you to make the
application as you please, without managing his authority to prove any one
point or term, in either of his propositions. But the next work we find him
upon, is an impertinent, confused accusation, that the Anabattists obscure and
darken Scripture, and persuade the world, that children have no right to the
promise, till they are actually called. Wherein we shall use some patience, to
bear his abuses, and frothy traverses, to give an answer as God shall enable.

Our sense of the Scripture alleged is this: That ver, 39. has a necessary
and plain coherence, with verses 37, 38. wherein we have an inquiry of the Jew
wounded in conscience for sin, and the Apostles full and comfortable resolution
of the case, to this effect; that God has made his precious promise in Christ,
to Jew and Centile, of pardoning repenting sinners, and of giving to them the
holy spirit; and that in this grace and promise, the Jew and his children had a
precedence, and priority to all other people: and therefore they repenting and
being baptized, should receive the mercy promised. This resolution of this
Scripture, is not only pertinent to the case, but also very coherent with it
self, and consonant to other Scriptures. It was a pertinent point for comfort
to the Jew, that grace was tendered to all, that all scruple from personal
incapacity, might be removed by such rich mercy: and it was an additional
comfort, that the tender of this grace was specially reserved, to be made to
the Jew and his children, before any others; as is elsewhere also declared,
Romans 2.10. Acts 13.26, 46. But withal it was profitable to inform the Jew (who
boasted much of his birth-priviledg) that although he had a priority in the
tender, yet as to the grace it self, he was but in a parity and likeness with
all others; that a right frame of spirit, might keep him from being puffed up,
under a mistake of that wherein his Interest lay: and this also we have
elsewhere frequently instanced, Gal. 3.28. Romans 3.29, 30. Ephesians. 4.5, 6, 7. And
that therefore the same common requisite, of Faith and Repentance, in order to
Baptism, must be found alike in all persons, that would partake in the benefit
of this grace indeed, Mar. 16.15, 16. He that believes and is baptized, etc.
this is the Doctrine that Christ commanded to be preached to every creature for
salvation, and this is the order by which it should inure to every creature,
first that they repent, and then that they be baptized. And let not your minds
be shifted aside from this truth, by a pretense that the Spirit of God, in
these and suchlike places of Scripture, is only to be understood of an
invisible work of grace, in the hearts of the saints, and not of the principle
upon which the Gospel Church was to have its constitution. (Of which you have
formerly in like case been warned.) (1.) Jesus Christ came to gather the true
seed into his granary the Church, and not the chaff; Mat. 3.12.
and his sanne, the Gospel-administration, was fitted as a fan to do the
thing according to the doctrine held forth; he came not to set up a Church
after the Jewish principle, Mat. 16.18.
of a natural generation of the sons of men, but by spiritual regeneration to
be made the Sons of God, and therefore tells Peter, that he will build his new
Church upon the rock of personal profession. And (2.) who shall presume to lay
a right in natural generation, as a principle to give an entrance into the
visibility of the Church, of which there is not one titlte to be found in all
the New Testament, from Christ or any Apostle? while in the mean time the
Scriptures of the Prophets, and all the New Testament, do everywhere abound
with evidences that run upon a supposition of a real profession of a work of
grace, as the state of the Gospel Church: and many passages against the
principle of a seed according to the flesh, the principle of the bondage
covenant, as has been promised.

2. Whereas he charge us with persuading the world to believe that children
have no right to the promise, till they are actually called. It is a very
odious and false suggestion, the man was ill instructed to publish it; this we
say, that a right to the promise, does not conclude a right to be baptized. We
affirm that children have a right to the promise as well as the aged; but to
have a right to be baptized, is not given to old or young, till the rule of the
word be complied with according to which baptism is to be administered. As for
his discovery of our mistake which he thus rectifieth:

Accuser.

[Call] has no relation to children, but to them that are afar est (1.)
Because the children are joined with their parents in the promise, which is an
entire proposition in the Text.

Answer.

We say, that his affirmation, and his reason, are of the like worth, both made
up of a mere trinkling about words; his reason supposes, that in a continued
discourse, a word in one proposition can have no relation to words without the
same; which is senseless: or that there may not be more then one logical
proposition, in the same coherence of matter; which is also as vain as the
other.

We have not yet ended with this Scripture, Acts 2.39. We lay our claim to it,
as eminently justifying our practice of baptism; and that it speaks not in
favor of our opposites at all; although alleged as a chief evidence against
us, The promise is to you, and to your children, therefore repent, and be
baptized. This is part of the Apostles argument to the Jew, which plainly
infers this,

That the reason upon which the title of the Jew, and their children to the
promise was to inure, was repentance, and baptism thereupon, otherwise there
lay no force at all in the Apostles argument, if the promise would inure, where
there was not found, in the person the prescribed qualification of repentance,

If the children should be admitted to baptism before repentance, then the
promise carries more to the children, then it would afford to the parents,
although the parents title to the promise, be reckoned antecedent to the
child's, and the child's title, through the parent.

If [call] in the close of the 39. verse. is to be restrained to them afar off,
and to have no relation to children, as is alleged, what a disproportion would
it have produced in the converts to the Church, that the Gentiles, and their
children, being comprised under [them afar off] must first be called, and then
baptized; but on the part of the Jews, the effectual calling of the parents,
and their baptism, sufficed to justify the baptism of the children without
calling.

Our Accuser proceeds with a long train of arguments: we cannot pick out the
coherence they have, with what had been before alleged: we shall therefore
take them in their course, (as the Lord shall give assistance) and make our
answers to them severally, without taking advantage from their inconsequential
application, either to his propositions or alleged Text.

Accuser.

If children should be excluded from the promise,

Answer.

This Argument supposes our denial of the promise to the children: Job 1.5.
James 5.15, 16. 1 John 5.16. And that therefore there is great ground given to
such parents of an holy hope, that God does hear their prayers for the
salvation of their infants, seeing they are not under that sin unto death, that
is not to be prayed for. And we could never find our soberest opposites, to
ascribe a greater ground for a believer to conclude the salvation of his infant
if he died after he was baptized, then if he did before. Besides which great
advantages, there being also reserved to the children, the same tenders of
grace, for their full investure into the real fruition of the promises, we
remain yet to be informed what discouragement was put upon the parent,
laboring under the sense of guilt, to receive a dectrine thus tendered,
bringing with it the same grace upon the like terms, to be bestowed upon his
posterity, together with these high advantages premised.

We also say, Whatever benefit may be justly said to accrue to the infant by
virtue of the promise through the baptism of the parent, all that would be
more effectually and certainly made out to the comfort of them both, by
baptism upon faith, then can be by baptisine in infancy; by how much baptism
upon faith, more certainly declares the parent by whom the benefit does accrue,
to be really in the covenant, then baptism in infancy can be said to do.

Accuser.

Arg. 3. If so, then this could not encourage the Parents to submit to Christ
under this administration; but would have hindered them, that their children
should be excluded from the Promise, who stood in it two thousand years before,
under the other administration.

Answer.

This Argument runs upon the same supposition with the former, (whither we
refer the Reader for an Answer in part) only there it pretended to saddening,
here to discouragement; here also we have the old common mistake, that an
incapacity to Baptism excludes from the Promise. But to pass by these faul^s,
we come to what may be further found a color for an Objection.

Object. Infants stood visible members of the Church for two thousand years in
the administration: this administration excludes them.

Answ. They stood excluded altogether, as much above two thousand years before
Circumcision, as they do now; so that an Ordinance for their Church Membership,
was not so from the beginning; but came in by special institution long since.

2. The other administration in which they stood, was established with a seed
to be propagated by natural generation, according to express command, Genesis
17.9. Thou shall keep my covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in
their generations this is my covenant which ye shall keep, etc. Every man-child
among you shall be circumcised. But where have we command for the like in this
administration? That administration was a typical, temporary, bondage-covenant;
and in a sigure it ministered unto the ends of the everlasting covenant; and
therefore it sufficed as unto that administration, if the people, the children
of that covenant, were of the seed of Abraham, because by that shadowy
covenant, young and old, good and bad were all alike Covenanters, and all alike
in a capacity to be subjects of an administration, which was to serve unto the
example and shadow of heavenly things, till the seed should come to whom the
Promise was made, Gal. 3.19. as has been formerly proved, whereunto we reser
the Reader.

But the Gospel-administration, that brings Christ, and all the mystery of his
grace, in the truth and reality, and not in the figure and example; is not
receptive of children, as to the Principle upon which it stands, any other way
then upon some visible demonstration of Faith, whereby Christ comes to be
received, who are therefore called the sons of God, John 1.12, 13. As many as
received him, to them gave he power, right or privilege to become the sons of
God, to them that believe in his name, borne not of blood etc. Thus the
Apostle, Gal. 4, 28. calls the saints of the Churches of Galatia, children of
the promise, in opposition to the seed according to the flesh, verse. 23. And
their mother the free Gospel Covenant, v. 26. And the same Apostle declares,
Romans 9, 8, that the children of the promise are counted for the seed, in
opposition to the seed according to the flesh, v.7. Neither, because they are
the seed of Abraham, etc. Whereunto many other scriptures might be added. Yea,
the whole stream of the New Testament, witnesses to a seed according to
calling, and (as to the principle of their admission) all living stones, for
the constitution of the Church of God, and not one word in favor of a seed
according to the flesh, as to admission into the Church, upon that principle of
birth-priviledge.

3. Though the Gospel Church may not be built by such a seed, nor can be
receptive of it upon that account; yet would there arise no ground of
discouragement or sadness to the Jew thereby; his shadowy glory was now to
cease, but real glory was set up in the place of it: and the same specially
prepared, and held forth to him and his seed, as amphe as ever, and by a better
and more lasting covenant, to be made good upon better promises. But this glory
must be received as it is tendered; it is tendered to faith, and by faith alone
can it be enjoyed and partaken in, and profession the visible title thereunto.
And against this change, the Jew had nothing to except, but his unbelieving
mind which God determined should break him off, Romans 11.20. The change of the
administration from the carnal seed to the seed by adoption, did not at all
abridge the interest of the Jew to the grace of God in Christ, or any
privileges thereof, but unbeleef.

We consent thus far to the truth of the objection, Abraham; was doubtless that
stumbling block which offended many of them, as the Lord had foretold by Isaiah
8.14. applied by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.5, -- 9. But what of all this? must the
mystery of grace, for the gathering of the elect to Christ, be still cumbred
and clouded with the pretensions of a carnal seed, which could by no means be
brought to the standard of so high a mystery as Christ was come to call men up
unto ( viz, faith, repentance, laying down of life and all for Christ in or to
the glory promised) rather then the Jew must take offense? we therefore deny
that the argument from saddening and offending the carnal Jew, is of any worth
at all.

Accuser.

Arg. 4, If so, then children would be superfluous in the Text, and so the
Spirit of God would be charged with tautologies, which would be blasphemy to
affirm.

Answer.

It seems superfluity and tautologie must all be one. But we say that our
denial of baptism to infants, does not render the declaration of the right of
the children of the Jew, in this Scripture superfluous, because the children of
the Jew may have many great rights in the promise held forth, and yet through
present personal incapacity, may not have a right to be baptized. Baptism is a
part of instituted worship, and must be administered just as the law of its
institution directs, and not otherwise: and it had well become our Accuser
to have found one little place, within some of his arguments, to have convinced
us of error from a rule of the word, whereby this form of infant baptism
came to be a Gospel-ordinance; or at least some example of its practice in the
manner he pretends unto, and to have passed by these empty notions.

Accuser.

Arg. 5. The tense is changed: The promise is to you and your children, in the
present tense; but when he speaks of the call, he speaks in the future tense,
as many as God shall call, which must needs be applied to them afar off, and
not to children.

Answer.

Must it needs be applied to them afar off, and not to children?

This absurd disproportion cannot be shifted aside by replying that [them afar
off] must be limited to the first called Gentiles:

This trifling dispute from the change of the tense is very absurd, as well as
frothie,

Accuser.

Arg. 6. If their interpretation hold good, there would be a very great change
in the extent of the Covenant, narrower under the Gospel then it was under the
Law, and no notice in all the book of God given of such a change.

Answer.

Passing by the unexpressed interpretation, we shall apply an answer to this
argument, as it stands opposed to our practice of baptism, as the Lord shall
give ability.

1. We say, That the Covenant has one and the same extent before, under, and
since the Law, considered singly in it self: is changeable, and was often
changed; yet whatever passes from the Believer to his Child, by virtue of the
intrinsecal Nature of the Covenant of Grace, that also admits of no change; but
being so made out, we say, That all that will be more evidently and clearly
ratified, both to Parent and Child, for the comfort of both, by Baptism after
Faith, then by Baptism in Infancy.

2. Neither is the administration under the Gospel, narrower then that under
the Law, because it admits not Infant-baptisin. This administration under the
Law, was circumscribed to a little Land, and a small People: the bounds of the
other are stretched from Sea to Sea; and from the Flood to the Worlds end. This
was restrained to the seed and family of Abraham; the other extended to the
seed and family of Christ. This had its existence but two thousand years, upon
an occasional temporary principle, the other is suited to answer a principle
existing from everlasting to everlasting. This administration was the shadow,
figure, and example; the other the substance. This was the Handmaid; the other
the Mistress. And if the case be thus between these two administrations, will
any presume to charge the Gospel-adminstration with more narrowness, then the
Law; because of the dis-continuance of the Birth-Priviledge?

3. Although the Grace of the Gospel be extended far beyond the Grace under the
Law; yet as to Persons, the Children of the Gospel are formed to so strict and
refined a qualification, that in that respect we allow the Law, a latitude
beyond the Gospel; but yet with this mark. That that indulgence of the Law was
one of the great imperfections, which the Gospel came to reform, Mat. 3.10, 11,
12. And of this change the Book of God does give abundant notice, although the
Accuser be informed to the contrary, Genesis 21.10. Cast out the bondwoman, and
her son, etc. Shortly after the institution of the Ordinance of Circumcision,
for the Privilege of the Seed according to the flesh, the Lord brings forth a
Prophetical instance in the very Family of Abraham, (the type of the true
Church) wherein this great change of Church-Priviledge was revealed to be taken
from the carnal Seed, that it should be given to the Seed according to Grace,
under the Gospel-administration. And to put that matter out of question, we
have the unvailing of this Prophetical instance to the very same purpose, in
Gal. 4.30. so also, Isa. 54.1. Sing O barren thou that bear not. What she
was, the Apostle tells you, Gal. 4.26, 27. next consider her husband, verse. 5.
Thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of hosts is his Name; and thy Redeemer the
holy One of Israel: at verse. 13. you have the refined qualification of her
Children and People, And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. Here you
have a Prophetical description of the Gospel-Church-state, which the People of
a fleshly extraction from the most sanctified Saints, cannot possibly compare
unto, it must therefore necessarily be understood of another Seed, even of a
Seed begotten of God by the Word of Truth, James 1.18. the Gospel-People. And
this was a fair notice given of the change in question, to wit, narrower, as to
the qualification of the Persons, but more extended in Grace. To the like
effect is Isa. 60.1. Arise, and shine, etc. at verse. 21. Thy people also shall
be all righteous. Another fair warning for the fleshly Seed, is Isa. 65.15. For
the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his people by another name. What think
you of this warning? Hear the Prophet Jer. 31.31. The days come that I will
make a new covenant etc. verse. 34. They shall all know me from the least of
them to the greatest of them. Here is a plain notice of the change of the old
administration, which gloried in the Seed of Abraham, after the flesh, and as
plainly foretelling the cessation of that propagation, to give place to the new
administration, and the true Seed of Abraham, the Seed according to the Spirit;
and indeed the change of the administration necessarily removes the fleshly
Seed, because it has a standing by no other right then what it had under that
Covenant. We shall not make use of the New Testament to prosecute this point,
it everywhere abounds with evidence to it.

4. And because the Accuser places the force of an Argument upon the
supposition of not giving notice of the change of the principle of visible
admission into the Church; we also shall take the same liberty of reasoning,
and say, That seeing the common way of admission to baptism in the Primitive
Church, was after personal Profession of Faith; and also seeing the error of
circumcising baptized Disciples, had generally overspread the Churches, and
might be interpreted very much in favor of the fleshly seed, Act. 15. it is
very strange, that notwithstanding the common practice of Baptism upon
Profession, and notwithstanding the severe Confutation of this, and the like
error, by Arguments plainly in dis-favour of the carnal Seed, as may appear
Mat. 3.10, 11, 12. Romans 4.13, 14. Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 4.30. yet that in neither
case, there should be found anywhere in all the New Testament, a qualification
for the saving of the right of Infants of Believers to Baptism, if it had been
a right, especially upon that pertinent occasion about circumcision: we
therefore conclude, that there was not such right.

Accuser.

Arg. 7. If their interpretation be true, then the believing Jews, should have
loss by their repentance, if their children should be excluded from the
Promise, as soon as the Parents had repented.

Answer.

1. Very true, and a greater loss then that would befall the children, if the
Parents repentance should exclude them from the Promise. But where did the
Accuser learn that Interpretation and Opion? we utterly disown it, and do place
it among the other calumnies unjustly thrust upon the Profession of the Truth
wherein we stand. We say, That the Children have a right in the Promise with
the Parent; and that the Parents Repentance and Baptism, brings great
advantages to the Child: but we deny that a right to the Promise infers a
right to be baptized. The Scripture alleged, declares a right unto the Promise
in these Jews, when they had no right to be baptized; the right to be baptized,
arises from the instituted Rule prescribed by God's word for the
administration of Baptism, and the Persons conformity thereunto. Among all the
Disputes in this Question, when shall we be pressed with a rule prescribing
Infant Baptism, as a part of the instituted worship of the
Gospel-administration?

2. We consear, that in some sense, a Jew converted to the Gospel should have
loss, and particularly in that point of sealing his fleshly Seed by an
Ordinance, together with the fall of all the glory of their Sanctuary, and
pompous Priesthood, so much and so long the joy and boasting of that Nation:
which the Spirit of God foresaw and foretold, by Isa. 8.14. and hence it come
to pass, that Christ became so great an Offense, and the Gospel so sore a Stone
of stumbling and Rock of offense to them all; yea, even to many of them after
they had submitted to the Gospel: yea, the Gentile Churches were scarce, if at
all, preserved from stumbling hereat with the Jew. But all this loss well
considered, would amount to no more then what befalls a man, who from the
Privileges of a Servant, is invested into the Privileges of a Son. And this
was the very case, Gal. 4.4. God sent forth his Son, etc. Verse. 5. To redeem
them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. Verse.
7. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son. And the reason of this
change, the Apostle plainly shows us, verse. 23. He that was after the
bondwoman, was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman, was by promise.
There was an infinite difference in the propagation of the Seed of the former
Churchstate, and of the Seed of the Gospel-state; no less then between Nature,
and the Power of God, as was in the Types, Ishmael and Isaac.

3. Neither has this change brought any other loss unto the child, but, 1. The
Interest which it had in the everlasting Covenant, under the former
administration, it still retains. 2. The benefits and advantages which it had
by the Parent, are so much bettered, by how much the spiritual state of the
Parent under the Gospel, by Baptism after Faith, is better ratified then under
the Law. 3. All other and further benefits from the Covenant, are more freely
and fully tendered, and with many enforcing advantages, brought near to be had
and enjoyed. 4. It is an advantage, that as a token of the expiration of the
bondage Church State, their signing upon the natural birth, is also at an end;
and their sealing into all these Privileges, transferred to an Ordinance upon
the visible Title of their New Birth; without which, no word of God can be
found to raise them into the visible Dignity and Prerogative of the Sons and
Heirs of Sarah, the Gospel Covenant or administration. And it is clear to us,
that such a loss as this, was not obscurely pointed at, in the preaching of
Christ, although we do not strain it here, Luke 14.26. a loss of natural and
carnal Ordinances, to enjoy spiritual.

4. There is no color of warrant from the Word of God, That Jesus Christ, in
the day of his appearing, did establish any one Ordinance in the Church, which
did import a Communion in his Intercession, to be practicable duly by a person
in an unregenerate state.

Accuser.

Arg. Then they could have no hope of their children; for hope without a
promise, is presumption.

Auswer.

1. If the hope of the Parent for his child's salvation be grounded upon the
administration of an Ordinance in Infancy, then neither had the Patriarks for
above two thousand years hope of their children: which we find false by Noah's
Prophecy, Genesis 29.26, 27.

2. We demand what hopes the Accuser intends? and by what Scriptures the same
are annexed to the administration of an Ordinance in Infancy?

3. We justify an holy hope in Believers, in behalf of their Children; which
is grounded upon plain Scriptures, without Infant Baptism.

4. We say. That this Argument seems to carry in it this conclusion. That
Christian People, by Infants Baptism, are by Scripture-grounds assured,
according to Gospel-hope, of the Salvation of their Children: there wants a
proof for it; and we suppose, it is not received as a Truth by many that oppose
us in this Point.

5. His Argument supposes, That to be without Infants Baptism, will infer a
being without the Promise; but that has been often disclaimed.

Accuser.

Arg. 9. If children should be excluded from the Promise, let any man breathing
show me what privilege the Children of repenting Parents have above others?
Now it is clear the Apostle adds children in the Text, to show that they had
some special privilege above those that were uncalled.

Answer.

1. The supposition of this Argument is, That the denial of Baptism to the
Infants of repenting Parents, deprives them of all Privileges above the
Infants of Persons uncalled: but this suggestion has been formerly replied
unto, in our Answer to the Accuser's second Argument; where also, many high
Privileges of the Infants of the Godly, are expressly mentioned.

2. The Accuser does not show us how the Apostles words, [the promise is to you
and to your children] being made use of to win an unwilling People to the
Faith, do prove the Baptism of the Infants of those that are actually in the
Faith, seeing it will not be granted, that a right to the Promise, and a right
to be baptized, are convertible terms.

3. We have already set down many Privileges of the Infants of believers,
above others; although we admit them not to baptism, or visible-Church
membership. If we detract from them any spiritual participation in the grace of
the covenant, we believe we had not been so long left under a general charge,
without some particular allegation against us. But we are well assured, that no
such thing in particular can be justly found against us. Besides we know that
our opposites among themselves are so puzzled about the finding out more
privileges to the infants of believers, then we allow (save in the single
point of admission to baptism) that although there have been sufficient
demands of it, we do not know that the same has hitherto been done: and yet
still the cry is up in general words, for the privileges of the infants of
believers, as if we denied their possibility of salvation.

Accuser.

Arg. 10. Then how could the blessing of Abraham come to the Gentiles,
according to Gal. 3.14. which blessing of Abraham was, I will be a God to thee
and to thy seed, Genesis 17.7.

Answer.

1. The supposition of this argument being not expressed we take to be this: If
the infants of believing Gentiles be not to be baptized, then could not the
blessing of Abraham, mentioned Gal. 3.14. come to the Gentiles; I am a God to
thee and to thy seed, etc. To this argument we reply:

Two places we have in this third to the Galatians, in which the blessing of
God to Ahraham is intimated. (1.) In the close of verse. 8. In thee shall all
Nations be blessed. (2.) And at v. 16. To Abraham and to his seed were the
promises made. As to the first place, verse. 8. it is taken out of Genesis 12.3.
And because there is a necessary coherence of this authority with verse. 7. for
the proof of what is here affirmed viz. That they which are of faith, the same
are the children of Abraham; and because the same proposition is also affirmed
by this Apostle, Romans 4.11. That he might be the father of all them that
believe, and at verse. 16. to the same effect. Who is the father of us all: And
is also confitmed at verse. 17. by a place alleged out of Genesis 17.5. I have
made thee a father of many nations; We therefore say, That these two places,
Genesis 12.3. and Genesis 17.5. have an agreement between themselves, because they
both agree in the proof of the same position; viz. that they which are of the
faith, are the children of Abraham. But although this blessing of Abraham to
come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ (as is expressed, Gal. 3.14. by a
continued and necessary coherence of the matter there treated of, falls in
with that which went before, quite against the title of the birth-priviledg,
established by the law, and gives it to believers the only sons of Abraham in
the Gospel-day, verse. 7. They which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham. This bold opposite has pleased to lay aside that blessing, and to
call upon another Scripture managed by the Apostle in another argument, and to
annex it with this verse. 14. to serve his turn, but with as little advantage
as if he had stayed where he was. In the interim, we deny that there is any
color of truth in this allegation, that the denial of infants-baptisme bars
the blessing of Abraham from the Gentiles, or can be justly supposed so to do.

2. But admitting his application, of verse. 16. drawn from Genesis 17.7. I will be
a God to thee, and thy seed after thee, to be pertinent: Yet it makes not a jot
to his purpose, to wit, that because the carnal-seed of Abraham had a day,
wherein as the natural sons of Abraham they were privileged under
circumcision; that therefore the carnal-seed of every believer should in the
Gospel-day, be admitted into the visible privileges of sons and heirs of
Christ. It is a very froward supposition, that the proportion between Abraham
in the flesh and his carnal seed, in the time when circumcision was in date,
should be the same to Abraham in the spirit, (who is Christ) and the carnal
seed of every believer in that season when circumcision is out of date.

3. What is this seed of Abraham to whom God does here promise to be a God? or
what has blinded the man, that has considered the 16 verse. and cannot see
what interpretation the spirit makes of his own words in Genesis 17.7. He says
not, Unto seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to thy seed, which is Christ?
Not the natural children of all believers, unless men will turn Quakers, and
say that Christ is given with every natural procreation. For Christ, even that
ONE is that seed, to whom or in whom the promise is made, Genesis 17.7.

Object. But this must be Christ mystical, and that will serve to take in the
natural seed of believers.

Answer. No, it is not Christ mystical: at verse. 17. the covenant is confirmed
of God in this Christ, the Christ who is given for a covenant of the people.
Although by adoption believers are joynt-heires with Christ, yet are they not
(and much less are their natural seed) joynt-mediators with him in the
covenant. That Christ was the sole Mediator in the everlasting covenant,
confirmed to Abraham by the covenant of circumcision; that the promise by faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe, is the plain use and
improvement of this Scripture in this place. But what if Christ mystical be
also taken in to help the matter? when will it be proved that God has made
the birth-priviledg a way under the Gospel-administration, to be ingrafted into
Christ mystical?

4. Take this distinction concerning the blessing of Abraham.

1. The blessing of Abraham in the letter and according to the Law. 2. The
blessing of Abraham in the mystery and according to the Gospel.
1. According to the letter, Abraham obtained the blessings and privileges of
the whole inheritance, which came by the Law to be the peculiar inheritance of
himself, his fleshly-seed and family, together with all the singular advantages
which thereby were ministered among them for the calling and gathering of a seed
to Christ, in an everlasting covenant, whereunto that covenant in which they
stood under circumcision, with the prerogatives of the inheritance thereof, did
minister, as an example, figure and shadow. The sum of the covenant of
circumcision, see Gen, 17.10. This is my covenant which ye shall keep between
me and you, and thy seed after thee: every man-child among you shall be
circumcised, unto verse. 15. That circumcision was of the same nature with the
Law, see Lev. 12.2, 3. John 7.23, That the Law was a covenant ministering as an
example, figure and shadow of heavenly things, to wit, of the sanctuary and of
the true Tabernacle whereof Christ alone was the high priest and minister, See
Heb. 8.1, 2, 5. Chap. 9. verse. 1. and 9. Chap. 10 verse. 1. That the covenant of
circumcision fell with the Law, see Acts 15.24. Subverting your souls, saying,
ye must be circumcised, and keep the Law, Col. 2.14. In this sense, the
blessing of Abraham was not to come to the Gentiles, neither consequently the
birth-priviledg, which had its institution from that covenant only, and was a
principal part of the blessing thereby given.

2. The blessing of Abraham in the mystery and according to the Gospel, is the
manifestation of Jesus Christ, with all the blessings and privileges of the
everlasting covenant to be the peculiar privilege, inheritance and right of
every believer, who therefore are called the children of Abraham, that the type
and the substance having a mutual and respective application each to other, the
mind of God might be clearly seen in them both, for the distinguishing of
shadows and figures, which were to be done away, from the substance that was
not capable of any change: which we are manifestly instructed in by the
Apostle, Gal. 3.26. Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ, Jew,
Greek, bond, free, male, female: mark how the Apostle resolves the point in
question, at verse. 29. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise. Not, if ye be the seed of believers, then are
ye Abraham's seed, as the Accuser would insinuate to the Reader by his
half-faced argument. And this is the blessing of Abraham, which was to come to
the Gentiles, even this, that Christ with all his benefits should be given to
the believing Gentiles for a covenant.

Accuser.

Arg. 11. Then how can believers be heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3.29.
if their children should be excluded from the promise? for the childrens right
to the promise is a part of the fathers inheritance (for) the promise is to
thee and thy seed.

Answer.

1. We shall not be persuaded to entertain that position, that the children of
believers are excluded from the promise. We say, that as the denial of
infant-baptismes imports no exclusion from the promise, so neither does every
right to the promise instate a person into the inheritance.

The Jew had a right to the promise uncalled. (1.) As God had his remnant among
them according to election. (2.) He had a right to the promise, as God gave him
a priority and precedencie in the tenders of the promise, above and before all
other people. (3.) They had a right to the promise, as they were lost sinners
whom Christ came to seek and save. But in neither of these respects was the
Jew an heir in the promise: such an interest and right to the promise,
declares the person to be made a son by adoption; and if sons, then heirs of
God through Christ, Gal. 4.7. a privilege which no title of the natural father
can prefer a creature unto in the Gospel-administration.

2. The Scripture made use of for infant baptism in this argument is this, If
ye be Christ's, then are ye Abram's seed, and heirs, according to the promise:
and the application of this Authority, is made by way of question: If Infants
of believers may not be baptized, then how can believers be heirs? And has the
person this Scripture in his eye, and yet pretends himself unprovided of an
answer? How plainly does this Scripture lay the Title of the Heir upon this
conditional qualification, of being Christ's? He that is Christ's, is an heir by
this Text, be his Children never so great alieas and stangers.

3. But says he, The childrens right to the promise, is part of the fathers
inheritance: for the promise is to thee, and to thy seed. His meaning seems
to be this: If the Father be Christ's, and so comes to be an Heir, then the
promise carries the same Title to the Inheritance, down to the children: which
is all one, as if he had said, That if the Father be a Son of Abraham, (which
in Gospel-construction is a believer) then the child must be a Son of Abraham,
and a believer also; even by his Birth-Priviledge, and not by Faith: directly
confronting many Scriptures, which restrain the blessing of Sonship to Abraham,
and the Inheritance in all manner of persons to Faith in Christ, Gal. 3.9. They
which are of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham: not, they which are the
Children of Believers. And in the Text alleged, If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's: not, if ye be children of believers.

4. As to the interpretation of that passage, taken from verse. 16. The promise
is to Abraham, and to his seed; besides what has been said in answer to the
tenth Argument, we say, that the application of this Scripture must be made
between competent persons, and under their proper qualifications and respects,
respectively considered. The promise was made to Abraham, as a common Ancestor;
and he had a noble seed, to whom the blessing, as an Inheritance did inure; but
under this qualification, as they were his natural seed, privileged under the
typical administration: by which this Prerogative was so settled. Now to improve
this Scripture aright, the heavenly mystery veiled in this dispensation, must
be sought out: and first we must find the common Ancestor, and him the Apostle
discovers to us to be Christ; if Christ's, then Abraham's seed, verse. 29. So
then, although Abraham stood a Father of many Nations, under the Law, yet
Christ is the only Father, the everlasting Father under the
Gospel-administration: and this Ancestor has also his Seed more nobly
descended, then the Seed of Abraham: they are all the Sons of God by faith in
Christ, verse. 26. Yea, it is impossible, that by any other qualification, men
can come to be the Sons of this Ancestor; then by being made one with him in
the participation of the everlasting Grace of the unchangeable Covenant. Now
then, it is an incompetent application of persons, to compare every particular
believer and his children to Abraham, the common Ancestor of a whole
administration, and the Seed privileged thereby: and no less incompetent, is
the application of the qualification requisite in persons to be accounted
heirs, that because it sufficed to Abraham's heirs, that they were the sons of
his natural Generation, and thereby made capable of an Inheritance in the
figure, and in the letter; that therefore it suffices, by being the child
according to natural generation of any believer, to be upon that account an
heir of God, and joynt-heir with Christ, in the very substance and mystery,
which the former administration did prefigure. We therefore shall deny the
Argument raked up out of these two abused Scriptures: and we say, That it is an
absurd, as well as a presumptuous reasoning from the promise to Abraham, and
his seed, to infer or suppose, that the Infants of believers are joynt-heirs
with Christ and their godly Parents, under the administration of Grace, because
of the Birth-Priviledge given to Abraham, and his Seed by the Law.

Accuser.

Arg. 12. Lastly, If children be excluded from the promise, it seems the
Apostle went about rather to deceive his hearers, then to inform them: it is
very unlikely, the Apostle would use the same dialect of the Covenant, that was
formerly used to Abraham, (I am thy God, and the God of thy seed: the promise
is to you and your children) if it had been his mind that children should be
excluded. I wish that men would with unbyassed hearts weigh these things, and
you shall see, that the children of believers are in the promise.

Answer.

1. We say, That the Apostle in plain terms tells them, That the promise is to
you, and to your children: and in the strength of that gracious promise,
persuades them to Repentance and Baptism: but what if Children be not excluded
from the promise? where comes in Infant Baptism upon that account? and this
should have been the very first thing, if he had intended ingenuously to have
proceeded; and there was a fair occasion for it in the first Proposition, That
the Covenant of Grace stands now in force to the children of Believers under
the Gospel. But in stead of a fair proof, as well there, as all along, we have
a parcel of doubtful and equivocal terms, made use of, without any discovery in
what sense they are applied: of which artifice, we have frequent experience.
And we have some grounds to judge, by the management of what has passed, That
the Opponent durst not open that door, lest the light thereby entering, would
have manifested these, and the like inconsequential and confused reasonings:
and that therefore it was thought best, silently to trust the credit of that
Point, with the good disposition of the credulous Reader, having to deal with
us, whom in a jeer he scorns, with the Title of a learned company, meaning a
company of silly follows.

2. What an odious and audacious inference, he here imposes upon the Spirit of
God, That if Infant Baptism may not be concluded from the words alleged, The
promise is to you, and to your children; then the Apostles use of them is in a
deceit: we have already made known, That the use made of these words, was to
induce poor grieved sinners to Repentance, as containing a Doctrine full of
comfort for such, that repenting, and being baptized, they and theirs, in all
generations, had Promises of Christ, and all his benefits. And what is the
deceit herein? Indeed, to promise an Inheritance in Christ to poor Creatures;
and to affix a Seal of God to that Promise, without any color of authority by
any Rule of the Word, may perhaps be in time charged as a notorious deceit: the
good Lord draw all his faithful Servants out of it.

3. That the Apostle uses the like (Dialect, as he pleases to set it out)
phrase of speech to these Infants, that God was pleased to use to Abraham at
the confirmation of the Covenant, [viz. I am thy God and the God of thy seed;
the promise is to you and to your children] is no help to Infant Baptism at
all: forasmuch as the allegation of the Apostle, is to persuade the People to
Repentance and Baptism; without which, the Promise contributed nothing at all
to justify a persons Baptism.

4. These words spoken by God to Abraham, [ I am thy God, etc.] did
Prophetically and mainly refer to Christ, and Gospel Times, to have their
accomplishment for the gathering in of the Seed of God to Christ, scattered
abroad amongst the Jews and Gentiles; especically, and first of the Jews; it
was therefore necessary, that the Argument of the Apostle should be formed to
the likeness of the authority from whence it is drawn; but still the
intepretation suited to the mind of the Spirit, to wit, the gathering of a
spiritual, not a carnal Seed to Abraham, that is, Christ.

Accuser.

Further, I observe, that the promise is to be considered two ways: 1. As it is
invisibly made, so it is alone to the elect. 2. As it is visibly made, so it is
with visible professors and their children: whoever is in covenant in the first
sense, can never fall away; but many may be in covenant in the later sense, who
may afterward degenerate and fall away. Here let the impartial Reader take
notice, that the Covenant, as it is visibly exhibited is the ground for
baptism, seeing the subjects of the Covenant internally are known to God alone.
This distinction of the Covenant is clear, from Romans 9.4. where the Apostle
says, The Covenant pertains to them: and yet the Apostle was in great
heaviness for them, verse. 2. It Is clear from Act. 3.25. where the Jews are
called the children of the Covenant, and yet but few of them internally in the
Covenant. It Is clear, from John 1.11. where they are called God's own: which
could not be by Creation; for so, all are his own: neither could it be by
special Grace; For, says the Text they rejected Christ: then it must needs
follow, that there was a visible Church Covenant, or Covenant of Grace, visibly
exhibited, that gave them a claim to God.

Answer.

He calls upon the impartial Reader to take notice, etc. so also do we; and
shall take it for the point in issue between us and our Opponent, viz. whether
the visible exhibition of the Covenant, the ground of Baptism, will justify
the baptizing of Infants, or the baptism of Believers: and let the Reader
consider the evidence, and pass a righteous sentence. The visible exhibition of
the Covenant, is not that which the fancy and pleasure of men calls so; but
it is the visible way of worship, which stands and must stand by special
institution and appointment of God himself, under known ordinances, and laws
reveased in the word of God: a description whereof we have Ezekiel. 43.11, 12.
Show them the form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
Ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the Laws thereof, and
write them in their sight, that they may keep the whole form thereof, and all
the Ordinancas thereof, and do them: this is the Law of the house, upon the
top of the mountain, the whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy;
behold, this is the Law of the house.

Here we have a complete description of a visible exhibition of the covenant,
where we may see the Lords exactness to give his people an unquestionable plain
written rule, for all visible worship, with this caution, that the whole limit
thereof round about shall be most holy: nothing to be taken from it, or added
to it. So did heat first by Moses, Exodus 25.9, -- 40. Now we say, if such
exactness were to be kept in the figure; and a suitable faithfulness was found
in the servant, what exactness may we expect from Christ the Lord! see Hob.
3.5, 6. Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a
TESTIMONY of those things that were to be spoken after; but Christ as a Son
over his own house, which house we are. And that Christ was not wanting to us
in this matter, see Mat. 28.19, 20. but the administration of baptism is a very
main ordinance of the instituted worship of the New Testament; and that form of
it which is practiced among us, to wit, to baptize upon faith and repentance,
being an undoubted form instituted, and practiced, by Christ and his Apostles,
and no institution or practice for baptizing infants being produced: We
therefore say, that allowing this distinction of the promise or covenant,
invisibly and visibly made, and that the visible exhibition is the ground of
baptism; we require the proof of this, that infant baptism is a part of the
visible exhibition of the Covenant in the New Testament days, institured by
Christ or his Apostles; and it is no small comfort to us, that in a day of so
much contradiction, envy and detraction, wherein this truth becoms a word of
patience to us all, hitherto we have never been pressed by any one argument,
which does pretend to an institution of Christ, or any Apostle, but by certain
far-fetcht reasons from Abraham's carnal seed, and from circumcision, and
suppositions of strange inconveniences imagined by men, to follow the denial of
infant baptism, and such like matters; and indeed being tried, are found
suppositions, and nothing else.

Accuser.

In a word, this must be acknowledged by the Anabaptists themselves, else how
can they call themselves a visible Church of Christ, if there be no visible
exhibition of the Covenant, to give men such a visible relation? for there is
no claym to God but by Covenant.

Answer.

You have heard us affirm a visible exhibition of the everlasting covenant; and
that in Gospel Times, the same is of another nature then it was under the Law:
that now it consists in a clear unvailed discovery of the doctrine of
salvation by Christ, and an orderly disposition of all matters relating to the
same, by the rule of the written word of God, instituting the New
Testament-administration: all which we thus particularly set down once more.

1. The exhibition is the only instituted worship which God accepts; and in
performing the same according to rule, we are said to do that which is right in
the eyes of God, and not otherwise: Exodus 23.13. Deuteronomy. 12.28.

2. All the force and authority which it has upon the conscience, lies in the
rule by which it is commanded, and binds according to it, and no farther. Esa.
8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, etc.

3. God so greatly detesteth all services which himself has not commanded,
that in this respect he declares, that he is a jealous God, who will not
endure a provocation: Exodus 20.4, 5. and because man's nature is prone to be
inventing and meddling, God has therefore never left his Church without certain
plain and positive rules for all manner of duties, which he requires. And this
provision being as needful in the Gospel as under the Law, Christ therefore was
not wanting to the Church therein, Mat. 28.19, 20. And amongst other the Lords
Ordinances, we find a plain rule and institution, for the baptising of
believers and penitents; but for the baptising of infants, we have not a word:
and because we do not read it neither in precept nor president, we dare not to
practice the same.

Accuser.

In this sense we are to understand the children of believers in the promise,
according to the meaning of the Apostle, in Acts 2.39.

Answer.

That is to say, these words of the Apostle, The promise is to you, and to your
children, by him preached to the Jew, to bring them to Christ by repentance and
baptism, do import, that the children of believers are in the covenant visibly
exhibited such wretched abuses of Scripture this bold person dares to affirm.
That the interest of the Jew and his children before repentance and baptism is
here expressed to be in the promise of Christ, is plain: but from these words
to conclude an interest; yea, an actual being in the visible Church, would also
conclude, that the Jew in his rankest opposition, was already in that state,
which the Apostle labored by the tenders of this grace to bring him into.

Accuser.

Now this covenant-right, is a ground, which God himself lays down, why any
should be baptized, Acts 2.38. he requires baptism, v. 39. shows the reason,
for the promise is to you. Here I desire the reader to take notice, how the
word of command, depends upon the word of promise, and what an inseparable
union and connection there is between the command and the promise.

Answer.

It is a most false and senseless inference: the right to the promise we grant
to be the ground of the Apostles persuasion to repentance and baptism; but it
is no ground of a persons being baptized without repentance, neither is it so
laid down by the Lord, or by the Apostle.

But observe the dealing of this man, he requires baptism (says he) v. 38. and
what next? shows the reason, v. 39. the promise is to you, and to your
children: and then on he runs, that the word of command depends upon the word
of promise with an inseparable union and connection, without taking notice of
the conditional qualification of repentance, no less in the command (as he has
devised to call it) then baptism, yea antecedent to it. What wonder, if a
corrupt mind drive a person headlong to maintain a justification of smaller, by
greater evils? Having first found out in the Apostles declaration of a right to
the promise in persons, in order to conversion; that the same imports a right
in a visible Church State; That here again, he also has found out a command
for baptism (disjoined from a command to repent) with an inseparable union and
connection, directly against the letter of the text?

Accuser.

The same reason alleged by the Apostle, why the parent should be baptized,
is rendered by the same Apostle, as a reason why the children should be
baptized, (for the promise is to you and to your children.)

Answer.

Let the accuser, whoever he be, enjoy what he demands: we consent to him
herein, that the reason of the baptism of the parent, is the reason of the
baptism of the child: but the reason of the baptism of the parent, by virtue of
this right in the promise, cannot take effect at all, or for ever, without the
qualification of repentance: and if the reason rendered by the Apostle, be the
same for the baptising of the child, then it must bring repentance with it to
the water, as the Eunuch did faith to Philip, or it can receive no baptism, if
the Apostles reason be rightly alleged.

Accuser.

Nay, the very same command expressed to baptize the one, is employed to baptize
the other: for if some, or any, to whom the promise is made, may not be
baptized, there can be no force in the Apostles argument.

Answer.

We are not willing to contend with our opponent, about small matters, to wit,
how the Apostles counsel or exhortation, Repent and be baptized, may pass by
the name of a command. But having laid down a truth for the substance, in what
he first affirms, we shall join issue with him in it. (1) we consent, that
the command to be baptized to parent and child is one. Then what says the
command? Repent and be baptized: We answer, What God has joined together, let
no man put asunder. The accuser was telling but now, of an inseparable
connection: he might have better observed it here, then where he sought it. But
(2) Though we approve our accuser in the first part of what he affirms, yet we
must leave him to himself to make good his reason, viz. If any to whom the
promise is made, may not be baptized, then there is no force in the Apostles
argument. We make no question, but that, notwithstanding the multitude of
Converts at this Sermon, yet there were very many Jews, to whom this promise
was made, equally with those that were converted, who persisted in their
obstinacy; and thereby rendered themselves and their children incapable of
baptism, upon the Accusers own Principles: nevertheless, the Argument the
Apostle made use of, was not therefore without force, because they might not be
baptized.

The Accuser having put an end to the cruel torture, with which he has racked
the Scripture beyond all bounds of sobriety, he leads you to see his fair
fruits of better information; where, we believe, you will find enough to
discover the person's very great want of a sober Spirit, to say no more.

Accuser.

Thus the Lord satisfied me about Infant Baptism: being thus satisfied, I went
to hear the public Ministry; but this coming to the ears of the Anabaptists,
there came three of their Society the nex: day to me, to have an account
concerning this thing: I told them, If they would be pleased to come at a time
appointed, I would give them the Reasons of my withdrawing from them: and
accordingly they came, the Preachers, and Principalest among them; where I gave
them an account of my withdrawing from them, as many of my Friends can bear me
witness: which was as follows: 1. Their denying the Children of Believers a
right to the Covenant. 2. Living in constant neglect of an Ordinance of Christ,
viz. singing of Psalms.

Answer.

Thus the Lord satisfied me, etc. and in his entrance on this of Baptism, he
says, And upon serious enquiring into the Word, and earnest seeking of the
Lord, it pleased him to satissie me; and a little after, but by considering, I
saw their mistakes etc. If the Accuser deserves the praise which seems desired
by him, and allowed to him, of having, with much search of the Scripture,
consideration and Prayer, sound out and set in order these Grounds, wherein his
satisfaction lay, before he departed from us: would it not seem somewhat
unhandsome dealing, and beneath a learned Minister, that above a month after
our Accusels departure from us, these, our accusers meditations, should be
publicly preached in that Town, in matter and form, well-nigh verbatim, as he
here has written them; without acknowledging whose Collections they were? but
we leave them to agree, whether the one's claim to them in the Pulpit, or the
other's in the Press, shall carry away the applause desired: and go on to
consider, what he Reports of that Meeting, in which he gives account of his
withdrawing. The first Ground whereof, as he presents it, we have already
tendered to examination. The second is our living in constant neglect of an
Ordinance of Christ, viz. singing of Psalms. At this Meeting, he charged us,
with denying singing of Psalms: now he calls it, living in constant neglect of
it. About which, what our Light and Practice is (and as then in effect was
said) you may take thus: We do fully and cordially own, speaking to our selyes;
teaching and admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns, (...); singing and
making Melody with Grace in out heart to the Lord, to be the will of Christ;
according to which wholly men of God are bound in all generations to sound forth
his high Praises in the Church by Jesus Christ: which ought to be performed by
them, being merry in the Lord, with Melody in their hearts, and a distinct and
cheerful voice, expressed either in the Songs of Moses, David; or otherwise, as
the Spirit brings things to their remembrance, and gives them utterance, to
the edification of themselves and others, that they standing by may say Amen or
Hallelujah at such giving of thanks. Unto the performance of which work,
although under the shadowy dispensation, there were added Musical Instruments,
and Singers specially appointed to attend that service; which are done away in
Christ: And although in the beginning of the Gospels confirmation, some
extraordinary gifs of the Spirit adorned it, which are now ceased; yet the
substance of it abides as a duty still in force: to the which, we are not
convinced, that the common artificial Rhymes, Measures, and Tunes are
essential. In the practice hereof, according to the measure of the Light and
Grace of Christ, the Churches and Christians accused (we trust) endeavor to be
found faithful to the Lord. Although whatever imperfections or defects of this
kind, were apprehended among us by our Accuser; yet in pretending this neglect
of ours, as a just ground of his withdrawment from us, he shows himself to have
been a very unfaithful member, while he walked with us, in that he never
declared any offense or scruple about this matter, until he had thus left us;
nor yet of the next thing of which he charge us, Thus,

Accuser.

Thirdly, For neglecting of Family-duty, maintaining it to be a man's liberty,
not his duty, to pray in his family.

Answer.

What our Principles and Practices are in this matter, we have hinted before.
Touching the later clause, which is here told you (but very falsely) to have
been then presented by him, as the ground of his departure: as there is not the
least color, why he should lay it upon the whole Church from whom he withdrew,
(much less, upon the whole of that people, whom he styles Anabaptists;) so
neither seems it so honestly charged on the person, where all the pretension
that we can learn of it, is: the passages appear to have been thus: At the time
he mentions, when some Members came to confer with him about the Reasons of
his departure; among others, he gave this for one; because we denied
Family Duties. It was replied to this effect: We do not deny it; but do own,
and affirm. That it is the Duty of Parents and Masters fearing God, to be
frequent in calling their Families together, instructing them in the Principles
of Religion; endeavoring by all means possible, their Conversion and
Salvation, and in their presence to spread their condition before the Lord;
praying for them, that God would set home such instructions and endeavors with
power, etc. But afterward, several things being debated, a Case was put: What
and if the Master had an ungodly Family, in which he could not judge any one
did fear the Lord, with whom he could join, as with one Spirit, in Prayer;
whether he was bound twice a day, viz. Morning and Evening, to join in Prayer
with them? It was replied by a Brother, That if he saw advantage might come to
them thereby; and found the Lord making his Spirit free, he might so do; it was
his liberty: but as to any positive command, that did bind him in such cases,
the party thus speaking, said, he knew none. Upon which, one in the company
drew this conclusion from these words, That we made it a man's liberty, not his
duty, to pray in his Family. How fairly this is inferred from what was said;
and how righteously fathered upon the whole; and how certainly this instance
was a ground of his leaving us (which himself says, was before this conference)
is left to the sober Christian to judge.

Accuser.

Fourthly, For denying the power of the Magistrate for punishing evildoers,
(to wit, Quakers.)

Answer.

What the Principles of the people, whom he in the general accuses are in this
point, is full well known to the world, by their confessions of Faith,
particularly that of the Congregations in London, Art. 47. the words are these,
A civil Magistrate is an Ordinance of God set up by him for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well, and that in all lawful
things commanded by them, subjection ought to be given by us in the Lord, not
only for wrath, but for conscience sake; and that we are to make supplication
for Kings, and all that are in authority, that under them we may live a quiet
and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. 1 Timothy 2.

As for this particular Congregation, they have not only explicitly testified
their Fellowship, with these Churches in this Profession of Faith: but it is
well known to the Accuser, that several Members have, and as occasion offers,
still do address themselves to the Magistracy in that place, for their
punishment and reformation of such disorders as fall under their Observation.
Only they say, They are not persuaded, that the sword of the Magistrate is a
mean appointed by Christ in the Gospel-ministration for the punishing or
reclaiming of an erring or mis-guided Conscience, in matters that do depend
upon the revelation of the Spirit. As for the people mentioned as an instance,
(to wit, the Quakers,) it was affirmed by those Brethren at that Meeting, and
still is, that wherein the Quakers should be found to commit any Offense
against the Rules of good manners, the Magistrate has power as fully to
proceed with them, as with any other men.

Accuser.

5. For slighting the public ministry.

Answer.

This charge is left exceeding raw; whether it relate to all the people by him
called Anabaptists? or to this society in Tiverton? or to those members only in
particular? whether it be slighting a public ministry, as not being the
ordinance of Christ? or whether it being some kind of testifying against that
which is usually called public ministry? If the latter, then whether it be
only that public ministry in T^^^rton, or else universally? whether it be
their persons, their gift or standing that is slghted? here is latitude for the
Reader to make construction as he pleases. Our understanding in this matter,
is, we do own and honor as an ordinance of Christ, a public spiritual
ministry or service, to be performed to him and his people in the things of the
Gospel, by persons qualified in some good measure from the Lord, and called and
set apart according to Christ's laws in his Church; both as to that ministry of
the word of reconciliation, and edification, and to that of serving tables. And
though this be not as yet fully brought forth and established in that
congregation (it being a falsehood in scorn castion them, that Willtam Facie is
their Pastor, if by it be understood a man chosen and ordained to that office)
as through grace it is with some Churches with whom we have communion in the
Lord; yet is it that mercy in order to which they are waiting on the Lord for
more of his light and spirit, in making proof and trial of the spirits of such
among them as they have best ground to judge the Lord has bestowed most of his
gifts and graces on for that work. As for the ministry of the nation, we have
this to say. We own and honor many of the men, not only as holy, but as such
that have received gifts and graces from the Lord, which he has blessed in the
exercise of them. But as for the form of their standing, as ministers in
office in the Church of Christ, we judge it not to be according to the rule of
the Scripture. Nevertheless we do not own nor willingly allow, that in this
case any should take up railing accusations, or unsound and unsavory
expressions, such as gender to strife rather then to godly edifying; but do
pray for, exhort to, and labor after this, that our speech might be always
with grace, seasoned with salt, that we may know how to answer every man. If
the Accuser had the knowledge of, and was grieved with any such hard speeches
either from the whole or any members, his faithfulness would have been in
exercise to have testified against it in his place, while he had communion with
us: his utter silence in bearing any witness of this kind till now, was it
seems from hence, that he knew he was second to none in any language of that
nature.

Accuser.

I offered to give them a farther account of my withdrawing from the hypocrisy
and wickedness of one William Facy, who is their present Pastor: but they
refused to hear, and desired I would not cast dirt to their face; I desired
that they would please to give an account, what they had against me, but I
could get nothing but this from them, viz. you are withdrawn from us, and have
neglected your place among us.

Answer.

In this passage is all the color the Accuser has for what he pretends to be
one main occasion of publishing his book (viz.) that he could not have liberty
to speak for himself: which was thus: at this conserence, wherein his five
unrighteous grounds were at large debated, he several times began to insist on
what he calls the wickedness and hypocrisy of William Facy, which now (being at
liberty in printing) he displays at large. Of which the Reader may in it is
place expect an examination.

The matters he makes so large an outcry of, came to pass while the Accuser
walked as a member there, who as he was acquainted with the man's sin and fall,
so also declared himself fully satisfied with his being humbled in the sense of
it to the dust, and publicly in the Church, praised the Lord for his
repentance and recovery. But now beginning to make a narrative of all those
matters in the presence of his other friends, with the same rancour of spirit,
as may be perceived running through his book (it being six months before, that
he had so soemnly witnessed his satisfaction in the others repentance) he was
desired to desist from so doing, unless he had any thing to lay to his charge,
either before or since those acts, of which the Church had took such public
cognizance, and had proceeded against him with such severe censure; but there
was nothing of any other kind could be produced. In that he says, I could
get nothing but this from them, You are withdrawn from us, and have neglected
your place among us. These brethren came to him not as from the Church, but
upon his motion to speak with him; neither was the place or company judged
expedient to open what was to be laid to his charge, (besides, this manifest
withdrawing of his) it follows not, that therefore the Church had nothing
else to charge him with.

By this time he has made his report (how righteously, let the impartial judge)
what principles he found among us. That which remains (except here and there
a repetition of what has been said before) is only what carriages and
miscarriages he met with among us, with his observations on them, and
instructions to young Christians, etc. from them. All which discovery of
personal failings and infirmities (should it be admitted that they are truth)
would not be of that weight upon the deliberated thoughts of the grave and
spiritually judging man, as that he should hence condemn the profession and way
we walk in; unless there appeared in the nature thereof, something of a cause
producing necessarily such effects. To such a one therefore it might suffice,
besides the stating of our principles, to declare in simplicity of heart, as in
the presence of the Lord, that our soul loatheth such abominations, in our
selves and others. But because this remaining part of the engine may do
execution upon the simple and harmless ones, toward whom it is professedly
directed, and our God having not left us without boldness of appeal to him, and
righteous matter for the clearing our selves to men, in diverse things falsely
presented touching us, we presume on the readers patience to proceed.

Accuser.

Then they solicited me again to return to them: but seeing they could not
prevail, they summoned me to appear before them such a day. I told them, that
if I might have the liberty to bring some friends of mine with me, I would meet
with them: this being granted, and the day assigned, I desired Mr. Fortescue
Lowman, Minister of the word in Cadlie, with some other friends to be present:
whom I found very ready, and accordingly at the sams time appointed, came with
me to their meeting where were present some of the ablest of that party in
these parts, both from Plymouth, Dartmouth, Tornes, Boveytracy, Bampton, and
several other parts, whom they had invited to assist them; and it is
remarkable to behold, the just hand of the Lord, who will not bear with sin,
nor suffer his truth to fall to the ground: as soon as we came into their
meeting, it pleased the Lord to strike such a damp upon their spirits, and cast
them into such a hurry, that not a man among them would engage to justify
their proceedings, but one Thomas Glass, ( who was not of that society, but a
teacher of a company of them at Boveytracy) in the name of the rest of the
Anabaptists, desired, that all such as were not members of their society would
withdraw. I told them, if my friends should not be present with me, according
to appointment, I would withdraw also (knowing the inconveniency of being with
them alone, when there was no one to testify the plain truth of things.) He
told me, if I would deny the authority of Christ and his Church, I might: unto
whom I replied, That the authority of Christ, I did own; but your authority I
did deny. William Facy not willing to be laid open, joined with this motion,
and desired my friends to withdraw. Then Mr. Lowman told them, he had something
to propose to them before he did withdraw, if they pleased: Thomas Glass
replied, Pray withdraw, for you have nothing to do here. So we withdrew, and
one of my friends said, Report no more that we resuse to give you a meeting;
which false report they have often spread to deceive the simple, and to carry
on their design, by persuading the ignorant into an opinion, that such as
differ from them have nothing to say from Gods word, to justify their
practice. The same night came Thom^s Glass (it is worth inquiring why they sent
not their Pastor William Facy, if they were not ashamed of him, or he to look
on me) and one of his brethren to my house, with a message from the rest of the
Anabaptists, to declare that they had rejected me. Mr. Lowman being present,
desired to know, by what rules they walked, to reject a man, for withdrawing
upon such just and reasonable grounds, as I had before urged. But Thomas Glass
refused to entertain any conference with him for his satisfaction; and told him
they had nothing to do with him. And being asked why they denied my friends
liberty to be present in their meeting, according to appointment, and refused
to give Mr. Lowman liberty to propose what he had to offer them: Thomas Glass
brake out in a pettish fit, saying, that we had attempted to disturb them in
the worship of God; and charged us with abusing the Name of God, and his
people, with incivility, dishonesty, and want of knowledge; and withal
affirmed, that he was employed by the rest of his brethren to tell us so: Unto
which Mr. Lowman replied, If you are employed by your brethren to give us such
language, pray be pleased to return this message again, that I humbly
conceive, they have done us the wrong, to appoint such a meeting with us; and
when we came, to deny us our liberty to be present; and now to send such
language after us.

1. We did not disturb you in your worship of God, for we did neither see nor
hear you about any religious exercise when we came, neither did we speak a
word till you bid us depart, neither were uncivil with you, for we withdrew
according to your desire. Thomas Glass being desired to show some reason, for
giving such slanderous words, replied, That he was not come to dispute, but
declare in the name of their Church, that he had rejected me, the partioulars
of my charge, were as follows. (1) That I had withdrawn from their society,
and neglected my place amongst them. (2.) That I had vilified some of their
brethren, whom I had forgiven. (3.) That I had vilisied some of their brethren
for denying Magistracy, neglect of Family duties, singing of Psalms. (4) That
I had abused my Father in Law. These things put together, Thomas Glass, and one
more of his brethren, did in the name of the Church, declare me guilty of
blasphemy (you may judge this was a learned assembly, that brought this charge
to such a conclusion) and they were sent to tell me they had rejected me.

Answer.

Here you have at large his story of the Churches proceedings with him (for
hitherto was only the private advice and endeavors of particular brethren) in
which he lays before his ignorant young Christian, several things, though with
such reservations, as may, if need be, afford him some retreat; yet in such a
way, as may easily beget a persuasion, and has done so in many, that he
intends they should believe these things in it.

1. That the Church had granted a meeting, and assigned a day, wherein Mr.
Lowman, and others should propose in way of discourse, what they had to say in
examination of our proceeedings; which when they came to do, was denied them.

2. That in order to this, the Church had invited to assist them, some great
number of the ablest of our party that could be got in the several quarters of
Country, far and near, who were then present.

3. That at Mr. Lowmans approach, they all were stricken in such a damp and
burry by a just hand of God, that no one durst engage to justify their
proceedings.

4. That the Accuser was judged an offender, and we would not give him liberty
to speak for himself.

5. That this learned assembly (as he calls them) brought his charge to this
conclusion, that he was guilty of blasphemy.

6. That this assembly employed messengers to charge him, Mr. Lowman and
others, with abusing the name of God and his people, with incivility,
dishonesty, and want of knowledge, etc.

At most of this affair, our selves (that publish this) being present, we can
upon knowledge testify the falsehood of these things suggested. All we shall
do, to manisest the abuse imposed on the unwary Reader, will be, to give this
true, brief account of the thing.

The accuser having dealt so unworthily with those that had endeavored more
particularly his conviction; the Church at length sent some messengers to
signify, that they expected him at their meeting such a day: To whom he
replied, he would not come, unless he might bring some friends with him. That
these messengers withstood not his declared resolution, but rather gave way to
it, as their particular opinion that it might be granted him, this is not
denied; but that the Church gave any such instruction, or allowance, is not so.
At that time there were four brethren of other congregations (and not one more)
having agreed among themselves several days before, to be about that Country,
and to give that Church a visit, who by providence were brought thither, not
knowing any thing more or less of their expecting the Accuser that day before
them, much less of Mr. Lowmans coming to propose any thing; nor were they sent
for by the Church, nor did the Church as we suppose, know any thing of the
intended visit, till after the day that he was summoned (as he calls it) and had
took hold of the seeming concession, and given out, he would bring Mr. Lowman,
etc. We being present, the Congregation desired us to assist them that day,
being the usual day of the week that they met on, which we were ready to do
accordingly; and having spent some hours together in prayer and exhortation,
about noon-time took the Accusers case into consideration, with the rumor that
was spread in the Town of a dispute that was to proceed, etc. Upon which
enquiring, and it being evident, that the Church gave them that had been their
messengers no such allowance, as they had given way unto; as also weighing how
little it could be hoped that we should administer conviction to the Accuser,
when such a rabble of people as were at the door, would thrust in about us and
him; and withal, having other matters to charge him with, that were not
convenient to be declared before them.

Moreover, that a true taste could not be had of the man's spirit; and what
himself might be conscientiously persuaded of, and upon what grounds, if the
matter should be taken up, and the time spent by any others on his half: on
these and some other grounds it was agreed, we would desire any that should
come in with him, not being members, to withdraw; and withal, the members
wereexhorted, that in case the rude concourse of people should throng in with
him (which indeed proved so) to abide in their places in the fear of the Lord,
and not make themselves accessarie to any confusion, though tempted and
provoked so to be, by the multitude. Our Brother Glass also was pitched upon to
speak the sense of the whole; first, to the multitude, in case they should
throng in, desiring we might enjoy our liberty to be private by our selves,
there being nothing to be debated that concerned them: and then to the Accuser,
to lay before him those evils which he was to be charged with, together with
the proofs we had of them, and to hear what he had to offer touching it, etc.
Then was he sent for, who brought in with him, and after him, such a multitude
as has been declared, who rushing in with no small incivility, as is usual
wherever such contentions are expected, the members generally sat silent as
was desired, though grieved to see such provoking demeanor: which the Accuser
calls a just hand of the Lord, striking a dampe on our spirits, but we take
to be a mercy, and token of love, to be kept serious and silent under such
incivilities. Then did our Brother Glass desire such as were not members to
withdraw, etc. whereat, those he calls his friends appearing to be troubled at
the disappointment of their design (which it seems was, as some of that party
have given our, mainly to have thrown in our faces the passages about William
Facy) many discontented words dropped from several of them; to whom the answer
was, Our continued desires were, they would not deal uncivilly with us, but
afford us our liberty, being we had no business in hand that concerned them. It
is like that if Mr. Lowman made any motion to speak among the rest, he had the
same answer. The Accuser, to show his valor in refelling any manner of advise
or admonition, refused to abide, though again and again exhorted to it, except
the company he brought with him might remain; speaking reprochfully of any
authority of Christ among us, and with much derisiont at length he with them
withdrew. (At this time then, he being so often admonished to remain, was not
debarred his liberty to speak for himself. The Church then considered what was
their duty farther concerning him, resolved to send messengers again to him, of
whom they thought good our Brother Glass should be one, he being acquainted
with him, and might best work on him; who in much meekness and bowels desired
him to come to the Church, and hear what they had to offer to him, promising
him what liberty he could desire toward the clearing himself; but he utterly
refused to come, going on to speak contemptuously, as his usual manner of late
had been, not only of the Church, but of the way it self, etc. This answer was
returned to us (and may it not be worth noting by the way, that he makes no
mention of this message wherein he was again offered liberty to speak for
himself, but still refused it) the Church then considering again the nature of
the evils they had in charge against him (of which hereafter) as also the
irreconcilable enmity that he manifested toward us, and the way we walk in;
that we were out of any capacity to endeavor farther his recovery, or to
deliver him from those iniquities that he boasted in as his glory, concluded it
our duty to cut him off, and reject him from the fellowship of this body. But
there was not (that we remember) the least mention made of the word blaspemie,
much less was his charge summed up under that denomination, or or brought to
that conclusion by that learned assembly, as he is pleased in derision to call
us.

As to the occurreaces about the delivering the knowledge of our proceedings to
him, however we are satisfied, and could make it out upon good demonstration,
that it holds proportion with the rest of his book, both for the forging lies,
and misrepresenting what has any color of truth in it; yet we judge it not
worth the while to cumber our present work, or the Reader withal, it appearing
at best, but an envious paraphrast on the weakness of a particular man, thereby
to asperse the way he walks in, and the whole people he walks with. The
slanders therein may be more conveniently disproved and reproved if need be
face to face. Only the Reader may know, that what passages were betwixt our
Brother Glass, and them, about their uncivility etc. it appears, that as they
were not any part of our Message, so neither were they affirmed by him to have
been; but delivered by him in the midst of much discourse, as his own
observation: at the sight whereof, as he had cause to be grieved, so having
such an opportunity, might justly complain of. As for that also about
Blasphemy, as we are abused by them in it, so is our Brothers the occasion
pretended to give color to it being only thus: Our Brother Glass, being come
to him with the Message abovesaid, began in some freeness of speech, (as far as
the Accuser's and Mr. Lowman 's interpositions^ and interruptions would give
leave) to set before the young man his state, manifesting; with what tenderness
we had demeaned our selves from time to time toward him, being always ready to
counsel and admonish him: but he had persisted, notwithstanding all means used,
slighting our counsels, despising our reproofs, still opposing, contradicting,
and blaspheming. At this word, Mr. Lowman, as was his manner, interposed, Will
you tharge him with blasphemy? yea, you charge him with blasphemy: how will you
make good your charge of blasphemy? etc. though it was answered, as both the
brethren testify, That this Expression was not the Churches, but out
brothrer's own Affirontion of him, which he was ready to make good, etc.

And whereas a^^^rward the conser says [He had made sad shifts te mince the
matter] surely, needed not to be so put to it, being an ear-witness to those
unparasleld reproaches, that by him, and by means of him, were cast upon the
way and people of the Lord, which the Spirit of the Lord does not unusually
call by that very name, 1 Cor. 4.13. Rev. 13.6. 1 Pet. 4.4. though rendered in
our Translation, d^^aming, evil speaking, slanderously reperting.

Accuser.

Now that you may see the irregular Proceedings of such as pretend to Religion,
and under that pretense draw away many poor souls from those means which God
has blessed for their conversion and edification; to the end, such may be
warned to take heed, Give me leave to answer to my Charge, and I shall speak
nothing but the plain truth; and let the moderate judge, where the guilt lies.
For the first particular of my Charge for withdrawing from them: I judge it a
great blessing, that the Lord has so far opened my eyes, as to bring me out
from among them: which will easily appear, if you remember the grounds I have
already alleged, and shall yet urge, as well from their wickedness of
Practice, as Principles, that I found among them; insomuch, that I wonder how
the sober among them, could walk with them hitherto.

Answer.

Here he takes on him to answer to the particulars of his Charge, as himself
shapes them, after a sharp invective, of which his Book is full; and from which
our God, to whom we have committed our Cause. will deliver us: [ For the first
particular of my Charge for withdrawing from them, I judge it a great blessing,
etc.] This indeed was one thing, which, had he abode, we should have laid the
evil of before him, that notwithstanding when he crept in among us, under a
profession, that in the fear of the Lord, in conscience and judgment, he did
put on Christ; and lifted up his hand to the most High God, that he would walk
among us, according to Grace received, as a Member in the Body of Christ's that
he did yet, contrary to the Law of his Relation, without any endeavors to make
the Church sensible of any evil, either in Principles or Practice, or to help
on their reformation; wholly desert them, and withdraw from them: this he
counts his great blessing on the grounds alleged: to which we say, That this
our Defense considered, together with the true taste of his Spirit from first
to last, the Moderate to whom he appeals, may easily judge the greater Blessing
to be on our hand, that we are delivered from such a one.

Accuser.

But this I shall show you in answer to the second Branch of my Charge, which
is a vilifying some members, which they say, I have forgiven.

Answer.

This was also an evil which we should have laid before him, That he (as all
the Members did one by one) explicitly witnessed his being satisfied in the
repentance of a sinner under censure; and withal, solemnly gave public thanks
to the Lord, for having thus humbled and healed him, as also forgiving him
freely, in the Name of the Lord; and joining in the receiving him into
Fellowship, as a Member of the Body again; he yet should at length, after above
half a yee^s silence, and declared satisfaction, display all the repented-of
evils of this person with wherever aggravations and additions he could, to
render him, and the people he walked with, odious to persons opposite to the
way of the Lord we walk in both profane and professors.

Accusers.

The occasion of this charge they bring against me, is as follows: William
Facy, their present Pastor walked so disorderly, his wickedness was so great,
that they could do no less then suspend him; but so slightly did they deal in
the business that his suspension pretended repentance, and admission again, was
all within one week. Shortly after, he feigned himself mad, and began to play
pranks with his wife: called a for basin to let out his blood; pretending that
he would cut his Throat: goes to cast his child into the fire, which child
shortly after sickned and died. Much of this, I was both an eye and ear-witness
unto: for his wife came crying unto me that she was afraid to abide with him in
the house: gave me a relation of those things; desiring me to come with her to
her husband. When I came, I found him on the bed: I asked him how he did; but
he gave me no answer. After some time I had been there, he arose, and goes from
his house. This wickedness committed by him was deemed then by the Anabaptists
(as was afterward by himself acknowledged) to be out of a design to get some
money from his wife, having married a widow, which kept certain Bills or Bonds
of Debt in some Friends hands, lest he should consume it: for which the
Anabaptists suspended him again; and in a little time received him again;
wherein I was never satisfied to this day: and in testimony of my
dissatisfaction, I refused to sit down with them at the Lords Table ever since.
Now they charge me for vilifying some of their members, when I spoke nothing
but the plain truth, in declaring against their sin; and they say, I have
forgiven him, when I was thus unsatisfied in his repentance, and now judge it
but feigned: for he that could so artificially counterfeit madness, could
easily counterfeit sadness.

Answer.

Here he begins to entertain the Reader, with whatsoever new or old, before or
since his rejection, he can invent and vent against this William Facy; all
which, lest it should seem no otherways in the Readers eye, then the personal
failings of a poor frail man, and not to be reasonably imputed to the cause or
people he walks with, and therefore no just ground for his reproaching and
forsaking them; he pins it upon the whole, by inculcating several times a
falsehood, as the running verse of his distinct Paragraphs, [yet they continue
him to be their Pastor,] and at length, closes up the whole with this, [ --
whether I have cause to withdraw, where such iniquity is indulged.] In this the
Accuser, as in his former story, about the Churches rejecting him, exposes the
Reader to a temptation of supposing these things to be a very truth.

1. That the Church dealt slightly, and short of their duty with William Facy,
on his first evil.

2. That the Accuser himself was an eye and ear-witness to the pranks he played
(to use his own words) when he feigned himself mad, called for a basin, etc.

3. That the Anabaptists judged, and himself confessed afterward, that he
feigned himself mad, out of a design to get some money, etc.

4. That the Church indulged this iniquity, and so they had done the former,
only suspending, and in a very little time receiving him again.

5. That this Accuser was all along unsatisfied with his repentance, as being
artificially counterfeited.

6. That upon the whole, himself is not to be accounted one that vilifieth his
brethren, in that he spoke nothing but plain truth in declaring against the
others sin.

To free such as desire to know the truth of things from the Accuser's snare,
we shall only present this short account.

This poor Creature now under accusation having walked blamelesly (as far as we
could judge) several years among this people, in the faithful and diligent
improvement of a good gift of Grace, to preach Christ's Gospel, that the Lord
had blessed him with, and blessed in his hand, both to conversion and
edification, was at length overcome by the power of temptation arising from
some more then ordinary crosses, in a state of Marriage, whereinto he was newly
entered; wherein he (as also his yoke fellow) was attended with trials
exceeding bitter to be born: which yet, for honor of Truths sake, he greatly
concealed. On a time, being overwhelmed with grief and impatience, he rent a
Garment that was in his hand; and used some expressions to his Wife, that
savoured of a very disturbed and passionate frame of Spirit: of which she
complaining to some Members, and it coming to the knowledge of the Church, they
required the cessation of his exercising his gift publicly, till they might be
satisfied of his repentance for such iniquity; which he tendering the knowledge
of abundantly, within a short time (as the Accuser says) they accepted of his
ministering to them again as formerly.

Some time after which, the cause of his grief remaining unremoved, exceeding
bitter and little hopes appearing to him that it could be taken away, that also
which the Accuser mentions about writings being some aggravation of his
trouble; It pleased the Lord to let out the Tempter, to tempt him to that
extremity, that upon a fresh onset of the enemy of his peace, he brake out in
his wives presence (none but she being with him) into a condition as a man for
the time beteaved of the use of his reason, in words not unlike his, Job 7.15,
16. As if he had chos^n present death, rather then life, and could have helped
it on with his own hands; and had desired the same for his little one, which
had been maimed and sickly before, and was now weak in the sickness of which
it shortly after died, being an imposthumation that brake within it.

Of all which, together with the aggravations of it, what breakings it has
been to his bones, to the enfeebling his very outward man; what tears, what
wounds it has begotten in him and all that were round about him, That the Lord
should be thus dishonored, and the fear of God should no more rule in his
heart, it is not unknown to the Accusers conscience, but our comfort is, that
our God knows how loathsome the thoughts of the iniquity were to us, and with
what impartiality, detestation, and severity we have borne our protest against
it, and with what heart-bleedings we do think of it to this very day. In
testimony whereof, he himself was sometime since drawing, and was taking advice
with several (long before this pamphlet was out) about the publishing a
narrative of the whole; showing the inward declensions that at first secretly
took hold of him in point of his communion with God, the various temptations
that then attended him, the great iniquities that at length got victory ever
him, with their aggravations, the Churches faithful and through dealing with
him, and the foorsteps of God rebuking, ab^sing, yea breaking him to pieces;
and yet the sweet and kindly operation of his hand, sustaining him in
distresses from sinking in despair, and at length bringing him forth to see
the light of his countenance in the face of Jesus Christ. But the publishing
this (intended for a warning to them that think they stand) was not by some at
that time thought expedient.

The Accusers pretended knowledge of these passages as an eye and ear-witness
was no otherwise then thus, as himself declares; that when the sury of the
temptation was over, he came in at his wifes desire, and found him silent upon
his bed, from whence after some time he arose, and went out of doors, which was
all the iniquity that he saw, only he heard his wife make relation of the
things to him, but that also she did to others afterward; (might not they then
be said with as much truth to be eye and eare-witnesses as he?) When this was
spread before the Church, in all the particulars of it, both when they were
alone, and when they had obtained the assistance of other congregations for
advice, which was very suddenly upon it: The Lord knows, and the conscience
of this Accuser knows, what days of anguish and sorrow they were to us all,
who forthwith not only suspended him again (as he calls it) from the public
exercise of his gift, but withdrew our communion from him in all the ordinances
of Christ, that hold out the peculiar fellowship of the Saints, notwithstanding
he then testified, how the very morning after his iniquity the Lord had broken
him for it, and with many meltings he declared it: insomuch as though the whole
could not but have compassion on his misery, knowing the unspeakable distress
of spirit he was under while the temptation was upon him (and therefore were
far from judging that he feigned himself mad, but rather that suffering such
terrors, he was even distracted, Psalm. 88.15.) yet knowing how the name of the
Lord was blasphemed, and seeing that Scripture Jer. 20.10. verified in some
from whom better things were expected, and considering how grievously such
impatient turnings from the Lord were aggravated in him, who had spoken so long
and openly in his name; The Church judged they were bound to wait on the Lord
in separating him from the congregation for some considerable time, to see what
fruit would farther demonstrate his repentance to be such as was not to be
repented off. And therefore though during this censure he several times
addressed himself to the Church, tendering still the knowledge of the Lords
going on to humble and abase him for his iniquity to the dust, and many feared
he would be swallowed up with overmuch heaviness, yet held they him under that
exclusion from membership, from the third day of the twelfth month, 1655. (when
he was withdrawn from) till the 12 day of the 4 month 1656. and from thence
till the 28 day of the 10 month following, they employed him not fully to
minister in all the ordinances of Christ as formerly. At that time mentioned,
the 12 of the 4 month, the Church received him again as a member, when each
member, (and the Accuser particularly for himself, as has been said) witnessed
full satisfaction in the truth of his repentance, and renewed their love to
him. And whereas the Accuser says, that in testimony of dissatisfaction at
him, he never sat down with them afterward at the Lords table; it is not
denied, but that about that time, and onward, the Accuser grew remiss and
negligent in that, as he did in all other acts of visible fellowship with God;
confessing but a little before his departure, that the world and relations had
drawn him aside; but that he did abstain from the Lords table as a testimony
against any counterfeiting either madness or repentance; he never spoke in the
least, as can be found, to any member.

Whether therefore the Accuser was not justly chargeable with evil, for
running up and down, displaying all that he could find against this member,
himself having testified so amply his satisfaction in his repentance, after the
Church had witnessed so faithfully against his sin, and this on purpose to
render him and the Church odious, as indulging such iniquity, let the sincere
judge.

Accuser.

1. He cries down the public ministry for taking of Tithes, when as shortly
after that his brethren had admitted him to their communion and fellowship, he
tells them, that unless they would engage to him 30 pounds by the year, he
would leave them.

Answer.

Two things the ignorant young Christian is invited to take up from this short
accusation for truth. First, that this man did at least essay to indent with
his brethren for 30 l. per an. or else would leave them. Secondly, that his so
doing does justify the national ministry in their taking Tithes, or at least
condemns him for testifying against it. The whole truth of the former
appears to have been thus; that a member speaking to him, at a time, about
his being fully set apart from other employment to the work of the ministry by
the Church; he replied to this effect, that he thought he should not yield to
it, for that he should expect a greater maintenance, then that Church could
well provide for him (as the case stood with them) which, said he, cannot be
less then 30 l. per annum: but spoke nothing of his leaving them.

This Member having occasion to speak something concerning him to the Church,
related this passage, which he (being present) acknowledged was from a
temptation. But put the case he had made this reasonable Proposal, it had in
the whole amounted to thus much: A Pastor of a Church (as he is called) having
a family, demands of the flock of Christ, to whose service he is called, 30 l.
per annum, as that, short of which he cannot, with his family subsist among
them. If this motion be justifiable, then the Ministry of this Nation must not
be testified against, for compelling by Law their Tithes and large Revenues,
from persons whom they judge were never fitted by the Lord for Communion as a
Church in all the Ordinances of the Gospel: this is one of the Accuser's
rational inferences.

Accuser.

1. He is a notorious liar, that makes little conscience of his word, and has
reported many untruths touching the public Ministers of Tiverton; nay,
justifies himself in lies when reproved. There was a young man who wrote notes
after Mr. Lowman preaching upon the Doctrine of the Covenant in Tiverton: which
notes this young man delivered to one of the Anabaptists, who gave them to
William Facy. Within three or four days after, this young man came to William
Facy, and demanded these Notes: which he plainly and presumptuously denies,
saying, he had them not: but William Facy withdrawing the room the young man
espies these Notes on the Table and takes them into his hand: William Facy
comes in; and perceiving the Notes in his hand, takes the Notes by force out of
his hand. When the young man reported this to some of his Friends, William
Facy comes to this young man, and calls him Liar, before his Master, (the young
man being then a Servant:) but the young man produced another to testify the
truth of this matter, who was with him at William Facy 's House, and heard him
deny the Sermon-Notes. Afterward Mr. Lowman, meeting with William Facy,
reproved him for lying: William Facy, to justify himself, tells Mr. Lowman,
That the young man had cleared him in this matter, before his Master: which
being examined was found a Lie. So here were three lies: 1. he denies the
Notes: 2. he denies that he did deny them: 3. he affirms that the young man had
cleared him: which were all false. Several untruths has William Facy reported,
which upon examination has plainly and clearly appeared so to be: yet they
continue him to be their Pastor.

Answer.

Who would not think by what is said, but, 1. That the Accuser had from hence a
very good ground to leave us, or at least a very good evidence to clear himself
from our second head of matter in charge against him, could he have obtained
liberty to speak for himself? 2. That this William Facy has very many times,
been had upon examination, about notorious lies, touching the Ministers in
Tiverton, and otherwise; and justifies himself, when convicted. 3. That he was
unquestionably found in three in one matter. The deceit of the former
insinuation appears by this, That whatever is pretended to made out in this his
ample story, was all transacted since the time that the Accuser left us, and
was rejected by us; and therefore came too late for his just vindication, in
the matter for which the Church proceeded with him: but still shows him to be
as the raging Sea that cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. For the
second thing suggested, if the single affirmations of such a slanderous person,
without any particular instances or further proof, shall have any weight with
the sober to fasten such charges, then how can the very generation of the Just
stand, in man's day, before envy? Reason will prompt the indifferent Reader to
suppose, that were there indeed at hand, proofs so clear upon examination of
those horrible impieties and injuries done the Ministers of Tiverton, we should
have had them inserted, as more pregnant to his business, and notorious then
this of the Lad's; that the Reader is at large informed in: which upon the best
light we can obtain, amounts to no more then this: There was a Sermon it seems
preached in Tiverton, about Infants right to the Covenant, which had a very
great similitude to, and agreement (to say no more) both in matter and form
with the Accusers formerly digested and much studied meditations on the same
subject above examined. The Notes of this Sermon, were by a Member (with Mr.
Lowman's consent) delivered to the person accused, and he engaged to deliver
them into that Members hand again, as purposing to give some Animadversions on
them.

Very shortly there came two youths to his house, neither of them known to him
by face; one of which demanded such notes from him, as being his. William Facy
denied the giving them to him, told him he could not have them; the lads
importunity grew so great upon him, as would admit neither of denial or delay:
at length, not remembering where he had laid them, and (as the lad says)
saying, he had them not at present: while he went into a chamber to seek them,
the lad found them among other papers on the table: when the youths were gone,
they reported, that he had said, he had them not in his house at present: about
which when the youth that claimed them, was examined before his Mr. after he
was in two or twree tales, as his Mr. still acknowledges, and witnessed it
lately in one of our hearing (who publish this) as well as before other
witnesses. The sum is, put case William Facy, as the lad reports, did say, he
had them not at present, thereby intending, he had them not at hand, nor
remembered where to find them at present; and the Lad understood, he meant by
the words, that he had them not in the house at present: If there be not left
in the reason of men, or love of Christ, a way for the serious reader to
reconcile these things, without our farther enlarging, or to accommodate them
to a more charitable construction and conclusion, then the Accuser does, the
business shall be left to his censure. Only let it be understood, to be far from
us to excuse or plead for a willing use of such equivocal terms in any cases,
as may leave the party to whom we express our minds under a temptation, to
suppose otherwise then in the plainest sense seems to be intended: and we have
good ground to believe, our accused friend was not at this time under this
temptation.

Accuser.

Yet they themselves have given it under their hands, that he is not fit to
manage a discourse to vindicate their practice and way, in which they now walk;
for there was a dispute appointed betwixt Mr. Lowman, and Mr. William Facy,
which was occasioned by some opposition from the Anabaptists in Bampton, where
William Facy and his followers came and opposed Mr. Lowman in the Pulpit, who
entertained some discourse with him before the congregation, and then referred
it to a day of public dispute. The Question to be debated, was; Whether the
infants of believers were in covenant: But Mr. William Facy being desirous to
new state the question, came to Mr. Lowmans house, and in the presence of
several, swore upon the faith of a Christian, that the question to be
discoursed, was not whether infants were in Covenant, but, whether infants were
to be baptized: where you may see, that such as make little conscience what
they say, will make little conscience what they swear. Mr. Lowman reproving him
for swearing told him, that the question to be discoursed, should be given
under each others hand, and if he desired to have the question so stated, it
should be done; the time and place was appointed, the question stated, given in
writing; the Anabaptists willing to wave the business, employed a modest man of
their own party, one Mr. Nathaniel Strange, with some others of their brethren,
of which Thomas Glass was one, to come and treat with Mr. Lowman, in order to
wave the dispute: Mr. Lowman desired to know the reason of their retreat: they
told him, because William Facy was incapable to manage such an undertaking. Mr.
Lowman asked, if they would give it under their hands: which accordingly they
did, and subscribed it in the name of the rest of their brethren, upon which
the dispute was prevented, yet notwithstanding Mr. William Facy is their Pastor.

Answer.

Being led back again to a story in 1655. by it his ignorant young Christian is
exposed, if he be disposed, to believe,

1. That though the Anabaptists hold this William Facy fit enough to be their
Pastor, yet they have given under their hand, that he is not fit to manage a
discourse to vindicate their practice and way.

2. That he is an open swearer, and further discovered to be a liar.

3. That the Anabaptists (a feeble flock) were sorely put to a very shameful
retreat from an appointed disputation with Mr. Lowman, and so a great advantage
on Mr. Lowmans side was prevented.

This public examination of Mr. Lowman at Bampton, occasioned by some very
terrible flourishes he had made a little before in his preaching upon the point
of infant baptism, drew on the appointing a further day for a public dispute:
in which hurry, the question was not so clearly and distinctly stated, to the
apprehension of either, but that each (while he thought he took, it seems)
mistook the others meaning, and reported variously; hence was the meeting at
Mr. Lowmans house, to find out and rectify the mistake; where the conference
was managed with much confidence and seeming assurance, that the one, and that
the other was in the right, though in this variety; so that meekness and
moderation was not called for, between them; neither could ordinarily, yea and
nay, go but a little way: being both in this heat, its possible William Facy
averred it, in the faith of a Christian. Of this, they that are quick at the
observation of our failings, give testimony, and that Mr. Lowman reproved it:
undoubtedly if this were done vainly and rashly, and not in judgment, truth and
righteousness, it was an evil worthy to be reproved, and the Lord will humble
him in the sense of it; but the Accusers Paraphrast on it must pass as an
inference of his own violence, which we leave with his other reproaches to the
Lord. Well, the question was agreed unto in writing^ in the interval (for there
was some long time set till the dispute should be) it pleased the Lord, for our
and his humbling, to let that forementioned great iniquity of his to break out
upon him, whereupon the Church, as has been said, proceeded against him,
suspended him from the exercise of his gift in any public service, denying him
also communion in the body; by means whereof they were (and well might be) at a
loss about the manner of carrying on the appointed disputation, which either he
must be left to manage alone without any countenance or conjunction of theirs,
or else some other by Mr. Lowmans consent must supply his place in that
appointment, or otherwise some way of treaty for the cessation of it for the
time. The former could not be thought any way expedient, and therefore two or
three brethen were desired to confer with Mr. Lowman, either about exchanging
his antagonist, or waving the dispute for the time: the result of which modest
conference, was the mutual subscription of the inwritten paper.

Whereas there was intended a dispute betwixt Mr Lowman and Mr. Facy, it is
upon some weighty considerations disappointed, and broken off. (1) We do not
eye it as the work of our day, to permit the work of the Lord to cease, while
we leave it, and spend our time in that which is like to turn to so little
account. (2.) Mr. Facy through some more then ordinary providence, is for
present rendered utterly incapable for such an undertaking. 3. Yet it has been
offered, that our retreat in this may be without manifest disadvantage upon the
cause and truth of Christ, that if Mr. Lowman would either defer the time
until Mr. Facy might be capable for such a work, or desire or challenge it
from any other hands, it would be accepted, and either he or some other should
be appointed to meet with him, and answer him in his desire or challenge. But
Mr. Lowman weighing the little advantage which may redound to any by such
disputes, as also desiring peace, not loving distance or disturbance, seeing
Mr. Facy is for present disabled, who was to meet with him, is willing also,
the whole business may be waved and laid aside. In token of my consent unto
this your motion, I hereto set my hand.

Fortescue Lowman.
Feb. 15. 1655.

From which at first sight, things rightly considered, the serious will judge,
(1.) That that fall of his which then disabled him from being judged a suitable
disputant with Mr. Lowman, did beforehand disable him from standing as a member
in communion, much more as a Pastor in that Church. (2) And that it does not
now follow, but that the grace that has restored him to be a member, and
enabled him again to improve his gift of grace to edification, may also
sufficiently enable him to answer to Mr. Lowmans desires, if need be, and they
yet remain with him, to vindicate the way and practice that we walk in. As also
(3.) That though Mr. Lowman was treated withal by us, yet had he reasons also
of his own, leading him to a willingness to lay that disputation aside.

Accuser.

I wish that the plain hearted among them, would but seriously consider,
whether they can possibly expect a blessing from heaven, under such amans
ministry, whose course I have a little hinted to you: and judge you, whether I
have not cause to withdraw, where such iniquity is indulged.

Answer.

Here you have his conclusion with William Facy, and now upon the whole of what
is said, either in defiance or defense of him (though we might say much more in
the words of truth and soberness) it would appear that the man is a poor
sinner, that stands in daily need of his Savior, compassed about with
weaknesses, temptations, and tribulations of all kinds: without are fightings,
within are fears: whose footsteps are watched, and the iniquity of them written
in his forehead, who was left for a season under the power of the Tempter, fell
in a grievous manner; was sharply rebuked of God, severely censured by the
Church, to the breaking of his bones; so that he has neither the perfection of
the flesh, nor the honor of the world left him to glory in. And yet being
graciously delivered by Love, and upheld by Divine power from perishing by sin,
or sinking, is at length brought out to declare the Lords praise in the midst
of his Church, who being a poor plain despised people, abhorring the indulgence
of iniquity, and not judging aster outward appearance, but righteous judgment;
finding that God has humbled him to the dust, remembering that they also
themselves are compassed with infirmities, and liable to be tempted; have
renewed their love toward him, and can comfortably wait upon the Lord, and
their waiting is not in vain in the Lord, for a blessing on the faithful
labors of him and others (despised) like unto him; though yet they have not
clearness to appoint him to Pastorship in a way of office, as the Accuser
falsely repeateth often as if they had done.

Accuser.

The third particular of my charge is, for charging some of the Anabaptists
with denying Magistrates, and the neglecting of Familyduties, and singing of
Psalms; let me tell you I do not charge you without a cause, for these things
abound in you at that rate, that seeing you and sin will not part, you and I
must part; and though some of you are dear to me, whom I trust the Lord will
convince in his due time: yet the Lord Jesus is nearer and dearer, whose
communion I must, and through grace do prize before yours: had you and I
continued, its to be feared, the Lord and I should have parted; for while I sat
under your ministry, I could never find that blessing which I have found from
that Ministry you despise. That tenderness which the Lord wrought upon my
spirit by the public Ministry before I came among you, did much decay, while
I continued with you, and therefore it is no small mercy, that the Lord has
brought me from you.

Answer.

That which he calls the third particular of our Charge, for charging some of
the Anabaptists, etc. was thus far worthy to be laid before him in the iniquity
of it, that he had openly and very slanderously affirmed concerning us in the
general, that we denied Magistrates, denied family duties, denied singing of
Psalms. etc. and on this ground had left us. The introduction to his Defense,
is filled with such flourishes and invectives, as either we meet with, and
speak unto elsewhere, or will be best answered by committing our Cause to him
that judges righteously. We come therefore to consider what he says in the
particulars, for himself.

Accuser.

1. For denying the power of Magistrates, it is notoriously known to many good
people in Tiverton, how you have carped at the Magistracy there, for executing
their power upon Sabbathbreakers and Quakers; yea, you confessed it, and
pleaded it against me as many of my Friends can testify, when I charged you
with it, affirming, that Magistrates had nothing to do with Quakers.

Answer.

He publicly and falsely accuses us, that we deny the power of Magistrates, or
(as he also phraseth it) we deny Magistrates: his proof is, It Is notoriously
known, we have carped at them for executing their power on Sabbath breakers and
Quakers. We have in great part declared above, and still do. That we abhor the
imputation of denying the power of Magistrates in punishing evildoers: though
withal we say, That it will be an hard task to undertake the justification of
all the actions of persons in Magistracy, who may presume to smite and
imprison, in execution of passion and lust, and not of Law: and that such
things, and so acted, whether against Quakers, or any other People, are not
only lamentable, but most abominable. As to matters relating to the
Conscience, and what Power the Magistrate may exercise in that respect, we
leave the Accuser for answer to the public Edicts of the Magistracy it self;
without which, the Sect to which the Accuser is joined, can claim no more
Privilege in England, Scotland, and Ireland, then any other Sect or party of
People professing Religion by the Magistrate allowed.

We utterly reject what he suggests about Sabbath Breakers, as not having the
least color of Truth; of which, had there been the least pretense to have
fastened it upon any, somewhat would have been said, to tender us odious and
liable to punishment in this Pamphlet, or at the Meeting abovesaid, proceeding
his rejection, where he was not backward to load us with whatever ignominy he
could bring, to bear on us, or the way wherein we be.

Touching the Quakers, what testimony we hold up against their principles is
very well known to this Accuser, and diverse good people in Tiverton, and
elswere: what measure they have found in that town, and by whose violent
importunity and instigation it has been executed; whether to the satisfaction
in point of conscience of some that did it, or whether even constrained to do
it beyond a voluntary inclination; what compassions and complaints it
occasioned in many good people in that place (that are neither Anabaptists nor
Quakers) are not things unknown there. The day may soon enough declare it in
other places, we judging it not now our work to say any thing unto it.

Accuser.

2. For neglecting family duties, you cannot without blushing say that I wrong
you in charging the neglect of it upon you, being conscious to your selves that
many of your families call not upon God, which I can confidently affirm upon
my own personal knowledge, when I walked with you; besides when I charged you
with it, you affirmed that it was a man's liberty, not his duty to pray in his
family, as my friends can testify who were then present.

Answer.

What his false accusation about this matter was, and our defense therein, are
manifested above, to which we refer the Reader.

Accuser.

3. For neglecting to sing Psalmos, an ordinance of Christ, you never performed
this duty in your assemblies: but when I charged you with this, you affirmed it
to be no better then ballads, as my friends can testify.

Answer.

How wrongfully our denying this (as he presented it at first) was laid to our
charge, may appear by what has been said already to that point. Touching the
uncomly comparison that one of our friends it seems made between the
translation of David's Psalms, by Sternhold and Hopkins, (considering the many
additions to, and substractions from the word to make it speak in rythme and
meter) and the Ballads of the Book of Job; whatever might be said touching the
harmless use of the word heretofore, the Canticles being in some ancient
translations of the Bible, entitled Ballad of Ballads, yet we utterly
disapprove of the expression, and condemn it, as being unsavory and offensive:
nevertheless herein may be observed the accusers perfection in the art of
slander, multiplying to calumaiate, something will stick, fathering the
failings of any person upon the whole party and way, whether owned by them or
disowned: being also aforehand with invectives and falsehoods of such a nature
as will require time and other helps to remove; and in the interim the slander
passes for a truth, and the slanderer for a man that has done notable good
service in making discoveries to the enquiring world.

Accuser.

I come to the fourth and last particular of my charge for abusing my father:
but whether by word or deed, or in what manner, you gave me no account: but
sure I am, If I were guilty of such a thing, you never reproved me. I must
confess that when I walked with you, through your instigation I took up many
hard thoughts both of my father and mother, because they labored to convince
me of mine error, yea and I left my fathers house upon this very account, as I
have hinted before, but through mercy the Lord has showed me my evil in so
doing, yet you were never the people that admonished me all the while I walked
with you. But now you act as if you would rejoice, if you could take up any
thing to reproach me, and set variance betwixt the father and the son.

Answer.

Here to avoid the supposition of his being any way guilty farther then he
might father it upon the Church, he imposes upon the Reader these things:

(1.) That the many hard thoughts he had of his father and mother laboring to
convince him of his error, were through this peoples instigation.

(2.) That upon this very account of their instigation, it was, that he left
his fathers house.

(3.) That they never reproved or admonished him for any evil of this kind.

(4.) That we rejoice to forge and take up any thing that may reproach him, and
set variance betwixt the father and the son.

That through our instigations he should have such thoughts, as it is but barely
affirmed by him so it may suffice that the thing is denied and abhorred by us,
as that which is beneath civility, and much more beneath Christianity; that any
occasion of our instigation brought him to forsake his fathers house, is an
evident falsehood, there having been former differences betwixt his father in
Law (that married with his mother) and him. On a time, about his beginning to
profess the truth we walk in, his said father in law, being greatly offended
with him, required him to depart from his house: after which passion was over,
he desired his father in law's leave to depart by consent; which he obtained
accordingly; whiles he walked with us, indeed his deportment to his parents,
was much as he reports, but it is ready to be made good by many witnessess,
that his uncomly behavior in this kind, being a great grief to us, was often
reproved by several, both brethren and sisters, as occasion presented. But in
the case before us, which we had this time in charge against him, his revilings
were of his wives father and mother, who not complying with some desires of his
about his marriage as he expected, reprochfully said of his father in law, that
he was an old knave, and that his mother in law was a serpent that lay in his
bosom: of which being reproved by a sister that heard it from him, he gave no
other satisfaction, then this; he thought he should find them such. He was
afterward reproved for it by a brother, but then stood in the denial of it:
which being brought before the Church, with evidence of the truth thereof, they
then by messengers did more solemnly exhort him to repent of such iniquity; but
he manifested not any, but rather a stubborn spirit. Then was both his railing
and lying judged worthy with the rest to be laid before him, if peradventure
the Lord would give him repentance. Our unwillingness to have these things made
public, that he might be brought to a sense of his evil, without such an
occasion of discord betwixt the father and the son, was one main reason, why we
had a desire to have had him apart from the multitude in the time of our
proceedings with him in the Church: and it is no small grief, that we are
constrained to say thus much of him now; yet he has compelled us to let all
men know how far we are free from the horrible things he charge so
maliciously on us.

Accuser.

But had I been guilty of every syllable of which you charge me with, how can
you bring it to blasphemy? The Truth is: Thomas Glass made many sad shifts to
mince the matter, when he was desired to make forth, wherein I had been guilty
of blasphemy: but let all modest sober Christians judge, whether that which
lies in the bottom be not my discovering their wickedness, and withdrawing from
them: though I could not in Conscience continue longer with them, when God
said, Come out from among them; which makes them to forge something against me;
and let the Reader judge where lies the guilt.

Answer.

For answer to what he enquires about blasphemy, he is referred to what is said
above: upon the whole, the modest sober Christian is called in by him, to give
judgment: to whom also we gladly submit the consideration of the premises,
Whether a person so abundantly discovering a rash, persecuting, revengeful
Spirit; heaping up such falsehoods and mis-representations, on the Way, on the
whole Congregation, on the Member whom he had forgiven, (his own near Relations
not escaping him) under pretecsions of a just Ground to leave us, were not
justly proceeded withal; and (after all due means, found obstinate and
irreconcilable) cut off and rejected from the Congregation.

Accuser.

Thus have I given you a brief Narrative of the Principles and Practices of
these Anabaptists, having walked with them and tried them: and likewise an
account of God's gracious dealing, in bringing me from them, to attend the
public Ministry; and of their unjust proceedings against me in this matter.
If the good Lord make it useful for the good of any poor soul, to undeceive
him, and bring him into the way of God, or to prevent any from departing out of
God's way, I shall rejoice, so that God may not lose his Glory, nor any of his
people lose their comfort: which if you tender, be sure to prize those ways in
which you received the first Conviction, lest you one day lie down in sorrow,
for going away from God, and from the striving of his Spirit. Let me ask you
that have with drawn from that Ministry, to whom ye can say, We are your work
of the Lord; have you the same tenderness, the same affections to God, that you
once had in former days? are not these much decayed? O return from whence you
are fallen, and repent! And now I shall conclude, by giving the Reader an
account of the sad experience that I have had, in two years digression from the
public Ministry in Tiverton, which God did at first bloss to the awakening of
my soul.

Answer.

As he draws toward his Conclusion, you have the Application of his miserable
Doctrines after he has, with some flattering insinuations, bespoke the farther
attention of his ignorant young Christian (as he calls him in his Title Page)
That now he may give a testimony of his fixed enmity to the way he was in, and
show farther what Oracle he has consulted with, and what Spirit he is of; he
adventures on the house top, in the sight of the Sun (under the coverts of his
two years sad experience) to cast upon the way of the Lord, and them that walk
therein, such horrible reproaches, as the thoughts of Temperance,
Righteousness, and Judgment to come, would have made him tremble at; having,
though seemingly, aimed at them in Tiverton therein, yet so shot, as may
indifferently reach all them anywhere that serve the Lord Jesus Christ under
that name of reproach.

Under all which, as a part of our Crown, we could quietly sit down, and pray,
Lord lay it not to his charge: Father, forgive him, he knows not what he
does: appealing for our Vindication to the Consciences of all serious,
unbyassed, and unprejudiced Christians, that have tasted our Doctrine, and
observed our walkings in the three Nations, whether the things be so, or nay;
and so leave it to the God and Father of the Spirits of all flesh, who is
coming out to pass righteous judgment in all such cases for his poor people
that wait for him. But yet for their sakes at whom he levels, who being
ignorant of us, may be apt to be offended at such an impudent testimony; we
present a few animadversions on the two or three first things he says; the
rest being such wretched falsehoods as we abhor the thoughts of; and delivered
in such general terms, without any particular instance, wherein it is possible
to trace him, we reckon not worthy any other answer then that, Psalm. 120.2, 3,
4. and 52.1, -- 4.

Accuser.

1. I do not remember that I have had one conviction, under all the sermons
which I heard whilst I walked among them; but that sense of my condition which
I had before, did abate, and by little and little fall away, after I turned my
back upon the means, which God made use of in working upon me. Therefore I beg
all those upon whose hearts God is working, to take heed of despising, or
slighting those instruments with whom God is present.

Answer.

The Reader must suppose his meaning to be either, that he felt no such thing
as motions, quicknings, soule-searchings, etc. while with us; or else, that
whatever of that kind he had, they are now to be accounted no other then
delusions; and so not worthy the name of convictions, or of being remembered. If
the former be imagined to be his meaning, we have abundant and pregnant
testimonies, how that many times he has declared his having met with God to
admiration, while he has with us been waiting on him; so that he would not
have given such opportunities (as he has reported) for the world. But if he
minds all these to have been the delusions of his own heart, we shall not
contend about it; but that likely they were so, or that he dissembled those
pretensions of enjoying God. Only it further shows the mercy we have, of being
delivered from such a deceitful m^mber, who either then belyed the spirit,
while he owned such operations to him, as were none of his; or if they were the
spirits works does now in effect deny them. Nay, the mistake is very great, if
it cannot be made good that he being (shortly upon the publishing of this
pamphlet in his name) demanded by a member, how he could date affirm such a
thing, that he had no convictions, etc. replied, that he never had said such a
thing. If so, the Reader may guess what hand it is likely himself had in
compiling the book; which with other evidences, if we liked to produce them,
would put that matter out of question.

Accuser.

2. I was drawn off by these men, when I was in the greatest probability of
receiving good from the ministry that I ever was: for I do remember still the
impressions which were made upon my soul by those truths, which I heard from
Mr. Chishul, a little before I was thus drawn aside, which did work mightily to
conviction and to resolution in me: but the devil envying my prosperity, sent
me this thorn in the flesh; and their insinuations and temptations did so
prevail with me that I left this ministry to attend on them, which was but a
diversion from the work of my soul: and I find that whereas before I had some
things of weight upon my spirit, these were soon laid aside, and I had nothing
to do but to dispute about Baptism, and to rail against ministers, so that
my former awakenings were turned into drousiness and doting about questions.

Answer.

How unskilful this man is of judging about Convictions, appears in part by
what is last said; How infaithful he is in reporting them; is no less evident
by considering, that when he came at first to make out among us a profession of
his faith in order to fellowship with us, he testified, that the first
convictions that were wrought on his soul, were through the word of the Lord
held forth in the Church, after which (as himself said) for worldly respects,
he went again to attend on the public ministry; but was there met with, by
some word of Mr. Chishul, which put life again into his former convictions
begotten by the ministry with us: whereupon he returned again, and on a
declaration of the work of faith was baptized and admitted. If this testimony
of his was in truth, and a true work of grace was on him, then did the Lord
witness to our ministry; if he deceived us in that profession, then has the
Lord witnessed to our rejecting him; he went out from us, because he was not of
us. Whereas he lays the stress of his coming to us, upon our insinuating and
tempting him, after the strictest search, it does not appear, that any were
urgent with him at all, but that of his own voluntary inclinatition he proposed
his desires of communion first to a particular member (now with the Lord) and
then unto the whole.

Accuser.

3. As I found no profit my self by attending on their teaching, so I observed
little to any other. Nay, it has been not only mine, but the experience of
others, who have constantly attended them as long as my self, that there was
nothing but deadness of spirit to be gained there, which has at last caused
them to desert them also.

Answer.

The Accuser does not tell you, that those constant attenders that have
deserted us were members with us (there being but his wise and one or two more
since, that on that pretension have left that Church) as for usual hearers, if
any of them are gone on this ground, as it is more then they have declared, so
neither is it visible by any loss of number in that great concourse. But put
case that (we lying under so great reproach as the Accuser has publicly and
does daily wait and labor with his new friends to cast upon us) both Members
of the Church and Attenders on it should be offended, finding fault with
Ministers, Administrations, etc. would this become a convincing Argument with a
serious heart, that God is witnessing against the way? has it not been the
common trial of Gods own people heretofore? and at this day is there not to be
observed and lamented, a spirit of giddiness taking great hold of men and
things; so that the whole series of what of late days had on it the impression
of Reformation, seeming as it were to labor and incline toward its ancient
corruption? In which house of temptation we are indeed in expectation of
greater trials then these, and yet in the midst of them have this to be glad
in our God for, that all along he has not left us without several gracious
testimonies of his converting and quickening presence, notwithstanding our
Accuser, and such spirits as his is, may have tasted little of it, but have
been filled with their own ways.

Accuser.

4. They are very vigilant and watchful to find out any that are convinced and
awakened under the public ministry: and when they begin to see things a little
darkly and confusedly, they take the advantage of this twilight, in which their
souls are to put off their commadities: where their souls have some
tenderness and yet a great deal of ignorance they are fit to wrought upon by
them; for by reason of the first, they dare not neglect a command of God; and
by reason of the second, it appears to them that it is necessary to be dipped.

Answer.

This fourth Experiment comes to appearance very big into the world, and
promising great discoveries, suddenly eases it self of six monstrous births,
conceived in the womb of it: all which, for the substance of them, are no
other then the old pulpit and pressworne-slanders that the dragon has had
ready in all generations as a flood to pour out upon the Lords people, who
have labored faithfully to bear their testimony and set their shoulders to
the work of reformation, or to the recovery of any truth in Doctrine or
practice from the pollutions of the man of sin, against the interest and
stream of the fleshly wisdom and glory of the times they have lived in. All
which, as we might cast off at once, by testifying an holy detestation through
grace in our hearts against the baseness of the things suggested; so need we,
and shall we, say the less to them.

(1.) For that there are no particular persons instanced, who in the things
laid to our charge may be made out demonstrably to be guilty; and it is our
comfortable assurance, that on a faithful and impartial search they will not be
found; but that the slander will return on the Accusers head, and none be
stumbled at it; unless such as may judge, that this Accusers truth and
faithfulness in this narrative examined, deserves for him that he be believed
in a matter of this moment upon his own word.

(2.) In that our Accuser with his own pen freeth those that are Godly among us
from these things, saying toward the close [ I speak not this of all: for as I
have said, I believe there is a mixture of godly among them, etc.] our interest
is not, (our cause needs not) that we should plead for any ungodly ones, or any
ungodly deeds that they shall commit if any such shall be found guilty of the
things charged, and persist in them, let them bear their judgment whoever they
be: the Lord will we hope in due time discover them, and deliver us from them.

For what is said of our insinuations on the ignorant with pretensions of love
from us or peace from God, pressing them speedily to Baptism, and having all
our zeal for the practice of holiness running into that; we abhor and reject
as base falsehoods, as might appear from our not accepting the tenders of many
persons desiring baptism and communion with us, when we cannot be satisfied in
some good measure of illumination in their understanding, and distinct
knowledge of the work of conversion on their hearts; though we judge it our
duty to be tender to the babes in Christ.

Touching our own ignorance, with which we are often branded by this our
Accuser, and our shunning the light; its true we are reputed, and know our
selves to be a weak and dark people; yet we declare, that through the
supporting mercy of God, whom we fear, and on whom in this day of rebuke and
blasphemy, we rely for help, we shall not cease to witness bebefore great and
small, as the Lord shall minister ability, and clear up our way,

That the doctrine which we profess, and particularly that point of baptising
only upon personal profession of saving faith, is a doctrine according to
Godliness, and the same which was once delivered to the Saints (excepting
nevertheless to our selves, and owning whatever miscarriages through personal
defects, may accompany this profession of truth in this day of small things.)
Neither shall we shun to testify, that the imposing of the fleshly off spring
upon the Gospel Church, is a doctrine without Scripture, foundation. And we do
testify, that in this faith we stand through grace, and have peace with God in
it; withal, we desire the upright in heart to weigh and consider faithfully as
for God, how much the said doctrine imposing the fleshly offspring on the
Gospel Church sperplexeth and obscureth the light, and order of the
ministration of the everlasting covenant established by the Son of God: how it
confounds the main distinction of the two Convenants in the different
principle of their respective subjects, typified by Ishmael and Isaac, Genesis
21.10. and explained Gal 4.22-30. and Romans 9.8. distinguished in plain terms by
the children of the flesh, and the children of promise, with respect to the
several seasons of Law and Gospel, Romans 4.13, 14. How it also darkneth the
honor and dignity which the Gospel. Ministration exalts the Jew and his
posterity unto, by confirming unto them the first tenders of divine Grace by a
special institution of this Ministration, Mat. 10.5, 6. whereby from their
former privilege of servants under the bondage-convenant, they by faith in the
grace so tendered to them, obtain for ever the privilege and dignity of Sons
and heirs of God, a more noble descent then that of Abraham.

Neither can that suggestion, [That baptizing only upon personal profession is
a narrowing of the Covenant of grace] be of any weight, seeing no subject which
the Covenant of grace, either in the nature or present exhibition thereof,
declares and judges competent in any degree, stands excluded by it, although
we be thereof judged, because we dare not presume in point of practice in
instituted worship, to depart from a plain known rule, to follow uncertain
suppositions. Notwithstanding also our Accuser be among others come forth to
mock and reproach us for it; a man that has been our companion in the counsels
of the house of God: and as David found that an aggravation to his afflictions,
Psalm. 41.9. and 55.12, 13, 14. so is it with us this day in behalf of this poor
man, who may doubtless become a stumbling stone to credulous and incantious
souls; but we are taught to cast our care in such a case upon God, seeing the
case is particularly his to provide for; and we are persuaded, that though
thousands should fall off, and be offended in this day of manifold temptations,
through worldly disadvantages, yet that thereby the truth wherein we stand,
should only receive purgation from the blemishes that are brought upon it by
(...)


