THE State of the Navy CONSIDERED In relation to the VICTUALLING, Particularly
in the STRAITS, and the WEST INDIES.

WITH Some Thoughts on the Mismanagements of the ADMIRALTY for several Years
past; and a Proposal to prevent the like for the future.

Humbly offered to the Honorable House of Commons, by an English SAILOR.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin in Warwicklane, 1699. Price 3 d.

The State of the Navy considered In relation to the VICTUALLING, etc.
THE Mismanagements of the Navy since this Revolution have been so abominable,
that they could never have been born at such vast expense, but by an easy
People, fond of a Government of their own setting up, and of a King suitable to
the Genius of the English Nation, and worthy of Immortal Honor, notwithstanding
the Maladministration of the Officers employed under him. Will not future
Ages blush at the insensible Temper of their Forefathers, when they shall read
of the escape of the Thoulon Fleet into Breast, and the abominable Affair of
Monsieur Pointi? When they read the horrid Stories of our being gulled out of
Money raised for public Service, and diverted to private and sinister Ends,
will they not wish those Sums had been transmitted to them to be employed in
more generous Achievements? But as Clouds often arise over the more clear
Understandings and wisest Heads, so Nations sometimes become delirious, and
hurry into Ruin, till kind Heaven remove the pernicious Frenzy. Had the
Mismanagements of the Navy tended only to the Consumption of our Wealth, the
Loss might have been repaired; but when our Sailors are poisoned by bad
Provisions, or starved for want of good, the loss is irreparable. Thus the
Blood of War is profusely spilt in louzy Hammocks, stagnated with noisome
Scents, and the flower of our youthful Sailors smothered in unsuccessful and
needless Voyages, who might have won to themselves and the Nation immortal
Wreaths of Honor in noble Attempts upon the Enemy. This Decrease of Seamen
looks more like a Design upon the English Nation, than the effect of
Providence. He that abandons himself to a morose Temper in his sickness, and
will not take such Specificks as are essential to his Recovery, is a selo de
se: And such Officers as deny necessary and good Provisions for Sea Service,
can design no other than the Destruction of the Sailors, and consequently of
the Nation. They undermine our National Walls, I mean our Shipping, which
without Men are but Floating C^stles, mere Machins of War altogether
indefensible. The Hardships of the Sailors have indeed been worthy the
Consideration of our Representatives in Parliament. But poor Creatures, they
have no body to represent their Grievances, they are tumbled and tossed on the
watery Element perhaps 18 or 20 Months together in the Straits, and as soon as
they arrive in the Channel are turned over to other Ships bound to the
West Indies or other Parts, and not suffered to come ashore and tell their
Tale; or if they land, the necessitous good-natured Creatures sell their
Tickets for half the worth, bouze it about in a Can of Flip, or a Bowl of
Punch, forget their Sorrow, and remember their Misery no more. If any
Complaints have been made, it has been done by the starved Wives and miserable
Children of Mariners; if they have complained to those Officers that should
have done them Justice, they might as well have told their Story to the Winds
and devouring Billows, the treacherous Sands, and fatal Rocks, the natural
Enemies of their Relations. Have they complained to Parliament? What Redress
could they expect from such a Parliament as the last and preceding Parliaments,
so full of Courtiers, Judges of their own Cause, and Auditors of their own
Accounts? The last Sessions of Parliament the poor Laborers, Artificers, and
others, belonging to the Victualling-Office, petitioned for Arrears of Wages
due to them; the Committee that examined the Case, consisted most part of the
time but of seven Persons, when (I am told) according to the Custom of
Parliament they ought to have been eight: four of the seven I knew to be
Commissioners and Officers, and two of the four Persons complained against; tho
the Case was clear that they had some fifteen, others twelve, etc. Months due
to them, and at the same time the Commissioners and Officers received their
Salaries quarterly, yet a Report of the poor Men's Case was never made to the
House. But the Case of the Sailors is far worse than others; they have no Time,
no Acquaintance, nor Interest to prosecute any thing of this Nature, and those
that abuse and cheat 'em have got the Weathergage of them, they can send 'em at
any time on a long Errand to the E. or W. Indies far enough out of hearing:
upon their return the Complaint is grown as moldy as their Bread, and as rusty
as their Pork and Beef have been during the Voyage, and therefore ought to be
cast without Survey.

The Sailors Case is indeed deplorable, kept long without pay, sometimes fix
years, forced to sell Tickets to raise a little Money for their Families at half
value, tho as good and brave Englishmen as any; are altogether enslaved, and
without any Law that I ever heard of impressed, their Liberty taken from them,
which when gone they are effectual Slaves; imprisoned on board Ship, caned and
kicked by Commanders just dropped from behind a Coach at White Hall into the
Service of the Navy, miserably abused in being turned over from one Ship to
another (contrary to the Rules of Humanity, and the Custom of the Navy) so that
after they have been at Sea several years, are hurried out again without
Liberty so much as to see their Relations. Now all things considered, What
Encouragement have Mariners to serve their Country in the Navy? The only thing
they have a seeming Certainty of is their Meat and Drink, and to be cheated of
that too is the Devil.

The Parliaments of England have always made a generous Allowance for the
maintenance of the Sailors, and especially upon the Account of Victualling: but
considering how damnably Funds are clipped, how many hands Money passes through,
and every one of them must have a snack out of it, it is no wonder if our
Sailors Guts are pinched, and appear like half starved Mortals, rather
resembling the carved wooden Images in the Stern than the Ship's Crew. Go to
Smithfield first, and see there the Oxen bought, and very modestly compute the
Buyers Snip out of 'em to be 60000 l. since the Revolution; follow the Cattle
to the Victualling-Office, and see an undescended Wretch there receiving them,
advanced from thredbare Clothes since the Revolution to the Sum of twenty
thousand Pound got out of a Salary of eighty Pounds per annum; besides a
Journy-man Apothecary, and a Skipper at the Board, raised from abject Nothing
to wonderful Pomp. These things considered, the Sailors must make small Meals;
and it dos plainly demonstrate how our Funds become deficient, when so many
obscure Persons of no intrinsic Value or Worth must get Estates out of them.
But to proceed to the Condition of the Victualling since the Revolution.

Soon after the Revolution and the honorable Fight off Beachy, Sir John
Parsons and Company, the then Commissioners of the Victualling, were complained
against in Parliament for poisoning the Sailors, by putting Guts in the Beer,
and Galls in the packing of the Flesh, which put the Sailors into a Flux,
whereof great numbers of them died: The Commissioners in their own
Justification alleged, That the Beer being ropy, as often it is, and recovers
it self again, might occasion that Mistake by some ignorant Sailors: That the
Galls happened in the packing by reason of some Bags of Galls that broke on
board the Ship, from whence the Salt was taken, wherewith the Flesh was packed.
I shall neither justify nor condemn those Commissioners; but I always wondered
how Galls should have different Virtues by Sea and Land, for that very year I
was cured in Ireland of a violent bloody Flux, by taking Powder of Galls:
However hereupon Sir John and the rest were dismissed from their Employments.
This Remove always seemed to me to be made by some Persons to make room for the
present Commissioners; nor do I believe the present Commissioners themselves
think their Predecessors guilty of any Crime: for upon the Establishment of the
present Commission, those very Persons that put the Guts in the Beer and Galls
into the Cask, were continued in their places, and the only Favorites of the
present Commission, so that Sir John Parsons and Company were to bear the Sins
of the whole Office, as King James did of the whole Nation, none suffering for
Maladministration but himself.

But the chief Design of this Paper being an Account of the present Management
of the Victualling, I shall relate it with all the Candor and Faithfulness that
becomes a Christian and an Englishman, as in Duty I am bound by those natural
Ties and Obligations which lie upon me to the Service of my Country, and
redressing the Grievances of injured Seamen. In order to which I shall consider
how the King and Nation have been served in the Victualling, and what Provision
has been made for Seamen during the War.

You Will say perhaps it is no News to hear that the King and Nation are cheated,
since we have had a continued Series of Villainy in Public Offices with
Impunity. But from the Victualling we might expect better things, where not
only Honesty, but Religion is pretended; yet the Godly are liable to
Temptations, and an Ounce of Virtue is a precious Commodity amongst some sort
of People. A certain Person must be a very honest Man, because the Dissenting
Preachers about London vouch for his honesty; and as mighty Zealots as they
were in the late Reigns for Liberty and Property, and against Courtiers in the
House of Commons and Pensionary Parliaments, can now join with the Wicked to
commit Iniquity, and shove their heavyars'd Hearers to Guild Hall to vote for a
Courtier, and give their recommendatory Epistles to the Church at Dover on
behalf of the sage Politician the Son. But particular Reflections are somewhat
besides my purpose, and therefore I shall offer Observations on their Service
to the Country in the Management of the Victualling.

Their Contracts with the Dealers to the Office have been the most preposterous
of any thing in the World. Thomas Middleton a Hogman told me, he one year
contracted with the Commissioners for a number of Hogs, by which Contract he
gained betwixt four and five thousand Pounds: That the next year (as I
remember) he made another Contract for a number of Hogs, by which Contract he
was a loser, the Markets rising higher than usual; at the end of the season
when the whole Complement of Hogs were killed, he complained of his Loss to the
Commissioners, who made an Interest with the Lords of the Treasury, who in
consideration of his loss gave 2500 l. out of the King's Pocket. Who would not
enter into Contract with the King, who is willing to bear all the Loss and have
no share of Profit? This Thomas Middleton being burdened with Riches, took an
occasion to hang himself, and was succeeded in Contract by Henry Nunalee, who
upon a Contract of Hogs lost 1500 l. He went the same way as Middleton had
done; but Nunalce being a Williamite, and well affected to the Government, met
with more Rubs and Obstacles than the other who was a professed Jacobite:
However after much attendance, and (I suppose) payment of a little Civility
Money, he got an allowance for the Loss. The Case is plain on the King's part,
that he is a Loser by such a Contract; and as the Commissioners cannot be
justified in such a Contract, so the Reason of it on their part is very
difficult to be found. For when they contracted with Mr. Nunalee for the Parcel
of Hogs beforementioned, Pork was at half a Crown a Stone in the Markets, a
rising Price too: It was no Mast Year, all manner of Hog Grain excessive dear,
the Season so far advanced, that all the Town and Offal Hogs were killed and
converted to Bacon: however the Commissioners, like good Husbands for the King,
beat down the Price; and one wise Commissioner said, that as he returned out of
the Country, he saw a hundred Hogs in one Field, and thence rationally
concluding there were the like number in every Field in England, they brought
the Contract down to twenty six Shillings per hundred Weight. Now if there was
any other meaning in this Contract, besides doing Disservice to the Nation, it
must be this, that at the end of the Season, by putting the Hogman to petition
the Treasury Board to have his Loss considered, they should manifest their
wonderful Sagacity in biting off the Head of a poor Hogman.

Such Contracts are equally injurious to the Sailors as to the King; for the
Contractor losing Money every day, must make the best of his Market, which is
buying the worst Hogs; so that very thin and ill sed Pork, in all likelihood
must fill the wooden Platters aboard Ship, and the Sailors be fed with the
Refuse of the Markets, who as they do the best Service to the Nation, ought to
have the best Provisions the Land can produce. Ancient Custom and common Usage
in Offices are or ought to be as much observed by Officers, as the Laws of a
Realm by the Subject; for when old Customs are broken in Offices, all things
are put into confusion, and Men are at a loss how to apply themselves. It has
been an old and a rational Custom in our Offices, and always inserted in the
Instructions from the Admiralty to dependant Offices upon it, that no Person
shall deal, or be any way concerned in Trade in that Office wherein he receives
Salary: But this has been so far from the Practice of the Victualling, that
some of the Commissioners and Officers have dealt with the Office either in
Shipping or otherwise. A great evil attends this Practice; for Officers paying
themselves, we cannot imagine they will put themselves last upon the List of
Payment; and so other Warrants that are in Course are postpon'd. And it has
been observed that no Office in England has broken the Course of Payment more
than that of the Victualling: Besides, some of the Officers are common Buyers
and Sellers of the Office Bills, and as constant Brokers upon the Exchange, as
any that deal in Exchequer Notes, Bank Bills or Tallies.

It is now become a Custom (I believe throughout the whole Navy) for the
Cathiers and Clerks to take Poundage of the Persons they pay Money to, contrary
to ancient Custom, and all the Equity in the World. The Victualling for some
time had a Banker in Lombard Street, who paid Money upon the King's Account,
and took Poundage of the Persons he paid it to, as did their Agent at
Portsmouth. This must be either a very great Exaction upon the Parties dealing
to the Office, or else an Allowance is made for it in the Price of the
Commodity, which is a downright Abuse to the Nation.

That the Nation has been cheated and abused more since the Revolution than
under any other Government, is evident to any thinking man. The Mismanagements
of the Victualling have been so great, and the Office so scandalous, that it
has been even a national Nuisance; and tho prosecuted with reiterated Complaints
at the Treasury and Parliament, all the honest Endeavors of Mankind have
proved ineffectual: for where Men are Judges of their own Cause, no Justice can
be expected: You Will never hang a Highway-man more, if you allow him to be tried
by his own Troop. About four years ago some honest Men in the Victualling had
made a Discovery of several Embezelments, of which they complained in diverse
Articles against the Officers embezelling the King's Stores. These Articles
were delivered to one of the Commissioners, and so to another, but never
examined into: All the punishment they inflicted on him was, that about a week
after the Complaint, they gave him liberty for the Summer to reside at his
Country House, and ordered the Officer that complained against him to do duty
in his Room: This is much of the same nature of another Complaint against one
of their Officers for drinking K. James's Health, who in a Fortnight afterward
was advanced from a Place of forty Pounds per Ann. to about three or four
hundred. A Person of Honor hearing how the foresaid Complaint was stifled by
the Commissioners of the Victualling, got a Copy thereof, and gave it to the
Lords of the Treasury, who after some time heard the Commissioners ex part
against the King, and never examined one Witness on the King's part, to the
proof of the matter of Fact alleged in the said Articles. So that hitherto it
has been in vain to complain of Grievances, and the People of England have been
forced to maintain by the sweat of their Brows, many that formerly betrayed
their Liberties, and now enrich themselves out of the public spoils of the
Kingdom.

To recount all Mismanagements in this Office would fill a large Volume; the
Ignorance and Negligence of the Persons concerned in it, the profuse wasting of
the Nation's Stores, the contriving and forming Perquisites out of the same to
themselves, contrary to former Custom and Practice; the supernumerary Officers
and Laborers in the Yards, old and decrepid, fitter for Hospitals than
Service, are things notorious in the Eyes of all but such as should punish
them. Indeed such Men are well secured in ill Practices; they have their
Brethren in other Offices to stand by them, and a Power of discharging such of
the Office as complain against them, as they did several of the poor men that
complained against them in Parliament last year; nay one of the Commissioners
threatened to discharge one of them in the Speaker's Chamber before the
Committee.

Thus this Office has been managed in respect to the good of the Nation. It
will not now be amiss to consider how far this Management has affected the poor
Sailors: An English man is not hard-hearted enough to reflect on the miserable
Condition of our poor Sailors of Admiral Nevil's Squadron in the West Indies. I
am credibly informed from good hands, that out of that Squadron in a very short
time we lost above 2500 men, whose Lives I am sure were of more value and
concern to the English Nation, than all the Advantages of that Expedition, and
the mighty Business of Cartagena our Gazette made such a noise about. A hot
Country, stinking Meat, and maggoty Bread, with the noisome and poisonous Scent
of the Bilge Water, have made many a brave English Sailor food for Crabs and
Sharks.

Now I am victualling abroad, suffer me to take a view of the Navy in the
Mediterranean, under the Command of Admiral Russel: I shall not touch too far
upon this Head, the Affair being in better Hands, and under the consideration
of wiser-Heads; I mean before the Parliament. But as a Sailor, I must needs say
if so large a Sum of Money as is talked of was imprested to some body upon the
account of Beverage, it is a damned shame that our Fleet should be so
scandalous as it was there, and go by the name of the Vinegar Fleet, by reason
of the sour Wine they drank: Besides, I remember it was a believed Report
aboard our Ships, that the Spaniards were obliged by Articles to find Beverage
and dry Provisions for the English Fleet; and we all concluded the vast Sums of
Money brought aboard the Fleet by the victualling Pinnace, had been upon that
account: The Cockswain and some of the Pinnace's Crew once told me how many Tun
of Plate they brought aboard the Fleet; but that and a hundred Rogueries beside
in that Fleet are out of my head at present: yet this I can assure you, the
Folk concerned in buying the Beverage got very pretty Estates out of it; and
old nonsensical Humphrey had sense enough to get, as we computed, at least ten
thousand Pounds, when I am well satisfied if the Lords of the Admiralty would
have been graciously pleased to have kept him at home, and given him twenty
thousand Pounds for so doing, it would have been more for the advantage of the
Nation, and the Sailors Welfare: for we have abundance of men in public
Offices, that it would be for the advantage of the Country to give 'em twice
the Salary to be without their Service. Thus has it fared with the poor Sailors
abroad.

Now let us look into the Channel, and see how our Summer and Winter Guards of
Shipping have been victualled. I thank God England is a very plentiful Country,
and an honest Man that has money in his Pocket need not go with an empty
Stomach; and I think the Parliaments have always made as ample Provision for
Victualling as may be; and yet during this War our Fleet has been put to short
Allowance in the Channel, have had their guts pinched in view of the most
plentiful Country in the World, an unparalled and barbarous Action hitherto
unknown. This is bad enough, but to be fed with stinking Beef and Pork is much
worse; and yet in the Year 91 or 92 the Victualling Office was turned into
Pandora's Box, and emitted as many Poisons to the destruction of the poor
Seamen, who were fed with rotten and stinking Meat, as the Pursers Surveys, and
the Books at the Victualling-Office at Dover will testify. It was not the
nature of the Climate made these Provisions stink, this we are certain of, and
as certain that it was done either out of a wilful Design against the Sailors,
or out of profound Ignorance, both which are very dangerous.

It seems as if England was still to be perplexed with a continued Series of
ill Practices, and that the poor Sailors our chiefest Strength were to be
abandoned to all the Miseries of human Life, and as if every one that has a
superintendency over them, by that Power had a Right to abuse them: they learn
one of the other to make earnings of them, and at the same time get Money out of
the King's Pocket and those poor Creatures Bellies. Our Advices from Admiral
Aylmer's Squadron affirm their having Irish Beef instead of English: without
doubt English Beef bears a good Price in those Parts, and is a very
Merchantable Commodity. It has always been contrary to the Custom of the Navy
to victual with any other Provisions than what are received from the King's
Stores, as long as such Provisions shall last: and the Pursers of Ships are
obliged to furnish the Ship with such Provisions as are specified in their
several Indents, for which before they gave Security at the Navy Board. Indeed
it may be allowable for the Pursers of Ships in foreign Parts, where they can
afford it, to victual with fresh Provisions, this change being not detrimental
to the King but serviceable to the Sailors overrun with the Scurvy. And having
before given Security for the Victualling of the Ship, in this Case the
Provisions have been adjudg'd to be their own, and they have been empowered to
sell them for their own Advantage, but not without the Commander's Warrant for
so doing; tho I have known the King's Provisions sold in the River of Thames,
which, if there had been any left upon Return from a Voyage, ought to have been
returned into the King's Stores from whence they were first issued. The
Commanders of Ships formerly had nothing to do with the Ships Provisions, any
further than to overlook and overawe the Purser, that none of them were
converted any otherways than to the use of the Ship; but now it seems the
Commanders have usurped a Power in this Case, altogether detrimental to the
Sailors: there is now as ill a Custom brought up in the Navy for the Commanders
to receive the Ships necessary Money which always was the Pursers Charge, and
for which they always indented with the Clerk of the Issu^s in the Victualling,
being one Article amongst the several Species of Provisions specified in their
Indent. But the Commanders being willing for their own Interest to have every
thing in their own hands, have gained this Point upon the Pursers, not to their
own disadvantage. Now the Commander only having the Charge of the Ship, and
giving no Security, being charged with nothing else, it is impracticable for him
to receive the necessary Money, the Purser having before given Security for the
same.

If there had not been so great Care in the Victualling to get Estates, there
might have been more Care taken in getting good and wholesome Provisions for the
Service of the Navy: but any thing is thought fit Food for Sailors, who being
long accustomed to bad Diet, hardly know when they are ill used. But indeed the
Care of the Victualling requires something of Brains; and as Times and Seasons
alter, so must Methods too, for a common Road may lead a Man to the Place he
intends to go, tho common Reason might direct him a nearer and perhaps a
cleanlier way, if his Judgment was suitable to his Necessity. But Men of small
Reason are often the greatest Opiniat^rs, and think the Exercise of their
Talent outdoes all Mankind, when their Actions weighed in the Balance of
Reason are lighter than the lowest degree of vanity. I refer it to the Judgment
of any rational Man whether the Method now used in the Victualling in
dissolving the Rock Salt into Pickle, and therewith pickling their Meat for Sea
Service, be consistent with Reason and the health of the Sailors: we know they
are neither Conjurers nor Philosophers, yet a small degree of knowledge will
tell a Man, that Pickle with all the ill qualities of Salt in it, can never be
wholesome for human Bodies, which the Rock Salt must of necessity have before
refining. The Bittern, the most noxious Quality in Salt, is separated only by
Precipitation; and this Quality joined with a sulphurous Arsenick in the Rock,
and embodied with the moisture of the Meat, if it suit the Victuallers
Interest, it can never agree with the Welfare of the Sailor. Mr. Collins in his
Discourse of Salt, p. 55. speaking of its vicious Effects, says as to Flesh,
Besides in general a bad Taste, or a good Relish destroyed, the Moisture,
Gravy, and Nourishment in a little time is rendered as salt as Salt it self.
Hence the Flesh becomes hard, afterward very bad or unfit for Food, and at
length is mortified or rotten. He further adds as to the Consequences of using
it: It causes Scurvies, Consumptions, and other Acrimonious Diseases in the
Bodies of Seamen, or Soldiers in a besieged Garrison, that are compelled to the
frequent and long use of it. Nay it is of so violent and corroding a Nature,
that the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire; has so prepared it, as to make it dissolve
Iron Bars: but perhaps the Victualler thinks the Sailors Bodies more durable
than Iron, and because their Patience cannot be worn out, their Guts cannot
neither. There Is no great danger that any Body will follow this foolish
Example; however herein they have manifested their kindness to the King and
Country in using a Method that lessens the Duty upon Salt, considering how many
Weigh of Salt is used in Pickle in one Year: and it is very unseemly that a
Project destructive of a public Fund, should commence at the King's own House
as an Example to the Subject; but the whole Management of the Navy is of a
piece. The Simeon's and Levi's, tho of different Tribes, are embarked in the
same Cause, pursue the same Ends, and are alike odious in the eyes of the
People.

But the mismanagements of this Office and of the Navy, proceed from the
Admiralty, as filthy Springs from an impure Fountain, these being but branches
of that cursed Tree, that has yielded the Nation such sour fruit, as to set all
our Sailors teeth on edg: an Office managed we know not how, nor to what
purpose; for I dare engage to pick out as many old Women in Wapping, that
should have managed that Affair more for the Honor, Glory and Advantage of the
English Nation. The Queen of Sheba when she gave her Visit to Solomon, extolled
his Wisdom and his Servants: our Solomon is indeed worthy of Honor, who has
been the Care of Heaven, as these Nations have been his; and the Queen of Sheba
might justly have done him the same Honor could she have come hither: yet I
engage she would have left out the latter part of her Compliment, and took
little notice of the Sitting of his Servants in the Admiralty, of their Virtue
or Wisdom: She takes no notice of Solomon's nor Hiram's Navy, yet the Scripture
tells us they were under the Conduct of Ship-Men that had knowledge of the Sea;
and in another place, that part of their Loading was Apes and Peacocks, but
tells us no where that Apes or Peacocks had the Sovereign Command in Sea
Affairs, or that Land men were proper Persons to command Men of War. It is a
great Misfortune to a Prince to fall into the hands of Sycophants and
Flatterers, who magnify their own deserts to the Ruin of the Nation, get about
him so close that his best Subjects cannot see him; and if he be unfairly dealt
with they know nothing of it, neither how to commiserate his Condition, nor
give him that Assistance as is necessary to his preservation: such a Prince is
perfectly hoodwinked like a Hawk, and those that hold him will not let him fly,
but at some profitable Quarry for their own Advantage; they never suffer him to
hear what others can say, lest they should speak something to their own
Prejudice. And thus the Prince by adhering to and promoting the Interest of a
few, loses the Love of many, which often proves fatal both to himself and
People. A Good Prince dispenses his Favors as the Sun does its Beams by a
universal Reflection upon Plants of all sorts, but the more generous Plants
receive most of the kindly Influence of its Rays. Mercy is a commendable thing
in a Prince, it may drop upon Criminals, but Favors ought not to pour down
upon them. I would not destroy the whole Species of Vipers because they are
part of the Creation, and manifest the Wisdom of the great Former of all
things; but there is no necessity for me to foster them in my Bosom, and expose
my Body to their Poison. If the Managers of the Admiralty deserve the Posts
they occupy, it is more than the People know, and the Merchants of England will
tell lamentable Stories to the contrary. Some of them perhaps have deserved
well of their Country, however not in the Admiralty: for a Person preferred to
an Office he knows nothing of, by his Ignorance in one day may do more
disservice to his Country, than all the former Services of his Life will amount
to. The wisest Men in England have employed their Brains to no purpose, to
unriddle the meaning of such Preferments; the old Maxim of preferring Enemies
and disobliging Friends has been exploded by all Men of Sense: but the Court
Party have now another Maxim, that all Commonwealths Men are Enemies to
Monarchy, and not to be trusted; and all Englishmen and Lovers of the Liberties
of their Country they represent as such, while the contrary get the best Places
of Profit and Trust in the Kingdom. Now I would fain know how this Government
comes to be a Monarchy in their Sense, and whether any Commonwealthsman in
England can desire a Government more suitable to the common Good, and conform to
his own Principles, if it be faithfully administr'd according to its
Constitution. For no Man of a Republican Principle can desire more than to have
Kings accountable to the People for Maladministration, and by their
forefaulting to make a Forfeiture of the Regal Dignity wherewith they are
vested; by which Forfeiture all the Right of Governing devolves again upon the
People, who of their own free Will and undoubted Right and Power proceed to a
New Election, and place one more Righteous than the former upon the Throne if
they think fit, upon which Foundation this Government is built. So that
Commonwealthsmen, as the Courtiers call them, must be the best Friends of this
Government, because they are for securing the Foundation of it, and not for
raising a Superstructure to make it top-heavy and tumble down. Ill and corrupt
Officers and Ministers are the greatest Enemies to Monarchy in the World: for
when the People see under all Kings ill Men in Offices, the Wealth of the
Nation profusely lavished, and the Liberties of the People in continual danger,
they will conclude that Mismanagements are accidents inseparable from Monarchy,
that the Fault is not in the King but in the Office, and let 'em change the
Person never so often, the thing will be the same; and so begin to think of
another form of Government.

There has been such an uninterrupted Progress of Mismanagements in our Naval
Affairs, through the Conduct of the Persons concerned in the Managery, that
nothing hitherto has been our preservation, but the immediate hand of
Providence: The Walls of our Island are our Shipping; those once broken down,
we are laid open to the violent Insults of any Enemy: A little Retrospection
now would do very well, and not only so, but we ought to look forward, and find
out ways and means to prevent the like for the future.

It is the Business of our Representatives in Parliament to enquire into things
of this Nature; they are the Guardians of our Liberties, and are bound to
redress the Grievances of the People, by virtue of whose electing Power they
have a Right to sit in the House of Commons and enact Laws: They have no Power
from the People they represent to make Laws destructive of their Property, or
diminishing of their Wealth, upon groundless Occasions; nor ought they to give
Releases to such as have squandered away the Wealth of the Kingdom, and
betrayed the Liberty of the Subject. He that dos not prevent a Mischief when it
lies in his power so to do, is equally guilty with the hand that did it, and
equally accountable to God Almighty. It is much more now the Business of
Parliaments, since there is no way else to bring Criminals to Justice; and the
greatest Justice that ever was done in Cases of this nature has been done by
Parliaments, of which I could give many Instances had I time or place. Making
public Examples of such Criminals is not only a Debt we owe to public
Justice, and the common good of the Realm, but will be a Terror to all future
Offenders in Cases of the like Nature: for if such Abuses are tolerated too
long, they will become fashionable, and a Man must turn a Rogue to get into an
Emploiment. It Is well for the English Nation these Miscreants are not beyond
the Reach of Parliament, whose Authority and Prerogative if once lost we may
bid an eternal Farewell to our Native Liberty; and indeed the lessening of the
Power of Parliaments has not a little been aimed at by some within these few
years, who would have us believe the Business of the Commons is only to
assemble one year in St. Stephen's Chapel to raise Money for them to squander
it away the next; I wonder all this while they have not had the Impudence to
attempt the raising of Money without Act of Parliament, that being as legal as
the converting appropriated Funds to other uses than such as are specified in
the Act. But the day of Judgment we hope is at hand, when the Wisdom and
supreme Authority of the People shall avenge the Injuries done to the English
Nation upon the Criminals.

To look forward is as much our Interest; and no less the indispensible Duty of
our Representatives in Parliament to take care of the safety of the Nation in
the well management of the Fleet. His Majesty in his most Gracious Speech upon
disbanding the Army, lays the safety of the Nation before them, as a Duty
incumbent on them; and since the Army is disbanded, our main safety is our
Shipping. This Security supposed, was, I believe, the chief reason of laying
the Land Forces aside; so that now the best Security we have left is our
Shipping, and a good and sufficient Security too under a good Management. The
Nation has already felt the Effects of the present Management; and to let the
Nation suffer any longer upon this Account may bring us under such ill
Circumstances, that will put it out of the Power of Parliaments to recover us
from ruin. The Admiralty has been in the hands of such Men too long already,
and it is now more dangerous than ever to repose a Trust of so high a Nature, of
such great Consequence to the Nation, in their hands; we know very well what
Party it was insisted so much upon the Necessity of a Land Force: and to trust
the Navy in such hands for the future, as already it has been of ill
Consequence, so it may prove more dangerous; they may so far embarass the Naval
Affairs, retard the Enterprises of the Navy, by ordering Squadrons and Cruizers
in such Stations where they cannot be serviceable: so that in a little time the
Navy doing no service, shall be thought altogether useless, and this shall be
made an Argument for the necessity of a Land Army. I wish the Miscarriages of
the Navy already have not been out of design for this Purpose: If these
Grievances continue, the Commons may at last be forced to prevent such
Mischiefs for the future by taking the Charge and Management of the Navy and
dependant Offices into their own hands, by appointing Commissioners of their
own: and this seems rational enough for those that are at the Charge, to
superintend the Management of the Affair; nor is this a new thing and
unprecedented. 31 Hen. 6. Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Shrewsbury,
John Earl of Worcester, James Earl of Wiltshire, and the Lord Sturton were
appointed by Parliament to keep the Seas; and the Tunnage and Poundage were
appointed for defraying the Charge thereof. 8 Hen. 4. The Merchants were
empowered to name two Persons, the one for the South, the other for the North,
who by Commission had the like Power as other Admirals had. So that you see the
Charge of the Navy has been a Parliamentary Care in times less dangerous than
now; and those who are appointed Commissioners in this Affair will be more
careful in the discharge of the Trust reposed in them, nor will they have so
many ways to slip their Necks out of the Collar as now: Here will be no Privy
Seal to impressed Money for unknown Services, no passing of Accounts without
Vouchers, no abuse of Sailors in Wages or Provisions; the Kingdom will be kept
in a good Posture of Defense; the Minds of the People will be easy when the
Management of their Navy is in the hands of Commissioners of their own, alike
interested in the Good and Security of the Realm; and our Enemies more
terrified, when the Business of the Navy is the Care of the whole Kingdom. All
which is submitted to the Wisdom of our Representatives in Parliament, before
whom the Case lies at this Juncture.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books written against a Standing Army, and sold by A. Balwin.
AN Argument showing, that a Standing Army is inconsistent with a Free
Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English
Monarchy. In 2 Parts. Price 1 s.

A Letter from the Author of the Argument against a Standing Army, to the
Author of the Ballancing Letter. Price 3 d.

Some Queries for the better understanding K. James's List of 18000 Irish
Heroes published at the Savoy, in answer to what had bin, and what should be
writ against a Standing Army. Price 1 d.

A Discourse concerning Government with relation to Militias. Price 6 d.

The Militia Reformed, or an easy Scheme of furnishing England with a constant
Land Force, capable to prevent or to subdue any Foreign Power, and to maintain
perpetual Quiet at home, without endangering the Public Liberty. The 2d
Edition. Price 1 s.

A short History of Standing Armies in England. The 3d Edition. Price 6 d.

A Confutation of a late Pamphlet entitled, A Letter ballancing the Necessity
of keeping up a Land Force in times of Peace, with the Dangers that may follow
on it. Part I. The 2d Edition. Price 6 d. The Second Part, being a Vindication
of Magna Charta, will be speedily published.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament concerning Guards and Garrisons. Price 2 d.

A 2d Letter concerning the four Regiments commonly called Mareeners. Price 3
d.

The Seaman's Opinion of a Standing Army, in opposition to a Fleet at Sea as
the best security of the Kingdom. In a Letter to a Merchant written by a
Sailor. The 3d Edition. Price 6 d.

Some further Considerations concerning a Standing Army. Pr. 3 d.

The State of the Case, or the Case of the State. Price 1 d.


