Duke Hamilton Earl of CAMBRIDGE HIS CASE, Spoken to, and argued on the behalf
OF THE Commonwealth, Before the HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE.

By Mr. STEEL of Gray's Inn.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Tyton, at the Three Daggers near the Inner
Temple-Gate, Fleetstreet, 1649.

Mr. Steel's Speech before the High Court of JUSTICE, upon occasion of the
first coming of the Earl of Cambridge to the Bar, February 9. 1648.
My Lord,
THat power which was at first in Families, Towns, and then in greater
Collective bodies, was after, for the better conservation of the whole,
disposed into bodies Politic and Representative: Principium Originis is the
privilege of the one, as Dispensationis of the other; which distinction as
easily prevents all disputes about the preeminency of these powers, as it
usually satisfies that question touching bodies Natural, viz. Whether the
Primum sensorium be to be ascribed to the heart or head? Of the birth and
growth of these powers, God himself gave us some resemblance, when that Lux
primogenia, the light created on the first, was upon the fourth day contracted
into those heavenly lights, which were the first created Rulers of this world:
The powers of men thus settled, were invested with various immunities, suitable
to their Offices, as so many beams flowing from them for the good of mankind;
and amongst these, I know none more bright and influential to the world, then
that of Justice; which when it is rightly darted into the hearts and hands of
men, does not prove like that sword behind the Ephod, but rather as that of
Gideon, and sometimes upon just occasion, like that which hung over the head of
Damocles, ready to do speedy and impartial execution: Of this power I both
suppose this Honorable Court to be the proper Subject, and the now Prisoner at
Bar the proper Object.

The proceedings of Justice are called, Streams of Righteousness for their
clear and current passage: And (my Lord, what if no gallant Ship nor Galley
with oars, sail in these of yours? yet if the glorious Lord vouchsafe you his
presence he will be broad Rivers to you; what if others of inferior rank, spare
not to load your persons and actions with reproaches? yet you know, not
withstanding Latratus Canum, what is the posture of that faithful witness in
heaven, Et peragit cursus surda Diana suos: And as for this Lord, brought by a
divine hand to appear thus before you, I may say of him, Quae alios divisa reos
faciunt in hunc conjuncta fluunt, so fit is he to stand at the Bar of Justice;
to look upon him as he now appears, may perhaps move compassions, as once Date
obolum Bellisario did to that great Commander (and indeed (my Lord) however his
Crime may be above your mercy, yet I would not have his better part either be
beyond your prayers or pity) nevertheless, that you may take a right view of
those actions for which he is here convented, I wish he may rather be looked
upon as marching the last Summer in the head of twenty thousand men, in an
Hostile and Treacherous manner to invade this Nation, as if that which some
feared in the Argument of Calvin's Case, if the judgment should pass, as it
after wards did, were under this man's conduct come to pass; viz. That the the
Scots, ambitious of such a privilege as to be Denizens of England, would
thereafter come like avers sans number into the English Commons; or as if he
were willing to revive the truth of that observation of Comities, that what
Portugal was to Spain, and the Venetians and Florentines then to Italy, that
was Scotland of old to England, a scourge to mind them of their duties to God,
and to keep them humble: But more particularly to touch the aggravating
circumstances of this horrid Treason, and therein to omit the mentioning of
those personal benefits this Nation had afforded him, by making him capable of
their own Dignities, and privileges, equal to any Natural born Englishman, and
to take the dimensions more peculiar to this Rebellion: We were the last year
after a tedious storm of War, beginning to rejoice in the hopes of seeing the
Vessel of this State, come safe into the harbor of Peace, but the enemies of
Englands happiness, and of their own, were not willing to enjoy this blessing
upon the Terms it was purchased; an harmonious spirit must pass betwixt the
South and North, the vessel again lanch into the deep, all our hopes of
settlement be endangered, and the poor wasted Northern counties, which ere now
expected a Jubilee, must by these Brethren in cruelty be used like Sechemites,
and again tormented, before they be healed of their old sores; as if they now
came to take Livery and Seisin of those counties, which some affirm were
promised them as part of their reward for this service: And all this, as
against those solemn Treaties transacted in 1642. and 1643. for the Union of
both Kingdoms, and those Engagements not to make War each with other, before
three months warning, nor to Garrison Berwick or Carlisle, without consent of
both Parliaments; so also against the frequent premonitions of the General
Assembly in Scotland (the Assembly here also by their Letter, signifying their
concurrence with those endeavors of the Scottish Divines) and both agreeing,
this Expedition to be against, not for the ends of the Covenant; but whilst
these Invaders were thus forewan'd, they notwithstanding forearm themselves in
the worst sense for us: But two circumstances above all seem to me, to extend
the vileness of this fact beyond all aggravations; the one, That the Parliament
of England, whilst they in Scotland were forming their weapons against us, by
their Commissioners residing there, often signified their desires of
presereving a Brotherly Agreement; howbeit, instead of receiving any other
satisfaction, we must be answered, Per argumenta baculina: the other, That
their coming in must be for the ends of the Covenant, that being usually made
the stock whereon to grast their desperate Designs; thinking thereby, as to
mask their own deformities, so to seduce many well meaning men into their
consederacy; and from thence as this third War was called Bellum Hypocritarum,
so may the Prisoner, under whose command in chief they came, be justly styled
Hypocritarum Princeps: The Parliament of England hereupon appealed to heaven by
their Declaration, and therein Prophetically spoke what came to pass, That they
doubted not but God would be with them, and the prayers of his people for them;
and that those who had dealt falsely, in striking hands with the common Enemy,
to kindle a new fire betwixt these kingdoms, should perish themselves therein;
upon which appeal the highest Judge gave out his righteous decree, and spes
hypocritarum periit; and had he not indeed appeared for his despised people, by
a more then ordinary rule of his dispensation, and enabled a small company of
men, like stars in their course, to fight against and vanquish this Sisera and
his mighty Host, England doubtless ere this had been a Field of Blood: Of this
unnatural and unchristian Army thus totally by a power from Heaven routed,
habemus ducem, we have here present the principal Author and Actor, against
whom the pillaged depopulated counties, the blood of many innocents, many of
his own Countrymen both at home, and now in foreign parts, and God himself,
by the strange and speedy delivery of him into your hands, after his escape
from Windsor, coming himself sooner then possibly he could have done if sent
for, immediately after the former execution, do all unanimously call for a just
sentence, and the same do I in the Name of the People of England.

The Charge being read against the said Earl, containing matter of High
Treason, for his invatling this Nation in an Hostile manner, and levying actual
War therein, he thereunto put in this ensuing Plea.

The Plea of James Earl of Cambridge, whereby (as he alleged) he was not to be
tried for Treason within this Kingdom.
1. THat he was employed by the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, not to
invade this Kingdom, but for the ends they have declared, sent to the
Parliament of the Kingdom of England.

2. That he is no Englishman, notwithstanding the Naturalization of his Father.

3. That he is a Prisoner of War, rendered upon Articles by Major General
Lambert; and that those Capitulations were made before his Rendition with Major
General Lamberts Commissioners.

THE ARGUMENT of Mr. Steel, On the behalf of the COMMONWEALTH, Touching the
matter of Law in the CASE of the Earl of CAMBRIDGE.
My Lord,
THe Council for the Earl of Cambridge have framed their Arguments upon the
fact, as they conceive it proved; and also by admittance of the contrary in
some points, I shall use the same method, first, Arguing from the fact, as I
conceive it stated by the proofs produced, and then by admittance of the
contrary, that though the fact should be as they would have it, that yet the
Law will fall out to be against them.

The Charge being read to the Prisoner, he has thereunto put in his Plea,
consisting of three parts; the truth and validity whereof has been denied on
the behalf of the Commonwealth.

First, The first part of his Plea was, That he was employed by the Parliament
of the Kingdom of Scotland, not to invade this Kingdom, but for the ends
declared by them: The improvement made of this part of the Plea, is, That the
Earl was but a Servant in this Expedition, and under the Authority and command
of another, and tied under Oaths and penalties to give obedience; if he had
disobeyed, he had been liable to punishment, therefore it were hard for him to
be punished for obeying also: That he has not exceeded his Commission; besides
the Parliament of England in their Declaration of the 17 of February last, lay
the blame of this Invasion upon the Parliament of Scotland: And lastly, That
the Earls case is not unlike that of an Ambassador, who is not to be blamed for
acting against a State, if he have it in mandatis, as in the case of the Bishop
of Ross, in the Reign of Queen Eliz.

By endeavor to give satisfaction to all which, I shall dispatch what I have to
say upon this first part of the Plea.

I shall admit it proved, that he had that Commission and Authority mentioned;
and also, that the rule is generally true, That a man is not to be punished for
an act which he does by the necessity of obedience, because he has nor solutum
arbitrium, which is required to denominate actions either blameworthy or
excusable; but I shall easily prove, that this Rule is capable of restrictions;
both by the Rules of Law and Reason, and if we observe the distinctions aright
which determine this question, we shall still find the Earl of Cambridge
within that part which renders him inexcusable.

First, The first difference is, where the Action is lawful, and where unlawful
which is commanded: If it be lawful, a Superior command may dispense with some
circumstances; but if unlawful, the Servant obeying, is not the less to be
blamed: I never held that Law of Ina the Saxon King to be warrantable Divinity,
Servus si quid operis patrarit die Dominico ex precepto Domini sui Eiber esto,
if the precept it self were unjust.

Now for the Action in question, wherein this Earl was engaged, it is not
defended by his own Council, the dispute being only de modo, whether he be to
be punished as an Enemy, or as Traitor, though if this Argument held, he were
neither way to be punished, and therefore certainly the necessity of his
obedience is no mitigation for his Crime; and if it should, Empson and Dudley,
with all their Monopolizing Successors, had been unjustly censured, who always
have had Patents and Commissions from Authority to plead: And so also all that
catalogue of former Traitors, who have hatched their Treasons and Designs
against this State in Foreign parts, and have ever had the Pope or Foreign
Princes to put a stamp of Authority and command upon them, must by this
Argument be in some measure justified.

It was never expected from any under command, to write himself more a servant
then us^ ad aras, those being the Hercules's pillars whereon a non plus ultra
is written, and therefore who ever exceeds those bounds, he will find it to be
at his peril.

Secondly, The second difference is, where the instrument is inanimatum, and
where an Active living instrument; of the first it is truly said, Instrumenti
nulla vis, all being therein attributed to the principal efficient, but
otherwise of the other: From hence the Statute of 1, 2. Phil. and Ma. ca. 10.
did justly repeal the Statute of 33 H. 8. c. 20. which had punished a man for
Treason, though he became non compos mentis before the execution; and no less
justly did 25 Ed. 3. de proditionibus by the word (Imagination) alter in the
like point that Law which was in use till then, concerning such a persons
committing the act of Treason, such an one being no better then quasi
inanimatus: But who can affirm this Earl to be other then an active and
vigorous instrument, non modo vivit sed in senatum venit, being a chief Member
of that Parliament, under whose command he would shelter himself, and by that
means is a Master rather then a Servant, and so met with by that Declaration of
the Parliament of this Kingdom, of which he would have made an Argument for
himself.

Thirdly, Where there is necessitas culpabilis, the Law will not excuse, as it
will where there is no crime in contracting the necessity: Those who in former
times gave victuals and provision to Sir John Oldcastle, were not punished as
Traitors, because they did it (say our Records) Pro timore Mortis, and
recesserunt quam cito potuerunt, 3 Inst. 10. and upon this reason seems that
opinion of Tremayle to be grounded in 21 H. 7.39. That a Servant may justify
the killing of another, to save his Masters life, if he cannot otherwise escape.

But if one being drunk commits a crime, though he has not properly and
immediately the free exercise of his will, yet the Law reputes him voluntarius
Demon, and he is not at all the less excusable by our Law, 1 Inst. 247. 4 li.
Beverleys Case; and by the Philosophers Rule, such a one does ignorans, not per
ignorantiam agere, and is therein so far from being excused, that he is
therefore to be doubly punished.

Now to assume, that whereby the Earls Council would excuse him; viz. His Oath
and Commission, renders him the less excusable, because both are strong
Arguments of a free and full consent; for who can imagine them of Scotland to
be such mean Statists, as to think that Oath equally obliging, which was
compulsive, to the same, if freely taken; or that that General should be
trusted with a Commission over all their Forces both by Sea and Land, as his
Commission runs, whose heart as well as hand had not embraced it; and truly,
they that have heard his Letters read to Sir Marmaduke Langdale, wherein he
prays for the increase of the distractions at London, and for his friends at
Colchester, would not judge him an unwilling instrument, but one exceeding,
rather then falling short in executing his Commission.

Lastly, Necessity of obedience may excuse in privatis, but never in publicis:
If a Feme covert together with her husband, commit an act which in another
would amount to felony, yet in her it shall not, because sub potestate viri, 27
Ass. p. 40. but otherwise the Law is in point of Treason, and so is the
judgment of my Lord Verulam, Nes valet privilegium (says he) contra
rem-publicam. And as to the case of an Ambassador urged on the other side, and
in particular of the Bishop of Ross in the days of Queen Elizabeth, I answer,
first, The privileges of those who are entertained as Ambassadors, are very
great, and not to be made presidents or assumed by any other, whence Proregis
Dedecus redundat in regem, and therefore before 25 Ed. 3. it was Treason to kill
an Ambassador, 22 Ass. p. 48. and from hence might arise that privilege showed
to the Bishop of Ross. Secondly, It appears to be rather an Act of Grace then
of Justice, that, that Bishop was freed, because he was set at liberty after a
long imprisonment, which if not liable to the censure of the Law, he should not
at all in Justice have endured: Also by the judgment of my Lord Bacon, cited
by the learned Doctor on the other side, in point of conspiracy against the
State, even an Ambassador is not privileged; yet of this Bishop learned
Cambden says in his Eliz. Fuit liberatus que rebellioni clam faces subjecerat,
all which were Arguments of Grace, and therefore that case will be no president
for this, wherein also conspiracies and correspondencies, with many of this
Nation have been proved, and are otherwise notorious.

And for that inevitable labyrinth out of which the Earl of Cambridge cannot
extricate himself, but that whether obey or not obey, he is under a mischief,
he may for that thank himself, volenti non fit injuria, this is like the plague
of an Erroneous Conscience, which whether obeyed or not, proves a tormentor to
its subject.

Secondly, The second part of the Earls Plea is, That he is no Englishman,
notwithstanding the Naturalization of his Father; which in effect is as much as
to say, and so it has been insisted on, He is by birth a Scots man, and by
consequence an Alien to, and not tryable as a Traitor by, the Laws of England:
Concerning the handling of which question, it being that whereupon the validity
of the other two does in my judgment principally depend, I shall first answer
the material Objections which I conceive, made by the Council on the other
side, before I offer any thing positively to assert the invalidity of this part
of the Plea.

Obj. It has been said, The proof is not clear, for the Earl of Cambridge his
being a Postnatus; viz. One born after King James his Access to the Crown of
England, and that being but a non liquet, in favorem vitae, the most favorable
construction is to be taken for the Prisoner.

First, Answ. I deny that the proof amounts to no more in this particular then
a non liquet, for there is one positive witness that speaks directly to the
Earls birth, after King James his coming to the Crown of England; another
speaks to the Earls own confession, of being about two or three and forty years
of age, which speaks him born since that time; and a third speaks to the common
report of his being born since; and if the proof were but semiplena probatia;
yet as Bracton says, That amounts to a presumption; and, says he,
Presumptioni stabitur donec probetur in contrerium, especially when the Earl
himself, who should have proved the contrary for the making good his Plea, has
offered nothing against it, and being asked, never absolutely denied it.

Secondly, I do agree, that what the Jewish Expositors observe in the
Exposition of their Laws, which sounded in favor, is to be observed in our Law,
in those things which we usually say the Law favors; viz. Favores sunt
ampliandi, and that strict Expositions are only for penal Rules, according to
that of the Civilians, Constitutio penalis non excedit casum, yet we shall
find; that where the penalty of a penal Law is against one or few persons, and
the benefit redounds to the generality, in that case even a penal Statute shall
be taken largely against the Offender, so the Rule is put Plow. Com. 36. Plats
Case, where it is resolved, though the Statute of 1 R. 2. c. 12. give an Action
of escape against the Garden of the Fleet; yet for the reason abovesaid, it is,
though a penal Law, by a benign interpretation, to extend to the Sheriff of
London; and in like manner if there were any latitude in Cases of Treason and
Murder (as there is not) yet to extend it on the behalf of the Prisoners,
might prove to many thousands, Crudelis miserecordia.

Thirdly, Add to this, that the Law of England is so tender of the Public
Weal, that though in other Cases it may seem to insist too much upon
formalities, yet herein it will dispense sometimes with its most certain Rules:
Hence it is, that if one pass over another Land without his consent, to fetch
a Falcon, or the like, he may be punished as a Trespasser; but not so, if to
hunt or kill a Fox or an Otter (which instances, I suppose, not unsuitable to
the Prisoner) because these are Creatures contra bonum Publicum, which reason
the Book gives of the Law in that Case, 12 H. 8.10. for the same reason, no man
shall be punished as a Trespasser for erecting Bulwarks on another Land, Dyer
36. Maleverers Case: And hence certainly was the reason of that ancient Law,
That Capital Offenders who had transgressed against the Law, had Lupina Capita,
and might therefore by the Justice of Lex talionis, arteperire sua; wherein the
Law followed Naturae ordinem: The rules of nature are most constant, yet for
the preservation of the whole, it will sometimes contradict it self, as to
prevent a vacuum and the like, what an inversion do we see of natures most
constant and ordinary Rules: Do not they then in this prove somewhat unnatural,
and embrace a cloud in stead of substance, that fear not to omit the weightiest
things of the Law, rather then in cases of invincible necessity, dispense with
some formalities?

Obj. But though the Earl of Cambridge were a Postnatus, yet he is quasi Ligeus
acquisitus unto England; and if so, as his Allegiance began with an Act of the
Nation, so it might determine by an Act of the same Power, to wit, by Command
from the Parliament of Scotland.

First, Answ. The strength of this Objection, if admitted, would, as I
conceive, by a new invented distinction, overthrow the learned and solemn
resolution of all the Judges and Chancellor of England, 6 Jac. in Calvin's Case,
wherein all Allegiances that the wits of men could imagine are enumerated, and
they are but four; viz. Ligeantia Naturalis, Acquisita, Localis, and Legalis;
and by the Judgment of that Case, Robert Calvin, Son and Heir to James Lord
Calvin of Colcross in Scotland, born three years after King James his access to
the Crown (as also all other so born) were adjudged Subjects of this Kingdom of
England Ligeantia Naturali, by the best and highest Allegiance, without any
quasi at all, in the same kind, and to all intents and purposes that any
natural born Englishman was.

Secondly, The Objection seems to me, not only to be against the Judgment of
this Case, but against reason also; for what acquisition is there by the party,
or what contributes he to it, whether he be born in this or that time or place;
the conceit, that there is any act of the party's in this (as there must be to
make a quasi Ligeus acquisitus) seems to savor of the Pythagorean
Metempsucosis, or that opinion of Plato, who held a preexistence of Souls,
which after came into the bodies, tanquam in ergastula.

Obj. It is inconsistent to have two natural Allegiances to two several
Kingdoms, as it is impossible to have two Fathers, in which Case major relatio
trahet ad se minorem, and in that case the Earl is rather to be reputed a
Subject of Scotland where he was born, then of England.

First, Answ. It is indeed inconsistent that the same person should in two
several Kingdoms have two original Allegiances, in a physical acceptance, to
wit, to be so born; yet by construction of Law, he that is born in Scotland,
may have an Allegiance to England, equivalent with the other; thus Calvin by
the resolution of that Case was Scotus patria, and Anglus privilegio.

And thus without any contradiction, it was ever held for Law, That the Natives
of Gascoign and Aquitain, and those other countries which were Geographically
out of England, were yet in construction of Law, equally Denizens and Subjects
of England with those born here, in regard of one Allegiance and Protection
wherein they were equally involved, 27 Ass. Pl. 48.

Secondly, No Allegiance which gains the name of alta and Naturalis Ligeantia,
can by the Common Law of England be divested, though otherwise it may be by the
Civil Laws, there being no magis and minus that its capable of, which the
Objection would suppose; and the truth is, The resolution of Calvin's Case,
answers all the suppositions of any future contingencies, and positively
resolves, That this Allegiance cannot possibly be lost by any matter ex post
facto, no, not by difference of discents and Governments, 7 Li. 27. and what is
agreed to be inherent to a natural born Englishman, belongs also to a
Postnatus, non potest patriam in quo natus est exuere, nec Ligeantiae Debitum
ejurare, 1 Inst. 129.

Thirdly, And for the inconsistences of Allegiancies that the objection seems
to insinuate, in the case of Competition between the Kingdoms, Bracton has met
with that supposal long since, Li. de. exeptionibus 427. speaking of one that
is ad fidem utrinsque Regis, si contingat guerram accidere inter Regna, putting
the case of one born in France, and Indenized in England, Remaneat personaliter
cum eo cui Ligeantiam fecerit, and faciat servitium debitum ei cum quo non
steterit in persona.

Obj. Though the Earl of Cambridge were a Postnatus, yet as this Case is, it
makes him not to differ from an Alien, because the Kingdoms of England and
Scotland were at the time of this Invasion divided, and there were then several
Administrations of their powers, from whence a double Allegiance is to be
considered, Regis and Regni.

First. Ans. If we look upon the judicial powers of the Kingdoms in a Legal
consideration, even at the time mentioned in the Objection, besides the Union
of the Kingdoms made by force of 1 Jac. cap. 1. we shall find as strong
Stipulations and Engagements by Treaties confirmed by Parliament and otherwise,
betwixt the Nations, as were possibly to be made, none of which were repealed
at the time of this expedition, and so far from that, that the Earl himself
has often at the Bar professed, That neither his coming nor Commission were
against the Parliament or Kingdom of England; How then were the powers of these
Nations so legally or judicially different?

Secondly, The Union of the Laws and Governments of these Nations, was a thing
desired and endeavored by some, as may appear by the latter part of the Statute
of 4 Jac. cap. 1. but it was not effected; therefore the distinction of the
Kingdoms was taken into consideration in Calvin's Case, where (Regna) was one of
the Nomina operativa, and granted, That though the Kingdoms, Laws, and
Nobilities of the Nations of England and Scotland were several and distinct,
yet the Allegiance of all born in either Nation after the union, was one and
the same; and the pleading of that case (which best denotes the Law)
demonstrates this, That such distinction of the Kingdoms was under
consideration; for the pleading was, That Calvin was born extra Ligeantiam
Regni Regis Angliae, and infra Ligeantiam Regni Regis Scotia; and the learned
Chancellor of that time says in his Postnati, that the judgment was, That
neither Calvin, nor any other Postnati, were Aliens to the King or Kingdom of
England.

Thirdly, It is agreed on the other side, That there was always one Ligeantia
Regis; and therefore even thence I do infer, that there was also one Ligeantia
Regni, because that Allegiance which was due to the King, was certainly due to
him in his politic capacity, though not to that only, or divided in the
Subject from his natural capacity; however it may be said nevertheless, as it
is in Calvin's Case (by a community of properties) that it was due to the
natural capacity also, viz. As it ought ever to be accompanied with the
politic, thence it was but just in the Parliament, notwithstanding the Kings
Personal Command and Opposition against them, yet to permit the taking of the
Oath of Allegiance, and not to abolish it till after his death, it being ad
Legem Ligatio, yet the person was so necessary, that without it, it had been
ridiculous to administer it in the form it was, in which case majus dignum
trabit ad se minus; and hence it was, that capital crimes committed in one
Kings time, might be proceeded against after the death of that King 3 Ed. 3.
Fitz. Reattachment 18. and Bro. Corone, 178. If the King had purchased Land to
him and his Heirs, though the word (Successors) the word of his politic
capacity, had not been mentioned, yet he was feised thereof in jure Coronae, 43
Ed. 3.20. And if Land had been given to the King and another, and their Heirs,
they had for the same reason been Tenants in Common, and not Joynt-Tenants,
Com. 239. for the same reason: And though many of those persons who have been
Kings, have often oppressed, in stead of preserved their Subjects; yet still
that which Bracton has said upon the same ground, remains true of the Regal
Power, Non aliud Rex potest quam quod de jure potest, his Office still being Ex
Officio, as 2 Li. Coo. Wisemans Case says, and Fitz. na. bre. 113. out of the
Register, to provide for the preservation of his People; and if any other
construction should be made, then it must have followed in the Kings Personal
absence, minority, or disability, the Kingdom must either have been but weakly,
or not at all governed; from all which it may be inferred, That the Obligation
and Allegiance which was owing to the King, did include, that which Savo sens^
was the Kingdoms also.

It remains now, that somewhat be spoken for the further invalidating of this
part of the Plea, wherein I shall

First prove, That one born in Scotland after the Union of the Crowns, cannot
be to any purpose considered as an Alien to England.

Secondly, That though the Earl of Cambridge had been born before the Union,
yet he had not been an Alien to England; partly from a National consideration,
but more principally from personal considerations; viz. first, By reason of his
Local Allegiance both in Scotland and England. Secondly, Ligeantia acquisita,
and that by the Naturalization of his Father, or his own Denization.

Thirdly, That though he had been an Alien, yet as this case is upon the
proofs, he will prove tryable for Treason by the Laws of this Kingdom.

Before I speak of any of these, I might touch upon that part which lays
Murder to the charge of this Earl; it having been fully proved, That several
persons by name, amongst many others, were slain and murdered by the Scottish
Army; and to make him punishable for this Crime, there is no need of
denization, it being an offense in it self against the Law of God and Nations,
and we trust, requisite to be an ingredient to it, as is required in Treason:
Hence we find Rape punishable in England, committed by a Scot, 13 Eliz. Dyer
304. and Murder done by the Lord Zanchar of the same Nation, 9 Li. Coo. 116.
where we find him indicted by the Name of Robert Creighton Esquire which together
with the express Authority of 11 E. 3. Fitz. bre. 473. are (by the way)
sufficient warrants for our charging the Prisoner by the Name of James Earl of
Cambridge, without mentioning his Dukedom, as he has often intimated we should
have done.

And if the Earl should say, He killed not these persons himself, his Council
can soon tell him, That Is not material, the Law being, That if diverse persons
come to do an unlawful act, and one commit a Murder or Treason, its so in all,
1 Mar. Dyer 38. 13 H. 4.13. 19 Ed. 2 Fitz. Cor. 433. But the truth is, I shall
not rely upon this, being not willing so high an offense should pass under any
other name then that of Treason; therefore I pass to those aforementioned
considerations, which will evince his Crime to be no less then Treason.

1. As to the first of these, there being so much said in the Argument of
Calvin's Case, I shall omit the citing of any thing particularly from thence,
and select something from the Statutes made shortly after the Union. Its agreed
by all Historians, That these two Kingdoms were anciently but one, Divisos orb
Britannos, and sabducta Britannia mundo; thence its observable, That in the
Preface of 1 Jac. cap. 1. by the access of the King of Scotland to this
Kingdom; the Parliament speaking of the Union, correct themselves in these
words, or rather a reuniting of these two Nations (though anciently but one;)
if so, this reunion amounted to no less then (as it were) a National remitter
of the ancient Union.

For the settlement of this Union, Commissioners were chosen to compose some
differences betwixt the Nations, and to consider what was fit and necessary to
be done for the Commonweal of both Kingdoms, 1 Jac. cap. 2. These Commissioners
consult long about it, and because they could not perfect it within the time
prefixed, an Act passes for longer time, 3 Jac. cap. 3.

At length the work is finished by the Statute of 4 Jaco. cap. 1. by which all
Statutes that express or imply any strangeness of the one Nation to the other
are repealed; and moreover, it does Enact and say, That if there had appeared
any other Statutes of this Realm of England, wherein any thing is Ordained,
Enacted and Established expressly, and by name, against the Scottish as Enemies,
or Scotland as an Enemy Country to the King of this Realm, or the State of the
same, we should for so much of them as concerns Scottish men or Scotland,
have utterly abrogated and adnulled the same, seeing all Enmity and Hostility
of former times between the two Kingdoms and People is now happily taken away.
So the Statute. After which it seems as strange, that any born in Scotland,
after, and during the continuance of that Union, should make themselves
strangers to England; as if natural born English men should have made the same
allegation.

In the aforesaid Statute of 4 Jac. 1. there is a clause, That no Scotishman
coming into England to prosecute the Law against any Englishman, offending in
Scotland, is to be arrested here, except for Treason and Murder; and in the
latter end of the Act, amongst other things, it is Enacted, That if any
Englishman should commit Treason or other Crimes in Scotland, and come into
England, he should not upon his apprehension here be sent into Scotland to have
his Trial there, but be tried where he is taken; but the Statute of 7 Jac. c.
1. which was the year after the resolution in Calvin's Case, repealed that
clause of 4 Jac. 1. last mentioned, as to all offenses but Treason, leaving the
offenders in that kind to be tried in the Kingdom where they were apprehended;
and though the Statute speak only of English, yet the like Act was to pass in
Scotland, in case any of that Nation committed Treason here, else neither was
to be binding to the Nations.

2. In the next place, somewhat may be said from a National Consideration to
prove the Earl no alien here, though born before the Union, not that my purpose
is to endeavor the revival of that ancient homage done formerly by that Kingdom
to this, it is not worth the mentioning, in comparison of that love and those
engagements which have been betwixt us, Gens una summus, was heretofore said of
us, and if it may be, I wish, Sic simus in aevum; but because somewhat has
been on the other side cited from the stories of Bruce and Baliol, in the days
of Edward 1. and for that I find both Law and History afford some matter for
this Argument; I hold it my duty not to be altogether silent in what passed in
those times and since: I will not insist up-those several Appeals made by
Magdolphus and others of the Scottish Nation to Ed. 1. contra custodes Scotiae,
and against the Kings of Scotland themselves, all Arguments of allegiance then
acknowledged from that Kingdom to this.

But to instance in some Presidents nearer to this in question, Simon Frysel,
in 34 Ed. 1. anno 1306. a Native of Scotland, came in an hostile manner from
that Kingdom to invade this, and being apprehended here, he was condemned as a
Traitor; the words of Math. West, 456. concerning him, are, That he was a turri
Londinensi per plateas distractus ut proditor.

In the same year of Ed. 1. William Wallis the Commander in chief of the
Scottish Forces, and a Native of that Nation also, as the Prisoner was, came
into this Kingdom, and being apprehended, was, says Walfingham fol. 61.
Londonias usque ductus and judicialiter condemnatus, trahitur, suspenditur, and
ultimo decollatur, though he pleaded, as our Historians tell us, what this Earl
does. That he was a Subject of Scotland, and not of this Kingdom, and therefore
ought not to be tried here for Treason. In 42 Ed. 3.3. in the Lord Beaumonts
case, when it was replied that the party, objected against to be an Alien, was
a Scots man, the plea is no longer insisted upon. A protection quia profecturus
lies not into a Country that is within the allegiance and protection of
England, 7 H. 4.14. yet we shall find the only reason given, wherefore it was
granted into Scotland, was, because of the Wars that were then betwixt the
Nations, 7 Ed. 4.27. After the ceasing of which Wars, it may be collected by
the book, a protection would have lien no more thither, then it would have lien
into Wales or Ireland.

In 13, 14. Eliz. Dyer. 304. one was arraigned for a Rape, at the return of the
venire facias to try him, he pleaded that he was a Scots man, and desired a
medictate linguae, which manner of Trial is granted to Aliens by the Statutes
of 27, and 28 Ed. 3. but by the judgment of the Judges of both Benches it was
denied him, for this reason amongst others, because, says the Book, a Scots
man was never here reputed for an Alien, but rather a Subject.

Object. Whereas it has been said, This was because the Statutes of 27, and 28
Ed. 3. were made when Scots men were generally reputed Subjects to this Kingdom.

Ans. I answer, That the Book gives no such reason. Secondly, To affirm this,
is to suppose the Judges, by such a Foreign conceit, to go against the
express provision of two Acts of Parliament, and the constant practice in
pursuance thereof.

In the same year of 13 Eliz. in the case of the Duke of Norfolk, the evidence
of the Bishop of Ross, a Scots man, was offered against the Duke by the Council
for the Commonwealth, which the Duke opposed from the judgment of Bracton, That
a Foreigners testimony was not in that case to be received; but Cataline chief
Justice, though he says nothing to Bractons opinion touching exterorum
testimonium, yet he gives the rule of the Court, that the testimony was to be
received, Cambdens, Eliz. 214.

After this time also the Queen of Scots was tried in this Kingdom, though not
upon the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. yet upon the Statute of 27. Eliz. cap. 2. then
in force; And though in the proceedings of that business Commissioners of both
Nations met, and that the Scots Commissioners did protest, that though they did
join with our Commissioners, yet they did thereby make no acknowledgment, that
they were other, then a Foreign Nation to this: yet the English men protested
against that Protestation, as we find in the history of that Queen.

3. But to pass from this National to a more Personal Consideration, and from
thence (though he were an Antenatus) to prove the Earl liable to punishment for
Treason against this State, and that by a local allegiance, both in Scotland
and England; wherein it must be granted as a principle, and cannot be denied,
but that if an Alien come into this Nation, and there abide, and commit that
act which would always be Treason in an English Subject, it is by the Law
Treason in him during that abode, because he owes localem ligeantiam, and the
indictment against him shall say Contra ligeantiae suae debitum, 7. li. Calvin's
Case. Thus in 36 Eliz. 2. the Portugals here in England join in an Act of
Treason with Doctor Loper, and it was adjudged Treason in all. Thus this Earl,
though he had been born before the Union, yet he lived in Scotland after the
Union, and at the very time of this Invasion, whereby he became a Subject, at
least locali ligeanti^.

So in England also, not only by his former residence here, which he will say
perhaps was avoided by his removal hence, but by his late coming in, he became
Ligens here locali Ligeantia, because he came from a Kingdom then, by his own
confession, in amity with this. This was the case of Sherley a Frenchman, 4
Mar. who came from France, then in amity with England, and being taken, levying
War in an hostile manner, was indicted and executed as a Traitor, Dyer. 144.
and as the book puts it, 7. li. Calvin's Case, if he had had issue here that
issue should have inherited.

4. In the next place, I shall prove the Earl of Cambridge (though he had been
an antenatus) to be a Subject of England Ligeantia acquisita, and that by the
naturalization of his Father or by his own denization, but first as to the
naturalization of his Father.

1. The Act of Parliament has been read and proved whereby the Father of this
Earl by the name of James Marquess of Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, in 21 Jac.
was naturalized to be to all intents and purposes a Subect of this Nation, as
if he had been here born, with a further clause, that his heirs might inherit
and purchase any Lands, Tenements, etc. By which Act it clearly appear that
this Earl is naturalized also. For, 1. Though in the case of a denization,
there may need the word Heir, to extend it to them, because it goes as it is
limited, it may be for life, in tail, or upon condition, 9 Ed. 4.7. yet its
repugnant to suppose, that, in point of a naturalization, because he that is
born in England, as by relation this makes him, without any other expressions,
conveys the right to his heirs: Hence Naturalization is never temporanea though
data 1. Jnst. 129.2. Here are not wanting words neither that reach to the
heirs, if necessary; for the Act is, That his Heirs may inherit and purchase,
etc. And in pursuance hereof its notorious, that this Earl has done both; But
we shall find, that oftentimes no more goes to express a Naturalization then
this: No other expression is used to import the privilege of being English to
them that are born of English Parents beyond Sea, but only that they may have
and freely bear the inheritance within the same allegiance as other inheritors,
25 Ed. 3. de natis ultra Mare. And in 3 H. 6.55. Hall and his wise brought a
Writ of Dover, the Tenant pleaded that the Feme was an alien, the Demandants
reply, that the Feme in the time of H. 4. was enabled by Act of Parliament to
purchase Lands and Tenements, etc. with which Reply the Defendants Counsel
rested satisfied, as if the Replication expressed it sufficiently that she was
naturalized, and thereupon demanded view.

Object. But it has been objected, That this Act can have no other effect,
then if the now Earls Father had been born in England; and though he were a
Native Englishman, yet having issue, this Earl, by a Native Scots-woman in
Scotland, the issue thereby remains an Alien though his Father were Naturalized
or born in England.

1 Ans. I shall easily grant, both that this Earl was so born in Scotland, and
that the Naturalization amounts to no more then if the old Earl had been born
in England, but do deny the inference drawn from thence, That therefore the now
Earl must be an Alien. For though in former times some Controversy has been
touching this question, viz. Whether the issue of an English man, going out of
the Kingdom, born of an alien woman, shall be a Subject of England, or no? Yet
I take the Law to be clear at this day, that such issue is a Subject of England.

By the common Law, if Father and Mother, both English, have issue beyond sea,
that issue is English, 1 R. 3.4. the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. de natis ultra mare,
being declarative of the common Law, 42 Ed. 3. cap. 10. and if the reason and
practice of the Law be examined we shall find it to be the same, where the
father only is English, for these Reasons.

First, Because at this day any person may go from this Kingdom to another
without license, though he be neither Nobleman, Merchant, or Soldier, except
some restraint by a ne exeat regnum, Proclamation, or other Act of State be
against him, so is it resolved, 12, 13 Eliz. Dyer. 296. And though all, except
persons so qualified, were restrained by 5 R. 2. cap. 2. yet that Statute is
repealed by the Statute of 4 Jac. c. 1. made principally in reference to
Scotland; Therefore however the Law may be as to such as go when prohibited, or
who stay beyond Sea when commanded to return; yet as to all others at this day,
and always as to Noblemen, as the father of this Earl was, upon whom no
restraint was ever put by Common or Statute Law, certainly the Law is
otherwise, especially when the removal is to a Country in amity, as Scotland
was.

Secondly, Partus sequitur semen by the Common Law, therefore in 4 Ed. 4.25.
Statham villenage 9. if a free man marry a wife, and have issue, that issue is
free; but otherwise, if the man had been villain and the woman free.

Thirdly, The woman alien by the marriage is indenized, and the issue then must
needs partake of the privilege, and it appears by 26 Ed. 1. rot. Parl. 1. that
when Edmond, the brother of Ed. 1. who married the Queen of Navar, dyed, all
the Judges resolved, she should be ened; and what though she should not, as in
other cases it has been doubted; Yet that hinders not, but during coverture
she was endenized, and that's enough to endenize the issue. If a wife marry a
free man, it is and has been a doubt, whether this be a perpetual
infranchisement to the woman after the death of her Baron, but it never was
doubted, but that both her self, during coverture, and her issue ever after
were infranchised, Lit. sect. 187. 1 Instit. 136.

And for express authority in the point in hand, besides the ancient authority
of, Abridg. Ass. 39. tit. Bastard. 7. and Bro. Denizen 21. it was the Judgment
of all the Judges of England, 2 Ca. in the Duchy Chamber, betwixt the King and
Eaton, usually called Stephensons Case, the Record whereof is ready to be
produced, where Judge Yelverton and Harvey, then Judges Assistants to that
Court, declared it to be their judgments, as also of all the other Judges, That
the two Sons of Stephenson, born beyond Sea upon the body of an Alien, were
Denizens.

Object. I observed but one book cited for maintenance of the contrary opinion,
and that was 26 H. 6. where indeed it is 22 H. 6.38.

Ans. Which Authority is against, not for that opinion for which it is cited;
for in an Action there brought, the Defendant pleads, that the Plaintiffs
ancestor, in the time of H. 4. went beyond Sea without License, and there bad
issue the Plaintiff: upon this plea, Arderne the Plaintiffs Council demurs; but
says the book, Prisot the Defendants Council durst not demur.

Secondly, If the book were as it is supposed, yet it makes nothing against the
Law at this day, because by the Book it appears, that the Plaintiffs ancestor
went beyond Sea, in the time of H. 4. without license, which being after R. 2.
there was a restraint upon him, except by license, or qualified as that Statute
of R. 2. requires, which Restraint is now abrogated as is before said; and the
Inhabitants of England, as is suitable to all Islanders, may travel at
pleasure, except especially forbidden; and so whatever the Law was then, its
otherwise now, mutataratione legis mutatur lex.

Object. What if the present Earl did himself endeavor, or, as he says, was
advised, notwithstanding the Naturalization of of his Father, to procure
himself to be Naturalized, or indenized.

Ans. Yet that could be but in majorem caut^lam; as some savings have been
inserted into Acts of Parliament themselves, not for necessity, but for
satisfaction of the Lay Gent. as our books express it, 1. li. C^^. 24. Plow.
Com. 379. upon the Statute of 5 Ed. 6. and even in that case of Stephenson,
though the Judges assistants delivered what was their own opinions and of the
rest of the Judges, yet if making the party a Denizen would end the
controversy, they did advise it.

Fifthly, Besides this purchase of his Fathers, the Earl has himself
contributed to his own Denization, not so much by inheriting his Fathers
dignity, and purchasing and enjoying himself Lands in England, that being
rather an evidence of what he formerly was, then making him what he was not
before; but by the Writ of summons sent to this Earl himself, 15 Car. The
Record whereof has been read, commanding him ex fide and ligeantia su^, to
appear in Parliament as a Peer of this Realm, who accordingly did appear, and
acted in this Parliament, being chosen of several Committees in the Lords
House, to consider of many things of great concernment, some whereof were for
the strength of the Nation, as has been fully proved by the Records of the
Lords House; all which actions are so inconsistent with his being an alien, and
would be such a solecism in State to admit an alien to be invested amongst
others with a judicial power, that rather then it should be admitted, all this
laid together will (I conceive) amount to, at least, a Denization.

I will not say that the granting of every office, or the being employed in any
transaction, which concerns the Law or Government of the Kingdom, will make an
Alien a Denizen; the books of 9 Ed. 4.1. and 14 H. 4.19. forbid me to say so,
but it is another thing to have a judicial power in Parliament, and to sit by
virtue of such summons in the Parliament of England: The Lord De-la Ware was
disabled to sit in the House of Peers during his life; but he dying, and a Writ
of Summons coming to his Son, he was by virtue thereof enabled, not only to
sit, but to enjoy that place which his Ancestors formerly had done, 11 li. Coo.
1. and in 39. Ed. 3.29. Umfravil Earl of Angos ought to be named Earl in the
Writ against him, because by that name he was summoned to the Parliament, and
for not naming him so, the Writ abated; A Denization is a kind of a National
Manumission: Now as there is in Law an express infranchisement of a Villain,
and an infranchisement in Law, Lit. sect. 205. So it may be said of
Denizations. And amongst other Manumissions by Act in Law, I find in Britton,
fol. 79. and 82. if a Villain were made a Knight, this did make him free
rations dignitatis, and did not make the conferring of that dignity to be a
void act, parallel whereunto is the case in hand.

Sixthly, The last thing I shall insist upon, touching this second part of the
plea, is to make it appear, that though the Earl had been born before the
Union, and an Alien, that yet there are other circumstances in this case yet
remaining, which will clearly make this Act of his to amount to no less then
Treason, viz. His coming from a Kingdom in amity with this, and his marching in
hither with English Traitors; That he marched in and held correspondency with
Sir Marmaduke Langdale and his son, and with Sir Thomas Glenham, and diverse
others, has been fully proved; And that that Kingdom was then in amity with
this, besides the National Treaties and Engagements unrepealed, it appears as
well by the Earls own confessions at the Bar, as by the words of the Scottish
Declaration made upon this expedition, read at the Earls own request, which,
what ever it be, does yet conclude this Earl and all his party from alleging
the contrary for their advantage, it having been often reiterated by him; and
also therein said, That this expedition was neither against the Parliament nor
People of England; besides, that it is no slight matter to make Nations in
amity to become open Enemies in a legal construction, which we are now upon, as
appears by the book of 19 Ed. 4.6.

Now that these Circumstances will make this Act reach to Treason, appears by
these Authorities of Law. In the days of Queen Mary, France and England were in
amity, Sherley, a French Native, during that amity, joins himself with some
English Traitors, Sherley is apprehended and indicted as a Traitor contra
ligeantiae suae debitum, 4 Mar. Dyer. 144. which is confirmed for good Law
likewise, 7 li. in Calvin's Case by all the Judges, with which agrees Brook.
Treason. 32. and Crompton Jurisdiction of Courts 72. and Mr Justice Dallisons
Reports 3, 4. Mar. All which Authorities agree in this difference, That if
Alien Enemies join with English Rebels, and be apprehended, the Aliens shall be
tried by Martial Law, or ransomed; but if Alien amies so join, its Treason in
all; and it is observable that the case is put cautelously, in H. 4. and so
abridg'd by Bro^. Treason. 1. That where Alien Enemies join with English, the
Aliens shall be tried by Martial Law, and the English as Traitors.

Object. The Objection has been made, and so far it seems the Law is agreed,
That if Aliens fight under the banner of English, that this may be Treason in
all, but not if the English fight under the command of Aliens, which is
alleged to be the case in hand.

Ans. First, I cannot safely admit that which the objection takes for granted,
that the English were the Auxiliaries, and the Scots the principals in this
act, when I find it in the proof offered by the Earl himself, that he came in
by the invitation of their friends in England, and when I remember what was
designed and produced in the South of England before and at the same time with
this expedition. 2. But admit it to be otherwise, yet if this difference were
material, then it should follow likewise, That if Alien enemies did fight under
an English Command, it should be Treason in all, but it is not so.

3. The Law makes no such difference, nay the very objection seems to be made
and answered, 4. Mar. Dyer. 144. for the book says, that though Sherley were
an Alien, yet hoc non refort tempore pacis inter Anglos et Galls, the weight
is laid upon tempus pacic only.

4. The true reason of the Law in one case is the same in both, which I
conceive to be from the detestation of conspiring with an inward secret enemy,
and from the trust the Law reposeth in such as are of a Country in amity. There
is no Treason, but where there is a Trust, hence anciently Treason, in its
genuine and original acceptance, was only and properly amongst allies and
friends, who mutually did repose confidence in each other, as may be seen in
the Mirror, f. 30. and 201. And that a greater trust was placed in Aliens
amies, then in others, appears in that our Law allows not only Traffic and
Commerce with them, but also allows them to be to some purposes Denizens,
namely as to the bringing personal actions, which if they bring, it shall not
be allowed to plead that the Plaintiffs are Aliens, 19 Ed. 4, 6. and 6 H. 8.
Die. 2.

Object. But the Earl has objected, that upon the Scottish Forces coming in
under his Command, they of that Nation were by the House of Commons voted
enemies, and those of this Kingdom, who adhered to them, Traitors.

Ans. 1. The words of that Vote seem to be exclusive of the Prisoner,
mentioning only those under his Command. 2. Though every enemy in the legal
signification of the word, be not a Traitor, yet every Traitor is an enemy, and
therefore if now he be proved a Traitor, he may be well enough an Enemy within
that Vote; The present Charge against him is a Charge of High Treason, yet the
conclusion does not improperly pray Judgment against him both as a Traitor and
public Enemy. 3. Take the words in the strictest sense, and the Vore only
names those of the Scottish Nation Enemies, but those of this Kingdom Traitors;
Now the labor has been, and I suppose it clear that the Earl himself is of
this Nation, and so a Traitor by that Vote from which he would derive an
Argument for himself. 4. If yet any other construction should be made, Leges
posteriores priores abrogant, he is, by the Act whereby this Court now sits,
ordered to be tried for Treason in the same kind as the rest, who are now
under question; and if his fact be Treason, it will easily follow by an
argument of a denominatis, that he is a Traitor.

3. The third part of the Earl of Cambridg his Plea is, That he is a prisoner
of War, and rendered upon Articles, and that those capitulations were made
before his Rendition with Major General Lamberts Commissioners.

That there were Articles, and he a prisoner of War, I shall agree to be
proved, as also that one of those Articles was, That he should have quarter,
and have his life assured, and it must be agreed on the other hand, That the
Lord Gray, who had equal authority, protested from the first against that
Treaty, and after took him prisoner before any assent thereunto: But whether,
by the proof, the Earl were not a prisoner before the signing the Articles, and
whether before the Articles were to have any effect, the same were not to be
ratified by the Commanders in chief, is submitted to judgment upon the
evidence. That therefore I may do the prisoner right in this point, which he
seems to make his strongest asylum, I shall admit that there were such
Articles, and wave the relying upon the other Circumstances, which may not seem
so clear in proof.

Nevertheless I shall briefly show my Reasons, wherefore I apprehend no
security from the stroke of civil Justice, belongs to the prisoner by this
Refuge; for as to the military is not the contention.

First, If these Articles be of avayl, against the Civil Power of the State,
they must in effect amount to a pardon or discharge of Treason, (for this point
does take the last point by admittance, viz. that the fact is Treason.) Now
though the military Power may exempt a prisoner of War from the execution of
the Sword, and of their own Power, yet it is not in their power, nor do they
assume, or ever challenged such a power, as to exempt Delinquents and Traitors
from the execution of the Magistrate, for the bringing of whom to condign
punishment the Soldier was at first armed, and the war principally begun; and
if it should be in the power of one Soldier, it would pari ratione be in the
power of all, as well to spare all as one; and if to grant a pardon of life,
then likewise for their livelyhoods; and so the end of the War, and the
satisfaction promised, would be in the power of the servants of the State to
frustrate; not that the Articles have no effect, for he was by them freed from
the immediate execution of the Sword.

Secondly, The pardoning of Treason is a power so inseparable to the supreme
Power, that by the Authorities of Law it is not communicable to any other, in 5
Ed. 4.123. its made a great doubt, and so said to be 1 Bro: Treason. 22. Mercy
and Justice being not transferable, 7. li. Co. in the case of Penal Statutes.
9 Ed. 4.2. and 20 H. 7.6. It Is true indeed, there was a time when some had
gotten this power into their hands, but by the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 24.
this power was resumed into the supreme Power, and there it has since lodged;
and however we dispute not what the Parliament may do by express words, as they
have done in many Acts and Tenders of Indemnity, yet without such expressions,
not by any implicit power, nor ex officio, can any justly assume it.

Thirdly, By the Rules of Law no Officer or Minister of State can give away or
dispense with the Interest of the Common wealth; if a Customer, who is an Ofcer
of State, take a Bond in his own name for the Importation of Bulloigne, he
cannot discharge this Bond. 4 Ed. 4.4. and 12. The King was the supreme Officer
of the Commonwealth, yet if an Indictment of Nuisance had been preferred
against one in his name, it had not been in his power to have discharged this
offense, 3 Ed. 3. Fitz. Ass. 445. nor could he for the same Reason by any non
obstante dispense with the penalty of any Statute which did concern the
Interest of the Common wealth, 12 Jac: Sir Arthur Ingrams Case, and H. 36. Eli:
betwixt Hamond and Griffith, in an Information upon a penal Statute, the
Informer dyed, yet the Kings Attorney might proceed. The difference I apprehend
to be, as to the point in hand, betwixt one tryable by Martial Law merely, as
an Alien enemy is, for such a one being tryable by the Sword, if taken, may be
discharged by that power, though in that Case I totally exclude not the
legislative Power; but for a Traitor originally and legally, only tryable by
the municipal Laws of a State, to be absolutely discharged by a subordinate
power, without the Concurrence or Confirmation of the Magistrate, will ever be
strange to me, till I find that Rule overthrown of nil dat quod babe^, which
can never be in a just and moral sense.

Fourthly, However the words sound, the intention and true meaning of the
parties was not to free those that were concerned from Justice, if the State
required it; and intentions are the best Rules for construction in these cases:
That it was intended only in this Treaty to free the prisoner from the present
execution of the Sword by Martial Law, and no otherwise, has been sworn by two
of those Gentlemen that were Commissioners under Major General Lambert; who
have sworn their own intentions: Words, says Bracton, are but vestiment a
rerum, as the body and outward form; the true meaning and intention of parties
is the life and soul of every contract: as for sensus leteralis it has been (I
have observed) via regia, but it has not proved unto that side via tuta:
However words found, the exposition must be secundum subjectam materiam. In 41
E. 3.6. if one having diverse faculties has an annuity granted to him pro
concilio impenso, the words are general, but it shall be construed for counsel
in that art which was intended: And as Brudnel says, in 14 H. 8.2. Contracts
shall be expounded according to the intents of those that did contract. Cicero
says, speaking de justitia, as a Judge, not as an Advocate, fol. 24. to cavil
with words against the mind of the parties est calumnia quaedam and malitiosa
^ur^^ interpretatio; in which place he puts a Case upon a Treaty, as ours is,
of one who had made a truce for one hundred and thirty days with his enemy, and
taking advantage of the Letter, fell upon his enemy in the night, alleging the
truce was only for days, which the Orator derides as mere injustice, and no
otherwise may the litteral construction, contended for, be in the present Case,
except the letter must be observed, or not observed, as it proves advantageous
or disadvantageous to the prisoner; besides its usual in Law, That by averments
the intentions of parties take place where the letter would not so decide the
question, as 5 li. Coo. 68. and 21 R. 2: Fitz. devis. 27. Nor do I see, how in
the pening those Articles, any other expressions could well have been; if
provision had been made, that the prisoner should have been exempted from the
power of civil Justice, that had been void; and if it had been expressed, that
nothing was by those Articles intended to exempt him from civil Justice, that
had also employed a power in them, if they had seen cause to have given an
absolute discharge from the Magistrate, which had been equally by construction
derogatory to the civil Power.

Fifthly, If the Earl had ever been de facto pardoned, yet he may seem to have
lost the benefit thereof by his escape made after a special promise to the
Governor with whom he was prisoner; the Civil Law, as Fortescue observes, cap.
46. Libertinum ingratum in pristinam redigit servitutem, and our Law says, if
one has committed a capital Crime, and, being pardoned after, do but break the
peace, he forfeits the benefit of the pardon. 3 H. 7.7. As Bartue did the
benefit of his License to travel, by his resort to the Fugitives, 2 Eli. Die.
176. And I conceive no difference, whether the condition be expressed or
employed, which I infer not to make the escape Treason, being not so charged,
and the Statutes of 2 H. 6. and 14 Eliz. being expired concerning that, but
only for this purpose it is enforced, that he who rendered himself up a prisoner
of War, and had for that consideration quarter granted him, and yet after
breaks that which was on his part to be performed, has thereby deprived
himself of that privilege which otherwise he might have enjoyed.

Object. If now the Prisoner shall be questioned for his life, who by the
rendition of himself had quarter given him for it, how is the Consideration
made good which did induce him to surrender; besides, there if he had dyed (as
the Earl himself said) he had preserved his estate, and avoided the
consequences of Attainder?

Ans. It Is strange that it should be thought no privilege to have so much time
to dye, in case there were certainty of it, above a death by a military
execution, which usually is sudden and sine strepitu Judicii. 2. Is it no
privilege above an immediate death by the Sword, to have a fair judicial
proceeding by a Charge against him, putting in his own plea thereunto, the
matter of fact by witnesses and other evidence proved on both sides, and
Counsel assigned him of his own choice to argue his Cause in point of Law, and
himself to be heard as much as he could speak in his own Defense? 3. And the
danger seems by this manner of Trial not greater then before, for he that dies
a Traitor in (...), because himself is the cause why formalities of legal
proceedings against him cannot be observed, by the ancient Law forfeited his
estate, and remained attainted notwithstanding, Plowd. Com. 262. Fitz. Dower.
106. where, in a Writ of Dower, the Demandant was bart'd for that her husband
went into Scotland, and joining himself with the enemies, dyed in emnity.

Object. As to the examples of Josuah with the Gibeonites, and of the Prophet
Elisha forbidding the King of Israel to smite those whom he had taken captive
with his Sword and Bow.

Answer. I answer, As to the first, viz. that of Joshua with the Gibeonites;
God forbid but that as that, so all other Leagues and Treaties should be kept
so far as to bind that power that made them, and who can rationally expect
more? Now Josuah was the Successor of Moses, and a Magistrate as well as
Commander; Besides, the said the Princes of the Congregation swore unto them,
and had these Circumstances been incident to this Case, the dispute had been
ended.

1. As to the other instance, the men of Syria had a personal quarrel against
Elisha, and therefore none being interested but the Prophet, it might well
become his piety to be their Intercessor. 2. For any thing appears. the Prophet
only speaks against their being smitten with the Sword of War, which, if it had
been drawn in cold blood, might have been the blood of War in Peace but not
against the Sword of Civil Justice. 3. These enemies were taken in the midst of
Samaria intr^^^^ praeli^, and therefore bread and water might well be set
before them, that they might eat and go to their masters; but there has been
in this case much blood drawn, and mischief done; for the avenging and
satisfaction whereof, Justice cries to them that bear not the Sword in vain.

And now (my Lord) though I might have demanded Judgment for want of the
Prisoners making good his own plea, which he ought to have done before I had
said any thing to the contrary; the plea of being an Alien lying on his part to
prove that pleads it, 9 Ed. 4.12. and Die. 300. And the plea of a Pardon, being
a confession of the Fact, if not made out, proves fatal and final also to the
party, Stanf: cor. 150. Yet nevertheless, for that the Prisoner has not been
confined herein to the strict formalities of the Law, I have also, on the
behalf of the Commonwealth, taken the privilege of speaking thus much for
asserting the invalidity of his Plea. And therefore, upon the whole matter,
having now said what has prevailed with my judgment to offer in this case, I
humbly submit the same to the Judgment and Consideration of this Honorable
Court.

FINIS.
Reader, Correct with thy pen these following slips.
Page 11. line 10. for endeavor read endeavoring. P. 14. l. 22. for que r. qui.
P. 16. l. 19. for Garden r. Guardian. P. 22. l. 1. for sav^ r. san^; l. 28. for
we trust r. no trust. P. 27. l. 31. blot out the figure 2. l. 32. for Loper r.
Lopez. P. 28. l. 6. for Ligens r. Ligeu^. Whare Dover is r. Dower, P. 32. l.
17. for Lay Gent. 1. Lay Gents.


