Strange and Wonderful News.

Being a True, though Sad RELATION OF Six Seamen. (Belonging to the Margaret of
Boston,) WHO Sold Themselves to the Devil, And were Invisibly Carried away.

With an ACCOUNT of the said SHIP being Sunk under Water, where She continued
full Eleven Weeks: All which Time, to Admiration, the rest of the SHIP's Crew
Lived, and Fed upon Raw Meat, and Live Fish, that swam over their Heads.

The Names of the Three Persons, that were (through Mercy) Preserved so long
under water, were William Davies, (a Man very well known to the Merchants in
London,) Mr. William Kadner, and Mr. William Bywater. There was only One Boy
Drowned.

The Truth of which Strange and Miraculous RELATION, will be Attested at Mr.
Loyd 's Coffee House, near the General Post Office, in Lumbard-Street; where
the Original Letter, at large, will be shown to any Person, that desires to be
further satisfied in the Truth hereof; and by several Eminent Merchants upon
the Exchange.

LONDON, Printed for H. Marston, in Cornhil.

A Sad, but True Relation, of Six Seamen who Sold themselves to the Devil, etc.
THough this following Relation contains matter of very great Wonder and
Amazement; nevertheless it comes to our Hands, confirmed by that suffitient
Testimony, that we offer it to the Reader as a Narrative of unquestioned Truth
and Reputation.

By a Letter from Barbados, of the 23d. of July last, written by a Person of
Worth and Credit, in that Island, we have this Relation, viz. That the Margaret
from Boston, the 21th. of December 95 bound to Berbadoes, in their Passage one
of the Sailors at the Helm called to the Master of the Vessel, and told him,
That he could steer no longer. The Master asking the reason, he replied, That
he was not well; and for that cause quitted his Post; the Master taking the
Helm, the said Sailor further declared, That there stood a Spirit by the
Binnacle, that accused him of killing a Woman; a Fault which the Spirit had
falsely charged him with; for he never committed any such unmanly Crime in his
Life. The Spirit, he said, further told him, That all the Ships Company had
signed an Agreement with the Devil, which was used as an Argument for him to do
the same.

The next day the Fellow fell into strange Deliriums, and talked of wonderful
Accidents that would befall the Ship; which were looked upon as nothing but the
wild Notions of his crazed Senses, the Chimera's of Frenzy. Particularly he
said, That the Spirit had brought a Boat to fetch him away; with other
ridiculous idle Discourse of the same Nature.

Upon the 17th. of January in the Latitude of 19 about 9 at Night, a small
white Cloud arose, without any Rain, or extraordinary Wind, which presently
falling upon the ship pressed her down with that strange and indeed
supernatural Weight and force that the Hatches flew out, and the whole Ship was
under Water, by which unhappy Accident, the Boy was washed off and drowned.

But here to begin the more Miraculous Part of my Narrative, the Ship continued
under Water for Eleven Weeks; a thing that struck (as may be well imagined) an
extraordinary Consternation and Confusion through the Mariners, from several
strange Arguments of their Astonishment. First, That the Ship should be wholly
immerged under Water, and yet not sunk downright to the bottom. Secondly, That
though they were apparently thus entirely under Water, yet the Ship was not
wholly filled with Water, but that they had Air enough to breath in, by which
means they continued alive; feeding all this while, upon raw meat, and fresh
Fish which came swimming over the Vessel, and several of which they Caught and
Eat. Their Lodging was on Boards placed athwart the Rail near the Taffrel
covered with a Sail. The men were always wet which, in so long a time, made
that Impression upon them that their Flesh on their Bodies was galled and raw.

But what was the most dismal part of all, Six of the Ship's Crew upon the
sinking of the Vessel under water, were frighted with Infernal Spirits; and
about 12 the first Night were carried away invisibly, leaving no more then 4
Persons alive behind them; which indeed gave some little Credit to what the
fore mentioned Sailor at the Helm had declared in his Deliriums.

After this 11 Weeks Immurement these wondrous watery Walls, for so I may justly
call it, the Ship recovered it self above Water again; and the first Land they
could discover was the Island Dissiado, which, with so few Hands left, they
could not fetch up, by reason of a strong Northern Current that bore against
'em. The next was Grand-Terra, where they met with the same Disapointment: But
on the 5th. of April they run themselves on Shore upon Guardelupo; where the
French Treated them very kindly, not as Prisoners, but as Men in Distress.

The names of the Three Seamen left Alive are William Davis Master (a Man very
well known in London amongst the Berbadoes Merchants) William Cadner, and
William Bywater.

Not only the Original Letter, and the whole Relation, at large; is to be seen
at Mr. Lloyd 's Coffee-house in Lumbard-street, but likewise several Persons
are to be heard of, and spoken withal upon the Exchange, in Attestation of the
whole Truth herein declared.

The Reverend Mr. Baxter, in his Treatise of Spirits, says, That though
Hurricanes and Tempests have Natural Causes, yet there is great Reason to think
they are managed by Spirits: In Confirmation whereof, he relates many notable
Instances of his own, particular Deliverances from the Fury of most Boisterous
Whirlewinds; namely, when the Reapers in Evesham Vale, were Hurt, Writhen, and
One Killed, some Friendly Power (for so he expresses it) restrained the course
of Gravally Sand, raised by a Whirlwind, as it met him in a narrow Lane.

Licensed according to Order.


