A Strange and Wonderful RELATION FROM SHADWEL OR, The DEVIL Visible.

BEING A most true and faithful account how the Devil in human Shape, on the
3d. of this Instant July, made his Appearance to a Gentlewoman there, (a person
that had formerly lived well, but now reduced to poverty) with a Bag of Money
in one hand, and a Knife in the other, tempting her to Murder one of her
Children.

As also how she refused, and resisted his Temptation, Imploring the Prayers of
her Neighbors, of whom, two plainly saw this evil Spirit, going forth of the
House.

LONDON, Printed for W. Smith, in the Year, 1674.

A Strange and Wonderful Relation from Shadwell, OR, The Devil visible.
THough the prodigious swarm of Pamphlets, which of late the over-teeming Press
has Spawned into the World, may have rendered in a great measure, such
Relations both suspected and Contemptible; yet the certainty of the matter that
Impregnates this sheet, the nearness of the place where it happened, and the
notoriousness of the thing, seems not only to deserve, but challenge and
require, that a full and faithful Account thereof should be presented to the
public; Since the same is done not so much to gratify peoples vain Curiosity,
or rickle those Itching Ears which (like the Idle Athenians of old) are
perpetually Listening after strange Novelties. As to Alarm and awaken all, by
so fresh and present an Example to stand upon their Watch, and Guard themselves
(as they value the safety and Salvation of their precious Immortal Souls) with
the whole Armor of God, but especially the shield of Faith, against the
Assaults of the Tempter.

For though it be most true, as the Sacred Oracles of Divine Writ testify, that
this restless Enemy of mankinds peace and happiness, has ever since he
beguiled our first Parents in Paradize, gone too and fro as a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Yet we find by two woeful Experience, that in this
latter and worst Age of the World, his malicious and Hellish Industry is
increased more than ever; And (as all things move with a Swifter and more
violent motion the nearer they approach to their Center) so this dreadful
Tyrant Prince of the Air, apprehending his Chain to shrink, and that he must
shortly be tumbled into, and confined for Eternity in that bottomless Pit,
prepared for him and his seduced Servants; Endeavors with greater diligence
and more openly to spread his Nets, and Inveagle as many as he can into the
same Lake of Perdition with himself.

For certainly no good Considerate Christian, can but with grief of Soul have
observed, what a plentiful (but most deplorable) Harvest he has lately made
amongst us, by those numbers that in or about this very City, have been drawn
by his subtle suggestions, and the mediation of dispare within few weeks, last
past, to lay violent hands upon themselves, and cut off the thread of their own
Lives, by hanging themselves, drowning themselves, breaking their own Necks,
cutting their own Throats, and the like sad means wherewith our Laws are daily
Alarmed, Contrary both to the Laws of God, and dictates of Nature, in whose
Charter self-preservation has been always accounted the first Article.

But this Proemium (though if soberly considered, not altogether Impertinent)
may perhaps seem two great a Gate for so small a Fabrique, and therefore we
hasten to the intended matter, being truly and briefly thus.

In the Parish of St. Paul Shadwell (fately made so by Act of Parliament, being
formerly a Hamlet or part of Stepney) lives a Woman, who descended of good
Parents, who besides the Precious Legacy of an honest Fame left her, when they
paid that debt which we all owe to Nature, a handsome Competency of the Goods
of Fortune, she having to the value of three hundred Pounds to her Portion, And
being le^t by their decease in so Creditable a Condition, wholly at her own
dispose, she Spun not on the Thread of her Life very many Years, before she
twisted it in Matrimony, Being Matched some Years since to an honest Seaman of
good repute, named (...) whose promising Industry assisted by her before
mentioned Fortune, Seemed to bespeak their marriage happy, and probably assure
to the remainder of their Lives a comfortable subsistence; But as truth it self
has told us, That the Race is not always to the Swift, So Experience daily
convinces that there is a vast difference between human likelyhoods and the
Misterious decrees of Fate. For notwithstanding these advantages by some
unhappy accidents rather than defaults properly chargeable on either of them,
their estate began sensibly to wast, and in time to be totally consumed, that
they were now reduced to the very Brink of necessity, having not sufficient
left to maintain or provide Bread for her self, and several small Children
which she had brought into the World, the thoughts of whose pining and half
starving Condition, and Consideration of her Husbands absence (who is at
present gone a long voyage to Sea) so that she could not for a long time expect
any Relief from him, put this poor distressed Woman of late into such a
melancholy grief, that seemed to border on despair, so that she was seldom
alone, but she was bewailing her misfortunes with passionate Complaints, whilst
her languishing Cheeks over-flow'd with a briny ocean of Tears.

Satan (that has ever Tutored wicked Politicians to Fish in troubled waters)
was not wanting here to practice that Maxim himself. That subtle degraded
Seraphin knows two well, that want is one of the readiest and most open Inlets
for his Temptations, and therefore designs, whilst her mind is tossed in this
dismal Tempest, to Shipwreck her Soul.

For on the third of July last, she being extraordinarily straightened, so that
she knew not what to do, and being retired (as is usual with melancholy
distressed and afflicted persons) up into a Chamber, that with more freedom she
might bemoan her Condition, In broad day light this ever busy Tempter presents
himself to her, who, having at her coming into the Room shut the door, which
still to her apprehension had Continued last, was not a little surprised to see
a man (as by his form she at first Judged him to be) there intruding on her
privacy, and standing Just by her, But was much more astonished, when she beheld
in his right hand a naked knife, and in the other a large Purse filled as it
were with money, and was Just ready to cry out when this Apparition began to
speak to her.

Who spoke in smooth language, and a low but shril Insinuating voice
represents, That he well knew her wants and distress, and that he came there on
purpose in pity to relieve them, But that if she would not hearken to his
advice, she should be ten times more miserable than she was at present; For her
Husband was dead, and no succor to be expected from him. [mark here the truth
of the Gospel, saying, the Devil was a Liar from the beginning.] That she had a
most Insupportable Charge of Children, and that she should never be happy till
she had lessened their number, that her youngest Child which then (poor Babe)
happened to be Innocently fleeping on a Bed in the same Room, besides the
present miseries it suffered, was born to much greater misfortunes which it
must undergo, and therefore she should now come and dispatch it from those
afflictions and ease her own Charge, by Killing of it, which he would secure
her should never be known or discovered, and that thereupon he would give her
all that money in the Purse (holding it forth) and more from time to time, so
that she should never want, and upon that proffered her the Knife to Execute
what he persuaded her to.

The poor Woman in a fright, and Just Indignation at this horrid bloody
proposal, and some other Symtoms, concluding it could be no other but the
Devil, which could advise her to such a barbarous Impiety, began with a devout
fervency to detest an Action so abominable, and calling on the name of the
Lord, run down stairs and into the Street, where meeting some of her Neighbors
at the door, she with an amazing vehemence, entreated their Prayers to God for
her Protection.

Immediately after her coming down, two of these Neighbors plainly saw the
l^keness of a tall man in black Habit come down stairs, and so into the street
by them, but he did not seem to walk as men do, but rather glide along like a
shadow, and at a small distance disappeared, but though they spoke and pointed
at it, yet, neither the woman nor any of the rest could then see it.

Several Divines and other sober persons have been since with her, who
confirms the truth of this Relation, and for this latter art these two other
persons are both ready to attest it, for the Satisfaction of any judicious
enquirer, the Woman her self remaining still in trouble of Spirit, and desiring
the Prayers of all good Christians to Allmighty God for his Grace, that as by
the same in this grievous and terrible trial, so at all times hereafter, she
may be enabled to withstand the wiles of the Tempter.

FINIS.

