A GREAT VICTORY obtained by the ENGLISH Against the DUTCH, And the pursuing of
the Dutch Fleets, by General Blake and Sir George Ayscue, with one hundred and
eight Men of War, toward the Downs, and their Resolution to engage them
between Dover and Calice.

The manner how Sir George Ascue (with great policy) obtained the wind: The
number sunk and taken; And two gallant ships surprised by Captain Stoaks, laden
with Gold, and Elephants Teeth.

Also, the number of ships coming up the River of Thames for London; richly
laden from the East Indies, the Straights, Virginia, and the Barbados.

Die Septembr. 27. 1652. Extracted out of the Original Papers, sent from Capt.
Stoakes, to the Honorable Council of State, on Sunday last, Sep. 26.

Imprinted at London for Geo: Horton, 1652.

A great Victory obtained by the English against the Dutch; the particulars
thereof; and the number of ships taken, with 700 pieces of Ordnance, all their
Arms, Ammunition, Bag and Baggage, and great store of Gold and Oar.
SIR,
UPon the advance of Genesis Blake and Sir George Ayscue with a fleet consisting
of 108 gallant sail, toward the Downs, they cleared the whole Western Channel
before them by sailing, as by order within shot of each other, by which means
we cleared all from the Coast of France to the Coast of England, almost as if a
bridge had been made over the Channel; and thought to have fought the Dutch
fleet at the same time; but they gave us the go-by, much like that of the Scots
King, when he made an inroad into England; and are now sailed toward the
Downs: whereopon information being given thereof by the Assurance Scout, who
had forced her passage even through the thick est of Action from five Dutchmen
of War, the General hoysed sail after them; but the wind blowing stiff upon
the North point, could not reach so much as the Enemies Rear-guard; but on the
25 instant, we had intelligence of their stancing over to the Coast of France;
whereupon the General and Sir Geo: Ayscue bare up toward the Downs with a most
potent and invincible Armado, consisting of 1^0 stout Men of War, where of
twelve were Merchants ships, that is, the five from the East Indies, two from
the Straights, two from Lisbone in Spain, two from Virginia, and one from
Barbados, all which are sent up the River for London.

But not long had his Excellency anchored upon those Neptune streams, but he
received Advertisements from the Diamond, and other Frigates that had been
scouting forth, that a great Fleet of Hollanders, consisting of at least two
hundred sail was riding between Dover and Calice; whereupon Major Bourn was
commanded forth with the great Andrew, the nimble Saphir, the famous Garland,
and 27 other stout Men of War, as a Forlorn to the Navy, to engage the Enemy,
if possible.

After him sailed Sir George Ayscue with 35 sail, as a Reserve; And within shot
of the said Squadron the General bare up with the great ship, called the
Commonwealth, and the rest of the fleet, flanking Sir George; the Dutch
perceiving their resolute motion, endeavored to get Calice-point, but Sir
George, to prevent them, bare up to the Lee-ward, by which means he got the
wind of the Dutch fleet, and has now engaged them; The Zealand ships lie at
the head of their fleet, and seem to be very resolute for action; Vice Admiral
Evarson has atrempted to fire some of our ships, but was prevented, for Major
Bourn commanding the Guard that night, received Advertisements from one of his
Scouts, of the near approach of some of the enemies ships, prepared to receive
them, which he so effectually performed, That two of his fireships were soon
way laid, and the rest dissipated: Insomuch that Dewitte and Ruttyer endeavors
to deoline engagement; but it is a thing impossible; for we now have them pretty
fast upon the hug, and question not (by divine assistance) but to give them a
sudden turn; by reason they are much divided, having diversity of opinions, and
manned with English, Flemins, Soots, Walloons, Switzers, and Germans: This great
blow is suddenly expected, yet something further I should have insisted on; but
I am forced to draw to a period, by reason the Packet boat is fallin off, and
our ships ready to engage.

Aboard the Ruby, September. 25. 2652.

As touching our further victorious success against the Hollander, it is
confirmed by Letters from Captain Stoaks (Commander of the Dragon) to the
Council of State, and having discovered two sail upon the coast of France, made
up to them, and found them to have Swedish colors, but coming aboard them, he
discovered them to be Guinny ships laden with Gold, Oar, and Elephants Teeth,
and several Letters directed to Amsterdam, and other places in Holland, which
with other circumstances gave cause to believe, that the lading of the said
Vessels belonged to the Dutch, whereupon the Captain brought the said ships
into Plymouth, where they now remain: The Officers of these prize ships say,
that the Gold, Oar, and Elephants Teeth, and other lading therein, are worth
about fourscore thousand pounds: The said Captain likewise took a Pickroon of
24 Guns, and 24 men, which he likewise brought into Harbor.

By an Express from Dover, thus: The Dutch fleet under Dewitte came in sight of
this Town at the back of Goodwin on the 10. instant; and on the 11, 12, and 13,
plied to the Westward; the 14 they lay between Calais and Bulloin. The 15 they
came on this side with 6 Frigates, and gave chase to a Sandwich Pink, but she
got safe into the Downs. The 16 Dewitte with about 30 sail came to this side
again, having gotten sight of 8 sail coming to the Westward, bore up to them,
and between Foulstone and this town, put the Swan Frigate on shore, and 3
Morlaix men laden with linen cloth, and 2 or 3 small men of this Town most of
them ashore. The Mary fly-boat, and Brier-Frigat got past them to this Town,
but exchanged several shot with them: Thus it pleased God to preserve them all.
Dewitte himself came very near the shore, and let several broad sides fly at
our ships that were stranded, and Sandgate Castle returned him several Guns.
Toward night he stood over to the French coast to the rest of the fleet; and
that Tide all our ships got off, but not without some damage, only the Swan
frigate got a bulge, which made her unserviceable at present. The 17, he lay at
half sea over betwixt Boleign and this Town. The 18, he came to the back of the
Goodwin with 60 sail, being resolved to play some feats against the English, or
else never to return into his own country.

De-witte is joined with Ruttyer, having seventy of the greatest ships that
ever yet was set forth: Stout Evarson of Zealand is Vice Admiral, whose
Mariners are famous, and were once accounted the most stoutest enemy that ever
sailed upon the Seas. But truly Mr. Launsman, though you usurp a privilege
upon small game, the butter-box of your trifling honor may perchance melt away
in a hot day with the English: For, know, that injuries in this kind evermore
prove like stones thrown up into the Air, they may towse lustily for a while,
like the aspiring sound of a Trumpet, but at last they must of necessity fall
down upon your ambition, to dissolve the injustice of your imperious spirits.
They are grown so high and imperious, that they begin to truss up poor
Englishmen in several places, as a Faulcon does wild Ducks; especially about
the coast of Norfolk, where on Sunday the 12 instant, they adventured into the
very Harbor at Wells, and took away some Vessels. This sudden exploit caused
diverse Gentlemen, and others, with their families to return higher into the
country.

By an Express from Yarmouth it is certified, That there is a fleet of 70 sail
of Collyers lie ready to be convoyed for London; and that there is another
great fleet also in a readiness at Newcastie, with 13 sail of Island Vessels of
Capt. Worms fleet, but from him and the rest we yet hear no news. We hear that
col. Aires, and Doctor Chamberlain, being bound for Ireland, that through
distress of weather, the Vessel was in great danger by a storm, and it is much
feared the passengers are cast away.

The Hollander has agreed to send a Navy to the East India, with Commission,
to destroy and depopulate those places of the English; they are old excellent
at the routing of you, in high language; but are not a little moved, that you
have gotten so many considerable prizes from their Merchants.

From France they write, That the prodigious force and matchless valor of the
Du. of York, causes great admiration in the enemies Camp, who have felt
wonderful and strange exploits, and yet the vanquished continually find his
grace and favor; for upon beating up of some of the Spanish quarters, a French
Colonel persuaded him to use the benefit of the advantage which the darkness
of the night afforded him; No, no, said he, It fits not me to hunt after
night-stoln Victories: Malo me fortunae poeniteat, quam victoriae pudeat. I had
rather repent me of my fortune, then be ashamed of my Victory.

From the Navy further thus: We have received Advertisements from Genoa that
eight of our ships, whereof four Men of War, and four Merchant men, have had a
great dispute with nine Dutchmen of War; and after a sharp conflict, with great
gallantry and resolution performed on both sides, it pleased God to crown the
English with Victory, and to deliver into their hands five of the enemies best
ships, but three got off, though notwithstanding they were much rent and torn;
the other was sunk: These five, with those two taken by Captain Stoaks, make up
the whole number 47; wherein were found great store of rich Merchandises,
Ammunition, and at least seven hundred pieces of Ordnance. Which is a great
weakening to the States of Holland; and no little discouragement to their
Mariners, to see their own ships manned forth against them.

These particulars from Captain Stoaks, were confirmed by a Letter to the
Council of State on Sunday last, being the 26. of this instant September, 1652.

FINIS.

