Strange and Wonderful PRODIGIES: OR, A Full and True Relation of Supernatural
Sights and Aparitions lately seen in the AIR: VIZ. Two Great Armies drawn up
in Battalia, and seeming ready to Engage each other, beheld for some hours, by
several thousands of People: With dreadful Noises heard, like the discharge of
Cannons and Muskets, accompanied with hideous Cries and Howlings. As also a
FIERY-BULLET Of a most vast Magnitude violently rushing through the Air, and at
last with a most terrible crack breaking into a thousand pieces, to the
unspeakable Terror of the amazed Spectators. As it is certified by several
persons of quality. With an Astrological Judgment thereupon.

London, Printed for G. H. in the Year, 1673.

Wonderful Prodigies: OR, Supernatural Apparitions, etc.
THat there have been strange and unaccountable sights and apparitions many
times beheld in the Air, is a truth so well voucht as not to be denied by any,
but those obstinate Scepticks, who rather than part with a darling fancy of
singularity, care not if they give the Lie to all Antiquity, proclaim the rest
of Mankind, Fools or Madmen, or disbeleive the Testimonies of their own
senses: Josephus an Historian of unquestioned fidelity, tells us of a flaming
Sword that hung many days over the City of Jerusalem: Immediately before it is
fatal destruction by Vespasian, and it is sufficiently known what variety of
prodigies proceeded the last most bloody Wars in Germany: Certainly the
Doctrine of Methors affords but little satisfaction to our inquities, after the
Causes, amazing apparences, Philosophy is nonplust, and gives too lean an
account when it tells us of Reflections in watrish Clouds of Exhalations, moist
clammy Substances drawn up by the Suns heat, and set on Fire in the upper
Region, etc. These may produce an Ignis Fatuus, or Jack with the Lanthorn: A
falling Star, some unusual flashings, Corruscations, Mock-moons, and Halo's or
Sircles about the Sun, and the like: But for those Extraordinary Phoenomina; we
must assign some other adequate Causes, and certainly we shall not Err if we
say that All mighty God offended with men's Impiety Exhibites (whether by the
Ministry of Angels or otherwise) these strange sights as warnings to admonish
them of Severe Judgments impending, unless prevented by sincere Repentance
and Amendment.

How near the Kingdom of Poland was, but the other year to the Confines of
Ruin, none can be Ignorant, that at all observe the several stones of fate
acted on the great Theater of the World, Domestic Factions, and an overbearing
Invasion by the Turk had reduced that miserable Nation almost to Extremity,
being forced (besides an Ignominious tribute) to yield up and prostitute a
large part of their Territories to the Lust of that Insatiate Monster of the
East, since that, God has offered those People a Breathing time of peace, and
in a great measure abated the Animosities of the Nobless and discontents of the
Vulgar, what use they have made of these Mercies, or returns of Gratitude to
Heaven we know not: It Is certain great deliverances oblige Sinners to suitable
acknowledgements and Improvements, which providence seems now to Exact, by
Alarming them with the most dreadful prodigies that have been heard of in our
age. A full and true account whereof as it was lately Transmitted to us in
several Letters from thence, be pleased to take as follows.

On the third of October last past at the Town of Posen, and round about for
above ten miles distance from thence, about five of the Clock in the morning
was seen the perfect appearance of two great Armies in the Air: The Sky was
very clear and scarce a Cloud to be seen above the Horizon. One of the Armies
stood toward the East, the other to the West, faceing each other, both drawn
up exactly in Battadia, and appearing so visibly that the spectators could
distinguish the Horse and Foot, discern the Several Brigades, and plainly see
their Trains of Artillery: Those that first viewed this strange sight summon
their Neighbors to admire it, and in an hours space people are Alarmed round
the Country, who get out of their Beds and Houses, and with trembling behold
this amazeing prodigy, which added more to their terror, when having appeared
some time in that posture, as braveing each other, both Armies on a sudden
rusht forwards with a Violent motion, and seemed to meet and most furiously
engage each other, whereupon they heard whole Valleys of Cannons discharged,
and peals of musket shot, continually playing for above an hour; accompanied
all that time with hideons Cries, and shreeks, howlings, sometimes like the
shreeks of Women or Children, and at other times like that of men wounded, and
giveing up their last Breath in Dying Groans.

This dismal Airial Conflict continued with much fury till Sunrising, both
parties being so intermixed, that it was impossible to distinguish which had the
Victory, the whole Heavens appeared of a crimson-dye, and overspread with
blood: and the continual Flashes made it seem like the Day of Doom, when the
whole World shall become a Prey to the Element of Fire: It is impossible to
imagine (much less express) the Consternation of the People, who by thousands
stood to behold this wonderful Spectacle, where their eyes and ears Encountered
nothing but objects of Terror: At last the Sun being got above the Horizon,
caused all these Warlike Phantasms to disapear, and soon after, the noise
ceased, and the Heavens put on their former friendly Countenance, which yet
cannot wipe out those ruful Characters of Fear, Affrightment, and Despair,
imprinted on the dejected visages of the Spectators by this Prodigy of Horror.

About a week after, at Noonday, no Cloud, Storm, or Tempest appearing nigh, a
most terrible Fiery red hot Bullet was observed by hundreds of people, to pass
through the Air a little higher than the tops of their houses, but of a very
vast bigness, and making a strange kind of hissing in its passage, yet doing no
hurt, but flying so several miles directly East; at last with a mighty noise,
as if it would have rent the earth, it burst into a thousand pieces, which
flaming and fluttering a while in the Air, vanished.

Several other strange and prodigious sights have lately manifested themselves
in diverse parts of that Kingdom, the particulars whereof we shall here omit,
and only observe that the fore-recited Aparences could not be the vain
Chimera's of wanton Fancy, or depraved Conceits of melancholy heads, as
Children fancy they see Castles, and men, and beasts, and other strange things
sometimes in the Clouds, or a bright Fire; it is impossible such a multitude of
people should all be cheated in their senses with one and the same Imagination:
nor was it their eyes only, but their ears too had a sufficient share in this
prodigious entertainment.

Let us not place God's immediate miraculous Admonitions to the account of
common Secundary causes, nor argue against the reality of their Aparence, till
we smart under the fury of their Significations, God has two fair Volumes,
whereby he reveals his pleasure to the Sons of men, his Word, and his Works;
sometimes he wooes us by the one, and sometimes warns us by the other: and
those that will neither obey his most profitable Precepts, nor regard his
merciful Threatenings, deservedly become Objects of his severe Justice: who then
sets up cruel and barbarous Nations (as Rods of his Anger) to scourge them that
vainly pride themselves in the Title o^ Christians, and yet surpass the worst
of Heathens in all kinds of Debauchery and Wickedness.

As for the significations of these uncouth Apparences, we say only in the
words of the eldest of Sybils -- Caelum Mars Solus habebit: It is observable
that the Male-effects of the three last Comets in 1965. are not to this day
over-past: The Northern parts of the world have already been sensible of the
Disasters thereby menaced: But we fear this cup of trembling must go round, and
who knows but the Countries North and North-East are designed next to pledge
it: It is now a hundred years since the famous New-Star in Cassiopia first
appeared to mortals; and it was the Judgment of the most Learned Ticho Brahe
that the Portents thereof would be chiefly visible about such a period of time
from thence, and in those very Regions of Poland, Russia, or Muscovia: nor do
the late frequent opositions of the two Superiors, Saturn and Jupiter imitate
less than the Mid-wifeing some eminent Catastrophes into the World: Those that
are acquainted with the Hermetick Learning can tell to what Angel the
Government of sublunaries is most referrible, and the few vere Adepti, or
Legitimate Sons of Art possessed of the true Cabalistical Astrology, unsullied by
the vanities of the Egyptians and Arabians, may give a rational Judgment on
such rare Phanomina as these, whilst the vulgar Sciolist flutters in a purblind
Ignorance, and does but vend the follies of his frothy brain, instead of the
Dictates of Art.

FINIS.

