SIR,
YOU may perceive by the enclosed Brief for rebuilding the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul, how much His Majesty is concerned to have this Work carried on, and
in what particular manner He recommends it to the City of London; and therefore
I am commanded, not only to send you the Briefs, but to excite you to a more
than ordinary care and diligence in promoting so good a Work, and which tends
so much to the Honor of this City.

I am sensible what Objections a Work of this nature is like to meet with in
our Age; wherein some love to cavil at whatever relates to God and his Worship;
and especially if it be like to cost them any thing; others who seem very
zealous for some kind of Religion, are for enjoying it on as cheap and easy
terms as may be; and many of those who declare a good will to this Work, yet
express great dissatisfaction both as to this method of proceeding, and the
time we have chosen, which they think very unsuitable to such a design, if we
either respect the present State of the City or Nation. So that till such
Objections be removed out of men's minds, there is little reason to expect they
should make any free and cheerful Contributions; and if I can be any ways
serviceable therein, I shall think my time and pains well employed in writing
and sending this Letter to you.

It is a principle among those who love a thrifty and parsimonious Religion,
that whatever is beyond the bounds and measures of necessity and convenience in
the Worship of God, is vain and superstitious, and therefore deserves no
encouragement at all. I do not wonder at this principle in those men who
measure their Religion by their Interest, and choose that which brings them the
best Trade, and saves them the most expense. But there are many well meaning
persons among us, who look on what is great and Magnificent as unsuitable to
the times of the Gospel, and only proper for that dispensation, wherein God
declared, That he loved the Gates of Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
But I desire such to consider that we Worship the same God, who gave order for
the Building of Solomon's Temple; not merely for the convenience of that way of
Worship; but with all the Splendor and Greatness which was agreeable to the
Majesty of that God who was Worshipped therein. For since it was the House of
God, the sense of nature did teach the Jews as well as Gentiles, that it ought
to bear some proportion to the Greatness of Him who dwelt in it: And that is
the reason given by Solomon to King Hiram, And the House which I build is
great, for great is our God above all gods. Has not God made the most glorious
Temple for himself in Heaven, and adorned it after such a manner, as all the
Wit and Art of His Creatures can never exactly describe or imitate? And the
Jews think, not without reason, that the fashion of their Temple was designed
on purpose to represent in little, the far more Magnificent Temple which God
had framed for His own Glory in the Fabric of the World. And certainly, it is
no part of the Ceremonial Law, to Worship God in a way agreeable to those
conceptions of His Greatness, which the Works of His Hands suggest unto us.
Under the Gospel, I grant, that Christ has altered the way of Worship which
was used among the Jews; and now we are no longer tied to make any part of the
places dedicated to God's Worship, a kind of Shambles by slaying the Beasts for
sacrifice, but must we therefore make them Stables? There is a natural Decency
and Fitness to be observed in these things which Christ has never taken away,
no more than he has their separation from common use; the destroying whereof
brings such rudeness and Barbarism into Religion, as even the Turks and
Scythians abhor. And although Christ appeared in a low and mean condition in
the World, as most suitable to the design of His coming, yet even when He lay
in the Manger, He had Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh offered him (which
were all rich and costly presents) and that by Wise Men too. And when He was to
be buried, His Body was Embalmed beforehand with a costly Ointment; and we
know what a severe check Christ himself gave to him that said, To what purpose
is all this Waste? although at the same time he pretended great Charity to the
Poor. It was the Poverty and Persecution of the Primitive Christians, which
made them at any time to Worship God in Chambers and Grotts: For as soon as
they had any respite and ease, they erected lofty and beautiful Churches, as
Eusebius relates; and the first Christian Emperors showed their zeal in the
Splendor and Magnificence of the Churches which they built; and not only the
Emperors themselves, but the best Christians of those times thought this to be
for the Honor of Christ and of the Christian Religion. And do these men indeed
think, that building great Houses for themselves, and adorning them with the
richest Furniture, or raising of Families, and heaping up vast Treasures, is
more agreeable to the Design of the Gospel, than serving God in a Beautiful and
Magnificent Church?

But if none of these things will move them, let them consider this Work, as a
Design which will employ many poor men for many years (and this they cannot
deny to be a Work of Charity.) Let them look on it as an Ornament of the City,
as an Honor of the Nation, as like to be a standing Monument of Protestant
Affection to good and public Works; and on such Accounts as these, we are sure
there can be no scruple of Conscience against it.

But others say, Their own Parish Churches are not built, and therefore it
cannot be expected they should do any thing yet toward the Cathedral. I am
heartily sorry for the occasion of this Objection in any parts of the City; and
God forbid that we should hinder the Building of any of the Parochial Churches;
but I do not understand how this will do it. All that we desire is, That the
Mother Church may not be forgotten, while the others are rising so fast out of
their Ruins, and so many of them are already finished with extraordinary
beauty and convenience. For, however length of time has made the relation to
be almost forgotten between the Mother Church and the rest; yet for some Ages
of the Christian Church, whatever other conveniences they might have for
assembling together, there was but one Church in a City which had a Baptistery
belonging to it, that all the Christians being there Baptized, might own their
relation to the Mother Church. And although, since the great increase of the
number of Christians, it has been thought fit to have the Sacraments
Administered in Parochial Churches, yet it ought to be considered, that this
Church is properly the City Church, to which our Princes on extraordinary
occasions, and the Governors of the City have always resorted, and where the
Worship of God has been more solemnly performed, and the Word of God set forth
by Preachers chosen out from the Universities, and all parts of the Kingdom, to
the great Honor as well as satisfaction of this City. And it ought not to be
forgotten, that the emulous City to this for Trade and Riches, has not only
built a Stathouse, but a Magnificent Church too at their own Charges; and it
will be no great reputation to London to fall so much short of Amsterdam in
zeal for the public Worship of God.

But why should the burden lie on the City which has suffered so much of late
by a dreadful Fire? This were indeed a terrible Objection, if it had been made
in the Ruins of the City; but thanks be to the Wonderful Providence of God
Almighty, we have lived to see the City rise with a Splendor and Greatness so
far surpassing whatever it had before, that this were enough to put us in mind
of building the House of God in a way suitable to the present Grandeur of the
City. I do not think that in all respects the Prophet's Argument will reach our
case, Is it time for You, O ye, to dwell in your Cieled Houses, and this House
lie Waste? but yet methinks, those who have already laid out so many thousands
on a Monument of the dreadful Fire, should think themselves as much concerned
to contribute freely toward a Monument of the Resurrection of the City after
it, and what can be more proper for that, that the Re-building St. Paul's?

Lastly, Those who have nothing else to Object against this Work, find fault
with the Season, as very ill chosen by us, when so many Burdens and Taxes lie
already on the City, and men are still afraid of more. As though the Season
were of our own choosing! Whereas the true state of the Case is this: As long
as our Stock held out any ways proportionably to the expense, we went on
cheerfully and with great diligence; and we may say it without vanity, the
Stock we had has been managed with as much care and good Husbandry, as of any
public Buildng whatsoever: But when we found that we could not carry on the
Work without farther Supplies; What should we do? should we let the Work stand
still without trying other ways? Then we might have justly suffered under the
Clamours which would have been made against us, that the Work might have gone
on, if we had not been careless and negligent; that the City would, no doubt,
give very considerable Supplies, if they were but asked; that in the former
repairs the Chamber of London gave two hundred pounds per annum for ten years;
besides the liberal Contributions of the Aldermen and of the Wards, and
Companies; that it was not to be supposed, the City should be less able, or
less willing than it was at that time; that a very easy Rate upon the
New-built and Inhabited Houses would serve to sinish the Choire; that but a
fourth part of the Rate for the Poor in all the Parishes of England would go
very far toward the Body of the Church; that no Citizen of London would ever
refuse doing something toward it; that at least it was but our trying this
Way, and if it did not succeed, we need not doubt at last of the Kindness both
of King and Parliament. Upon such Discourses as these, it was thought fit by
the Commissioners to make an Address to His Majesty, for Authority to gather
Contributions, which out of His Royal Clemency and great readiness to promote
this Work, He was pleased to grant us. And now the time is Unseasonable! as
though it were ever otherwise, to those who have no mind to it! But is it ever
unseasonable to do Praiseworthy, pious and generous actions? We do not desire
men to impoverish themselves to Re-build St. Paul's, but to give freely and
cheerfully, and in such a proportion as other public occasions will permit,
and as will be no hindrance to the concernment of their Trade or Families. For
our Fears of future burdens and Troubles, can we do better to prevent them than
to be full of good Works? And if we were as full of Troubles, as we are of
Fears, we may remember that the City and Temple of Jerusalem were foretold to
be Built in troublous times: but thanks be to God, we yet enjoy Peace and
Tranquillity; our Port is full of Ships, our City of Trade, and there is great
store of Riches among many, who without any considerable diminution to their
Stock, may contribute freely to this great Work.

I am glad the Clergy of this City have already showed so good an Example to
others by their own Subscriptions; and therefore we are the more encouraged to
hope for your cheerful assistance in procuring Subscriptions and Contributions
from others, and your diligence in pursuing the Directions contained in the
Brief it self. I am

Your Affectionate Brother and Servant, Dean of St. Paul's, and Archdeacon of
London.
For the better satisfaction of all Persons concerning the present state of the
Building, I have Annexed a brief Abstract of it; and for the encouragement of
others to Subscribe now, I have adjoined some of the Subscriptions made in this
City toward the former Repairs.



St. PAUL'S Church, LONDON.
A Brief Account of the Receipts and Disbursements for the Rebuilding the said
Church.
l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. Remained in Cash in the Chamber of London, the
first day of May, 1674. (when the Work was first begun) upon the Coal Duty at
4d.. per Chaldron -- 12038 05 03. 12707 01 02. 40525 10 3. Upon free Gifts,
Legacies, etc. -- 00668 15 11. Brought more into the Chamber aforesaid upon the
said Duty of Coals; from the said first of May, 1674. to the first of May,
1678. 18144 04 01. 27818 09 1. And upon free Gifts, etc. -- 09674 05 00. Out of
which has been paid and disbursed in the said Building from the said first day
of May, 1674. to the first of May, 1678. including the Carting away of 28000
Loads of Rubbish; breaking up 11133 cubical yards of old Foundation Walls, with
Scaffolding, and taking down old Walls, amounting to 4000l. and upwards --
33000 00 00. 36000 00 00. Besides there is due upon a reasonable conjecture for
Scaffolding and other Materials, Masons work not yet measured, the several
Accounts not being yet Audited -- 03000 00 00.

Subscriptions toward the Repairs of St. PAUL'S, 1631, etc.
The CITIES Gift, Feb. 21.
The free Gift of the City out of the Chamber of London, by order of the Lord
Major and Court of Aldermen, the sum of two hundred pounds per annum, for ten
years. The ninth annual payment I find received Feb. 10. 1639. -- 200. per
annum for ten years. The Company of Merchant-Taylors subscribed the sum of
five hundred pounds to be paid by fifty pounds per annum, for ten years; the
first payment to begin before Easter, 1632. 50l. per annum for ten years. The
Company of Goldsmiths four hundred pounds 50l. per annum for eight years. The
Company of Grocers three hundred and fifty pounds 50l. per annum for seven
years. The Company of Vintners one hundred pounds to be paid before the last of
Jan. 1631. The Company of Salters one hundred and forty pounds, forty pounds in
present, and the remainder at 20l. per annum for five years. The Company of
Skinners the sum of two hundred and eighty pounds at 40l. per annum for seven
years. The Company of Girdlers 10l. per annum for seven years. The Company of
Ironmongers 20l. per annum for five years. The Company of Cloth-workers 40l.
per annum for five years. The Company of Stationers 15l. per annum for ten
years. The Company of Fishmongers 50l. per annum, of which I find the seventh
payment. The Company of Haberdashers 30l. per annum, of which I find the eighth
payment.

I omit the other Companies, these being the most considerable for
Subscriptions.

ALDERMEN, 1631.
l. s. d. Sir John Leman 30 00 00. And left by him, 1632. 50 00 00. Sir Robert
Ducie 50 00 00. Sir George Whitmore 20 00 00. Alderman Bromfield 50 00 00. Sir
James Campbell 20 00 00. Sir William Acton 20 00 00. Sir John Gore 20 00 00.
Alderman Pool 15 00 00. Alderman Backhouse etc. 15 00 00. Sir Paul Pinder's
extraordinary bounty ought never to be forgotten, who besides what he did
toward adorning the Quire, gave to the South end 4000l.

WARDS, 1633.
Langborn Ward 209 09 00. Broadstreet Ward 103 02 03. Farringdon Without 250 07
03. Bassishaw Ward 056 13 06. Aldgate Ward 150 09 10. Farringdon Without, more
126 00 02. Candlewickstreet Ward 050 00 00. Bishopsgate Ward 041 05 10.
Farringdon Within 334 08 04. Limestreet Ward 039 17 09. Tower-Ward 153 00 00.
Aldersgate Ward 077 05 02. Cripplegate Ward 045 16 04. More of the same 110 07
00. Vintry Ward 065 04 06.

These I have only mentioned as a Taste of the readiness of the City at that
time, and they are faithfully extracted out of the Books of the Receipts then
kept in the Chamber of London.

Imprimatur.

Dat. xxx. May. 1678. H. London.


