Strange and Wonderful News: OR, The Full and True Relation OF THE MIRACULOUS
INSPIRATION OF Charles Bennet; BORN AT Manchester in Lancashire: Who being but
THREE Years of Age, Speaks without the Least Instruction: English, Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew; so Perfect and Authentickly, the like thereof has not been
heard of in any Age.

Being now to be Seen and Discoursed withal at the Bear-Inn in West-Smithfield.

The Truth of which many Thousand Credible Spectators can Attest: This Deponent
being an Eye and Ear Witness to what is here Incerted.

As also the Account of his Earnest Desire to Speak with HIS MAJESTY: The which
he Effected, and some Words he Spoke, on Monday the 30th. of June 1679. Being
brought into the ROYAL PRESENCE.

With many other Circumstances most Wonderful and Strange to Relate.

London, Printed for F.F. in the Year, 1679.

Strange and Wonderful News, Or, The Miraculous Inspiration of Charles Bennit,
a Child of Three Years of Age, Born at Manchester in Lancashire, etc.
STrange and Wonderful are the Works of God, in all that his Omnipotency
designs, and when he pleases can declare it in the meanest Work his Hand has
formed, as our Blessed Saviors Sacred Evangelist explains; and likewise David
the Princely Prophet, That out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings, he has
perfected Praise; and can extol the mighty power of his Eternal self, as he
himself shall think most fit, the which may in this proceeding Narration be
produced to all as follows, and noted to after Ages, as a Wonder of the
times, and Prophetically mysterious.

A Male Child about Three Years of Age, the Son of a Linnen-Weaver of
Manchester in Lancashire, namely Phillip Bennit, being a Man of mean Education
and Fortune; his Son being born on or near the 17th. of June, in the year of
Man's Redemption, 1676. and after was Christened about the 28th. of the same
month, receiving in his Baptism the name of Charles; the Child growing and
continuing in a good state of bodily health, was often observed by his Parents
to be more serious and considerate then appertained to one of his age, many
times musing, and seeming to deliberate with himself; the which at first they
did not so fully regard, but after he could go alone, and began to speak, (the
which he exercised sooner then usual) many grave Sentences were observed to
proceed from him; But the first Discovery of the profound Knowledge that for a
long time had absconded in his Microcosnick structure, was about a month or Six
Weeks since: his Father after Divine Service taking a Bible, and reading a
certain Chapter in one of the Evangelists, by accident, or through ignorance
omitted, or preposterously read a certain Verse or Sentence: the Child
aforesaid being present, reproved him of his error, and told him there was no
such sentence in the Scripture, or Word of God: at which his Father being in a
consternation, casting his eyes upon the Text where he had read, found himself
mistaken, whereupon he examined him how he knew, having never seen nor known
the Scriptures as to the Practick part: to whom the aforesaid Charles most
discreetly replied; That he could, and in his conceit had often conversed
therein, and if occasion required, could Read them in Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew. This raised the primal Character of the Child's more then ordinary
perfection, sent his fame abroad, so that many hundreds from Towns and Villages
adjacent to the place of his Nativity, came flocking to take a view of him, and
to discourse in all the Tongues premissed, who did as freely Answer, to the
great astonishment of all that heard: for many Ministers and Learned Men were
likewise curious to satisfy themselves in the certainty hereof, and when they
had beheld and found it true, they went away with admiration. After some time
his Fame was noised in the great Metropolis of London, to which by the advice
and persuasion of some of their Friends, his Parents brought him about Five
days since; and coming up by the Warwick-shire-Carryer, they Inned or took up
their lodging at the Bear-Inn in West-smith-field: where no sooner was the
rumor of their being there spread abroad, but numbers flocked to see a wonder
they had heard of some time since: he being accompanied with his Parents in a
very spacious Room on the left hand going into the Inn aforesaid, where many
Ministers and others discoursed and questioned with him on Saturday the 28th.
of which this Deponent was one who did both reason with him in English, Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew; to which he soon answered, and rightly expounded and
Interpret each Word a Sentence; the truth of which, this Deponent is ready to
Justify upon Oath if need requires: Some of which Words I shall here (for the
more perfect satisfaction of the Reader) Insert, Imprimis, he was asked Latin,
Greek, and Hebrew for a Man, to which he as readily Replied, Vir, Inthropos,
Addam; For a Woman, Mulier, Genue, Eveve; For Boy, Pueri, A Girl, Puella; his
Forehead, Front,, A Hat, Gallerus. As likewise many other words and
Propositions, too tedious here to Insert. His Parents take no Money at the
Door, but are willing to accept the free Benevolence of Gentlemen: The Child
will not accept any Gift, be it Money or any other Present; but if it be forced
upon him, he will absolutely refuse and throw it away, showing how little he
regards such transitory Trash, the which is no ways permanent. The Child had,
as his Parents report, an earnest desire many weeks before he came to London,
to speak with his Majesty, and that he had some business of Importance to
declare to his Sacred self: the which they much Noted by his earnest and often
repeating the same desire, the which was, as some report, to speak Three Words,
and after the deliverance of which, he Prophetically foretells his Dissolution
as to this life. In the space of Nine days, but this is not certainly known,
but sure I am, that upon Notice of the said Child's being in Smithfield, his
Majesty was graciously pleased to send for him to his royal Palace of
White Hall, on Monday the 30th. of this instant June, 79; who in a Coach waits
His Majesty's good pleasure: and as it is credibly reported, most fluently
answered to several Questions, to the great admiration of all that were
present; but what was there said ii not as yet precisely known. He reads
English perfecter tden any Youth far above his Age, although never so well
instructed.

The Truth of what I have here proposed, can be witnessed by many Thousand
Worthy Gentleman and Gentlewomen, many whose names I could here insert if
occasion required: But for your further satisfaction, if you send to the Bare
Inn as aforesaid, you shall be fully informed of all these particulars, and a
number more, the which would tire your patience to peruse. As for the Stature
of the said Charles Bennet, he is not above two Foot and 3 Inches, being of a
ruddy and aimable Complexion, full eyed, with a sharp and piercing sight: Dark
brown Hair, and round Visaged, seeming very vehement in the delivery of his
Speeches, with a manly voice, but something thick in the delivery of his words.
His Parents were but mean People, getting their Livings by their daily labors
and Employments. This is no fallacy nor premeditated Instruction, taught by the
device nor Art of men, for was it so, the Child could not be perfect in every
cross question, the which amongst the learnedest of men requires some
deliberation; then what can we imagine less then that those parts and early
Docilities, proceeded by Divine Inspiration: and who can tell what Mysteries
Omnipotence may veil that tender Form, the which in time may shine more
perfect to the World, till when let us admire, and with the Prophet say, It is
the Lords doing and is Marvelous in our Eyes, etc.

FINIS.

