A Strange and Lamentable ACCOUNT OF A Bloody Barbarous Murder, COMMITTED By
William Close,
Upon the Body of a Young Woman at Lambeth, in the County of Surry, with whom,
as his Sweetheart, he had kept Company for the space of Four Years; with the
Particulars and Circumstances attending so Monstrous a Wickedness, all very
Remarkable and Amazing, with the manner of the Discovery, his being Apprehended
and Committed to the Marshalsea Prison, where he remains in Horror of mind in
order to his Trial, etc.
STRANGE and Amazing are the Prodigious Wickednesses of this Age; and although
the frequent Examples of Justice might give a sufficient check to men's minds,
yet we find the Punishment of many offenders, not forcible enough to deter
others from the most Enormous of Crimes, viz. Shedding of Blood, and Destroying
the Creatures of their own likeness, on whom God has stamped his own Image,
but among all the Cruel Scenes of Humane Rage and Barbarous Murders that have
lately happened, we present the Reader with one in this Paper, very Terrible
and Dreadful, considering the Circumstances that attended it, viz.

One William Close, sometime a Servant to an eminent Citizen and Trader in
London, having, about four Years since, contracted a Familiarity with a Young
Woman that lived by the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, and at sundry times they had
meetings together, and went abroad to Treats, and merry Meetings, so that they
were not only supposed, by the Kindness and Familiarity that appeared, to be
extraordinary Lovers, but some concluded them to be Man and Wife, though,
since this Fatal Accident, no such thing, as far as we can Learn, is evident.

This Familiarity continuing, there at last seemed to appear some signs of
Melancholy and Discontent in either of them, especialy in the Countenance of
Close, however, though not only his Countenance and Actions made it apparent,
yet he disembled it as well as he could, and they at certain times met as
formerly, though the last meeting proved the most fatal, they had (as we are
informed) several little Quarrels before, but Reconcilements of Friends, and
their own humors made up the breach between them, when on Saturday the 2d. of
September, it was agreed between them to go to Lambeth only by themselves,
where first they went to an Alehouse on the back side of the Town, and there
some words passing between them, the young Woman, apprehending some danger from
^owring Looks, and rising passion, threw away the Knife, that was brought in
with some Bread and Chees, and bid the Girl, that came in with it, take it
away, so that, missing of his opportunity to mischief her there, he flattered
her into a belief of his well meaning and good Intention toward her, and with
many persuasions, drew her to a Tavern near the Church, where calling for a
Pint of Wine, and some eatables, he (as it is supposed) took his opportunity
(all at unawars to her,) to strike her over the forhead with the Pot, which not
only wounded her, but bruized, and dinted the Pot very much, at which she gave
a Lamentable Cry, but whither the people of the House did not presently hear
it, or mind it, is uncertain, but however, before they came up, her throat was
cut with a Knife that had been brought up before, her windpipe being cut in
sunder, and she in the Convulsions of Death, Struggling and Panting, though in
vain, for Life, with great Effusion of blood, some of which was sprinkled on
him.

Upon this dismal sight, there being none but them two in the Room, he was
apprehended as the Murderer, and being carried before a Justice of Peace, upon
his Examination he made such Slender and Frivelous Allegations for himself,
that they made more against him, than for Excusing him, whereupon he was
Committed to the Marshalsea Prison; in Southwark where he now remains in order
to his Trial for wilful Murder. It is said, during these familiarities, he had
a Child by this young Woman, though not Married to her, which might probably be
one main matter of breeding the discontent between them.

Printed for J. Butcher, 1693.


