Concerning the Remissness of the Magistrate. A SERMON Preached in the
Parish Church of Bovey-Tracy, LAST Easterday in the Afternoon.

By FRANCIS STOOKE, M. A. And VICAR thereof.

EXETER: Printed by Sam. Darker and Sam. Farley, for Charles Yeo, John Pearce,
and Philip Bishop, Booksellers in Exon, School.

THE PREFACE.
READER,
THE only occasion of Printing this following Discourse, is to vindicate Myself
and it, from the unchristian Calumnies and Reflections that are every day cast
upon us: It was not my Design in Preaching of it, nor is it so in Printing of
it, to exasperate any Man, but only to contribute what I could toward the
suppression of Vice and Immorality: And in pursuance of His Majesty's
Proclamation, for preventing and punishing Immorality and Profaneness, I
concluded the best means of effecting it, was to reprove the Remissness of
Magistrates, and to excite them to a diligent Execution of the Laws against
notorious Offenders. And this I was moved to do from no other principle, but an
hearty Zeal for the Honor of GOD, and the Interest of Religion; which are very
much diminished by the bold and unrestrained commission of Wickedness

But instead of the Success I intended and hoped for, it was condemned as a
personal Reflection, and a very rude Treatment of the sublime Dignity of the
Magistrate; and a for: of Indigitation, to be preached only before one of them.
Now, I do sincerely protest, I had no such intentions, and should have done it
as soon before a whole Congregation of that Order; and it may be with better
acceptance, and less hatred, than now I have met with. I have therefore
ventured to send it abroad into the World, to let Men see how much I am
wronged, and how unjustly I have suffered in my Reputation, upon the account of
it. I am conscious enough of its being unworthy of an Impression, and of my own
inability for such a performance, and should have gladly declined the
Undertaking: but the perpetual incessant Clamours that are risen against us,
together with the terrible Threats, and false Reports that are given out, have
constrained me to it; besides which I know nothing could have prevailed with me
to appear in public: And all that I have to desire of the Reader, is, that he
will vouchsafe it a candid Censure, and give some allowance for the Occasion.

Farewell.
ACTS xviii. Ver. 17. And Gallio cared for none of these things.


THE Words are a description of the Carriage and Behavior of a great
Magistrate toward the most intolerable Impudence and Indignity that could be
offered in his Presence; no less than striking, and laying violent Hands upon a
Person in open Court; a Crime of so heinous and culpable a Nature, that it is
accounted Capital in some Courts, and would have been punished with Death. But
Gallio did not account it such, nor show so high a Resentment of it, and took
as little notice of it, as though it had been an innocent, or an indifferent
Action: He cared for none of these things.

Indeed it is a matter of great Consequence in all Governments to make choice
of such Magistrates as are impartial and courageous, active and resolute in the
execution of their Office; and will spare neither Friend nor Foe, wherever
they observe the Laws to be violated, or any Insolences or Outrages committed.
This would be a means to suppress the present Disorders, and to prevent the
like audacious and rude Attempts for the future. This indeed is the original
design of Magistracy and Government, to restrain Men from doing Evil and
Mischief, and to keep them in Peace and good Order; and as often as any shall
transgress and deviate from these Rules, to assign them a condign Punishment,
according to the demerit of their Offenses. And if this Method were duly
observed, the World would not have that cause to cry out of Rapine, Extortion,
Oppression, Fraud and Injustice, that now it has: the Rich would not grind the
Faces of the Poor, nor the Poor have cause to complain of the Oppression of the
Rich; Superiors would not tyrannize over their Inferiors, nor Inferiors murmur
and rebel against their Superiors. Vice would not be so bold and barefaced,
nor Profaneness so common and reputable, but Peace and Holiness would go hand
in hand, and a universal Piety and Justice would overspread the Face of the
whole Earth, and Righteousness would run down our Streets as a mighty Stream.

It is generally esteemed a great Honor to be a Member of those that make
Laws; I am sure it is a much greater to be one of those that put them in
execution: For, to what purpose are they made, if they are never executed? But
it is much to be feared, there are too many which are invested with this Power,
are of the same Temper and Disposition with Gallio, They care not for these
things: Although the greatest Indecencies and Disorders are perpetrated in their
Presence, and to the very Face of them. The Apostle tells us that the
Magistrates Power was given them for this purpose, To be a terror to those that
do evil, and an encouragement to those that do well, Romans 13. 3. And he
supposes the Sword to be born in vain, when the Magistrate is not the Minister
of God in this respect, A revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil.

And what a Blessing would it be to this Nation, if all our Magistrates would
resolve upon this Course, Act in conformity to the Apostle's Rule; and be
magnanimous and fearless in the execution of their Office in such a manner as
he here directs. But instead of that, may we not justly complain of a Coldness
and Indifferency, Remissness and Neglect, in taking cognizance of, or Punishing
Offenses; and although they are many times Eye witnesses and Ear-witnesses to the
foulest Vices and the greatest Lewdness and Profaneness, yet will they for all
that, pass by such Actions, and show as little resentment of them, as the great
Man did in the Text, who would not be offended, although there could not be a
greater occasion given, then for Men to revenge themselves with their own
Hands, and to offer Violence to a Person in the Court of Judicature, and in the
sight of the Judge. And yet we read of some that did so, for the Greeks took
Sosthenes, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, and beat him before the
Judgment Seat, And Gallio cared for none of these things.

In discoursing on which Words, I shall do these three things; I. I shall treat
of them particularly, and as they relate to Gallio. II. I shall consider them
in general, as they concern the whole Order of Magistrates. III. I will show
what use and improvement may be made of them: And of these severally.


1. And first, let us observe them in their particular concern, as they relate
to Gallio, who is said here to care for none of these things; wherein we may
inform our selves, 1 st, Who this Gallio was; a chief Magistrate. 2 dly, What
was the Crime objected against him; Neglect and Remissness in the execution of
his Office; he cared not for it. 3 dly. Wherein the peccancy and culpableness
of his Crime consisted; he was careless in these things, (i. e.) in things of
the greatest Moment and Importance.

1. As to the Person here spoken of, Gallio, he was a chief Magistrate, no less
than Proconsul of Achaia; viz. the Lord-Deputy of that Province, under Claudius
Caesar the Emperor of Rome. This Gallio was a Roman by Birth, and of a noble
Extraction; he was the great Seneca's elder Brother, and a Man of great
Eminency and Note in his time, otherwise he could not be fit to manage such a
difficult Post as the Government of Achaia was, a Country very full of Factions
and Divisions, and the People of it very stubborn and headstrong; and where
they could not prevail by Law, and obtain their Purposes by Justice, they would
fulfill them by Force and Violence; as appears by their beating a Man in the
presence of their Governor; a very rude and unmannerly Action.

2. But yet it did not move Gallio in the least, he passed it by, and took
little or no Notice of it, or at least, would not seem to do so; he would not
concern himself on either side, but as they quarrelled, so they might agree
again for him; it was all one to him whether they were Friends or Foes, so long
as they were Loyal and Obedient to Caesar. But however, this is censured by all
Interpreters as a great Fault in him, and taken as a particular Remark fastened
on him by the Spirit of God, and adjudged thereby, a careless Magistrate, and a
very ill Man, because he cared not for these things; but otherwise, of a very
good Temper and Disposition; for he is styled by the Poet, Dulcem Gallionem,
which imports no less. But whatever the Nature of the Action was, he thought it
would be no Policy in him to take either part, and so far he was safe, for then
he was assured he should disoblige neither side; but all this proceeded from a
cowardly and pusillanimous spirit in him; for being newly entered upon his
Government, probably he might be afraid of the Rabble. He knew not but the
Jews, had he favored St. Paul's Cause, might have accused him as no Friend of
Caesar's: And it is most likely the Greeks, had he rescued Sosthenes out of
their Hands, might in that boistrous Humor have served him in the same kind.
Therefore he concluded it the safest way to pass it by, that so he might escape
their Fury; and save himself in a whole skin.

This was the Humor of our great Magistrate here in the Text, he cared not what
Violences and Outrages there were committed; nor undoubtedly, if Murder it
self had ensued, would not have been much concerned, provided he could keep
himself out of Harms way. But this Behavior of his is so far from being
commendable, or indeed justifiable, that it is very criminous and blamable, and
deserves to be branded with the ignominious Character of Cowardice and
Popularity.

3. But that which heightens his Crime, and makes it the more culpable yet, is
that he was of the same temper in all things, in every Complaint that came
before him, and those of the greatest moment and importance; such as
Controversies about Religion, as this is generally supposed to be: If he had
been remiss and indifferent in one particular case only, and that too but a
small and inconsiderable matter, the Crime had not been so great; but he cared
for none of these things, small nor great: he would not concern himself in any
of them. Now by this general neglect and remissness of his, he did but
encourage and enbolden them to do the like again, and to be the more insolent
and irresistible for the future; had he put the Laws in execution, and punished
them as soon as they had offended, they would have been under some terror and
dread of committing the like, or any other offense again; whereas the impunity
of one Crime is not only taken for a toleration of that, but is also a
temptation to another. And this was the fault with which Gallio was justly
charged; he neglected the doing Justice upon one sort of Offenders, and
presently he is disturbed with the insolences and clamours of another; had he
punished the Jews for their Insurrection, the Greeks would never have fallen
upon a Person in such a violent manner, and beaten him in his presence.

You have heard what this Gallionian temper and disposition was, and wherein
the criminalness of it lay; which was the first thing undertaken to be shown.
And I think what is here alleged against this Magistrate in particular, may
with as great a truth be asserted of the generality of that Office: they are
too careless and remiss in the execution of their Authority, and are worthy of
as great blame as Gallio, or any other of that Order: they care but little for
these things; if they did, Sin would not so much abound.

2 ly. For the neglect of doing Justice upon Offenders, is one of the principal
causes of that deluge of Vice and Immorality, which at this time overflows the
World. And this is the general Proposition deduceable from these Words, and the
second Point we are to speak to.

And to confirm what is here asserted, I need go no farther than Experience; I
say Daily Experience is a sufficient Proof to this Purpose: But I shall not
content my self with this only, but shall assign you a Scriptural one; which is
that of the old Eli, who we are told 1 Samuel 4. 18. had been Judge of Israel
forty Years; and behaved himself undoubtedly very well in the Office; for we
hear no ill character fixed upon him, but only too much gentleness and lenity,
in the execution of his Office: but we find this was a just cause of incensing
the divine displeasure against him, and of God's denouncing such heavy
Judgments against his Family. Nay the old Man, as soon as the Complaint came to
his Ears of the profane and dissolute lives of his Sons, he took particular
notice of it, and immediately reproved them for it, saying unto them, Why do ye
such things? for I hear of your evil doings by all this People: Nay, my Sons,
it is no good report that I hear; for ye make the old People to transgress. The
good old Man seemed to be heartily sorry and troubled for his Sons follies, but
this did not answer God's end: And he was offended with him for this reason,
because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. God expects
more than mere words, and bare reproofs; especially where his Honor, and that
of Religion are so much concerned. For when Profaneness, and Looseness, and
Irreligion crept in among them, and grew too hard for the Government, God
threatens to do such a thing in Israel, at which both the Ears of every one
that hears it shall tingle, 1 Samuel 3. 11.

Now the principal Reason why God entertained such an indignation, and
denounced this heavy judgment against the House of Eli, was because those
Crimes his Sons were guilty of, were of a very contagious nature, and might
infect others, as well as themselves; and by not restraining them, the whole
land would soon be overrun with profaneness and debauchery. So that it was not
Eli's personal miscarriages that God thought himself so dishonored by him; but
for want of taking due care for the suppression of Lewdness and Immorality in
others. And this shows us the true way how every Magistrate may best serve God
In his Station, acquire the applause of being an Honor to God and his
Profession, and best answer the end of his Function; which is by giving all due
encouragement to Religion and Virtue; and by a diligent application of the most
effectual means for suppressing Irreligion, and Profaneness.

This indeed is a great and noble Design, worthy of the greatest Minds; and an
Employment fit for Persons of the most celebrated Valor and Courage; and no
way proper for Men of dastardly and effeminate Spirits: For it must be
acknowledged to be a work of some difficulty, to do this effectually. It being
much easier to subdue the Bodies, than the Passions of Men: For many are so
wedded to their Lusts, that they account it as bad as Death to be separated
from them; and would rather mortify their Bodies in the Literal sense, than to
be deprived of their beloved Sin. For do we not daily see that Men will forgo
Honor, Reputation, Interest, Health, and the hopes of Heaven, rather than
those Vices they have been accustomed to the practice of? It is in vain then to
imagine, that the mere fears of the Execution of Human Laws should presently
restrain those, whom no fear of Hell or Damnation, could hitherto reform?
However there may, no doubt, be a means found out how this blessed Design may
be perfected; how Vice may be brought into Disgrace, and Virtue become genteel
and fashionable: And there cannot be better expedient, than good Examples;
especially of those who are Men of Fortune and Grandeur: Let such as these set
the Example, and there is no fear but they will soon be followed. For Virtue is
as attractive as Vice, when it is recommended by the practice of Men of Riches
and Authority: for whatever a Great Man practices, be it good or evil, it is
mighty influential, and seldom fails of success: For, for the most part, (I
know not how) it strikes Men's Eyes, and charms their Hearts and Affections into
a Love first, and then into an Imitation of it.

But how powerful and efficacious soever great men's Examples may be to this
purpose, yet this of it self will not do with all; for mere Examples, although of
excellent use to men of ingenious minds, yet to others, they are not so, but
are likened to Mercury-posts which stand in the Road and point to the right,
but men will go which way they please notwithstanding.

But if Examples will not do, surely Laws will; and it cannot be denied but
that we have excellent Laws against Vice and Debauchery, and there is as great
an Encouragement for the Execution of them as was ever known in any Reign. But
yet there is a just Complaint of a mighty Deluge of all sorts of Wickedness
still among us; Are not Drunkenness, and Uncleanness, Unrighteousness, and
Oppression, Profanation of the Lord's day, and Contempt of Religion, as common
Vices now as ever? And don't we hear as horrid Oaths and tremendous Curses, and
as great a Plenty of them, as we heard before that excellent Act was made for
the suppressing of these Vices? Nay, How few of those whose Concern it is to
see it done, are so hearty and zealous in punishing of them as they are
required to be? And what should be the reason that there is no abatement of it
all this while, especially at a time when Gratitude, if not our holy
Profession, should oblige us to a Reformation? Why, it is easy to resolve all
into the Corruption of human Nature; men are degenerated from the Virtues of
their Ancestors, and are become feral and brutish: but this is a general Answer
which serves for all Times and Places, and may not be so peculiar to the
present, but I shall assign one as much more probable and likely; which is,
that the bad Examples of those who ought to reform others, bring Vice into
fashion, and do thereby propagate and increase the Practice of it. It is to
little purpose therefore to talk of Laws, Religion, or Reformation, unless
there be a Power made use of to restrain the Vices, alter the Customs, and
change the Lives of Men.

Therefore to Examples and Laws the Magistrate's Power must be added, which was
originally ordained for this end; that is, to be both a Terror to those that do
Evil, as well as an Encouragement to those that do well. And then the Apostle
supposes the Sword is not bore in vain, when the Magistrate is the Minister of
God in this respect; a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. But
if they suffer this bold Commission of Sin to pass without Correction, it will
ere long pull down the Vengeance of God upon the Kingdom, and cause him to rain
Fire and Brimstone upon it, as he did upon Sodom and Gomorrha, till it be
consumed: And if it should happen that this or any other terrible judgment
should be our fate, where can we lay the blame? Will it not lay at the door of
the Magistrates and Officers of Justice; because they might, but would not
redress these Impieties. For it has always been an allowed Maxim, That he who
did not forbid Sin, when it was in his power, does in effect command it. And he
that does not punish it, when it is in his power, encourages and upholds it.

But the great evil and mischief of the Magistrate's Neglect, in doing justice
upon notorious Offenders, will more fully appear from these following
Considerations; because God is thereby dishonored, Religion disparaged, the
Government weakened, Authority dispis'd, and Atheism increased.

1 st. First, I say, God is thereby dishonored; when Vice and Immorality are
countenanced, and tolerated in a Nation: or, which is all one, when they are
connived at, and uncorrected; Men will be apt to judge irreverently of God, and
say, That if he do not take complacency and delight in such actions, yet he is
not very highly provoked and offended with them. For, if he was, he would
either shower down an immediate Vengeance upon the actors, as he did upon
Hophni and Phineas, who for their Immorality and Lewdness, were taken off both
in one day: Or else, he would denounce an heavy judgment against those, who had
it in their power to restrain such Indignities, and affronts to the Divine
honor, and yet were so negligent as to overlook them; as he did to old Eli
and his House, so as utterly to cancel and extinguish it.

Should Pagans and Infidels observe the debaucheries of Christians, and how
they escape without punishment, they would be apt to entertain mean and
unworthy notions of the Deity whom we worship; that he is an impure or careless
Being, and unconcerned for his Honor; otherwise he would never suffer such
intolerable Abuses against his Divine and Sacred Person. Holiness and Purity
are most essential to GOD; herein does his Image chiefly consist, and whoever
acts in conformity to these Virtues, bears the nearest resemblance to his
Heavenly Father, and may (in some sense) be said to dignify and illustrate the
Deity whom he adores. And it is so accounted even by GOD himself, who takes it
as an Honor done unto Him; and has promised to compensate such services with
Honor, Those that honor me, I will honor with God; (i. e.) Those who by
Holiness of Life and purity of Manners, do profess to believe in me, such as
these I would choose for my Votaries; for they are an Ornament to the Religion
they profess, and a credit to the Numen they adore: But they that despise me,
shall be lightly esteemed, (i. e.) such as profess to know GOD, but in their
works deny him; who own a GOD, and yet live as if there were none; who give
themselves up to a profane and irreligious temper of Mind, and let loose the
reins to all sorts of wickedness in their Lives, such as the Sons of Eli were,
who are said to be the Sons of Belial; that lived without yoke or restraint,
who knew not the Lord. It Is true, GOD cannot be despised for his glorious
Perfections; yet his Authority may be dispis'd, when Men presumptiously break
his Laws, and do not regard what he has commanded or forbidden them. And
seeing he has appointed an Order of Men for this purpose, to see his Commands
executed, to punish Vice, and reward Virtue; he accounts it as a great affront
done him, if they neglect it.

2 ly. And as GOD is highly dishonored, by such a sinful Neglect, so is
Religion no less disparaged and contemned. Some will be apt to take it for a
cheat and imposture, and say, It is imposed upon Men for Secular and Politic
ends, and no way conducive to the Honor of GOD, or the benefit of Souls.
Whereas if the Magistrate did profess an aw and veneration for it, and act in
conformity to his Profession; then most Men, especially such as are dependent
on him, would be brought by his Authority, or won by his Example, into a love
and liking of it. But when Magistrates are careless and indifferent themselves,
it makes others so too; and renders Religion as a mean and contemptible thing:
When those whose main Duty it is to look after it, who are constituted
Guardians and Defenders of it, do slight and neglect it, and will not concern
themselves in restraining Immorality and Profaneness, the great blemishes of
Religion; then will Men be apt to slight and ridicule it, and account it a
thing of indifferency whether they are subservient to it, or no.

3 ly. But this is not all; their Contempt does not stop here; they will at
last despise Authority it self: What an insignificant thing is Power and
Superiority, if it be not employed to the uses for which it was ordained? And
where it is not duly executed, it will at length be slighted and despised: It
is a true Saying, Too much Familiarity breeds Contempt; but never more true
than in respect of Magistracy and Ministry; a too great Freedom and Familiariry
of Conversation, does very much depreciate and degrate these subblime and
honorable Functions, and makes them disesteemed and neglected: whereas
Strangeness and Distance, will create a reverential Aw and Deference in all
accesses to them, and preserve that Honor and Dignity, which is justly owing
to their Character.

4 ly. Another evil Consequence of Carelessness and Remissness in the
Magistracy, is, because the Government is very much weakened, and made impotent
thereby. The Sins of a Nation do naturaly tend the weakness and dishonor of
it: Profaneness, Debauchery, and Vice, are not only the reproach of a People,
but they are the readiest means to destroy it: who can deny that Luxury,
Debauchery, and all sorts of Intemperance, not only sink the Reputation of a
People; but also softens and effeminates them, and makes them careless, idle
and regardless of any thing, but what conduces to Ease and Voluptuousness. In
all probability, such a Nation cannot stand long; especially if it chance to be
encountered by another of more Wisdom, Courage and Resotion, it will soon be
overcome by it. So that it is plain, that such Sins as these have a natural
efficacy in them of weakening the Power and Interest of a Kingdom. But there
are other Sins, such as Profaneness, Contempt of GOD and Religion, common
Swearing, Hypocrisy, Lying, etc. are the moral causes of a Nation's Ruin; and
when the measure of the People's Iniquity is filled up, it will accordingly
succeed with them; as it did with the Jews, who are now a Lo-ammi, that is, no
more a People.

5 ly. The fifth and last evil Consequence of Remissness in the Magistracy, is,
that Sin is thereby increased and propagated; he that does not dread the power
of a Magistrate, will make but little conscience of his Actions, but indulge
himself in his Lewdness with all imaginable freedom and licentiousness, and
suffer nothing to restrain him, till he has gone through all the classes of
Impiety, and is become a great proficient in it: and having drowned his Senses
and his Reason, he is at last tempted to say with the fool in the Psalm, There
is no God. And the Consequence of that, is to be corrupt and abominable, or to
commit all Uncleanness with greediness, in the Apostle's phrase. This is the
pernicious effect of Sin, if it be not timely restrained and prevented: It is
of so contagious and spreading a nature, that it presently infects the whole
Neighborhood, diffuses it self from City to Country, and at last becomes
Epidemical.

These are some of the mischievous Effects of Remissness in the Magistracy; by
which it evidently appears to be most true, what was asserted in the general
Proposition, That the Neglect of doing Justice upon Offenders, is one of the
principal causes of that deluge of Vice and Immorality, which at this time
overflows the World.

Now the Application is as follows: If this then be the Cause of most of the
Sin and Impiety that abounds in the World, it does certainly then very much
concern all the Magistrates, and Officers of Justice among us in this Kingdom,
to use all due care to prevent the growth and increase of Atheism and
Profaneness. Let them abandon that Popular and lukewarm Temper (which has been
the cause of so much mischief, both to Church and State, for the future, and be
more active and diligent in their Office; especially where the Glory of GOD,
and the Interest of Religion are struck at: they should blush to be found
remiss and negligent in Executing the Laws, upon willful and notorious
Offenders. To do so, is an argument they are too much in love with Sin
themselves; otherwise they would be more careful to punish it in others. I wish
I could lift up my Voice, and speak loud enough to awaken every one of them,
and persuade them to be diligent and vigilant in their Office; to chastise all
public Offenders, and do Justice strictly upon those who dishonor GOD, and
are a scandal to Religion. Stir up your selves, and be zealous for your. GOD,
as the Scripture speaks. Let not the Drunkards, the Blasphemers, the profaners
of the Lord's Day, who despise his Worship and Service, go unpunished. Be just
and impartial in all your Corrections; spare neither Relative, nor Dependent;
let your Indignation be extended against Sin in general, and as often as you
find it perpetrated, be sure to punish it. Discountenance Make-bates, and
sowers of Discord among Brethren: reprove the Profane and Common-swearer, and
lay the Penalty as often as you find him to offend. In a word, let the severity
of the Law be executed against all open Wickedness.

And this indeed would be the most effectual way, to produce a Reformation
throughout the whole Kingdom. This would be the readiest way to make us an
happy People. For though there might still be a great many sins committed amongst
us, in secrecy and under covert; yet they would not be National Sins, nor be
imputed to us as a public Guilt; but every Man should bear his own Iniquity.
Whereas without such a Reformation as this, or an hearty and an honest
Endeavor after it, all our Pretenses to Religion, will serve only as so many
marks of our Insincerity, and of the mean Opinion we have of GOD; as if he
would be moved with such Services, wherein we present Him only the form and
surface, and neglect the weightier concern of doing Justice, showing Mercy, and
walking humbly before Him. There cannot be a greater dishonor done to His
Divine Majesty, than to be unconcerned at the great Scandal that is cast upon
Religion, by a bold and public Profaneness, and to suffer it to escape without
check or punishment.

It will be to no purpose for Ministers, to decry Vice in their Sermons, nor to
divert from it in their Lives, if the Magistrate's Authority do not second
their Endeavors; for let them do the one never so powerfully, and the other
never so regularly, yet it will be all in vain, without the concurrence of the
Magistrate's Sword, to terrify and restrain them from Vice, and overawe and
compel them to Obedience.

And this is no private conjecture, or groundless surmise; but the wisdom of
the Nation has concluded this to be the most effectual means of suppressing
that flood of Sin and Impiety, that at this time overspreads the Kingdom; and
have rightly adjudged the cause of it to be want of Care and Diligence in the
Magistrate, of putting the Laws in execution.

As you would therefore answer the great Ends of your sublime Order, omit no
opportunity of doing all that is conduceable thereunto: use your utmost Power
to promote the Honor of GOD, and the Interest of Religion: And this cannot be
better done, than by discountenancing all lewd and vicious Persons, and
encouraging the Virtuous and Good. And above all, be most careful to avoid all
the kinds, nay, and the very appearance of evil in your Lives and Actions:
Consider the Dignity of your Character; the Scripture calls you Gods; and sure
to answer that Character your must not only refrain your selves from all
Wickedness in general, but also be eminent and exemplary in all holy
Conversation and Godliness. Let your Light so shine before men, that they may
see your good works, and glory your Father which is in Heaven. And let us
constantly pray, as our Church directs in that pertinent branch of her Litany,
That GOD would be pleased to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them Grace
to execute Justice, and to maintain Truth.

And to close up all, let me exhort and beseech you, in the words of St. Paul,
That every one that names the Name of CHRIST, would depart from Iniquity: As
we expect the Blessing of Heaven upon us, and wish the Happiness of these
Kingdoms, and that the great work of Reformation may go successfully on; let us
every one in our several Conditions, Stations and Places, set our selves
seriously against Vice and Wickedness, and labor to root it out. For not only
our Temporal, but our Eternal Interest is depending on it: Which GOD give us
all Grace to do, etc.

FINIS.

