A SALUTATION of my Endeared Love in God's holy Fear and Dread, and for the
clearing of my Conscience, once more unto you of that City of Bristol, amongst
whom my Soul has some Years traveled under many a dreadful Exercise, which
has made my Bones to shake, and my Heart to tremble before the great God of
Heaven and Earth, who will yet further bring his notable Day, wherein all Flesh
shall Tremble before him.
ANd now in the sense of the great Love of God that has been extended unto you
of that City continually, first, in sending of his Servants amongst you, and
endued them with Power from on High, that it wrought effectually upon many,
whereby many are brought out of Egypts Darkness, and through the Red Sea
spiritually, and could sing to the Lord, as Moses and the Children of Israel
did, when the Lord had wrought wonderfully for their deliverance, and by a high
Hand and a wonderful Power brought them forth: And blessed be the Lord God
Almighty, and honored be his worthy Name, and the right Arm of his strength,
there are many living Witnesses of these things in this our day: Oh, dear
Friends! forget it not, but dwell low in the sense of your deplorable states
that you were in, when first the Lord reached unto you, and opened that Eye in
you, that let you see you were undone forever, if the Lord did not arise for
your Deliverance, when many cried out, for a Savior, or else I perish forever.
Oh Friends! what was too dear for us to part with in that day for the Lord?
Truly can my Soul say, That all that ever my Eyes beheld, was nothing to me in
comparison to my Souls Redemption; Oh! it was precious in my Eve, and to this
very day the living remembrance of it dwells fresh upon my Spirit at this time,
and my Heart and Soul loves the Lord, and blesses his worthy Name forever,
and for evermore. And now the Lord is remembering the Covenant that many made
with him in the days of their distress: Oh! remember, remember to pay your
Vows to the Lord; and look into your Hearts this day, and with the Light of the
Lord search and see, whether you are in Covenant this day with the Lord or no?
If you are, surely you are not this day to serve your selves, but the living
God, that made you for a purpose of his own Glory, and redeemed you with his
precious Blood.

And now consider, you that are at ease in your Sion, and eating, and drinking,
and wearing what seems desirable in your own Eyes, notwithstanding the Honor
of the Lord lies engaged, and your Souls in great danger, and the Servants of
the Lord distressed in your behalf: Oh! for the Lord's sake, and for your own
Souls sake, that will perish, if you do not speedily Repent, and arise and
strip your selves, and shake your selves from these things, and come away,
while the Call of the Lord lasts; Oh! linger not, for the Day of the Lord
hasteneth mightily, let nothing hinder you, make no excuses any longer, lest
you be excluded out of God's Kingdom, and the Door be shut against you; Oh!
think upon it, before the Midnight Cry come, wherein not one Day more will be
afforded to work for the Lord: Oh then! Wife nor Children, Lands nor Livings,
Husband nor Trade, Gold nor Silver will redeem one Soul; then that doleful
Sentence will be sounded, Depart, ye cursed workers of Iniquity, into
everlasting Torment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Oh the sense of
these things lie very heavy upon my Spirit, and truly bows my Heart in
Reverence before the Lord, and Morning and Evening is my Heart afflicted,
insomuch that I can say, as the Prophet said, Oh! that my Head were as Water,
and mine Eyes as a Fountain of Tears, that I might Weep day and night, for the
Unfaithful, that my Spirit might be eased: For truly, Friends, though I am the
least amongst many Thousands of the Lord's People, and a weak Instrument, yet
my Soul is concerned this day, and my Prayers to the great God of Heaven and
Earth are, That he would be pleased again to arise, and utter his Voice, and
thunder his Alarm from his holy Habitation, and make the Hearts of People to
tremble before his wonderful Power, and that he will yet afford a Day, and try
them again, and that his Trumpet may once more sound an Alarm, to the awakening
of their Consciences out of that Spiritual Slumber, wherein many are sleeping
and dreaming it is well with them, and that they are Rich, and Fat, and Full,
and need nothing; when their State is miserable, and wretched, naked and bare,
and undone forever, if they do not speedily Repent, and return with their whole
Hearts, and cry to God for Mercy, and that he will pardon their Iniquities, and
heal their Backslidings. Oh backsliding Israel! return, return, before it be
too late, for the Lord has long born with thee, Oh thou City of Bristol! as
the Testimony livingly sprung in my Heart a little before thy Distress came
upon thee, I was constrained to say, Oh, thou City of Bristol! a City of the
Mercies of the living God, he has highly favored thee; thou have had a Day
and a Time, wherein thou might have Enriched thy self with the Treasures of
God's Kingdom, and might have grown strong in the Lord, and in the Power of
his Might, whereby thou might have stood in a living Testimony for the Lord,
with one consent, as one Man; But now behold, the days of thy Distress are at
Hand, and thy Calamity like an armed Man; and now who can bemoan thee, or who
can interceed the Lord for thee? Or who can say to the Lord, Why have thou
suffered these things to come to pass? because it is in his Justice he has
done it. And blessed be his Name forever, he is fulfilling the Prophecies of
his Servants, whom he has sent early and late to proclaim his dreadful Day in
that City, and Year after Year, and Month after Month, has the Mind and Will
of the Lord been declared, and Messenger after Messenger, insomuch that many a
full Stomach loathed the Honeycomb, and all that seemed to received it, made
not a right use of it; for the Lord's end, in sending his Servants in days
past, was, that his People might be fitted and prepared, that a Judgment, or a
Destruction should not come upon his Children at unawares, but that they should
believe the Testimonies of his Truth, and take warning by it, and amend their
Lives, and be bowed in Spirit, and humbled under the great God of Heaven and
Earth, that your Prayers in this state might ascend unto the long provoked God,
whose Anger is waxen hot, and nothing will appease his Anger, but true
Repentance, and that with speed, and true brokenness of Heart: Oh! is this your
state? Or are you this day trampling upon the Testimonies of Truth, and upon
the Sufferings of your dear Brethren and Sisters, that are Sufferers this day
for the Testimony of Jesus, and are cruelly used? Oh! can you forget these
things? Come, put your Hands to the Work, and your Shouldiers to the Burden,
and cry mightily unto the Lord to spare a little, and give a little time to
renew your strength in him, that you may do something for the Lord, though but
at the last Hour; for surely Friends, the last Hour to many is very near; and
the long invited, if they miss of this Hour, they will never have another Hour
to work for the living God; and therefore is my Soul concerned, and my Heart
pained within me, and shortness of time is much before me, and therefore I beg
it of you, that you will lay it to Heart, before it be too late, and consider
how soon the Lord can call for your Breath; for our Lives here are likened to
the Flower of the Field, as the Lord said to his Prophet, when he said, What
shall I cry? Cry, All Flesh is Grass, and the Glory thereof as the Flower of
the Field: And I pray, how soon is that withered, and the Beauty of it comes to
naught? And seeing it is so, why will People run the hazard of their poor
Souls, for that which will augment to their perpetual Misery, World without end.

Oh! the Lord grant me my Request, and bow his Ear to my Prayer, for I am very
earnest with the Lord, and my Heart is pained within me in your behalf: Oh! it
is you, it it you that should have been as Pillars in the House of the Lord,
that the weakest might have leaned upon you, that your Courage and Valor might
have apppeared in the light of the Weak, that they might have been encouraged
by it, that the Strong and the Weak might have gone up together to the Mountain
of the House of the Lord, where the Lord would have taught you of his Ways, and
you might have walked in his Paths, and he would have fortified you with Might,
Courage, Strength, and Valor, and your Bow would have abode in his strength,
so that you would have grown strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
which he would have given unto you in a bountiful manner, had you wholly given
up your selves, and all that God Almighty had given you, and gave way to that
noble Spirit that was in Joshua and Caleb, who were resolved to follow the
Lord, they and their Families. Oh Friends! I can hardly write what arises in
my Heart, as touching this matter; but in the fear of the Lord I have this to
say, Your Eyes should have seen the Wonders of the Lord in a miraculous manner,
as they did that thus leaned upon the Lord, and trusted in his strength, and
believed in him, and then all things were possible; and by obeying of the
Command of the Lord the Walls of Jeriche fell, but if they had reasoned with
Flesh and Blood, or thought the Instruments too mean, or consulted with
reasoning, they had never seen the Power of the Lord to do his Work, neither
shall any now this day, that reason with Flesh and Blood: No, no; first learn
Obedience, give up to obey the Lord, and then your Eyes shall see the blessed
Work of the Lord to be fulfilled in its due time; for he is God Almighty, and
All sufficient, therefore let every Heart confide in his Power.

So, dear Friends, keep your Hearts with all diligence, for out of it are the
Issues of Life; for we all well know, that the People that live most Chaste,
keep nearest to the Lord, and they that are nearest, hear most of his Counsel:
And truly Friends, the time is at hand, when all shall be distressed for the
Lord, and the most Faithful will not spare of the heavenly Oil, then it will be
too late for any to go to buy. Oh! it often rises in my Heart, that yet a
little time, and Time unto many will be no more, for which my Soul is more
concerned than for any outward Suffering; for surely Friends, it is in my Heart
to believe, that the great God of Heaven and Earth, who has been long
provoked, and tried many waves, and shaken his Rod over this Nation many a
time, and nothing will prevail, therefore will he arise in his Strength, and go
through this Nation, and will plague the Inhabitants thereof, he will bring
Terror and Amazement upon them, that none shall be able to deliver out of his
Hand; for he has long called, and they have not regarded; he has long held
out his Hand, and they have not laid it to Heart, and therefore will their
Calamity come at a day unawares; and because they have not regarded the Call of
the Lord, when they cry aloud to him, he will not regard them; Oh! then blessed
eternally, and happy for evermore will all them be, that have obeyed the Lord
in their Day, and have not their Portion with the Wicked.

So with my endeared Love unto you, and that beyond utterance, Desiring and
Praying for your Souls Prosperity, I remain your Loving Friend, Elizabeth
Stirredge.
For the Friends that have been slack in their Duty toward the Lord, in this
day of Trial, wherein they should have doubled their Diligence unto the Lord,
that the Lord and his Truth might have been honored, as it was by his Servant
Daniel, who believed in his God, when the Enemies of the Lord were made to
confess, that he was the Servant of the Living God.


The 2d Day of the 1st. Month, 1683.
TO you that have been Professors of the Truth of God in the City of Bristol, a
weighty concern has been upon me, in the fear of the Lord to warn you that
have made a profession of God and Christ, and to be Christ's greatest Friends,
that you may take heed, that you be not found this day his greatest Enemies to
his Cross, which is the Power of God unto Salvation; for if we that have made a
profession to wait upon God and Christ in the pure silence of all flesh, at the
Heavenly Jerusalem, to be endued with Power from on High, should now break
Christ's Commandments, and should not obey him in his requirings, then how shall
we know his Doctrine and Life? then how shall Gods Ensign be set up to the
Nations, and his Standard of Righteousness to the People? How shall they be
gathered unto the Brightness of his Rising, and to his great and Glorious
Appearance, from off the barren Mountains, and dry Hills, where they have been
seeking the living amongst the dead, and scattered up and downn as Sheep
without a Shepherd, if we that have known the Lord do not glorify him as God,
and let our Light shine to the Nations? For though the Candle of the Wicked is
often put out, yet it is not so with the Righteous, who keep in the Just man's
path, which is a burning and a shining Light; for it burns up all the
combustable matter that lies in their way, and shines round about them to expel
all darkness, and to make manifest every appearance of Evil, that we may shun
it; and it shines more and more (unto them that obey it) unto the perfect day,
and then such can look into the perfect Law of liberty, the Ark of Gods
Covenant, and not be destroyed nor consumed; for it is the pure in Heart that
shall see God and live, but the Wicked shall not be able to abide the notable
day of his coming, neither shall they be able to stand in Judgment with him;
for when God speaks, all flesh must keep Silence before him; O therefore,
prepare, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel, and bring thy works beforehand to
Judgment, lest thou and thy works be burnt up together? For Sion must be
redeemed through Judgment, and her converts clothed with Righteousness, for
with the Spirit of Judgment and the Spirit of Burning, will the Lord purge away
the filth of the daughter of Sion, and he will have a clean People, zealous of
good Works; for Faith without works is Dead, as the Body is dead without the
Spirit; and that Faith which does give victory over the World, is the true
Faith, which is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen; therefore did the Apostle exhort them in his day, to come up in the
true Faith, and to put on the whole armor of God, that they might be able to
stand against all the Wiles of the Devil, in the evil day, and so having done
all to stand with their loins girt about with Truth, and so having on the breast
plate of Righteousness, and their feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel
of Peace, and above all, taking the shield of Faith, wherewith they might be
able to Quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked; for the travel of the
Righteous in all Ages, was that they might know and witness the true passage
through the great Tribulations within, and the Enemies of the Lord subdued in
their own Houses; and then they did not question Gods sufficiency in bringing
down their outward Enemies; for such that have given up their Souls and Bodies
to serve the Lord, can trust him with the lesser as well as the greater; for of
how much more value is the Soul than the Body? for the Body is but for a little
moment of time, and is cut down and returns to the dust from whence it came;
but the Soul passes into the never ending day of Eternity, where the Souls of
the Righteous shall forever live with the Lord in everlasting Joy and Felicity,
but the Wicked in everlasting Woe and Misery! Oh, therefore, what great need
have we, while we are in these Earthly Tabernacles, to bring forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, and to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, that our
calling and election may be made sure with the Lord; for what have we to do
whilst in the Body, but to fear God, and keep his Commandments, which is the
whole Duty of man; and blessed be the Name of the Lord, can a Remnant say, When
he does enlarge our Hearts, that his Commandments are not grievous, but joyous,
and his way a way of Pleasantness, and all his paths Peace! O, therefore, you
that would be counted Friends of God, and Disciples of Jesus Christ, come away
(whilst the call of the Lord lasts) into faithfulness, and leave your Nets
and Entanglements in this Life, which keeps you a fishing after the things of
this World, which do perish in the using, and take up the daily Cross of
Christ, as the true Disciples did, and follow him, that he may make you Fishers
of men; for those that will be Christ's Disciples must deny Self, and take up
the daily Cross of Christ, and follow him through the great Tribulations,
wheresoever he leads them; then such may be made Instruments in the hand of the
Lord, when they are converted to strengthen their weak Brethren, and to teach
Transgressors his Ways, that Sinners may be converted to the Truth; for the
Lord did not call us into his Vineyard to stand Idle, but to work, and
especially at this time of day; now the Name of the Lord is so much profaned
amongst the Heathen, by some that have left their public Testimony to save
Self, and have not done as holy Daniel did, notwithstanding the King's Decree,
he worshipped his God as at other times, with his Windows open toward
Jerusalem; but if Daniel had reasoned with Flesh and Blood, That the same God
that could hear in public, can hear in private; and so shut up for fear of
man, till the King's Decree was over, where had Daniel's Deliverance been, and
Gods All Sufficiency seen? Oh, therefore, what have you been a doing in your
secret Chambers for the Lord, that it cannot yet appear on the house top, but
are ready to say within your selves, That you have not left your Testimony for
the Truth, but do meet often together in his fear? O! arise, arise, and come
away; for your Rest is polluted, for the Lord loathes your solemn Assemblies,
and rejects all your Sacrifices, because it is not of his own preparing;
therefore it is an Abomination in his sight, and it is no more than the cutting
off a Dogs neck, or the offering of Swines Blood; for the Lord is jealous for
his own Names sake, which you should have honored in the fight of the Heathen,
if you had possessed what you have professed; for what excuse can you make with the
Lord, O ye Rich men of the Earth! when the Lord shall enter into Judgment with
you, for his great Name's sake, which you should have sanctified in the sight
of the People; for it was not sufficient for the poor Woman, when she was
healed by Christ's Virtue, of her bloody Issue, (which all the Physicians of no
value could not do) to slip away, and not make known his Power; but she was
made, at the call of Jesus, to come and reverence him in the sight of the
Multitude, and to confess unto his Power, which was beyond the sight of all
Visibles; and those that followed him no further than for what they could see
in his visible Appearance, or to receive from him, to serve their own ends in
the outward, and not only and alone for eternal Life, could not with all their
thronging and pressing of him, fetch one drop of Virtue from him, to the saving
of their Souls. Oh! therefore take warning, and answer the end of the Lord with
his own this day, or else it will be more tolerable for the Professors of the
times, (except you Repent, than for you) which never saw their way to wait upon
the Lord in the silence of all flesh, without they had an outward Teacher: And
what if the Lord should enter into Judgment with you, and require their Blood
at your hands; for there are many honest-hearted amongst them, that if they
knew the Truth, they would walk in it, and gladly receive it; and the day is at
hand, that they that do not gather with Christ, with the Whirlewind of his
Wrath, they shall be scattered; and then shall the gathering of the People be
unto him, from the East, West, North and South, and from the four Winds of
Heaven, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom, and
the Children of the Kingdom, that have lived in disobedience be cast out; for
those that have been first, may be last, and the last first

Oh, therefore, while you have an hour to work in his Vineyard, be diligent in
his Work; for cursed is every one that does the Work of the Lord negligently!
Oh, therefore, while the last hour lasts, be diligent, that you may be
clothed with the Wedding Garment of Righteousness, and behold the Lord and
live; for the long suffering day of the Lord is almost at an end with many, and
the day of his Judgments near to be poured out upon the Rebellious; then the
Rebellious in Israel may say, Oh, that we had given up our all, and trusted the
Lord in difficulty, that we might have seen his great sufficiency, and his holy
Arm made bare for our Deliverance; then will many be ready to cry out like old
Israel, We will go up to the Land which the Lord promised us: Oh! then it will
be too late; for what was the answer of Moses to them? Go not up for you would
not go up in the Lords time, and therefore he is departed from you; and now if
you go up, your Enemies shall prevail over you. Oh! therefore, you that have
been called by the Name of Israel, do not reason away your strength, as
Sampson, and they did, and give it into the hands of strangers, and then let
your Oppressors rule over you; but be tender of the Glory of God, and have true
charity over the seed of God in your own Bosoms; and then you shall be far from
Oppression; for the Lord has long waited to be gracious, and his tender
Compassion sails not to his People; nor there is no occasion to be offended in
the Truth, whatever has happened amongst some that have professed it: Blessed be
the Name of the Lord, Truth is clear in it self, and without variableness, or
shadow of turning, and more desirable to the Faithful than ever it was; for the
more we wait upon God, the more our strength is renewed in him, and as we grow
up in the Faith, and wait for the blessed Appearance of our Lord Jesus, when he
does appear, we can see him as he is, and appear with him in Glory, and grow up
from strength to strength, and from one degree of Grace to another, till we
come to the fullness of the Statute, that is to be attained in him; and he is
glorifying his People more and more, and clothing of them with his own
Righteousness, so that the Upright in heart can say, O Lord! thou art our
Righteousness, and by thy Name do we acknowledge thee; and because thou have
washed us, therefore have we a part in thee, and thou in us; and worthy, worthy
is our God to be waited upon, and to be had in everlasting Remembrance of all
his Saints that are about him, and to be reverenced and worshipped in the
beauty of Holiness, in the Assemblies of his People; for his Glory is far above
and over all the glory of Egypt, to those that see him as he is in his
invisible Appearance. And so, the desire of my Soul is, that all the Lord's
People may be gathered into the Covenant of Life and Light, and grow up in the
Life and Power of Holiness, which is beyond all Declarations of Words, and
shall remain when Words may cease, and Declarations may have an end; but the
Word of the Lord endures forever.

So I remain your Loving Friend, Prisoner to Bridewell, for Truths Testimony.
Dorcas Dole.
The 30th Day of the 3d Month, 1683.
O Lord! by a high Hand, and a stretched out Arm did thou bring the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, and made a Highway for thy ransomed ones to pass over
through the great Deep, and swallowed up their Enemies quick, that persued
after them, so that they sung thy Praise upon the Banks of Deliverance: but O
Lord! how soon did they forget thy great Name and glorious Deliverance, when
they met with other Difficulties, for the trial of their Faith, as if thy Arm
was shortened that it could not save them, or thy Ear heavy that thou could
not hear them: O! help thy People in this day, that we may take warning by
their Fall, and follow thee fully through all Difficulties, that thou may
honor thy great Name in us, in making known thy great Sufficiency in the sight
of the Heathen. O Lord! let us not look back again into Egypt, for Graves to
bury thy holy Seed in bondage, but raise us up more and more in the
Resurrection of thy Life and Power, that the second Death may have no Power
over us: O! thou that never slumberest nor sleep, who wast Israel's Keeper,
and Jacob's Preserver in Straits and great Difficulties, watch over thy People
for good, and help us to Watch and Pray continually unto thee, in the motion of
thy eternal Spirit; for of our selves we can do nothing, but when thou do
enlarge our Hearts in and through our Lord Jesus Christ, we are able to perform
an acceptable Sacrifice unto thee; for it is the Breath of Life which thou do
breathe upon our Souls, which makes us in the living sense of thy quickening
Power, to return unto thee that which is thy due, all Honor, Praises and true
Thanksgiving, for unto thee it does belong, and to the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne from me, and all that know thee. O! therefore fill our Hearts and Souls
with thy living Presence, that our Souls may still live to Praise thee; for
thou art worthy to have all Praise, Honor and Renown, from the rising of the
Sun to the setting of the same; Amen.

D. D.

The Way to Health, long Life and Happiness: Or, A discourse of Temperance, and
the particular Nature of all things requisite for the Life of Man; very
necessary for all Families. The like never before published. Printed and Sold
by Andrew Soul, at the Crooked-Billet in Hollway-Lane, in Shoreditch.


