Something written in Answer to a Lying, Scandalous Book printed for E. B. in
Paul's Churchyard, as he calls it, whose lies and slanders are denied by the
children of Light, who in scorn are called Quakers, which Book is proved to be
a work of darkness? The Author of it is said to be called Powel, who sold a
Copy of it for Ten shillings, and now and then a flagon of Beer, and would not
have his name declared: So here your fruits is known of your Trees, which are
to be cut down and cast into the fire, and when you are there, remember you
were warned.

Also a Declaration against the Lies and Slanders which are Printed for G:
Horton, that upon the truth they should not rest, but with the power and life
of God be denied; and who sees the end of them who makes lies their Refuge, who
are swept away with the Beesom of destruction; which shall be witnessed with
that of God in every one of your Consciences: And them whom you in scorn call
Quakers, from them is given forth who are in the Light that comprehends your
deceits, sees them that they are to be condemned with the Light.

A Slanderous Book printed for E. B. at the Angel in Paul's Church Yard, at he
calls it, but no name set to the Book: So to all the Children of Light, it does
appear and is seen to be the works of darkness; and he to be one of the
venomous Creatures that appears not in the day, who privily slanders in the
dark: Certain men of account in the eyes of the Lord, was sent to E. B. his
shop, to know who was the Author of the Book, and that gave him the Copy of
Lies and Slanders against the People called Quakers, and it was said to them
that he had vowed not to tell his name, and promised; then after another went,
to E. B. his shop, and inquired of the Author of the Book against the Quakers;
and after certain words it was told him, it was one Powel that had been a
Priest, which had Ten shillings for his Copy, and 40, or 50. Books, and he was
a poor man, and did it for money, and a flagon of Beer now and then. Here all
may see which be in the Light, how he sells his lies, and E. B. has printed
his Lies to get gain by, and so slanders the People of God: And the Title of
Powels Book, he calls it the Quakers Mountebanck, which is Powels own; or the
Jesuits turned Quakers. All the honest hearted and right minded that love and
fear God, will witness against thee to be a Liar, and that in thy conscience
shall witness against thee in the day of thy condemnation for thy lies, who art
the wicked one that sows the evil seed: And them that in scorn thou call'st
Quakers, their Rise thou know not, neither their Doctrine nor their
Language; but have discovered thy self and thy Ignorance, and Envy,
Profaneness, Dissimulation, Uncharitableness, evil Behavior, Gesture, Alms,
and Ends for Money; as it was said thou had for the Copy 10. s. and here thy
foolish wit, and folly has manifested thy self. None of them that fear the
Lord, and loves the truth, and are not given over to believe Lies, will not
give thy paper the reading, except to see thy folly: And the Country men who be
in the light and life of our Lord Jesus Christ, may all take notice of thy
silliness, and in what a delusion thou art, ensnared in subtilty, and led
captive by the will of the Devil, and sells thy lies for money; and have not,
nor dare not to set thy name to thy lies and works of darkness. And again
Powel, thou art vexing and fretting thy self at the meeting of the people of
God (that thou in scorn call Quakers) at a place which they have hired; which
thou callst Chapel or Tavern, which now is neither, but the people of God
there have met and do meet, which makes such unsavory Spirits as thine utter
forth their venomn, rage and folly; for it was the Apostles practice, who
taught in his own hired house two years together the Kingdom of God, who denied
the Temple and Jewish Synagogues, and witnessed Christ Jesus the second
Priesthood, at whose practice the Heathen raged, as now they do, such as are
given over to believe lies; and Powel, thou have bewitched the people with thy
lies for money, like the Doctor Simon Magus: But now thy God is known, what
thou servest and whom you serve; the Children of Light with thy lies thou can
not deceive. In the beginning of thy Book, thou sets some Scriptures for thy
cloak to blind the peoples eyes with a form of Godliness: But in the Life that
gave forth the Scriptures, thou art judged and eke condemned who have got the
sheeps clothing, but inwardly art a ravening Wolf, and thy speech is known, who
art he that sows the Tares, the Enemy and the lying spirit, which the spirit of
the Lord ever judged, and thou say they shall deceive the very Elect:
Proclaimed thou art here Liar, to be contrary to Christ's words, who says, If
it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect; and does not say as thou
say, they shall deceive the very Elect; and here recorded thou art with the
Spirit of the Lord God to be the lying spirit and the false, which the Children
of Light are to beware of, and with the light condemned, for now out of thy
mouth, thou false Prophet, comes the Blasphemy. But many shall say, We have
prophesied in thy Name, but he shall say unto you, I know you not, Depart; and
many we see are transforming themselves into an Angel of Light, and as the
Ministers of Righteousness, getting their form; and he that has the form and
not the power, turn away from such, says the Apostle, and with the life and
power we are brought to turn away from such, according to the Apostles Command;
which makes the Heathen to rage, which has a form of godliness, but not the
power; and thou may prevail with thy lying Spirit, with such as are given
over to believe lies; but the Children of Light do comprehend and see thee with
the light, which condemns thee and thy lies: Thou talkest, The man is blessed
that meditates in the Law of God day and night, but thou art far from that: and
then thou fallest a railing against them thou call Quakers and Tremblers:
David was a Trembler, that delighted in the Law of God, who had Songs made of
him by the generation of Liars, of which thou art one in nature: And thou
say, we refuse Dignities and Magistrates, and reject the word; how is lie
added to lie? and despise and reject all books and learning, here is heaps of
thy lies; and say, they cast away the Counsel of Christ, here is another lie;
but in this thou have, and taken money for thy lies, Judas like; and thou art
he who springs up in the night, whose works are seen in the night, who art
tormented that the Children of light goes from City to City, which preaches
the fear of God, the everlasting Gospel to men that dwell upon the earth, which
discovers thy works of darkness; whose mouth barks out the swelling nonsense as
thou speakst of, as beforementioned may be read, who would devour like the
fox, but thou art chained; who barks in the night, yet stands nameless; thou
say they never keep time nor method. Thy method, and that which feeds all
your wisdom, is with the spirit of the Lord denied, who are in the consounded
language of Babel, where the Beast sits; and thou and thy mother of harlots,
which are both judged with the life of God, who art the man thou speak of
full of words, which shall not prosper. And friend, in thy calamity remember
those words, and in the day of thy distress, when thou enters into that where
there is no Rest; from him who says, Depart, of thy blood I am clear, upon thy
own head let it be; and all thy jeers, scorns, and unsavory speeches, to thy
self shall return home; and Dignity and Ministry of God is owned, as the
Scripture declares, with the life that gave forth the Scriptures: and thou art
he who loves the dark, whose light and lightness, thou in thy liberty have
uttered forth, who in the doctrine of the Devil art found; and many words in
that which thou call the Doctrine, is not worth mentioning: And that which
thou call their language and discipline, is thy own, and shall stand for thy
self: And that which thou call their policy, manifests thy own nakedness
and folly, and proves it, who appears in the last days, whose froath now foam
out, but is afraid of the pot; but a fire is kindling, and many are scumming of
the filth, and this message shall stand, that in thy conscience shall witness,
that which governs thee is Antichrist and ungodly; and thou that caust not
witness the spirit of the Lord poured upon thee, as openly thou have declared;
with it thou art recorded in the lying spirit thou art, whose madness appears,
but with the light reproved, and thy End is seen: and that which thou call
presumption, is thy own, and whom to thy self shall return, who has the head
where is the names of Blasphemy; and that which thou calls the merit, is denied
by that which bridles the will, where free grace is received; who art worse
then Balaam, who has taken money to slander, and belie, and reproach the
people of God; but thy filthy dreams thou speak of shall home to thy self
return, who art one of the unclean spirits which out of the bottomless pit
comes, which has long caused our Nation and Land to stinck with such unsavory
smells. And whereas thou speak of their profaneness and uncleanness, this
as is said to thee before, shall home to thy self return, who art Esau like, as
is manifest; and of Israel we are and of the house of God, and it we do not go
about to pluck down; but thy old house now comes to be shaken which is upon the
sands, who turns the grace of God into lasciviousness: and there is no
Scripture speaks of a Sacrament; and them that are able to try Ministers, the
Children of Light do own, and not deny them as thou say: and here the lying
spirit is tried, and many other lies thou have declared which be not worth
mentioning, thou have such an unsavory smell. And the Ordinances which God has
set apart is witnessed, which the lying spirit does not, who art as black as
the pitch thou speak of seen with the light: And whereas thou say, their
dissimulation, envy and uncharitableness, shall stand for thy self; for thy
envy thou have uttered, and thy uncharitableness thou have uttered and
proclaimed abroad, and thy dissimulation is seen by all the children of light;
for which dissembling thou have money, and of the world thou must have a
praise, which lies in wickedness. But now the chief Sheepherd is risen, which
keeps the Lambs from thy mouth, and the Law and Gospel is witnessed, and thou
seen to be given up to believe lies, whose foundations must be razed down,
which the foundation of God stands sure, which all your winds, maliciousness
and reviles cannot shake; the Lord forgive thee, we revile not, but speak the
truth in thy conscience, that this great sin may not be laid to thy charge, and
the Printers which published the lies; for this brings in your gains
Diana-like, in publishing your sorcery and lies: Fine Crafts men! but children
of light will buy none of thy ware, but see thy folly, and with them art
judged; and thou have manifested of what College thou art of, and what School
thou have learned, and who is thy Master; which is denied with the Children of
Light, who witness Christ the Master, and learn of him: And whereas again thou
say [their Ignorance] this again is thy own, and in this thou have showed it,
and the darkness, as in the state of the Night, Bats and Owls thou speakst of,
who loves the darkness more then the light, whose evil deeds appears, and among
the Prophets of the Lord God comes not, in their way, life and light, which
with it art condemned; so the blind leading the blind, shall not both fall
into the ditch: And as thou say, their behavior, gesture, alms and ends, this
stands for thy self; thy gesture is known, thy ends is seen, and thy behavior
recorded, unlearned, an enemy to Isreal's Commonwealth, and the Lion roars
because he wants his prey: Thou who speaks of a Call; that which does call to
holiness, thou art an enemy to, who rails and lies for money, backbites for
money, and slanders the Children of Light for money: So the fear of God is not
before thy eyes, who makes a scoff at inspiration-teaching. Here thou have
showed thy ground; thou have showed thy Principles, and showed thy Religion;
and who has been thy Schoolmaster, who art unnurtered in the things of God;
but from them separated, who says, the revilings against God, Christ and
Scriptures, which are lies, and all the lies and unsavory Expressions which
thou speak of, we deny, and the untruths which thou slandereth the people of
God withal, which meet at the place called the Mouth, are condemned by the
light, home to thy self to return, with all thy lying stories: and whereas thou
say [their Gestures] this is thy own, who art shameless and not in thy
modesty, and the yellings, whinings, when thou art in thy misery, Remember what
thou scoffest at in thy life time, and have made a trade in uttering Lies and
Slanders against the children of light for money; and whereas thou speak of
their alms and ends, those whom thou scornfully callst Quakers, their ends thou
see not who thy self see not, and thou have shot with thy arrows, but have
not hit: But the arrows of the Almighty shall at thee be shot, and in thee
stick whose bow is bent: And in the pure Religion, thy divisions thou can not
sow among the children of Light, neither does thy delusions enter, and to thy
self enrich thee little credit. And all the Magistrates which fear the living
God will us own, and witness to be of God; we have a witness of God in all your
consciences: And here we have brought your works to light, and deny the works
of darkness, and are justified in the fight of God and all consciences, and are
bold in the Lord to declare against thy lies and slanders; and their charity
may and shall judge thee and all thy generation. Was there some made to go
naked amongst you, as a sign and figure of your nakedness, which wanted the
clothing of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Righteousness, which to you and
among you was a sign and a wonder, as the servant of the Lord God Israel was:
And whereas Pharaohs lean ill-favored kine, which devours the fat and the fair
ones, [Religion] this needs no further interpretation, but the light which
manifests thou and thy generation to be in the steps, who eats up the fat and
devours them that are fed, seen with the light, and with it comprehended, as
the Goals in England may witness against thy generation of Teachers, which
serves not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own bellies which is your God, who
glory in your shame, whose mouths must be stopped; who speaks great swelling
words, having the persons of men in admiration because of your advantage; but
none you have from the children of Light, who are in the Spirit who gave forth
the Scriptures. And many other lies is in the Book, as Jesuits and Papists,
which all are denied with the Light, which are not worth a mentioning, but home
to thy self return, by them whom the world in scorn calls Quakers, who are in
the light, life and power that does shake and remove that which must be shaken,
that that which cannot be shaken may appear and remain: So without the
Government of Christ thou art, and all such as believe thy Doctrine, which
makes lies thy refuge, which must be swept away with the Beesom of destruction:
So you Printers and Stationers, Beware lest you be found under that Prophecy,
which says, Report, and we will Report; ye all with the light will be seen and
manifest; which light shall be witnessed with the light in your consciences, in
the great day of the Lord. So now you have time, prize it, least you say you
had time, and it is past; This is the day of your visitation: But if you say,
our craft must go down, so said Diana, when the truth was preached, which truth
now throws down all deceits; and remember E. B. thou in thy life time art
warned, and Powel who art with the light seen, and thy smell is savored, thy
Language is known, and thy lie is seen, and thou weighed in the balance, and
thou found too light, and thy measure is too short, and thy weights is too
light, who the Serpent must feed, but the seed of God can not, but with it
art bruised.

G. Horton, A Paper is printed by thee, and no other Name subscribed to it, it
therefore thou must father; all thy slanders in it, upon thee we lay, for it is
the fruit that comes out of the old bottle, and from the envious man, which is
that evil seed which grows upon the thorny ground, and the stony ground, and
that which brings forth Briars and Thorns, thy seed may receive, which is nigh
unto curfing, and to be rejected, and the Title of thy paper thou call'st, The
Quakers Beacon fired, and many unfavory expressions in it, which be not worth
mentioning, which the honest simple-hearted will not give ear to the reading of
it, except to discover thy folly; but now it does appear how the wicked fret
themselves and gnaw their tongues, such as are wholly given up to believe lies,
cast out all their filthy stuff upon the Children of light, but praised be God
it does not touch them nor stain their garments, who are made white with the
blood of the Lamb; for though now the Sea roars and foams, and the Lions roars
because they have not their prey, yet God it is that stops their their mouths,
and has set the bounds of the Sea that the waves they cannot pass. And those
which you in scorn calls Quakers, do witness, Quaking and shaking away that
which must be shaken, and winnowing of that which must be winnowed, according
to the Scriptures, which the holy men of God did witness, and a Hell, and the
Beesom of destruction which sweeps all that makes lies their refuge; for such
forgets God, and must be turned into Hell, and that does wickedly: and this
shall thou witness, G. Horton: and the Ministers of Jesus Christ we own
according to the Scriptures, and Revelations we own according to the
Scriptures, for none knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him: and thou that makes a
scoff at this, makes a scoff at the Revelation of the Son of God, and the end
of thy Religion is seen; and Heaven is Gods Throne, and Earth is his footstool,
and all the Laws that are good we own, which thou says we sweep away; but the
custom of thy sin has taken away the sense of it. And then thou speak much
of a people called Ranters, and much thou bring of their conditions and
practices against them, which thou in scorn callst Quakers; but their condition
and thy condition is denied with the spirit of truth. And thou say, they
despise the Ministers of the Word, that is another of thy lies, for the
Ministers of the Letter is denied by them, which thou in scorn calls Quakers,
which are the Ministers of the word, who are made able Ministers of the Spirit,
but not of the Letter; and that of Jude shall stand for thy self, being one
that is separated from the Spirit of God, and a Reprobate concerning the Faith;
and Faith that works by love is owned. And the last Paper put forth against
your lies, clears and shows the resurrection and witnessing of it: And the
Faith, the gift of God is received, which Faith works by love: And your
Ordinances of men are denied, and are not to be touched nor tasted, as the
Apostle says, and the Churches of the world are denied, and that Church which
is in God is witnessed, These. 1.1. And them that are deceived by you, are
bewitched as the Gallathians was; and who are kept under thy lies, are deceived
by thee as Simon Magus was; but the light of God is risen (glory to him for
ever) and thy Lies are discovered, and them that makes lies their refuge; and
the Swine do cry, and the Dogs bark, and the Beasts do run, which makes many
people to admire and wonder, and despise at the works of the Lord, which makes
many ears to tingle; but wonderers and despisers perish: and you which are
quite run besides Scripture, sense and reasonables, have set your selves as a
Beacon for all to look at; a Generation of Liars, which says, the Devils
Ministers has transformed themselves into the Ministers of Righteousness, when
the Scripture does not say so. O Blasphemers, for if the Devil can transform
himself into Righteousness, let all the upright judge whether this be not quite
contrary to the Scriptures; but this is like unto the rest of the lies in thy
book, which is not worth mentioning; but in the day of thy calamity remember,
how in thy prosperity how fruitful thou was in the works of darkness, and
sowing thy lies; but the way of the wicked shall be stopped, which shall into
Hell be turned, who art seen to be one of them to come under the Prophecy, who
says, Report, and we will report, whose Tongues are bent to tell lies, and
slanders their Neighbors privily: Against whom, the Lords hand is turned, and
his Bow bent, when his Arrows stick fast in your sides: Remember in the day of
your slaughter, in your lifetime you was warned, and this was love to your
souls; and many unsavory words be in thy paper which is not worth mentioning,
but home to thy self shall return, but thy unsavory smell is into the Nation
ascended, which comes from the unclean Spirit, which such long have caused the
Nation to stinck. But the Lord is rising by his mighty power, who will take
away these filthy and noisome smells, by and in whose power we are preserved,
which drives away the refuge of lies, and the Liars to the Lake of fire, and
that in your Consciences in the day of condemnation and calamity shall witness
us (whom you in scorn call Quakers; whom you in your lifetime make a trade in
Printing lies, slanders, and false reports against them) to be friends of your
souls, and your eternal Good, and so the Lord forgive you that this great sin
be not laid to your charge: Every one shall have reward according to their
works: Your reward will be great and heavy, though now you may lead your life
as him that Christ spoke of, who went into the torment and fire, who had
pleasure in his lifetime, there is an example for you; but at this you may
snuff, as the wild Ass spoken of in Jeremy: but there is a month when you
shall be taken, and then think on us: Consider what was spoken in thy
lifetime, from them whom you in scorn call Quakers.

And in the Scout is printed by R. Wood for G. Horton; In it is found many lies
and slanders against those people whom he scornfully calls Quakers, but all the
lies and slanders is condemned with the Light, and the Liars with them: G.
Horton, mention the woman that is gone beyond the Sea, the Pilgrimage as thou
say; else for ever let thy mouth be stopped.

Also more slanderous Speeches is uttered by thou Walker, as the Quakers black
Error, which black Error is thy own, for to the truth we are converted from thy
black Error: Therefore the venomn thou have uttered forth against the children
of Light, with which Light, thou liar and thy lies are condemned to the Lake of
Fire, which burns, which cannot be quenched.

From them whom you in scorn call Quakers. Amos Stodard. John Bolton. Simon
Dring. Gerrard Roberts. Robert Rich. Robert Dring.
In the Name of themselves and the rest.

FINIS.

