One Heart and one Way.
Preached 1639.
ZACH. 14.9. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth; in that day shall
there be one Lord and his name one.


GOD leaves not himself without witness, nor his Church without witnesses; and
therefore he did in all ages raise up Prophets not only for his Churches
present Direction and Consolation, but also to show unto them what should come
to pass in the latter days.

God having now opened the graves of his people, commanded deliverances for
Jacob, and turned their captivity as the Rivers in the South, sent forth his
prisoners by the blood of the Covenant, out of the pit in which there was no
water, Chap. 9.11. being now come again into their own Land, they were apt to
please themselves with thoughts of ease and peace, as if they should now live
in an I Will of providence, where they should enjoy a perpetual summer: therefore
in this captivity the Lord does fore-warn them of greater sufferings that they
were to undergo in the last times.

Wherein we have first the Judgment it self denounced, setting forth an utter
overthrow, and a perfect conquest: the day of the Lord comes, when the spoil
shall be divided in the middle of thee, ver. 12. which being spoken after their
return from Babylon, must needs be understood deultima clade, of the last
destruction of their City, and the present dissipation of their Nation.

Secondly, here is a description of their miserable condition at this time: the
light shall not be clear nor dark, ver. 6. non stabilis aliqua temporum ratio,
there shall be nothing certain: in doubtful times we are subject always to new
fears: daily changes are continual dangers: quasi in continuo crepusculo, it
shall be neither day nor night, mixtures of hope and fear: they cannot say it
is so dark as there is an end of their hopes, etc. nor so light as there is an
end of their fears.

Thirdly, after this he comforts his Church with an assurance of deliverance,
and that by diverse Arguments.

First, though it were sharp, yet it should be short, but as one day: for a
thousand years with the Lord is but as one day: and a day that the Lord
knows; that is, he has limited, for the desolations are determined, Dan.
9.26.

Secondly, the issue shall be happy; though the day should neither be clear nor
dark, yet he promises laetum fore exitum, the evening shall be light.

Thirdly, the Author of their deliverance shall be Jehovah: he that before
gathered all Nations against Jerusalem, ver. 2. he that provided the thorns to
scatter Judah, provided also the carpenters to fray them away, Chap. 1.20,21.
then shall Jehovah go forth and fight against this Nation, ver. 3.

Fourthly, the manner of the deliverance, God shall so do it, that he will make
it appear to be his work. God does many things by second causes, wherein his
hand does not so clearly appear: his hand is in his glove, his arm in his
sleeve: but when it does appear to be wholly his work, then he does make bare
his arm in the sight of the Nations, Isa 52.10 The Lord should be as plainly
seen here, as if his feet did stand upon Mount Olivet.

Fifthly, the glorious condition of this Church after this deliverance, and
that in these particulars.

First, after this Jerusalem shall be made eminent and honorable: Jerusalem
stood in a Valley, and the Mount of Olives hid it, that it could not be seen:
but now, the Mount shall cleave asunder in the midst, and all shall become a
plain: what ever might hinder the sight of the glory of the City, or else might
hinder the flocking in of her own people and of all Nations to her. God will
remove great obstacles: Mounts shall not stand in the way of his people, either
to hinder their deliverance, or to over shadow their glory; Who art thou Oh
great Mountain, that thou should stand before Zorobabel? thou shall become a
plain, cap. 4.7.

Secondly, after this deliverance Jerusalem shall be exalted, as the mother
Church, and then living waters shall go forth of Jerusalem unto the uttermost
parts of the earth, Ver. 8. which was in a measure accomplished when the Law
went out of Zion, but it was not fulfilled; for this fountain in Jerusalem was
soon dried up; and therefore here is some further thing aimed at; for the
promise is, summer and winter shall they run, and therefore I doubt not from
hence to conclude, that after the coming in of the Jews, great profit and
enlargement both in knowledge and graces shall come upon all the Gentile
Churches.

Thirdly, the blessed and glorious Government of this state after this
deliverance; the Lord had for their sins broken both the staff of beauty and
the staff of bonds, by which he fed them in times past, but now he would return
and be their King again; for so I should rather express he Emphatical particle
(...) super totam terram illam; And it is exceeding probable, that after their
conversion the Lord shall in a more glorious manner undertake the Government of
that people: surely it is not for nothing that it is so often repeated, And
David my servant shall be their Prince for ever, Ezekiel. 37.24,25.

Lastly, here is the fruit and consequence of this Government, and that is
double in this verse, Jehovah shall be one, and his name one, etc.

We know the name of God is exceeding diversely taken in the Scripture; but here
I conceive is meant the Religion that God has set forth in his word, and the
worship that he has set up in the Church; so I conceive it is used in Mich.
4.5. All people will walk every man in the name of his God, and we will walk in
the name of the Lord our God for ever: that is, the greatest part of the world,
as their gods are Idols, so they are addicted unto a superstitious worship of
these according to the inventions of men; but as our God is but one, and his
rule of worship one: this worship according unto this rule we will keep our
selves to, and never change for any humane invention so long as the world shall
endure.

So that the meaning of the promise seems to be this; whereas before they
worshipped many Gods; as there be Gods many, and Lord, many; they served both
the Idols of their hearts, and of their hands; now they should turn from dead
Idols, and serve only the living God: they should say, What have I to do any
more with Idols? and then, Jehovah shall be one: And whereas in the times of
their ignorance as they served many Gods, so in the worship of these Gods they
had many superstitious and carnal rites, according as every man's fancy led him:
and so there were as many names, and several names of worship as they had many
Gods. But now the Lord promises that as all the Idols shall be taken away, so
all Idolatrous and superstitious worship also, so that there shall be but one
God, and one name. Jehovah one, the rule of his worship one, and his worship
according to that rule shall be one.

One name. Philosophers tell us that unum non superaddit enti aliquid positivum
sed tantum negationem Compositionis and divisionis. Aquin. par. 1. q 11. a.i. A
denial both of multitude and mixtures.

So we see God is One; that is, there is none else: none besides; and that
stands in opposition unto many; and God is One, that is, he has a simple
being, and quicquid est in Deo, Deus est, in opposition unto mixture: so that
First his name shall be One, to set out his purity, that his worship it shall
not be mixed with the inventions of men no more. Secondly, his name One, that
is, the Religion shall be the same amongst them all; it notes the identity of
it; so that though now there be many every where, but then they shall have One
heart and one way.

I will begin with the first, unity as it stands opposed unto composition
setting forth the simplicity of Gods worship; it shall be no more mixed and
corrupted with the inventions of men, etc.

Doctrine.
When a people turn to God by repentance, and he returns to them in mercy, he
will give unto them one name, (that is) he will free them from all
superstitious and humane mixtures in his worship.

In opening whereof I shall show two things: first that in all ages it has
been the main labor of Satan and all the enemies of the Church, when they
could not root out the worship of God wholly, then to corrupt the simplicity of
it by humane inventions, traditions and superstitious mixtures.

Secondly, that when they turn unto God, and God unto them, he will free them
from all these*

First, that the main aim has been a mixed Religion, contrary to the
simplicity of the Gospel, so that if they cannot sow wholly tares, yet there
shall be tares sown amongst the wheat; this has been always the practice of
the envious man, Mat. 13.28. this will appear if we look into the several ages
of the Church, and we shall find that the same plot has been always on foot.

First, look upon the Church of God in Egypt, and there Satan introduced a
mixture; they worshipped indeed the true God, as appeared in the Idolatry of the
Calf, but they worshipped him not according to the rule that he had prescribed,
but after an Idolatrous manner of the Heathen, and so they defiled themselves
with the Idols of Egypt, Ezekiel. 20.7. worshipping the true God according to the
inventions of men: Therefore the Lord having purified his worship in the
Wilderness, and seeing their proness to this evil, he warns them that when they
came into the Land of Canaan, they should not so much as enquire after the
manner of worship used by those Nations, not how they served their Gods, Deuteronomy.
12.30,32. he saw it was the heart of man was apt to enquire after, if not after
a new God yet after new ways of worshipping the true God, continually: the Lord
therefore commands them, Thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God: So that to
worship the true God in a superstitious and ceremonious imitation of Idolaters,
though it be but in the manner of their worship, and though I say it be done to
the true God, yet it is in Gods sight abominable.

Yet when God had given them this warning, when they were come into Canaan they
were mixed among the Heathen, and learned their ways, and worshipped their
Idols, which proved a snare unto them, Psalm. 106.36. Jeroboam fled into Egypt
from the face of Solomon, and there he learned the Idolatry of the Calves: and
when he came to the Crown this was the Religion, and the way of worship, that
he had a desire for Politic ends to set up; but yet he would have it to come
as near to the worship of God at Jerusalem as possibly he might: they had their
Temple, Altar, and Ceremonies, every whit as chargable, and in humane discourse
as rational as that at Jerusalem; only there must be a mixture of something he
had devised out of his own heart, 1 King. 12.33. and therefore the Prophet
says, Hos. 8.14. Israel has forgotten his maker and builds Temples: A man
would think that he that builds Temples should have God much in his mind: but
they that will appoint a worship of their own which never came into his heart,
and build Temples and places for Gods public worship when he has appointed
but one, that man in Gods account whatever he pretends, he has forgotten his
Maker.

After this, Ahab did not wholly cast off the worship God, but yet he must have
his mixture also, and therefore he joined unto the Calves the worship of Baal
which was yet more hateful, 1 King. 16.31,32. King Ahaz did not who ly cast off
the worship of God, yet he brought from Damascus a new fashioned Altar, which
it seemed that King was much taken with, and the pattern thereof he sent before
hand unto Vriah the Priest to provide him the like against the Kings return, 2
King. 16.10,11. And as we say where God has his Church, the Devil has his
Chapel; so where the Devil has his Chapel he shall seldom want a Chaplain;
he did provide him the Altar against the King came home: So in the times of the
Prophets there was still a mixture aimed at, Zeph. 1.4,5. there were some that
did swear by God and by Malcome also: and thus in the days of Josiah there was
a great reformation in matters of Religion, and Idolatrous worship in public
was much suppressed, 2 King. 23. Yet there was a remnant of Baal yet remaining,
which is conceived not to be expressed so much in outward practice by reason of
his restraint of authority, but it was much in the hearts of the people, there
being in them still a proness unto that kind of Idolatry, that for many years
formerly the Land had been infected withal: and there were Chemarims, which is
conceived to be from (...) incaluit (that is) men more zealous and hot then
ordinary for those Idolatrous worships, men that did further and promote it
with all their power; and if there be a remnant of Baal anywhere, a thousand to
one but there will be found Chemarims also, men very hot and zealous to advance
and increase it.

In the Primitive times we know there was a mixture of the Bondage of the Law
with the liberty of the Gospel. Of legal Ceremonies, and Evangelical
Ordinances: a composition of Judaism, and Christianity; because they saw there
was a question, they thought to take in both for surety as the safest way.

After this Popery came into the world, and that is merely a mixture, a medly
in their worship, a mixture of Gods Ordinances, and carnal and heathenish
superstitions: the Pope a mixture of a Prince and a Priest: their Mass a
mixture of a Ceremony and a Sacrament: their Canons a mixture partly out of the
Word of God, and partly from their own traditions: and to show that they love
the midway in all these, their Purgatory a middle place between Heaven and
Hell.

Since that, in the Reformed Churches there be many, that though they have not
been fully Popish, yet have greatly desired and much labored for a
reconciliation, as if a middle way between us were the way to peace: who
persuade themselves, and seek to their power) to persuade us, that if we yield
unto them in Ceremonies, it may be a means to bring them over in Doctrines: and
to tell us, were it not for the Jesuits on the one side, and the Puritans on
the other, two hot spirits, ^derate men would soon agree: we read of some, Rev.
13.16. that do receive the mark of the Beast; a mark I conceive to be an
expression taken either from a servant or a soldier, who by some badge or
cognizance are known to what Master or Captain they belong; for as Christ will
have his Church sealed, Rev. 7.3. so will Antichrist have his servants marked.

And this mark the text tells us is double, in the right hand, and in the
forehead: the one notes an open profession, and the other an earnest contention
to promote the cause.

First, in the forehead; it is an open profession either in words or practice,
when men either practice it, or praise it: when men praise their feasts, keep
their fasts, honor their Saints, set up their images, commend their
Crucifixes, love their Ornaments, their Copes, their Tapers, choose their names
of Priests, and Altars etc. it is as plain hereby as if it were written in
their foreheads, to whom they do belong, and it appears plainly that a mixture,
a middle way they desire.

Secondly, A mark in the right hand sets forth an earnest contention in the
cause of the beast, the right hand being the Instrument of action, and that
wherein a man's main strength lies; and so Antichrist has his Merchants, his
Factors and Agents in most parts of the world, that strive to the utmost of
their parts and power in many things, if not in all, to advance the worship of
the beast, and to engage men in their quarrel. So that in all ages there has
been a mixture; for Satan would have a Religion like unto Nebuchadnezars Image;
he cares not though the head be of Gold, and the breast of Silver, so long as
the other parts be either of brass, or else partly of Iron and partly clay.

Now what has been the cause of these mixtures in all ages? they are two.

First the Ministry: and,

Secondly the people.

First, an unclean spirit working in the Prophets; that is given as one reason
when the Lord will cleanse his people, and take away the causes of their
pollution he says, Zach. 13.2. he will cause the Prophet and the unclean
spirit to pass out of the Land: (that is) the unclean spirit that works in the
Prophets, for the truth is there is a spirit of uncleanness and profaneness is
gone forth into the world.

Secondly, horrible pride in all those in whom this spirit of uncleanness does
take place; for vain man would be wise, Job 11.12. and he affects a show of
wisdom in nothing so much as in matters of Religion, either in the Doctrine or
the worship of God; and this is made a special cause of all humane mixtures,
Col. 2.18. being vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds.

Thirdly, a vehement desire that some men have arising from this pride to win
Proselytes unto themselves, that all men may be of their mind, after their garb
in all things; they would have you circumcised, that they may glory in your
flesh: ut multitudine sequacium sese efferant, that they may please themselves
in this, how many they have brought about, and how many Disciples they have
drawn after them, that become their admirers, etc.

Fourthly, horrible hypocrisy, when men are Sepulchers within, yet they desire
outwardly to appear painted; who having no power of godliness within, yet by
new inventions would fain bear the world in hand, that surely they are men of a
higher strain for matters of Religion then ordinary, whereof their zeal for a
little bodily exercise and outward complement must be the great witness to the
world; and this Christ charge upon the Pharisees as a special cause of all
that corruption and composition that was in the Church of God amongst them, as
we see Mat. 23.13,14.

Fifthly, worldly wisdom, politic respects, and fleshly ends; what moved
Ieroeobam to set up the Calves, or Iehu to retain them, but because it suited
better with their policy, and earthly aims and purposes, then the purity of
Gods worship would ever have done; for when men come to this, to count gain
godliness, then that will be the best Religion, or the best way of worship, and
those the most decent ceremonies that will but further their worldly ends.

So sometimes a correspondency with foreign powers of another Religion: So
Ahaz that he might keep his correspondency with foreign powers, with Tiglah
Pelezer King of Assyria, he must have the fashion abroad also, 2 King.
16.11,12. outward references have many times a great influence into the matters
of Religion.

Sixthly and lastly, there are four sins which are in a especial manner
incident unto the Prophets, and the great causes thereof are, Ignorance,
Idleness, Covetousness and Cowardice.

First, ignorance; that is given as a special cause of many humane inventions
amongst the Pharisees; thou blind Pharisee, Mat. 23.26. And the Church of
Thyatira, many well-meaning men were deluded because they knew not the depth of
Satan, Rev. 2.24. many men are deluded because they see not the evil that is
intended: the Apostle tells us of Popery, that it is a mystery of iniquity, 2
These. 2.7. Iniquitas, sed mystica, pietatis and fidelitatis nomine palliata:
represented unto men under the names both of piety and loyalty.

Secondly, Idleness and carelessness in matters of this nature, so that if men
can enjoy their liberty, live quietly, and richly, for the purity of Gods
worship it matters not so much; that is given as the cause. Mat. 13.24,25.
While men slept the enemy came and sowed tares. In most ages there have been
some secure and quiet times of the Church; when the Prophets have taken their
ease, and a spirit of slumber has come upon them, and then is the time to vent
and set forth the inventions of men, and so by little and little, pedetentim,
usu ipso and tacita Doctorum approbatione coepit esse in precio, hac
aestimatione sensim sine sensu crescente. As a Jesuit speaks of some things in
Popery.

Thirdly, Covetousness, a desire of raising themselves in the world, and to set
themselves in a way of preferment: and when men see there is no other way to
rise, then they resolve to yield unto this: so it was with them of the
Concision, who brought such a Mixture, and caused such a rent in the Church,
Phil. 3.19. it was because their God was their belly, and they minded earthly
things: So that if there be a Diotrephes that loves preferment, he must and
will have both the Dictates and Inventions of men as well as their persons in
admiration for advantage sake.

Fourthly, Cowardice, Gal. 6.12. they found out a middle way to mix the bondage
of the Law with the liberty of the Gospel, that they might not suffer
persecution for the cross of Christ, but that they might be well thought of on
both sides. Ieroboham set up Idolatry in Bethel, and an old Prophet of the Lord
dwelt there, yet such was his Cowardice, that it seems he had nothing to say
against it, but that the Lord must send a Prophet from Judah to reprove him, 1
King. 13. and the truth is, had not the Ministers been in many ages a
generation of spiritual cowards, they had never had so many inventions imposed
upon them as they have had.

Secondly, there are also many causes in the people; but I will only insist
upon this one because they receive not the Doctrine of the Gospel in the
purity, nor the worship of God in the love of it; and therefore the Lord in
Justice gives them up unto an efficacy of deceit, 2 These. 2.10,11. They are
ready to receive any Doctrine without trying the spirits, and to yield unto any
command willingly, walk after the Commandment, Hos. 5.11. they are for the most
part a lump fit to receive any leaven; the Prophets prophecy falsely, etc. and
the people love to have it so, Ier. 5. ult. for a pompous Religion, that
consists much in outward shows, and that which abounds most in bodily exercise,
is a thing that is generally well-pleasing unto men, Amos 4.5. and usually when
men forsake the rule, then they look more at what will please them, then what
will please God: this likes you O house of Israel: and this was all they
looked at therein.

Secondly, when God turns unto a people in mercy, and they return unto him, he
will free them from all this superstition or idolatrous mixtures, Zeph. 3.9. I
will restore unto them a pure language: which place being compared with that,
Isa 19.18. They shall all speak the language of Canaan: Language there notes
consensum cum populo Dei in fide and cultu: restoring a pure language, may
signify purity both in Doctrine and Worship: they shall speak no more partly
the language of Canaan, and partly of Ashdod, as in times past: but the pure
language of Canaan: in Judgment I will make them one Nation upon the Mountains
of Israel, and they shall defile themselves no more with their Idols and their
detestable things, and from all your Idols I will cleanse you, Ezekiel. 37.2,3.
And I will give unto them one heart and one way, that they shall fear me for
ever, Ier. 32.39.

Now the reason why the Lord will take away these mixtures when he returns, are
these.

First, because usually these are the greatest and the most provoking sins of a
Nation, Hos. 9.15. all their wickedness is in Gilgal; this was anciently the
place of worship, 1 Samuel 15.12. and there they did now worship God according to
their own devices; the Prophet tells them, where they did think to please God,
it was the greatest transgression that they did commit; for so I conceive the
particle (...) is to be taken pro summo, in all their thefts, adulteries,
drunkenness, etc. they did not all of them provoke the Lord, so much as that
they did worship him according to their own inventions in Gilgal. Deo
serviendum est non ex arbitrio sed ex imperio: There is nothing to be done but
by rule, Gal. 6.16 now where the creature shall take so much upon himself as to
set his wisdom above the wisdom of God, and set his threshold beside the
threshold of the Lord, Ezekiel. 43.8. it is a provoking sin that the Lord cannot
endure.

Secondly, because this is a special cause why God departs from any people; now
the Lord will never return in mercy unless the cause be taken away that
provoked him to depart; Ezekiel. 8.7. every humane invention imposed as necessary
to the service of God, is an Image of jealousy, and the aim of it is to
provoke the Lord to go far from his Sanctuary: it is finis operis, though not
operantis.

Thirdly, because of all Judgments upon a people, this is the greatest; and
therefore when the Lord returns unto them in mercy he must take away these,
Psalm. 81.12. I gave them up to walk in their own counsels, it is spoken as of
the greatest Judgment could befall them: and so it is for a man to be a rule
to himself; for he that is his own rule, must needs be his own end, and he that
is his own end, must needs be his own God; and therefore it is a speech of the
greatest displeasure, he has made unto himself Altars to sin, therefore Altars
shall be unto him to sin, Hos. 8.11.

Fourthly, when God does return unto a people in mercy, he does intend to
delight in them, and rejoice over them to do them good, and that he can never
do in any service that they perform, until worship be purged from humane
mixtures, Mal 3.3,4. When he has sat in his Church as a refiner, and has
purged his worship, then shall the sacrifices of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord as in the days of old: then, but not till then.

Use.
Let this teach every one of us a double duty. First, hate all idolatrous and
superstitious mixtures in Gods worship whatsoever. Secondly, beware of them.
First, hate them as being the thing that causes the Lord to go far from his
Sanctuary: to be unto his people as a wayfaring man that tarries but for a
night: groan under them as burdens, that so the Lord may return unto his people
in mercy, and rest^ unto his Church a pure language; that they may no longer
halt between two opinions; no more swear by God and by Malcome; but that he may
restore to us one heart and one way.

To move your hatred against it; consider,

First, of all kinds of sin this is most defiling: thou defiledst thy self with
thy Idols, Ezekiel. 22.4. Now what is defilement or filthiness? it is, says
Aquinas, Carentia nitoris quem ex gratia habemus: indeed all sin stains and
blemisheth the beauty of the soul, but this sin above others. And if we observe
the Scripture, we shall see that they have been men of most corrupt spirits,
and the most profligated consciences that have been most set upon humane
inventions in the things of God: take the Pharisees for an instance; and indeed
it is Just with God, that they that will find out ways of worship for God to
be unto themselves means of sanctification, that those should prove in just
Judgment a means of desolation.

Secondly, it is most inflaming: they have inflamed themselves with their Idols
under every green tree, Isa. 57.5. they are said to be for this cause, mad upon
their Idols, Ier. 50.38. Now in madness there are two things: furor, and
amentia; here is both; first all soundness of mind is taken away, that a man
cannot say, Is there a not a lie in my right hand? Secondly, it carries the
whole man with fury after it, so that none more violent in their persecutions
then such men are who desire or have embraced for Doctrines the conceits of men.

Thirdly, there is no sin wherein men do manifest more folly; striving to show
themselves wise they become fools, Romans 1.21. for how highly soever men esteem
of humane contributions in Gods worship: yet in Gods account they are no better
then plays, and mimical dancings, Exodus 10.6. we know it was that which they
intended for a Religious worship; but being in a way of their own devising, the
Lord calls it play, and the Apostle in 1 Cor. 10.7. renders it: So that they
were but childish carriages, antiqui gestus, neither suitable to the holiness
of God nor the Majesty of his Ordinances; only fit to please children and no
more.

Fourthly, No sin ripens Judgment more, nor ripens a people more for
Judgment. So Ezekiel. 22.4. Thou have defiled thy self with thy Idols, thou have
caused thy days to draw near, thou art come even unto thy years. This provoked
the Lord to break both the staff of beauty, and of bands, with which he fed his
people, as Zach. 11.7. the staff of beauty, that excellent order of government
that was amongst them, was now turned into confusion: and the staff of bonds of
mutual love and amity that was amongst them, turned to division. And let no man
be forward in the promoting of humane wisdom this way; for Judge. 8.27. Gedeon
made an Ephod, and the people went a whoring after it: but the thing proved a
snare unto Gedeon, and unto his house.

Lastly, it is an endless sin: wherein a man knows not where to stay, as Hos.
10.1. According to the multitude of his fruit, he increased his Altars, and
according to the good ness of his land, he has made unto himself goodly
Images: as God blessed them in their estates, so they began to bethink
themselves of a more pompous way of Religion; for if any man's fancy may be a
rule, then may one man's as well as another, and so a man shall never know
where to stay.

Secondly, beware of it also; for seeing it has been a sin in so many ages of
the Church, it seems a man's nature is exceeding prone to it; therefore take
heed you be not ensnared by it: little children keep your selves from Idols:
amen, 1 Ioh. 5. ult. and you have great cause to take heed.

First, because they are brought in under beautiful pretenses; the mystery
Babylon gives the wine of her fornication in a golden cup, Rev. 17.4. and in
this she is truly. a Harlot, her hands are snares and bands: she is skilful to
allure.

Secondly, take the more heed because they come not in all at once, but by
degrees they creep in, (...), Jude 4. Ephesians. 4.14. they lie in wait to deceive:
it is a studied thing, and they have a method in it, and rules according to
which they do proceed, and they walk in craftiness: the word is, (...), which
properly signifies deceit at dice, so that there is not so much cheating and
juggling in the most deceitful sport, as there is used by them that in this kind
lie in wait to deceive. Hos. 7.6. it was the way that Jeroboam had to bring in
his Idolatry into this state.; his desires and purposes were as hot as an oven;
but the people were a great lump, and they could not be presently leavened; and
therefore he sends forth his Agents into the several parts of his Kingdom, and
they did seek to leaven the people, and in the mean time the Baker slept and
ceased from raising: the people were not leavened by and by, nor fitted to
receive such corrupt worship, and therefore he did stay a while till it might
be done.

Thirdly, take heed of it: for if it once begin, it will strangely increase: if
one that goes before do bring in some, there be those that come after that will
add to the plot: as when Popery was set up, we know one Pope added something,
and another something more, till at last they made up that patched Religion. If
Jeroboam bring in the calves, its a thousand to one but afterward Omri and
Ahab shall set up the worship of Baal.

Fourthly, it is a great dishonor to a Congregation; for it makes all the
worship of God unfruitful; for in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the rudiments of men, Mat. 15.9. nay it makes them sinful, Amos 4.4.
Go up to Bethel and transgress, etc. (implying) that the more they labored in
those services, (it is a bitter Sarcasm) the more they did displease God, and
add to their own fin and judgment; this turned Bethel the house of God into
Bethaven, Hos. 10 5.

Fifthly, they will surely eat out all the heart of the worship of God in time.
2 King. 16.14,15. when Ahaz had set up a new fashioned Altar, he commande^ the
Priests to burn the morning and evening sacrifices upon the great Altar that he
had made; thus we see it puts the Altar of God out of office; and that they
might think he had a Religious end in it, he says, that the Brazen Altar,
(that is) the Altar of the Lord shall be for the King to enquire by, si quando
placebit; as Iunius well notes upon the place.

Lastly, this will stand a man in no stead in time to come; its spoken with
some derision, Hos. 8.5. Oh Samaria thy calf has cast thee off: when the
captivity came, the Lord tells them that, because they were very confident that
they should be delivered: but now it seems the calf has cast you off. Canaan
was the Lords Land, and he gave it to you, and to your Fathers for an
inheritance: but as soon as you cast off God, it is no wonder if the Calf cast
off you, and cast you out of the good Land that God has given you.

Use.
Seeing the words are a promise that there shall be one God and one name,
consider, promises are objects of faith, grounds of hope, and rules of prayer:
and by these things men live, and in this is the life of our spirits, Isa.
38,16. that is, on this we rest, in these we hope, and according unto these we
pray: and in this does the life of a man's spirit mainly consist.

First, then look upon this particular promise as an object of faith; and
concerning it we must exercise these four several acts of faith.

First, let thy faith sound the depth of this promise; for there be treasures
in the word, and they lie not above ground, they must be dug for, Prove. 2.4
and they be not the smallest to be had in the promises; what does God here
promise? simplicity and sincerity, in whatever concerns his worship and
service; for whatever is mixed departs from unity: now of humane mixtures I
find in Scripture three sorts, and unto them all I conceive this promise
reaches: so our faith must look upon it.

First, in Doctrine, mixing the truth of God with false glosses, and corrupt
interpretations, neither agreeing to the wisdom, majesty, or mind of the
Holy Ghost, and this is the mixture here spoken of, Ier. 23.28. what is the
chaff to the wheat? and yet if many Sermons were winnowed, though the chaff is
nothing to the wheat, yet it might happily prove more then the wheat.

Secondly, in worship; Acts in the worship of God, that have no other ground
but the will of man, that is the mixture the Apostle speaks of, Col. 2.23. they
did worship the true God, and they did in many things perform those acts which
he required, but they mixed some acts out of their own will, which God never
commanded, neither came it into his heart, Ier. 7.31.

Thirdly, in Discipline a mixture of the Ordinances of God, and of the
Commandments of men, sometimes turning the power they have from God against
them for whose good and preservation it was mainly given; the edge of the sword
against the watchman, Ier. 36.5. he was shut up: it was not in prison, for he
fled and hid himself, and therefore it is conceived to be spoken of
excommunication: and so they slay the witnesses: which cannot be understood
literally of killing them as men, but Metaphorically killing them as
witnesses, Rev. 11.11. If there be a rotten member to be cut off, they strike
with the back of the sword; but if a godly man have but a hair to be paired
off, they turn the edge and strike a full blow, etc. so when men mix the
Ordinances of God with their own corrupt ends, and order all things in matter
of Government so as it shall best serve to advance their worldly ends, color
over acts of policy with pretenses of piety: Say it is Corban, for their own
advantage sake, Mark 7.11. let thy faith engage thee to lay hold on the promise
in all this, and expect to be delivered from them all, that in every one of
these respects Gods name may be one.

Secondly, put forth an act of reliance, affiance, recumbence, or whatever
else does express an act of an humble and believing soul, casting himself upon
a promise to obtain it: cleave to the word, Psalm. 119.13. leave thy self with
the promise: for that is the expression, the poor have themselves with thee.
Psa. 10,14 (...)

Thirdly, shut thy eyes against all difficulties, stagger not at the
unlikeliness of the means: he that should look upon the Israelites at their
division, and see how much division and how much Idolatry there was amongst
them, and that of all the Nations round about (but yet the Lord has said it,
and it shall be accomplished in his season) he that shall observe how
exceedingly a pompous Religion pleases them, and how much they are taken with
humane additions in Gods service, how firmly it is rooted and with what power
it is backed, he will be ready to say, if God should create windows in heaven,
this could not be: but know, though there were mountains in this way of his
people, yet this could not hinder the accomplishment of a promise; Who art thou
O great mountain? before Zerubabel thou shall become a plain, Zach. 4.6,7. nay
and these mountains faith does often remove and make them become a plain.

Fourthly, wait for the performance of it in Gods due time. Act 1.4. rejoice
for the promise of the Father, though it may happily by sin be delayed. God
brought his people to the borders of the Land of promise, and showed them the
good Land, and yet by their unthankful walking, they were led back again forty
years in the wilderness; but however, if it tarry, rejocye for it: for it will
speak, and it will not lie, it will come and it will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.

Secondly, let it be unto thee also a ground of hope: the object of hope is
good things to come; and that which is grounded upon the promise is lively hope
that never makes ashamed; let there be an holy, an earnest expectation and
groaning for it, (...), go forth and meet the mercy while it is yet a far off.

And to stir up your hope, consider first, it will be a means to allay your
present grief; to see men usurp the Throne of God, and talk of sitting
immediately in the consciences, and to wring those tender wards of conscience
that is as soon spoiled as a Ship cast away, 1 Timothy 1.9. to hear the word of
God (as preached) set forth by the unnourishing vapors of humane wit, cannot
but be a grief to a good heart; so to see the Ordinances of God pure in
themselves, to be set out with the dressings and blandishments of the
inventions of men, like a wall of a marble with a roof of straw; to see people
turned away with every wind of Doctrine; and when Ministers shall have cause to
complain that have preached long in a place, P. Martyr
as Peter Martyr did at the coming in of Queen Mary, when he heard in Oxford a
College bell ring to Mass and the Students flocking there a pace, Haec una
notula omnem meam doctrinam evertit: this bell rings a passing peal to all my
Lectures, to all my Sermons: to that man to whom the Ordinances in their purity
be dearer then his life, it cannot but be a great grief; as the contrary cannot
but be a great matter of joy when he shall consider that the time will come
when the Kingdom shall be the Lords, and men shall corrupt the purity of his
worship no more.

Secondly, hereby the Ordinances shall be set up in their glory, and they are
surely the glory of a Nation wheresoever they are, 1 Samuel 4: ult. To see Romam
in flore, that is one of St. Austines wishes; how much more does a good heart
desire to see Ecclesiam in flore, that God may beautify the house of his
glory? Isa. 60 7.

Thirdly, then shall his people more fully enjoy the presence of God in his
Ordinances; for when the Temple is purged, the glory of the Lord will fill the
house, Ezekiel. 43.1,2. and the name of the City shall be Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48. ult.

Fourthly, hereby the consciences of Gods people shall be freed from many an
unnecessary burden; now ye should desire the peace of Jerusalem; they shall
prosper that love it, Psalm. 1,22 6. suppose your consciences be not touched;
what if they be no burdens upon you; yet where is the spirit that said, who is
offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11.29.

Thirdly, let it be a rule of prayer, for the promise is the only rule of what
we can ask in faith, and prayer the only ground of what we can expect with
comfort, and therefore let thy heart say Amen unto this promise, be it unto thy
servant according to thy word, Luke 1.38.

And to stir you up to it, consider first the means by which God will do it,
and they be all desirable.

First, he has promised to take away the unclean spirit out of the Land: for
if the unclean man were taken away, new would arise, therefore the promise is
to take away the unclean spirit, Zach. 13.2.

Secondly, he will take off the hearts of his people from these mixtures, that
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? Hos. 14.18.

Thirdly, he will root out all these Idolatrous spirits amongst us, that will
not be reclaimed; they that purify themselves in gardens shall be consumed
when God comes to purify his Church, Isa. ult. 17. there shall be no Canaanite
in the Land any more for ever, Zach. 14 ult. and when they are cut off, no more
of his name shall be sown, Nahum 1.14.

Secondly, to move you to it, you have Gods command, Isa. 62.6. Ye that are the
Lords remembrancers, keep not silence; (...) the Lords recorders: and a main
thing that the people of God do record, is the promises which as yet remain
unaccomplished unto the Church.

Thirdly, we have a concurrence of all the prayers of the Church of God that
have gone before us; for the prayers of the Church be like the acts of a State,
they dye not with the man that made them; for they are made unto an eternal
God, grounded upon an everlasting righteousness, offered by an eternal spirit,
and therefore they are eternally acceptable, and of an eternal efficacy; in
after ages David's prayer, Psalm. 109.8. took effect upon Judas, Act. 1.2.
therefore as we must preach for after ages as the Prophets did, and the
Apostles entered upon their labors, so must we pray for after ages, and be
content that other men in time to come shall reap the benefit of our prayers.

Lastly, God has begun already, and now we have great cause to be earnest with
him to go on with it; Chrysostom. hom.
for he has said, shall I bring to the birth, and shall I not bring forth?
Isa. 60.9. Experiences of former mercies are a special pledge of future, Psalm
74.14. he smote the head of Leviathan in the waters: and gave him to be meat to
his people inhabiting the wilderness; it is spoken of Pharoahs army which God
destroyed in the red Sea; that is, the destruction of the Egyptians was a
pledge to him of the accomplishment of the mercy that God had promised to cast
the Canaanite out of the promised Land, and to give them possession of it; many
hardships they were to pass through in the wilderness; but God gave them this
mercy as food, not to their bodies, but food to their faith, while they were in
the wilderness: therefore those former great and glorious promises were
accomplished. So that former mercies are food that God gives unto the faith of
his people to feed upon till he has perfectly accomplished whatever he has
promised unto his Church

Let no man say, who shall live when God does this? but be sure, for thy time,
have a stock going in the Churches ship; for there is no knowledge, nor work,
nor labor in the grave where thou art going: therefore sow thy seed, and if
the harvest come not in thy time, yet thou shall be no loser; for in glory God
will reward thee according to the fruits of thy doing, Ier. 17.10. the Lord
tells thee, Go thy way Daniel, thou shall rest and stand up in thy lot in the
end of thy days, Dan. 12. ult. comfort and encourage one another with these
words.

Grace is Wisdom, AND Wisdom the Principal thing.
Preached at a meeting of the Company of Black-Smiths, October. 29. 1647. in
Fish-street, London.
PROVE. 4.7. Wisdom is the principal thing: therefore get wisdom, etc.


WHen the Lord gave Solomon his option, 1 King. 3.5. Ask what I shall give
thee: the choice that he himself made was wisdom; Give unto thy servant an
understanding heart: and his request pleased God so well, that the Lord gave
him wisdom and understanding, exceeding much, and largeness of heart even as
the sand upon the Seashore.

And this Book seems to be an Epitome of that large heart that God gave unto
the Author of it; the Book of the Canticles indeed sets forth the knowledge and
the mystery of Christ: and Ecclesiastes sets forth the knowledge of the vanity
of the creatures; but here en totum Solomonem: that there is not any part of
the revealed will of God, or the duty of man for knowledge, or practice, but in
this book it is more or less touched at: And we have great reason to admire the
goodness of God, that has not suffered this Sun to set, but being dead, he yet
speaks; and the Lord having honored him with wisdom above all men that ever
were (except the Lord Jesus Christ) we should hearken to his advice, concerning
wisdom in the text, wisdom is the principal thing, etc.

In the words you have these two things.

First, a commendation of it.

Secondly, an exhortation to it.

First, the commendation, (...) the word signifies either purity, or dignity:
and so some interpreters render it, principium sapientia, wisdom is the
principal thing: Montanus and others of a purity in order: and so Tremelius
renders it, quia caput est sapientiae eam acquirere: the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom: this is the chief excellency, therefore let it be
gotten in the first place: (...) the word signifies to get a thing as a man's
own possession, to have a title to it, and a propriety in it, to make it his
own, to have it in his own heart, and to possess it for himself: and whereas
there are many ways of gain that men do follow in the world, and many other
possessions that men do strive for, and seek after, the wise man here says, in
the middle of all your other gettings; let this be the principal care of every
one of you, it being above all others the principal thing: and though the world
flow in upon you, and you wash your steps in butter, and be great gainers
otherwise, and the earth bring forth her increase to you, yet with all your
other gains get understanding; whatever you get or lose make sure of this above
all: But what is meant by wisdom; By wisdom in this book is meant two things.

First, Christ the wisdom of God. So Prove. 8.30. I was by him as one brought up
with him, etc.

Secondly, Grace which is the only wisdom in a man, and so the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom: or caput, the chief and the principal part of it:
but it is only in the latter of these senses that I shall speak to at this time.

Doctrine.
First, that grace only is true wisdom.

Secondly, that this wisdom is the principal thing: which has more excellency
in it then all things else in the world: there is in it a superlative and a
transcendent excellency above all excellencies in the world.

And that grace only is the true wisdom, this I shall clear to you these two
ways.

First, the Lord (who is only wise) he counts nothing wisdom but goldiness, and
this he does everywhere style wisdom: there is a great enquiry and search
amongst all the creatures where wisdom is to be found: men know not the price
of it, neither is it to be found in the Land of the living: Job 28. ult.
(that is) amongst all the creatures, and in all the studies of them; the depth
says it is not in me, etc. it cannot be gotten for gold, it cannot be valued
with the gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx or the Saphyre, etc. and yet the
fear of the Lord, that is wisdom unto men, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding, Psalm. 90.12. teach us to number our days that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom, etc. (that is) in Consideration of the shortness of them,
we may get grace to our selves, which will be immortal, and stand by us when
all the creatures both in heaven and earth shall fail and forsake us, Luke
7.37. where grace expressed in the holy conversation of Christ and John, is
called wisdom; wisdom is justified of all her children, and Luke 1.17. souls
are said to be converted to the wisdom of the just, etc and therefore a godly
man only is called the man of wisdom, Micha 6.9. therefore in Gods account
grace only is wisdom.

Secondly, in Gods account all things is folly without grace; and therefore
Solomon throughout this Book, and so David, Psalm. 14.1. the wicked men are the
foolish men: the fool has said in his heart there is no God: the wicked man
and the fool are Synonoma's, and express the same thing: an unholy man, is a
mavelous unwise man. Take a view of that which has the greatest show of
wisdom, and the greatest name of wisdom in the world.

First, all humane knowledge without grace it is but folly; the He athen most
of them were the greatest Artists and Philosophers in the world, those that
most enquired into the secrets of nature, and had brought all humane learning
unto the greatest height, as in Athens and Corinth, which were Universities and
places far more famous then any other for knowledge, tongues, and all
abilities, 1 Cor. 1.20. God has made foolish the wisdom of the wise (that is)
made it manifest so to be, and, whilst they professed themselves wise, they
became fools; Romans 1.22.
but they had not the knowledge of the Scriptures, and therefore their
knowledge might well be folly: but for the Jews and their Rabbis, they had
great knowledge in the Scripture and in divine mysteries; surely their
knowledge was wisdom: Christ speaks it to the Pharisees, the most learned
amongst them all, Mat. 23.17. ye fools and blind, etc. so that if a man had all
natural abilities to the highest pitch that ever was attained, a sharp wit, a
piercing apprehension, a solid judgment, a firm and a tenacious memory, and
these acted and hightened by industry, and Art, the help of tongues, and the
greatest improvement of reading, and exercise, etc. without a principle of
grace put into the heart to enlighten and enliven a man, all this would be but
folly; and never be counted wisdom in the sight of God.

Secondly, take the greatest Statist and Politician the world, which has also
a great show and name for wisdom; let a man be acquainted with the Laws of all
States, let him be able by experience and observation, to judge of the managing
of all affairs, let him sit at the stern of the State, and let him with never
so great dexterity manage all the affairs of it, and let his counsel be as that
of Achitophel as an Angel of God, and as an Oracle of God; yet without a
principle of grace in the soul, the wisdom of this world is foolishness with
God, and he takes the wise in their own craftiness, 1 Cor. 3.19. and their own
policies prove their own snares, they are taken in their own nets.

Thirdly, take the greatest men in the world, and they are wise in their own
conceits, Prove. 28.11. that they can so manage their affairs as to get an
estate, and set themselves in the face and glory of the times, raise their
Bays, and mount up all the stairs of authority and honor, and make have to be
great, but yet without the power of godliness, Lu. 12.20. it is but, Thou fool
this night shall thy soul be taken away.

Fourthly, come to the civil men of the world, and they are the worlds Saints,
that can so order themselves in the profession of Religion, that they can keep
themselves unspotted of the world, and be esteemed Saints in their generation,
and yet can with wisdom avoid those dangerous ways of extremity that godly men
do walk in, as savouring of too much niceness and preciseness, and they can be
counted honest men and Saints, yet without the power of grace in their hearts,
they are but foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.1. and all the former blaze that they
made with the oil in their lamps, it was but their folly, and no wisdom in Gods
account.

So that in the Judgment of the great God, only the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom: and the knowledge of the holy, that is understanding: there is nothing
wisdom but godliness.

And this will appear by these rules of wisdom.

First, wisdom acts by the highest principles: that is the first thing wherein
a man's folly in a state of sin is seen, Ephesians. 4.18. having their understanding
darkened: which is the seat of principles; and according to a man's principles,
which are the rules of his actions, such they are: for Eccl. 10.10. Wisdom is
profitable to direct: it gives a man a right rule to walk by every man is
according to the principles by which he vvalks: lay but these two principles
in a man's heart. First, that the Church of Rome is the only true Church.
Secondly, that this Church cannot err, and he is immediately a Papist though he
act not many of their fooleries, etc. So lay but these principles.

First, that sin is no such great evil as men are told it is.

Secondly, if it be a great evil, yet men think God is merciful, he is not so
strict and severe as men speak of.

Thirdly, if God be so strict, yet it is long before the day of Judgment, and
therefore it will be long before a man comes to an account, and this will make
a man a profane man immediately, and to pour out himself unto all evil with
greediness. So lay but these two principles;

First, that every man is to love himself best.

Secondly, I am not my brothers keeper: it is nothing to me what other men do,
or what they suffer; and this will lay the foundation of all manner of cruelty
and injustice in the world.

Now the high and excellent principles that godliness lays in the soul, are
such as these; I Will name five to you.

First, that the chief beauty of the creature is holiness, every man is in
value as much as his soul is worth, and no more; the heart of the wicked is
little worth: Prove. beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord she shall
be praised; the Kings daughter is all glorious within, etc. Psalm. 45.

Secondly, the happiness of the creature consists in communion with God, Psalm.
63.3. if a man had fellowship with the wisest men of the world, yet it would
not content him; if this be his principle, that his felictty lies in Communion
with God, One day in thy house, says such a soul, is better then a thousand
years elsewhere.

Thirdly, that sin is the greatest evil in the world, Romans 7.13. it is
filthiness it self, the excrement of naughtiness: sinful sin, etc.

Fourthly, that it is better to suffer then to sin, Heb. 11.25. suffering is
but a light affliction in comparison of sin, etc. Heb. 11.25.

Fifthly, the things that are seen are but temporal, the things that are not
seen are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17. such a man sees the fashion of the world still
passing away, etc.

One of these principles now will change the man, James 1. it is by the word
ingrafted in the heart, that the seed of grace appears; the heart brings forth
fruit according to the principle that is put into it: all men judge according
to the principles that are in themselves.

Now there are lower principles by which the most of men are acted, as the
course of the world, the example of the multitude, the great ones, the
Traditions of the Fathers, and the common principles that go abroad amongst
men, and according unto these, men Judge, and walk, and are acted in all their
ways: this is the first property of a wise man, he lives by wise and high
principles.

Secondly, wisdom is seen in a right Judgment of all things: to conceive of
things as they are, and passing a right sentence upon them all.

First, he Judges good things to come, to transcend all the good things in this
life: better then all the pleasures of sin that are present, Romans 8.18. Heb.
11.26. it is said of Moses, he had respect unto the recompense of reward:
pleasures at Gods right hand for evermore, etc.

Secondly, he Judges men miserable that have all the jollities and excellencies
of the world in respect of the miseries to come, which is the portion of all
the fools in the world, that do not buy this pearl of great price: Go to now ye
rich men, weep and howl, for you have received your consolation; and, Son,
remember that in thy life time thou receivedst thy good things, etc.

Thirdly, it will make a man to judge aright of all the circumstances of men's
actions, Prove. 10.5. he that gathers in summer is a wise son: Mat. 25.3. the
foolish Virgins come to buy when it is too late, Luke 19.42. Eccl. 8.5. a wise
man's heart discerns both time and Judgment, etc.

Fourthly, he Judges aright of the issues and consequences of all things, Prove.
22.3. a wise man fore-sees the evil, and hides himself, etc. he knows, the
wicked are made for the day of wrath: and though they flourish now like a green
Bay Tree: yet what will they do in the end thereof, Deuteronomy. 22.3.

Thirdly, in the esteem that men have of persons and things; he says that
great men are many times the baseest of men, Dan. 4.17. he sets over
Kingdoms the baseest of men: and the worst condition of a godly man is better
then the best condition of the men of the world; he is of S. Paul's mind, I
would that you were altogether such as I am, except these bonds; better be a
Doorkeeper in the house of God, then to dwell with Princes: better never to
have known the way of righteousness. Having tasted of the old wine, he cannot
desire new, for he says the old is better: and it was better with me when I
was with my former husband then it is now: the rods and frowns of a father, are
better then the kisses of an enemy, etc.

Fourthly, in a man's election, a wise man does pitch upon a general good before
any particular good: it is true, that riches will avail against poverty, and
honor against disgrace; but these are but particular good things, they are not
profitable for all things; riches avail not in the day of wrath; honor will
not support a man in a sick bed, etc. but now, godliness is profitable for all
things, 1 Timothy 4.8. it is great gain, etc.

Secondly, he that is wise chooses that which is most profitable for himself,
Job 22.2. Prove. 9.12. If thou be wise, thou will be wise for thy self: Now a
man may by other things be wise for his estate, and be wise for his children,
but may be a fool for himself.

Thirdly, he chooses things that are most necessary in the first place; and
there is but one thing necessary, etc. Mary has chosen the better part.

Fourthly, he chooses the greatest sufferings rather then the least sin, Job
36.21. and not the greatest sin rather then the least affliction; Mallom mundus
a peccato Gehennam intrare etc. Anselm.
Anselm.

Fifthly, in a man's ends: a man's wisdom is in nothing more seen then in a man's
ends: now a godly man has high ends; the glory of God, and the good of his
Church, Romans 14.8,9. None of us lives to himself; and no man dies to himself:
but whether we live or dye we are the Lords, etc. and whether he does eat or
drink, or whatever he does, he does all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. so
that in the natural and civil actions of a man's life, he has high ends;
whereas another man he has low and poor ends, even in the most religious and
highest actions; if he pray, it is for himself, howl for corn and oil, etc Hos.
7.14. and it is but to tread out the corn, Hos. 10. all his profession, so much
of Religion as will serve his turn and no more; if he preach, it is to gather
Disciples after him: and they serve not God but their belly: pollute my name
for a morsel of bread and a little barley, says God: and if they fast, did not
you fast unto your selves? will the Lord say: and if they hear, What went you
out to hear, but a reed shaken with the wind? these are too mean ends for a
Christian spirit: their ends are more raised when they come to perform a duty;
they do not care to approve themselves to men only, but to God: that is true
honor which comes from God; not as Saul when he had neglected the glory of God
and his own salvation, now he takes care for a poor low end, honor me before
the people, etc.

Sixthly, wisdom does set a man upon the noblest actions and the highest
employments, Prove. 15.24. the way of life is above to the wise, etc. that is,
his conversation is in Heaven, and he seeks the things that are above, and is
employed about them, how he may honor God, and edify the Church, enlarge the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ; how he may get his sins pardoned, his corruptions
subdued, his election sealed: Rev. 12.1. how he may have the moon under his
feet, or be an intercessor in behalf of the Church, to stand in the gap and
turn away wrath: how he may win souls, and be instrumental for the public
good; this he endeavors, and he that does so is wise: whereas most men are
busied about meat and drink, and apparel, building for themselves and their
posterity, or are taken up with toys; fine clothes, a pin, a rattle, is the
highest things that they have in their eye, as Domitian the Emperor spent his
time in catching flies, for all he had the weighty things of the Kingdom lay
upon him, nihil aliud quam muscas Captare: Sueton.
Sueton.

Doctrine 2.
This wisdom is the principal thing; it has a pre-eminence and a supereminency
above all other things in the world, Prove. 3.14. happy is the man that finds
wisdom, for the merchandise of it is better then the merchandise of silver, and
the gain thereof then fine gold, etc. that is, even the trading for grace in
the Ordinances is to be preferred before the choicest worldly comforts.

But wherein does the excellency of grace lie? In these particulars.

First, the excellency of grace lies in a conformity unto God; the nearer any
creature comes unto God, the more glorious it is, and the more happy: herein
lies the happiness of the Angels, yea, and of the humane nature of Christ, that
is exalted far above all the Angels, in this, that it is more like unto God,
and all the glorious Attributes of God did shine forth in him; Now by grace a
man is renewed and transformed into the Image of God, 2 Cor. 3. ult. he lives
the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. has a life from God, in God, and unto God: which
is a higher life then any man in the world lives; his life is a most excellent
life, being made partaker of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. grace does (...),
and a man has all the virtues of God shining forth in him, 2 Pet. 1.9. a man
is holy as he is holy, and merciful as he is merciful: and we do thereby become
(...); imitators of God, Ephesians. 5.1.

Secondly, from this conformity there arises a communion: for between light
and darkness there can be no fellowship; and if a man say that he has
fellowship with him, and walks in darkness, he does lie, 1 Ioh. 1.6. they only
enjoy the divine presence, that are made partakers of the divine nature; and
suitable unto a man's conformity, so will his communion be: an unregenerate man
that has no conformity to God, he can have no communion with God: two cannot
walk together unless they be agreed. Cant. 7.5. the King is held in the
Galleries; thou have ravished me with one of thine eyes, and with the chain
about thy neck. Zach. 3.7. if thou walk in my ways and keep my Ordinances, I
will give thee places to walk in amongst those that stand by, etc. and when a
man's conformity shall be perfect, so shall his communion be: 1 John 3.2. We
shall be like him, and we shall see him as he is: An ungracious man can have no
fellowship: a man must be in a state of communion, Ephesians. 2.17. he must be made
near, before he can draw near.

Now every man by nature is an enemy to God, and cares not for communion with
him, but hates any degree of approach to God: he has another fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness; therefore he can have no communion with God.

Thirdly, grace fits a man for the service of God; for, he has no pleasure in
fools, that is a wise God: every man by nature is dross and chaff, fit for no
honorable employment: if a man were to stand before a King, Dan. 1.4. he must
be learned in all wisdom, and knowledge, and understanding, etc. how much more
he that shall stand before the great God, Psalm. 4.4. the Lord has separated to
himself the man that is godly: the Hebrew word is (...) to himself for service,
and to himself for communion. Psalm. 41.1,2. he will set them before his face
for ever: when the Lord calls men to any service, he does qualify them for
that service: Saul for government; but for a gracious work a common unction
will not suffice: and if a man have a new work to do, he must have from the
spirit of God a new supply; Phil. 1.19.

The Devil will not employ instruments in his service till they be fitted: and
therefore there be some sins that men are not tempted unto at first, because
their spirits are not prepared for them: Satan tempts and prevails with men by
smaller sins, and then they make way for greater: But grace enables a man to do
and to suffer which way soever the Lord employs him: be the service never so
difficult, a gracious heart will say, Here I am Lord, send me. Phil. 4.13. he
knows how to exalt God in a state of prosperity, he knows how to abound: and
cast him into a state of adversity, and the knows how to want, Phil. 4.13. and
grace does not only fit a man to do Gods work, but also to aim at Gods end, for
he is (...): wholly another: But other men, non obtemperant dum obsequuntur.

Fourthly, grace turns all things that a godly man enjoys into a blessing:
but unto an ungodly man every thing is become a curse: he is cursed in his
body, cursed in his name, and cursed in his estate, and in all his relations,
and in all the creatures that he uses: his Table becomes a snare, Mal. 2.2. I
will curse your blessings, nay the Ordinances of God that be unto the Saints
the savor of life, are unto him the savor of death: it is a means to ripen
their sins and hasten their ruin. Tit. 1.15. to the unclean all things are
unclean. So that Esau may have the dew of heaven, the fat of the earth, and yet
be hated: and Saul a Kingdom, and yet rejected of God: and Judas may have
Apostolical gifts, and yet be a Devil, and a son of perdition: they may be
blessings in the thing, but curses to the man: sine summo bono nil bonum;
without the chief good, there is nothing good. But godliness brings a blessing
into every state, 1 Pet. 3.9. the Saints are the heirs of blessing unto every
state, Romans 8.28. all things work together for good to them that fear God: all
things are yours, and ye are Christ's: whether it be life or death, things
present or things to come, 1 Cor. 3.22. mercies or crosses, Ephesians. 1.22. Christ
is made the head over all things to the Church: for the Churches sake, he does
order all things for their good, and does as Physicians do temper poison into a
wholesome medicine; Gods people are gainers by their worst estates, and by their
afflictions they are made partakers of his holiness: and when their outward man
does decay, the inward man is renewed: and whatsoever God lays upon them, so
it works in them the quiet fruit of righteousness, it matters not what befall
them in this world: though the rain make the way foul, it is no matter so it
make the land fruitful: for these clouds drop fatness: and therefore the soul
of a godly man blesses the hand, and kisseth the rod that smites, and says,
it was good for me that I was afflicted: maledictionem benedixit, paupertatem
ditavit. Luther.


Grace is like the Philosophers stone, it turns all into gold. Prove. 3.18. it
is said, wisdom is a tree of life unto them that lay hold of her: it puts a man
into the same condition that he was before the fall, it brings a man again into
the paradise of God, and the Angel with his flaming sword is removed.

Fifthly, it fills the soul with all spiritual excellencies, those that will
endure everlastingly: and the soul of man is the darling of a man: if he loose
that, what good will a world do him? and the excellency of the man lies in his
spirit: and the great and eternal difference between man and man lies in their
spirit; there are two differences here below: one man is a King, and another
man is a subject: one a master, and another a servant: but these differences
are but for the time of this life, and then all these relations shall cease,
Job 3.19. then the servant shall be free from his master, and the Princes robes
and the beggars rags lie down together.

And here be excellencies also that some men's spirits have beyond others: some
have knowledge, common gifts, and common graces: but these shall be alike: for
after this life if there be knowledge, that shall cease, and tongues they shall
vanish away, 1 Cor. 13. for all this is meat that perishes, Ioh 6.27. the soul
may feed upon it a while, but it will perish, and a man's oil in his lamp will
go out, 1 Pet. 3. ult. all flesh is grass, and the glory of it is as the
flower: only the word of the Lord turned into grace, the Law written in the
heart, that is immortal seed, etc. God looks chiefly to the excellency of a
man's spirit, Numb. 14.24. but my servant Caleb had another spirit, etc. for God
is a spirit, and the Father of spirits, and his eyes are wholly upon the
spirits of men, and he hates sin in the soul most; and so the excellency of the
soul he is most delighted with, is the adorning that is within, Psalm. 45.1. the
hidden man of the heart, 1 Pet. 3.4. which is in the sight of God of great
price: and all outward excellencies are but shaddows of this; gold and silver,
pearls and perfumes, etc. to have an enlightened, sanctified, sublime spirit,
walking above the creatures, and the Heart in Heaven, where the Treasure is; to
be brought up to an holy independency toward all things below, and a holy
magnanimity and self-sufficiency, this is a spirit with whom God delights to
dwell, 2 Cor. 6.16. the word is (...) and they were panes propositionis, set
before the face of God for ever.

Sixthly, grace will preserve a man from all evil Prove. 2.11,12. discretion
shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee, to deliver thee from the
way of the evil man and to deliver thee from the strange woman: there is in
every age a Course of the world: for Dan. 7.2. the world is a Sea, and every
man is as a drop emptyed thereinto, and swims with the tide: and the happiness
of Gods people is to be redeemed from it, Gal. 1.4. In the first three hundred
years the world proved persecutors: afterward they turned Heretics, then
Popery rose, and then all the world wondered after the Beast: yet in this time
there were some that did watch and keep their garments, that did not drink of
the wine of her fornication; who though they came out of great tribulation, yet
had washed their garments and made them white in the blood of the Lamb: we see
Noah in the worst times, and Lot in a Sodom of filthyness to keep their
garments. Seneca speaks of a certain place called Ephestion, which he says
Ignis innocuus circuit, that hurts not those that are within, and yet keeps out
all evil from them: truly such a fire is grace wheresoever it is.

Use.
Let me exhort you to get wisdom, get understanding: for let me tell you, there
be days coming wherein a little grace will be more worth then all the gold in
the world: Mat. 25 a little of the wise Virgins oil, what would the foolish
have given for it? men think they can live without God, and without grace here:
but when they come to dye, when the channels of all the creatures shall be
stopped: and all things take their leave, and God be all in all to them, and then
thou have no interest in him, then thou will wish as Cardinal Wolsey once said,
If I had served my God as faithfully as I have done the King, he would not have
left me, etc. then a man will say with Galeasius, their money perish with them,
that do prefer all the gold in the world before one hours communion with Christ.

Oh that I could but bring you in love with grace this day: the first step to
grace is a high prizing of it, Luke 17.5. Christ raises their esteem of it,
and thereby increases it.

I will give a few rules of trial, etc.

First, try the heart in respect of thy darling lust, thy right hand, Psalm.
18.23. there is no man but has some lust that is most beloved, and indulged
to. Now is thy heart most set against that lust above all other sins.

Secondly, grace enables a man to discern the spiritual presence or absence of
God in Ordinances, Ezekiel. 10. he saw the glory of the Lord to depart when the
rest did not; and the soul is drawn out to God in the use of Ordinances, and he
follows hard after God, and he has the spiritual skill to discern when God
draws near, and when the Lord departs; for his communion is not with the duty
only, but with God in it: he engages his heart to draw near to God, 2 King.
10.13. whereas another man like Jehu, is heedless in the service he performs,
does not labor with all his heart to enjoy communion with God, nor observes
whether God be present or absent: a constant heedlesness and regardlesness in
the service of God, is a certain sign of an hypocrite.

Thirdly, if sin be cast in, grace does never leave till it work it out, Mat.
12.35. the regenerate part in a man will be continually expelling corruption:
he does daily wash his feet, and is as a bone dislocated, till he be again
reconciled to God, after he has sinned against him: for he says, It was
better with me when I had peace of conscience then now; when the Lord called me
to communion: but sin has separated between me and God: and therefore in
regard of his daily failings also, as well as committing any gross act of sin,
he looks upon himself as Turtullian does, as nulli rei nisi paenitentiae natus;
Tertullian.
it is with him as it is with a man in a swound, whilst his soul is in him,
there is a principle that will bring him to life again: but if a man be dead,
it is not so: there is no inward working in him, because an inward principle is
wanting.

But you will say to me, How should a man attain to this?

I will give you these three directions at present.

First, be very sensible that thou art without it by nature, and what a
miserable condition it is for a man to be without grace. I desire you will
consider: if thou have not the Image of God upon thee, thou have the Image of
the Devil and thou art under the power of the Devil, who is perfectly contrary
to God, and an enemy to him: and thou shall be punished with him to all
eternity, if thou continue like unto him: and then consider, all the means thou
can use cannot bestow grace. Christ into the world, and Christ into the
heart, are free gifts: Lumen naturae, nature new dressed may make a show, but
it can never be a new man: it is a new creation: an act of Almighty power must
pass upon thee before thou art in a state of grace, Ephesians. 1.19. and let thy
heart dwell upon this apprehension.

Secondly, wait upon God forit to this end in all converting Ordinances: attend
at wisdoms gates, Cant. 1.16. for this is the bed wherein souls are begotten to
the Lord, even the Ministry of the word, Cant. 4.2 every one bears twins.
Psalm. 110. it is as the dew that falls from the womb of the morning: there are
abundance of souls begotten, for it is a dole of spiritual gifts. Romans 1.12. I
have begotten you through the Gospel; Grace is the Law written in the heart:
and God is pleased to make use of the Ministry as his pen to write it there.

Thirdly, do not only wait, but cry for it, Pro. 2.2,3.
make it thy great request unto God from day to day, that thou may have
experience of a work of Regeneration; that thou may rest in no grace but true
grace: nor be satisfied with oil in thy lamp only, unless thou have it in thy
Vessel; that thou may not build upon the sand, but on a Rock: for this will
be the destruction of most of those that profess Religion at the last day, that
they have thoughts to walk in the narrow way, before ever they entered in at the
strait gate: O labor that the spirit of God may not only have an influence
upon thee in common gifts, but that he may work truth of grace in thee; and
that he may not only come unto thee as forma assistens, to assist thee in some
common duties for a time, but as forma informans, so as to abide with thee and
in thee for ever.

THE Danger of being worse BY MERCIES.
DEUTERONOMY. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked.


AS it is said by some, of the Book of the Revelations; It is both an
Historical Prophecy, and a Prophetical History: the same we may truly say of
this present day: It is either a Thanksgiving Fast, or it is a Fasting
Thanksgiving: the present mercy calls for the one, the abuse of former, and
the fear of the abuse of this mercy also, calls for the other: the present
mercy indeed calls for Thanksgiving; but when we consider how mercies have
been abused by us, and what cause we have to fear lest this also should be so,
this calls to mourning and humiliation: there are two things which every godly
man is to look at in a mercy.

First, that he may obtain it.

Secondly, that he may improve it. That he may obtain the mercy; and that he
may obtain a right use, and a right improvement thereof: otherwise though it be
a mercy in the thing, it will be a curse to the man, as I have often showed
you. That which the Apostle says of afflictions, I would allude unto in this
particular, in Heb 12.10. there is no affliction for the present is joyous, but
grievous, but afterward it brings forth the quiet fruit of righteousness: the
mercy in affliction lies in the use of affliction. So I may say of mercy,
inverting the words, Every mercy for the present is joyous, not grievous, but
afterward it brings forth many times the bitter fruit of wickedness and
unrighteousness. For its the use of mercy makes the mercy a mercy, as the use
of affliction does: the learned do use to say of riches and honors, and all
the good things of this life: that they are things indifferent, (...), neither
good or bad in themselves, but according to the use that is made of them, and
according as the person is that uses them. So I say of all the blessings that
we receive from God: they are blessings according to the use that is made of
them, and according to the condition of the person that uses them, otherwise
they are not mercies: therefore as the Lord has been pleased to give us a
mercy, so let this be one great end of our humiliation, and of our supplication
to God this day, that we may be broken before God for the abuse of former
mercies, and obtain of the Lord a right use of this mercy.

This Chapter, out of which I have chosen this portion of Scripture, was the
last song that ever Moses the man of God indicted while he was here upon earth,
until he ascended up into heaven, there to sing hallelujahs to the Lord for
ever: and this song is partly historical, and partly prophetical: there are
four things in the context that are historical, that yet notwithstanding are
worthy of your observation.

First, the great care that the Lord had of this people Israel above all the
Nations of the world, Verse 8. When the most high divided to the Nations their
inheritance, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the
children of Israel: It is an observable Scripture; the Lord gave the earth to
the children of men: so the Psalmist tells you: but yet the Lord will not have
the children of men to scramble for the earth, to see who can get most of it;
No, the Division of the earth is the Lords; he has divided the earth, and
separated the sons of Adam: which is the meaning of that dark place, Isa. 7.
there were two Kings which the Lord calls, the tails of two smoking
firebrarnds: and they intend to enlarge their Dominions to take in Judah, and
set up a King there: No, says God, the head of Syria is Damascus. I have set
them their bounds: they are at their height: they shall go no further: the Lord
has divided the earth then to the sons of Adam: but has divided the earth to
the sons of Adam, according to the number of the children of Israel: the fewest
in number of all people: the meaning I conceive to be this, that the Lord did
take special care in the first Division of the earth, that he would choose an
inheritance in the earth for this people: for so the Psalmist tells us, he
chose an Inheritance for them: so that he that chose a people out of the earth
to be his peculiar people, he in the division of the earth made choice of a
peculiar Inheritance for them: certainly the people of God need not fear an
Inheritance then. When the Lord divided the earth among the sons of Adam, he
took especial care of them: the Lord in all his Providential Dispensations has
a constant respect to his Church, and a continual care of them: and he adds the
reason of it, v. 9. though all the earth be the Lords, yet the Lords portion is
his people: this is the first thing that is matter of history in the context.

Secondly, he then sets forth the condition of this people when they were in
the wilderness, Ver. 10. he found him in a Desert Land, in a vast howling
wilderness: the meaning is not, as if this people were strangers to God till
then: or that the Lord took no notice of them, or had no care of them; for ever
when they were in Egypt, Exodus 4. then the Lord (...), Israel is my son, my
first born: therefore Gods (...) did not then begin: But then they began to be
the Lords separated people: they were, its true, Gods people by a Covenant
before: Now they are brought into a wilderness, and separated from other
Nations, therefore because they then began to be the Lords people by a National
Covenant, therefore it is said, he found them: there is indeed another meaning
of that expression, found: that is, he is always present with them as a help,
always found of them: so you find the word used, Psalm. 46.1. God is a present
help: he is a help found in the needful time of trouble: and so I conceive that
place explains it, Hos. 9.10. I found Israel as grapes in the wilderness: as a
poor traveller in a desert wilderness has a great refreshment by this, if he
meet with a Vine that has but a few Clusters upon it: so I found Israel in the
wilderness, which was as great a delight to me, even as if a weary Traveller
had found Grapes in the Wilderness.

Thirdly, here is a further description of the Land of Canaan, Ver. 13. the
Lord made them to dwell upon the high places of the earth. It was a Land of
Mountains and Valleys, and upon that account called the high places of the
earth: but it was a Land also where the Lord destroyed the enemies, and carried
them without danger in the midst of the greatest dangers, thus they were made
to walk on the high places of the earth, as men that walk on high, out of
Gunshot.

And then fourthly, here is the plenty of the Land that flows with milk and
honey: where they eat the fine kidneys of the wheat, and drank the pure blood
of the grape: a Land wherein there was no lack of any thing that was upon the
earth, Deuteronomy. 8.7,8. all this is but historical.

In the words that I have read to you, comes in that which is Prophetical: for
Moses did not bring them into the Land of Canaan, Moses dyed in the Land of
Moab, on the other side of Jordan, and was gathered to his Fathers. It was
Joshua that gave them rest, and divided this Land for an inheritance to them:
Moses prophesied when they came unto the Land of Canaan, this shall be their
Condition; But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked: A godly man from a principle of
spiritual wisdom, without Divination, will be able to give a great guess of
men, what they will be: Moses might much guess by seeing how disobedient they
had been in the Wilderness, what they would prove when they came to Canaan: but
yet here is a discovery that the Lord made by Revelation to Moses, what the
condition of this people would be: the Lord does not only certainly know what
we are, but he knows what in such cases and conditions we will be: Nay, the
Lord knows in those conditions that we shall never be put into what we would
be, if we were in it: this is clear, the Lord foretells to Moses what this
people would be when they came to the Land of Canaan: having such a place, and
such enjoyments: and this is also clear when David was in Keilah: shall the
men, said he, give me up to Saul? they will give thee up: and yet David went
out of the City that night, and was never given up: and according to this we
may guess, if we consider, there are many of us, some would have wealth, some
honor, some would have higher employment, some more grace, some more comfort,
some more assurance, and the Lord denies it. It is because he knows what in
such a condition, if thou were put into it, thou would prove: and that which
thou look upon as a great affliction, the Lord does it with a very merciful
hand.

But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked: there are two things in the words to be
opened.

First their name: and,

Secondly their sin.

The denomination that is given to them here, and the transgression that is
charged upon them. I shall briefly explain both these, and then come to the
point that I would insist upon from them: the denomination, what is their name,
they be called Jesurun. It is used three times in this Book of Deuteronomie: in
Deuteronomy. 33.5. Moses was King in Iesurun: and in 33. Chapter Ver. 26. Who is God
like the God of Iesurun? and in this place; and it is used for ought I can find
but in one Scripture more in all the Old Testament. In Isaiah 44.2. Fear not,
oh Jesurun my servant, and Jacob whom I have chosen: there are three different
apprehensions that men have of it, according to the threefold derivation of the
word.

Some from (...) rectum: that signifies right, and they are so called as the
people that had only the right way, both to know God, and to worship God: the
Lord had given his Statutes to Jacob, and his Laws to Israel, he had not dealt
so with other Nations, they were only the right people: and so it may be
explained by Isaiah 42.19. where the Lord says, Who is blind as my servant?
Who is blind as he that is perfect? What perfect, and yet blind? yes, perfect
in Ordinances and privileges, and yet blind.

Forelius and others derive it from another word, (...) that signifies dux
gregis, Forelius.
the first of the flock: the first of the heard: one that goes forth as the
Leader of the flock: and so they make it to be a term of Dignity given unto
them: that they were those whom the Lord honored above all the Nations of the
earth: they were the head of all people. But,

Thirdly, it is derived from a word that signifies to see, (...) dirigit vel
intendet oculos; to intend and fasten ones eye: Now of all people they were the
seeing people: and Jerusalem is therefore called, the Valley of Vision: they
saw the mind of God so as no people in the world did like unto them: they were
the seeing people: the Septuagint renders it, (...) the Beloved people; then if
you take in all these it will not be amiss: they were the people that had the
right discovery of the way of God: they were a people that God honored and
advanced above all people: and a people that knew more of the mind of God, and
saw more of the works of God, then all the Nations of the world besides.

Secondly, for the transgression here charged upon Iesurun: this seeing people;
It is, they waxed fat, and kicked; I shall speak a little distinctly to them.

They waxed fat; there is in Scripture fatness spoken of in a good sense, the
fatness of Gods house; spoken of Psalm 36.9. and my soul shall be satisfied as
with marrow and fatness. Psalm. 63.5. Est quaedam saturitas pinguis sapientiae,
and sapientia ista animae quae carent macrescunt; there is in wisdom, and in
the things of God abundant satisfaction; says Austin: Austin.
a fatness, and a soul without this wisdom is lean; so then this is not the
fatness here spoken of, for that would never produce the other, that is,
Kicking against the Lord; Fatness here has a double signification; it is two
things.

First, it signified those that had abundance of outward things; and their
hearts wholly set upon them; and so rich men that have a great deal of the good
things of this life, are said to be fat; Psalm. 22.29. they that be fat upon
earth have eaten, etc. and so in Isa. 5.17. the wast places of the fat ones
shall strangely eat. It is meant of the great and rich men of the world,
therefore they that have abundance of outward things, are said to be fat in
Scripture. But that is not all, but you must put the other branch to it: Whose
hearts are set upon them, and satisfied with them; these are said to wax fat.
When they have much, and their souls are satisfied with that much: in Psalm.
17.10. they are enclosed in their own fat: abundance of these outward things
hem in their spirits, and incompass them about, called nourishing of a man's
heart, in James 5.12. not only taking the creatures to nourish their bodies,
but their hearts: being satisfied in these things they are said to nourish
their hearts; It was a dishonor to the Grecians that they were hair-nourishing
Grecians: it is not so great a shame to be a hair-nourishing Grecian, as it is
to be a heart-nourishing Christian; that is the first thing.

Secondly, there is another thing in fatness; and that notes to be dull, dead,
senseless, stupid; all this does fatness intimate, in Isa. 6.10. Go make the
heart of this people fat, that seeing they may see and not perceive; It notes
that a man is become dull, dead, senseless; so then Ieshurun waxed fat; that
is, they had many outward things, and rested satisfied in them; and in
reference to the Ordinances of God, and the Judgments of God, and the fear of
them: they were a dead, senseless, dull people, they were a fat people.

Secondly, they kicked, as well fed beasts you know use to do; for from thence
the Metaphor is taken; and herein there are two things also.

First, it notes they were untamed: their untamed disposition; they did refuse
subjection to the Lord; they kicked against his yoke: and so you shall find that
mercies do make men rebellious: that is one danger: the Lord says of Pharaoh,
For this cause have I made thee to stand. I have made thee to stand. I have
raised thee up, you read it: the meaning is this: the same God that cut off so
many thousands in Egypt, he could have taken off Pharaoh in the beginning; what
is the reason he did not? that by these mercies Pharaoh might become the
greater enemy to God: that he may say, I know not the Lord: Who is the Lord
that I should obey his voice? so you shall find in Jeremiah 5.5. I will get me
to the great men: but they altogether had broken the yoke, and burst the bands:
they were the worst and the most refractory against all the commands of God of
every sort of men whatever: and commonly great men have seldom much of this
life, but in this manner they kick, as if there were a greater liberty allowed
them then other men. It notes their rebellious disposition suitable to that,
Hos. 10.11. Israel loves to tread out the Corn: loves to thresh; why? because
the mouth of the Ox was not then to be muzzled: so much of Religion as carries
a present advantage with it, so much of Religion and the ways of godliness
they love; but they do not love to plough, says God: I will pass over her fair
neck: they were grown great, and by this means they were grown tender, and
could not submit: now says God, I will cause the yoke to pass over thy fair
neck.

But there is another thing in it: It not only notes disobedience, but
disobedience with contempt, with presumption: and so you shall find in 1 Samuel
2.29. the Lord says of the sons of Ely, Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifices?
It was to offer the greatest contempt and scorn to him that could be: they
kicked at the Lords services: this was their sin: abundance of mercies they
received from God: but their hearts were satisfied with the mercies, and this
made them grow senseless before God: and being thus fat, they kicked: they were
rebellious and disobedient against God, and manifested it with the highest kind
of presumption that could be: this Jesurun waxed fat and kicked.

There is but one general Doctrine that I have made choice to speak something
to you of at this time.

Doctrine.
That a people dearest unto God, that have had the greatest discoveries of God
among them, are in great danger to be made the worse by the mercies which they
receive: here is Iesurun, Gods people, and a seeing people, that had the
greatest discoveries from God, and yet they are a great deal the worse for the
mercy that they enjoy: it is a point of great concernment; in the prosecution
of it, Give me leave to speak to two things.

First, prove it to you, that even the best men are in danger to become the
worse for mercies: for outward mercies, I, even for spiritual mercies.

Secondly, give some grounds and reasons to demonstrate the truth thereof, how
it comes to pass that there should be so much danger that a people should
become the worse for mercies.

For the proof, that you may understand the more distinctly, let me lay it down
in a double distinction of mercy.

Mercies are either Privative or Positive: Privative, that is deliverances,
preservations from varieties of evils and dangers, which otherwise we were
liable unto; and indeed it is a good rule that some Divines have, Majores sunt
gratiae Privativae quam Positivae: our Privative mercies are greater and more
then our Positive mercies are, though we perceive them not: the dangers that we
are delivered from are more then the present mercies we do enjoy: Now let us
see whether Privative mercies make men the worse: when men are delivered, do
they grow the worse for their deliverance? look to this, Deuteronomy. 32.26. the Lord
speaks of a great Privative mercy: I said I would scatter them into Corners: I
would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men; were it not that I
feared the wrath of the enemy, least their adversaries should behave themselves
strangely, least they should say, Our hand is high: I delivered them from their
enemies: when I took no argument from them for their deliverance, then I took
an argument from their enemies: the Lord made use of that argument; I would
have given them into the hand of their enemies, but I feared least they would
wax proud: what good now did this deliverance do this people? in the 32. Verse,
Their Vine is the Vine of Sodom, and their grapes are the grapes of Gomorrah:
here is the fruit now that these men brought forth of their Privative mercies:
that the Lord did not give them into their enemies hands: for all that the
people grew more wicked under these, and their grapes were, etc. in this manner
they improved their corruptions: then certainly deliverances, Privative
mercies, men are in danger to grow the worse by them. In Psalm. 78.38. Many a
time he turned his wrath away, and would not suffer his whole displeasure to
arise: Were the people the better for it afterward? No, they grew so much the
more rebellious. I will give but one instance more of Privative mercies, and it
is a famous one: And it were well we made these our looking glasses; Jonah is
sent to prophecy against Niniveh, Within forty days and Niniveh shall be
destroyed: the King with the City were awakened and humbled themselves before
God: and the Lord was pleased to defer the Judgment; they were delivered: were
the people ever the better, or was this deliverance in mercy? No, the people
were never the better, as appears if you look to the prophecy of Nahum: where
you have the destruction of that people threatened to be at hand: this people
that had fasted and prayed, yet notwithstanding vengeance comes upon them with
greater fury afterward. In Nahum 3.3,4. Woe to this City that is full of blood
and lies. God spared her for a time and respited his wrath: but then, his wrath
came upon them to the utmost: thus Privative mercies may make men grow the
worse: And men may be delivered, and a Nation delivered, and they growing worse
for it, the Lord may reserve them to further plagues.

Secondly, there are Positive mercies, and they are of two sorts: and men are
in danger of growing worse by both of them.

Either temporal or spiritual mercies: as if the Lord give men the Scriptures,
they are in danger to wrest them to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.6. if God
give them his Gospel, they are in danger to turn his grace into wantonness. In
the Epistle of Jude, ver. 4. Not the word of grace, but the privileges of
grace; if God give men the Ordinances, they say, The temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord; And we are delivered to commit all this abomination, Ier.
7.8,9. and so in Heb. 6.7,8. there is the ground that drinks in the rain of
Ordinances and Influences, and yet brings forth Briers and Thorns; So if men
receive spiritual privileges, they may be the worse for them, Mat. 3.9. Nay
spiritual divination, and be in danger to be the worse for it: Paul was so, 2
Cor. 3.7. there was sent a Messenger of Satan to buffet him, least he should be
lifted up overmuch: Nay spiritual motions and operations, Heb. 6.5,6. there are
men enlightened, that have tasted of the good word of God; been made partaker of
the gifts of the holy Ghost, and tasted the powers of the world to come: these
are great works, and yet notwithstanding what do these do? these fit a man for
the great Apostasy, such as can never admit of a renovation; thus, When the
unclean spirit goes forth out of the man, which is a great common work too, yet
he returns with seven worse spirits; then certainly spiritual mercies endanger
men; they that know most of God and Christ, are in great danger to be the worse
for such mercies: And so it is true of temporal mercies too, if you will take
notice of that, Hosea 1. it is a whole proof of the point in hand: the text
tells what is the mother of all the decay there spoken of, even until they are
called Loami, they are not my people; What is the mother of all this? Diblaim;
and that properly signifies bunches of dried Figgs; and it is, and was commonly
interpreted to be a great dainty among them. Cakes of Figgs were part of
Abigals present to David; By this the Lord sets forth their great plenty and
abundance; this is the mother; the people had abundance, and their hearts were
set upon it; What was the daughter to this people? Gomer, the word does
signify perfection or defection; commonly Interpreters take it in the last
sense; that is, brought forth that great defection, that great consumption that
came upon the whole Land; then certainly, men may be the worse for temporal
mercies; that instance I am sure is plain enough, in Dan. 7.2. out of the four
winds that contended upon the great Sea, there arose four beasts: When they
were grown great so as to become Monarchs, they forgate to be men, and became
beasts, and never till then: never beasts till they became Monarchs: thus there
is a great deal of danger that men should grow the worse for temporal mercies;
I shall give one instance more in Neh. 9.25,26. they took strong Cities, and a
fat Land: and possessed houses full of all goods, etc. and did eat and were
filled, and became fat, etc. Nevertheless they were disobedient and rebelled
against thee: here were men that were a great deal the worse for their plenty;
the Scripture is full of such instances; Let this serve for the proof of the
point.

But you will say to me, What is the reason? are the mercies of God of such a
malignant nature? so invenomed that they make men grow thus and thus, the
worse? A man would think if any thing would make men the better, mercies would;
Its true, had men ingenuous natures as grace brings: But there are four great
reasons why it is a dangerous thing for a person or people to enjoy mercy, and
not be the worse for mercy.

First, is from the corruption that is in the heart of man; It is true, the
mercy of God is not a cause why men grow the worse: for it infuses no malignant
disposition into the soul of man. But the mercy of God is an occasion, though
it be not the cause; as it is said of the Law of God, Romans 7.11. Sin took
occasion by the Law: the Commandment gave no occasion; But, sin took occasion;
the command forbids sin; but sin took occasion to act more violently against
the command; the more the Dam is made up against the water, the more it swells;
corrupt nature takes occasion from the Law; Christ is put for the rising and
fall of many in Israel; and so is the mercy of God; it is not properly the
cause, but that which sin takes occasion from; Now we are to put a great
difference between things as they are in themselves, and the effects that flow
from them: the nature of the cause: and the effects that are not proper from it
as a cause, but as they look to the substance: there are two things in the
torments of hell: somewhat that is essential; somewhat but accidental: somewhat
essential: upon what object soever it lights, he is sure to undergo it: But
there is somewhat accidental: the wrath of God in the soul, is essential to the
torments of hell: So that the Lord Jesus Christ undergoing what was due to
sinners, the essential part he underwent, when it pleased the Lord to bruise
him, and to put him to shame: But somewhat is not essential, but may be
separated as it is from such a subject, as despair and the like: and you are in
this to distinguish between what is the proper fruit of mercy, and what is but
occasional matter, coming to such a subject, and taking hold of that: and so
affliction it is no cause of sin, no more then mercy is: But yet affliction is
many times an occasion of sin: It is said of Ahab, the more he was afflicted,
he sinned yet more: that is the first reason: because the corrupt heart of man
takes occasion to sin from mercy.

Secondly, from the general curse that by reason of sin is come upon all the
creatures, and all Gods providential dispensations: you know that ancient
curse, Genesis 3.19. Cursed be the ground for thy sake. It notes the ground as
referring to a man's use, and all the dispensations of God toward the creature;
there is a double curse come upon the creature in reference to you. First, as
it is decaying, and so it is a vexing creature; for this fills the creature
with vanity, and that vanity fills the soul with vexation. But the great curse
lies in this; it is a polluting and defiling thing now; as it is a means to
defile the soul of man: yet notwithstanding this is the curse; therefore to the
unclean, all things are unclean: that is, all the providence of God to that
man are means to increase that man's uncleanness; and that I think is the
meaning of that place, 1 John 2.16. Whatever is in the world, is lust, etc.
why, is there nothing in the world but lusting then? the meaning is: there is
such a Curse come upon all the creatures toward man; so far as a man is of the
world, so far they are objects of lusts to him: and draw out his lusts to
improve them: and therefore Job says of himself, in Job 31.26. If I beheld the
Sun when it shined, and my heart has been secretly enticed: there is an
enticing goes along with it: what is the reason of it? because there is a
general curse come upon all the creatures, and all the dispensations of God
through the creatures, that all these shall be means to ensnare and defile the
man.

Thirdly from the especial malice of the Devil against mercy: It is true, he is
an enemy to all the creatures, and he would destroy them all as creatures out
of his enmity to God, as he did the Gadarens herd of Swine. But in a more
especial manner the Devil is an enemy to the mercy of God more then to any
other creature of God. Why? because the Devils sin is direct enmity, and
malice, and revenge: God looks for most glory from his mercy: and therefore of
all other things the Devil has the greatest envy to that, that God may be
dishonored by them: take the first mercy of the Lords dealing with Adam; the
Lord made him to be the Monarch of the whole world: But there was one mercy
that the Lord vouchsafed him above all the rest, should be the glory of the
man: It was a far greater glory to have the woman subject unto him, then to
have all the rest of the world: Now upon this mercy the Devil sets his malice:
and he received her a rib, but the Devil made her a snare; Satan's great aim is,
that he may abuse Gods mercy: if God give a man great parts and gifts above all
other men, the Devil desires to abuse those parts, as Austin says of Licinius
a young man of great gifts, Cupit abs te ornari Diabolus: Austin.
the Devil desired he might be credited by him: great mercies and great
abilities are the special stocks that above all others the Devil desires to
graft upon: No fruit so bitter to God as the abuse of mercy: and therefore look
to your selves, for it is the Devils great design to abuse your mercies.

Fourthly, there are some mercies that God has given to persons and people out
of a particular displeasure: you heard of the general curse that came upon all
the creatures before. But now I say, there are some mercies that God gives out
of peculiar displeasure, and they prove a more peculiar curse. I conceive that
will appear plain to you, in Zach. 5.3. there is a curse goes forth (the
general curse went out ever since the fall) It shall enter into the house, and
consume it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof: and so if you
observe Mal. 3.2. I will says the Lord, Curse your blessings: I gave you
blessings, and notwithstanding these blessings there shall be a peculiar curse:
you have it more fully cleared to you, in Eccles. 5.13. riches reserved for the
owners hurt: one has riches, great mercies: they are so; Wisdom is good with
an inheritance: But many a man God gives riches to out of a peculiar
displeasure: and they are reserved to him for his hurt: No wonder these men
grow the worse for mercies, because it is out of a peculiar displeasure that
the Lord gives them: as Austin says of Gods hearing prayers, Austin.
he hears wicked men's prayers and gives them things they ask: though not
properly as an answer to prayer: God hears prayers with revenge: Gives the
things prayed for, but out of a peculiar displeasure: No wonder then that men
be the worse for them: take but the instance of Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. he fought
many battles, and the Lord helped him mightily: you will say God intended good
to this man sure: No, all this was in displeasure: he mightily helped him till
he was strong: and then his heart was lifted up to his own destruction. My
Brethren, God does as much rain snairs on men in mercy, as in any other of his
dispensations whatsoever: and therefore look to it: it is a dangerous thing for
a people to receive mercy, if they do not improve it.

I shall now speak a few words of Application; there are but two uses that I
would make of it.

First, of examination: Look back upon all the mercies that you have received
from God; temporal and spiritual mercies: privative, positive mercies. Indeed
it is your duty; the expression is, in Psalm. 68.26. Bless the Lord from the
fountain of Israel: Not only for late mercies received; but look to the
Fountain from whence all mercies did first flow: Remember the Lord from Shittim
to Gilgal: Micah 6.5. it is from the first beginning of mercy to the latter end
of them: ask but the question now of your own hearts: look to your own personal
mercies every one in private family mercies: and the public mercies that God
has afforded the Nation: and tell me, are you the better or the worse for
them? have you brought forth fruit answerable to the mercy? or has not the
Lord cause to say, Do you thus requite the Lord oh foolish people and unwise:
what are the evil fruits that mercies are in danger to bring forth, by which
people are made the worse? and see whether or no a great many of these be not
to be found amongst us? and if they be, you may say the thing is a mercy; yet
notwithstanding you have little reason to take comfort in it: certainly it can
never be a mercy to thee: nothing is a mercy to you, but that which you are the
better for.

There are six things that are the ordinary ways by which men do appear to be
the worse for mercy: And pray let us see whether all these be not to be found
amongst us: this is a day wherein you should lay your selves naked before God.

First, the ordinary abuse of mercy is forgetfulness of God, Deuteronomy. 4.14. When
thou have eaten and art full, and dwell in houses that thou buildest not,
and enjoyest wells that thou diggedst not, then take heed least thou forget the
Lord thy God: And indeed this is the first and the most natural fruit of a
heart fatted with mercy: for so it is said here, they waxed fat and kicked: they
lightly esteemed the rock of their salvation: the mercies of God make men
dis-regard God: Now I pray consider: if the mercies that raise thee up, cast
God down in thy soul, examine I pray: has respect to God risen by his mercy?
look to it each particular foul, and judge your selves faithfully: I am afraid
I may speak it with a great deal of bitterness: respect to God has not risen
by his mercies to this Nation: Nay rather lay aside all things; for the things
of God, we have nothing to do with them. Certainly, this is an evil thing, and
is an argument that men grow the worse for mercy.

Secondly, when they are settled upon them, and satisfied with them. Let them
but keep this mercy, and it will be well with them. Let us enjoy this, and all
is well: See how the people are brought in, it is a strange speech, Ier. 2.31.
We are Lords, say they, we will come no more to thee: God set them in a good
and a prosperous condition; now we will own God no more, we will reign alone:
have we seen so much need of God in a mercy? or do we ever come in to God but
when some present trouble is upon us? if any great eminent danger be over us,
then a fast: otherwise if not for a year together, it is no matter: as much as
to say, we are satisfied with mercies and have enough of them. We are Lords,
and will come no more at thee.

Thirdly, when men grow refractory unto duty, and oppose the things of
godliness with a higher hand: that is another way by which men grow worse for
mercies: An untamed heifer unaccustomed to the yoke: that is the expression;
when you shall find such a disposition in you, to reject God, deride his
Ordinances, oppose the Ministers, corrupt his Scriptures, or at least endeavor
to make them void, by mystical, allegorical interpretations; and thereby make
them a sound of words and no more; when men dare proceed to this pass, and have
a great deal to say for themselves, and against duty confidently, this is an
evil fruit of mercy.

Fourthly, when a people do begin to dote upon their own beauty, God sets them
in a good condition, and they begin to rest in it, that evil was the fruit of
their mercy, Ezekiel. 16.15. Thou wast comely through my comeliness that I put
upon thee; But thou did trust in thine own beauty: this is another evil fruit
of mercy, men grow more self-confident of their own wisdom, and their own
strength, and trust in their beauty; a great Argument that men grow much the
worse for mercy.

Fifthly, when men ascribe mercy to themselves, and would take the glory from
God, Hab. 1.16. Sacrifice to their own net: and say, this is great Babel that I
have built; my wisdom says one, and my power says another; this or that arm
of flesh has got the victory, the hearts of men run out to second causes, to
poor instruments; this is an argument that men grow the worse for mercies; when
they cannot call to mind any former thing wherein the Lord has been pleased to
use them, but with great Elevation of Spirit; And it must not be spoken of but
with the greatest advancement of the instrument that can be. And,

Lastly, when men employ all to their own use, when all men's mercies do but
serve their lusts; one man says, we have obtained this mercy, therefore I will
be rich; now I must sit at the stern says another; the management of all the
negotiations of the State is in my hands; as much as to say, God has given all
these mercies to serve me: remember that place in Isa. 29.1. It is a Scripture
I confess you should have much before your eyes: Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the City
where David dwelt: why is Jerusalem called Ariel? you have it rendered in the
margent, the Lion of God; that City and that people which had been as a Lion to
conquer all the neighboring Nations, that none were able to stand before them:
yet when they abused all these barely to serve themselves, the Lord has a woe
for them; have these been the fruits that mercies have brought forth amongst
us? the Grapes of Sodom: have not we reason now as to bewail our wants, so to
weep over our mercies all this day long? and to consider how much we are the
worse for those mercies wherein the Lord has been merciful to you.

There is a second use of Caution, and admonition; do you take heed seeing it
is so dangerous a thing, that the same thing be not justly said of you, and
charged on you as was here upon Jesurun: that they were the worse for their
mercies: the mercies they received did but ripen their sins and hasten their
ruin: take heed you bring forth fruits worthy of the mercy you receive: as
Christ says, bring forth fruits worthy of repentance; you may remember, it is
said of Solomon, Cant. 8.11. he had a Vineyard in Baal-hamon, and Solomon let
it out, but he expected to have the incomes of his Vineyard: the Lord deals so
with men: whatever the mercies are you do receive, the Lord expects returns for
them: and that your mercies should make you thrive and grow more in grace and
more in obedience, that you should be the better for them.

But what are the natural fruits that the mercies of God should bring forth,
that I may know when they are fruits that grow upon mercy naturally, not from
sin occasionally, that I may say, I am the better for mercy?

I shall name to you six particulars, and pray lay them to heart.

First, the proper fruit of mercy is an humble acknowledgment of our own
unworthyness: when the soul is made more humble under the apprehension of its
own unworthiness, that is a mercy indeed: the Lord directs to this in Deuteronomy.
26.5. they were to come to bring their first fruits to God when they came to
Canaan; they were to come to God and say, A Syrian ready to perish was my
Father: and the Lord brought us out of the Land of Egypt: they acknowledge
their own unworthiness of mercy, when a soul can say as Jacob does, I am less
then the least of all thy mercies.

Secondly, the proper fruit of mercy by which a man may be said to be the
better for it, is when they ascribe all mercy to God: when they say, We have
wrought no deliverance in the earth; neither have the inhabitants of the earth
formed it: it is not my bow nor my sword that has saved me: but as David,
Psalm. 18.2. When God had delivered him from all his enemies, and out of the
hand of Saul: Now what does David say? The Lord is my strength and my rock, he
is become my salvation: God is all in all; he looks on no instruments, no
second causes.

Thirdly, when mercies do bring a man's sins to remembrance, the soul stoops
under the apprehension of mercy: what will God show mercy to me! one so
rebellious and disobedient as I! and then the soul reads over the guilt of his
sin with new remorse: is this thy Voice, thy act O Lord whom I have so much
provoked, that the Lord might have cast me off so long ago? It was so with them
in Ezekiel. 16. ult. when God shows the greatest mercy that ever he will give
them: when he will give them sisters for daughters, and exalt her to be the
mother Church of the earth; then, they shall remember their ways and their
doings, and shall be confounded and put their mouths in the dust, and never
lift up their faces any more when I am pacified toward them: I might have
expected that God should have destroyed me rather, and sent me to hell as well
as to captivity: but will the Lord yet show mercy? the soul is in bitterness
for this.

Fourthly, when mercies lay upon the men the stronger obligations, and a man
makes this use of it; looks upon himself as more firmly bound to God; that is
the use they make of mercy in Ezra 9.13. after we have received such a
deliverance as this, should we rebel? as if they should have said, if this
mercy do not make up the banck against disobedience, nothing in the world will
do it: this makes a man as David, to cleave to God with full purpose of heart,
and to say, this God is my God, is my God for ever.

Fifthly, when the soul studies what he shall return to God for all his
mercies: you know that God not only expects returns, but proportionable
returns: And I desire you would take notice of it, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. But Hezekiah
rendered not according to the benefit done unto him. But can our returns be
answerable to our receipts? there is a double way to make reckonings even: you
can never return so much in the thing, but in the will: and so much the more as
the hand of God is large in mercy, so much the more thy heart should be
enlarged in returns: and let me offer this to your thoughts: in every
affliction it is observed God has some one special end: though the Lord has
many ends do meet in every action, for therein his wisdom appears: But yet
notwithstanding some special thing the Lord aims at in every affliction; and
therefore Job goes to God, and says, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest
with me: there is some especial thing that the Lord aims at, that he would have
his people to endeavor to find out: and so it is in every mercy; though the
Lord have many ends in it, yet some special end the Lord aims at in every
Mercy, which you should consult with God about: go to the Lord Jesus as your
Priest, and desire direction from him; enquire what special duties the Lord
aims at in this mercy. For you can no more thrive under mercy, then you concur
with God in his ends: set those three ends together, Mich. 6.8. and now oh man,
what does the Lord require of thee; but to do justly, to love mercy, and to
walk humbly with thy God? But it is good for you to spend some time to enquire
what is the peculiar thing the Lord aims at in every affliction, and in every
mercy: that is the way to thrive under, and to be the better for mercy.

Lastly, that soul is the better for mercy when it loves God the more for it,
Psalm. 18.1. a great mercy David had received, deliverance from all his enemies:
Oh I will love the Lord says he: that is the first thing; he does not say, I
will love the mercy, and I will rejoice in the mercy: No, I told you it was
Austins observation: Austin.
It is an adulterous love, the love of an harlot, to love the gift above the
giver: Let this be an evidence of your love, that you so delight in the mercy,
as you delight in the goodness of the God of the mercy: and that you keep your
selves in the way of mercy ever after: why is one particular mercy so sweet?
the Scripture speaks of Gods drawing out of loving kindness; how shall the soul
obtain it? keep your selves in the way of mercy; then thou shall be sure to be
kept in the way of loving kindness continually: there shall be a tract of
mercies to thee: take heed therefore that your mercies do make you the better;
for otherwise mercies wronged are the most dangerous things that are meddled
withal.

But how shall I know that I know that I am the better for mercies? Pray
observe these four rules, and I have done.

First, thy mercies will never make thee the better, unless they be mercies
that proceed from a Covenantright and interest: What is that? the great promise
of the Covenant, is, I will be thy God: that is, all that is in God thou have
an interest in; then there is infinite mercy in God; that mercy is my mercy:
the God of my mercy, and the God of my strength: this labor to be sure of:
what mercy soever thou receivest, let it flow from a Covenant Interest, that
thou have closed with the Lord, and chooses him for thy God; no mercy will do
thee good else.

Secondly, when a man as he receives all from God, does direct all to God; that
he that is the first cause is made the last end; when the soul says, of him
are all things, therefore to him are all things: I desire to have no benefit
from that which God has no glory from: when a man does so, it is an argument
that the mercy does his soul good.

Thirdly, consider, this is the mercy that does you good, when it makes thy
soul prosperous: I would not have you judge of mercies by any thing but with
relation to your souls: as God gave Gaius a great estate, the host of the whole
Church, in John 3.2. I wish thou may prosper as thy soul prospers: if God
has given thee a large estate, great employments, or great dignity amongst
men, is thy soul the better? then thou art the better, but never till then:
take the instance of Iehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17.5,6. he had silver and gold in
abundance; and his heart was lifted up in the way of Gods Commandments: how
should I know when God gives me riches in mercy? why, his soul was lifted up,
and therefore he had them in mercy.

Lastly, wherein your prayers to God are drawn forth more for a sanctified use
of the mercy, then for the mercy it self: this is certain; it is said of
ungodly men, that by the prayers of Gods people, their mercies are turned into
snares: in Psalm. 69.22. let their table be made their snare: and that which
should have been for their welfare, let it become a trap: so their prayers are
drawn out, that all the mercies that they receive may cause them to thrive and
prosper, that every thing may work for good together for good, as the Lord has
promised to those that love him. And so much now for the point which is of
continual use to you: and therefore I beseech you consider of what has been
spoken.

March 3. 1652.
Unruly Thoughts quieted, BY Divine Consolations.
At Paul's, June 9. 1653.
PSALM 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight
my soul.


THE Psalm in the Hebrew is without a Title, and therefore I can say nothing
either of the Author, or the Occasion, but the Septuagint adds a title, and
Jerome from them; Psalmus David quarta sabbati; Ierom.
upon which Austin and Ierom have their several conjectures, which will be to
little purpose to humble you withal; only from the contents thereof Musculus
and Calvin both do observe, that the Psalmist does here speak de
persecutionibus domesticis, some that proved great persecutors at home, and
they do referr it unto Saul, and unto his government: it is true, they had many
enemies round about them; all the neighbor Nations, the bordering Nations,
they were their evil neighbors; the Holy Ghost calls them so in Ier. 12.14.
but yet it seems they had more cruel inmates within, worse then all the
neighbors without: a home-born slaverie amongst all upon earth, is the
greatest misery; home-born Oppression among all upon earth is the greatest
tyranny: yet notwithstanding, so it seems it was; for that is the humor of
some men, as if they were only ad dominium, and all others admancipium nati;
they born to rule, all other men born to serve: and such was Saul's party; Cush
the Ethiopian, Psalm. 7.1. Jews by profession, but Gentiles in Religion: this
misery grew so great upon David, that he chose rather a voluntary exile, then
to subject himself unto the cruelty of those, or that hypocritical faction
which bare rule in his own Nation: as Salv. l. 5. de great. p. 6. such was the
oppression in that time of the Roman Governors, ut-unum Romanorum erat omnium
votum, liceat iis vitam agere cum Barbaris: This seems to be the great subject
of the Psalm. In the words that I have read to you, there are two things to be
considered.

First, David's affliction (if he were the Author of the Psalm) and that arose
from a multitude of perplexing thoughts within him. And,

Secondly, here is David's Consolation too in the midst of this affliction: thy
comforts delight my soul: amara vulnera, sed suavia medicamenta, Austin.
so Austin says: From these two Branches there are two Observations that I
have made choice of to speak something to you at present.

The first is this; That in evil times the misery of the Saints of God is more
from thoughts within, then troubles without.

Secondly, That God provideth Consolations in, and answerable unto the
afflictions of his people, which shall have a power to revive and delight their
souls.

Doctrine first.
To begin with the first of them. In evil times the misery of the Saints of God
is more from thoughts within, then from troubles without. There are three
things in the opening of this truth, that I shall endeavor briefly to
demonstrate to you.

First, That the best men they are not freed, while they live here, from unruly
un-subdued thoughts.

Secondly, That in times of trouble, these thoughts come in by multitudes: a
man's thoughts are never so tumultuous as in troublesome times. And then,

Lastly, That the great part of afflictions does lie more in these tumultuous
and unruly thoughts within, then in all a man's troubles and afflictions
without: winds without do not cause an earthquake, but wind within, (...).

For the first, even the best men while they live here, they are not freed from
unruly and unquiet thoughts. Thoughts, they are the immediate issues of
principles; the buds and the blossoms of the principles that are in a man's
heart: and so long as godly men live here, they will have corrupt principles in
them; so long will these principles bud and blossom into unruly and inordinate
thoughts, while a man is in an unregenerate estate: all the imaginations of the
thoughts of his heart are evil, and only evil, Genesis 6.5. because he has
nothing but a principle of sinning in him: when he is regenerate, yet so long
as a corrupt principle remains in him, so long there will arise in him unruly
unsubdued thoughts: it is very true, there is a great deal of difference
between the thoughts of regenerate and unregenerate men: for in a regenerate
man there is a holy government set up in his thoughts, they are brought into
subjection unto the government of Christ, even (...), every thought: in 2 Cor.
10.5. for let a man's change in his words, in his actions be never so glorious,
even an Angel before men, yet if his thoughts remain the same, I must say it,
he is still a child of Belial, he is still in the gall of bitterness, and bonds
of iniquity: therefore there is a great deal of difference between the thoughts
of a regenerate and an unregenerate man; and indeed the main regeneration lies
in that, and is principally discovered in it, purity in the inward parts: in
Isa. 55.7. let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; the great change lies in the inward man: therefore there is a great
deal of difference between the thoughts of a regenerate and an unregenerate
man: and though there be rebellious thoughts in the best men, they are not the
top thoughts in the man: you have an expression in 1 King. 18.28. how long halt
you between two opinions? (...) the word in the Hebrew is taken from a word
that signifies the top branches of a tree: as you find the same word used in
Isa. 17.6. a few berries upon the uppermost boughs; there you have the same
word used: and therefore Mercer renders the word, how long halt ye inter duas
prominentias: Mercer.
that is they had 2 top thoughts; they thought as highly of Baal as they did
think of God; and they did set up Baal in the same authority that they did set
up God: the word of God is said to cast down (...), every top thought, 2 Cor.
10.5. he does so far bring them into order and sub-ordination, that though they
be unruly thoughts, yet they are under control, and under a higher Kingdom and
dominion: now a godly man has never those: though he has sinful thoughts, yet
they are never his top thoughts: they are thoughts that are brought into
captivity; but yet my Brethren for all that, there will arise in the best men
abundance of unruly and unquiet thoughts, yet for all this they do arise in the
souls of godly men: even in the best men, the corrupt principle in them is
still bubling up, the Sea within them is casting out mire and dirt: and that
from a threefold ground: I will but touch it, and pass to the second particular.

First, from the corruptions of the unregenerate part, the remainder of
corruption in the best men, it is like fire in an Oven, the Holy Ghost compares
it so, Hos. 7.4,5. and he has violent irruptions, their hearts are as hot as
an Oven, these thoughts arise from the irruptions and the breakings forth of
the unregenerate part.

Secondly, from the invasion of some enticing creature-objects amongst them, as
David saw Bathsheba: Achan saw, and he desired; considered, and desired: so
likewise it is said, in 1 Ioh. 2.16 Whatsoever is in the world, is the lust of
the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life: is there nothing in
the world but lust? the meaning is, take all the creatures to an unregenerate
man, and they all of them become the objects of lusts, all of them are but
means to draw out lust: so that there is a threefold curse come upon the
creature since the fall unto all unregenerate men; it is not only a deceiving
creature, because it is empty: and it is a vexing creature, because it is
promising and then deceiving: but withal, it is a defiling, a polluting
creature: thus from the invasion of objects, from without, are these thoughts
drawn forth. And then,

In the last place: from the injections of Satan: for what are unruly thoughts?
it is Satan does himself many times immediately inject: so the Devil put it
into the heart of Judas to betray Christ: the Devil put it into his heart:
there are some thoughts that come immediately from hell, like fiery darts: the
best men then are not in this life free from unruly, inordinate, unquiet
thoughts. But,

In the second place; In troublesome times these thoughts come in by
multitudes: never so tumultuous as in evil times: that as it is said of the
thoughts of God, and of his love, Psalm. 40.5. Thy thoughts to usward are
innumerable, there is none can reckon them up to thee; So (my Brethren) it may
be said of our thoughts that proceed from our fears, when either guilt within,
or danger without presents it self, our thoughts then are innumerable, they
fly within a man's Spirit like Atoms in the air, no man is able to reckon them
up to his own self: observe Dan. 5.6. a handwriting appears to Belshazer: the
hand smote him not, did but write upon the wall, yet notwithstanding Belshazer
was troubled: What was the reason? his thoughts troubled him. The Disciples
they had an apparition of the Lord Jesus, Luke 24.38. they supposed they had
seen a spirit, says the Text why he hurt them not, yet notwithstanding Christ
says, thoughts did arise in their hearts, thoughts did arise: but in a special
manner that place, Job 6.4. The terrors of God are set in Battle-array against
me: how came the terrors of God? the terrors of God were let in by thoughts, by
thoughts, that was the way, and they did not come single in he says, but they
came a whole army, and an army in battalia; thus did the Lord let in
afflictions by his own thoughts upon Jobs person: and thus in evil times it
always is so; an army, an host of thoughts come in upon us: they fall upon a
man's heart like bubbles in the rain: and the reasons are these two.

First, because in troublesome times the souls of men are awake; commonly
troublesome times awaken men's spirits: in times of prosperity and peace, there
is usually a Spirit of slumber upon men; but when the Lord emptieth a man from
vessel to vessel, that has been before settled upon the lees, then abundance
of the lees appear; when God (I say) empties a man from vessel to vessel, then
how full of projects is the heart of man? never brought into danger, but the
man his thoughts rise; Oh how shall I escape? what shall I do? and how shall I
make provision for my self? evil times awaken men that were before lulled
asleep by security. But,

Secondly, Satan takes special care to assail the hearts of men with thoughts
in an evil time, daemonum est malas cogitationes suggerere. Bernard.
Bernard: Cogitationes onerosae. Idem: his great care is to keep men in peace
in prosperous times, to keep the house and all that he possesses in peace; but
let troublesome times come once, then he does stir up in the soul all manner of
unquiet and distracting thoughts, and thereby he labors to add unto the
affliction: as it is in temptations to sin, their strength lies in the
multitudes of them, and in the intention of them: Satan's great care is, that he
might impress the same image upon you that is on himself; and your great care
should be, to keep your selves that the wicked one touch you not; touch you
not, how is that? tactu qualitativo, so to touch you, as to leave an impression
of his own devilishness upon you: a conformity in you to him: non nocet sensus
ubi non est consensus: quod resistentem fatigat, vincentem coronat: now Satan
is an unquiet Spirit, always full of tumults and restlesness: why now such a
disposition in evil times does he labor to raise up in you also, that so there
may be the same image in you that is in himself. Thus the best men are not
freed from turbulent thoughts, and in evil times they come by multitudes.

But then, which is the main thing that I am to stick upon: That a godly man's
affliction is more from these thoughts within, then from any trouble without;
and that will appear by these six considerations: I shall desire you to observe
them.

In the first place, because the eye of God is mainly upon a man's thoughts in
troublesome times, and your thoughts especially displease him. When the
apparition was made to the Disciples, Christ says, Why are you fearful? Why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? Luke 24.38. Christ's eye was mainly upon their
thoughts: and indeed these are the things that do in a special manner displease
God: the first buddings and risings of corruption does appear in a man's
thoughts: and God does eye sin in the rising of it, in the thoughts, in an
especial manner: sua quisque cogitatione stat vel cadit: quia spiritus sanctus
auferet se a cogitationibus quae sunt sine intellectu: eritque templum Dei,
spelunca Diaboli: Bernard.
Bern. de inter domo. It is true, that thoughts are free from the eye and
censure of men, because they are secret and invisiible: But they are known to
the eye of the Almighty: He sees our thoughts afar off: and therefore some
humble souls are more grieved for the provoking the eyes of the glory of God,
by the rebellion of their thoughts, then for the exorbitancy of their actions:
when the times are troublesome and your thoughts within you grow unquiet and
tumultuous. Now what is it in an affliction, that is the main thing in
affliction? That which does displease God, and draws out sin in the soul, that
makes it to be an affliction indeed: Chrisost.
and therefore I remember Chrysostom (speaking of a godly man) lays down this
for a general rule, which we should do well to take with us: he says, that
unto him there is but one thing only that he fears: and what is that? that he
should displease, or offend God; that is the great thing he is afraid of, he
fears nothing else: (...); he fears nothing else: why then my Brethren, what is
it in an affliction that makes an affliction grievous? That which draws out sin
in me; now the blooming of corrupt principles is in thoughts, there they bud:
and therefore I say, there is many a godly man, that considering the eye of God
is always upon his thoughts, is much more affected; I say, much more affected
with the continual excursions of his Spirit that prevail, and unruly thoughts,
then he is with all the deviations of actions whatsoever. That is the first
ground why the main of the affliction lies in this. But,

Secondly, there is another reason of it, and that is this: this lets the
affliction into the inward man: when once the thoughts grow unruly, this lets
the affliction into the inward man: while you keep afflictions without you they
can never hurt you: therefore Jesus Christ says, fear not them that can kill
the body, and have no more that they can do; all this is but without you, and
so long I say they can never hurt you: but if the affliction gets within, then
it is like wind in the bowels of the earth: then it causes the earthquake:
Godly men for this cause have taken more care to guard their Spirits that they
may keep afflictions without, then to be delivered from the afflictions: there
are two Scriptures that I shall offer, mavelous considerable, Hab. 3.16. that
is one, I tremble in my self (says he) that I might rest in the evil day:
rest, there is a double rest: there is a rest of deliverance, he meant not so:
but there is a rest of quietness, and confidence and that all the people of God
labor for: keep the afflictions without you, let it not invade your inward
man; that is the promise, Psalm. 127.2. So he gives his beloved sleep: observe
that Scripture; it is in vain to rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the
bread of carefulness; so he gives his Beloved sleep: what is that? Animum
tranquillum, placidum laborem; Calvin.
so Mr. Calvin: that let his condition without be never so troublesome, let him
be forced to break his bodily sleep never so often, yet the inward sleep, the
inward rest, and tranquillity of his mind is reserved; he gives his Beloved
sleep. My Brethren, so long as temptations are kept without you, they will
never hurt you: it is true of afflictions too: take a man that keeps an
affliction out of his thoughts, that is, from unruly, and turbulent, and
tumultuous thoughts: Huic non est onerosa paupertas, non sentit injurias, ridet
opprobria, contemnit damna, Bernard.
Bernard: this man alas, poverty, or injuries, or disgraces, or loss of goods,
truly all these are no great matter to him: why? because they are only
afflictions without: they have not invaded his inward man: That is the second
ground.

Thirdly, unruly thoughts in evil times, are the great part of the affliction,
because this opens the door to the Devil; in patience possess your souls, says
Christ: but my Brethren, when your doubts once grow unruly, the Devil enters,
Ephesians. 4.26,27. Let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, nor give place to the
Devil: violent, and unruly thoughts, of what kind soever, they do but open the
door to that wicked one: every man by nature is the Devils house, in Matthew.
12.43,44. and though in godly men Satan be cast out, yet he will attempt a
re-entry; and therefore he says, I will go to my house from whence I came out:
it is true, it is not spoken of a godly man there, but Satan in the best men
will attempt to re-enter: now, when any affliction shall be the means to open
the door to Satan, this I say is the great part of the affliction.

In the fourth place, it is the great part of affliction, because unquiet
thoughts do raise up in the soul distracting and vexing passions: for your
passions rise by your thoughts, and the affliction of the soul lies in this:
all the rest is but the affliction of the body, but the affliction of the soul
lies in tormenting passions; you have that expression frequently used, as in
Isa. 58. and many other places; a day for a man to afflict his soul: and that
soul that is not afflicted; then the soul has its afflictions as well as the
body. What are the souls afflictions? they are tormenting and vexing passons:
as that there needs no other misery befall the body, then if God should leave
it to the jarring of its own humors: so there needs no other plague befall the
soul, then if the Lord should leave it to the violence of its own passions;
this would be like Vulters gnawing upon the heart of a man; these stir up in a
man, fear, and sorrow, and amazement those tormenting passions of the soul;
these be soul-afflicting affections: do but consider what it is that torments
the Devils; they are reserved in chains of darkness to the judgment of the
great day; those chains of darkness I conceive to be in a great measure their
own dark and guilty thoughts, by which they are bound over to wrath, in these
chains they are reserved. What shall the never dying worm be? Nothing but the
furious risings of the thoughts of a man's heart, the furious reflections of the
man's soul upon himself: why then a man needs no greater misery, if God should
but leave him to the tyranny of his thoughts; for these raise up in his soul
perplexing, distracting, and tormenting miseries.

Fifthly, unruly thoughts are a great part of a man's afflictions; for these
draw out in a man passionate and unruly speeches: you have such an expression
in Job 20.2. My thoughts caused me to answer: men's thoughts mightily press
forwards to words: and by this means passionate speeches rise from unruly
thoughts; these I say, do exalt folly. Solomon in Prove. 17.27. has such an
expression; a man of understanding is of an excellent Spirit; you read it so,
(...) he is spiritu frigidus: a man of a cool spirit: whereas another man, he
is tinder unto every injection: but I say, such a man exalts folly, a great
part of affliction is in this.

There is one thing more, and I beseech you consider it: unruly thoughts in the
time of trouble, they do rob the soul of its richest ornament, those glorious
inward qualifications which are the souls beauty: I will name but three to you.
It is inward quietness: and serenity; it is contempt of the world: and it is
holy magnaminity.

First I say, It robs the soul of its inward quietness and tranquillity; and a
quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price: the soul of a man should be
always like the upper region of the air, calm and sereen, what storms so ever,
or blusterings there are below. And,

Secondly, contempt of the world: Love not the world, nor the things of the
world: it is but (...), an outside thing: now, a godly man he is able to say,
there will come a time when I shall take my leave of all these things with joy;
and I say, to be dissolved and to be with Christ is much better: Nay, there
will come a time in the general conflagration of all things, when I shall be
able to stand upon the honors of this world, the ruins of all things, and a
man is able to say quum mundus exarserit, as he says, cogitat se nihil habere
de tanta mole perdendum: though all the creatures were destroyed, yet the man
could say, I have lost nothing, my portion is not here; the things of this life
are given me, Non in praemium, sed solatium. Prosper.
Prosper. Licet omnia amiserunt, nunquam fidem, pietatem, interioris hominis
bona: Hae sunt opes Christianorum: now that man that struggles, his spirit is
marvellously robbed of this glorious quality. And so likewise,

In the last place, that holy magnaminity and greatness of mind which should be
in us; the greatness of a Saints mind should be answerable to the greatness of
his God, and answerable to the greatness of the promises that are made to him;
a holy greatness of mind, built upon the greatness of his God, and his interest
in him. Now unruly thoughts cross this: Who art thou that art afraid of a man
that shall dye, and the son of man that is as dust, and forgettest the Lord thy
Maker? We are not careful, Oh King, to answer thee in this matter: their
thoughts were not troubled: in re tam sancta nulla est deliberatio: now this
preserves true greatness in a man, that as David, in Psalm. 112.8. says, My
heart is underpropped: so Montanus reads it, suffultum est cor meum; Monta.
that let the affliction be what it will be, he has something within that
bears up, and underprops his spirit, and he is acted neither by hopes nor fears
from below: Qui nil sperat nisi a domina, nil timet praeter dominum, Bernard.
Bernard: then this is a truly nobleness: Now unruly, and unquiet thoughts rob
the soul of these glorious qualifications; and this has made some of the
Ancients exceedingly complain of the troublesomness of their own thoughts: I
remember Bernard cries out, Cogitationum tumultus a Cord quotidie amovere
volo, nec valeo: sine cogitationibus esse non possum: introeunt, and exeunt:
Bernard,
Bern. de inter. dom. On the tumults of my own thoughts! I would remove them
every day, but alas I am not able, still my thoughts increase: What is the
reason of this? surely, the main of every affliction lies in this, the
unruliness, and unquietness of a man's own thoughts.

I, but you will say to me; what great cause had David, or this Psalmist to
have such a multitude of unquiet thoughts? let us look to that a little, before
I pass from this first point: we will go no further then this present Psalm,
and you shall find, that if any man had cause to be troubled, that he that
penned this Psalm had cause of troublesome thoughts, and that will appear, (...)
our hopes are past, Ezekiel. 37.12. then says God, Lo my people, I will open your
graves: when they say, our bones are dry, our hopes are lost, then the Lord
says, I will open your graves: as God brings evil upon wicked men seasonably,
because he watches over them for evil; therefore in Zeph. 2.4. it is a
considerable expression: I will drive out Ashod at noon, at noon: Tempus
incommodissmum cum sol maxim fervet. Drusius.
Drus. In the worst time, when the Sun was hottest, and therefore in those hot
Countries, it was the greatest evil. I will watch over them, and bring the
affliction at the seasonablest time: so I will give my people seasonable
comfots, because he watches over them for good, as he watches over the other
for evil.

Nay, not only in the affliction, but according unto the affliction, so shall
the consolation be, and therefore Ierom reads it, secundum multitudinem; Jerome.
according to the multitude of my thoughts: so were the multitude of Gods
consolations; God will give it in the time, and the season of it; but withal,
the Lord will give it according unto the measure; when he does bring great
afflictions, he provideth for you strong consolations, that as the affliction
abounds, so the consolations shall abound; the Lord tells you, that his
rewards shall be according to the measure of his mercies: it is an admirable
expression in Hosea 10.12. according to the measure of mercies your rewards
are; the Lord measures your consolations according to the measure of your
afflictions. Thus then you see the truth of these two points. Let us see now
what these consolations were that upheld the heart of our Psalmist here in
those sad times: thy comforts delight my soul: what were they? I will go no
further then the Psalm neither, and you shall find that there were eight that
were the great stay of his heart in those times.

As in the first place; he did consider God beholds them: it is a wrong that is
done to his people under the fathers eyes: that was the first thing that he did
stay his heart on; the people of God do say, Surely thou art our father, though
Abraham know us not, and Israel be ignorant of us: we have no greater comfort
that we can look at, no friends below, yet notwithstanding our groans are not
hid from thee. That was the first comfort.

Secondly, God did not only see it; Surely thou have seen it: but withal he did
comfort himself with this: God would revenge it; therefore he calls him, thou
God to whom vengeance belongs, the God that revengeth: habes ultorem Deum,
Hierom.
Hierom: he was a God that did avenge the cause of his people: he has said,
vengeance is mine; and of the Lord Jesus Christ when Steven was stoned, Acts 7.
it is said, he saw Jesus standing at the right hand of God; Jesus standing; why
the Scripture every where says, that Christ is gone to Heaven, and is sat
down at the right hand of God, but he sees him standing up at the right handof
God; what is the reason? that is, tanquam causae suae judex and vindex, says
one, as one that was the Judge of his cause, and the avenger of his wrong: I,
this is another great ground of comfort upon which the heart is stayed: My God
is a God to whom vengeance belongs. Then,

In the third place: by all these the Lord teaches his people, for so he says
in the 12. Verse, Blessed (says he) is the man whom thou chastenest, and
teach out of thy Law; that is another stay of heart in the worst of rimes:
the rod (says he) has a voice: hear the rod, and who has appointed it: Nay,
the rod teaches a man that it is better to be under the saddest affliction,
and have the graces of that condition drawn forth, rather then to be under the
greatest prosperity, and the sins of that condition drawn forth: do but observe
Iam. 1.4. Let the brother of low degree rejoice that he is exalted: I, you will
say, he has good reason for it: but, Let the brother of high degree rejoice
that he is made low; a hard matter to rejoice in that my Brethren: a godly man
can as truly rejoice in an afflicted condition, so as the graces of that
condition be drawn forth in it, as he can rejoice in a prosperous condition,
much rather if the sins of that condition be drawn forth in it: therefore there
is a teaching in the rod, when a man is brought to that indifferency of Spirit,
as I remember the Father brings in David speaking, Vis me Pastorem ovium aut
regem populorum? ecce paratum est cor meum: Lord says he, shall I be a Keeper
of sheep again, or Lord shall I be a King over Israel? Lord, my heart is ready,
my heart is ready, willing to embrace each condition: This is another thing:
the rod is a Teacher, the rod has a voice. Besides,

In the fourth place: There is a rest God has prepared for his people in the
most restless condition: so he says in the 13. Verse, that thou might give
him rest in the day of evil: there is a shadow of Gods wing, and the people of
God in the worst condition, they can lie down under this shadow with great
delight: Look into that precious Scripture, Hos. 14.8. I am like a green
firtree, says God the Lord; like a fir tree; Why? in two things: it is (...),
densam umbram habens: so the Septuagint renders it: a tree that yields a thick
shadow: and it is a tree likewise that is always green, perpetuo virens,
never casts its leaves as other trees do in the Winter; so says the Lord, such
is my defense, you may lie down under my shadow in quiet: and he gives them
rest in the day of evil. And,

In the fifth place; he comforts himself with this: the Lord knows that the
thoughts of man are but vanity; with that he comforts himself, that all these
designs shall come to nothing, all their thoughts are but vanity: the Lord has
appointed that he will take the wise in his own craftiness, and his hand shall
not perform his enterprise: the Lord has said, by iniquity shall no man be
established: the Lord has said, he will not suffer the hypocrite to rule,
least the people be ensnared, that is the expression, Job 34.3. Now let their
designs be what they will be; with this he comforts himself, yet
notwithstanding the Lord knows the thoughts of men to be but vanity. That is
another ground of comfort.

And then; In the sixth place, that I may draw to a conclusion; that while they
labor for their own exaltation, God is preparing for their destruction: that
is another thing that he comforts himself with; for so he says, till the pit
be dug for the ungodly; till the pit be dug; all this while I do not envy
their rising says he, but rather pity their ruin: Impatientia humana non
vult habere Dei patientiam. Ierom.
Jerome: for God is preparing a pit all the while: that is another great ground
of comfort in the worst of times; for my Brethren, there is a judgment written
that must be executed, and many times (as Austin well observes upon the place)
faelicitas peccatorum fovea est ipsorum: Austin.
even their very prospering in an evil way, is the pit in which they find their
ruin: that is another thing by which he comfort himself.

Seventhly, (That I may draw to an end) though for the present the Lord seems
to neglect the condition of his people; yet he comforts himself with this: that
God seemed to neglect for the present, but says he, he will bring forth
judgment to righteousness; it is true indeed, Gods judgment for his people
seems now to have left them, it is hid: but says he, the Lord will appear for
their safety, and he tells them plainly; that will he executes Judgment for his
people; Judgment shall return to righteousness; it is true indeed, there will
come a time, when the Saints shall rule the world, there will come such a time,
I am afraid it is not at hand yet: I am afraid so, for that place in Dan. 7. I
rather choose to expound it by that in Isa. 60.12. That Kingdom and Nation that
will not serve thee shall perish: not a Gentile, but a Jewish Nation: but I
say, there will come such a time, when Judgment shall return to righteousness,
and then that prophecy of Lactantius shall be fulfilled, Oriens dominabitur,
and Occidens serviet: Lactant.
there will come such a time, and with this now he comfort himself, that
though the Judgments of God seem to lie hid, and be deferred, yet it shall not
be so always, but Judgment shall return to Righteousness. And then,

In the last place, he comforts himself: the Lord will bring upon them their
own iniquity: their own iniquity; that is, they shall fall in their own
devices, they shall be dashed in pieces upon the stumbling block of their
inventing: he takes the wise in their own craftiness: and he burns them like
Bees in their own hive^: and so you shall find in Daniel 7.25,26. where, the
little horn is said to speak great words against the most High, and to wear out
the Saints, and to change times and laws; What then? why then it is said, the
Judgment shall sit, and dominion shall be taken from him, and to consume, and
destroy, even to the time of the end: for says he, Our God will bring upon
them their own iniquities: These were now the thoughts wherewith he comforted
himself, and by which he did overcome all those troublesome and tumultuous
thoughts that were in his Spirit.

My Brethren, I should speak something to the Application of it; I shall say no
more but this, because I see I have trespassed.

You have heard, that the great afflictions of good men in troublesome times, is
more from thoughts within, then from dangers without. You have heard, that
answerable unto these thoughts God provideth consolations which do sustain, and
cheer the heart.

My Exhortation to you is;

Use.
Live in the faith, and walk in the strength of these truths: labor I say to
live in the faith, and to walk in the strength of these truths: that there are
consolations that can quiet the heart of man in the midst of the greatest
struglings and tumults of Spirit that can be. And that afflictions never do you
harm, but when they invade your Spirits by your own thoughts.

Consider I beseech you these things, and then let thy affliction be never so
great, and though your thoughts be never so tumultuous, yet there are
consolations, there are I say consolations of God, which will certainly be a
means to delight your souls.

And so much now shall serve for a brief opening of this Scripture unto you.
Comfort and encourage one another with these words.

Gods Throne Erect, IN The Assemblies of his Saints.
At a Fast.
REV. 4.6. Round about the Throne were four beasts full of eyes before and
behind, etc.


THE Comma of this Book is set forth, Chap. 1.19. write the things that are,
and the things that shall be hereafter: and into these two parts this Book is
divided. First, a Relation of the things that are referring to the seven
Churches of Asia, Saint John's special charge. Secondly, a revelation of the
general estate of the Church to come, and that from John's time unto the second
coming of the Lord: And this second part begins at Chap. 4. where the Church is
made the scene of all things prophesied of in this book; the vision of the
Throne, the Beast and the Elders, are the representation of the Church where
the Lord has his Throne, of whom are the Judgments executed upon the Churches
enemies for the Churches sake.

The whole subject of this Book contains,

First, a representation of the Church upon earth; for there the Lord is
worshipped, for they fall down, and they cast down their crowns, and they are
those that were redeemed by the blood of the Lamb: Chap. 5.9. and the Angels
are reckoned as distinct from them, Chap. 5.11. they are round about the
Throne, and the beasts, and the Elders; it sets forth their office, and their
watchfulness over the Saints in their worship.

Secondly, it is a representation of the universal Church in all times, and in
all places: for Chap. 5.9. they are such as were redeemed out of all Nations,
and kindreds, and tongues: therefore all that have been redeemed by the blood
of the Lamb in the Churches of the New Testament, unto them is this Revelation,
and them it does concern.

Thirdly, it is this Church universal as it is constituted and made up of
particular instituted Churches; for if we look upon the Church invisible, it
has no Officers in that, only the Lord Jesus Christ who is the head; and if we
look upon the universal visible Church, there are no Officers in it, but here
are Elders and Brethren, Officers and members, which do Constitute a
particular visible Church, that do meet together to worship God, as being the
platform into which the Lord would have all the Societies and Congregations of
his people gathered together in.

There are in the words three things.

First, a Throne. Secondly, the Beasts; which are four round about the Throne.
Thirdly, the qualifications of these Beasts, they are full of eyes before and
behind.

First, here is a Throne, and there was one that stood upon it. Verse 3. here
it is an allusion to the Tabernacle and the Temple, where the glorious presence
of God amongst his people was manifested: that is plain.

First, from Ier. 17.12. A glorious high Throne is the place of our Sanctuary:
and therefore that is resembled unto the throne of God.

Secondly, it is said Rev. 16.17. there came a voice out of the Temple of
heaven from the Throne, saying, It is done, etc. therefore a Temple is his
Throne, or, his Throne was the mercy-Seat in the Temple, from whence God did
manifest his presence to be in the midst of them.

Thirdly, it will appear by what is said to be before his Throne; the golden
Candlesticks with the seven lamps of fire and the Sea of glass: which was an
allusion unto the laver of brass in the Temple; all were ornaments or utensils
of the Tabernacle, or the Temple: It is true, that we read of another Throne
which shall be erected after the thousand years of Satan's binding be
accomplished, Rev. 20.11. and he who stood upon it, was he before whose face
the Earth and the Heavens fled away, and the dead both small and great did
stand before him to be Judged of those things that are written in the Book,
according unto their works, and the earth and the Sea gave up her dead, etc.
But that is a Throne of Judgment, and this a Throne of Grace: and this sets
forth the presence of Christ in the midst of his people in Gospel Ordinances,
and Administrations unto the second coming of the Lord.

Secondly, the four Beasts set forth the people of God incompassing the Throne
of God, and therefore Psalm. 7.7. the Congregation of his people are said to
compass him about: it is an allusion unto the manner of the peoples compassing
the Mount of God and the Tabernacle in the Wilderness, when the 12 tribes did
pitch round about the Tabernacle in four squadrons, 3 tribes in each of them,
as appears Numb. 1.52. and Ch 2 and each of these had the images of Beasts in
their Ensigns. First, Judah and those with him; and their Ensign was a Lion.

Secondly, Ruben and those with him; and their Ensign was an Ox.

Thirdly, Ephraim and those with him; and their Ensign was the Shape of a man.

Fourthly, Dan and those with him; and their Ensign was the shape of an Eagle.
And answerable unto these the Church of God compassing the throne of God about,
is expressed by this Hieroglyfick, the Ensign being put for the tribe, as if we
should put the Lion for England, the Cross for Scotland, and the Eagle for the
Empire, as it is said, Rev. 12.13. the woman was helped with the wings of a
great Eagle to fly into the Wilderness; Aquila Imperii Romani Insigne est, etc.

Thirdly, these Beasts were full of eyes before and behind, and their wings
also are full of eyes: it notes unto us that they are persons excellently
skilled in the mysteries of God, they are very knowing Saints, for of such
should the Churches of Christ be made up; Before and behind, that is, they are
all eyes, to set forth the greatness and compleatness of their knowledge in the
mysteries of God, and the mind of Christ; or before and behind, that is, says
Brightman, Bright.
they know not only the mysteries of the ways of God that are past, but the
prophesies of the will of God for time to come: or else, their great
heedfulness in all their ways, specially toward God, they look before to what
they are to do, and to the issues and consequences of things that are to come:
and they look back upon the experiences they have had of things that are past,
and they consult and compare both.

And their wings are said to be full of eyes within: wings do note their
readiness and speed in the Execution of all the duties that God does require of
them; but the duties they do they are not carried to by a blind resolution
only, coeco impetu: but there are eyes in their wings to direct their actions,
that whatsoever they do, they do it with wisdom, and they walk by rule in all
their actions, and not at an adventure with God; and their wings are said to
have eyes within; that is, though the wisdom and the reason of their actions be
not discerned by others, yet they have light for what they do in themselves,
they guide their own way, it is the wisdom of a man that directs his own steps,
etc. Other men have eyes without, and they can see into other men's ways, and
to direct them: but they judge not of their own ways, that they may lead them
with Judgment: It is an expression like unto that of the Angels, Ezekiel. 1.8.
they are said to have the hands of a man under their wings, etc. which does
note two things.

First, that Angels do all things by a secret and invisible manner: they work
mightily, but their hands are not seen: they are under their wings; that
executive power that is in them is secret.

Secondly, that they do all things rationally, they do manage all their works
with judgment, that though they fly, and do make haste in the execution of
their Commission: yet, their haste does not precipitate their wisdom, but they
manage all things with prudence, even as with the hands of a man: and so it is
here, they have wings, and therefore are hasty and speedy in their execution of
the mind of God, but yet they do all things with wisdom and judgment; for
their wings have eyes within them, they are full of eyes, and there is a great
deal of spiritual prudence that lies secret and hidden in all their
administrations and operations.

Doctrine.
The Lord does sit upon a Throne in the middle of his people; Here I will show:

First, that Christ is present with his people, with the Churches upon earth
unto the end of the world.

Secondly, he is present with them, as upon a Throne.

Thirdly, show you the grounds or the reasons of this his presence. And,

Fourthly, make an application thereof unto our selves.

First, that there is a presence of Christ with the Church: that there was such
a presence with the Church of the Jews, that is plain, Levit. 26.11,12. the
Lord says, My Tabernacle shall be with you, and I will walk amongst you, etc.
the Tabernacle was the place where the worship of God was set up, and it was
the place of his presence, and a special sign of his presence; and his walking
there, notes a continual residence there, as he says of Sion, here will I
dwell for ever, this is my rest, for I have desired it: and this is applied by
the Apostle unto the Churches of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the
Temple of the living God: it is not there spoken of them as particular persons,
though it be true that the bodies of the Saints are called, the Temples of the
Holy Ghost; of each particular Saint; but it is spoken there of them as a
Church, as a people embodyed, and the Lord says, they shall have a special
presence amongst them, even as there was a special presence of God in the
Temple; and therefore Christ is said to go down into the Garden to feed in it,
and to gather Lillies: as Cant. 6.2. for as a garden enclosed, is my beloved
unto me. Chap. 4.12. and the same course and walk does the Lord keep still,
Rev. 21.3. Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he dwells with them:
and God himself will be with them and be their God, etc. he walks in the middle
of the seven Golden Candlesticks, and they are the seven Churches, and so twill
be in the latter days, etc.

Secondly, the presence of the Lord is as the presence of a King upon his
throne: there is a throne of Christ upon the Firmament over the heads of the
living creatures, which sets forth the authority and sovereignty that Christ
has over the Angels which act the wheels, and by whom all things are governed;
they have the spirit within them, and his voice without them, Ezekiel. 1.26. for
the throne of Christ is exalted above all the Angels of God, above all
principalities, and powers, and dominion, and every name that is named, etc.
but this is a throne of Christ in the Heavens; but there is a throne of Christ
(as upon the Firmament) so there is his throne and his Sanctuary also, and that
is the presence here spoken of.

First, it is a throne of glory and majesty; the Throne, the Scepter, and the
Crown, are inter regalia, that belong unto the royalty of the great King; all
these belong unto Christ; the Crown, he is crowned with glory, and honor, and
he has a Scepter, which is sometimes the Word, Psalm. 110.2. and sometimes the
Sword, Ezekiel. 21.10. what if it destroy the King, and reach unto the greatest
amongst men? for judgment shall in a special manner reach them, Verse 14. It
was part of Solomon's glory, that he built unto himself a high throne of Ivory;
and a King sitting upon this throne appears in his glory: and therefore at the
last day, when that great white throne of Christ shall be erected, Rev. 20.11.
it is said of him, that he shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and
therefore Ezekiel. 10.4. and the glory of the Lord went up from the Chimney, and
stood over the threshold of the house, and the house was filled with the cloud,
etc. and so there is in the middle of his people, 2 Cor. 3. ult. we beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord; there is that discovery of Christ to be
glorious amongst his people, as there is nowhere in the world beside; they see
he is altogether lovely: they can see a beauty and an excellency in him above
all the world; they are able to describe him in his glory from head to foot;
when other men say, What is thy beloved, there is no beauty or comeliness in
him, that he should be desired: now as the Lord did to Moses when he did desire
him, show me thy glory, the Lord causes his goodness to pass before him: and
so Job 42.5. Now my eyes see thee, etc. it was such a discovery of glory as he
never had before, and so it was with Isa. 6.34. and so Rev. 22.4. they shall
see his face, and his name shall be writ in their foreheads: as in Heaven the
habitation of his holiness and glory, there are such discoveries given forth of
God, which also are voluntary, and in such a degree as he pleases; for there
is a Lumen gloriae, as well as gratiae, that is, from the spirit of
illumination; and as God is pleased to discover more or less of his glory, so
have the Saints in heaven more or less glory; for their glory consists in
vision, the more they see of him, the more they enjoy him, and the more they
are made like unto him: so it is in this life also: there is a Vision of faith,
and it is more or less according unto the different degrees of the Spirit of
illumination, Ephesians. 1.17. and it is this revelation of Christ that is the ground
of believing in him, Ioh. 6.40. he that sees the son and believes in him; and
so Isaiah saw his glory and spoke of him, Ioh. 12.41. There are different
discoveries made unto the souls of the Saints of the excellency of his person,
the King in his beauty: the all sufficiency of his righteousness, the glory of
his holiness, the fullness of his spirit, the compleatness of his victories,
etc. We see what a common work did to Balaam, and how mightily it affected him
and transported him: how much more then a saving and a supernatural work upon
the souls of the Saints? the vision of Christ in his glory will be much
illustrated: as it is by a discovery of sin in its filthyness, when the Lord
sets a man's sin in order before him: the Law entered that the offense might
abound, Romans 7. not to make it to be more then it is, for the Law adds no evil
unto sin, but it discovers it, that a man sees it to be the most hateful thing,
that which before he loved more then his life, and could venture all to attain
it; now he would give any thing to be rid of it: so there is a vision of Christ
that is manifested unto his people in the Gospel, by which they are really and
spiritually affected, and carried out into love and admiration of him, the vail
of the covering that is upon all flesh, being taken away; and according to the
reality and fullness of this discovery, so does a man's affections rise toward
him, Ioh. 14.21. I will manifest my self to him: he had a manifestation before,
but he shall have a further manifestation; for the Lord does arise in the soul
as the Sun of Righteousness, as the morning; his goings forth are prepared, as
the morning that shines more and more unto the perfect day; and the more of the
glory of Christ is discovered in the Gospel, the more the man does see the King
upon his Throne; for he does sit upon a Throne of glory in the middle of his
people; as it is with sin, there is a rational conviction of sin, and that is
light without heat; and so there is a rational revelation of Christ, that will
harden the heart, but will never melt it: as there are Consolations from men
taken out of the word, but they will never satisfy the soul: so there are
discoveries of Christ from men, which is but by the hearing of the ear; but
there is a sight of him, and it is that only does affect the heart, etc.

Secondly, it is a throne of sovereignty; a throne does belong to a King, and
so is a note of supreme authority: so in the government of the Angels, the
voice that commands them is from the throne that is in the Firmament over their
heads, Ezekiel. 1.25. so does the Lord sit upon his throne, and all his people are
gathered about him, that they may sit down at his feet and receive his Law,
Deuteronomy. 33.3. and he gives Laws unto the consciences of men, for the word is
mighty in operation, and sharper then a two-edged sword, dividing between the
joints and the marrow, and discerns the secret intentions of the heart, Heb.
4.12. The efficacy of the Law depends upon the authority of the Lawgiver: and
therefore till that be seen, the Law is of no power: when a man does see that
it comes from him that is Lord of the conscience, and Judge of the conscience:
as what is the reason that at the day of Judgment the conscience shall be
specially awakened, to accuse, or excuse men, Romans 2.15,16. it is because then
the majesty of the Lawgiver shall be then most gloriously seen, and in the
authority of the Law giver lies the efficacy of the Law: that as upon Mount
Sinai the mountain did shake when the Lord did utter his voice; so there shall
be a shaking and a terror struck into the hearts of men; they shall have a
dread and an awe upon them of that Majesty and authority from whence it comes,
though before they regarded it not. It is wonderful to see the impressions that
are made upon the souls of unregenerate men by this authority, when they have
but a glimps from a common work of this King upon his Throne. Oh how it damps
lust, brings down strong holds of sin, overcomes all their reasonings, and
unsettles a man's former sinful peace, that the bed is too short, and the
covering too narrow: the man cannot lie down as formerly under a refuge of
lies; his sweet morsels now are not sweet to him, but his mouth is filled with
gravel. As to have seen the River Jordan to run backward in its own channel:
and to see the Sun to go back in its own orb, it was a mighty word that must do
this; to see that the fire could not burn in the furnace of Babylon, and yet
their natures with their natural properties still to be continued: even so
mighty a work there is upon the souls of unregenerate men: but for a Law to
come forth from the Lord, and that very word to be written upon the heart, and
to be put in there as an indelible character never to be blotted out, though
indeed sin may soil it and blur it, yet it can never be blotted out nor
obliterate, 2 Cor. 3.2,3 that the conscience shall stand in awe of it, that a
man shall not dare do any thing that is contrary to it, as Psalm. 119. My heart
stands in awe of thy word: that though he had never so great an inclination
within, and never so violent temptations without, that he cannot get the
authority of it off from his spirit: and not only to do this by force, but
willingly and cheerfully: thy Commandments are my delight, that he loves the
Law of God, and delights in it according unto the inward man; if a man should
come and speak to a Marble, and with his voice thereby words should be written,
so that they could never be blotted out again, we would say this were a mighty
voice; there is the same power put forth when the Lord Jesus is in the middle
of his people, giving Laws unto their consciences as the King upon his Throne:
when the Law comes from Christ upon his throne, it puts a kind of moral
impossbility upon the man, that he says, How can I do this great wickedness
and sin against God! we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; we
cannot but speak the things that we have heard and seen; there is an inward
impulse of spirit that a man cannot do otherwise: as it is in the Law of sin,
it does so command the man, that the man cannot do otherwise, because there is
a Law within him, and that has the commanding power over the man, that though
sometimes they would strive or give any thing it were otherwise, yet they
cannot resist it, there is amoral impotency, he is not able to resist the doing
of evil.

Thirdly, it is a Throne of grace, and therefore it is commonly so called, Heb.
10.22. Let us come with boldness unto the throne of grace; a King upon his
throne does pronounce pardon and give gifts: and therefore when the Lord Jesus
did enter into his glory, and take possession of his Kingdom, thed he did shed
abroad his Spirit abundantly: but it did come from the King upon his throne:
then he does delight to give gifts as a King, and to show mercy as a King.

First, sitting on his throne he does dispense the greatest gifts from it; it
is from his presence in his Ordinances that he does dispense the spirit, Rev.
4.5.14. the seven spirits are before the throne: it is not spoken of the person
of the Spirit, for that is but one, but of the gifts of the spirit, which
because they are many, therefore for their variety, their multiplicity, and
their perfection are said to be seven spirits: therefore there they are to be
dispensed by Christ at his pleasure: but it is as he sits upon the throne, that
he does it, Rev. 2.21. The River of the water of life clear as Crystal,
proceeded out of the Throne of God and of the Lamb: By this all light is meant;
for Doctrine is compared unto water, as corrupt doctrine to a flood, Rev. 12.
and also all grace is compared unto water, Rev. 4.6. there was before the
throne a Sea of glass clear as Crystal: so now it is cleared again; those
Doctrines that had been mudded and darkened under Popery, and by all the smoke
that arises out of the bottomless pit: now they begin to clear again, and there
is no mudd in them, etc. the spirit is given by the hearing of faith, Gal. 3.2.
that is by the preaching of the doctrine of faith: for faith is there put for
the doctrine of faith, as also that place, contend earnestly for the faith that
was once given to the Saints: it is therefore in vain for men to expect
spiritual gifts and graces anywhere else: for it is only from the King upon his
throne: and the seven spirits are only to be found before the throne; if a man
had gone into any other Pool then Bethesda, and expected the moving of the
water, it had been no wonder if he had returned ashamed: and if the Israelites
will go out to gather manna upon the Sabbath day, when the Lord told them it
should not fall, it is no wonder if they found none: and so it is with all that
will go out of Gods way, and Christ's way, and yet will expect the influences of
the spirit, and that the Angel should move the waters, and that they shall find
manna, though the Lord has told them the contrary, etc. they shall but sow the
wind and reap the whirlwind.

Secondly, it is upon a throne that he does grant pardon, Zech. 6.13. he shall
be a Priest upon his throne: both the offices of a King and Priest shall meet
in one person, and they shall both concur unto the same eminent and glorious
ends, which shall be peace: both the making of peace and the speaking of peace;
as the Priest under the Law was to offer the sacrifice to procure peace; and as
King he does speak peace, he sends a Messenger one of a thousand to declare to
a man his righteousness: if a man had a pardon from a thousand subjects, it
would do him no good; but when the King sitting upon his throne, shall give him
a pardon, then he says, that his soul is delivered from going down into the
pit; when a man comes into the presence of Christ, and sees his glory, and has
a discovery made to him, and he sees his name written in the heart of Christ,
though Christ come as a Judge sitting upon his throne, and his soul is set
before him, either to be accused or condemned, and Christ says, be of good
cheer, thy sins be forgiven: eat thy meat and drink thy wine with a merry
heart, for God accepts thy works: let his soul be delivered from death, for I
have found a ransom: hereupon, the man revives, and his flesh comes again as
the flesh of a young child: and he does return unto the days of his youth, and
walks no more drooping under his own darkness, that made his strength decay,
and made him grow old in his youth: now he grows young when he is old; renews
his strength as the Eagle: and Rev. 16.17. the voice from the throne says, It
is done.

Fourthly, it is a Throne of Judgment; for out of the throne comes
thunderings, and lightenings, and voices, Rev. 4.5. there do not only mercies
and graces ascend upon the Saints, but there are also very terrible things
against the enemies of Christ, and these Judgments are either temporal, or
spiritual: either upon the enemies of Christ, or upon the Saints.

First, upon the enemies of Christ there are great Judgments that proceed out
of the throne: he did deliver Judas unto Satan in an Ordinance, when he stood
upon his throne, and so he does bind men over unto wrath: for his sitting on
this throne of Judgment, is but a praeludium to the Judgment that he shall
pronounce against his enemies in the great day, Isa. 6.10. Go, make the hearts
of this people fat, and make their ears heavy: of all Judgments none are like
spiritual Judgments. And also great temporal Judgments, Rev. 8.3,5. there was
a golden Altar before the throne, and from the incense offered upon that Altar,
there came forth thunderings, and lightenings, and voices, and earthquakes,
etc. this is all the Trumpets of Judgment that sounded against the Churches
enemies, they did all come forth of the throne; though the prayers of the
Saints did procure them; and all the ruins and over-throws that ever have
befalen the enemies of Christ, and the Gospel, have proceeded from this throne,
when God is exalted amongst his people; and let us comfort our selves with
this, the Lord raigns for ever: he does still sit upon the same throne of
Judgment, and therefore so long as he sits upon his throne, he will scatter
away every evil thing, as it is said, Prove. 20.8. A King that sits on his
throne of Judgment, seatters away all evil with his eyes, etc. let what
enemies there will arise, they shall fall by the thundering, and lightning, and
voices that come from this throne.

Secondly, against Gods own people: for, his throne is established by
righteousness, and therefore he will not spare his own people when he is in the
middle of them: but as he does delight himself in their graces, and therefore
loves to be in the middle of them: so he will punish their corruptions also:
and there are some spiritual Judgments for them also, Rev. 2.4,5. Yet I have
something against thee, because thou have lost thy first love, and I will come
against thee quickly except thou repent, and will remove thy Candlestick from
thee: which is the greatest spiritual Judgment that can befall a people; that
though they that were godly, should continue godly still, and they could never
be cast out of the number of the invisible Church, yet they shall be looked
upon as a visible Church unto Christ no more, but he will take away the
Ordinances, and will depart from them, and they shall fade away in their
iniquities: and so for temporal Judgments also, as sickness, yea and temporal
death, it is a sentence that the Lord Jesus does pronounce from his Throne, 1
Cor. 11.30. For this cause many of you are sick and weak, and many of you fall
afleep; and yet they are therein chastised of the Lord, that they might not be
condemned with the world: it is done in mercy, and not in wrath; in much
compassion unto their souls does the Lord lay affliction upon their bodies, yea
even unto death it self: for they that are embraced with everlasting loving
kindness, may sometimes dye under a temporal displeasure, as it seems Josiah
did, and so have many other Saints.

Use.
First, be exhorted to see Christ as present upon the throne: for without this
you come not to him, but unto the duty: he does call unto you, behold me,
behold me: that worship that is terminated in any thing below him, is a false
worship; and that faith also that does not raise the soul up to him, is a
feigned faith: but what are the signs of his presence? how should a man know
whether he be present or no? these three things being premised, you may try
whether you have ever found him thus present, etc.

First, the Lord is present unto no unregenerat men in their duties: they that
live without God, do pray without God, and they fast without God: therefore
they must first desire his presence unto their conversion: for as I have often
told you, an unregenerate man's services are no more accepted by God, then when
he swears, or lies, etc. for his services proceed from the same principle that
his sins do, etc.

Secondly, God is not always present unto the Saints, but he does sometimes
withdraw himself, as the Spouse complains, My beloved has withdrawn himself,
they seek him, but they find him not, he does hide his face, and he does cover
himself with a cloud, that though they seek the Lord, yet he is a stranger unto
them, if they walk in the ways of sin, etc.

Thirdly, even when he is present to the Saints, yet he is not present to all
of them in the same measure: some have a fuller presence of God, and a clearer
discovery; as some have a clearer Revelation of his mind, so some have a
clearer discovery of his presence then others in this life: and it is so with
the Saints even in glory, that they behold his face continually; yet they have
diverse degrees of glory: some have a more full and perfect discovery of God
then others have.

When God is present to the Saints here;

First, the heart will be overawed; there is nothing will over awe the heart
but Gods presence; how dreadful is this place, says Jacob; he had a discovery
of God to him as present with him, and it made the very place fearful to him;
the heart of man is very fearless of God naturally; when a man does come into
the presence of God without Consideration, and goes out of his presence without
fear, it is a sign that God was not present.

Secondly, if God be present, thy heart will be carried out to loath thy self;
for he that sees God in his glory, will surely abhor himself in dust and ashes.
Job 42.5,6. and will see himself undone: there is no soul that ever enjoyed the
presence of God, but it makes him nothing of himself; and so do the glorious
Angels in heaven; God is all in all unto them, and they are in themselves
nothing.

Thirdly, if the Lord be present with thee, thy heart will fall in love with
him, and thou will be carried out in admiration of him: when a man sees the
beauty of God and his glory in the Sanctuary, a man would dwell there for ever,
he would dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life conversing
with God, and he would not be weary, but it is wearisom to converse with duties
only: Moses was not weary when he was in the Mount conversing with God 40.
days, his heart was so taken up with him: and the reason why men love him no
more, and are no more carried after him, is, because they see him no more; and
the Saints in heaven therefore are carried after him more then we are, because
they have more of his presence.

Fourthly, he that sees God present sitting upon his Throne, will surely fear
to sin against him; therefore all sinners cast God behind their back, they
cannot sin else; he that sees God always present and walks before him, he
dares not transgress, he is still in the sight of the Judge: he must draw the
curtain that offends but in the sight of a temporal Judge, as he did before his
fathers picture: therefore the Angels souls in heaven are impeccable, because
they have always a living and blessed presence of God with them, that they
cannot turn aside unto any thing else, being in this infinitely satisfied, etc.

Fifthly, it would make a man sincere before him; open thy heart, for thou art
in his presence that knows the heart, and weighs thy actions, and ponders they
paths, and if we could hide it before men, there is no hiding of it before
him: he sits upon his Throne that shall be thy Judge: so much hypocrisy as
there is in any man in duty, and the more any man does cover his sin before
God, the less of his presence is with that man; it is dangerous to compass God
about with lies, and when a man's heart does not fulfill after his lips, but in
his confessions and supplications has reserves: God will make his presence
terrible to such a man.

Sixthly, where Christ is present, the soul is unwilling to part with him: it
holds him, and it would not let him go: it says, Oh that he might be with me
always, it is good to be here; the impression of thy presence, I will have it
ever more kept in the heart of thy servant, and the soul is carried after him
to seek his face, and there is nothing else will satisfy him: and he fears
nothing so much as his departing, his soul withers with the thought of it; but
if thou find none of these, yet Christ is present when the soul mourns for
the want of him, and groans after him; he puts in his finger at the hole of the
door, and my heart failed when he spoke; that a man cannot be quiet if he find
him not: now he will after him again, and is restless till he find him; there
is a presence of Christ, though the soul discern it not: for it is this makes
the soul follow hard after him.

Use. 2.
Answer the great ends of his presence amongst his people.

First, the Lord is present to manifest his love to you, Cant. 7.12. Come my
beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us remain in the Villages; there
will I show thee my love.

Secondly, to enjoy communion with you, for the Tabernacle of the Lord is with
men, and he will dwell with them.

Thirdly, that your graces may flow forth, Cant. 1.12. and that he may delight
himself in the fruit of his own pleasant things.

Fourthly, that he may improve your graces and perfect them.

Fifthly, that you may be acquainted with him, and may know the way of approach
to him, Job 21.22. it is being accustomed to come to him as to a friend, there
is an opening of heart and imparting of secrets.

Sixthly, That by this taste you may long for his appearance: for all grace
here is but first fruits of glory, and so is all Communion: it is but to give
you a taste, that you as searchers of the good land, having tasted the fruit of
it, your hearts may be the more set upon a full enjoyment: if the glimps of his
presence be so sweet, what is his continual presence, which is fullness of joy
and pleasures for evermore?

The Keepers of the Vine-yards, must keep their own Vineyard.
At a Fast before the Parliament, June 13. 1650.
CANT. 1.6. My mothers children were angry with me, they made me Keeper of the
Vine-yards, but my own Vineyard I have not kept.


THE duties of godliness are of two sorts, either ordinary or extraordinary,
and both are alike necessary in their season: Your vessels for daily use, your
ordinary washing is commonly sufficient, but you do sometimes scow^r them when
you will have them bright: and your ordinary tilling your Land is enough
usually, but you do soil it when you would have it fruitful, etc.

And of this nature is the duty that now we set upon, and being extraordinary
must not be reduced to an ordinary practice, for which cause your stata
jejunia, are by our Divines generally condemned, being contrary to the nature
of an extraordinary service, Ames.
Ames. cas. p. 19.

In extraordinary duties we may expect an extraordinary presence, and we are to
look for it; indeed there is not a service but the Lord has promised a
blessing to it: they are all wells of salvation, out of which the soul may with
joy draw water: they are all of them but fasciae Christi, the garments with
which he goes forth amongst men, and they all of them smell of Myrrh, Aloes,
and Cassia, Psalm. 45.8. but yet this King of Saints, though he keeps a constant
royal Table, at which with the Saints he himself sits, Cant. 1.12. yet he
sometimes makes a feast like a King, and gives to all his people extraordinary
entertainment, he does never go forth amongst his people but he does spargere
missilia, dispense a dole; but there are extraordinary times when the bounty
and munificence of the King more appears, and then the prisons are opened, and
the Conduits run with wine, and the Cocks with rosewater, etc. And the great
ground of faith to raise your expectations is, that the Lord Christ has in his
own person and practice sanctified the duty of fasting to this end: Why did
Christ fast, seeing he had no disobedience, or bodily distempers, nor no
distemper of Spirit? etc. Why was he baptized, seeing he had neither sins to be
pardoned or subdued? there were two special reasons for it.

First, that he might fulfill all Righteousness, and all duties laid down in
the Word, that he might perform them; as that in his active obedience there
might be a consummatum est, as well as in his passive.

Secondly, that he might sanctify the duty, and leave a blessing upon it unto
us; for he did fast as Mediator, with reference to his body. Christ did all as
the first fruit, which did sanctify the whole crop. Maledictioni benedixit,
paupertatem ditavit, ignominiam glorificavit: Luther.
Luther. Surely, he that is able to sanctify death in his own person, is able
also in his person to sanctify duty, and this is the duty that the Lord has
highly honored in all the great reformations that ever were in the world. In
the example of Moses, Elias and Christ himself: and therefore we may expect, if
we seriously intend reformation, God will honor and bless it unto us also.
But, if it be such a fast as the Lord has chosen, and in which he delights, it
must be a day for a man to afflict his soul, for that is the duty of a fast,
Isa. 58.5. I know the Hebrews do put soul for person, and the humiliation
should reach to the whole man, but yet so as that which is the main in the man
do not pass unhumbled, nor un-affected: rend your hearts and not your garments,
it is the soul has the great hand in the sin, it is the soul that is the sole
and the arch-rebel against the Law: now only to humble the body is but
Mountebank-like, to lay salve to the weapon, but not to the wound. And it is
enforced, Lev. 23.29. that soul that is not afflicted that day, shall be cut
off from amongst the people, etc.

And there is nothing that will afflict the soul like to sin, it being of all
evils the greatest, when it is felt, and by the lively coming of the
Commandment, it revives, and the man dies; answerable unto the reformation,
such must be the humiliation; now there is a double reformation that we do
profess to endeavor: personal, and National; there can be no expectation of
the latter without the former, therefore both must be laid to heart, and that
chiefly in your own particulars, by you whom the Lord (we hope) will use in
this great work: he that will be a vessel of honor for the Masters use, must
be purged; and when Ioshuah was to negotiate a public reformation, and to
administer a public service, his filthy garments must be taken away, and he
clothed with change of raiment, Zach. 3.4. there are no men's sins that are of
such dangerous consequence as yours; and your personal sins have an influence
upon your public employments and services; and the sins of such a man do send
up a prohibition, and will blast the wisdom of his head, and the labor of his
hands; and their personal sins are a great ground and cause of National sins:
Ita nati estis ut bona vel mala vestra ad Rempublicam pertineant: Tacit.
Tacit. In omnibus peccantibus pecco: Prosper.
it is a sad saying of Prosper: if ever you would have National Judgments
removed, and mercies to be conferred, you must be affected with National sins
first; for as an ungodly man cannot love his brother, because he does not love
himself, Non diligit proximum, quia non diligit seipsum: and so he can never be
affected with other men's sins: his eyes cannot gush out Rivers of tears,
because men do not keep the Law of God, etc. because he is not affected with
his own; for sin is filthiness, and therefore it is the more loathsome to a man
the nearer he is to it; therefore my work at this day shall be to set your own
sins before you, that you may pluck out the beam that is in your eye first, and
ye shall be able to see clearly to pluck out the beams that are in the eyes of
the Nation, and to affect your hearts with your own personal guilt and
neglects: if the Lord be pleased to make me instrumental this day, that it be
unto you a day of atonement, I shall look upon it as a great mercy, and a great
step unto our National deliverances and protections; and as for more public
mis-carriages and the other parts of the work of this day, I hope God will be
with the spirits of those his servants that afterward are to carry on the work
of this day.

Here we have the Churches condition set forth to us, which shall be the same
for the first 6000. years which being ended; according to the Jewish account,
postea sabbatum; the time of Satan's seduction is at an end for Popery, but the
time of his persecution is not; the witnesses are not yet slain, etc. but there
will come a time when in this respect Satan also shall be bound. In fine sexti
millessimi anni malitia omnis aboleatur e terra: Lactant.
Lactant. de divin. Imper. p. 576. It is black as the Tents of Kedar, but yet
comely as the Curtains of Solomon; there is a very great comeliness under the
Churches blackness, with which in her suffering she supported her self

Here we have also the causes of the Churches blackness, which is the Sun in
general: it was not natural and blackness that grew out of her self, but from
the Churches adversaries: the Sun has looked upon me, persecution has scorcht
me; but yet it was not only from enemies without, though it is true; as the
Lilly amongst thorns, so is my love amongst the daughters, tot hosts, quot
extranci: Tertul.
but it is from those of the same family; the Churches enemies are those of her
own house, my mothers children; matris filios, non patris vocat: men born in
the same Church, and claiming the same interest in the Church with the true
members; qui maxim conjuncti videbantur qui sese Ecclesiae nomine venditant;
Mercer.
Mercer. Hosts Ecclesiae intestini, authoritate sua ad ipsius perniciem
abutentes. Beza.
Beza. They were angry with me: the word (...) signifies iram vehementem,
excandesentiam, bitter fierce anger, anger exasperated and kindled as a flame;
the same word is used, Isa. 41.11. All they that were incensed against thee
shall be ashamed, and the men of thy strife shall perish, (...). so the
Septuagint: they strive with me, or they fought against me: the bitterest
indignation against the Church, and the bitterst opposition is from those
within it self, her mothers children: the ground of the greatest persecution of
the Church is laid in the composition and constitution of the Church: and
therefore the flourishing and prosperous condition of the Church in the latter
days is upon this gronnd, Isa. 54.12,13. When the foundations are laid with
Saphir, the windows made of Agates, and the gates of Carbuncles: de hominibus,
non de doctrina; Calvin.
Calvin. Then great shall be the peace of the Church; in right cousness shall
thou be established, and thou shall be far from oppression, etc. To constitute
Churches of a mixed multitude, as it lays the matter of all Church corruption,
so it lays the foundation of the bitterest Church persecution.

Now how did they vent their displeasure? it was by putting them upon difficult
and distracting employments: for I do not understand that of Churches, because
the Church is in Scripture commonly called a Vineyard: the Vineyard of the
Lord of Hosts is the house of Israel, Isa. 5. and the Lord brought a Vine out
of Egypt, and planted it, etc. neither did these mothers children take so much
care of Churches, but they laid all the care of the Churches upon them, and
they took none at all; both the care of Church and Commonwealth was laid upon
them: and by this means they were distracted and hindered from that which is
proper unto themselves, and should have been the special part of their care: or
else with Zanch. I understand vineam pro quacunque cura aut occupatione
rustica: Zanch.
the keeping of a Vineyard is matter of great labor and continual
watchfulness. Cum aliquid conatu maximo studioque curandum esse dicitur, vineae
nomen supponitur; vinea pro maximo negotio sumitur; and ratio est, quia vinea
assiduitatem, perpetuum and indefessum laborem Agricolae desiderat: So it was
used after a sort perpetually for any hard and continued labor, as Horace has
it, l. 2. ep. 1. Vt vineta egomet caedam mea: and this is called pruning his
own Vineyard; But this is a Metaphor most commonly put for the Church, Isa.
5.1. Mat. 5.20. hire Laborers into the Vineyard, Mat. 21.33,39. But are carnal
men in the Church so sollicitous for the Church, that the Vineyard must have a
Keeper, they that endeavor to break down the wall thereof, and leave it open
unto the beasts of the field? and if they would have a Keeper, whether they
made so good a choice as that the Church should be Keeper? Surely, they would
never have placed them in authority that they were so angry with; they would
have exalted some of their own spirit, and party as commonly the manner of men
is; be they never so vile (which is one of the great abominations of the times
and this age) and they by their power over the Vineyard could make Keepers who
they would; they could set who they pleased over the Vineyard: Surely the
meaning is this, they did themselves witheraw the shoulder from the public
work, and left it in the Churches hands; that either they must now stick to it,
or all must fall to the ground, and the Vineyard be wholly laid wast; as for
their part, the work was hazardous; they were to meet both with Foxes, and with
a wild-Bore also, one to destroy the grass, but the other to root up the
Vineyard; and therefore it is good to withdraw the hand, and let all be made
waste; let all former labors and cost be lost, and all the culture that has
been used about it, and let us forfeit all our hopes; though we have looked for
fruit, yet let the enemy gather it, though the Vineyard have been watered with
blood at the root, which Historians say, is above all other, a means to make it
fat and fruitful: If Gilead abide beyond Jordan, and Dan remained in ships,
Reuben did hear the bleating of the flocks, and Asher abode in his own
beraches, and Issachar be couched between two burdens: in this case Zebulon and
Nepthali are by their brethren made Keepers of the Vineyard, for the burden is
laid upon their shoulders, or else all must be laid waste, and all trodden down
by the beasts of the field, and so they did not make themselves Rulers of the
Vineyard; but the necessity that their brethren put upon them did it; and that
this is the meaning, you may see by the word in the Hebrew, (...) posuerunt:
they did put me Keeper, it was a thing that I did not seek after, but it was
that which they put upon me, and that through the necessity that they brought
me into; and upon this the interpretation of Mr. Brightman and Cotton, and they
that make this a prophetical history, do fully agree; for they say this is
spoken in the person of Judah, the two tribes of the sons of the mother here
spoken of, and the ten tribes that were their brethren and made up one Church
of God together with them, and they by their withdrawing themselves did put a
necessity upon the tribes to maintain the worship of God, and the Church of
God amongst them; but the evil begun in their withdrawment, and so there was a
necessity put upon the children of Judah, to appear for God and to keep the
Temple, the worship and the Ordinances thereof; and so by this means the care
of the Vineyard was devolved upon them, the rest having disserted it, and
almost it has fallen to the ground; Gods people ar many times necessitated
unto public services, because others sinfully and unworthily desert it.

But yet the Church of Christ being thus put upon employment, utters a sad
complaint, but mine own Vineyard I have not kept: Luther says, it is gravis
quaerimonia, Luther.
a very sad complaint: and Bernard, Ego huius loci occasion meipsum
reprehendere soleo, quod animarum suseperim curam, qui meam non sufficerem
custodire: sancta acsi dicat sponsa, se curis alienis intentam, non curasse
quod maxim curatum oportuit: Bernard.
And as Mercer has well observed, Emphasi non caret (...) vinea mea quae mihi,
Provinciam scilicet sibi a Deo concreditam vocat: Mercer.
in which in a more special manner man is concerned, and unto which in all his
public employments he is engaged to have respect.

Hence the observations are plainly three.

First, the Keepers of the Vineyard have more peculiarly Vineyards of their own
to keep; which is by God committed to them, of which they can say in a special
manner, My Vineyard which is mine.

Secondly, their keeping of the Vineyard may many times hinder them from
keeping their own Vine; the care and employment about the public, though
conscienciously undertaken, yet may be a deversion to a man from something that
does more specially concern him, and as a duty lie upon him.

Thirdly, a man cannot look upon his public service with comfort, if he do
neglect his own vine: for it is that which the Church in the middle of all her
public employments does here bitterly complain of.

Doctrine.
The Keepers of the Vineyard have yet a more peculiar charge from God of their
own Vineyards: There are two sorts of Watchmen, Cant. 3. the Watchmen that go
about the City, and there are the Watchmen of the wall: and both are for the
safety of the City, as here the Keepers of the Vineyard are, and the safety
thereof; and I know its a high honor to be employed by God in such a work, and
therefore they have very eminent titles given unto them both in the Scripture;
they are called the Angels of God, and they are for protection, they pitch
their Tents about you, Rev. 2.1. 2 Samuel 14.17. they are fathers, Job. 29.15. No
men have more honorable titles: pietatis and potestatis nomen: A term of care
and tenderness, as well as of authority and power; they are also the sheilds of
the earth, Psalm. 47. ult. and a shield is a kind of partition wall between a
man and danger, all is for preservation. But yet they that are themselves the
Keepers of others, and for the good of others, they have all of them something
of their own committed unto them by God to keep.

And this Vineyard that is committed unto persons to keep, is twofold.

First, keep thy heart.

Secondly, keep thy house. For they are in a special manner thy own Vineyard.

First keep thy heart, Prove. 4.23. above all keeping, keep thy heart: it was
the great care of David, Let my heart be sound in thy statutes: I will run the
way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart; and it was the grand
honor of David, that his heart was upright with God; and it is made the
pattern of his sincerity to the Governors that followed, etc. and it was the
grear comfort of Hezikiah when he came to dye, after he had ruled the people
skilfully all his days, Remember that I have walked before thee with a perfect
heart: and it is this that is the bitter reflection upon all the good that Iehu
had done after that glorious testimony of God to him, thou have done all that
was right in mine eyes, and which was in my heart. 2 King. 10.30,31. but he
took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his heart,
etc.

And the grounds of it are these four.

First this is properly your own: it is the soul is the darling, it is the soul
is the man, it is (...): therefore he that does lose his soul, is said in
another place to lose himself. It is true that there is a great trust committed
unto a man in other things, but yet they are all but this worlds goods: a man's
estate is no more, and a man's honor is no more: nay a man's inward gifts and
abilities of his mind are no more: they do all dye with him; if there be
tongues, they shall cease, and knowledge it shall vanish away, 1 Cor. 13.12,13.
Now if propriety be an engagement, as we do love persons and things because
they are our own, Christ loved his own, he loved them unto the end, etc. Surely
there is nothing that is your own like unto your heart; therefore keep thy
heart above all keepings; for if thou lose thy soul, thou art a lost man, and a
Son of perdition.

Secondly, this Vineyard above all others is in danger, and the most fought
against. First by sin, 1 Pet. 2.11. it is against the body and state, and
brings all plagues upon both, but it is eminenter against the soul, Numb.
16.38. sinners against their own souls; so that as it is really the act of the
soul, the sin of the soul; for sin is in the soul as grace is; it is
radicaliter in cord, and redundanter in corpore, as sin is mainly the act,
Micha 6.8. the sin of my soul, etc. it is the mischief of sin which does really
light upon the soul, and it is to the prejudice thereof.

Secondly, Satan mainly fights against the soul, he is Abaddon, the destroyer,
he seeks to devour all the man. I, but its the soul that is the sweet morsel
that he does continually with greediness gape after; he does take away the
word: it is, Mat. 13. least they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and be converted: it is the conversion of the soul that he really
is an enemy to and when he knows he can hinder the salvation of a soul, there
is no such pleasure to him; for there is no walking in the narrow way without
entering at the straight gate; Satan is the envious one (...): now as the
greatest mercy is that of the soul; so the greatest envy of Satan is that
which reaches unto the soul.

Thirdly, the main Judgments of God are upon the soul; as the greatest
blessings from God are spiritual, so the greatest Judgments from God are also
spiritual; and that is, when he does suffer the soul to prosper in a way of
sinning, Hos. 8.11. they made them Altars to sin: Altars shall be unto them to
sin. Magna est ira quando peccantibus non irascitur Deus, Ierom.
Jerome. Tu dixisti Domine, and ita est, ut omnis malus animus sibi ipsi sit
poena: Austin.
Aust.

Thirdly, answerable to the prosperity of the soul, so do all things else
prosper; all prosperity is to be measured by it, oh. 3.2. So Paul did measure
all his prosperity, 2 Cor. though his outward man did decay, so his inward man
was renewed, it was that he could rejoice in, because he measured his
prosperity be that of his soul: and otherwise for a man to have an enate,
honor and a high place in the world, and to mount all the steps of honor, and
to prosper in it, in ways of briberie and blood: all this is but that Psalm
106.15. (...), which Muis translates repletienem emaciantem, Muis.
a fullness that does cause a leanness in the soul; to be indutus purpura cum
conscientia pannosa; truly that man does not prosper whose soul prospers not,
though all things else be according to the desire of his heart, etc.

Fourthly, this will have a very great influence upon your government: and
therefore keep this Vineyard, Psalm. 47. ult. Magistrates are said to be Shields
of the earth, they should be scuta Deo, as well as hominibus; to keep off the
Judgments of God, to stand in the gap with Moses and Joshua, who did this in a
common slaughter and David in a public famine etc. And is he like to prevall
with God for a people, who has neither communion with God nor interest in him?
is he like to turn away Judgment who is every day instrumental in procuring
it, and who is also to be fuel for the same consuming fire? And in respect of
men also, there is a power over the bodies and estates of men, and there is a
power over their hearts and in their consciences; and such a one God does give
unto gracious Magistrates, as we see he gave his people of old, as David, etc.
There is a double Image that a Magistrate must bear; an Image of God in him as
a man, as well as upon him as a Magistrate; and the heart of men will stoop to
them that are such Magistrates: Let me tell you, It is not a Scepter, a Sword,
nor a Mace, a Navy, nor an Army, that can long govern a Nation. An evil heart
will destroy a man's wisdom, and will blast his government, and make it
unsuccessful, whatever he be, though he be never so great a Politician, and
never so much admired and cried up by men, yet if he be not a godly man, be
shall not prosper: the Lord was with him, and whatever he did, he made it to
prosper. I, that is the true ground of all success in government: therefore be
sure keep your own Vineyard etc. But you will say How shall we make our
Government prosper? Take there directions

First, keep a good conscience (...). And in this ^xercise my self daily, says
Paul, to keep a conscience void of offense. Government is a burdensome thing,
and therefore it is said, that Christ has the Government upon his shoulders,
Isa. 9.6. It is not barely work for the head only, wherein lies the strength of
the man; it is a great misery to lay a great burden on a galled back. Do not
live and be acted by principles without you, as the manner of men is; Persius
-- Nec te quae siveris extra: is a good Motto for a Christian: Nec spe nec
metu: a good Motto for a Soldier: Sit miser qui miser esse potest, as Luther
says; the applause of men, or the reproach of men, is but a small matter unto
him who resolves to keep his integrity, that his heart may not reproach him
when he dies: in the middle of all thy employment lay thy ear to thy heart, and
observe the speaking of conscience within thee, whether to accuse or condemn
thee; for that is but divini judicii praeindicium: Men in their day, judge
before the time, and therefore many such Judgments shall be repealed; when the
hidden things of darkness shall be manifested, and the counsels of the heart
revealed.

Secondly, be you diligent in making of your calling and election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10 and indeed your condition requires it more then other men's, because your
services and your hazards are greater then other men's: There are (as some
observe) two cases in which God does give his people early assurance sometimes,
when he does make others wait longer for it, for God does dispense assurance
after the nature of temporal blessings, according to no ruled case, but in a
privilege way.

First, When he has an intention men shall dye betimes, and therefore he will
perfect their graces early.

Secondly, when God has great Services immediately to employ men in after
their conversion, which was the case of Paul. It is too much for any one to
conflict with dangers without, and terrors within at once, when a man carries
his life in his hand, and if then the thoughts of eternity seize upon him, and
distract him in his way; but when a man can say, I know my Redeemer lives: and
when this earthly house is dissolved, I have a building not made with hands
eternal in the heavens: and a man can with this light of the Lord walk through
darkness; then the man can walk upon the high places of the earth, and his soul
tread down strength.

Thirdly, keep your souls constantly in ways of communion with the Lord; it is
an excellent rule for Magistrates, Mich. 6.8 to do Justice, and love mercy, and
walk humbly with their God, that the unction of God may be upon your hearts as
well as upon your offices, that you may be every day anointed with fresh oil:
ye have need of new direction every day answerable to your fresh occasions and
occurrences; and it is a happy thing when a Magistrate can go to God in a
straight, as David at Keilah, Lord, will Saul come down? I beseech thee tell
thy servant: and when there is a continual secret intercourse between him and
God, as 1 Sa. 9.15. and the Lord told Samuel in his ear; a man has his urim
and thummim to consult with, an Oracle to go to from day to day; and you have
need of new assistance and encouragements daily, answerable to the new
difficulties that do present themselves, and ye are the nails upon which all
the burden hangs, Isa. 22.24. and therefore you had need be fastened in a sure
place; therefore it is that which the Lord did promise unto Jesus Christ when
he did undertake the government of the world, Isa. 42.6. I have called thee in
righteousness, I will hold thee by the hand, he shall not fail nor be
discouraged: and truly there is nothing in the world can do it, unless the Lord
daily stretch a banner of love over you, etc.

Fourthly, keep your selves from the sins that do ordinarily attend high places
and employments, Psalm 18.23. It is David's great care to keep himself from his
own iniquity: and they are commonly these.

First Pride, having your hearts lifted up above your brethren; it is a hard
matter to keep a man's heart low in a high place, and to be like a
spire-steeple, minimus in summo, smallest at top; for you are made of the same
clay with other men: only, as it is with the rainbow, it is but a common
wattery cloud, and only by reflection it is enameled; rara virtus est humilitas
honorata. Bernard.
Bernard.

Secondly, Coveteousness. It is one of the qualifications required in a
Magistrate, Exodus 18.21. that he be one hating covetousness; and the bain of
Magistracy is when every one is for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. the
word in the Hebrew is (...) ab extremitate sua: as far as he can reach and
extend his authority, all is to fetch in gain for himself, and for his own
advantage: for so, dives potestas pauperem facit ^rempublicam: Salvian.

Thirdly, Mercilesness, in laying heavy burdens upon others, which you will not
touch with the least finger: The four persecuting Monarchies are compared unto
beasts for this cause, Dan. 7.2. Ye are called Fathers in the Scripture, and
you should have compassion answerable to that relation you are called Gods and
should in this in a special manner show your selves children of your heavenly
Father: it is a sad thing when it shall be said of you, their possessors slay
them, and hold not themselves guilty; their own Shepherds pity them not, Zach.
11.5,6. but specially there is a tenderness to be used to the consciences of
men: those I mean that are truly conscientious: and when by their general
walking and by long experience you have in the judgment of charity ground to
judge of it to be conscience, and not will, nor humor; suppose it be an error
or a want of light in some things in which their judgment is not truly
informed, shall we not say, God will reveal even this unto them; See the
indulgence of God unto a froward child, Isa. 5.7. I have seen his ways, and I
will heal him, etc. and of Christ to Thomas who was a little willful also in
his unbelief. The complaint of old was under our former Governors, that if a
wicked man had a dead member to be cut off, they did turn the back to the sword
of Justice: but if a Saint had but a hair to be pared off, then they did turn
the edge of the sword and strike a full blow: let it not be so said of you,
when you rule over men, and those your brethren, whose Representatives you know
you are, and profess your selves to lead by the cords of men, and the cords of
love: amor nescit cogi: for they will never give Governors a place in the
hearts of men, Ezck, 34.18 I will judge between the fat and lean cattle: for
the fat eat up the good pasture and tread down the residue; they drink of the
good water, and they foul the refidue with their fect, etc. this does provoke
the Lord to come in to Judge between them, yea to feed them with Judgment, etc.

Fourthly delays in Judgment: to defer Justice, is the next door to
injustice: and he in whose power it is to do a man right, does him wrong all
the time his right is delayed: therefore let Judgment be executed speedily,
and let Justice run down (...) River, and Judgment as a mighty stream: the
(...) Nation is great in this respect that men (...) their undoing upon a
^ommitte^ from day to (...) they (...), or else if a Committee be procured it
is with respect unto some few particular businesses in which themselves are
engaged and when they are ended one is gone this way, and another that, as if
nothing were to be done for love of Justice, but barely to pleasure friends by
whom they have been solicited; and by this means men do commonly say, the
remedy (...) worse then the disease; and the best is a brtar and as a thorny
hedge: as it is, Mich. 7.4 the sheep come for succor, their flesh is torn away:
you should Judge, (...); when as it is the Apostles rule, and it will hold in
all public administrations, and ye should be nails for the small vessels as
well as the great cups and flaggons. Your Justice should be as large as
Solomon's wisdom, to reach as well to the hysop as unto the Cedar.

Secondly, you have another Vineyard, and that is your house, which in a more
special manner is yours also: for Magistrates have the subjects only in
imperium, but not in patrimonium: and for this Joshua 24 15. I and my house
will serve the Lord; if he cannot by his authority work it amongst the people,
yet he resolves it in his own family: though he cannot thrust them out of the
Nation, yet he will put them out of his house and family; and it was the misery
that David did bewail when he came to dye, though my house be not so with God,
etc.

He that cannot rule well his own house, how is he able to rule the Church of
God? etc. and here give me leave to press a few things.

First, walk you exemplarily in your family. Psalm. 10.1 3. I will walk in the
middle of my house with a perfect heart: the matter is not so much what you are
abroad in common view; there is many a man that is like unto to the carbuncle,
that which Rurus says, Translucet ad modum ardentis prunae: Rurus.
and yet if you touch it, it is key cold.

Secondly, let the Ordinances of God be set up in your family, that at least if
you cannot join unto other Churches, you may have a Church in your house, which
was the honor of some of the private Saints in Scripture: Ahraham had his
Catechized servants, Genesis 14.14. the Hebrew word is, (...) and it was the great
honor that God did put upon him, I know that he will teach his family to fear
the Lord: There are many men that make great shows of Religion abroad, that if
we look into their families, there is little difference between them and the
families of the Heathen that know not God.

Thirdly, do not countenance those that are evil for any respect. Asa would not
bear with the Queen his Mother if she set up an Idol in a grove, but he deposed
her from being Queen, etc. Ierom.
there is no relation that is to stand between God and duty: per calcatum perge
patrem: Ierom. And in this case its our duty as it is Ieroms rule: and in such
cases Jesus Christ put no difference between his Mother and another woman.
What have I to do with the woman? etc. and David, Psalm. 101.6,7. My eyes shall
be upon the faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me; he that is
perfect in his way shall serve me: he that works deceit shall not dwell in my
house: it is grace only that makes the difference with God; surely it should be
the main difference with us also* it is a common evil in a Magistrate, their
servants oppress the people, but so did not ^, said that godly Magistrate, for
the fear of my God, etc. and Zeph. 1.9. there will come a day when the Lord
will punish them that leap upon the threshold, and fill their masters houses
with violence and spoil: qui praeda onusti, laetabundi, limen transilientes:
Drusius.
So Drusius. They did rejoice that they had gotten a booty, and in such
servants that are for their turn the masters can rejoice; but thou do then
covet an evil covetousness unto thy house.

Fourthly, be diligent to know the state of thy family, and by consequence in
bewailing the sins of it, Pro. 27.23. be diligent to know the state of thy
flock, and look well to thy herds: de diligenti rei familiaris administratione
intelligitur: Cartwr.
Cartwright. Next unto the state of a man's own heart, it is an evil to be a
stranger to the state of his own house; and a man should be much in bewailing
family evils and decaies, as we see it in David when he came to dye, though he
make my house not to grow, etc.

For, there is a curse on the families of men, and that curse many times
cleaves to the house, as we see it in the family of Ely, though a godly man;
and of David, I will bring evil upon thy house, etc. And there shall not be an
old man in the house of Ely for ever; Consider what a sad thing it is for God
to curse a family. To entail mercies and promises on a family is sweet, etc.
and as bitter is the entailing of a curse.

Doctrine 2.
The Keepers of other Vineyards, do many times neglect their own Vineyards; See
the instance of Iehu in the Magistracy, and of them in the ministry, Mat. 7 we
have prophesied in thy name, and we have eat and drank in thy presence, and in
thy name have cast out Devils: and we have done many mighty works for thee in
the world.

Men employed in the highest affairs in Church and state, and God has used
them as instruments of much good to others, yet they themselves may be
castawaies: and the reasons are these.

First, their employments do take up their hearts: there is something of the
thorn in every earthly employment, and it sucks the strength of the soul, and a
man's heart is apt to be drawn out inordinately to them, and to be over-shot
into them, that there is no place for any thing else to grow there: and those
sweet retirements of soul with God from day to day he is a stranger to, when he
wakes and should be with God: now a crowd of worldly affairs press in upon him,
and so by this means his soul is drowned in them. It is strange to observe the
highest degrees of temporary Believers, and that is the thorny ground; they
were men that had great works upon them, and were in high esteem in the Church:
men of great gifts and eminency; and those that had suffered much for God, and
the Gospel: and yet, licitis perimus omnes: they perish in the unlawful use of
lawful things: the creatures had taken up their hearts, and they were set upon
them, and lose their souls in the persuite of them, and calmely lay down in
their graves, and be cast away in a calm before they are aware.

Secondly, they do take off the heart; for pectora nostra duas non admittentia
curas; there can be no place; for, intus existens prohibet alienum: when a man's
heart goes out unto a thing, as David's heart went out after Absalom: and their
hearts in Ezekiel. 31.33. went after their covetousness; set it upon God, and
duties oftentimes, but its attendance is taken off by the affairs to which it
is accustomed.

There is that poison in the creature, it is not only deceiving, but its
defiling, and there is that curse unless a man be very watchful, that will
creep upon him in all employments about the creature whatsoever; the heart will
be taken off from God thereby; there is a strange kind of Idolatry, summus
seculi reatus, that does vent and discover it self in the hearts of men in this
kind, that the heart shall be taken off from duty whilst he is in the way of
duty, and a lower employment shall dead his heart unto that which is higher and
more excellent, and yet the man shall please and satisfy himself fully in the
one, with the constant and daily neglect of the other; and yet this shall be
given unto him as a Rattle to still his conscience if it cry, that he is called
to public employment; if he be diligent in that, he thinks he has done
enough, etc.

Thirdly, a man that has so neglected his own Vineyard, cannot look upon it
but with grief, notwithstanding all his care of other Vineyards committed to
his trust and care; and it is a sad thing in these respects.

First, it is said to think how I have neglected the great duties for which I
came into the world; it is true, you are to serve your generation by the will
of God: and there is a respect unto God to be put upon your meanest actions; Do
all to the glory of God, and it is this bent of the heart through Christ that
makes them to be accepted of grace in ordine supernaturali: But yet though
there be duties done to men wherein God is served, yet the main of the man is
to be laid out in the service of God, and the duties between God and the man's
own soul; walk in and out before the people, yet Solomon my Son, know the God
of thy Fathers and serve him, etc. it is sad to see the great Commandment
neglected, etc.

Secondly, it is sad to think how many precious opportunities and advantages I
have lost: how many sweet motions and admonitions of the spirit have I posted
unfruitfully over, and made the Lord to speak in vain in sweet illapses of the
Spirit: the Lord has called upon me, but my worldly thoughts did lodge within
me still, and there was no place in my heart for such calls from God, and
insinuations, etc. Surely there is a way of enjoying God even in worldly
employments, and God would never have put the soul upon them, that he might
serve God in them to their own disadvantage, that they should have loss of him
by it: Enoch walked with God, and he begat sons and daughters, Genesis 5.19. he
did not retire and separate himself from the affairs of this life, etc. And the
Angels that are employed by Christ in the things of this world; for the spirit
of the living creatures is in the wheels, and they are finite creatures and
cannot be in a twofold ubi at one and the same time, and yet they lose nothing
of the beatifical vision all the time of their administration; but their
Angels, yea even while they are employed for them, behold the face of their
Father who is in heaven, Mat. 18.10. and we need not lose our vision by our
employment, if the fault were not our own, and and therefore it is sad, because
it is our own sin that is the cause.

Thirdly, it is sad to see so many glorious works rejected, and so much labor
lost, that shall never redound unto the man's account: as we see in Iehu, it was
a great work and service that he did: and so that of Cyrus, but yet neither of
their services stood upon record in reference to an eternal acceptance: Now to
see a wise Counselor, and a Statist, and a valiant Soldier, and a painful
minister lay out himself unto the utmost, and eat the bread of carefulness all
his life time; and yet when he comes to give up an account, all is but a
Cipher, because his main work went not on, because he took no care of his own
Vineyard: therefore the Lord rejects his care of others: as one says, Si mihi
daretur optio, eligerem Christiani rustici sordidissimum and maxim agreste
opus, prae omnibus victoriis and triumphis Alexandri, Caesaris, on Genesis 31. for
his work to be burnt, and the man to suffer loss when he has bestowed a great
deal of pains in the building of it, etc.

Fourthly, it is more sad for the person to perish, and after all this to be
cast away, that he that did save others, should himself be destroyed: he that
was instrumental to save Kingdoms, and to settle Nations, that he himself
should perish: and he that did cast out Devils should be himself condemned with
the Devils: who would not pity such a man that had gone along with and acted
with the better party all his life time, and seemed very industrious and
zealous in it also, as Iehu did, and been active in reformation and resolute,
and yet the man cast away, because of the neglect of his own Vineyard: for as
Heaven and Hell divide the world: so will Christ, and he is making preparation
for it at the last day, Psalm. 125.5. he will lead them forth with the workers
of iniquity, with whom they seemed to have little acquaintance in times past:
but the Lord will put every man thus in his own place, with those of his own
rank, whatever now he may seem to be a covering Cherub. Ezekiel. 28.14,16.

Use.
Now for the Lords sake, I beseech you, as you are made Keepers of the
Vineyard, so be sure that you do keep your own Vineyard; if you could settle
the Commonwealth in the most happy and flourishing condition that you could
desire, all this would be nothing to thee, thou should never see when God
comes; for no man can receive benefit by others that keeps not his own
Vineyard; let me tell you the sweetest fruits that the soul seeds on all his
life time, are those that he gathers from his own Vine; and to quicken you to
it, take but these few considerations.

First, ye must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ: as he told his
friends when he came to dye, he should not appear before God as a Doctor, but
he shall be dis-robed of all those any further then they refer to his works
done in his body; but as a man only he shall appear and be Judged: death does
pluck the Princes Crown off his head, and the Judges robes from off the back,
and the Lord shall Judge you without respect of persons: not so much how you
have kept others, but how your own Vineyard: tantus quisque est quantus est
apud deum: the Lord does not value any man by his greatness, or place, or his
honor, or his office, but as he is instrumental in service, and as he did keep
his own Vineyard.

Secondly, it is a comfortable argument to such a man, that he is placed in
such a public employment in mercy, if it does not cause him to neglect his own
Vineyard: and if he does neglect it, it was in Judgment that he was placed
there: that creature which does draw the heart off from God and duty, was given
in a curse: and though it be a blessing in the thing yet it is a curse to the
man: if the table be a snare, its a curse: Iratus dat amanti quod male amat:
and so it is of employments also: there is a difference between the graces of a
condition and the gifts of it. Judas had the one, and so had Saul: but it was
Paul and David had the other; and therefore the one might keep other Vineyards,
but the other they also keep their own, and that was a token they were called
in mercy; if thereupon thy heart neglects God, and thou grow remiss in
reference unto thy eternal estate, take heed this be not (...) to thee, and
after all thy Religion, this is the time when God will turn thee off.

Thirdly, know that if you neglect your own Vineyards as Magistrates, there is
a Judgment will come upon you: remember Ezekiel. 21.10. Christ in his Judgments
will put no difference, he will lay you aside as a vessel in which there is no
pleasure, and cast you out also as an abominable branch, Zach. 11.16. there is
a Judgment threatened on Magistrates, thy right arm shall wither, and thy right
eye shall be put out: he shall lose the gifts for government: for they be of
that nature that they may decay and be utterly lost, as it was with Saul when
the Spirit of the Lord departed from him; and all his authority and ruling
power with the people shall be taken away, and the place that he had before in
the hearts of the people, he shall lose for ever.

Fourthly, if you perish, there will be more rejoicing then at the downfall of
any men in the world: therefore do not gratify the enemies so much, that watch
for your halting: and with Triumph the enemy will say, How is the hammer of the
earth broken? you that God has made victorious, and you have set your foot
upon the necks of your enemies; yea how would Satan rejoice at such a fall, and
all the damned spirits would sport themselves as it were, Isa. 44.9,10. art
thou fallen from heaven O Lucifer the son of the morning, etc. and there are no
men in the world that will perish with so much shame and confusion of face as
you will do if the Lord reject you: Therefore to conclude all, suffer this word
of exhortation: seeing your mothers children have made you Keepers of the
Vineyard, look upon that charge, and let it not be neglected; for the account
of Nations will be dreadful when you come to give an account of your
Steward-ship: but however, above all keepings, keep your own Vineyard.

State Prosperity, IN Keeping close to the Word.
At a Fast in the Parliament house, June 31. 1653.
JOSHUA 1.8. Then shall thou make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have
good success.


HEre Joshua a holy man, and a godly Magistrate, is to undertake a great
service; he was to divide unto Israel the Land of Canaan for an inheritance,
which God had promised unto their Fathers to give them. But great duties are
commonly beset with great difficulties; therefore the heart of a man must have
something to bear it up that is stronger then it self: suffultum est cor meum,
etc. my heart is under-propped, Psalm. 112.8. there is a double courage: both
which we find in Joshua.

First, more particular in reference unto a service enjoined, and that is a
courage in ventering upon dangers: for the sons of Anak be there, and their
Cities walled up to heaven: they are a mighty warlike people, and in
possession, and fortified: Yet be strong, for I have commanded thee; there is a
particular faith or considence that the Spirit puts into the hearts of the
Saints: and this particular faith works from a particular courage, that though
weak, yet by faith are made strong and become valiant in fight, Heb. 11. and
with this God gives to his people two things, as Plut. says were in Hannibal,
Plurimum andaciae ad capienda pericula; and plurimum Consilii inter pericula
ipsa: he was bold in attempting, and yet wise in managing of the most difficult
services; his courage wrought not rashness in him, nor his counsel wrought not
slothfulness.

Secondly, there is a more particular courage in reference to duty: be very
courageous, and observe to do according unto all that the Lord commanded thee:
difficulties and dangers are properly the objects of courage; and many a man
may be as courageous as a Lion in a particular service, and yet when he comes,
to observe all that is commanded, in point of duty, his heart may fail him: men
daring in dangers, are many times men fainting in duty; many a man in a
particular service may have his heart with Iehu as an Adamant, to destroy all
the house of Ahab, etc. but yet when he comes to a general obedience, he is as
weak as water; for Iehu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of
Israel with all his heart: there are duties that are discountenanced, and a man
must go alone; at my first answer no man stood with me, all men forsook me,
says the Apostle, etc. but yet then a man must not forsake the service he is
doing, either for God or his people; and there are some duties which lie upon a
man, and which he undertakes, that enemies may oppose and observe him in, as
they did Daniel; yet he would venture his life to gain an hour at prayer; and
there are some duties that a man may with courage resist enemies in, and
conquer all their opposition, yet he may be betrayed by his friends: as we see
in Rehoboam, 2 Chronicles. 3.7. there were gathered to him vain men, children of
Belial, and they strengthened themselves against him, but it was when he was
young, (and yet he was forty years old) but he was young and tenderhearted,
and could not withstand them: so also it is said of Zedekiah, that the men of
his peace set him on and prevailed against him, etc. they that no enemies could
conquer, have been overcome by their friends; wild counselors they will prove
ill friends: and thy feet will sink in the mire, and they will turn away back:
they will leave thee to shift for thy self in the greatest of thy streights,
nay they will be the worst enemies against thee; as an Ivy twists about an Oak,
and lives by the sap of it, but he has a root of his own, and yet by his
embraces he eats out the heart of it, and he does flourish and grow green, but
the Oak does wither, who is thus embraced and loses its verdure from day to
day, etc.

And the rule of this courage must be the Law: Resolution without a rule, is
like a horse without a bridle, which has no restraint; its running well but
out of the way: and it must be according to the Law known, and rightly
understood, for he must meditate therein day and night; it must dwell richly in
him that is in authority: it must not be the Law unlorded, Mat. 15.6. the word
is in the Greek, (...) not by the traditions of men, nor by the frenzies and
inspirations of men: for there is a kind of mystical Divinity that is brought
forth by men, that cannot be contented to be wise according unto what is
written; that turn all the Scripture into fancies, and Allegories, and far
fetched imaginations: there is wisdom from beneath, and there is inspirations
from Hell, when Satan will transform himself like an Angel of light, as well as
there is inspirations from heaven: but let me tell you, we must know no Law
within us, but that which is derived from the Law without, and answers to it as
the Counterpain to the Copy; and we must know no other Christ, but he that was
born at Bethlem; and was crucified at Jerusalem: and no other Antichrist but
mystical Babylon the mother of Harlots, which is the City that rules over the
Kings of the earth; and to speak of another spiritual Christ and Antichrist,
apart from these, and so to turn all into fancies, this is not the Law as
delivered by God, but as framed by men whose fancies go beyond their faith, and
their pride exceeds them both.

And this Law he should not only have in his heart and in his eye, but he
should have it always in his mouth; he is not to depart from thence; non
tantum sibi privatim, sed toti populo.

The knowledge that he has of the Law of God, he should hold forth to the
people in his government, and let him profess the truth which he does believe;
the same duty lies upon him, both as a Magistrate and as a man: or else, the
ten Kings could never as Kings, destroy the whore; else as a Magistrate let him
never be called Christian, if he bear not the testimony of Christ; let him be
Christian as a man, if he do profess Christ; but let him not be so as a
Magistrate, that thinks he is born to do no more for Christ under whom he acts,
then a Pagan is: All Magistracy came in by sin: nomen istud culpa meruit, and
non natura: Austin.
est Remedium corruptae naturae: Luther.
A natural subjection there should have been, but no civil subjection of one
man to another; and it is by Jesus Christ after the fall, the government being
put into his hands, Prove. 18.15,16. by me Kings reign; it is not spoken of
Christ barely as God, but as Mediator in a Covenant, and Decree: so that the
Government of all Nations belongs to him, he is King of Kings; and they that
will serve him must not only do his work, but serve his end: now his end is
that the Providential Kingdom be subordinate to the Spiritual, Ephesians. 1. ult. and
that must be their aim also, or else they will never be accepted of Christ: as
we see it in Iehu: notwithstanding the great services he did, yet because his
end was not Gods, therefore they were not accepted.

We come not to Magistrates for a Confession of faith in this, as if the Gospel
had not strength enough of it self to defend it: there was a time when
Magistrates were not Christian and yet the Gospel wanted not its defense: and
when the Magistrate is Christian, we know Diabolus nondum factus est
Christianus, Austin.
Aust. We have the same Lawgiver, who is the Judge: and we know, the Churches
support tarries not for man, it waits not for the sons of men, Mich. 5.7. it
has in a readiness to revenge all disobedience. I do profess, that were it not
that we desire to be sensible of Gods dishonor, and dare not but be faithful
unto your souls, and the Nations good, because we know that the soul of the
Lord will be dis-joynted by these means, we should never so much as move you in
this kind: for we know, that the (...) and stubble the fire will consume them:
and we know, that the day of the Lord will come, when he will destroy
Antichrist with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming: and
all these which are but appendixes will vanish with them; only we would not
have you neglect your duty, and thereby bring a guilt upon your selves and upon
your government; and we would not have you lose your share in the honor of it
before God and the Nations: and after such solemn professions and public
expectations to the contrary, and now to be put off from them by fancies,
suspicions of impositions, and that from men that never desired any thing from
you but a public owning of those things, which we know you dare not deny to be
truths: and a not-countenancing (if we may not attain a discountenancing) of
the contrary.

Neither is profession enough, but there must be an answerable practice: the
Magistrate must observe to do all that is commanded therein: it is obedience
that is the life of the Law: he must be ready to do every good work: without
practice the Law is but a dead letter to a man: and it is the fruit of grace,
Ephesians. 2.10. created in Christ unto good works: dead works flow from a dead man;
a man that is living will act lively; and its the glory of our profession, let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, etc. If we
speak never so high and Angelical, yet if our conversation be not in heaven, we
do nothing our ways are in hell, when our words seem to be in heaven: the
Angels and those that stand by, they receive that they may do: they go and come
as lightning: they are ready and speedy in it, and they that do so shall have a
place amongst them, Zach. 3.7. and there is the same distance between God and
great men, that is between him and mean men: for he regards the rich no more
then the poor, they are all the work of his hands; they shall be all judged
alike, and shall all stand up alike before the Judgment Seat of Christ;
distances amongst men may persuade the vain mind of man that there is something
that makes them differ: but with the Lord it is not so: and it is a small
thing, as well as a vain, to profess we know God, when in works we deny him.

And the fruit of all this is, that thou may make thy way prosperous, and
then thou shall have good success: the words have many efficacies; prosperous,
that is, to have all things go well with him: and his undertaking to answer his
design: whereas many times it does not, but the contrary: and the counsels of
wise men are turned backwards: and though they conceive one thing, yet another
is brought forth: it is as the Greek (...); a man that goes well on in his way:
and it is the same word used, Psalm. 1. Whatsoever he does shall prosper: and
the other word for good success, it does signify to do wisely: the Septuagint
(...); viam tuam diriges, and intelliges eam, Jerome.
Jerome. Res tanta est ex qua omnis ratio Magistratus been gerendi pendebat,
inculcanda est. Massius.
Massius in loc.

Doctrine.
The only way for a godly Magistrate to rule wisely and prosperously, is, in
all his government to have respect unto the word, and to keep close thereunto.

First, this is the way to walk by an un-erring rule: let me tell you, the
policies of men will deceive you, for they do many times deceive themselves:
the wise are taken in their own craft, and burnt as Bees in their own hives;
and the Devil does commonly make use of the wisdom of the wise; also cupit and
diabolus, etc. Satan has his (...), and his (...): any man can act the Devils
lusts, but all men cannot understand and reach his depths; therefore the Devil
will make use of wise men in the world this way: but this is a rule in which a
man shall never err, never miscarry, Prove. 19.16. he that keeps the
Commandments, keeps his soul: and, as many as walk according to this rule,
peace be upon them: it is the way to peace only.

Secondly, this is the only way to rule with God, Hos. 11.12. they rule for
God; ye Judge not for men, but for the Lord: and it is a great happiness to
have God rule with them: there are two great Judgments that in a special
manner we should fear: the one is to have God to depart from our Magistrates,
and the other from our Ordinances, 2 King. 18.6,7. Hezekiah clave to the Lord,
and departed not from him, but kept his Commandments; so the Lord was with him,
and he prospered in all things he took in hand: every Government does stand
upon a double Covenant.

First, between God and the Magistrate.

Secondly, between the Magistrate and the people: 2 King. 11.17. between the
Lord and the King and the people, that they should be the Lords people:
likewise between the King and the people: So that a people coming under the
authority of men, and obeying them for conscience sake, it is still with
respect unto the authority of God, that they will so be under government, as
they will be the Lords people still; and therefore the care of Magistrates
should be, not only that they rule in a way of providence, Dan. 4.17. but in a
way of grace, Magnus Caesar, sed Deo minor; and whilst the Magistrate rules
according to the word of God, and has respect to it in his Government, so long
God rules in and with the Magistrate, and therefore all that he does undertake
shall prosper.

Thirdly, this is the only way to have the spirit to be their guide in
Government: he has undertaken to his people to be (...), a Leader; not only as
Saints, as he is to all the Saints in general, but also in their particular
places, and callings, and employments, Ioh. 16.13. he shall lead you into all
truth: it is not to be understood in omnem veritatem absolute, but necessariam:
all that is necessary to your calling, employments and condition in which he
has set you; and where shall a man hear the voice of the spirit speaking, but
in the word? it is in the Sanctuary of the Lord: there David found the rule: he
was showed the way; the way of the spirit is in the word: it is the light that
shines in a dark place, unto which you do well to give heed.

Fourthly, this is the way to come under the favorable aspect of many gracious
promises of success and prosperity in your undertakings and administrations, 1
King. 2.3. Keep the charge of the Lord thy God, his Statutes, his Commandments,
his Judgments, his Testimonies that thou may prosper in all that thou do,
and whithersoever thou turnest thy self, 2 Chronicles. 22.13. Only the Lord give
thee wisdom, that thou may keep the Law of the Lord thy God: then shall thou
prosper, etc. 2 Chronicles. 24.20. Zachary was clothed with the spirit: and he had
need be so, that speaks to an apostatizing Magistracy, and to a revolted and
backsliding people: and, he said that they did transgress the Commandment of
the Lord, and therefore they could not prosper: and Zach. 11.16. there is an
Idol Shepherd, (or a foolish Shepherd) it points unto the folly of the
Government that was afterward to arise: that is, when they did forsake the Law
of the Lord, and what wisdom was there in them then? Their Arm, their power and
authority with the people; and their Eye, their counsel shall be nothing, but
they shall err, and cause the people to err in every work of their hands, the
Lord will mingle a perverse spirit upon them, etc.

Use.
Then surely this is the way for you to prosper, and this will be your wisdom
in the sight of the Nations, to keep close to the word: and here I shall exhort
you to keep close to the word,

First, in the Doctrine of it.

Secondly, in the worship it holds forth.

Thirdly, in practice.

First, for Doctrine: Let the word be always before you, that you may receive
it, and give a testimony to it: there is a form of Doctrine, a pattern of
wholesome words: there is a personal foundation, and there is a doctrinal
foundation, Heb. 6.1. Rev. 21.14. which the Saints ought to build upon; and all
the superstructures, let them be for clearing the truth and establishing, not
for subverting of the faith: Sit profectus fidei, non permutatio; under
persecution Satan acted another part; Cogit homines negare Christum, nunc
docet: Austin.
Austin.

Here are three things that I shall speak to.

First, that the great interest Christ has in the world is Truth. First, it is
that by which Christ rules and conquers, Psalm. 110.2. Rev. 6.2. Secondly, it is
that upon which the Church stands, Ephesians. 2.20. Churches are said to be the great
interest of Christ in the world: and indeed it is true, that for the Saints
sake, and the Churches sake, the world stands; but he now that would destroy
truth, overthrows the foundation upon which the Church is built: we speak of
persecution, and there is a great cry of persecution; but the greatest
persecution that ever was or can be to the Church, was not in destroying their
persons, but in over-throwing the truths upon which the Church is built:
therefore Heretics have been the greatest persecutors, etc. Thirdly, truth is
that by which holiness is maintained in the world, Ioh. 17.17. sanctify them
by thy truth, thy word is truth. Now for men to cry up holiness, and decry
truth, it is oppositio in adjecto: the Lord loves his people, but he loves his
truth above all; and it is dangerous to set a man's self against that which
Christ specially will own and advance, he has exalted his word above all his
name.

Secondly, no Nation did ever prosper, that did ever set themselves against
Truth; and no Magistrates did ever prosper in their Government, that did set
themselves against Truths, and did countenance and favor them that did it: to
give you a few instances: First, consider, the Jews Idolatry before their
captivity, was their great sin: but afterward they departed; Non prius facti
sint haeretici quam esse Idololatrae destissent: then here sies sprung up; and
it will appear that their opposing of truth, and suffering these to get ground,
and make merchandise of the people, was the destruction of the City, rather
then the Army of the Romans that came against them, as Josephus, etc. The
Rulers, they favored those that opposed Truth, and did aid themselves, and
took their parts, and contended for them: the Roman Empire it was the flood:
the Arrian heresy their Emperors favored it, and taking part with them that
brought in the Goths and the Barbarous Nations upon them, and extinguished all
the glory of their ancient Government: the Star wormwood in Augustulus falling
from heaven: And the Eastern part, the seven Churches of Asia, the Doctrine of
the Nicolaitans, and the doctrine of the woman Iezebel, brought the Saracens
upon them: I might instance in many other; but here at home though there was a
persecution before, and it may be in regard of restraint, as great well nigh as
was afterward, but yet their sins never came to a ripeness till they did begin
to make void the Law of God, and labor to bring in the Doctrine of Popery
amongst us, and Arminianism; and the Rulers took part with them, and favored
the Doctrine, and Teachers: and that brought in corrupt worship, and this
filled their measure, and then did God awaken the souls of his servants to cry
to him; and indeed, what can the righteous do when the foundations are
destroyed? and the Lord was pleased to hear and to awake: when men in authority
will favor and countenance those that endeavor to overthrow truth, then God
will pour contempt upon them, etc. and if there were no more but this, it will
clear it, that the Churches are the great interest of Nations which have been
formerly: and if destroying of the truths of God be the greatest persecution of
Churches that can be, and the greatest wrong that is done or can be done unto
them, and let the Churches be corrupted, let me tell you, the end will be with
a flood: they were the sins of the sons of God that in a special manner brought
the flood upon the world.

We may speak of Popery, and cry out of Antichrist: but for the Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son, that they never did directly, but
consequentially: and yet if the main Doctrine of Antichrist be received,
favored and countenanced, and the Teachers of them, surely the greatest part
of Antichrist is amongst us: Bernard speaks of one Peter Aboliardus in his
time, Bernard.
Cum de Trinitate loquitur sapit Arius: cum de gratia Pelagius: cum de persona
Christi Nestorius. There are some men that are nothing else, all their Religion
is a bundle of old and absolete herisies.

I speak not this to stir you up to an imposition of Doctrines upon the
consciences of men, which is commonly objected, and that all our dictates must
be received: a liberty and an indulgence I pray you to allow in those things
wherein it may be granted: but a bounding of men's spirits by the word, is not
bounding of the spirit, and an imposing those things, at least not to be
disputed, which the Scripture says without the believing of them men cannot be
saved, this is no dangerous imposition: but yet this I press not, but only that
as you are in authority, you would not countenance such Teachers, and that you
would give your testimony unto the truths of God, and let the Nation, yea all
the Nations of the earth know, that you are not departed from the faith to
follow such lying vanities; and this should I look upon as a glorious answer of
the prayers of this day, and that you do not involve your selves and the Nation
in the ruin of these things threatened and feared in the judgment of most that
are godly and considering Christians.

Thirdly, hence also I cannot but infer, that they are the greatest enemies
unto the Church of God, and to any Nation, that do endeavor to corrupt the
Doctrines of Religion, and are to be looked upon as such; though they may be
men of great parts, and otherwise for a State interest useful; yet if the bent
of their spirits do run out this way, to corrupt the Doctrines of godliness,
and to oppose and decry them that do support them, let me tell you, all the
service that they can do you, will not countervail this loss; for though they
may be cried up for Saints, yet these are the great Engineers for Satan in the
world: as Iraeneus has a story of Cerinthus, whom he calls, (...), Iraeneus.
and they are the greatest designers for Popery: I will not say it is finis
operantis, but operis it is: as Contzen the Jesuit, Error cui patrocinium
deerit, sine pugna concidet: This I speak as that which I am persuaded in my
conscience will and does provoke God both against you and your Government, etc.

Secondly, keep close to the word in the matter of worship: services tendered
unto God must be word-service: and if not, you will never prosper: for else,

First, it is worshipping of Devils, and not God, Rev. 9.20. Now to bring in
worshipping of Devils amongst you and not God, will be that which will cause the
Lord to depart from you.

Secondly, it is an image of Idolatry: and so much the greater, if there be a
hand of the ancients of Israel in it, Ezekiel. 8.3. it will provoke God to depart
from a Nation.

Thirdly, this has destroyed the most flourishing Churches and Nations, Hos.
8.5,6. Thy Calf Oh Samaria has cast thee off, etc. and the Eastern part of the
Empire, Rev. 9.20. It was their Idolatry in worship that did it.

Fourthly, it will bring vengeance upon the Nations as well as on the Churches,
Hos. 8.7. They have sown wind, and reapt the whirlwind: Ezekiel. 10.2. fire from
the Altar, and scattered over the City, it burns the hottest. 2. Chron. 7.20. I
will pluck you up by the roots out of the Land, says God.

Thirdly, keep close to the word in point of practice also: personal holiness
the Lord requires of them that would prosper in their way, and have God with
them in their Government. 1 Samuel 12.24,25. they had set up a new Government,
and the Lord had answered their desires; I but he says, fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth, and with all your hearts, and consider how great things the
Lord has done for you: but if you shall still do wickedly, etc. there the
wickedness of a people indulged by the Magistrate, will bring a Judgment upon
the Government, 1 King. 14.5,7. if thou shall walk before me as David thy
Father walked, in integrity of heart, then, etc.

Here you see the Apostasy of the Governors will bring a Judgment upon the
Nation, nay though it be but a personal Apostasy: hear, and fear, and tremble,
you that are the Rulers of the Nation.

Secondly, this is the way to get you honor in the hearts of men when you
reform your lives: purify your hearts, and your houses as well as your hearts;
there is a double image that the Magistrate must gain authority by, an Image in
you as men, as well as upon you as Magistrates: the Elders were crowned, and
also clothed with white garments, Rev. 4.9.

Thirdly, not keeping close to the word in point of practice, is the way to
provoke God to lay you aside, and not to delight in you: he loves vessels
fitted for the Masters use; when you are faithful to God in ways of holiness,
as well as unto the Nation in ways of Justice, Isa. 8.2. And I took unto me
faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the Priest, etc. A man may be faithful in
discharging some trust put upon him by men, but yet be unfaithful to God in
ways of holiness: Contah was a despised broken Idol, a vessel in whom God had
no pleasure, one that God will set himself to disgrace; God will pour out
contempt upon Princes, and all ungodly Magistrates; and if you also walk
unholily, there will be a shame poured upon all your glory: they must be
called, and faithful, and chosen, that God will delight to use. Consider the
Judgment upon Shebna, he and all his lumber was cast down, Isa. 22.16,17,18.
if men in authority be vainglorious and self-seeking, though they have made
many men their creatures, and raised parties to strengthen their interest, God
will sweep away all such rubbish.

Fourthly, this will be a testimony to you, if you walk holily and faithfully,
that you are called to the employment in mercy and not in wrath, if the graces
of the condition God has placed you in be exercised: indeed a man may exercise
parts and gifts, but ^at does not make a man acceptable in the sight of God: if
the employment a man is in do draw out and improve his corruption, certainly it
was in wrath, not in mercy that he was placed in it: therefore Remember your
first love, 2 Chronicles. 17.3,5,6. walk in your first ways, that ye may have an
interest in God to attain mercy from him for your selves and for the people: Oh
how powerful would the prayers of gracious Magistrates be? and how able are
they, as Moses was, to stand in the gap, and to turn away wrath: they are the
shields of the earth, Psalm. 47.9. and they are to be scuta Deo and hominibus,
to keep off Judgments from breaking in upon the people from God, as well as
violences one from another: and can a man do that? can he think to turn off
wrath from a Nation, who does expect Judgment upon himself daily, and is in
continual danger of it? And if there be any amongst you that are
unsound-hearted under all your shows, the Lord will discover you; for, Job
34.30. He will not have the hypocrite reign, lest the people be ensnared: the
word signifies a man that walks in a cloud, or has an artificial covering,
that men may not see and observe his steps: God hates such men in authority,
and for his peoples sake he will not have them reign: therefore let me exhort
you to be sincere and truly holy in your own persons: many of you have been
judged so to be; continue in it, manifest it, let it appear that you are better
by authority, not worse: you are called Gods upon earth; Oh how unworthy the
name of a God will such be? A drunken God, an unclean covetous God? etc. Oh let
such things be not so much as named amongst you, but with abhorrency, as
becomes Saints: see to whom the promise of protection is made, and of
exaltation also, Isa. 33.15. he that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly, he that despises the gain of oppression, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil, he shall dwell on high, and the place of
his defense shall be the munitions of Rocks: bread shall be given him, and his
waters shall be sure, etc.

I Will add but a few considerations, a little to quicken you to this duty. I Will
but name them.

Consider, first the mercies that you have received, Deuteronomy. 8.10. a people
purchased with mercy, redeemed with a mighty hand; saved, yea with great
salvation.

Secondly, the opportunities you have had, Prove. 17.16. opportunity is a price,
talentum maximum: there is a time when the Angels stir the waters: and if you
miss an opportunity of doing good, God may never honor you with one again.

Thirdly, remember the promises that you have made in the days of your
distress, etc. What have you held forth to the Nation, nay to all the world,
with hands lifted up to the most high; and vowed the endeavor of a
reformation; and it is a snare after vows to make enquiry; the delay of a vow
was visited upon Jacob twenty years after, etc.

Fourthly, consider the expectation of the Nations: all the eyes of the Saints
all the world over are upon you, and they look what you will do: God has made
your cause leading; let not your example hinder them that follow you in the way
that you have gone, etc.

Fifthly, it will be a mighty testimony of your uprightness, that your heart is
for God, and that you are set against evil things and persons, etc. Psalm.
139.21,22. David appeals to God in it: Oh that many of you could do so, as he
said, amicum amo in Deo, inimicum propter deum: they are your corruptions that
are snares both to you and the Nation.

Sixthly, what account can you give to God? you must all appear before God, and
come to Judgment: and to whom much is given, of him much shall be required:
and they can never give an account to God in Judgment, that cannot give an
account before hand unto the Word by which they shall be Judged: This is the
way to prosper, and that the fear of you may fall upon all the Land that you
shall tread upon, as the promise is, Deuteronomy. 11.25. God gives men favor many
times in the sight of their enemies, and he makes them a fear to all round
about them: and by this you shall establish the Government that you have begun,
and God shall give you in the hearts of his people, and ye shall prosper in
whatsoever you take in hand, then shall you make your way prosperous, then
shall you have good success.

CHRIST'S Instrumental Fitness, FOR His Fathers Ends.
ISAIAH 42.2. Behold my servant whom I have chosen, etc.


CHrist is the Treasure hid in the Gospel, and the Pearl of great price: he is
the Sun in the Firmament of the Scriptures, whom to know is everlasting life;
and therefore men are to lift up their heads, to pry into him; for the Angels
do bow down theirs, and the Cherubims bow down theirs toward the Mercy-Seat:
And in Christ there are mainly two things that should take up our studies; his
personal fullness, and his instrumental fitness; for the one, it pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell; we saw his glory, as the glory of
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth: and for the other,
this Text holds it forth; and that in these three things.

First, he is a servant, (...) the term notes a subordination to do the work of
another, and to serve another man's ends: to have no will of his own, but what
is his Lords: the Philosopher says, that servants are but (...), living
Instruments and they are (...). and the less instrumental any one is, the less
a servant he is; the nature of the relation lies in this properly, to be
instrumental to another, 1 Cor. 3. ult. All things are yours, ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods, etc. there is a threefold subordination; as the creatures
be your servants, and were made wholly for you, and ye are Christ's servants, so
Christ is Gods servant, 1 Cor. 11.3. the head of Christ is God, and the head of
the woman is the man, etc. So that there is a subordination and a subserviencie
instrumentally in Christ.

Secondly, he is a chosen servant; the Lord had a work to do that was
extraordinary, that men and Angels his ordinary servants could not perform; and
that is to bring the creature as fallen from God, to God again, in
reconciliation and Communion; and therefore the Lord must raise up a new
servant of purpose, who only could do this great work: and therefore the word
is, (...) which does signify first probare, and then eligere: First, examine
and approve, and then to choose: to choose after a trial and examination, my
tried, approved and chosen servant.

Thirdly, God having chosen him, he does so fully answer his will, that he
says, his soul delights in him, or is satisfied: for the less suitable
servants are to their masters ends, the less delight they can take in them, for
all delight arises from suitableness: but he did the work of his master so
fully, that the Lord had a perfect delight and full contentment in him; and
therefore whereas we render, whom I upheld, it is in the original (...) innitar
in eo, Montanus
Montanus: upon whom I rely: other servants are unconstant; God puts no
confidence in Angels, but leans and relies on Christ.

Doctrine.
The Doctrine from hence is this: That Jesus Christ as Mediator, is God the
Fathers servant, and has in him an Instrumental fitness to serve all the
Fathers ends.

First, for the proof of this, the Lord does everywhere style him his servant,
to set forth his subordination, and his instrumentality to God, Isa. 43.10. ye
are my witnesses, and my servant also whom I have chosen: potissime spectat ad
Christum: it is spoken of Christ who was the great Prophet, and under whom all
other Prophets were witnesses unto God: and therefore Rev. 1.5. he is called,
the faithful and true witness. Isa. 52.13. he speaks of the great restitution
of his people the Jews; put on thy strength O Zion, etc. the Lord has made
bare his arm, etc. My servant shall deal prudently, and prosperously, he having
undertaken the Churches restoration, the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand, Zach. 3.8. There were great difficulties that did hinder them in
building the Temple: a mighty Samaritan faction, a mountain, the whole power of
the Persian Monarchy against it: but says the Lord, be not discouraged; for,
I will bring forth my servant the Branch; Ezekiel. 37.24,25. Servum vocat propter
officium, and germen propter Humanitatem, Cameron.
Cameron. David my servant shall be their King for ever: David was dead long
ago, but this is at the return of the last captivity of the Jews, when the two
sticks shall become one, and then Typical David shall be King over them: and he
shall sit upon the Throne of his Father David, and become the glory of his
people Israel.

The Temple was the type of Christ, Joh. 2.19. there was no service to be done
in the Temple, but there were all manner of necessary utensils for it; there
were Altars, Lavers, Censors and Snuffers, etc. to show that Christ the
spiritual Temple was himself furnished with whatever was necessary for the
service required of him, to be performed by him, Psalm. 80.17. Let thy hand be
upon the man of thy right hand: which is expounded three ways.

First, as an expression of special love and favor, so Jacob called his
youngest son, Benjamin the son of my right hand.

Secondly, it is an expression of special honor: Solomon did set his mother at
his right hand; and so Christ glorified in heaven, is said to sit down at the
right hand of God.

Thirdly, an expression of instrumentality; the right hand being the main
instrument of action, therefore Christ being dearest to God, because most
servicable; in this respect Christ may be well styled, the man of Gods right
hand.

But how came Chirst to be a servant? Servants are of two sorts. First, nati,
some are ad mancipium nati, born servants, as Ishmael, for partus sequitur
ventrem, and therefore was a bondman. Gal. 4. Hence it is, he is made the type
of all uuregenerate men; the two mothers are the two Covenants; Isaac theson of
the one, a type of the regenerate: Ishmael of the unregenerate, who are born
slaves, because they are born under a broken Covenant; Hence is that Covenant
said, To gender to bondage. Secondly, facti, some are made, and that also two
ways. First, by constraint, or by purchase, or by conquest; and in all these
ways the creatures are servants to Christ. Secondly, by consent, when one
being sui juris, does freely and willingly consent and enter into Covenant with
another, to yield up his will unto him, to do his work, and to be subservient
unto his ends: Now Christ was not born a servant, for he was the only begotten
Son of God. There is a threefold service introduced by sin.

First, a service of men to Satan, Ioh. 8.44. to be led Captive by him at his
pleasure; and in the highest manner, as a God, to worship him: hence he became
the God of this world.

Secondly, that civil subjection of one man to another; there was a Dominion
that man had over all the other creatures: and there was a natural subjection
of children to their parents: but a civil subjection of man to man came in by
sin, by the curse: Nomen illud culpa meruit non natura, Austin.
Austin.

Thirdly, Christ as Mediator becomes a servant unto God the Father; had man
stood, all the creatures had been every way fit for the ends for which they
were created, and they would have answered Gods expectation in them all; but
when sin came into the world, there is now a new work to do, to raise up the
decaies of mankind, (...), to take away sin, and let the sinner live: and this
no creature in heaven or earth was fit for: the Lord must make a new servant,
raise one a purpose for it, and unto this Christ did give consent freely and
willingly: he took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. Heb. 10. he
says, Lo I come to do thy work O God, etc. Now that it may appear there was
in him such an instrumental fitness for all God the Fathers ends, we must
examine what these ends are for which he is appointed: and they are of two
sorts. First, principal. Secondly, additional and overplus ends, etc.

First, the principal ends are four: two of them are in respect of God, and two
of them are in respect of man. First, in respect of God. First, the highest
manifestation of all his glorious excellencies; the Lord had showed forth much
of himself before, but he will now set forth a new System of all his
attributes, and he will so manifest them in Christ, as they were never known
before: and if he had created millions of sons, they would never have been so
fit instruments for the manifestation of God as Christ is. First, God had
showed much wisdom before in the creation of the world, but much more in its
reparation, etc. but now to take away sin, and let the sinner live, sin damned
and the sinner saved, and that by so unimaginable a way as by the second person
to be made flesh, it is that which the Angels admire and study, etc.

Secondly, God had before showed a great deal of mercy and goodness to the
creature, making him after his own Image, and entered into Covenant with him:
but for to take up a creature into personal union with himself, and to make up
one person, and he never to put off that clay again for ever: how great is this
goodness?

Thirdly, God had showed much Justice before, both upon Angels and men: but all
this was but Justice upon creatures, yea guilty creatures; now Gods Justice is
far greater: he will not spare his son when sin was but imputed, and it is
said, he delighted to grind him to powder, the word in the Hebrew, (...) Isa.
53. as the word is used, to beat a thing in a mortar, etc. it was the highest
act both of mercy and Justice, that he did not spare his son, that we might
thereby be freed from the punishment due to sin.

Fourthly, it was the highest act of sovereignty; he had an absolute
sovereignty over all the creation before: he gives what Law he will, and
appoints to what end he will: but for the Son to become a servant, he that
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, and yet to take upon him the form
of a servant, etc. and to be made under the Law, herein the sovereignty of God
was marvellously declared, etc. therefore if God will manifest himself unto the
world, there is more seen of him in Christ then can be in all the creatures in
heaven and earrh.

Secondly, for Communication of himself in the highest way. Now this is the
highest way of all other: for the ground of Communication is union: and the
higher the union is, the more glorious the Communication. Now the Lord having
taken the Lord Christ into the highest union with the Godhead, there must
needs be the fullest Communication, and so God will dispense nothing unto the
creatures but by the son, 1 Ioh. 5.11. and the more abundantly the Lord does
communicate himself unto Christ, the more gloriously will Christ communicate
himself unto us; for he has made him the second Adam, A public person, a
fountain, a common Treasury, and by him he will dispense himself to us;
therefore in respect of God the Father, whether we consider Gods intention by
manifestation, or self-communication, Christ is the fittest Instrument to
accomplish Gods ends in respect of God.

Secondly, in respect of us, and so Gods ends are set down, Luke 2.14. peace
and good will toward men: reconciliation and communion; and there is a fitness
in Christ for them both.

First, for reconciliation; there must be satisfaction given unto God,
something answerable to the wrong that God has sustained by sin; for it must
be (...), for if he will make the peace, he must pay the debt; and this none
was able to do but Christ. Consider, sin has wronged God in point of goods,
and has destroyed all the creatures; but Christ has a world to lay down, for
he is heir of all things, he is haeres natus, and he lays down his natural
right, and takes it by a new title, as it were, Heb. 1.3. he is become haeres
constitutus, an heir appointed, etc. Sin did wrong God in point of service, it
took away the service of all the creatures from him, but now Jesus Christ
becoming a servant, he can do God more service then all men or Angels could
have done to eternity, and that in a higher and far more glorious way: and sin
did also wrong God in point of honor; and there it is impossible for a
creature to make satisfaction. If all the Stars should be Ecclipsed, they do
never answer an Eclipse of the Sun, it is nothing in comparison of the Suns
Eclipse; but if the Sun should be contented to be Ecclipsed, as Christ the Sun
of righteousness, he who in glory thought it no robbery to be equal with him:
and Ioh. 17.2. he had a glory with God before the world was: and he did lay,
down this glory for a time, and now he having finished his work in the days of
his humiliation, he desires that it may be restored to him again, glorify me
with that glory which I had with thee before the world was: for upon earth he
had emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant; satisfactio est
redditio aequivalentis; but this no creature could do, and therefore none could
make peace for us, or ever accomplish Gods end in our reconciliation.

Secondly, God will take man also into Communion with himself; man is Non solum
instauratus, sed melioratus, Austin.
Austin. And there is none can do it but Christ having once paid the debt, and
received his discharge, the Angel rolled away the stone, as a public Officer,
to let him out of prison; he went unto the Father, and sat down at the right
hand of the Majesty on high, and he that is gone so near unto God who is the
Son of his love, that lies in his bosom, which is the seat of secrets, and of
love, who can give us Communion with him, and bring us unto the Father but he?
Ephesians. 3.12. we have a (...). Who can give Sonship, but he that is the Son? and
who can give an inheritance, but he that is the heir? who can renew our Image,
but he that is the Image of the Father? and who can set us at the right hand of
God, but he that is himself set down there? therefore as union is the highest
ground of the highest Communion, so all the Communion that we have depends upon
the Communion that he has with the Father; and he being the nearest, we have
the greatest ground of boldness and of confidence, when we come unto God by
him: thus he is every way a fit instrument for all the principal ends, whether
they respect God or man.

Secondly, there are some additional ends to be accomplished also, and Christ
suits them all.

First, consider the Lord establishes the earth for the Elects sake; that all
the creatures that are for man's use be not destroyed, it is for the Elects
sake: for Justice did require as speedy vengeance upon men, as it did upon the
Angels, Isa. 49.8. now it is by the second Covenant that God does establish the
earth, by undertaking to pay the debt; for the sentence had been executed
immediately, had not this Covenant taken place; and therefore, Col. 1.17. it is
by him that all things consist, therefore his name is called Adonai, which does
signify a basis, which does support and uphold the building, that it fall not
to ruin.

Secondly, will God have the services of all the creatures brought about unto
him again, that they shall do him more service then ever they should have done,
and bring him in more glory one way or other? 2 Pet. 2.1. they are said to deny
the Lord that bought them: he has bought all the world, some as sons, to live
with him and enjoy him for ever; and some as slaves, as wicked men and Devils,
to do him service: the persons of the one, and the services of the other, 2 Timothy 2.20. the world is a great house, in which are Vessels, some of honor,
and some of dishonor, but all for the masters use: and all the cross actions
and sinful ends of men and Devils, he does as a skilful Physician temper as so
many cross ingredients that make one wholesome medicine: or as a skilful
Musician, out of the discord of several strings, makes a sweet and a pleasant
harmony.

Thirdly, if he will have the world ruled; for according to the rules of the
first Covenant, he will rule men no more, but he must destroy them: and
therefore God the Father cannot govern immediately: together with a change of
the Covenant, there must needs be a change of the Government: Now who shall
govern the world? there is none so fit to do it as Christ himself; and
therefore Isa. 9.6. the Government is upon his shoulders. Ioh. 5.23. and
therefore the Saints of God do rejoice in this, that the Lord raigns, and that
not only in the Church, as some have conceived, but in all the Kingdoms of the
world, Psalm 8. Heb. 2. What is man that thou rememberest him? thou have put
all things in subjection to him: and for him are all things: and by him are all
things: it is spoken of him as Mediator, God-man, Ephesians. 1. ult. he is made head
over all things to the Church; over the Church, and over all things in the
world for the Churches sake, and so he is the person that dispenses both
Covenants, and he is the great Executioner of all the decrees of God: for God
has committed all Judgment to the Son; yea, as he is the son of man.

Fourthly, will God have the creatures reconciled one to another? there is none
so fit to do it as Christ; sin did make a breach in the whole creation: and
when man sinned, all the creatures became enemies to him, and one to another,
that a man is afraid of the stones of the field; Job 5.23.
but now in Christ there is an (...), Ephesians. 1.10. and in him Angels and men are
reconciled, Ioh. 1. ult. and all the creatures, Hos. 2.18. there is a Covenant
that the Lord made with the beasts, and the creeping things, etc. So that being
one with Christ, all the creatures being his servants, they do all become your
servants, Heb. 1.14. 1 Cor. 3. ult. all things are yours, for ye are Christ's,
and Christ is Gods.

Fifthly, would God have the creatures not only restored but enriched? First,
those inferior creatures that the sin of man has defaced, as we see in this
earth, but the old ruins of glory, and the beauty of them all is gone, 2 Pet.
3.13. we look for new heavens, and a new earth, etc. Acts 3.21. there shall
come a time of the restoration of all things; and who shall do this? Rev.
21.5. he says, Behold I make all things new: and it is admirable to consider
the restoration of things, and that golden age which the Lord has promised in
the latter days of the world, when all persecuting Monarchies shall be taken
down etc.

Secondly, in men, will the Lord not only restore, but redeem; melioratus est;
he will give them a higher righteousness, the righteousness of God in him, even
that righteousness to which the Godhead gave efficacy and excellency; the
members of Christ have a higher and a nearer union then the Angels had; for
theirs was but a moral union, but the Saints have a mystical union, and a
higher Sonship then the Angels had; for theirs was but by creation, but ours
by adoption, and a more glorious inherirance in this that we enter into our
Masters Joy, etc.

Thirdly, the Angels that never fell have, First, a glorious head in him, who
has undertaken both guidance and influence.

Secondly, a high employment, principalities and powers, which came in with the
second Covenant; when Christ's administration upon earth shall cease, then also
he will put down all rule, and authority and power, etc.

Thirdly, they receive the Spirit of God that acts them, Ezekiel. 1.12. and they
receive many gifts from this spirit, even a spirit of Prophecy, Rev. 19.10.

Sixthly, will God have the world Judged? there is none fit but he that is the
Son of man to Judge the world; Acts 17.31. he will Judge the world by the man
whom he has appointed; and who is able to do this but Christ? to take the
accounts of all the world, or tell them what they owe unto God, and what is due
in punishments or rewards from God unto them again, he only can open the Books:
the Book of Conscience, and the Book of Gods decrees: and discover the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart, etc. and when
he has performed this last and great service, and given up the Kingdom of the
Church to God the Father, then God shall be all in all in the Son, as well as
in the Saints: and it will appear that he is the highest end, and his glory the
utmost aim of both: and that all the glory that Christ has, he has as the
Fathers servant, and so it is with the Saints also, etc.

Thus if we consider all the ends of God, Christ has in him a fitness that
does answer them all.

Use 1.
Take notice of the goodness of God in this: it was a great mercy to provide a
Mediator, and an act merely of free grace: and to do all this for you when you
fell from him, when he did not catch after the Angels but let them go; but the
Lord adds to his mercy much in the suitableness of it, that your Mediator
should be taken up amongst your brethren, and he that sanctifies, and they that
are sanctified to be of one; for it is the suitableness of the mercy that does
make it much the greater; for God to give Adam a help, when amongst the
creatures there was none found, was a mercy; but now for the Lord to give him a
meet help, a friend of a suitable spirit; and a calling suitable to a man's
disposition (for all sweetness does arise from fitness) O what a great mercy is
this, for God to give a man such a relation, which is as his own soul! Now how
should this sweeten the Lord Christ unto a man? and how should we study his
suitableness unto Gods ends? as he is Gods servant, we should labor to bring
our hearts into such a holy frame that the Lord may delight in our suitableness
also, with all his ends and purposes; we should take comfort in a suitable
wife, estate, employment, but above all in a meet Mediator.

Secondly, this does plainly argue, that God will give us all things, Romans
8.32. A wise builder does make his building in some measure answerable to the
foundation; surely he that has laid a foundation of Saphires, he will not
build upon it mud-walls, and cover them with a roof of straw; he has laid the
foundation in Christ his only son: and if he did not spare him, surely he will
with him give us all things, etc. So he that has fitted you with a Mediator
answerable to all Gods ends and your ends, he will surely fit you with all
things; so that thou shall want nothing that thou standst in need of: he will
give thee a suitable estate, and feed thee with food convenient for thee; he
will dispense mercies to thee in the fittest time, for the Lord waits to be
gracious; he takes measure of men's spirits; you may think, It would be fit for
me to have such a mercy, but the Lord denies it you; let me tell thee, mercies
in thy time, without Gods time, will do thee hurt: if thou have a mercy before
thou be ripe for it, before God see a fitness in thee to receive it, it will be
unseasonable; God takes measure of men's spirits I say, and defers mercies that
his children long for, till they be made meet to receive them; therefore if God
withold any good thing from thee, do you conclude, Surely it is not fit for
me; for else he that has fitted us with a Mediator, he would never fail to fit
you with all things else.

Use 2.
If an instrumental fitness be an honor to Christ, then it must needs be so
unto us, to be vessels of honor fitted for the Masters use: and here Consider,

First, to be employed by God is the greatest honor to the creature, as the
greatest dishonor is for God to lay a man aside, 2 Timothy 2.21. etc. The great
title of honor that Moses had, was the Lords owning him as his servant, Moses
my servant, etc. and David my servant: and the Angels, their great honor lies
in their services, they are principalities and powers, Romans 15.20. but in all
this they are ministering spirits; and Paul, yea so have I strived to Preach
the Gospel, (...). He looked upon it as his duty, and as his glory also: their
ambition lay in this, who should do most work, not who should receive most
wages; truly to be a Doorkeeper, Psalm. 84.10. the meanest office, the lowest
employment for God is an honor to the greatest Prince in the world: and
therefore if the Lord employ men in eminent services, it is the greater favor
and the greater honor.

Secondly, it is a great honor to be useful amongst the creatures; Eliakim was
highly exalted by God, I will fasten him as a nayl in a sure place, etc. Isa.
22.23,24. Much people shall hang upon him, etc. Mich. 5.7. And the remnant of
Jacob shall be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord; and Elijah a
man mighty serviceable to God in his generation, he is called the Chariot of
Israel, and the horsemen thereof, etc. It is the honor of godliness to be
profitable for all things, etc.

Thirdly, the Lord is exceedingly pleased with the services of his people, Hos.
9.10. I found Israel as grapes in the Wilderness, etc. but they are then more
specially acceptable, if their services proceed from a spirit suited and
prepared for them: for a good work from an unprepared heart, is a provocation
unto God, and a sign of hypocrisy in the man, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. and truly if our
services be not acceptable to God, they will never be comfortable unto us.

Question.
The great Question therefore which we should study all our days, should be,
What will make a man fit for service?

I will give you a few things briefly.

First, he that will be fitted for service, must be acted by the same principle
Christ was, and he must do all from a principle of union and unction; Christ
did his from a personal union, and from an unction without measure, being
clothed with the Spirit; but we, from a mystical union, and an unction from
the same spirit, according to our measure, 1 John 2.20. having received this
spirit as a spirit of regeneration and sanctification: for there are no
services of an unregenerate man, that can either please God or profit himself,
because of the corrupt principle from which they flow; for he prays from the
same principle that he sins, and the spirit of Satan does as truly work in him
in the one, as it does in the other; and therefore his religious performances
are turned into sins, only his sins proceed from a principle of open enmity,
and his duties from a principle of secret flattery. Semen naturae, etc. and
therefore says Luther, Bona opera non faciunt bonum virum, sed vir bonus facit
opera bona: Luther.
A good tree brings forth good fruit: fructus non faciunt arbores bonas vel
malas. The tree goes before the fruit, and the fruit is answerable to it;
therefore if the tree be evil, and thou have not in thee an inward principle of
union and unction, thou art not fitted for service, etc.

Secondly, Christ was fitted for service by this, that as he did not his own
will, so he sought not his own glory, but did all his services from a principle
of self-denial. I seek not mine own glory, but the glory of him that sent me;
that was all the gain he sought for, that his Father should be glorified: Non
tantum possessio, sed proprietas acquiritur a Domino. There is a twofold
faithfulness, as there is a twofold integrity: there is an uprightness
particularly in some one act, as there was in Abimelech, In the integrity of my
heart did I this, Genesis 20.6. and Isa. 8.2. and I took unto me faithful
witnesses, Uriah the Priest, who was not faithful to the things of God, etc. a
man may be faithful in particular actions between man and man, and yet be very
false and unfaithful in the universal course of his life between him and God,
as this Uriah was, who made the new fashioned Altar for Ahaz. Whilst the Lord
Christ was upon earth, he had not the possession of any thing in the earth;
though he was Lord of al, he was maintained by the benevolence of his servants,
denied himself in his honor, and in his ease, had no will of his own, but the
will of duty overcame the will of nature: O why should not we aspire to be like
our Master! etc. but how few make this example theirs! Hos. 10.11. Men are
willing to tread out the corn, etc. but it is hard to find men that in service
are carried with a single eye; it is easy with Jehu to pretend Reformation,
and also proffer to do much for God, under a cloak of covetousness or
pre-eminence, to make themselves rich and great; I fear that is the design of
many, and its strange to see what poor respects will sway with men in this
kind, in things of the greatest consequence, as Saul, honor me before the
people; and Mal. 1. the Table of the Lord is polluted by the Priests, they
offered polluted bread, they would have been glad it had been better, but the
people were newly come out of Captivity, and did snuff at the sacrifices, and
therefore they said they must take what the people would bring, else they
should get nothing; the worship of God would cease they thought, potius omnia
rejiciunt; and so men do, (...); Men that bend with the times, and maintain
truth in an artificial middle way, etc.

Thirdly, Christ did all his services from a principle of love and desire to
please God, Joh. 14. ult. he did all, that the world may know that I love the
Father. Christ indeed loved the Church, but his great argument that prevailed
most with him, is love to his Father: Amor est pondus animae: the byas of his
soul: Amore desiderii, to be united to him; Amore complacentiae, delighting in
him; and the love of benevolence too returns all to him again; for this
principle lies at his heart as coals of Juniper, etc. and all this was to
please God; for Christ did not please himself in what he did; there is
self-pleasing, and men-pleasing, which acts many men in their services; but
there are few with Christ and Paul, that do all they do that they may please
God. John 8.29. I am not alone, but the Father is with me, for I do always the
things that please him, etc.

Fourthly, Christ was zealous for God in all things, and the things of God were
dear to him: with how much earnestness does he assert the truth against the
Heretics, the Pharisees, Sadduces, and Herodians in his time? he whipped buyers
and sellers out of the Temple: nay if his Disciple be an Instrument of Satan,
he says, Get thee behind me Satan, etc. 2 Ioh. 10. if they bring not this
word, receive them not: give them no entertainment, show no friendship to them,
nor familiarity with them, least you thereby encourage them in an evil way, as
Polycarpus says to Marcion the Heretic, Novi^te esse primogenitum Satanae.
Men are but as Carbuncles, have a great show of zeal for God, but when they
come to act any thing, they are key-cold, etc. Translucent ad modum ardentis
prunae.

Fifthly, he acted with resolution, and was not discouraged for want of
success. Isa. 49.4. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for
naught, etc. Yet surely my Judgment is with thee, etc.

There is a curse pronounced upon him that does the work of the Lord
negligently, or deceitfully, etc. and he says, though Israel were not
gathered, my reward is with the Lord. Duty is ours, success is Gods, should be
a Christians Motto; when we undertake any service for God, we should cast our
burden upon him alone, all the burden of success: for many men do promise
themselves much success, and undertake a great service for God, and think to go
through the difficulties they meet withal, yet afterward they say as he did,
Old Adam is too strong for young Melancthon, etc.

Sixthly, Christ did serve God so in his public Ministry, that he neglected
not his private Communion; he Preached publicly all the day, when it might
have been said, Master spare thy self; yet he got into a Mountain at night
alone to pray: he rose up a great while before it was day, to spend some time
in secret fellowship with God: and is not this our duty to maintain our private
Communion? It is an evil way we are all subject to, to neglect private benefits
to our souls, under the pretense of public service and employments: and let me
tell you, sins of omission at the last day will be their destruction, when many
shall guash their teeth and say, I have been employed in saving Kingdoms: I
bore up the Pillars of the earth, but now I am shut out: I have been employed
in that great work in saving souls, but now I my self am a castaway: I shone
as a star upon earth, but now I must for ever be in the horror of darkness. Oh
who would not tremble at these sad apprehensions, and labor for a suitable
frame of spirit with the Lord Christ, in all our services! that the Lord may
say unto us, Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord.

THE MYSTERIES OF PROVIDENCE.
Preached at Paul's, Aug. 18. 1650.
EZEKIEL. 1. ver. 16. the close of it. And their appearance and their work was as
it were a wheel in the middle of a wheel.


THE scope of this Chapter sets forth the Providence of God in the Government
of the world; for all things pass under a Providence: he that made all things
to their ends, does rule and act all things unto the same ends. This is set
forth by a threefold Vision in this Chapter: and those three Visions present
unto you a fourfold subordination of causes in the Providential Kingdom of
God; for I must a little give you light into the whole Chapter.

First you find in the 26. verse (for that is first in nature, though it be
last in place) there is a Firmament, and upon it the likeness of a Throne; and
one sits upon the Throne in appearance like the Son of man; this is the Lord
Jesus Christ, the glory of God in the person of the Mediator, into whose hands
the Providential Kingdom of God is committed, together with the change of the
Government: There was a necessity of the change of the Government; therefore
Ioh. 5.22. the Father Judges no man, but he has committed all Judgment unto
the Son: for which cause God the Father calls Christ the Mediator my King; he
rules for him: he is my King, Psalm. 2.6. There is a twofold Kingdom of God
committed to the Mediator, the man Christ Jesus: the spiritual Kingdom by which
he rules in the hearts of his people: so he is King of Saints. The providential
Kingdom likewise by which he rules in the affairs of the world, and so he is
the King of Nations. Christ now is described here, as being King in the
Providential Kingdom; that is the first in the Order of causes, in the
Government of the world.

Secondly, Christ, though the Government be committed unto him, yet he does not
rule immediately, but he rules all things by the spirit, and that in the
Providential, as well as in the Spiritual Kingdom: that is set forth to you in
the 12. and the 20. verses of this Chapter; Whether the Spirit was to go, they
went; and wheresoever the Spirit was to go, thither was their Spirit also for
to go. Here is a Spirit that acts the Angels as well as the Saints, and all
inferior Agents. The Spirit is the Viceroy of Christ; Mark what I say: as
Christ is Gods Pro-Rex, and rules for him; so the Spirit I say of the Mediator
is the Viceroy of Christ, and rules for Christ in the administration of all
things; therefore observe, though it is true the Spirit of Christ is not to the
Angels a principle of Sanctification; for they stand in the same righteousness
in which they were created: yet the Spirit is unto the Angels a Spirit of
direction, and that in all their ways, Rev. 19.10. the Angels receive a Spirit
of Prophecy from Christ. I am of your Brethren the Prophets, says the Angel
there: an Angel, a Prophet? yes, and he that has the testimony of Jesus; what
is the testimony of Jesus? the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy:
Why then the Angels have a spirit of Prophecy from Christ: the Spirit of Christ
the Mediator is the principle of their Doctrine, though not of their
Sanctification. That is the second thing in the Order of causes in the
Government of all things.

Thirdly, this Spiritacteth the living creatures: that is the third Vision;
that is the third subordination: you read in the beginning of this Chapter, of
a Vision of living creatures, with four faces, etc. What were these living
creatures? why look into the 10. Chap. and the 20. verse, you have it there
expounded by the Spirit, I perceived (says the Prophet) that they were the
Cherubims; the living creatures that are there spoken of were the Cherubims;
they are the Angels that be called the living creatures: for this cause the
Angels now being employed by Christ in the Government of the world, they be
called in Scripture Principalities and Powers. There is a double Government
come into the world with the Kingdom of Christ, that should never have been
else; the government of Angels, the Government of Magistrates; it is true, both
are eminent Ordinances of God, but yet both introduced and occasioned by sin: a
natural subjection of man to man there should have been, if man had not falen;
but a civil subjection of man to man there should not have been: Nomen istud
culpa meruit and non natura, Austin:
says Austin: and for that cause, when Christ shall give up the Kingdom to the
Father, he will put down both these: the authority of Magistrates, and the
authority of Angels: he will put down all rule, and all authority, and power:
these authorities began with the Kingdom of Christ: and before Christ shall
give up the Kingdom to the Father, he will put them all down. Calvin.
So Mr. Calvin expounds the place, in 1 Cor. 15.24. Consider then the spirit of
Christ: Christ sends forth his spirit: the spirit acts the Angels: that is
the third in the subordination of causes: Only my beloved, there are two
strange benefits that the people of God have by the Government of Angels.
First, the Angels rule for them. Secondly, the Angels pray for them: the Angels
rule for them, Heb. 1.14. they are ministering spirits for the good of the
Elect; he gives his Angels charge over thee: Then the Angels pray for them: see
an Angel praying to Christ, Zach. 1.12. and thereupon Christ prays to the
Father: here an Angel prays for the Church, and attaineth an answer of
prayer, Dan. 4.16,17. the thing is by the decree of the Watchers, and the
demand by the command of the Holy ones: it is spoken of the Judgment brought
upon that great tyrant and oppressor Nebuchadnezzar: the demand, you shall read
that in the petition: the request, it is the request of the Watchers: so the
Angels are called; and I remember it is an observation Origin has, when we
pray (says he) there are millions of heavenly Angels, Celestial Spirits do
join with us, they do pray with us, unspoken to, unasked. Then I entreat you
consider, that is the third subordination in the Government of all things.

Fourthly, the fourth in this subordination, in the Government of the world,
is, the Spirit rules the Angels, the living creatures. But then here is another
Vision, a Vision of Wheels: I, so all things here below are called; it is
resembled to the Moon, because it is in a continual change, Rev. 12. that is to
say, they have the Moon under their feet: resembled to the Sea, Dan. 7.2.
because the Sea is in perpetuo fluxu, it is always ebbing, and flowing, never
at a stay: there is an unquiet principle in it self: So here suitable
thereunto, it is resembled unto Wheels: why? they are in continuo motu, always
moving, they are never at a stay; their very form of which they are made,
fitteth them for nothing else: all things here below are compared to wheels.
Now I entreat you consider, who it is that acts these wheels: Christ sends
the Spirit, the Spirit acts the living creatures: Now the living creatures
are the wheels, and the Text says, the Spirit of the living creatures is in
the Wheels: In the 20. verse so it is said, When the living creatures moved,
then the Wheels moved; when the living creatures stood, then the Wheels stood:
Why? because the Spirit of the living creatures is in the wheels; the Spirit of
Christ acts the Angels, the Angels have a great influence in the acting of
things below. Now concerning these wheels, here are seven things spoken: and
truly they are all of them weighty truths; truths of very exceeding great
consequence, and of very great use for the present times; and therefore I shall
in a word offer them to your consideration. This, that is in the text is the
last of them.

First, in the 18. verse it is said, the Rings of these wheels are full of eyes
within; things in the world are not carried by the wills of men, coeco impetu,
by a kind of blind force, as if men ruled the world: No, my Brethren, in all
the turnings that there are in the world, know, the wheels be full of eyes; all
things are carried and ordered by a wise and a foreseeing Providence.

Secondly, the wheels go upon their four sides, in the 17. verse, that is, they
are constant, and settled in their motion: men may turn from one side to
another, as it is common for them to do; they may change their principles, and
act quite contrary: they may destroy that which formerly they have endeavored
to build; but yet notwithstanding the wheels go upon their four sides still;
there is no turning of Providence out of that way: you may use your art, you
may use your power, use your policy, the Wheels will still go on upon their
four sides: Gods providence is stable, and settled in its motion.

Thirdly, the wheels return not when they go: that is another; God has not in
ways of Providence retrograde motions: when the Lord begins, he does use to
make an end: in decretis sapientum nulla est litura: wise men make no blots: if
God go forth against a people, if God go forth against a person, truly, the
Lord carries on his work: as the wheels are constant in their motion, so
likewise they are so settled, that they are carried on, there is no returning;
they returned not as they went.

Fourthly, the Rings are said to be high, and exceeding dreadful, in the 18.
verse. The actings of Providence are very terrible: I say the actings of
Providence are very terrible: when men look upon them with an eye of reason,
truly they cannot but stand amazed; when you shall see God cutting short the
Spirit of Princes, plucking up Kingdoms, destroying families, deposing Kings:
when you shall see the Lord causing the Mountains to skip, and the Towers to
fall; the Rings be exceeding high, and therefore exceeding dreadful: such high
actings of Providence when they are seriously considered, cannot but strike
terror in the minds of men.

Fifthly, the wheels are sometimes lifted up from the earth: Mark ye, so the
text says: sometimes they go upon the earth: Providence acts in an ordinary
way; sometimes the Wheels are lifted up from the earth, they go out of the
ordinary rode; God acts in extraordinary ways of Providence. Now I entreat
you consider, the Lord does not go always by ruled cases: many times rules are
prescribed, but none must prescribe to him; many times the Wheels are lifted up
from the earth.

Sixthly, the Wheels sometimes stand, they do not always go; for so you see,
when the living creatures stood, the Wheels stood over against them: they
sometimes stand I say, they do not always go: there is many times a seeming
cessation of Providence; Pray observe it; there is many times I say, a seeming
cessation of Providence; the Angels seem to let down their wings, and the
Wheels seem to be at a stand: many times things are becalmed, that you would
think surely now the business is like never to go on, all things are at a
stand: by and by the spirit of God acts the living creatures: the living
creatures again, they act the Wheels: You know how it was in the building of
the Temple, sometimes the work was at a stand for diverse years together; by and
by the Spirit of God stirred up the heart of some one or other again, and then
the work was revived, then the Wheels went again. Consider I humbly pray you;
sometimes there seems to be a cessation of Providence, but yet the Lord will
carry on his work.

In the last place: and so I come to the text. Thereis a Wh^el in the middle of
a Wheel: there is a double interpretation given of it; you may do very well to
take in both, though it is the last that I shall stick to. A Wheel in the midst
of a Wheel.

First, it notes motionem transversam: I say there is in it motio transversa;
that is, it implies a motion that is cross and thwarting, like the motions of
Watches, or some curious work, where one Wheel moves one way, and yet it acts
another Wheel that moves quite the contrary way; this is Gods ordinary way in
Providence; he accomplisheth things by transverse, and cross and contrary
motions. So you may observe a Saul laboring for to establish the Kingdom upon
his Posterity, was the great means to settle the Crown upon David's head: God
does many times carry on things by a transverse (I say) and a contrary motion.

Secondly, there is likewise not only a transverse motion, but there is also
motio complexa, a complex motion: and so the word signifies, a Wheel in the
midst of a Wheel: a motion that is intricate, entangled one in another, like to
some curious waterworks, that you shall see the Wheels do not only turn cross,
contrary one to another, and one wheel moving this way, shall act another wheel
moving that way; but withal, it is a hard matter for a man that is not skilful
in the Art, to be able to discern which way it is the Wheels are turned so one
within another. A man that is not skilful in a Globe, would wonder to know what
the meaning of those many lines and circles should be; they all go one within
another: so, here is a wheel in the midst of a wheel; Providence is so
intricate, so complex, so mysterious, it is impossible for a man that is not an
Artist in Providence, to be able to see the ways, and the goings forth of God
in them. That now is the sense of this Scripture, as I conceive: and the
Observation that I shall give you from it, is this;

Doctrine.
The actings of Providence are very intricate, and mysterious: I say, the
actings of Providence are very intricate and mysterious; that it will pose men
of the greatest parts, and of the greatest graces to be able to discern the
ways of God in them. My Brethren, there is the wisdom of God in a mystery, in
his Works as well as in his Word. This I shall briefly clear to you by a few
instances out of Scripture; then I shall show you some of those intricate and
mysterious actings of Providence for the manifestation of the truth of the
Doctrine, and then shall come to the Application thereof.

First then for the proof of it, take these three instances.

The first is that in Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and darkness are round about him;
righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his Throne: how does the Lord
when he does minister judgment and righteousness in the world, how does he
carry himself? truly he does infold himself in a dark cloud; clouds and
darkness are round about him, says he: as it is said of the Virgin when she
conceived, the spirit of God over-shaddowed her: so my Brethren, the Lord is
pleased to act things in Providence in an over-shaddowing way: that is the
first instance for the proof of it.

Secondly, look into Psalm. 36.6. Thy Judgments are as a great deep, thou
savest both man and beast: it is spoken of the actings of God in the
demonstrations of Providence: and he says, there is no tracing of God, no more
then you could trace a man's footsteps in the bottom of the Sea: thy Judgments
are as a great deep. The Apostle in Romans 11. uses an expression suitable, how
unsearchable are his ways! ways that are without footsteps, you cannot trace
them, you cannot say, here God has gone, he has walked so mysteriously: how
unsearchable are his ways, and his wisdom past finding out.

Thirdly, look into Psalm. 77.19. Thy way is in the Sea, and thy path in the
great waters, and thy foot steps are not known. Why, the actings of God in the
world, they are beyond the reach of the wisest men, the greatest Politicians,
that the truth is, when they look upon the ways of Providence, they cannot yet
tell whether God will go forward, or backward: for his way is in the Sea, and
his path in the great waters, his foot steps are not known: actings of
Providence are very intricate, and mysterious: a wheel in the midst of a wheel.
I will give you some instances of it, that by this means, the meaning of the
Doctrine may be the more clearly seen. There are six instances as projects of
providence, that I shall set before you, wherein you must acknowledge that the
Lord works very mysteriously.

The first is this, God carries on all things by a secret and an invisible
virtue, that though you see the hand without, yet you see not the spring
within. It is said of the Angels, the living creatures, that they had wings,
but they had the hands of a man under their wings: the hand; what is the hand?
it is symholum roboris, it is instrumentum operationis, it is an expreffion of
strength, it is the great instrument of action; Now there were hands put forth,
they worked effectually; I, but secretly; the hands be under their wings: so
observe I beseech you, there is a Spirit of the living creatures in the wheels:
the text says, all things are acted by a secret, a hidden, and an invisible
virtue: that though there do nothing appear, yet still the thing is carried on,
no body can tell how; For instance; The Lord would build the Temple: there was
the highest opposition that could be: a Samaritan faction at home, and that
backed with the power of the whole Persian Empire: yet notwithstanding there is
an invisible virtue carries on the work: that all this power cannot hinder, but
this mountain must become a plain before Zerubabel, Zach. 4.7. Well, that is
first, it must needs be mysterious I say, because, though you see the actings
without, yet there is an invisible virtue within, that you do not see.

Secondly, men's spirits are many times raised unto an extraordinary pitch
beyond the spirits of men: drawn out to higher resolutions, they pitch upon
higher thoughts and purposes then ever the times require: why now mark, here is
a mystery in this, that at one time a man should rise higher then at another
time, and their resolutions, and courages rise higher, and they should dare to
encounter with those difficulties that even formerly they did tremble to think
of: What is the reason of it? Oh here is the mystery of Providence; in Zach.
12.8. the weak shall be as David, and David as an Angel of God: What is that?
why, the Lord makes it as a special promise; he says, how he would raise the
spirits of men, that he that formerly was weak, weak in body, weak in heart, he
should now be as David, as valiant, and as stout a Soldier, as skilful and
expert in war, as ready to encounter with the greatest difficulties, and look
the stoutest Giant in the face; the weak shall be as David; and David a man
that had but such a degree of spirit as David had, now truly he should have the
spirit of an Angel: Mark ye, God raises the spirits of men; a mighty mystery
of Providence lies in it: When the worm Jacob shall thresh Mountains: I, when
it is a worm, and a worm shall undertake to encounter Mountains: When a Barley
Cake shall overthrow a Tent; when Cities shall be like to figgs that fall into
the mouths of the eater: and Captains and valiant men shall be like those
Grass-hoppers in a Sunnyday; here is a great mystery of Providence, that they
that are men of might at one time, shall not find their hands at another: What
is the reason? My Brethren, the works of Providence are very intricate and
mysterious.

In the third place; God puts impressions and apprehensions upon men many
times, that they run to their own ruins: I say, there be apprehensions raised,
and left upon the spirits of men, that they run to their own ruin, as the
horse rusheth into the Battle: sometimes impressions of discouragement: Mark,
Judges 7. there was a man dreamed that a Barley Cake over-threw a Tent; God sets
on an impression of discouragement: this is nothing (say they) but the sword of
the Lord, and the sword of Gideon.

Sometimes impressions of encouragements, 2 King. 3.22,23. this is a strange
story. There comes out a mighty Army of the Moabites to encounter with the
Israelites: in the morning as the Sun began to rise, they saw the Sun shine
upon the water, and it looked red like blood: presently, what was the
impression? say they presently, the Kings have destroyed one another; arise
Moab to the spoil: Mark, God set on such an impression, such an apprehension
upon their spirits, that they by this means run on to their own ruin, as you
shall see in the ensuinng story. And so likewise when the Red sea was divided
before the children of Israel, such a desperate spirit seized upon Pharaoh,
that in their pursuit he should follow them into the Red Sea. Consider, here
lies the mystery of Providence, God sets on such an apprehension upon the
spirits of men, that they shall run on to their own ruin.

In the fourth place: God many times raises up Instruments, and he qualifies
them for his work: girding up their loins, and strengthening their hands, that
they shall go through that at one time, that you would have thought ten
thousand instruments could not have done it at another. This now is Gods
season. Cyrus, the Lord raised him up; I will hold his hands (says he) I will
gird his loins, Isa. 45.1,2. and then God lays the same instrument aside again
at another time: Mark, many times the Lord will make a combination, and there
shall be a conjunction of Instruments, and afterward the Lord will make use of
these, even to destroy one another: here are the mysteries of Providence.
Abimilech and the men of Shechem join, they make him King; who would have
thought but that certainly the men of Schechem would have stuck to Abimelech
for ever, having now renounced the house of Jerubaal? but mark, when they had
done the work that God appointed, their conjunction falls: why then, then fire
comes out of Abimelech and devoures the men of Shechem, and fire comes out of
the men of Shechem and destroys Abimelech: Here now are the strange mysteries
of Providence.

In the fifth place: God many times destroys men by those means by which in
all humane judgment they think they shall be preserved: I say, God does
usually destroy men by those means by which in humane judgment they think they
shall be preserved. The people of Israel when they were in any necessity, then
by and by unto King Jareb, which some expound to be a helping King: sometimes
in the way of Assyria, sometimes in the way of Egypt; yet notwithstanding, they
were destroyed by those that they brought in to their help. When Israel was
low, why truly they would needs have a King: the King ruined their Nation
almost: the earth is weak (I should read it) the Land is weak, and the
inhabitants thereof, I should bear up the Pillars thereof: Saul was weak, and
destroyed the Land. When David came to the Crown, he did bear up the Pillars
thereof: I beseech you consider it, it is an ordinary thing therefore, Isa.
44.25. the Lord turns wise men backward; the meaning of it is; take all their
counsels, and the events no way answer the design, but the quite contrary. the
quite contrary unto what they did design is brought to pass; wise men are
turned back. Now these are the strange actings of Providence. They bound Paul
that he should not preach: My bonds tend to the furtherance of the Gospel. They
banished the Church out of Jerusalem, on purpose that so they might have
destroyed it: but that is the Churches preservation, when Jerusalem is
destroyed. These are the strange actings of Providence.

In the last place: when things are brought to the lowest ebb, the means
weakest, and the confidence of the enemy and their expectation highest, then
many times God is pleased to destroy the power of the mighty. When Gideon has
but three hundred men, he is fit to fight Gods Battles; yea, Sisera must fall
by the hand of a woman. This is mighty considerable, in Nahum 1.10. When they
are drunk as the drunkards, and folden together as thorns: that is, when they
are unanimous as one man, their combination strong, they are folded together as
thorns, you cannot pull them asunder, and by this means they are drunk with
confidence as a drunkard; for such a drunkenness is there spoken of: What then?
they shall then be consumed like stubble that is dry: they are never so near
destruction; these are the mysterious actings of Providence; why certainly then
the Government of the world is like a Wheel in a Wheel; the actings of
Providence are very intricate and mysterious. I am sorry the time has so
out-gone me: indeed it was the Application I aimed at. Let this serve for the
Explicatory part: let us now come to the Application.

If this be so, I have two Uses to make of it; but it is the last I shall
insist upon.

The first is; In all actings of Providence subscribe to his wisdom.

The second is: In all actings of Providence submit to his will. Well, these
are the two Uses.

First, I say, If there be such great mysteries in Providence, then subscribe
to his wisdom; acknowledge that God only is able to govern the world: he is
wonderful in counsel, and mighty in working. Luther.
I remember it was a handsome reproof that Luther did once give to Philip
Melancthon when the Protestant cause lay very much at the stake: Melancthon was
mightily troubled how things would go: Luther sent him this message, Monendus
est Philippus (says he) ut desinat esse mundi gubernator: you must admonish
Melancthon that he leave off to govern the world: alas government of the world
belongs to God: Subscribe to his wisdom; say only, that he is fit to rule the
world. That I did think a little to have enlarged my self upon, but I dare not,
because I shall transgress. But the second I would willingly, though I beg a
little time of you to speak something of it

As you should subscribe to his wisdom, because his providence is mysterious.
So likewise submit to his will, I say submit to his will. Oh, it is a sad
thing, that those that profess obedience unto Gods commanding will, should yet
harbor in their souls so much discontent at Gods effecting will then
notwithstanding. Truly, this is an evil that may befall a gracious heart. I will
give you the example of a Saint: Jonah, in Jonah 4. God had caused a Gourd to
spring up as a shade to Jonah in the night, and the Lord smote the Gourd at the
root and it withered: the text says, Ionahs heart rejoiced because of the
Gourd, his heart was shortened to the present contentment, and upon that cause
God takes away the Gourd: Jonah is angry with this act of God. Now, I entreat
you, if it be but a small content, a conceit, a petty advantage, why yet
notwithstanding, if God act contrary to my design, that party goes not up that
I would have, it may be, or I have not those ways of advantage, or friends one
way, that I could make another, for that cause truly that man is angry; this is
(consider I beseech you) this is the true cause of all the grudgings in the
world, and of all those repinings and discontentments that there are in the
world, because men do not submit their wills unto the effecting will of God.
Now, I beseech you be pleased to observe two or three things.

Observe in the first place; you sin in this in a high degree in three things;
you sin in a high degree.

First, you exalt your wisdom above Gods, and it is as much as if you should
say: truly, things go not so well now as I could wish them; if the government
of the world were in my power, truly matters should be better ordered; you do
plainly say so; that party should prevail, that I would have prevail, and those
ways should be carried on that I would have; for, (my Brethren) he that
corrects another man's act, does in that (at least) suppose he is wiser then
he.

Secondly, hereby you exalt your wills above Gods, your will is the rule of
goodness, not Gods. Now I entreat you observe, was the Devil ever guilty of
higher Atheism then this? for a man to say, it is true, thus, and thus it is,
and I must needs acknowledge it, that God judges the world: but yet I should
rather have judged it to have been better if it had been thus: what is this to
say? truly, this is my will that is the rule of goodness, and not Gods: for if
it had been as I would have it, it had been better. You little consider when
men are carried out in passion in such things as these are, you little consider
the abomination of them. Nay,

In the third place, You hereby put God out of his Throne, for the government
of the world; such a man says with Absalom, Here is no man to do you Justice;
if the Government of the world were in my hand, things should not be carried on
with such confusion and disorder; the Church of God should not be brought to
that distress, nor the world put into such disorder as now it is: Consider what
a high sin is this: well, that is the first. But,

In the second place; I entreat you consider this: do you think now when the
Providence of God is so mysterious, and thy will rises against the actings of
Providence, do you think you will turn God out of his way? do you think I say,
that you shall turn God out of his way? No I beseech you, observe it in Isa.
31.2. the Lord will not call back his Word, says the Text; it is not all your
grudging (my Brethren) will make God go back; No, I entreat you, observe there
in the 3. ver. I will rise up against the help of those that work iniquity; I,
both they that work iniquity, and they that help them shall fail together,
says the Text: they and their helpers: it is true, many think by calling in
help, by joining party to party, counsel to counsel, they shall certainly
prevail, and so by this means scatter parties upon different interests and ends
made up into one; Why, but what is the meaning of this? truly, they that could
not prevail by themselves, must never look to prevail by their helpers: says
God, I will rise up against them that help them: do not think you shall turn
God out of his way, because it pleases not you, the way that God goes in: No,
thou may set thy self in a way against God, and fall before him. I will give
you two instances of this: and truly they are very remarkable ones. One is that
of Ahaziah the King of Judah: Ioram the King of Israel is wounded: Ahaziah. his
brother in Law goes down to visit him: you will say, this was but a brotherly
courtesy: was there any harm in this? nothing but civilitie. I, but Ahaziah
goes down at the same time when God was going forth in Judgment against Ioram,
and against the house of Ahab, and what follows? truly, Ahaziah dies in the
way: the same instrument that destroys Ioram, destroys Ahaziah, that he
perishes in civilitie. I will give you another instance of a godly man; so
that you may see it is dangerous to have a preengaged will against the actings
of Providence. Josiah, he wrought the great reformation that was in Judah after
the revolt of the ten Tribes, yet after he had wrought this reformation, yet
this man he must be standing in the way of Gods Providence. Pharo-Neco King of
Egypt was appointed by God to execute a Judgment of God upon Charchemish a
City that belonged to the King of Assyria upon the borders of Euphrates; he
desires Josiah that he might have liberty (that being the shorter cut) to pass
through his Country; Josiah he refuses it, and a man would have thought he
had good reason for it too; he had had a great deal of experience heretofore of
the cruelty of the Egyptians, they had been ill neighbors; and he was likewise
in league and covenant with Nebuchadnezzar the King of Assyria, he did owe
fealty, and allegiance, he had taken the oath of allegiance to him: and what
should he not be faithful to his King? upon this ground now he goes forth. (So
Peter Martyr) -- (So Doctor Usher in his late Chronology) a kind of sudden
fierceness there rose in the man, and what follows? why, truly he dies in
the way. Iosiahs good reforming, tender hearted Josiah, yet he meets God in the
way of his Judgments, and he dies in the way: therefore I say, take heed,
think not your opposition will turn God out of the way: O, submit your wills,
his Providence is mysterious. But that I may a little give you some grounds for
it, for the quieting of your hearts: take notice but of that expostulation
first by the way: take notice of that expostulation of God unto Samuel, 1 Samuel
16. How long will thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him? Saul was not
yet deposed from the Kingdom, Saul reigned still: I, but Gods will was
manifested to Samuel; Samuel mourns, God reproves his mourning: as if he
should have told him: Why do thou dote upon a man, as if the good of the
whole Commonwealth lay upon him? rather look out for better for the time to
come. God does not love those passions, neither will he allow them in his own
people, that cross his will when it is manifested; how long will thou mourn for
Saul, seeing I have rejected him? Now to bring about your wills to the
effecting will of God, I beseech you be pleased but to consider these two or
three things; they are mighty quieting considerations, and so I have done.

In the first place; consider this: all the government of the world is
committed unto Christ, I have told you: I say the Government of the world is
committed unto Christ: the Father judges no man, he has committed all
Judgment to the Son; it is the speech of Christ that acts the living
creatures, and the living creatures act the wheels as you have heard. Now (my
Brethren) should not you be willing to leave all in Christ's hand, seeing God
has committed all into his hands? There is a double title Christ has, he is
bound to be faithful in both.

1. As it is an office, in which he is employed by God the Father: And,

Secondly, as the Church is his own inheritance; Now I entreat you consider,
if all be committed to Christ, the government of all things; then I say, leave
it with submission of will unto that hand into which God the Father has placed
it.

Secondly, I entreat you consider this (which is a mighty quieting
consideration) Christ governs the Providential Kingdom, all for the good of the
Spiritual Kingdom. I say, Christ subordaineth the Kingdom of Providence unto
the Kingdom of grace, Ephesians. 1.22. he is made the head above all things unto the
Church, he undertakes the government of all things for the Churches sake, and
he orders all things for their good, he is the head over all things unto the
Church. It may be alas poor creature, when thou look upon Providence God
walks in the dark to thee: and how Christ will bring good out of all these,
thou can not tell; leave it to him now: he is called the Artist, the skilful
Artist. You have the place, Prove. 8.30. I was by him as one brought up with
him; you read it so. I do a little wonder at the translation: I was by him as
one brought up with him: it is in the Original, I was by him as an Artificer:
you have the same word so translated in Cant. 7.1. by the hand of the cunning
workman; the very same word is used: now it may be, if a man unskilled should
come and look upon a man that were a curious Artist, it may be a Chemist, or
the like, he would wonder how he should be able to bring such great effects out
of such unlikely things: yet notwithstanding the man is contented to look on
with delight, and rests upon the man for his art; for he says, he knows how
to bring it to pass, though I do not. Jesus Christ is a curious Artist; when
you see him, take content in it, and rest: for the art is in him, he knows how
to bring it about, though you do not. That is another very quieting
Consideration. But.

In the third place; the Lord has discovered to us the ends for which he
works, and I am sure his ends shall be effected: Now, if God will carry on
his own ends, truly, what if some of my inferior mistaken ends miss, should I
be discontented? no, let God carry on his own ends; he will carry them on.

But you will say: What are his ends? His ends upon the world at present are
these.

First, he will shake the things that are made, Heb. 12.27. that the things
that cannot be shaken may remain.

Secondly, he will make way for the ruin of Antichrist and Popery in all the
forms of it. I say, that is another end, and that he may destroy Antichrist,
and ruin Popery in all the forms of it. And,

Thirdly, that he may make way for the accomplishment of that glorious
promise; the Kingdoms of the earth shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord and
his Christ. Now I entreat you observe; If these ends of God be carried on, as
they shall certainly be: then, what need have you to be disquieted, because
some of your inferior injudicious mistaken ends be not brought about? truly
this is that that comfort a Godly man: and I confess it has been in all
these troubles and confusions that have been amongst us, the Land reeling too
and fro, staggering like a drunken man, it has been the principal, the main
support to me: a godly man can never miss his utmost end: Now this I know is a
rule the Schoolmen give: finis ultimus perficit tam agentem quam actionem: the
utmost end is that that perfecteth the Agent and the action: the utmost end:
why now that man can never be miserable that attaineth his utmost end. Here is
the misery of all ungodly men, they may attain many inferior ends,
subordinate ends: I, but their utmost end they never obtain, therefore they are
for ever miserable. But now here is the happiness of a Saint, he never fails in
his utmost end: but as Austin says of Gods answering his prayers, he did
answer the hinge of my prayer, that he did: sometimes I prayed for the thing,
but God did not give me the thing: I, but the hinge on which my prayer moved,
that is, that all might tend to Gods glory, and my good, in that God answered
my prayer; and so shall a soul say at last: there were many things that my
mistaken judgment did think would have conduced to such an end; but God saw it
not good: therefore I obtaining my utmost ends, he lets Gods will go on in the
world: and for my part I am satisfied, though many of my inferior ends I miss.
These are the quieting principles that should be in your hearts, when you
submit to the will of God in his mysterious actings in the world. I dare not
detain you any longer. Consider I beseech you what has been spoken, and the
Lord give you wisdom and understanding in all things.

Christ's care in Glory, FOR his Churches good on Earth.
REV. 2. ver. 1. These things says he who holds the seven Stars in his right
hand, who walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks.


THe Works that God the Father gave his Son the Lord Jesus Christ to do, are of
two sorts. They are either Acts of Ministry, or Acts of Majesty: the first he
finished when he was here upon earth: For he said, he had finished the work
given him to do: And he is ascended up to Glory, that so he might perform the
second: (that so he might be both faithful to God, and merciful to you:) For
though he be ascended up into heaven as our Lord, yet he sits in heaven still
as the Fathers Servant: For this Cause though he has changed his place, yet he
has not changed his office: you shall have him therefore in this Book of the
Revelations (which was indicted from heaven) described suitable to all his
offices, according to the various Condition of the Church, as Brightman has
well observed, pro varia Condition Ecclesiae. Brightman.
He is described as the Churches Priest, in Chap. 1. ver. 13. He was seen
wearing a Garment down to his Feet: In allusion to the priestly Ephod, and the
curious Girdle under the Law: for that I understand by that Vestis talaris
there, and not a description of his Imputed righteousness as some conceive it:
then Christ though he be in glory, remains the Churches Priest: for he wears
his Priestly Garments there.

And he remains still the Churches King, in Chap. 4. ver. 3. I saw a throne,
and one that sat upon it was to look upon like to a Jasper and a Sardix stone,
spoken of Gods ruling the Church in the Person of his Son.

And he is described to be the Churches Leader and Commander. In Rev. 19. ver.
11, 12. His eyes are like a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns.
Clothed with a vesture dipped in blood: And the Armies that were in heaven
followed him upon white Horses.

And he is described as the Churches Prophet too. In Chap. 6. ver. 7. There he
is set forth as a Lamb that has seven horns and seven eyes: And he came and
took the Book out of the hand of him that sat upon the throne, and opens the
seals thereof: And therefore he it is that receives all the discoveries of God
toward his Church; and he it is that does dispense it unto the Church. Chap 6.
ver. 2. And there was given a bow and a crown, and he went forth conquering and
to conquer: Spoken of Christ's prevailing by the Preaching of the Gospel: as he
is described in Psalm 45.4,5. So that though Christ has changed his place, yet
he has not changed his office, nor his Company: while he was here on Earth, he
conversed with his people, and he walks still in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks.

And to manifest that he was still in office for his Churches good, that
whatever he is, even after his ascension, he is all for the Churches sake:
therefore shortly after he departs; he did as Princes use to do upon the days
of their Coronation, spargere missilia, he scattered abroad, poured out certain
extraordinary Gifts, to manifest that still he had respect unto the Church: But
these lasted but for a time; for this Cause after he had in his bodily presence
been absent, yea and seemingly silent for about sixty years (for its Generally
conceived, that this book of the Revelation was penned about the latter end of
the reign of Domitian the Emperor, which was sixty years after Christ's
ascension) now it was that he gave this Revelation unto his servant John, that
it might be a standing monument unto the Church, what his affections were,
though he were now in Glory: therefore he leaves this unto them for their
direction, that they might know what to expect in after Times, and what to pray
for, and also for their Consolation: though sad occurrences were to come, yet
the Lord lets them see the Event and Issue of all should be for good.

This is the scope of the Lord in this prophecy; he writes in this Book of two
things: The things that are, and the things that shall be hereafter. Among
which there are several prophesies that concern the seven Churches of Asia, of
which, this is the first to the Church of Ephesus.

It may here be enquired, seeing there were so many other famous Churches in
the World; the Churches of Rome, of Galatia, of Corinth, etc. to whom those
Epistles were written; how comes it to pass, that the Lord Jesus singles out
only the seven Churches of Asia, to write Letters from heaven to them, passing
by all the rest of the Churches?

There are four Reasons I meet with among Interpreters that are given hereof.

First, Because Patmos (which was the Place of John's Banishment) was nearer to
these Asian Churches, and the Conveyance to it easy by the Aegean Sea; By this
means being in Exile, he did endeavor to do them good, being shut out from the
like opportunity from Churches more remote.

Secondly, Because these Churches were in an especial manner part of St John's
Charge; for though it be true, that the Apostolical Authority was universal
over all the Churches, as their care reached to all the Churches, and was not
limited to a particular Congregation, as the Ministers of the Gospel now is: in
Acts 20.28. Attend to the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you a
Bishop; though the Apostles were sent forth to all the World, yet it plainly
appears from Gal. 2.9. that they did by mutual consent divide the World among
themselves, and did every of them take a several part of the world as their
more especial Charge, as they that write the lives and travels of the Apostles
do clearly set forth; among the rest these of Asia the less, are conceived to
be the especial part of John's Charge, and upon this Ground he takes especial
care to write to them.

Thirdly, Some conceive it was, because the Lord did foresee that of all the
Gentile-Churches these were nearest to Judgment and ruin, to have the
Candlestick removed from them, unless their repentance did prevent, and
therefore he especially takes Care to apply the Remedy where there was the
greatest danger in the Disease.

Fourthly, Some give a further Reason, making these seven Churches of Asia,
types of all the Gentile-Churches afterward unto the end of the World: What
reason there is out of the Text for that, I shall not speak to: only this I am
sure of; the Lord when he bids John write, he writes the things that are, which
are distinguished from those that are to be hereafter; and therefore I am not
to confound them: But this is most true, if these Asian Churches were not types
of all the Gentile-Churches, yet certainly they were as it were the patterns,
and all the Gentile-Churches were to take warning by them, that the same
Corruptions were as truly incident to all the rest of the Churches, which had
now overgrown them: and John having opportunity to write to these, does by them
admonish all the rest.

The words that I have now read unto you, are a Glorious description of the
heart of Christ in heaven, and of the care that Christ has of his Church in
Glory. It is true, that of him the whole family in heaven and earth is named,
and he it is to whom Angels, Principalities and powers are made subject after
his ascension into Glory, 1 Pet. 3.22. He it is to whom the Providential
Kingdom of God is committed; for, he has committed all Judgment unto the Son,
Joh. 5.23. But yet notwithstanding though he takes Care of the whole
providential Kingdom, yet he has an especial eye on his spiritual Kingdom, he
does not forget his Lambs: the Kingdom of Christ in this world is made up of
two Parts or Branches, Officers, or Members; both which are described in the
Text.

Christ's care that he takes of officers; this he holds the Stars in his right
hand: his Care of the Members, this he walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks.

A short exposition I intend to give you upon this: First, The Care that Christ
takes of the Officers of the Church; and that you see is described thus, he
holds the Stars in his right hand. Two things I must here explain.

First, here is a description of the Persons, they are Stars.

Secondly, The act of Christ's Care toward them, he holds them in his right
hand.

First, By Stars are meant the Officers of the Church. And that clearly appears
from the Exposition given by the Spirit of God in Chap. 1. ver. ult. The seven
Stars of the Angels of the Churches: where I pray observe, I cannot interpret
Angels singularly, as referring to any one kind of Officers, as some do: But
Collectively, as referring to all the Officers of the Church. The Reasons I
shall hint you to, pray note them: because it has been some kind of
Controversy in these latter days.

The first is from the Title Angel, upon what Ground called Angel; It is a name
first given to Christ, and from Christ derived and applied to those special
Ministers and Officers employed under him; this I make appear from Genesis 48.15.
The Angel that redeemed me from all adversity; the Angel the Redeemer, that is
his name; Called therefore the Angel of the Covenant, in Mal. 3.1. Now from
hence, because God entitled his Son thus, this very name does Christ himself
convey to all those that are Officers under him: and that it is a name borrowed
from the old Testament, I shall clearly make manifest: and therefore it must be
used in the same sense: In the Old Testament I find it applied to all
Church Officers: to Prophets, in Haggai 1.13. Then spoke Haggai the Angel of
the Lord, in the Lords Message; there he is called the Angel of the Lord: yea,
all Gospel Ministers are so styled. In Job 33.23. When a man's soul draws nigh
to the grave, and his life to the destroyer: that is under the guilt of his own
conscience: if there be an Angel, an interpreter: so you are to read it: not
only Prophets neither, but Priests are called Angels too: So you shall find,
Judges 2.1. There came an Angel of the Lord from Gilgal to Bochim: a man would
have thought it had been an Angel come from heaven: But it is an Angel that
came from Gilgal to Bochim: It was a Minister among men, as Interpreters
expound it: But its ordinarily interpreted of Phineas the Priest: And his
Message drew such tears from the people, that its called Bochim, the place of
weeping: so some expound that place, in Eccles. 5.6. spoken against rash vows:
lest they say before the Angel of the Lord, it is an oversight: the Angel of
the Lord, who is that? Look to the 5. of Leviticus ver. 5. it will help you to
expound that text: It was commanded of God, that all rash Vows, the errors of
them, should be confessed unto the Priest: therefore if the title Angel were
given to all Church Officers under the New: And cannot in reason be applied to
any one sort of Officers, as some have done it lately to Bishops.

The second expression is that of Stars, and that will evidence the thing unto
you: By stars, in the Scripture, are meant all men of great place or power,
either in State or Church: Persons of great place and authority in the state;
Matthew. 24.9. where the Lord describing the sad Desolations that should befall
Jerusalem, he says, Stars shall fall from heaven: when some people read that
place, they conceive its spoken of the day of Judgment, and not of the downfall
of that State: these shall be brought down from their state and honor; and
that is the meaning of that place, Rev. 8.27. the Sun shall be smitten, and the
third part of the stars. And its meant all persons of great place in the
Church; observe Dan. 8.10. from whence in all probability these expressions are
taken: Antiochus waxed great over the host of heaven (for so the Church is
called) and cast down some of the Stars to the ground, and trampled upon them:
persons of great place are commonly called stars: and the edge of the
persecution commonly turns upon them. When the Lord speaks this to the comfort
of his servants, that he holds the stars in his hand; it were but small comfort
to inferior officers to tell them, the Lord holds the stars in his hand: that
is great men, the highest officers, but not you, when as its spoken of them
all: the Church is the host of heaven, and all the officers thereof are the
stars in Christ's right hand: that is the first thing.

Secondly, What is the act of Christ's care toward these? the text says, he
holds them in his right hand: it signifies two things, according to a double
expression in the Scripture: the right hand of Majesty, in Heb. 1.3. and so
Christ is said to sit at his right hand. The right hand of power, Luke 1.76. I
conceive the latter is here intended, and to be understood of that power that
he does use in mercy to put forth, for the protection, deliverance, and
preservation of his people: hence it is that in Psalm. 20.6. all deliverance and
preservation is called the salvation of his right hand: Rivet.
and therefore, De clementissima Protectione. Psalm 22.7. he will protect them
with his right hand in this life, and he will exalt them with his right hand in
the life to come.

Here give me leave to hint to you four things, before I pass from this; mark
them well, for they concern you.

First take notice from hence, that Church Officers are but stars, and they
shine but with a borrowed light, with a derived light; they have their light
from the Sun of righteousness, the fountain and the Father of lights, Mal. 4.2.
they must be Seers before they can be Prophets; What have thou that thou have
not received? take heed therefore, though its true, that one star differs from
another star in Glory: yet let no man exalt himself in regard of his own light:
thou art but the vessel, and have no more light then the Lord is pleased to put
into thee: and remember while the stars shine it is night; though whilst the
night lasts the stars are needful: whilst we live here, even the best men,
they walk in the dark: and therefore the most glorious times of the Church
stand in need of these stars. But the day hastens when these stars shall
disappear for ever, for Christ will put down all rule, and all authority, and
power, 1 Cor. 15.28. there shall be no more use of Magistracy or Ministry for
ever: But yet though the day approaches, it is night still: the greatest
light, and the most glorious discoveries of all the Ministers in the world,
cannot make day in the soul, or in the Church, unless the Sun of righteousness
discover himself: therefore let the people seek out for further direction, and
get a light from Christ the Sun of righteousness; which is a light that all the
Ministers and Officers in the world cannot impart: for all the light that they
can bring in, is but starlight; and they are a woeful people, and disconsolate
souls, that only live and walk by starlight all their days.

Secondly, The stars are in the right hand of Christ, that is, at his dispose;
therefore sure he appoints them their Orbs where they shall shine; he removes
the stars as well as the Candlestick; that expression is very observable, in
Isa. 62. How Beautiful are the feet of those upon the mountains, that bring
glad tidings! What beauty is there to be seen in their feet! the meaning of it
is, there is a beauty in the Message that they bring: the Lord having made the
Gospel ambulatorie and itinerarie, that it is carried about from house to
house, and from place to place, by the feet of the Ministry. Remember, you
that enjoy the Gospel, that sad expression in Jerem. 7.12. Go to my place in
Shilo, where I set my name at first, and see what I did there. Why, what did
God there? he forsook the Tabernacle of Shilo. Remember the stars are in the
right hand of God, and he appoints them where they shall shine: and one of the
saddest Judgments that can befall a people in this life, is for God to seal up
the stars: that's Jobs expression in Job 9. that they shall not bring out a beam
of light, but the people shall be left in the dark continually.

Thirdly, the stars are in the right hand of Christ; then surely there is
protection for them, and a merciful care over them; they do but lose their
labor that think either to pluck the Saints out of the right hand of God; or
the stars out of the right hand of Christ. Surely he will preserve a Ministry
in his Church unto the end of the world; or else blot that text out of your
Bibles, Ephesians. 4.12. He has given gifts for the work of the Ministry, for the
gathering and perfecting of the Saints until we all come, etc. Why did the Lord
institute the Ministry? For a double end: the one for the Gathering, the other
for the Perfecting of the Saints: then so long as there are any of the Saints
to be gathered: or any to be perfected, the end of the Ministry is not
accomplished: God will uphold it until it has attained the end of its
institution. Consider therefore what enemies those are unto the Church of God,
that endeavor to remove the stars out of their Orb: for, its that leaves a
people under pure darkness, and a perfect night, and therefore its the worst
and the most pernicious design that ever was set on foot in the world: one
strikes at their calling, another at their maintenance: though the truth is,
the intent of the work is the same, the Ministry, whatever the design of the
workmen may be: Well, suppose God should grant your desire, for there is a
generation of men that have been long hacking at the Ministry: Suppose it
should be as you would have it: give me leave to tell you two things; one is,
when the stars are darkened, in Scripture it denotes great judgments, great
plagues to come upon a people; Joel 2.10. The Sun and the Moon shall be
darkened, and the stars shall withdraw their shining. But further to clear what
kind of Judgment you must look for: and pray mark, for I speak nothing but
Scripture unto you: in Dan. 8.10,11,12. When the stars were cast unto the
ground; the text adds, The daily sacrifices were taken away, because of
transgression; cast down truth to the ground: the daily sacrifice, the worship
of God; and truth, the word of God; Both will soon go down, if once the stars
be cast to the ground, and trampled on by the feet of pride.

Lastly, take this hint from it too: Its a great judgment, not only to have
the stars sealed up from you: but to have the stars to fight against you: an
expression that you have in the 5. Judges, the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera; there is not a worse Army can be engaged against a people:
observe, Psalm. 68.12. The Lord gave his Word, and great were the number of them
that published it. What follows? Kings with their Armies did Fly; It relates
to the Ascension of Christ; that is plain by ver. 18. thou have ascended on
high, etc. the Lord did give his word at his ascension, and there were a
multitude of them that published it, and by this means Kings, Armies were put
to flight: they conquered by the word: there is not such another way to rout
Kings and their Armies: Look into the 47. of Ezekiel. ver 10. and you shall see,
this shall be the glory of the last times: the most glorious and most
flourishing times of the Church: And there shall be Fishers, the text says:
and the fish that shall be taken by them, shall be like the fish of the great
Sea, exceeding many: a number of converts: take heed of the stars fighting
against you, for you have need of these stars in the best and purest times. But
the second thing I mainly intend, the care that Christ takes of the body, which
is described in the latter expression: he walks in the midst of the seven
Golden Candlesticks: he takes care as well of the meanest Member, as of the
greatest Officer. Psalm 45. The unction does run down upon the s^irts of his
Garment: so does his protection and his provision also: to explain this, here
are three things to be opened.

Why the Church is called a Candlestick?

Why a Golden Candlestick?

And what is it for Christ to walk in the midst of it?

First, Why is the Church called a Candlestick?

In Revel. 1. ult. The seven Candlesticks are the seven Churches: there are
four notions in it, and you must take in all, or you will not understand the
meaning of the Word.

First, A Candlestick has no light in it of it self, but light must be put
into it: and therefore the Candlestick under the Law, to which this here is an
allusion, the Priests were to light the Candles: a Candlestick has no more
light then is put into it, and it must be continually maintained by a new
supply of oil, as you see it described in Zach. 4.11. There are Olive Trees
that grow on each side the Candlestick, and they drop the oil, etc: here is no
oil prepared by the art and industry of men, but it is Natural Olive-oyl that
does of it self drop: and therefore the supports and supplies of the Church are
compared unto the rain, and unto the dew, that waits not for man, and tarries
not for the Sons of men.

Secondly, The use of a Candlestick is for no other end then to hold up, and
hold out the light, and to this very End the Lord has instituted Churches: the
great Ordinance under the Gospel is the Church, though alas, we little consider
it: now pray observe, the great End why God instituted Churches was this: that
he might have a company of Saints, that might hold forth his Word, and hold up
his Worship: and for this Cause, the Church is called the pillar and ground of
truth: 1 Timothy 3.16. The pillar of truth, why so? as one well observes, as a
pillar holds forth a Proclamation; truth that upholds the Church: but the
Church holds out the Worship of God.

Thirdly, A Candlestick is a thing moveable, and with the removing of the
Candlestick, you carry away the light also: and therefore the thing that the
Lord threatens, is, that he will remove the Candlestick out of its place; the
Lord removes the Candlestick from place to place; though the Land remain, the
Church is gone, that is a dangerous Judgment: not only an immediate removing
of the Ordinances, but of the Church, for which all Ordinances were appointed:
the Kingdom of God shall be taken from them; he will call them Loammi, they
shall be no more a people to him: the Lord will remove the Candlestick, and the
glory of the Lord shall depart.

Lasty, Its an allusion unto the Candlestick under the Law in the Tabernacle,
in Exodus 25.31. which was a type of the Church of God; for all things were done
unto them in types, and yet with this difference: Under the Law there was but
one Candlestick in the Tabernacle; but here are seven Candlesticks: what is the
reason? there is a double Ground, and both of them Considerable.

First, Because the Church of God, under the Gospel should be of a larger
extent then under the Law: and for that Cause happily it is, that the
dimensions of John's City go so far beyond that of Ezekiels; though it be spoken
of the same thing, and of the same time: yet Ezekiels City, that is but 4500.
Cubits, and Saint John's is twelve thousand furlongs. A great difference; But
Ezekiel saw it with Legal apprehensions, he had a sight of Gospel Ordinances by
a darker light only: But John saw it with a Gospel light, and he describes the
latitude and the dimensions thereof according thereunto.

Secondly, And that is the main reason: there was but one Candlestick in the
Tabernacle, because the Church of the Jews was but one; and though they had
many Synagogues, yet they met all in one stem, they were united all in one
shaft; but the Churches of the Gentiles are many, and for that Cause, though
there was but one Candlestick under the Law, yet there are seven under the
Gospel; and that is the meaning why a Candlestick.

Secondly, Why is the Church is called a golden Candlestick?

Upon a double Ground.

First, Because Gold is the purest metal, and the Lord will have his Church
such; they shall differ as much from other men, as Gold does from the common
clay in the streets; the Lord is very exact in every thing in the Church; he is
very curious of what mettle such Candlesticks be made of, and therefore it is
not every society or constitution of men that will be looked upon as a Church to
Christ; but when the Lord lays the Foundation of a Church, he does it with
Saphirs: Isa. 54. Non est de doctrina, sed hominibus; there is a double
Foundation of Churches, as Divines do observe, doctrinae and personae; the
Church is founded on doctrines, but here of persons; the First founders of
which the Church is built, they must not be common stones; for if the Church
become corrupt, if the Gold become Dross, if the house of the Lord become an
outward Court, then the Lord will take no care either to build or to measure
it: and there is Golden Doctrines, 1 Cor. 3.12. The light that does shine forth
in this his Candlestick; and then the Lord is curious with what oil the
Candlestick is maintained; for the Lord will not have it maintained with common
oil, that Persons may put in themselves, but God will not delight in them; It
is a strange expression, that in Zach. 4.12. These, empty golden oil out of
themselves: their parts, their pains, and all, it must be golden oil.

Secondly, Because Gold of all other metals is the most precious, and of the
highest esteem; there is as much difference between the Church of God and other
men, as there is between Gold and Dirt in the street; as between Diamonds and
Pebbles in the Lords esteem: make Israel a Church, and then, all the earth is
mine, says the Lord, but thou art my peculiar treasure, in Exodus 19.5. they
are to God above all people; the truth is, they are the first fruits of all the
creatures; the Church is called so, James 1.18. The first fruits were best, and
were dedicated to God, and they did also consecrate the whole crop; you all
claim a title to Church Membership; look they be golden Candlesticks; the Lord
has his scales to weigh you, and his touchstone to try you, and let me tell
you, the less Gold there is in any Church, the less value God sets upon it.

Thirdly, How is Christ said to walk in the midst of the Golden Candlestick? It
denotes a promise of especial presence and fellowship: this is the promise that
the Lord made unto the Jews, Lev. 26.12. I will walk among you, and I will be
your God, and my soul shall not abhor you: 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell and walk
amongst them: it notes his presence with them in all ways of love and
Communion: for Amos 3.3. Two cannot walk together unless they be agreed: When
God has Communion with us, he is said to walk with us; therefore we read of
his goings in the Sanctuary; this then is the meaning, he affords his especial
presence and Communion. Now here is an observation that I shall hint unto you.

There is a gracious presence of Christ with his Church in all
Church-administrations.

Two Scriptures hold forth this gloriously unto you; one is Psalm 27.4. I would
see thy beauty and glory as I have seen in thy sanctuary: thy beauty, what is
beauty? It is a symmetry and a proportion of parts: now when you look abroad on
the works of God, you see one Attribute manifested in one work, and another in
another: you see not these parts put together: and so the beauty of them does
not appear: God does great things when he manifests an attribute when he would
show his love, he gives his Son: when he would manifest his mercy, he pardons
sin; so that in the Works of God, the Atributes of God are thus scattered, you
cannot see them together. But come to the Sanctuary, and there you see beauty:
all the Attributes of God are displayed there: for as Christ as Mediator, is
the stage on which all the Attributes of God are acted; for he is the Image of
the Invisible God: so is the Church the stage or scene on which Christ acts all
these Attributes. Rev. 11. There is the special presence and beauty of God to
be seen there, beyond what there is in all the world beside.

Secondly, There is the great Glory of God to be seen in heaven; and you shall
find that there is a great resemblance between his presence in his Church and
in Glory: In Heb. 12.22,23. When you read it, you will see but little
difference between that and heaven, that you can scarce know it from heaven; we
are come to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the General assembly of the Church of
the firstborn, whose names are written in heaven; to God, the Judge of all, to
Jesus the mediator of the New Testament, etc. Let us compare a little the
presence of Christ with his Church, with that of his presence in Glory: take
the parrallel in these five particulars.

First, Christ in heaven is present in Majesty and Glory: It is called the
throne of his Glory: and such is his presence in his Church too: And therefore
observe it, he is said to sit upon a high Throne in the midst of his Churches.
Rev. 4.3. The name of the Church is called Jehovah Shammah, on that account,
the Lord is there; Ezekiel. 11. Christ does nowhere but in heaven discover so much
of his Kingly Majesty, as he does in the middle of his Churches and
Church-administrations: and if the Lord once take away the vail that is upon
our eyes, then we shall be able to see the glorious presence of Christ in
Gospel-administrations. As I remember, Iunius when he read the Scripture, and
the Lord had taken the scales off his eyes, to fee the Majesty of it, repent
divinitatem argumenti, Scripti majestatem authoritatemque senserim, longo
intervallo omnibus eloquentiae humanae praeeuntem, horrebat Corpus, stupebat
animus; Iunius.
he saw a majesty so far beyond all humane eloquence, that he confesses his
soul stood amazed at it; so it would be to you; only there is a vail before
your eyes.

Secondly, In heaven the Lord is present as revealing his mind and will unto
his people; the Saints in heaven know the whole mind of God, concerning what
ever belongs to Gods Glory or their own duty: there we shall know as we are
known, 1 Cor. 13.12. and so he is present in the midst of his people; In Deuteronomy.
23.3. As his Saints sit dowe at his feet, they all receive of his words; he
gives forth what his will is concerning his Glory, and their Duty: nay, look to
Revel. 4.22. They shall see his face, and his name shall be written in their
foreheads. It is not spoken of the Glory to come; it is new Jerusalem that
comes down from God out of heaven; and yet such Glorious Discoveries there
shall be of the will of God, and the mind of Christ unto his people, as if so
be they saw Gods face in heaven; such a Glorious presence of Christ there is
with his Churches.

Thirdly, In heaven there shall be a glorious and full Communication of all
Grace; not only in reference to the secrets of his Counsel, they know his Will;
but he will withold none of his graces from you; as your Communion shall then
be perfect with him, so shall the Communication of all his grace be to you. Now
you know, It is death that puts an end to sin: mark it, it is death that puts
an end to mortification; for he that is dead is free from sin, 1 John 3.3. But
it is the Beatifical vision that perfects Sanctification, and reddit nos
impeccabiles makes the soul impeccable, as the Schoolmen observe; there is a
great resemblance of this too in the Ordinances of the Gospel, and Christ's
presence in them. Beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, we are
transformed into the same Image. 2 Cor. 3. ult. For there are before the Throne
seven lamps of fire, and the seven spirits of God. Revel. 4,5. The Throne is
Compassed about with a Rain bow signum gratiae, and it is not of many colors,
but of one; to show, how steady, and constant, and unchangeable, Christ is in
his ways and dispensations toward his people.

Fourthly, In heaven there is convolutio animae in deum, as the Schoolmen
express it; the soul is wholly as it were resolved into God: Roled and
transformed into God, that is, God wholly takes up the whole soul; that is all
I mean: I would not be understood after that new fancy, that men are deified
with God: But as it is said of the angels, they behold the Face of your
heavenly Father continually. Mat. 18.10. never look off from him to eternity:
there is a glorious resemblance of this in the Lords presence with his
Churches; their eyes are fastened upon the Lord their eyes watch for the Lord,
mere then they that watch for the morning; their soul is satisfied as with
marrow and fatness, which is in the house of God; there is that sweetness in
the presence of God in his Ordinances, which is next heaven it self, when a man
is made to drink out of the rivers of his pleasure: some of Gods people can say
so, one day in thy Courts is better then a thousand elsewhere: there is a
sweeter taste of God in Ordinances then there is anywhere in the world besides.

Fifthly, in heaven there is the presence of Christ among his Saints and
Angels: if we should see the Lord sit upon his Throne, and all his Angels and
Saints gathered together round about him, oh what a glorious presence this
were! but its so in all Gospel administrations: there is not only Chrst sitting
on his Throne in the midst, Rev. 4.24. Elders compass his Throne; but then in
Rev. 5.11. the text says, there is a guard of Angels round about the Elders:
Every time you come to worship God, Remember there is Christ upon his Throne,
and Church Officers compassing the Throne; and Church Members the people: and
then the Angels as a guard about them. Consider but that place in Zach. 3.7. If
you will keep my ways, I will give you Galleries to walk in amongst those that
stand by. A man shall be taken into fellowship and Communion with the Angels;
then there is a glorious presence that Christ affords unto his people; he walks
in the midst of the golden Candlesticks.

For the Application.
First, how should this command reverence in every soul of you when you come to
have to do with any Church administrations! you do not consider the King will
come in to see the guests; you think it is but to hear a Sermon, to join in
prayer, to go unto the Sacrament: but consider not that you have to do there
with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is present in Majesty and Glory: take heed
therefore of all rash approaches to Christ, and dealing rashly in any
Gospel-institution. Oh that the Lord would but set on this very apprehension on
the hearts of those that profess to fear God in the Nation, that they would
take heed of rashness in dealing with Church-institutions! in Lev. 26.24. If
you walk at adventure with me: Rashly with me, so the word is many times used,
(...) temere, sine personae discrimine; then God will walk at an adventure with
you: do not draw near to the Lord Jesus Christ at an adventure; for he is
present at all Church-administrations; there is a strange profaneness of heart
that men show in it: and usually an hasty heart makes a rash mouth, as Solomon
speaks: take heed therefore in all Church-administrations, of rashness; for
Christ is here, and he has said, you shall reverence my Sanctuary, for I am
Jehovah: Let all be done with reverence and godly fear.

Secondly, Is there such a gracious presence of Christ in Gospel
administrations, labor to see it there, labor to have your souls affected
with the spiritual presence or absence of Christ there; The Prophet Ezekiel
could see the glory of the Lord go up from the Cherubims; but the people could
see no such thing; the Ordinances remained, and they were well pleased: yet
though the Ordinances were not removed, the glory of the Lord was gone; and
therefore have your hearts affected with this: look upon it as your great
affliction, that it should be with you as it was with the Disciples after
Christ's resurrection; the Lord appeared to them, but their eyes were withheld,
they did not know him. God discovers himself gloriously in
Church-administrations, and all the time thine eyes are withheld, and thou
do not see it: I remember it was Bernards drift, and it argues I confess a
very holy Spirit in the man; Dico mihi (says he) in languore desiderii mei,
quis amat quod non videt? moriar ut te videam: Bernard.
he sighs in the languishing of his desires, and entreats God to discover
himself to him: Lord, I am willing to dye, to have a further discovery of thy
self: A man should come into the presence of God, with high expectations of the
beatifical vision; and every new discovery will increas the desire to enjoy
more Communion with God; and therefore press the Lord with fervent prayer, as
he does in that place, De amore Dei, ca. 1. quod obiter vidi accenso desiderio
vix patienter expecto: auferas a me manum tegentem: and the Lord can make a
short cut of it when he will; habet and gratiae sapientia sua compendia; Desire
the Lord to take that hand of his from him, that hid him from his eye; is there
such a presence? be not satisfied until thou see it.

Thirdly, Remember Christ is present, but he is present in holiness; there is
no attribute of God so terrible to a sinful creature, as that of his holiness;
Justice and wrath are no way so terrible as his holiness: and this attribute
Christ shows forth in his presence in Ordinances: this attr^bute the Angels of
God in glory do admire, in the 6. of Isaiah; and when the Saints come to
worship, what do they cast down their Crowns unto? unto his holiness, Rev. 4.8.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts; It is not a vain presence, but its a very
holy presence.

Lastly, take notice he is present in jealousy: You cannot serve the Lord:
Why? in Joshua 24.19. for he is a jealous God: now there is a double fruit of
Gods jealousy, and do you tremble at the hearing of it.

First, if you come at an adventure with God in Church-administrations, the
greatest temporal Judgments shall be inflicted upon you: look to Ezekiel 10.2.
The Angel of the Lord takes fire of the Altar, and scatters over the City; the
Jews thought that the fire of the Altar did tend to nothing but to expiate
their sin: no, says God, it shall burn the City to; no fire burns as coals of
Juniper, like that fire.

Secondly, if the Lord spare you in temporal judgments, he will pour out
spiritual judgments. I only put you in mind of one place of Scripture, in
Ezekiel 47.11. But the myrie and the marish places thereof, they shall not be
healed, they shall be given to salt: What is the meaning of it? here is waters
of Doctrine and Grace issue out of the Sanctuary: wherever these come, there is
glorious healing: but there shall be under these Ordinances, myrie and marish
places, where the water stands; new plagues shall light upon these places,
they shall be given to salt: they shall be delivered over to perperual
barrenness: let never fruit grow upon that soul, nor that people more; these
are the spiritual Judgments that God will pour out upon those that walk at an
adventure with Christ in Gospel administrations: for there is a glorious
presence of Christ in them; he walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks. So much for a brief Explication of this portion of Scripture.

Gifts and Talents Shall be accounted for.
Preached before the Parliament on a day of Thanksgiving, Sept. 3.
LUKE 12.48. To whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required.


CHrist having before exhorted his Disciples to a continual, watchful and
constant preparedness for his coming, (the coming of the Lord) as it is the
great hope of the Saints, they long for and hasten to the coming of that day of
God; so it is the great care of the Saints, they knowing the terror of the
Lord; and they are to give their utmost diligence to be found of him in peace,
that they may be like unto the servants that wait for their Lords return,
because they know not the hour when the Son of man will come. Upon this Peter
propounds the question, ver. 41. Lord. speak thou this parable unto us, or
even unto all? Christ answers not directly, who is the faithful and wise
Steward: Non negat ad omnes pertinere, praecipue tamen ad Apostolos. What I say
unto you, I say unto all, watch, Mark 13.37. where the same Exhortation is
given.

These Verses set forth two high aggravations of sin when the Lord comes to
reckon with his servants. First, the knowledge that they have. Secondly, the
gifts and talents that they have received. First the knowledge that they have;
he that knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes; its true, that knowledge is a great gift, in so much that the Jews
have a proverb, (...) Pauper non est nisi scientia destitutus. There is no man
poor but he that wants knowledge; to be richin knowledge, is to be endued with
all riches: but yet knowledge is given unto many a man in wrath, and not in
mercy, to aggravate the contumacy, and so the condemnation of a man. Nihil
aliud est scientia nostra quam culpa quoad hoc tantum legem novimus ut majori
offensione peccemus, Salv.
Salv.

Its a great misery to live without the Ordinances of God, to be out of the
Valley of Vision, and in the dark places of the earth; better is the bread of
affliction, and the water of trouble, then a famine of hearing the word of God,
Amos 8.11. yet it is much better to be without a teaching-Priest, and without
the Law, then to enjoy them to no other end, but with the higher hand to sin
against them, there is no burden like unto that of the valley of vision, Esaias
22.1. No woe like unto that of Ariel, Esaias 29. The word is by some rendered the
Lion of God, because of the strength of that City, and its power to subdue
other Nations: that it is as a Lion of invincible strength, no beast of the
field could stand before it: but others do render it the Altar of the Lord, and
it is the name given to the Altar, Ezekiel. 43.16. The Altar shall be twelve
cubits long; it is Ariel; so that they that had the ordinances of God, and the
sacrifices of God amongst them, there is a woe unto them above all other people,
though it were the City where David dwelt: so that they that abuse their
knowledge, and walk not answerable unto it: here you see, the Lord will surely
reckon with them for their knowledge in the great day that he has appointed to
judge the world.

Secondly, not only the knowledge, but the gifts of men, the gifts that men
have received, they will also aggravate their sin and increase wrath in the day
of their account: the Lord will require nothing, where he has given nothing;
he will reckon with his servants only for the talents that they have received:
he does not expect to reap where he has not sown; but where he has committed
a depositum, he will require it, and he will account with men according unto
what their receipts have been; and answerable unto that, so will their Judgment
be; there shall be different degrees of punishment, answerable unto the
different measure of Talents abused and neglected; (...). Ch^ysost.

The Observations out of the text are four.

First, What ever a man has here, is both given to him as a gift, and
committed to him as a Talent. Secondly, They are not given or committed unto
all in the same measure, but unto some much, and unto some little, in different
measures. Thirdly, Whether a man has much, or little, it is given or committed
to him, as that which he shall be called to an account for, it shall be
hereafter required of him. Fourthly, The more any man has received, the more
shall be required of him in the general day of Judgment; men's accounts shall
be answerable to their receipts.

Doctrine.
Whatsoever men receive from God, they are given them, or committed unto them;
There is that overflowing fullness in him who is the fountain of living waters,
that there is no man but receives something from him, much or little every man
does receive, and these blessings are to be considered in a double respect;
either as given, or as committed.

First, They are all given, and are to be looked upon as dona, gifts merely of
grace: a man can receive nothing, unless it be given him from above, John 3.27.
Every good gift comes down from him who is the father of lights. James 1.17.
All good things are from above, and they come unto us only in a way of gift.
There are but four ways of the conveyance of any thing one from another.

First, Ex debito, by way of debt, which is due to be paid, and so the Lord is
debtor unto none: who can say they gave unto God first, and he shall be
recompensed? and though by his promise, he seems after a sort to become come a
debtor unto us; yet its true, reddit debita, nulli debens; the rice of his
promises are merely his own grace, and his obligation by them is not so much
unto us as his own faithfulness; that is true of Aquinas, touching all the
blessings of God bestowed upon men, Opus justitiae divinae semper supponit opus
misericordiae, and in eo fundatur. Aquinas.


Secondly, Ex pretio, By way of purchase, and so we have nothing to pay, for
they are not our own.

Thirdly, Ex merito, by way of desert, and so we can have no right; for, when
we have done all that is commanded, we are unprofitable servants; it cannot be
agreeable to a created nature to merit any thing at the hand of his creator;
even the Lord Jesus Christ himself cannot be said absolutely, and in a full
sense to merit as Mediator, at the hand of God the father; and therefore grace
was the foundation even of the merit of Christ himself; there is gratia
unionis, and gratia unctionis, according unto that ordinary saying of the
Schoolmen: Etiam meritum Christi habet Gratiam invisceratam: and if the
Mediator who paid the debt, could not merit, much less can we.

Fourthly, It must therefore be ex dono, purely, merely of gift; all our
receipts from God are of his grace: he shows mercy for his own sake.

Secondly, They are not only given unto them, but they are also committed to
them, and so, that they are to be looked upon as deposita committed unto them:
the one implies grace in God, and calls for thankfulness; the other, trust in
us, and calls for faithfulness; the Lord is that great wise man spoken of in
Luke 16.1. and he has put his goods into their hands, that they may preserve
and employ them: as there is no man that is sine dono so there is none absque
officio they are all of them stewards but not proprietaries, and the time of
their stewardship will have an end, and then will the day of their account be:
that as it is said of the Jews, that the Scriptures, the Oracles of God, that
they were committed unto them, Romans 3.2. The word is (...), they were
concredited to them, or left to them as a depositum, which they were so to
keep, as they were to transmit unto their posterity so its true of all the
pledges that the Lord does betrust his people with, they are committed unto
them, concredited with them, as goods left in the hand of Officers; for every
man is a Steward of some of the graces of God: and under this double notion all
men are to look upon the blessings and mercies that they enjoy, not only as
gifts bestowed from the grace of God, but as pledges committed unto their
trust: and here interpreters upon this place do point us unto a double
distinction.

First, Ratione rei, so they are gifts to be received, that the free grace that
is given may be acknowledged. Man in his fall had forfeited all his right to
the blessings of God for he was now under the curse of the Law: But the Lord
did by a second Covenant give all things into the hand of the Son; the Father
loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand; for he is appointed
heir of all things; which cannot be understood of him as God, for so he is
haeres natus; but as Mediator, so he came under an act of the will of God, and
is now haeres constitutus, Heb. 1.3. So that now the Lord Jesus raigns, all
Judgment being committed to him; the donation and dispensation of all things
is now in his hand: he has now a double ground of bestowing of gifts: one is
from common bounty, and the other is from peculiar mercy; the one by right of
providence, and the other by right of promise, unto the one as servants, unto
the other as sons; the one as their portion in this life, and the other but as
added unto the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, Matthew. 6.32.

Secondly, as Talents wherein our diligence and faithfulness is to be
exercised, both in employing and in improving; for there is no Talent but its
given to trade withal, and being employed it will be increased, for men do
gain by trading; they are as the bread that Christ fed the Disciples with, it
multiplyes in the breaking; and as the widows oil, it increases in the
spending: for all that a man has received here, it is in reference unto
trading, whether it be grace or gifts: for all is given that a man might employ
it, and by employing it, improve it.

Secondly, Ratione personae, as they are data in salutem propriam, and
commendata in salutem and aedificationem aliorum.

First, some there are that are heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14. and all the
dealings of God do tend to prepare them for that great end, but to qualify
them for their inheritance, being they are as yet but in their nonage, that
they may be made meet inheritors, etc. (...), Col. 1.12. there is a spiritual
preparation by which the soul is fitted for so great mercies as the Lord does
intend in reference to eternity, to bestow upon man: and so the Saints have an
interest in the sovereignty of God over all things in the providential, in
reference unto the spiritual Kingdom; that as the Lord Jesus Christ has
undertaken the government of it in order unto this end, Ephesians. 1. ult. and
therefore all things work together for good, Rom 8.28. the word is (...), all
things (that is) omnis creatura, omnes eventus^, shall work together, that is,
not of themselves, but by a gracious concurrence or cooperation of God with
them; and Ministers are said to be, (...), workers together with God, 2 Cor.
6.1. by a gracious concurrence of the principal cause together with the
instrument; for instrumentum agit dispositive in virtute principalis agentis.
Others do refer working together unto the creatures themselves, that is not
apart, they may not seem so, but by a blessed disposition and a sweet
combination and concatenation, they do work together for good; the Greek word
is, (...), that is, ad aeternam salutem; for sine summo bono nil bonum: There
is nothing good to him that is without the chief good, there is nothing good
but that which is in order to the chief good; the Ordinances of God are good,
and they are therefore good, because they are Ordinances that God has
appointed for so good an end as to fit us to enjoy the chief good, Heb. 6.7.
The ground that drinks in the rain that it may bear fruit meet for him that
dr^sseth it, and so receive a blessing from God; and so Paul, etc. is yours, 1
Cor. 3.22. that is, given for your sakes, and with a special tendency to your
good; and so also it is true of providence, there shall be deliverance, Isa.
35.7,8. The parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of
water; that which had nothing but barrenness, now shall become fruitful; and
that which was no way profitable but hurtful for men, a habitation of Dragons,
that shall now bear grass for the use of man; for the Lord will make a way for
their return into their own Land, and it shall be a way of holiness, that is,
via sanctitatis and sanctificata; for a way in which they that are holy shall
walk, and a way that shall tend to make them to become more holy. Joel 3.17.
Then shall Jerusalem be holy, and no strangers shall pass through her any more;
their deliverance shall come upon their holiness; and Dan. 11. ult. when
Daniels people shall be delivered by the overthrow of the Turkish Empire; for
that great Empire shall fall by the hands of the Jews in the glorious Land; and
it is the coming together of bones, Ezekiel. 37.7. the noise and the shaking that
is spoken of, is tidings out of the North and the East; and there he shall come
to an end, and none shall help him; and whereas Canaan was not called the holy
Land, nor Jerusalem the holy City, after the death of Christ, yet until this
time it was called so, ver. 41. the glorious or the pleasant Land: but now it
should be a mercy bestowed upon a holy people, and it should be sanctified to
make them holy, and now it is called the glorious holy Mountain; and so its
said of Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles 17.3,4,6. His Kingdom was established, they all
brought him presents, he had silver and gold, and he walked in the ways of
David his Father.

Secondly, there are some things that are given unto men, but it is for the
good of others, and such as tend not unto their own salvation at all; So some
men shall be raised and exalted, not for their own sakes, Isa. 44.28. Cyrus is
my Shepherd, says the Lord; he shall perform all my pleasure; I will hold his
right hand and subdue Nations before him; I will loose the loins of Kings,
break the gates of brass in pieces, and cut asunder the bars of Iron, give him
the treasures of darkness, and the hidden riches of secret places, for Jacob my
servants sake, and for Israel my elect, Isa. 45.1,3,4,7,14. There is authority
given also for the sake of others, as many times power and success is given for
the sake of others, and yet they that are in power, etc. themselves have no
good by it, he has not known me, says the Lord. So there is many a man makes
riches his glory, that his house is increased, but it is not for his own sake,
but the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just, Prove. 13.22. He that by
usury and unjust gain increases his substance, he shall gather it for him that
will pity the poor: Prove. 28.8. And a man may say of such Bees in all their
gatherings, Sic vos non vobis, its not for your selves, but it is for the good
of others that all this is done: and indeed all good things that ungodly men do
receive, it is not for their own good, as it is not for their own sake; it is
for the Saints sake, and it is by their Covenant, and therefore Luther says,
omnia conservantur propter verbum and sanctum semen: Deus non curat Politiam
and Oeconomiam nisi propter Ecclesiam.

It is true that there are many that receive great mercies, great deliverances,
but its not for their own good, but for their hurt. Eccles. 5.5. Biches are for
the hurt of the owner: and so it is also of honors and victories, which are
mercies in the things, but not to the men: as Cyprian says of the Sacrament,
Petro ^emedium, Iudae venenum: so it is of all blessings, unto one in
perniciem, unto the other in salutem, to the good of others which he himself
had no good by.

Doctrine 2.
The gifts bestowed by God, and the talents that are committed, they are
committed, they are not given unto all in the same measure, but according to
different measures: some have much, and some have little: some have two
Talents, and some have five Talents: and here are two things to be considered.

First, He does not give in the fame measure unto all persons: it is true, that
there is no servant that is without his talent to trade with: for the Lord does
not expect to reap where he has not sown, or to gather where he has not
strawed: but yet he does not sow alike plentifully everywhere, and that neither
of grace, nor of gifts, nor of opportunity. First, Not of grace, Ephesians. 4.7.
Unto every one of us given according to the measure of the gift of Christ, but
not to every one according to the same measure: and he gives grace unto us by
measure: imperfectionem quandam necessario importat, tum partium tum graduum:
if we understand it of (...) gifts, so no one man receives all gifts: and if we
understand it of grace, though the Saints have all grace in the habit, yet
there is but a measure, and it is not in fullness and perfection, as Christ is
said to receive the spirit without measure: John 3.34. Non significat
infinitatem: for it is in the humane nature, which is not capable of infinite
perfection: but the meaning is, he had it without measure, in opposition unto
our measure: that is, he had all gifts and graces in him, and he had them all
in their perfection, and in the highest degree that ever was communicable to a
created nature: Bodius.
Bodius in loc. All have not the same measure of grace: nay the Saints that
have grace, they have not the same measure of all grace: but as in sin there
are some peculiar corruptions in the body of sin, so there are some peculiar
graces, and as it were proper excellencies; for though all grace grows in the
growth of any one that is regenerate, yet there are some graces that do grow in
a man more then others, according as the Lord is pleased to act them and to
draw them forth; as in Abraham his faith, and Joseph's chastity, in Job
patience, and in John Love; graces that they were eminent for.

Secondly, All have not the same Gifts, but God has appointed unto every one a
measure of faith; Romans 12.3. And it is not put for the grace of faith, but for
the gift of Knowledge of the doctrine of faith; and 1 Cor. 1.7. There are some
that are (...), men that come behind others in gifts, and there are some that
do excel others in Knowledge, in parts; they do prophecy, but in Part; but yet
some have a greater part of knowledge then others have; I speak with tongues
more then you all, says Paul, 1 Cor. 7.7. There is an (...), as God gives to
every man his proper gift, some after this manner, and some after that.

Thirdly, All have not the same opportunities; opportunity is the springtime
both of gifts and graces: Phil. 4.10,11. Ye were willing, but ye wanted
opportunity: but now you care, (...), Reviviscere, it is to wax green again: it
is true it was winter, and your care did not appear, nor your love to me,
because ye had not opportunity; but now opportunity coming is as the sun
waiting upon your graces; now they do grow green again. 1 Cor. 6.9. A great
door and effectual is opened to me. Ostium pro occasion and opportunitate, if
given, a man may enter and make a progress, which if missed, the door is shut,
and there is no entrance for that man, he can do nothing: the people of God
have this promise, Rev. 3.8. I will set before thee an open door, and no man
shall shut it: if at any time the Lord do open a door, and give his people any
opportunity, Satan and the adversaries do endeavor all they can to shut it;
yet the people of God many times by their own folly, by their unobservancy
commonly shut their own doors upon themselves: the Saints have two doors which
they should especially look upon: one is Hos. 2.15. a door of hope, and the
other is a door of service: and if the one be shut, truly there is no great
ground to expect that the other should be opened; shut the door of service, and
in a great measure the door of hope must needs be shut; but all men have not
the same doors opened unto them: some have much more then others have.

Fourthly, All have not the same success, and yet they may have as great gifts
and graces, and may take as great pains, yet success is proportioned to neither
of these; Paul plants, and Apollo waters, but it is God that gives the
increase. 2 Cor. 10.13. We do not says the Apostle, boast of things without
our measure, but according to the measure of the rule: regula est donum dei,
the rule is, that every man shall thrive and prosper in his work according to
the blessing of God upon, and concurrence of grace with his labors; mensura
personae secundum mensuram Regulae: for it is this blessing and concurrence
that is the rule of our success in all our labors: and so Paul had this
measure, even unto them in preaching the Gospel, and all the great things that
by his ministry the Lord had wrought among them, but it was according to the
measure of this rule abundantly: the Lord Jesus in his labors complains, I
have labored in vain: The word is (...), it signifies to labor with
weariness, it is toyling labor, it is hard, sore, exceeding, extreme labor;
it answers the word in the Greek (...), sore labor, and it was spending (...)
humidum Radicale, a man's natural moisture, and yet it was in vain, the success
answers not the labor; the Disciples did convert more souls by their
Ministry, when they were sent forth to preach the Gospel to all Nations, then
the Lord Jesus Christ did in the days of his flesh, as he was the Minister of
Circumcision; not that they labored more, and with more faith, fullness and
integrity, but yet he had not the same success: as wicked men have the same
wicked spirits that other wicked men have, and take the same pains in their
wickedness, but yet they have not always the same success in their wickedness;
as we see, loose the four Angels which are bound by the River Euphrates, ^ev
9.14
the divided Empire of Rome, etc. First for the West it was possessed by ten
Kings who made one body with the Beast, or Antichrist with them made up the
Beast; and the Eastern Empire was invaded by the Saracens and Turks, and they
seized upon a great part of it, but yet could go no further then the River
Euphrates: there was yet Asia the less and all Greece still remaining under the
power of the Roman Emperors with Constantinople their royal city. Now the
Turks hovered about for the space of two hundred years in four Colonies or
Armies at Iconium, also Aleppo, Damascus, all bordering upon Euphrates: but now
they are loosened, and they make an inrode upon this part of the Empire also;
not that they had not a will and endeavored it before, but they were bound:
but now the Lord does give success unto their endeavors for the execution of
that remaining vengeance: now they are said to be loosed, and now this part of
the Empire is also immediately overrun by them.

Secondly, As it is true of Persons, so it is of Ages also; they are not
measured unto all ages al^ke, but unto some much, and unto some little.

As first of light. All ages do not enjoy the same light; they do not see the
days of the son of man; Kings and righteous men have desired to see the days
that you see, and have not seen them, and to hear the things that you hear, yet
have not heard them: Plus uno die vident pueri quam per totius vitae tempora
philosophi. Gerhard in his Chronology speaks of Infoelix seculum exhaustum
hominibus ingenio and doctrina claris; Gerhard.
there are dark times, and there are times also when the light of the Moon is
as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun sevenfold: Esaias 30.26. One
age has much, and another age has little.

Secondly, They have not the same deliverances: for three hundred years she
traveled under cruel persecution under the power of the Red Dragon, but at
last the Church brought forth a man-child, who was exalted upon the throne of
God, as the fruit of all their travels, all their prayers, and as the price of
all their blood, principem a quo libertatem and exemplum fidei mundus accepit.
Sulpic.

There is a time when the Lord does lift up the rod of the oppressor, and
there is a time when he does break their yoke from off the neck; there is a
time when the enemies do plough upon the backs of the people, and make long
their furrows; and there is a time also when God does cut their harness, and
they are able to plough no longer; there is a time when God gives his people to
be trodden down as (...) in the streets, and there is a time when no stranger
shall any more pass over it; there shall be no more a grieving thorn, or a
pricking bryer; there shall be none to hurt or destroy in my holy Mountain,
etc. there is a time when God does bend Judab for him, and when he does raise
the worm Jacob to thresh the Mountains, etc and the Lord delivers the land out
of the mouths of the Enemies, etc.

Doctrine 3.
Whether men have received little or much, it is all in reference to an
account: there is a time when the King will take an account of his servants:
for he will come to reckon with them, Mat. 18.23. There is not a talent that
the Lord bestows, but it is in reference to this account; all mercies received
must surely be counted for: every one of us must give an account of himself
unto God; and there are not only personal, but there are national accounts: he
that is Judge of all the world, he is the Judge of all Nations, Isa. 5.3. Judge
I pray you between me and my vineyard: he that refers unto men to judge, he
will be the Judge himself also, and he will surely judge them with righteous
judgment. For,

First, All their mercies are recorded by him: they may forget them, but he
records them: what is a great part of the Scriptures, but the records of God?
Chronicles of his several mercies and deliverances that he has bestowed upon
his people in succeeding ages, Micah 6.5. Remember from Shittim to Gilgal: it
was the place of their Transgression when they committed abominations with the
daughters of Moab, and sacrificed unto Baal Peor, did eat the offering of the
dead: and Gilgal was the first place that they set their foot upon in the Land
of Canaan, when the Lord rolled away from them the reproach of Egypt, from
whence it had its name: and in the very places the Lord wrote in their names
the memorials of his mercies, that the very names of the places might be a
witness of his mercies to them, in memoriam, and in testimonium; Jehovah
jireth, Gilgal, Berachah, etc. as you record your victories by the names of
Dunbar, and the name of Worcester, etc. the 78. Psalm is nothing else but the
Lords records in which he has written the memorial of that continued Tract of
mercies which he gave unto them: and the Lord wrote the memory of their mercies
in the months, Exodus 12.2. This month shall be unto you the beginning of
months; the Lord changed the beginning of their years in the remembrance of his
mercy. Ver. 14. This day shall be unto you for a memorial. How should the third
of September be for a memorial unto you? etc. though the Canon of the Scripture
be consigned, and the Lord will write this story by an infallible spirit no
more to remain upon records amongst men: yet they are all of them recorded
before him, as the Law is written in the hearts of the people of God, not with
paper and Ink, but by the spirit of the living God; so does the Lord record his
mercies which he does multiply upon his people, not with pen and Ink, but by
the spirit of the living God, in the heart of God for ever: as its said of the
sins of men, Deuteronomy. 31.34. Is it not laid up in store with me, and sealed up
amongst my Treasures? they are laid up amongst the treasures of God: so God
has treasures of mercy also, as well as of sins by him, etc.

Secondly, they are numbered by him, as the Miracles of Christ in the days of
his flesh were numbered, as its said, this was the first Miracle that he did,
and this was the second Miracle that Jesus did after he came out of Judea into
Galilee: So also the Miracles that Christ did work in glory are all numbered;
as the Lord numbers the several degrees of his enemies downfall, in seven
Seals, seven Trumpets, and seven Vials; so he does number also the several
degrees of his peoples deliverances; and 2 Numb. 14.22. he does number their
sins answerable unto the number of his mercies; they have seen my Miracles in
Egypt, and in the wilderness, and they have provoked and tempted me now these
ten times: it is true that the mercies God bestows on us are a multitude of
mercies, and it is as easy for us to number the stars as it is to count them
all; but though we cannot do it, yet God can do it, and he does it, who can
tell the number of the stars, and call them all by their names, Psalm. 71.15.
David says, that he would show forth the salvations of God all the day long,
for I know not the number of them, etc. and we must consider God has his set
number of mercies for a people; if they abuse them and walk unworthy of them,
he will not show mercy for ever, he will not draw forth his loving kindness
from generation to generation: Cessat descensus si in perpetuum ascensus
cessat; as Belishazers Kingdom was numbered, the Lord wrote a memorial for him,
so he will write a memorial upon some mercies, as the number of sins is
finished, as Antichrist has his Numbers, the number of the beast is the number
of a man, etc. and mercies may have their number also: even your mercies: the
Lord may say, Now your prosperity is numbered, your deliverances and victories
are numbered, I will deliver you no more, as our Lord Christ after his
satisfaction is said to finish transgression, and make an end of sin: so men by
their transgressions may finish and make an end of mercy also, it may come to
its full number. Now why does the Lord in this manner record and number the
mercies he has bestowed upon a people? surely it is in reference unto a
Judgment: he will call them to an account for the place where he set them, on
a fruitful hill; the wall he made about them of protection, the wine press of
Ordinances that he set up in them, and the overthrow of their enemies that he
wrought for them.

Thirdly, the abuse of mercies is by God imputed to men, and punished by him:
woe to Ariel: Ariel was either the Altar of God where the sacrifices were
offered, or the Lion of God, quod vicinas Gentes subjugasset: and yet there is
a woe unto them: Have I been a Wilderness to you, or a Land of darkness? and
what iniquity have your Fathers found in me? therefore I will be a Lion unto
Ephraim, and as a Leopard I will observe them. And what are these but ultimi
judicii praeindicium? for now the reasons of Gods Judgments are secret, and no
soul sees them, but the Lord will make it appear in the day (...); the day of
Revelation of his righteous Judgment, and all the Nations of the world shall
see that it is not without cause all that the Lord has done: therefore
particular Judgments are resemblances of the general Judgment; its said, the
Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, Rev. 6.12,13,14.
There was a great earthquake, and the Sun became black as a sackcloth of
hair, etc. which some have misapplyed unto the day of Judgment, because of the
resemblance in the description of it: but it has a great resemblance because
it was all in reference to it; therefore all the mercies that people do
receive, they are in reference to an account.

Doctrine 4.
Fourthly, answerable unto men's receipts, so shall their account be; they that
have received much, shall account for much: and they that have received little,
shall but for a little; he that has received five talents must look to reckon
for five: and he that has received but two, shall count for no more; it is
some kind of comfort unto them that have received but a few talents, that they
count but for a few; as he did comfort his friends that had but one eye, he
should count but for the sins of one eye; and it is a comfort unto godly men
many times, who have little of the things here below, that their account for
them shall be less then many another man's; and it is a great ground of fear and
terror unto them who have received much from God; surely great will their
account be; some shall account for an hundred talents, and others but for few:
indeed much mercy is sweet in the receipt, but it is sad in the account; and yet
thus it must be upon a double ground.

First, because all the mercies of God are given unto eternal ends, and
therefore they shall all of them be brought forth and accounted for in the
eternal Judgment; its true that the Lord has some temporal acts that he does
in time, but he has no temporalends; they are all of them eternal: and all
that men do, all their actions also are in reference unto eternal ends;
therefore they shall all be brought forth at the eternal judgment; so shall
all that the Lord does also, and though the frame of this world shall stand but
for a season, yet the Lord will have an eternal glory thereby, when all the
creatures shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God; so though there be great variety of mercies given
to the children of men, yet the glory that God shall have by them shall be
everlasting glory: as it is in our acts of sin, though it be but for a season,
yet the misery will be everlasting: so though Gods acts to the creature in this
life be but temporal, yet the glory of them will be everlasting; there is not
any one of these temporal mercies that you enjoy, but the Lord does them to
eternal ends, and therefore he will reap by them eternal glory; and therefore
some make that the meaning of that place, Eccles. 3.14. What ever the Lord
does, he does for ever; ab imutabilitate; men can change none of the works that
they do; indeed men may do works in one age, which the next age may destroy and
pluck down; but men cannot do so of the worksof God: what he does, there is no
man can add to it, or take from it. For the ends of all Gods works they have
all of them reference to eternity: he does them all for an eternal end, which
shall remain; when the work is destroyed, yet it shall attain its end, and
shall redound unto his eternal glory.

Secondly, because all the Judgments of God shall be righteous Judgments;
now, righteousness does consist in a proportion; therefore it shall be exactly
answerable unto men's sins which they have committed; and to the mercies which
they have received; it must neither exceed nor fall short: there is a great
deal of difference between acts of sovereignty and dominion in God when the
will of God only is to be looked upon, and the acts of his Justice wherein he
will deal with the creature by a rule, and will plead with him in a rational
way, so as he shall in the Judgments of God be his own Judge also; therefore
he is said, Esa. 28.17. to lay Judgment to the line, and Righteousness to the
plummet, that is, summa equitate jus reddere. Forer.
Forer. Therefore the Lord will be very exact in it, in setting men's accounts
in order before them; for Jesus Christ shall Judge as man; by the man Christ
Jesus; and therefore it shall be done in such a way as men may be capable of,
and may understand the reason of his proceedings; that so they may justify the
Lord: and therefore the Saints are said to Judge the world, because they shall
be assessors with him when they shall hear the mercies that he has bestowed,
and how he does require of men his own again in that great day of their account.

Use.
If it be so that answerable to men's receipts shall their account be; then let
us consider our mercies that God has bestowed upon us; what persons, what
people can equal us in mercies? surely such will our account be without
parallel; we are all for receiving mercies, at receipts we are good: but who
does think of his account? Go to now you rich men; weep and howl you great men;
men of great gifts, men of high place, men of great interest, let me tell you,
answerable unto all this will your account be; ye that pride your selves in
what you have received, and never consider what will be required for all this:
as it is a great Judgment to sow much and to bring in little, so you are the
most miserable men alive, to have received much and returned so little.

The same is also true of Ordinances: you that receive much, Manna from heaven
is rained upon you every day, consider what your returns are: the ground that
drinks in the rain, that comes often upon it, and bears briars and thorns, is
nigh to cursing; surely you that keep days of Thanksgiving now, and do not
live thankfully, do not return to God accordingly, you will have a time when
you shall curse the day of your mercies, and wish that the light of it had
never dawned upon you.

But what is the thing that shall be required? it shall not be in the thing,
but in the fruit: the mercy indeed God bestows upon us, but he expects the
fruit from us, and that he will surely require of us: and more particularly he
will require these four things.

First, with what hearts did you receive this mercy? did you receive it with a
heart set upon the mercy it self, or else was your heart carried out toward
the God of the mercy? Hannah received mercy in a son: I but, says she, My
heart rejoices in the Lord, 1 Samuel 2.1. Can any of you say, it is not the
thing we rejoice at so much as the presence of God, and the appearances of God,
and the return of prayers; and without this the mercy would have no sweetness
in it? how were our hearts carried toward God in the receiving of it? how are
they drawn out in the remembrance of it? Ordinances are nothing without the
enjoyment of God in them; even heaven is nothing without the enjoyment of God
there: and therefore mercies are nothing of themselves any further then the
soul savours God in the mercies: as he said, Give me mercies O Lord, but give
me thy self in them; give deliverances, but give me thy self in them: To love
the gift more then the giver, it is an adulterous affection: the Lord hates it,
Zach. 11.5. Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich: and so many may say, I wish
there were none such amongst you, that say, blessed be the Lord, for I am
preserved, we are delivered, and say that in an hypocritical and formal way:
men may bless God whose spirits are not at all drawn out to God: and to rejoice
in a mercy from God, and not in the God of the mercy, is to rejoice in a thing
of naught; creatures without God are vanity, and mercies without God are a lie;
so it is with the soul that is filled with the blessing, but not with the Lord;
and as the heart should be filled with the love of God, so also it should be
filled with the fear of God. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness. There are no dispensations of God more aweful to a gracious heart,
then the discoveries of goodness: how shall I be ever able to answer this
goodness of God, says a gracious heart? as the neere^ the Lord comes to any in
ways of grace, the more the fear of God is exalted in their souls: I am undone
because my eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts: so the more God draws near unto a
man or a people in the ways of mercy, how dreadful is it to the soul! it
rejoices with trembling; but men usually being delivered from the fear of
their enemies, they are deprived of the fear of their Redeemer; its a sad
Judgment when mercy hardens men's hearts from the fear of God.

This is all that the Lord requires, Deuteronomy. 10.12. What does the Lord thy God
require of thee but to fear the Lord thy God? etc. Surely the Lord that looks
with what heart we receive our punishments, and therefore he requires that men
should accept the punishment; he does also look with what hearts men do accept
their mercies, their deliverances; and in our services that we perform to God,
we should eye with what hearts God receives them, Mal. 2.13. That he receives
it not with good will at their hands; We should also be sure that God looks
into our hearts to see how we accept his mercies; mea non placent nisi mecum,
tua non satiant, domine, nisi tecum. Bernard.


Secondly, how they are remembered by us? They remembered not his hand, nor the
day that he delivered them from their enemies, was the charge upon them. Psalm.
78.42. They soon forgot his works; nihil citius senescit; there is nothing that
obtains in our hearts an act of oblivion sooner then mercies, but they kept a
yearly remembrance of it; there was an Ordinance for the remembrance of it made
to that purpose in their generation, but it was not with affection and with
like, it was but a formal thing. Now that is in Scripture said not to be known,
which is not known with an affecting knowledge; and so that is said not to be
remembered, which is not remembered with an answerable affection and impression
of spirit; the Lord looks what impression Ordinances leave upon us, and what
impression mercies also leave upon us, and how the heart is molded and
fashioned by the one and by the other; the Apostle says, in Heb. 2.1. That we
ought to give the more earnest heed to the things we have learnt, lest we
should let them slip, etc. the word is, (...), and as we are to do so in the
Ordinances that we partake in; so also we had need of the same mercies that we
receive, and to remember the affections that were stirred up in us when we did
partake of them; so it is on the other also, and if that be not done, the
truths we hear are forgotten, and so are the mercies also if our memories prove
leaking vessels; charta bibula, let the mercies be what they will, that the
Lord writes upon us, yet they run abroad in us, and come to nothing, that they
cannot afterward be read by us: there is a demy-appearance of mercies; as
spiritual appearances of comfort, if there be barely the remembrance of them
that it was so, but be no affections stirred up in it, the soul is not cheared
by it; so it is in the remembrance of mercies also, only a dull (...), and no
more: in regard of our own seize, we should forget that which is behind;
but in regard of the Lords mercies, we should never so press toward that which
is before, that that which is behind should be forgotten; and the least mercies
should be regarded with most life; They shall say no more the Lord lives that
brought his people out of Egypt, but the Lord lives that brought his people out
of the North Country, etc. Jer. 23.7,8. Those mercies which were then called
crowning mercies: I should think so too, if I could see the crown set upon the
head of Christ in them, the King exalted in his glory, etc.

Thirdly, how they have been improved, and what has been returned unto God for
them, What shall I return unto the Lord? etc. Hezekiah returned not according
to all that God did for him.

Let me put some questions to you, to what ends you think God has wrought
deliverance for you? First, was it that the Truths of God might be corrupted?
In Jerusalem there shall be deliverance and holiness: and is the first step to
holiness the subversion of Truth? it remains as a brand upon their Tayls for
ever, Rev. 9.7,10. Their faces were as the faces of men, and they were locusts;
they conquered wheresoever they came, but they had a sting in their tails; they
corrupted Religion wheresoever they came, and is the way to holiness to corrupt
truth? that cuts up holiness by the root: shall it be said, this is the Army
that conquered all enemies, but generally poisoned the people whom they
conquered? and shall it be said in this age, men asserted the liberties of men,
but corrupted the truths of God? shall we contend for every thing but truth?
and this is a Truth, there are fundamentals in Religion: let scorners say, what
are fundamentals? let me say, how long halt you between two opinions? etc.

Secondly, were you delivered that your brethren might be oppressed, that some
few men might share Nations between them? I looked for Judgment and behold a
cry; I, and its a cry that will enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath,
every man is for gain from his quarter: and no man abates of his own private
interest, whatever he can stretch forth his hand unto he takes, let the people
be oppressed, yea authority overawed, rather then we be retrenched, we groan
under the peoples oppressions, and yet we are the greatest oppressors, let all
opposition be removed, that so none but we may oppress.

Thirdly, to trample the Ministry under your feet, and to remove that standing
Ordinance, to pluck the stars out of the right hand of Christ; but yet they
will be preserved notwithstanding all opposition: and take the Jesuits counsel
Contzen, begin with them first, that there may be none able to maintain any
thing in the Religion which we oppose, and error cui patrocinium deerit sine
pugna concidet.

Fourthly, was it that the Ordinances of God might be by every one profaned,
and to turn liberty unto Libertinism, a free liberty to make Arminians,
Socinians? etc. and all manner of abominations, and they must not be
restrained, no nor discountenanced, though the Apostle will not allow a man to
show that common humanity to them that he would do to a Heathen: Receive them
not into your house, because they bring not this truth; is there nothing men
have to dally with but the truths of Christ? is there nothing to be turned into
wantonness but the grace of God? it is the word of his grace; were we delivered
to commit all these abominations? etc.

I beseech you, nay, charge you, to beware of these things: else first your
mercies will be witnesses against you, and let me tell you, then the witness of
mercies and of conscience, there are not any more dreadful, but him who has
said, I will be a swift witness, etc.

Secondly, your deliverance is then not in mercy, but in wrath; men's pleasures
may become plagues, and their liberty their destruction.

Thirdly, if you forsake God, then your deliverances will be your ruin, Josh.
24.20. if you depart from him after he has done you good, he will turn and do
you hurt; but consider the Lord does make glorious promises to his people,
Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, etc. and the glorious Lord will be unto
us a place of broad Rivers, Esa. 33.21. Rivers, first for fruitfulness, Deuteronomy.
10.7. a fruitful land, a land of Rivers, etc. Secondly, defense, Amos 3.8.
Whose rampant was the Sea, and whose wall was from the Sea. Thirdly, for
plenty, Esa. 23.3. The harvest of the River is her revenue, and this is a Mart
of Nations, etc. And whereas Siloah was a little River, what they wanted in the
creature should be supplied in God, he would be a place of broad Rivers to
them. But Rivers may give access to enemies, as well as do good to the
inhabitants; there were but two sorts of ships, some for burdens, and some for
war: but no galley with oars, or ships for war should pass; but the supplies
from God shall be without any inconvenience, they shall receive good from God
without evil, etc.

Fourthly, consider how mercies shall be avenged, there is no provocations like
unto them of sons and daughters, because there are none that are so much
against mercy; and those mercies that are not returned in thankfulness and
obedience, will surely be required in punishment: in rewards the Lord does not
return unto men according to their services, but he does reward men in the
(...) of mercy, Hos. 10.12. but punishments shall be answerable to abused
mercy, and that either here or hereafter: there is no people so highly the
people of his curse as those that have been the people of his mercies, and
those to whom he has shown most love: you have I known of all the Nations of
the earth, etc. therefore you will I punish, Amos 3.3. and its mercy and light
that will be the great aggravations of men's sins hereafter; the Lord does come
to ask fruit here in ways of grace, but he will exact hereafter in ways of
Justice, for he will not lose any of his mercies; but if he has them not
returned here in way of thankfulness, he will hereafter in a way of torment, as
men's mercies have been, so shall their torments be; the greater vessels of
mercy men have been in this life, the greater and the larger vessels of wrath
they shall be in the life to come, for mercy here does but enlarge the heart
for wrath hereafter.

The upright Heart, AND Its DARLING Sin.
PSALM 18.23. I was also upright before him, and kept my self from mine
iniquity.


DAvid now being grown old, his enemies being subdued, the promise that God
made to him fulfilled, and the Kingdom settled upon his head, and he was not
only delivered from the danger of the hand of Saul, but also from the fear of
the house of Saul* he cannot let the remembrance of such a mercy pass without a
song of praises (though for particular deliverances he made particular songs
before) that God might have praise is his end in bestowing mercy, and it should
be our end in desiring mercy; and they are our greatest assurance of enjoying
of mercies, when Gods enlarging of his hand is also a means of enlarging of our
hearts, for he does expect no other sacrifice but the calves of our lips: Here
are four or five things that David here takes notice of.

First, he sets forth the greatness of the danger that he was in, the sorrows
of death compassed me round about, etc.

Secondly, the glory of the deliverance, and that was as an answer unto prayer.

Thirdly, the fruit of it; and to be unfruitful under mercies is the greatest
barrenness, for they drop fatness, and not only the fruit of the lips, words in
labris nata; but it must be from inward and hearty affections, e sulco
pectoris: God expects special fruit under mercies, or under crosses, and if he
comes to find fruit upon a fig tree dunged, he will be much displeased if he
find none: Now the fruit of the mercy is threefold.

First, the love of God is enlarged and inflamed, the more mercy a gracious
heart receives, the more abundant he is in love to God, for our love to God is
but by reflection, we love God; because he loved us first: and the more the soul
tastes of Gods love in a mercy, the more it does draw forth in him love to God
again; much was forgiven her, therefore she loved much: so much is given to a
Saint by God, therefore he loves God much.

Secondly, his confidence in God is enlarged; the Lord is my rock and my
fortress, my deliverer; and when I call upon him, I shall be saved from mine
enemies, the Lord is the God of salvations, and to him belong the issues from
death, and this God I have an interest in, he is mine by Covenant, and he is by
my experience all this to me.

Thirdly, he is by this quickened and encouraged unto prayer, therefore I will
call upon the Lord, and I will pray to him in all dangers, and my cry shall
come before him, it shall enter into his ears, etc. The proper fruit of mercy
indeed, is the inflaming of a man's love to God, and the strengthening of a man's
faith, and his encouragement and the enlarging of a man's heart in prayer.

Fourthly, he sets down the grounds of all these mercies.

First, Gods free grace (...) because it was Gods good pleasure, and from this
fountain do issue all Gods mercies to the Saints, as Christ resolves it, Mat.
11.25. Even so Father, for so was thy good pleasure; nay the greatest blessings
that ever were bestowed upon a creature, and the highest advancement that the
creature was capable of, the union of the humane nature with the Godhead, to
be ex nullo merito sed gratis.

Secondly, in the person to whom the mercy is bestowed, for as God stands in a
peculiar Covenant Relation to his people, so he has a peculiar providence over
them, Job 29.4. The secret of the Lord is upon their Tabernacle, and according
to their integrity the Lord will appear for them, and own them in trouble: God
is with his people at all times, but he is nearest to them in the worst times.
And here there was first, Justitia causae; the Lord has undertaken the cause
of the oppressed, and the relief of the innocent. Now they charged me with
treachery, with a design to kill the King, and to take the Kingdom as a man
that raised sedition, and civil wars in the Nation, the Lord knows, in this my
integrity, according to the uprightness of my heart, and the cleanness of my
hands has he recompensed me. Secondly, Justitia personae, a legal
righteousness there cannot be, so there is none righteous, no not one; but
there is that which in Gods account goes for righteousness evangelical, and
that is sincerity and truth in the inward parts, God delights in the works of
his own spirit, and in rewarding the graces that he himself has wrought in a
man; Qui tribuit ut benefacerem, secundum puritatem factorum retribuit mihi.
August.
Aust. in loc. Now he shows wherein this sincerity does appear in these three
things.

First, I have not departed from God wickedly; that is, with a purpose and
resolution of heart to continue in a way of sinning, and that is the property
of sincerity; a man indeed may be over-taken and surprised by a temptation, but
it is not with a resolution to forsake God, and to cleave unto the sin, or rest
in it, he will not sleep in it, spare it or favor it; that is, to do wickedly
against God, to have a double heart, and a double eye: to look upon two
objects, partly at God, and partly at sin; so to keep God, as to keep some sin
also, as it is with all false hearted men in the world, they look not upon god
alone, let them pretend to Religion never so much, yet they look not unto God
alone but upon something else together with God; as Herod he regarded John, but
regarded his Herodias more; and the young man in the Gospel, comes to Christ,
yet he looks after his estate; and Judas followed Christ, yet looks after the
bag, this is to depart wickedly from the Lord.

Secondly, all his Judgments were before me: a sincere and an upright heart
has a respect to all the Commandments; as its said of David, Acts 13.22. A man
after Gods own heart, he must fulfill all his wills; not only easy duty, but
difficult duty; not only those that are in fashion, but those that are out of
fashion, and are discountenanced amongst men; in the least as well as in the
greatest; for the whole Law is written in the heart; and his obedience
thereunto is universal, Romans 6.17. And the more of Gods authority there is in
the Law, the deeper impression it has upon the spirit.

Thirdly, I was also upright before him, and I kept me from mine iniquity. A
sincere heart has the most serious resolutions, the most unfeigned
detestations, and therefore the greatest and the most diligent watchings
against his own iniquity, that sin to which his nature is most prone, and
wherein he is most apt (and has commonly been) to be ensnared.

In the words are two things. First David's profession of his sincerity.
Secondly, his testification of it.

First, I was upright (...) perfect, there is a twofold perfection; First a
legal perfection, which is a perfect conformity in nature, and in life to the
Law of God; such as was in Adam in the state of his innocence, and this the
Papists contend to be attainable even in this life; but here, Who can say my
heart is clean? or I am purged from my sin? therefore surely this was not the
perfection David here speaks of, for his failings were known and confessed by
himself, and remain upon record, known and read of all men.

Secondly, there is an evangelical perfection, a perfection according to the
tenor of the second Covenant, and this is twofold.

First, in a man's Justification, and so a man is perfefectly justified that is
in Christ; for, we are made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.22. So we
are said to be complete in Christ, and by his blood to have no more conscience
of sin. So the Church is said to be all fair, and to have no spot in her; and
so, by one offering the Lord has for ever perfected them that be sanctified;
Heb. 10.14.

Secondly, a perfection of Sanctification, and this is perfect in the parts of
it, that is, 1 These. 5.23. when a man is sanctified throughout; that is, in
every part, though he be not perfectly sanctified in any part; perfect holiness
is the aim of the Saints upon earth, though it be only the reward of the Saints
in heaven; and here God accepts of the will for the deed, and looks upon the
things that they aim at as already attained, for his end; in their
predestination was their conformity to the image of his son, Romans 8.29. And
according to that end, the Lord looks upon them as Christ shall present them,
without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; so that they that are perfect,
First, in the perfection of their holiness. Secondly, in their aims. Thirdly,
it shall at last end in perfection, When that which is perfect is come, then
that which is in part shall be done away, and they shall be the souls of just
men made perfect, Heb. 12. And it is this last that is the perfection God
ascribes to his people; to Noah, Genesis 6.9. to Abraham, Genesis 17.2. Job 1.1.
there is a perfection with men, as Paul says he was, Phil. 3. Concerning the
righteousness of the Law blameless; but though I know nothing by my self, yet I
am not thereby justified; for the eyes of the Lord they are pure eyes, and he
looks not as man looks; men look upon the appearance, but God looks upon the
heart. There are three expressions of this in the Scripture. First, to walk
with God, as its said of Enoch, Genesis 5.22. and Noah, Genesis 6.9. Secondly,
Abraham, Genesis 17.2. God says, Walk before me; the word is, (...) in the sight
and presence of God, having always a respect unto his allseeing eye. Thirdly,
there is a walking after God, Numb. 14.24. Caleb walked after God: and to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes; that is, in reference unto the precepts of
God, the providence of God, and the pattern and example of God, and these
three expressions set forth a choice perfection. First, in all a man's ways to
have an eye to Gods presence. Secondly, to see God going before him in his
precepts, and his providence, and example, to be imitators of him. Thirdly, to
walk with him; that is, in all these to enjoy Communion with him, and to
approve a man's heart unto him, as David does here, I was upright before him.

Hence observe: First, that a godly man may have his heart upright and perfect,
even in the imperfect on of his ways.

Secondly, a man that is sincere is in Gods account a perfect man: sincerity is
the truth of all grace, the highest pitch that is to be attained here.

Thirdly, sinceerity of heart gives a man boldness, even in the presence of
God, notwithstanding many failings. The Lord does charge the Angels with folly,
Job 4.18. how much more man that dwells in a house of clay? David whose faith
had failed, and he said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; and his
tongue had faltered also to Abimilech the Priest; three or four several lies he
had told, yet David can say to God, that he was perfect with him, for all that;
it is a strange boldness that the Saints have in the presence of God, by virtue
of the New Covenant, all their sins shall be laid open at the last day as a
canceld bond, that they wonder how they shall look upon them and not blush, but
the same spirit of sonship that shall give them perfect boldness then, does
give them boldness in a great measure, begins in this life; that they shall be
able to say, Neither height nor depth, etc. Nothing shall separate us from the
love of Christ.

Now for the testification of it, how did he prove this perfection? Why by
this, I have kept my self from mine iniquity; the word in the Hebrew, (...)
some interpreters do refer unto his enemies that he had many corrupt affections
that were ready to break forth, and in all this time he had very great
temptations, but yet his care had been to keep them under, that they got not
the power over him; sometimes his unbelief did arise, and he was full of
despairing thoughts: to see that all men were liars, and the promise of God
would fail them: sometimes the revenge of his spirit did arise, that he had
motions to avenge himself with his own hand, and sometimes the impatience of
his spirit in reference unto the mercy promised, that he could not stay Gods
time, but to have used indirect means to accomplish it: but he did watch
against all these, and did not suffer them to carry him headlong, etc. But
there are some Interpreters that commonly refer itun to someproper and peculiar
evil, and way of sinning that David had respect unto here, which the Fathers
commonly call peccatum in delitiis, a man's special darling, and beloved sin;
and what ever that was, David testified his uprightness by it, that his care
was to keep himself from it.

[Keep himself] who made man his own Keeper? its the Lord that is his Keeper:
He is the Keeper of Israel, and the preserver of man; if a man cannot keep
himself from sorrow, how is he able to keep himself from sin? God indeed in our
first conversion works upon us as he did upon the earth or Adams body in
Paradise, before he breathed a soul into it, and made it a living creature;
such a power as Christ put forth upon Lazarus in his grave; for we are dead in
trespasses and sins; but yet being living, he must walk and act of himself, the
Lord will have us to cooperate together with him, for we are built upon
Christ, not as dead, but as living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. The grace whereby we are
made alive is his, and the power is his, he it is that works in us both to will
and to do: when we perform any thing, and yet by his grace we do it also: ille
facit ut nos faciamus, quae praecepit. August.


So we are said to cleanse our selves, 2 Cor. 7.1. and to purge our selves, 2 Timothy 2.21. and to keep our selves, 1 John 5.19. he keeps himself that the
wicked one touches him not, etc. Grace is the new creature a new nature: and
therefore has sympathy and antipathy answerable thereunto, to desire the
things that make for it, and to rise up against the things that are against it,
as all other natures in the world have a principle to seek their own
preservation.

Doctrine.
Hence the Doctrine is, Even the best and dearest of Gods people have some sins
that they are more prone to then others; which may be called their own iniquity.

Secondly, that the main power of grace is seen and exercised in a man's
preservation from these.

Thirdly, that for a man by the power of grace to be active against these, is a
special testification of an upright heart.

Here first, we are to enquire what is a man's own iniquity?

Secondly, what is it for a man to keep himself from it.

Thirdly, how and in what respects is this a sign of a sincere and a perfect
heart?

Fourthly, apply it?

First, what is a man's own iniquity? Here consider, in every man by nature sin
does reign, and a man is in just judgment given up unto the power of it; quod
venditur, transit in potestatem ementis: but the reign of sin is double,
virtual and actual; virtual, so every sin does reign, for it is original sin,
the Law in the members that is properly the King, and in preparation as the
Kingdom of sin shall require; sometimes it requires a man to commit this sin,
and then another, and many times makes men commit those sins that before they
abhorred and started at the thought of, as we see it in Hazael.

But the actual reign of sin, is commonly of some particular master-lust, which
is as the viceroy over all the rest of the sins in the soul, and commands them
all as Lord paramount, and makes them all subservient and subordinate unto it,
and this is according to custom, calling, constitution, abilities, relations,
and according to the different administrations of the spirit of God; for though
God be not the Author of sin, yet he is the Orderer of sin. So that, it is that
way of sin and death that a man choseth to himself, he having looked abroad
upon all the contentments of the world, his own corrupt inclination does chose
unto himself to follow with greatest sweetness and contentment, and delight, as
that wherein the happiness of his life consists; that as in the body there is
in every one some predominant humor; So there is in the body of sin also; That
as in the natural man, though there be all the faculties, yet some faculties
are in some more lively and vigorous then in others, some are more witty, some
are more strong, some quick of sight, some have a ready ear, and others a
nimble tongue, etc. So it is in the old man also, there is all the power of sin
in an unregenerate man, but in some more dexterous one way then another; as men
in the choice of calling, some have a greater inclination to one thing then to
another, so it is in the choice of contentments also: as in the appetite for
food, so it is in lust, being nothing else but the appetite of the creature
corrupted to some sinful object.

As in the regenerate man, though there be the whole new man wrought, all
graces at once, yet there are some peculiar graces wherein some men excel
above others; Abraham in faith; and Moses in meekness; Job in patience; Joseph
in chastity; David in height of spiritual affections; Solomon in wisdom; and in
zeal Hezokiah: and therefore we shall in Scripture read it after, that there
was none before him, nor none such shall arise after him; it is to be
understood in reference unto their peculiar graces, wherein they did excel, as
their proper excellency; so it is in the old man, there be peculiar
corruptions, the whole body of sin is in every man, but yet some sins are more
predominant in some men more then others, as Jeroboam for idolatry, and Herod
his uncleanness, Baalam his ambition, Came his envy, Corah his gainsaying, and
Esau his profaneness, Ismael was a scoffer, and Judas his coveteousness, the
young man in the Gospel was a worldling, etc. and this is the sin that a man
may truly and properly call his own; and though the reigning power of this sin
be broken in a man's conversion, yet there are the remainders of corruption that
Satan will assault a man again withal, and varnish it so over, that the man
shall fall in love with it; and as Tertullian says of an apple which is rotten
on the one side, men may not be drawn to like it when that is discoverd, yet if
it looks well on the other side, a man may be induced by that fair appearance
to taste it, etc. And Satan will think to enter at the same door, and by the
same Dalilah that he formerly prevailed with, he will try to prevail again; and
the former pleasure of the sin will offer it self to a man, so that even to a
godly man it will be a hard thing to keep himself from this iniquity.

Secondly, what is it for a man to keep himself from his iniquity? I shall a
little open this to you in six particulars.

First, he takes care to keep the evil of that sin always in his eye, and to
keep himself lo^ in this consideration, that he has been guilty of it in times
past: as we see, Paul's darling lust was persecution in the days of his
unregeneracy, and he never lets that go out of his mind, to humble him, 1 Timothy
1.15. I was a persecutor, and I was an avenger: and when the blood of thy
Martyr Stephen was shed, I was consenting unto his death, and kept the clothes
of them that slew him, etc. And last of all, Christ was seen of me, as of one
born out of due time, not worthy to be called an Apostle, the least of Saints,
the greatest of sinners, I persecuted the Church of God; what sins soever he
left out in his confession, he never forgets that from day to day.

Secondly, there is no sin that the heart of man is more perfectly set against:
ind eed as a godly man's opposition unto sin is universal, as well as his
obedience unto God, there will be a hatred of every false way; but yet he hates
that sin most, and breaks out against it with the greatest detestation, by
which God has been most dishonored, and whereby his conscience has been most
inslaved in times past, Hos. 14.8. They shall say, what have I to do any more
with Idols? they did formerly think their choicest gold scarce good enough to
frame their Idols of, but now they think no place bad enough to cast them upon,
Esa. 2.20. and 30.22. To the moles and to the bats, and they shall cast them
away as a menstrous cloth, and say unto them, Get you hence, etc.

Thirdly, he is in this above all other sins most jealous of his heart; he
fears it in respect of every occasion, and opportunity, and temptation. Peter,
his evil was frowardness and self confidence; there was no sin that after
Peter's fall he was further from, Joh. 21.21. Lord thou know I love thee; no
more comparisons now, etc. So Austin being often ensnared in uncleanness in his
younger time, he was most careful to avoid all occasions of it afterward, etc.

Fourthly, this sin he prays most against; and if it be a Devil, that's the way
to cast it out, and usually it will not go out any other way, he does it by
fasting and prayer, and calls in the assistance of Christ and his Almighty
power for his preservation.

Fifthly, he turns the edge of the threatening against this sin; for the same
method that the spirit of God does use, that does the soul also use, for sin
will die by no other sword, Dan. 4.27. Nebuchadnezars sin had been cruelty and
oppression, now he would have him break it off, by showing mercy to the poor,
as before he had made many poor: John Baptist that preached to Herod, who heard
him gladly, yet he sticks at his Herodias: and Paul being to preach to Felix, a
corrupt and a lascivious Judge, he does it of righteousness, and temperance,
and judgment to come; and John met with their peculiar sin, which was
selfishness in the people, extortion in the publican, and violence and rapine
in the soldiers; and Christ to the woman of Canaan, Go call thy husband, Ioh.
14.16. And to the young man, One thing thou lackest, go sell all that thou
have; so, a man that knows the corruption that oftnest leads him captive, he
sets the edge of the word against it.

Sixthly he does endeavor to grow up in the contrary grace, and strengthens it
by all means; as we see Zacheus his sin was worldliness and defrauding, now he
grew in restitution and liberality; the sin of the Jailer was cruelty, now he
grows up in courtesy; and Paul was a persecutor, but now a preacher: he thinks
he can never do enough to advance and exalt that which before he did labor to
his utmost endeavor to destroy, I labored more abundantly then they all.

Thirdly, How does this prove a sincere heart?

First, This does show a man to be truly affected with Gods dishonor; there is
no way of evil wherein he has so much dishonored God as in this; now looking
upon sin, as a wrong unto God, that wherein he has dishonored God most with,
that he is affected most with.

Secondly, This is a sin that he has found the power of Satan most in, and his
own weakness most unable to resist, and therefore against this sin he sets
himself with the greatest earnestness, this his sin did lie at his door in the
guilt of it, Genesis 4.7. which is a miserable thing, talem habere Janitorem. This
he did in the guilt of it, most fear, and therefore this in the power and
dominion of it he does most hate, which he does show a holy revenge against.

Thirdly, This shows the truth of a man's self-denial, and his hatred against
sin: there be some members in the body of sin, that a man can be content to
have them pared when they grow troublesome excrements, or prejudice him in his
reputation or advance in the world: but now for a man willingly to cut off a
right hand, and pluck out a right eye, when a man comes to that once, that he
will not spare his darling, he may be sure he hates sin indeed.

Fourthly, This shows forth the sincerity of a man's love to God: for Christ
says he that loves Father or Mother more then me, House or Land, that will not
part with these when God shall call for them, he is not worthy of me; now if a
man part with what is dearest, then his love to Christ is in truth; Abraham's
love to God appeared in this, that he did not spare Isaac; so we should do as a
token that Gods infinite love commanded us to part with it; as he spared not
his son, so shall we commend our love to God in this also, to part with that
morsel that we have tasted the greatest sweetness in.

Use.
Try the uprightness and sincerity of your hearts by this: can you say that you
have kept you from your own iniquity? many men profess Religion, and may go far
in a form of Godliness, and yet still their hearts run on after their former
darlings. Job 20.11,12,13. A sin that many a man carries with him to his grave,
and a man lies down in his grave with his bones full of a sin, that has been
bred and grown up with a man from his youth.

But how should a man know what that sin is?

First, It may be that which you may count a small sin, and that which may lie
in lawful things; the young man's darling was covetousness, and the thorny
ground, their lusts ran out in a lawful way, Mat. 13 22. A man's individual love
to a wife, to a child, etc. may draws a man's love from God, and ruin him, etc.

Secondly, this sin may be so far snibbed and pruned by the word, that for a
long time it may not appear, Heb. 12.15. A root of bitterness, yet it may lie
hid as a root in the ground a long time, and a man may cast it out at last, and
afterward he may return unto his vomit.

Thirdly, A man's darling may change with the change of a man's condition, and
some occasion that may present it self; what was Saul's and Jehues Sin before
they came unto the Crown we know not; but surely it was that wherein their lust
did afterward run out, the establishing of the Kingdom upon their posterity:
wantonness may be the darling of a man's youth, and worldliness the darling of
his age, and a man's being raised unto honor, and having the opportunities that
he had not in times past, the lust may run in another channel, he having now
such an opportunity that before he never expected.

How may a man know what it is?

First, It is that where a man's treasure is, Mat. 6.21. there a man's heart is.
Now all things do taste best at the fountain, and grapes at the wine press: Now
a man's thoughts are the immediate issues of the soul; let me ask thee where are
thy thoughts in the midst of thy employments? thou art impatient till thou have
leisure to take up thy mind wholly with thy treasure; and as Sampson, when thou
returnest unto thy self, thy retreats unto thy Dalilah.

Secondly, What sin is most sweet to thee, and brings thee in most delight and
pleasure? Job 20.11. It is sweeter to a man then any thing else, all other sins
have not that sweetness that this one sin has: it is the meat that his soul
lives upon from day to day, Psalm. 11.3. Wicked men's dainties.

Thirdly, this sin a man favors most, and hides most, he cannot endure to have
it crossed, as we see in Haman, Hest. 5.13. being crossed in his ambition, if his
darling be not pleased, all other things will do a man no good; and Herod also,
he will part with any thing, till it comes to his Herodias: this is a sweet
morsel, he hid it under his tongue: cannot endure to hear it reproved, etc.

Fourthly, this sin makes all the rest of a man's lusts serviceable unto it;
indeed men in their unregenerate state do serve diverse lusts and pleasures, but
all other lusts are subject and subordinate to this one.

Fifthly, if God have had any dealing with thy soul, any treaties by his spirit
in common works, what kept thee off from Christ? what was the remora that thou
could not come? it was Judas covetousness, and Herod's uncleanness, and the
young man's worldliness, after many heating motions, and they cool again, that
man is in an ill condition, Ezekiel. 7.19. The stumbling block of their iniquity,
Luke 8.13. There is a (...), an opportunity of temptation when such fall away.

Sixthly, what sin is it interrupts thee most in holy duties? for when all
other lusts are kept out, Satan will be sure to set these darling sins on to
speak for him, and the corrupt part within a man will join with him that these
may have audience, and when a subservient lust may not then be entertained, the
darling may, Ezekiel. 31.33. Ioh. 13.27,30. after Christ had been upon the Mount,
Satan tries their Communion by that, how their master-lust will take with them.

Try your hearts, how you stand affected unto this from day to day, and so
judge of the truth of your repentance and mortification, and the measure of it
by the subduing of your master-sin, for there is not a greater sign of an
unsound heart, then for a man to reserve and delight in a master sin, and that
root of bitterness will in time spring up, and thou shall again be defiled; and
thou will afterward return with the dog to his vomit, and it will be as a
secret curse from God to thy soul, and this sin being only kept under for some
time, it will as a dam to the water rise the higher, and as fire covered, break
forth with the greater violence, and make way for seven worse spirits, and so
thy latter end will be worse then the beginning.

I should now have enlarged these motives, to stir you up to take heed of this
sin; as,

First, this sin will be the ground of thy Apostasy; the stumbling block of thy
iniquity.

Secondly, this sin God will in Judgment give thee up to: restraining grace is
a mercy: now for a man to have his lust let out, for a man to be as wicked as
he will, to be let alone in sin, is a great Judgment, etc.

Thirdly, this will be thy torment for ever, Rev. 1.8. so much pleasure as she
has had, so much torment give her; the worm of conscience shall be in the
gnawing of this sin above all others, etc.

I should also have showed you, that these darling sins are either personal, or
national, or Church sins: and I should have given you instances of each of
these: as First, for personal stubborness in Pharaoh, gainsaying in Corah,
envy in Saul, churlishness in Nabal, ambition in Absalom, intemperance in
Felix, etc. Secondly, National; Curiosity in the Athenians, Acts 17.21. and
cruelty in the Babalonians, robbery in the Caldeans, etc. Thirdly, Church
sins, Idolatry was found in Israel, having those amongst them, that teach false
Doctrine of Balaam; and the Nicolaitans in the Church of Smyrna; suffering the
woman Jezebel to deceive and seduce my servants, in the Church of Thyatira;
having a name to live in the Church of Sardis; being lukewarm in the Church of
Laodicea; and abusing Church Power to the persecution of the Saints in the
Church of Rome; no man may buy or sell that has not the mark of the beast, and
there is sellingof the souls of men, and making merchandise of them, etc.

First, personal sins. I should now have proved that there are such sins.
Secondly, how a man should know what it is in him that is his Darling sin.
Thirdly, that this sin above all other sins is to be denied. But I cannot more
enlarge; The Lord give you the spirit of wisdom and understanding. Let us look
to God for a Blessing.

An Alphabetical Table of the Principal Heads and Matter in these preceding
Sermons.
A
Acts of God that he exercises, are of two sorts, p. 235 Adam, man was in him
two ways p. 343 Afflictions prevent sin p. 180 Afflictions are for
instruction, ibid Afflictions are for sanctification, p. 181 Agreement between
God and Man is twofold p. 340 All Israel, a double sense of it, p 272 All
Things are the Saints See after page 163. in p. 146 Angel applied to
Church Officers, p. 686 Angels differ in office p 49, 71 Angels additional
glory shall be made out to them ibid Angels, why impeccant p. 148 Angels that
never fell, what they have by Christ. Anger of God is twofold, p. 176
Antichrist, a threefold discovery of him p. 75 Antichrist, the fruit and
consequences that will follow upon his destruction p. 86 Antichrist rises in a
double Beast, p. ^78 Army has three things to make it orderly p. 93 Authority
threefold, erected by Christ p. 3^3
B
Babylon the great is fallen p. 70 Babylon, who speaks it? ib. Babylon, why so
called? p. 74 Babylon, how is it said, it is fallen, p. 75 Babylon shall
certainly fall p. 76 Babylons causes of destruction, p. 77 Babylons destruction
shall be double p. 81 Babylons destruction is matter of Triumph to the Saints
p. 84 Babylons consequences of her destruction p. 86 Babylons ruin, how to
improve it, p. 87 Barrenness perpetual, why inflicted for the neglect of the
Gospel, p. 19 Barrenness spiritual, are of three sorts p. 20 Barrenness
perpetual, why God gives men over to it p. 23 Barrenness has three several
steps and degrees p. 25 Battle bow, what it is p. 393 Beast that the woman
rides upon, what is it p. 73 Beast has three names given to it, ibid. Beast
full of eyes, what it notes, p. 570 Beasts, the four what they set forth p.
ibid. Blessed in the end: That a man may be so, directions for it p. 225
Bondage: see Covenant.
C
Candlesticks golden, how Christ is said to walk amongst them, p. 697 Calling
of the Jews. See Jews. Capernaums exprobation p. 311 Capernaums exaltation p.
312 Cases two, in which God gives his people early assurance p. 603 Christ has
a double reference to us, p. 143 Christ, how he has freed us from the Law p
344 Christ is God the Fathers servant, p. 638 Christ in him, there are two
things that should mainly take up our studies p. 637 Christ, how he came to be
a servant p. 640 Christ had in him instrumental fitness for his Fathers ends p.
642 Christ has a double Title p. 677 Christ, though in heaven yet he is still
in office p. 682 Christ, why he singles out the seven Churches of Asia to write
unto, p. 684 Christ's care of the Churches Officers p 686 Christ's care, what is
the act of it, and what is noted from it, p. 688, 689 Christ's care of the
Members, p. 693 Christians duty. See Perfection. Church, her power and glory in
time to come shall be visible p. 2 Church, her perfection stands in two things
p 91 Church, her order consists in three things p. 92 Church Officers are of
two sorts p 95 Church has three things in it differenced by the Lord p. 110
Churches (All) accepted of officers, p. 115 Church without officers a true
Church p 116 Church complete with officers, ibid. Church Authority is spiritual
p. 1^3 Church Power for spiritual ends, p. 124 Church comforted with assurance
of deliverance p. 466 Church, her glorious condition after deliverance p. 467
Church, why called a Candlestick, p. 693 Church, why instituted p. 694 Church,
why called a golden-Candlestick p 695 Church has a double foundation, p. 696
City, what is meant by it p. 5 Cleansing, men have great need of it p. 434
Cleansing, rules to know a man comes nearer the perfection of it, p. 437
Cleansing, the Motives to it, p. 440 Communion with God keeps upon the soul
such qualifications as make afflictions easy 150 Communion is the first fruit
of fruition p 163 Consenus the Jesuits advice p. 53 Consolations provided for
Gods people answerable to their afflictions p. 558 Consolations of David, or of
the Psalmist, what are they p. 559 Converse. See Heedlesness. Covenant twofold,
with a twofold head p. 142 Covenant has a double property, ibid. Covenant made
with mankind, p. 338 Covenant the second, to judge whether we be under it or no
p. 348 Covenant, he that is under the first, how he is in bondage p. 349
Covenant, what is spoken to them that are under the first p. 551 Covenants two
in the Galat. what is meant by them p. 336, 337 Covenants two, made with two
several heads p 340 Covenants under which men are, God deals with them
indifferently p. 45 Courage twofold p 618 Corner shall come out of him, what is
that, p. 391. See Magistrates. Crown, commonly belongs to the Saints p. 48
Crowns peculiar belong to some Saints ibid. Curse twofold upon the creature, in
reference to Man p. 528 Curse has two things in it, p. 215 Curse threefold
upon the creature, to all unregenerate men p. 546
D
David's temptations and afflictions, p. 134 David had three things discovered
to him of unregenerate men, p. 135 David was taught something of his own people
p. 136 Day of Trouble. See Trouble. Days five, great in Scripture, p. 167 Day,
none such like it p. 170 Death of the Saints has something that is peculiar to
them in it, p. 215 Deaths consequences p. 217 Decree, why so called p. 455
Deliverance, how to know it when it is near p. 185 Deliverance, to what ends
did God work it p. 730 Desertion is an act of Justice, p. 237 Desires of most
men, two things in it. p. 187 Destruction, how men bring it upon themselves p.
205 Destruction, how dangerous to Nations ibid. Discoveries, there are
different of the excellency of Christ's person to the Saints p. 575 Dishonor,
how to God p. 204 Dispensations present, compared with the rules of the word,
p. 183 Devil draws men from Christ two ways p. 52 Devil, how he is gratified
p. 204 Dominion is twofold. See p. 148. follow p. 163 Draw near to God, in evil
times is good p. 137 Draw near, what is it, ibid. Draw near, why is it good p
146 Draw near to God, how to be improved p. 152 Draw near to God, how we
should, p. 154 Duties difficult in Religion. See Officers, People. p. 56 Die,
when Godly men die, they are to be lamented p. 221 Die, the death of the
righteous, Considerations of it, Page 224. See wisemen.
E
Election. See Pastors. Ends 4. principal appointed Christ to accomplish p. 642
Ends additional accomplished by Christ p. 646 Ends of God, what are they on the
world at present p. 679 Estrangement of sinners. See Sinners. Evangelists
appointed by the Apostles to set up Officers p 115 Evil twofold that befell the
creature. See p. 148. follow p. 163 Exactors, what it is p. 394 Ezekiel, some
light into his 8. last Chapters p. 3
F
Faith and hope differ. See p. 152. follow p. 163 Faith, its acts p. 184 Faith
must be striven for p. 189. or else dangerous ibid. Faith has several acts p.
485 Fast, why Christ did so p. 590 Fat waxed, it has a double signification p.
520 Fearlesness of Judgment. p. 153 Fellowship has peculiar times, p. 157 Fit
for service, what will make a man p. 652 Fitness instrumental, a great honor
to God p. 651 Forsake God, he that does it shall be forsaken of him p. 234 To
Forsake God, what is it p. 248 Forsake God, how men do so. See p. 247. follow
p. 248 Forsaken, the grounds of it are different p. 243 Forsaken of God, what
is it p. 258 Forsaken by God, the misery it brings p. 265 Foundation double p.
228 Fruitfulness is an Argument of Christ's delighting in a man, p. 21 Fruits of
mercy. See Mer^ Fullness of sin p. 153
G
Galleries wherein Gods people walk are two p. 145 Gifts of the spirit are of
two sorts, p. 41 Gifts that Christ bestows, he has a double ground for it p.
711 Gifts are not bestowed upon all persons in the same measure, p. 714 Gifts
are not measured unto all ages alike p. 719 Gifts, God will reckon with men for
them p. 706 Glory additional, shall be made out to the Angels p. 49 Godly man's
description p. 209 Godly men die not as others do, p. 211 Godliness, its duties
are of two sorts, p. 589 Goodness of God, the evil in not returning according
to it p. 2^9 Goodness of God. Take notice of it, p. 649. Gospel neglected, when
punished with perpetual Barrenness p. 19 Gospel wherever sent, it is with a
threefold reference p. 310 Gospel Ordinances set up in purity and honor to the
meanest, p. 314 Gospel, how to walk toward it, p. ^27 Government civil is
lawful p. 114 Government, how to make it to prosper p. 602 Government does
stand upon a double Covenant p. 624 Government of Angels, by them Gods people
have a double benefit p. 660 Grace of God, what is meant by it, p. ^92 Grace of
God, to turn it into wantonness, what is it p. 194 Grace of God direct: to take
heed of turning it into wantonness p 203 Grace only is truly wisdom p. 495
Grace, the excellency of it wherein it lies p. 504 Grace, Trials for it, p. 510
Grace, how to attain it, p. 511 Grace was the foundation, even of the merit of
Christ himself, p. 709 Graces excel in some more then in others p. 745
Greatness of spirit that is holy, wherein it lies p. 59 Growth of grace in some
respects as necessary as truth of Grace, p. 46
H
Habitation of his holiness, what is meant by it p. 363 Hand, Gods right hand,
what it notes p. 640 Hear, take heed how, and what p. 295 Heaven has not in it
four things, p. 6 Heedlesness in conversing with God, a provoking evil p. 302
Heedlesness constant, a certain sign of a corrupt heart p. 305 Heedlesness,
directions against it, ib. Hell, what makes it p. 381 Hells torment has in it
two things, p. 528 Hiding place for Gods people is twofold p. 219 Holy, how a
man should know it, p. 49 Holiness, what is it p. 33 Holiness is twofold ibid.
Holiness the only way to happiness, p. 38 Holiness, quoad principium, is called
regeneration, p. 39 Holiness, quoad incrementum, is called sanctification p. 44
Holiness, quoad exercitium, is called Obedience p. 47 Holiness weighs the best
p. 224 Holiness, the Motives to it p. 422 Holiness, the perfection of it
consists in three things p. 425 Hope is conversant about things to come. See p.
152. follows p. 163
I
Jacob put for all the Tribes p. 165 Idols, take heed of them p. 483 Jehu's
service p. 289 Jehu's heart not right with God, p. 291 Jehue's censure p. 293
Jealousy of God has a double fruit p. 703 Jesurun, the word opened p. 518 519
Iesurun waxed fat p. 520 Jews, National conversion p. 274 Jews, God has not
cast them off, p. 268 Jews shall be ingrafted again, ibid. Jews shall be
converted by sight, p. 277 Jews, calling the manner of it, p. 280 Jews, calling
the time of it p. 281 Jews, when converted, what shall be amongst them p. 282
Jews conversion, the grounds for it. See p. 283. follows p. 288 Jews
conversion, the use of it. See p. 282. follows p. 288 Jews objections
concerning them answered. See p. 278. follows g. 288 Jews sacrifices of two
sorts, p. 358 Inheritance of the Saints. See 145 follows p. 163 Iniquity our
own, how to keep from it p. 159 Iniquity a man's own, what is it p. 744 Iniquity
our own, what is it for a man to keep himself from it, p. 746 Interest in
Christ, rules to know it, p. 348 Joy in Scripture is twofold p. 65 Judgments,
what they are upon men unfruitful under Ordinances, p. 11 Judgment has a set
time. See Nation. Judgment determined in the time of it, is set forth by
diverse expressions p. 544 Judgment, the means that did formerly prevail in the
time of it, does not now prevail, p. 455 Judgments, their manner how executed
in an ordinary way, p. 13 Judgments, none like spiritual, p. 15 Judgments of
God are an evidence of reprobation, and an earnest of condemnation p. 17, 18
Judgments upon Babylon. p. 82 Judgments, the use of them, p. 235 Judgments,
signs foregoing, p. 458 Judgments beginning, a token that the time of
Judgment draws near p. 361
K
Keep close to God in evil times (...) good p. ^ Keep thy heart upon what g^ou^
p. ^ To Keep a man's self from their iniquities, that attend high places, p. 605
Keep thine own house, rules for it, p. 607 Keep thine own Vineyard;
Considerations to quicken p. 614 Keep close to the word, Considerations unto it
p. 634 Keepers of the Vineyard, have a more peculiar charge of their own
Vineyard p. 598 Keepers of other Vineyards, many times neglect their own p. 609
Kicked, notes two things p. 521 Kingdom providential p. 658 Kingdom of God
committed to the Mediator, is two fold ibid. Kingdom of Christ in this world is
made up of two parts p. 686 Knowledge, God will reckon with men for it p. 706
L
Law. See Christ. Loss of godly men is to be considered p. 221 Loss of
righteous men is to be laid to heart p. 227 Love electing aims at a twofold
end p. 141 Love of Christ to the Saints is twofold p. 157 Lusts, some acts are
more then others p. 158
M
Madness has in it two things, p. 481 Magistrate made choice of by the people
p. 114 Magistrates, why called the Cornerstone p. 392 Magistrates good, are as
a Cornerstone to a Commonwealth, p. 397 Magistrates business is, to uphold a
Commonwealth ibid. Magistrates, how said to be the Cornerstone p. 399
Magistrates care and duty to rule well ibid. Magistrates bear a double Image,
p. 405, 602 Magistrates hands must be first in union p. 409 Magistrates, what
manner of men they must be that are fit for this work p. 416 Magistrates in
their Government are to have respect to the word, p. 623 Magistrates opposing
truth never prosper p. 627 Man natural, if considered as fallen, has reason to
be awakened p. 354 Man natural awakened, is to seek the change of his Covenant,
p. 347, 352 Mark of the Beast is twofold, p. 474 Marish and mirie places, what
is meant p. 9 Marish places, and men unfruitful under Ordinances resembled,
ibid. Marriage has a double end, p. 21 Members duties toward their Pastors p.
105 Members have a threefold power, p. 119 Members are not to entrench upon the
officers power p. 120 Mercy National, has six things observable p. 64 Mercy
for Gods people. See People, Mercy, in it every godly man is to look at two
things p. 514 Mercy discovers six ways, by which men are the worse p. 532
Mercy, the fruit of it p. 535 -- It is threefold p. 736
Mercy, the grounds of it, p. 737 Mercies are of two sorts p. 523 Mercies, the
reason why they make men the worse p. 527 Mercies, the use of them, p. 531
Mercies, how to know they make men the better p. 538 Mercies are sweet in the
receipt, but sad in the account, p. 724 Mercies, for receiving them, what is
the thing that will be required, p. 727 Ministers, how its possible to
reconcile them p. 413 Ministers have a threefold reference p. 443 Ministers are
servants of the Nation p. 444 Ministers are Prophets of the Nation p. 446
Ministers and people, the causes of mixture in all ages, p. 475 Mixtures in
Religion, what they should teach us p. 480 Mixtures humane are of three sorts
p. 485 Mixitures, the means God uses to take them away, and the motives to
believe it p. 489 Motto, for a Christian p. 603 -- a soldier p. 665
Mould, two things in it p. 291 Mystery, what it is p. 268
N
Nayl shall come forth out of him, p. 393 Nayl has in it a twofold Analogy,
ibid. Name, one p. 469 Nation that is sinful, has a set time of Judgment
appointed unto it, p. 449
O
Obedience in some sense as necessary to salvation, as faith p. 47 Obligation
of God to man is twofold p. 339 Officers duty p. 111 Officers and offices
appointed by Christ ibid. Officers appointed by the Holy Ghost, ibid. Wherein
he does two things p. 111 Officers set by the Apostles, according to Christ's
Institution, p. 115 Officers set up by the Evangelists according to the
Apostles appointment ibid. Officers accepted of by the Churches ibid. Officers
appointed for several ends, p. 116 Officers, the glory of a Church, ibid.
Officers have an office p. 118 Officers power, threefold p. 119 Officers, if
they had not power, what would follow ibid. Officers are the Churches servants,
p. 120 Officers have the management of the Churches affairs p. 121 Officers
must account for the souls of their people p. 125 Officers will give a
different account at the last day p. 128 Officers in a Church, what manner of
men they ought to be p. 130 Officers chosen without gifts, will prove miserable
to the Church, p. 132 Oppression, what it is p. 394 Ordinances of worship shall
continue, till the worlds end p. 7 Ordinances, all manner shall be in Gods City
p. 8 Ordinances that have men unfruitful under them, resembled to Marish
places, p. 9. ^ee their Judgment in p. 11. Ordinances, the purest have some
given up under them to perpetual Barrenness p. 12 Ordinances must be pure p.
155 Ordinances, some objectjons against them answered, p. 325 Ordinances, how
to walk toward them p. 327 Ordinances, what to do for them, p. 329
P
Parables of the Virgins p. 40 Pastors office, what is it p. 94 Pastors
election, the privilege of the people p. 95 Pastors duties, which they owe to
their people p. 97 Pastors duty in point of teaching, p. 98 Pastors are to pray
for their people, p. 99 Pastors, how they must watch over their people p. 100
Pastors dispositions p. 102 Peoples duty p. 111 People of God have a double
right to mercy. See p. 155. follows p. 63 People of God, why they are not
spared p. 172 People, Gods own dearest brought into streights ibid. People have
many causes in them of mixture p. 478 People are freed from mixture, when God
returns p. 479 People, Gods own dearest in danger, to become the worse for
mercies p. 523 Perfection, in striving to it, here is the Christians duty p.
4^4 Perfection of purification consists in three things p. 426 Perfection, in
striving after it, it is not in vain p. 431 Perfection is twofold p. 739
Perfection Evangelical, according to the tenor of the second Covenant is
twofold p. 740 Perfection, how David proves it, p. 742 Perfection that the
Church should undergo is threefold p. 377 Peter Martyrs remarkable observation
p. 488 Power, all of three sorts p. 62 Praises are to be returned for mercy p.
69 Prayer, how abundant to be in it, p. 89 Praeterition an act of sovereignty,
p. 235 Presence of Christ (that there is) with his Church p. 572 Presence of
Christ, the ends of it, p. 586 Presence of Christ, here compared with his
presence in glory, p. 698 Presence of Christ, what application to make of it p.
701 Principles, God looks upon before the actions p. 43 Principles that
Godliness lays in the soul p. 449 Promises, three great, the Saints have under
all their afflictions, p. 700 Promises are, Objects of faith p. 485 Grounds of
hope ibid. Rules of prayer ibid.
Projects of Providence p. 667 Prophesies are to be eyed by the people of God
p. ^ Prophesies in Ezekiel concerning the Church, unto what time to be referred
p. 3 Prophets have 4 sins incident specially to them p. 476 Providence, over
all the Saints in especial, See p. 159. follows, p. 163 Providence, her actings
very mysterious p. 665 Providence, in all the actings of it, submit to the will
and wisdom of God, or else mark the consequences p. 672 Purification, wherefore
to strive after the perfection of it, p. 428 Purity perfect, objections
concerning it answered p. 429
R
Raised, how God is said so be, p. 365 Raised up, when God is, how to know it
p. 372 Receiving little or much, it is to be accounted for, p. 720. and the Son
of God himself will be the Judge ibid. Receipts answerable thereunto shall men's
account be p. 724 Receipts, what improvement to make of them p. 726 Reformation
is twofold p. 592 Regeneration, in it a man receives two things p. 42, 43
Relations are of two sorts, p. 142 Religion, Luther found in it three things
very difficult p. 56 Religion always attempted to be corrupted p. 470
Reprobation has three consequences p. 18 Rest is twofold p. 550 Returning to
God is twofold, p. 137 Revelation, the Book of it divided into two parts, and
what it contains p. 567, 568 Revelation of Saint John, when and for what end
was it penned, p. 683 Righteous men dying, are taken from the evil to come (a
special mercy) p. 319, 320 Rise up presently, two things causes God so to do p.
368 Romes destruction, matter of joy to the Saints p. 84 Rule of the word, what
is it, p. 298
S
Saints have a double right to heaven p. 45 Saints, some of them are taken up
into Heaven betimes, p. 47 Saints great work in this life, p. 63 Saints have
three Titles given them, ibid. Saints have two things terrible, of which they
are afraid p. 99 Saints at the last day will have something that will be even
matter of sorrow p. 129 Saints and Angels why imperant in heaven p. 148 Saints
Inheritance. See Inheritance Saints great comfort in their straits is to see
God arise for them. p. 366 Saints labor in their straits to awaken God 368
Saints comfort must needs be great from Gods arising. 369 Salt given to a
double interpretation p. 12 Sanctification consists of two parts p. 243
Scripture wrested. See, Searchers See God, what is it p. 34 See God, as he is
in himself. 36 See God, in his Saints p. 37 Servants are of two sorts p. 640
Service acceptable to God must be heedfully done 294 Service who the person is
that performs it. p. 300 Service introduced by sin threefold p. 641 Silence in
the World is twofo^d p. 379 Silence of all ungodly men has a double ground for
it ibid. Silence to keep it upon a fourfold account p. 380 Silence why to be
kept p. 383 Sin causes a double distance p. 137 Sin, the Misery by it, stands
in two things 347 Sin is filthiness p. 423 Sin, darling how should a man know
what it is p. 750 Sin the reign of it is double p. 744 Sin darling how a man
may know what it it p. 751 Sins darling are of three sorts p. 753 Sin darling
motives to take heed of it p. 753 Sins some more peculiarly break a man's
Communion p. 158 Sins some especially cause God to depart from his Sanctuary p.
332 Sins of Judah what did ripen them p. 458 Sins of the Prophets. See
Prophets. Sins even the best are prove more to some, then to others p. 744
Sinners State twofold p. 139 Sinners in a State of estrangement cannot pray
ibid. Sinners may draw near to God Sincerity is Gospel-perfection p. 34
Sincerity. David shows wherein it appears p. 738 Souls, the trust of them, the
greatest p. 127 Souls they ascend into heaven two ways p. 144 Spirit is double,
that acts all man kind 42 Star, what is meant by it p. 688 Star, in Christ's
right hand what noted from that p. 689 State of Man is twofold p. 340 Strive
for the Faith. See Faith. Strive with whom p. 191 Subordination of Causes
fourfold in Gods providential kingdom p. 658
T
Talents are not alike given to all persons in the same measure p. 714 Things
whatever men receive from God are given to them, or Committed to them. 708, 709
Things have four ways of Conveyance each for other p. 708 Thoughts in
troublesome Times come in by multitudes p. 546 Thoughts within more troublesome
to a godly man then troubles without p. 548 Thoughts unruly in troublesome times
rob the soul of its chiefest ornaments p. 553 Thoughts such a multitude in
David, what is the ^ause p. 554 Throne, what it alludes to p. 567 Throne of God,
what it is p. 594 Throne, what does Christ delight to give upon it. p. 759
Throne out of it proceed Judgments p. 581 Throne, to know when God is present
upon it. p. 359 Times of doubtful expectations and disputations p. 31, 32 Times
there are peculiar for fellowship p. 157 Times of trouble what is meant by it.
p. 166 Time of trouble reserved for Gods own people. p. 173 Time twofold set
unto men p. 225 Time there is when God seems to sleep p. 366 Time for Judgment
set to a sinful Nation. p. 449 Time has its set bounds 453 Time of Judgment,
Old means prevail not in it p. 457 Time of Judgment may, and must be kown. p.
457 Time of Judgment against its coming p. 463 Translation must have a double
Change p. 347 Tree of life p. 341, 342 Tree that is barren has a double curse
22 Troubles of Gods Peoples are greater by how much more their light grows p.
174 Troubles, 1. With what mind does God bring his people into them p. 176 2 In
what measure he will 3. do it. p. 179 Fourthly, unto what ends God does it p.
179
Troubles have a day, the use thereof p. 182 Truth is the interest that Christ
has in the world, p. 627. See Magistrates. Truth is the Mother of holiness, p.
52, 54
V
Vineyard, a man's own to neglect is a sad thing p. 611 Vineyards committed to
keep, is twofold p. 595 Vision of God is twofold p. 35 Union with Christ, the
end of it, p. 21 Union, the ways of it p. 409 Universality, the great note of
sincerity p. 61 Unregenerate men (all) that are in a state of nature under the
Covenant of works p. 343 Voice that spoke in Ignatius p. 138 Voice in the
Revelation is twofold, p. 81, 364 Voice of trembling, what apprehensions of it.
p. 164
W
Walking holily has a double goodness in it p. 224 Walking with God. before
God. after God.
Sets forth a choice perfection, p. 471 Wantonness, what is meant by it, p. 193
Wantonness in corrupt Teachers, p. 195 Waters issuing out of the Sanctuary,
what is meant by it p. 8 Watchmen of two sorts p. 598 Ways of holiness, the
best ways, p. 223 Wedding Garment what it is p. 40 Wheel in the middle of a
wheel, what it notes p. 664 Wheels, what things spoken of them, p. 662
Wickedness, depths appears in Satan's influences p. 199 Will whole of God, is
the ground of prayer p. 431 Wills ours, how to bring them to Gods effecting
will p. 677 Wings, what they note p. 571 Wisdom, what is meant by it p. 495
Wisdom without grace is folly p. 496 Wisdom, nothing is it but godliness, p.
503 Wisdom, is seen in a right Judgment of all things p. 500 Wisdom the
principal thing p. 504 Wiseman, how he dies p. 213 Witnesses at the last day,
three great against those that profit not by the means p. 130 Word of God, what
compared unto in Scripture. See 152. follows 163 Word has in it two sort of
rules, p. 183 Word, keep close to it. In the 1. Doctrine of it p. 626 In the 2.
in the worship of it, p. 630 In the 3. practice of it p. 631
Word, in not keeping close to it, what consequences follow p. 630 Works, God
the Father gave to Christ, are of two sorts, p. 681 Worship of God is twofold,
p. 250
FINIS.
Some Errata are in the Printing, and some words not enough plain, which the
judicious Reader will observe, and may correct as he meets them here and there:
such as are;
Page 18. l. 23. make it (...), (...) for (...); p. 50. l. 27. r. bitter; p.
60. l. 17. make it plain, (...), and p. 81. l. 11. (...); p. 82. l. 8. summam;
p. 92. l. 10. make it plain, (...); p. 112. l. ult. for is, r. in; p. 156. l.
27. Rediunt; p. 146. l. 2. (...); l. 24. potestatem; p. 149. l. 11. omnis; p.
155. l. 12. praeveniens; p. 165. l. 4. tremble; p. 171. l. 31 certam
promissionem; p. 174. l. 18. persecutionem; p. 183. l. 6. finituri; p. 187. l.
7. raro; p. 200. li. 25. luce veritatis extincta; p. 216. l. 19 double; p. 22.
l. 25. wish; p. 232. l. 3. plane; p. 262. l. 25. Astructive; p. 368. l. 29.
proeme; p. 283. margent, r. Austin; p. 284. l. 14. blot out Secondly; p. 285.
l. 13. r. Christ was not glorified; p. 329. l. 28. r. quam; p. 384. l. 14
deposes; p. 386. l. 26. Lex; p. 393. l. 13. proportion; p. 437. l. 19. (...);
p. 467. l. 3. Horns; p. 542. l. 1. trouble; p. 541. l. 7. Quartus; p. 574. l.
18. Cherub. p. 581. l. 13. descend; p. 677. l. 15. Spirit of Christ.


