STRANGE NEWS FROM THE DEEP: Being A FVLL ACCOUNT Of a Large Prodigious WHALE,
Lately taken in the River Wivner, within six miles of Colchester.

Declaring the strange manner of its Coming up, and by what unusual means it
was seized upon by the Neighboring Inhabitants. Also an Account of the like
prodigious Accidents in general.

Printed for W. H. in the Year 1677.

Great News from the OCEAN.
THE main Ocean being the general Empire or Dominion of the Whale, the admiring
World look upon it as a prodigy, if at any time that mighty Leviathan makes a
prodigal excurtion out of his own spacious Confines, to sport himself in any
Creek or River.

Some People have been so supersticious as to take notice, that there commonly
falls out some extraordinary Change or Revolution in those Countries where such
a thing happens; but what reason they have for it, I cannot yet imagine: So
heretofore Men took their Augury from flying-Birds, or the entrails of dead
Beasts; but how little intelligence this as inquisitive, and if I did not live
in it my self, I should say more learned Age, has gathered out of such
Observations, I leave to the Prudent to Compute.

I know some Men who have precipitated their own Mortality, and conceited they
should immediately dye, before (as the subsequence after proved it) Providence
intended their expiration; merely upon the insignificant Clicking, or
well-measured palpitation of a discontented Wood-worm, or Death-watch. Others
who have took pet at their own Salubriosity or Health, and been frighted into
an Ague, or Consumption at the letcherous shricks of a wanton Weesel. For my
part, who am no Admirer of Old Women's Stories, I know no reason why we may not
as rationally tremble at the obstreperous neighings of a Rude Stone-Horse; or
put on a Sick Cap at the lascivious noise of a clamorous Catterwauling, as be
terrified at either of them. So far am I from insinuating any doubts or fears
into the minds of any of my Fellow Subjects, that I think they had never less
occasion to apologize a smile, or excuse the mirth of a Jubilee, than now they
have; and perhaps the most discontented of them would club with me in that
belief, would their frenzy give them so much patience as to consider, That most
part of the yet known World are now involved in Martial Broils; whilst the
indulgent Heavens are so kind as to admit us to be the quiet Commiserators of
their miseries.

My Pen raves, and Fancy itches to amplify upon that Subject; but fearing my
large Porch is already too big for my little House, I will baulk my
inclinations to pursue my Theme.

Being not over-cumber'd with business, I made it part of mine to walk the
Streets, which I found lately infected with the hideous noise of a
Blazing-Star, or prodigious Comet, which was visibly seen here in England (as
if other Parts of the World were not admitted The fine sh -- or Rarity show;
and might not as reasonably appropriate ensuing evils to themselves, as some
of our discontented Fanatics do to us) whereupon I consulted the Judgment of
the Learned concerning the nature of a Meteor, which I find them all agree
(except the Lillian Tribe) to be no other than an Ignis fatuus, or Will of the
Wisp drawn by the Sun's extraordinary exhalations into a higher Sphere, and
owns its elevation to that degree of heat which attracts it. --

After this I heard the Multitude ask for an Account of a Strange Whale, which
was lately taken -- they could not tell where, but somewhere about England they
were sure of it. This made me solicitous to enquire after it; and I was so
fortunate at last to meet with the Master of a Ship who was an Eyewitness of
its incursion, and gave me this following Account concerning it.

That on the 23. of this present Month April, the Neighboring Inhabitants to a
fair River in Essex, known by the Name of Wivner-River (whose Mouth opens to
the Sea) perceived a great disturbance in the Water, which biggened the
expectations of the Contrymen in those parts, so that some of them threw
down their Shovels, others forsook their Plough-tails; and in fine, the
generality of them left their Employments to go to be the Spectators of the
Event of so unusual an Accident. The troubled Water put some of them into pious
cogitations, whilst others gaping for the Event, spied the back of a Fish of an
extraordinary size, who by her discontented postures and frequent struglings
seemed to quarrel with the narrowness of the River for more Elbow-room. She
sometimes threw her prodigious Head above the Waves, at other times with her
spreading Tail shovelled the Sands so high, that part of them fell on the
Spectators Heads: One while she flownced at such a rate, that they beheld the
greatest part of her Body, and with the ponderous squelsh of her large Bulk
falling again into the Water, made the depressed Waves in a haughty
insurrection out-swell their Bancks, and threaten an overflow to the
Neighboring Meads.

In this discontented motion she continued to go up some part of that River,
till she came within six miles of Colchester, where the Sands being washed away
by the preceding Tide, she was fain to struggle for life in a low Water and
hard bottom; where, with her extraordinary endeavor to quit her self of that
praemunire, she brake off part of her Tall, and with a deluge of Blood which
immediately issued from that fraction, colored the whole Stream with a
sanguine or bloody Tincture; in so much that those Inhabitants who lived some
distance off, nearer the Sea, were startled at the alteration, and really
imagined that no less an accident than that of a Bloody fight could stain the
Water with so deep a Dye.

In fine, the Spectators were amazed; no Man durst venture to seize upon the
unusual Visitant, till at length she her self saved them that labor; for
having struggled so long in those shallow Waters, she bruised her self so much,
that had she not had that misfortune of breaking off her Tail, it is since
judged she could not have lived, had she recovered her beloved Ocean.

In short, Reader, this Gentleman who gave me this information told me that in
this lamentable condition she endeavored to resist her fate, till at length,
for want of both breath and blood, she dyed in the Water, being of so large a
bulk that the River could not cover her: Her Body strutted out of the Waters
like a Hill, or Promontory; and when she was drawn out of the River and came to
be measured, she was found to be no less than fifty Foot in length, and twenty
eight in thickness.

Perhaps it may be expected by some, that since I have undertaken to give an
account of the arrival of this prodigious Creature, I should also turn
Naturalist, and be obliged to give the World the Reason of their excursions in
general.

I know there are diverse have guessed at those inducements which have caused
Whales to wander out of their Natural Province, the unbounded Ocean; but since
they have not been able to give us a sensible demonstration, we may choose
whether we will pin an implicit credulity on their (in other things)
authentic sleeves.

Pliny would persuade us that their unnatural wanderings are generally caused by
sickness or indisposition of Body, which, as with rational, so much more with
sensitive Creatures usually makes them restless and discontented; this it is
which makes them out of conceit with their old Coverts, and run like mad Dogs
at Adventures, they greatly care not whither, having vainly tried for a
Medicine in the salt Waters, their sense inclines them to hope for what they
mist of there in the fresh; so that having made some entrance into some Creek
which leads to a Rivers mouth, the fresh Water still increasing upon them, they
never return till they are either taken or Sanded.

Some hold that there are some Tides so impetuous, that by virtue of their
strength alone they are able to hurl a young Whale into the mouth of a fresh
Water River; in which, perhaps she may sport her self awhile, till those Waters
revert and treacherously leave her on the naked Sands.

A third sort of opinions there are, who do appropriate to a storm the same
effect.

And a fourth, and indeed these are most numerous, though (perhaps least
authentic) who would have Whales to be brought to Land by the same means, and
for the same Reason, as (they would have it) Comets are placed in the Sky,
viz. either as a certain sign of an ensuing Judgment to fall upon that Nation
over which they depend, or else a favorable warning given us by the Almighty,
to turn from some notorious sins, and consequently avoid those threatening
punishments which nothing but a real reformation and hearty repentance can
infallibly avoid.

For all I have said I know some people upon this Narrative will be apt to be
presaging, but as long as it shall please the Almighty to keep in health his
most sacred Majesty, and (as he already has) to give him the Love of his
Subjects, and a happy Concordance with their representitive the Parliament, I
think we should abuse the remarkable mercies of our God in fearing ensuing
miseries, whilst we have such probable hopes of future Prosperity.

FINIS.
man in the mouth of a whale


