THE COMMONWEALTH OF ISRAEL, OR A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of Mr. Prynne's ANATOMY OF
THE Good Old Cause.

By H. S.

Prove. 15. 2. The tongue of the wise uses knowledge aright, but the mouth of
fools babbleth out foolishness.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Brewster, and are to be sold at the Sign of the Three
Bibles at the West End of Paul's, 1659.

The Commonwealth of Israel, or a brief Account of Mr. Prynne's Anatomy of the
Good old Cause.
SIR,
I Know you are very inquisitive of news since this miraculous Revolution,
which God has brought a bout by means altogether unexpected, for the salvation
of his People amongst us: This morning I met with something which may no less
divert you, then it has for some time entertained me. The Cooks and the
Grocers have once more excited Mr. Prynne to write, least they should be put to
the expense of clean paper: the World is already satisfied, Mr. Prynne* does
not diminish his repute by any such performance, and it is no small* benefit to
these his Abettors; And this is the GOOD OLD CAUSE for which he now writes. I
assure you the piece is genuine, and no way imposed on the Author; it has a
large title page, and sundry insignificant Texts of Scripture prefixed; it is
as full of impertinency, railing, lying and false quotations as any work he
ever published. There is a great contest now on foot, whither the Juncto of
Lincolnes Inn, or the Parliament at Westminster, adhere to the Old Cause; and
if so great Personages differ, I may be allowed to dissent from Mr. Prynne
Bencher (and Dancer at the late Revels) in Lincolns-Inne. I say nothing to his
Introduction, that piece need not be dismissed to the pastry, for I think there
never will come out an enquiry to the end of the world, whereunto that may not
agree. (Page 1.) He talks of a confederated Triumvirate of Republicans,
Sectaries and Soldiers: I am sorry Mr. Prynne himself contributes so much to
the upholding that Report, that himself has lost his senses* as to write thus.
A Triumvirate, signifying only a Government of three jointly, he must be
destitute of common sense that finds out a Triumvirate of Republicans,
Sectaries, and Soldiers, unless he will baptize each of them Legion, for they
are many: I am sure this is not the good old Language. As for the good old
Cause, he says, He did not only superficially view the outside of it, but
considerately penetrated into the true original seminal sourse and intrails of
it. If he had not told us this, we had never guessed so much: But what did Mr.
Prynne discover? That the Good old Cause is a plot to blow up subvert destroy
the King, Queen, Prince, Royal Posterity, Lords, Commons, Kingdom, Government,
Laws, Liberty and Property of the People of England, yea the very constitution,
freedom, power, privileges of all true English Parliaments, the Church and
Ministry of England* and true Protestant Religion it self, formerly
established, to set up Oligarchy, Anarchy, Tyranny, Oppression, Libertinisme,
Marshal-Government, and all kind of Heresies, Blasphemies, Religions, Sects,
yea Atheism, Popery it self at last in their stead. I would Mr. Prynne would
write sing-songs; again to be Poet and mad, were natural, and his Fictions
would not be lies. It is not a disgrace, but an indearmeat of the Good old
cause, That it destroys King, Queen, Prince, Lords and Kingdom in their
political capacity, and that is all that is intended by it: To destroy the
Commons (whereof the Sectaries and Republicans, and Soldiers, are a part) is
impossible; as it is inconsistent with a Commonwealth (which is a form of
Government, and an Empire of Laws) to destroy Government, Laws and Property, or
Freedom As for the pulling down the true Protestant Religion (which is
Lutheranisme, and which was never established here, though Cranmer were at
first a Lutheran) and setting up Heresies, etc. I understand not that, how it
can be verified in a just and innocent Toleration, nor shall I ever comprehend
it, till patience and long-suffering (in Mr. Prynne's new language) he rendered
Active in signification. But the old Cause sets up Oligarchy, Tyranny [and
Marshall Government:] These are such Synonymaes to express a Commonwealth, as
none makes use of, but he that calls good evil* and evil good. But suppose it
did set up either of these (for to erect both any man but Mr* Prynne would
think it impossible) how shall it set up an Anarchy* which is a (...) of all
Government, whereas Oligarchy, Tyranny Marshal-Government impose some? If Mr.
Prynne had any Philosophy, I would a^k him how Anarccy could be set up any way*
it being a thing of pure privation, and so not to be composed by positive
actings. But why should you or any body expect Philisophy, where there is no
sense? Till it be proved, that our old Laws, Kingship, Church State, etc. were
good, it is a begging of the question, to think the pulling down of that is
ignominious and execrable.

Well, but you will say, that he proves Monarchy to be the best of Governments:
Therefore it was an ill and not good Cause (how old soever) that pulled down
Kingship. Truly Sir, this Lawyers Logic is as bad as Lawyers Latin; for
though our late Governors were called Kings, they were no Monarchs: The latter
being a name for such only, who are absolved from all law, and may do what they
please without any further use of others, then as Instruments and Counselors:
But our Kings could act no such things; if the trials and depositions of former
Kings did not prove their subjection to coertion; yet in that they could do
nothing in taxes, or Law-making, but by the Advice and Consent of Parliament,
they were no Monarchs. Thus all his Texts which make for Monarchy, do no way
render the pulling down of Kingship illegal, or r^sh, but rather in part
prudential, since that is not the best form of Government, as Mr. Prynne
confesses; Monarchy must have that pre-eminence, and so slavery becomes the
best of conditions. I hope the Assembly at Lincolns-Inne will keep a Fast for
the good success and prosperity of the Turk, that so they may have the best of
Governments, a Monarchy.

His Texts of Scripture are excellently impertinent, I never heard better
answers at cross questions. Is Monarchy the best of Governments? Yes in good
sooth la! for Jer. 21. v. 3, 4. Then said Jeremiah, thus shall you say to
Z^dekiah, Thus says the Lord God of Israel behold I will turn back the weapons
of war that are in your hands, wherewith you fight against the King of Babel,
and against the Chaldeans which besiege you without the walls, and I will
assemble you into the midst of this City. Might not Mr. Prynne as well have
quoted any text in Scripture, in which the name of King is mentioned? even that
of, Tophet is prepared for the Kings of the earth. So Jer. 17. 25. Then shall
the Kings and the Princes enter in at the gates of the City, etc. THEN, that
is, after the captivity, they had no Monarchs in Israel: such were only they
that were the Descendants of David, as the Jewish Rabbis tell us, and they
were subordinate to the Sanhedrin, and might be scourged by them in case of
offense: So that this Text proves nothing (but yet as much as the former) that
Monarchy is best, but for the Paramount dignity of Parliaments over the Kings.
But you may reply, that it is promised as a blessing, and therefore that is
better then a Republic. I answer, That where the executive Power is in one
person triable by a Sanhedrin upon breach of Law, it is a Republic, and the
controversy is merely Grammatical, whether this or that is duly named. So that
Mr. Prynne here proves a Commonwealth to be the best form of Government. But
is not Mr. Prynn a man of admirable qualities to be followed by any, that can
think there is any Government absolutely best, and abstracting from
circumstances? It is the posture of the Nation, and the disposition of the
People, which makes this or that Government best here or there. In France a
Monarchy at present is best, but an extraordinary revolution may so order
things, that it may be as little feasible there, as amongst us; and where the
Land is so modelled, it is a blessing to have a King: All that Ezekiel says
is, that God did bless Jerusalem, and she fared deliciously, and was very
beautiful, and did grow up to a Kingdom; and her name was spread amongst the
Nations for her beauty, Ezekiel. 16. 13, 14. What then? he does not say, that
Monarchy was the beauty he put upon her to make her perfect; but that beauty
was precedaneous thereunto: and it was for that she was famous among the
Heathen. These are pretty allegations! Monarchy is so far from being proved
best here, that it is not so much as said to be any way GOOD. In Deuteronomy no
more is said to the advantage of Monarchy, then is to be expected from Mr.
Prynne's quotations, Deuteronomy. 17. 14* When thou shall come unto the Land -- if
thou say. I will set a King over me* like as all the Nations that are about me.
Then thou shall make him King over thee -- and thou shall write him this Law*
-- I had thought that Mr. Prynne would have thought If's and Ands to prove
nothing* such suppositions infer nothing but the conveniencie of tying a King
to Laws, if one be chosen, not that it is best to choose one. God did institute
a Commonwealth in Israel, as Mr. Harrington has excellently shown* and the
rejecting thereof he calls a rejecting of God, 1 Samuel* 8. v 7. I desire all
judicious* persons to read that Chapter, and consider the pre-eminence of the
best of Governments, viz. Mr. Prynne's Monarchy.

He pleads for Monarchy because God is a King, and this he proves by sundry
Texts! I would too submit to a Monarchy, if my King were omnipotent,
omnipresent, omniscient, without passion or shadow of change. This is not for
the advantage of every Monarchy, no more then if I should say, it is better to
ride on horseback then go on foot; Ergo, lets go buy hobby-horses: If God and
Christ were as men, passionate and fallible, they should not be my Monarchs.

In that he calls the Good old Cause Iesuitical, it is not such accusations will
make it censurable: The Jesuits are (generally) against Bishops; so is Mr.
Prynne; Ergo, it is Iesuitical to be against Bishops: Bellarmine too is for
Monarchy, and says, it is the BEST of Governments: so says Mr. Prynne too:
you see then by his argument, Mr. Prynne of Swanswick is a Romish Jesuit. The
Dominicans are against Free Will, etc. so is Mr. Prynne, Ergo Mr. Prynne is a
Dominican. The Pope is principally against a Toleration, so is Mr. Prynne;
Ergo, he is an errant Papist. But primitive Christianity, under Christian
Emperors, allowed and avowed an universal Toleration, with a capacity for each
not differing in Opinions, but Religions, to be preferred to the highest
dignities; Ergo, the Good old Cause is agreeable thereunto, and justified by
their judgment as well as practice: But of this I shall more at large
discourse against Mr. Prynne, or any else that defy the Host of Israel: My
have permits me to add no more, but that you may find an ample confutation of
all that Mr. Prynn either has, or shall write, in Pantagruels Library within
New-Colledge in Oxon: by the name of Tartaretus de modo cacandi* I am,

Sir, Yours, etc.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
I Suppose these reflections may suffice for to evince the goodness of the
Cause against Mr. Prynne; and to let you see that his writings have much of the
Lawyer in them; high charges and imputations are but words of course with them;
and all that cry he makes, is but the way of the man's indicting. As to the
Antiquity of the cause; (though I might say with Tertullian upon another
account, illud prius quod verius, Truth, Reason, Honesty, and foundations upon
nature, will make a cause not only better but older then any plea from musty
records, and concessions extorted from Tyrants) enough by other penns has been
said; and what he says was never the design of the Parliament, was objected to
them for such by their quick sighted adversaries. I cannot examine his proofs,
but you may conjecture by his Scripture allegations how his others would appear
upon a review. It is clear from the covenant, that the generous English never
intended the defense of the King, otherwise then as it was consistent with the
subjects liberty and priveledges of Parliament. As to the seclusion of members,
I understand not why if some betray their-trust, others may not be faithful,
Mr. Prynne once taught, that if the house of Lords dissented and refused to
provide for the safety of the people, the house of Comomons alone might do it:
why may not a part of the latter house take the like care upon the like
exigency? I profess I see not how one is a greater breach of privilege then the
other: or less inconsistant with Mr. Prynnes Similitude used by him in his
defense of the War against the King, viz. As in a storm, if the Mariners are
drunk or neglect their duty, or drive upon rocks, the rule of
selfe-preservation permits any body to interpose. So is there not as great a
danger now as ever, of the Nation? may we only use arms to provoke, not secure?
and take them up that we may lay them down at the feet of Kings together with
our necks, to be trampled on? It were more prudential in case of oppression to
go with halters at first, and so to incline to mercy, then to enrage them, and
then give them opportunity to satisfy their fury.


