A LETTER SENT TO MY LORD MAYOR. AND His Venerable BRETHREN:

By no Athist, no Papist, no Arminian, no Anabaptist, no Familist, no
Separatist, or Brownist; but an honest believing Protestant, and that because
that Separatist otherwise called Brownist, was in many men's account said and
held to be worse then Papist.

Written by A. S.

depiction of a pig being bled

LONDON, Printed in the year, MDCXLII.

A COPY OF A LETTER Sent to my Lord Major, and his Brethren.
MAY your Honor with the rest of your Worshipful Brethren, with all that
shall see hear or read this writing, consider and understand, how that
Separatists caled Brownists, why they should be courted and imprisoned, for
the way they walk in, I much marvel at. Truth may be blamed, but it can never
be shamed: these reasons I give for it.

First, they are a people very desirous to make the Scripture the rule, and
pattern of their lives and actions during their extancy in this mortal life.
And King James of blessed memory told Master Burton, that those men that did so
walk as near as the frailty of the flesh would let them, in avoiding the
vanity and vitiousnes of the times, he loved immutably, and so do I: and so
should we all do, if we will do as we ought, Saint Peter's rule comprehends
the whole Law of God for a good Christian to imitate. 1. Is Sobriety in respect
of ones self? 2. Vprightnes in respect of our Christian Brethren? 3. Of
Holiness toward God, and this three-fould cord is not quickly broke.
And according to these rules do that Sect of Separatists, called Brownists
walk, and those good Christian Protestants called Puritants, or roundheads
prick cares walk: but shameless ruffians past grace and good manners, with
black mouthed Tertullus will be babbling: when the shame lies in length of
their own hair. Is it not a shame for a man to wear long hair, if they will
not believe me they may Saint Paul: I have digressed a little to my m^tter,
This Sect of Seperatists called Brownists endeavor according to Saint Peter's
Rule to live.

First, soberly, in respect of themselves, and so are no drunkards, or at least
no common ones if they fall; and which of us Protestants do not, in a large
field; yet I am confident they rise again by serious contrition and repentance.

Secondly, they live uprightly in respect of their Christian Brethren, using
fair and honest dealing between man and man; if there be a close Hypocrite
amongst them, as Judas amongst the Apostles, and is our own wheat so clean as
to have no co^kell, or kernel in it, let us not then condemn all for some a
generality for a particularity.

Thirdly they live holily toward God, and it excellently appears in their
frequent receiving of the Sacrament, and in having a reverend regard of the
name of God, not daring to take it in vain; much less to curse swear or
blaspheme that holy name, by which they are sealed to the day of Redemption:
besides the Sun-day most properly named the Saboth day, or Lords day they
celibrate, not in luxury or wantonness, not in riot or excess, not in
hobihorsing morris dancing, carding diceing bowling, wrestling, tippling,
sporting, gaming, or unnecessary idleing or vain spending that day, or the
evening thereof in unnessesarie walking to take the air, and so forth: but in
sanctifying that day as the Lord requires, and as is prescribed in the
Practice of Piety, a Book we allow good, and made by the Spirit of God: which
tells that if we do not sanctify that day, and every part thereof, we shall
never keep a Saboth with the Lord in Heaven. Me thinks whenwe consider our
neglects in this duty, we should tremble to punish these good and godly people
by courting or imprisoning them.

Object. These are good things, and we like the people well, being so careful
to please God, but why will they not come to hear our Lyturgie, or our
Ministers preach?

Answ. Time would not give way to satisfy in answer to that, but their reasons
shall be given as speedily as may be, they shall be so plain that he that
runs may read.

And now because they are counted, and said to be by too many of us Protestants
worse then Papists, I shall here prove the contrary.

First it is one thing to err in opinion, and tell me which of us Protestants
Divines, and others do not?

Secondly it is another thing to err in fundamental truths; in the first they
may as we our selves, in the latter for fundamentalls they do not, and so are
not worse, but better then the Papists. Real presence in the Eucharist. Merit
of Heaven by good works. Purgatory for souls to rest in after death. Pardon
for sins present and to come. Prohibiting Marriage to the Clergy, with a vow
to it.


Original sin, nor actual transgression in the blessed Virgin Mary; and that
she is glorified in body, and sits at her sons right hand in Heaven, making
intercession for them.

That those that die in venial sins on the want of satisfaction, are by
prayer delivered out of Purgatory, and so pass immediately into Heaven.

Maintaining Stews, taking a million of money, or more yearly by the sin of
whoredoms and uncleanness.

These though many more might be named, all contrary to fundamental truths,
the Papists hold and believe. Now I hope never a one of us Protestants will
ever cenfure, or acknowledge, that Separatists (otherwise called from Brown
Brownists, as we call from Luther Lutherans, or from Calvin Calvinists, not but
they were long before ever Master Brown was) I say, ever believe any of this
Sect to be guilty of these, or other fundamental truths, and so are better
then Papists: and shall I say, looking on our own lives and ways, (would God I
could not) better then many of us profane, and lukewarm Protestants: It is
ever good to speak truth, and to set the saddle on the right horse, and I pray
God grant, that we Protestants may make their lives, and actions in all
godliness our rules and patterns to walk by, however never prove railing
Rabshakes, or scoffing Shimeis against our brothren, and I verily believe to
Gods dear ones.

And I am confident these Separatists called Brownists, do tender the person
and welfare of his Majesty, so highly, that to do him good and service, they
would stake estate and life for it: many have protested it seriously, and as
really I believe it, and they that do not, I question whether they be good
Christians to God, or good subjects to his anointed: had this Sect ever their
hearts dipped in blood in all their persecutions, or molestations, or were ever
Traitors to the Crown and Sat?

Object. They have been kept under, and could not hurt us.

Ans. And so have the Papists, but would have hurt us; but these people would
have endured wrong, and suffered patiently, knowing they have thanks with God
thereunto, were they called, and if they could they would not, for their
Religion is no bloody one, and so long we need not be afraid, for we shall
never be hurt I warrant you by them, either in estate or life, if there were
ten times more then there are of them.

God bless and preserve our Gracious King, our Royal Queen, the Noble
Offspring, all the Honorable Lords, Right worshipful and worshipful.
Burgesses* now assembled in the High Court of Parliement, and the whole Realm,
and send us peace and truth in Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

ARON STREATER Divine, and licensed Physician.
FINIS.

