HAving seen a paper Printed, reflecting on the person and labors of my Dear
Husband Mr. William Strong; I was much amazed, especially it being supposed to
have proceeded from men reputed Godly: And now the less wondering, that a
Minister of note should be of late deceived by their insinuations, little
suspecting (as what honest heart would) that under a pretext of general
advantage, such men should drive on designs: who, being once disturbed in their
design for profit, stick not with open face to cast unhandsom and unjust
reflections on the memory of him, whose works they pretend to propagate and
promulge: I need not touch at their reflections (any thing of calumny wiping it
self off by its own hand) referring thee to the testimonies Prefacing his Tract
of the Heavenly Treasure, or Man's chiefest Good, newly extant: I have only a
word touching matter of fact, which is clearly thus: One piece after another
appearing in Print, done without my privacy, and (according to truth, and
experience of such as shall compare these things already done) very imperfect.
A friend disperses a small note, advising that the said Copy, named The Saints
communion with God, and Gods Communion with them in Ordinances, Printed for
Geo. Sawbridge, and Robert Gibbs, was an imperfect Copy; which advice of his
was really true: This is followed by a scandalous paper from them (as supposed)
wherein they tell the world, That Mr. Strong left all his notes under a
Character of his own devising, and say, It is impossible any man should publish
any things by his own notes. Out of what design they Print so known an untruth,
I say not, unless either to raise prejudices against those excellent things he
left behind him (not considering how dangerous it is to be laying stumbling
blocks in the way of souls: offenses may come, but woe be to them by whom they
do) or else, (not inconsistent with the former) to spoil mine and my childrens
benefits, we might otherwise receive by those my husbands labors: There are
some things not to be named among Christians: my thinks this is one: The Lord
forgive this un-christian dealing, I do: But this I assure thee, on the word of
a Christian, the widow of a Minister, and (through Gods merey) of good repute:
That my said Husband did never in his life time Print any thing but by his own
notes, and not as he spoke in the Pulpit, judging that the worser way: And that
he wrote Willis his Characters, adding here and there some of his own,
sufficiently known to, and understood by that person of honor (and to many
others who are able to read them) to whom he committed his notes, many of them
in his lifetime, with a charge, that if any thing should be Printed, it should
be done by them: Directing also to what things (if any) he would have done
first: All his things, being ready prepared thereto, and fitted by himself
(save only transcription) by his own hand: except only one discourse, lying
unstitched (his other things being all stitched by his own hand) in his study
at the time of his death; and so displaced by the sad confusions thereof: many
things were accordingly in long hand wrote out, and by himself in part looked
over ere he dyed. Some things, good part Printed and done by himself with
marginal annotations ere he dyed: which will all (in Gods due time) come out,
word for word as himself wrote them, if I may be permitted to have the dispose
thereof. Among other things, is now completely finished for the press, that
Tract on Heb. 10. 22. which God sending, will carry with it its own evidence;
neither is there any licking over his notes, (as the Authors of that paper
please to phrase it) more then a careful review, without the least alteration
from his notes: Not like that of theirs, concerning which I shall give thee one
test: its not found in all my husbands Notes, wherein he gives more then some
few significant Hebrew words, here and there (not whole lines, as in theirs now
pubisht) and not any of them ever wrote in a Latin Character. I shall only
add, my case is the same with the widow (that may be) of any Godly and able
Minister now living: the unjustice is much to me, and the injury to the Church.
Let this serve for general satisfaction.

(...)

