A STRANGE PROPHET NOW IN ENGLAND. BEING A True Relation, sent to a Person of
Quality, now in OXFORD.
THERE is a strange Prophet, now in England, who knows no Parents, neither did
he ever suck his Mothers Breasts; he has a red Beard, and goes Barefoot like a
Gray-frier. He wears no Hat, and his Coat is party-colored; it is neither Dyed,
Knit, Woven, nor Spun; it is made neither of Silk, Hair, Linen, nor Woollen, but
naturally of a good color and gloss. He drinks no Wine, nor Beer, but Water;
and contents himself with a moderate Diet. He esteems not Money, neither will
he receive it if proffered unto him. He walks neither with Stick, Staff, nor
Sword; yet he Marches Boldly in the face of his Enemies: and can, if he
pleases, encounter with the stoutest that wears an head. He is often abused by
Wicked Men, yet he takes it patiently. He lets all Men alone with their
Religion; neither does he dispute with any about it. He complains of the
Protestants, and inclines to the Papists, who use him kindly in Lent. He sleeps
in no Bed, but standing or sitting; and is Admired by all Men for his
Watchfullness; He Cries out upon the Wicked World with outstretcht Arms. He is
so skiled in all Languages, that Men of all Nations can understand him. He
raises up Men, by declaring that the Day of the Lord is at hand! The Doors and
Windows fly open when he Prophesies, Day and Night; and Men find the Effects
true. He was with Noah in the Ark, and with Christ when he was Crucified. He
denies no Article of the Christian Faith.

He was lately at Rochester.


