MANIFEST TRUTH: OR AN INVERSION OF TRVTH'S MANIFEST. Containing, A VINDICATION
of a Church of Christ in their Proceedings on March the 8. 1657, against Mrs
Mary Allein, from the false and injurious Aspersions of her husband Mr. Toby
Allein.

By LEWIS STUCLEY, Pastor of a Congregation in Exeter.

Matthew. 5.22. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the Judgment, and whosoever shall say to
his brother, Rach^ shall be in danger of the Counsel, but whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell fire.

Luke 19.22. Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee.

Eadem possunt alicui videri manifest vera, quae alteri videntur manifest
falsa.

Quisquis a criminibus vitam suam custodit, sibi benefacit; quisquis etiam
famam, and in alios misericors est, nobis necessaria est vita nostra aliis
fama. Aug. de bono Viduitatis c.22.

London, Printed by D. M. for M. Keinton at the Fountain in S. Paul's Church
Yard, 1658.

TO THE READER.
THat Ink has Poison and Gall in it, the Historian as well as Naturalist will
confess, and a late Pamphleter has exemplified: We need not impannel a Jury
of Inquest for this; hereby it happens that no quarter is given to paper, and
as little to many men's names, as thou can witness if thou have perused a
book of Mr Alleins (falsely) called, Truths Manifest.

I must confess I have had some conflicts in my own spirit whether I should
silently pass by the falsehood of the report or return some answer to it.
Eloquar an sileam? First, I shall give thee the workings of my thoughts for my
silence; and then Secondly, give thee an account of the praeponderating
considerations that have had the greatest influence upon me, to come thus into
the view of the world.

First, I shall consider what may lie in the balance against my printing.

1. I bless the Lord I am in some good measure made sensible of my want of
parts to contribute to the good of souls by my penn or tongue.

2. There are many choice practical Tracts (that concern the eternal welfare
of souls) published within the last twenty years, that (according to the
conviction of my own conscience) must needs promote the great ends of Creation
and Redemption, more then I can hope my answer to a Scurrilous pamphlet may
conduce; and if Luther (that Phaenix of the world) would condemn his excellent
writings to the fire, rather then by the publication of them, the Scriptures
should be laid by; ( Ego odi meos libros, et saepe opto eos interire. Luther in
Genesis 14.) And if Augustine cries out, away with our writings, that room may be
made for the Book of God, how much rather may I cry out and others, Auferantur
de medio chartae nostrae, away with our scriblings

I must profess to all the world, That I am heartily sorry I must trouble the
press or thee with any thing but what may be useful and practical for thy
furtherance in Grace.

3. I was even resolved to say as Bernard, Premat Corpus, tremat mundus, fremat
Diabolus, conscientia semper ecit secura: or rather with Paul, My rejoyecing is
this, the Testimony of my Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity I
have had my conversation in the world, 2 Cor. 1.12. And with Job; Job 16.19 my
witness is in heaven, and my record is on high.

I was thinking to relieve my self with my own innocence, as to things laid to
my charge; I could even have resolved not to make Hue and Cry after my self
abroad in this mis-judging age, but to become careless what the vulgar think or
say of me, so it be not deservedly ill; I was loath to buy their good opinion
so dearly, as by the expense of much time and many spirits: how sweet have such
thoughts as these been to me! It is not the breath of men's praise that I can
live by, if I have credit with God, what if I have none with man? God and
conscience are my Compurgatours to whom I dare appeal from man's bar; if God and
a good Conscience feast me within, no matter for the Hail of man's reproaches
that rattle without: my God does not do by me as man does, he does not throw
dirt but rather washes it away in his Sons blood, etc. and therefore in the
midst of all the clamours, misapprehensions, and misjudgings of men, why should
not this content me, that there sits one in heaven that will clear me one day?

4. When I veiw the generality of the nation, I fancy them so overgrowne with
misprision, that I have hardly hopes they will believe truths, further then
they suit their particular parties, and interests. One justly complains of the
times, that men's words or reports of their actions have fared hard since envy
(as Peter with Malchus) has cut off their right ears; affections always cut
off one (and too often the right) we seldom reserve one care for the strangers
(much less the enemies) relation.

5. I might hope that a Ministers yea or nay, might be of as much credit as Mr.
T. A. his yea and nay; and though he has got a certificate to gain him some
credit, yet he knows well how easily I could procure hundreds of Ministers to
do me such an office if I thought I needed them.

6. I have considered that some men's malice is best born by silence, and malice
slighted loses (as the Be) with its sting its life; I have known some scolds
soonest silenced by turning the deaf ear; answers and replies do not so soon
strike detractours dumb, as a contemning and disliking deafness: It stands
with some men's credit to despise poor accusations, and their best answer is,
with Alexander (in Lucian) unto Hannibal, (...) to answer nothing at all: And
might not I hope that those mists that were cast upon my person might in a few
weeks scatter and vanish, without speaking a word for my self or cause?

7. I thought I might venture upon the Testimony of the Consciences of many who
know me, to vindicate me from the Aspersions of this pamphleter.

8. Besides all that know me, can bear me witness, how little pleasure I take
in a Salamander life; books of this nature can hardly be writ nor read without
many heats and Commotions in spirits: These times already have been too
fruitful in disputes and controversies, I have from my heart wished that all
our swords of Contention were beaten into plough-shares of more use, and
fruitfulness, for the Lords field: Would it not be better if Abners Language
were in every man's mouth and heart, 2. Sam. 2.26. How long shall it be ere thou
bid the people return from pursueing their Brethren?

9. Is it not a known experimented truth, that when the head is Intoxicated
with empty jejune controversies and notions, the heart becomes Consumptive in
the solid parts of Godliness? And therefore I had rather acquaint poor souls,
that there is a Controversy depending betwixt God and them, and that it is not
no small misery to be an enemy to God, to be unpardoned, unsanctified, without
hope of Salvation, if so they live and dye, to be a slave of Satan, and
confidently to go on in the way to condemnation: It grieved a Roman Emperor,
that a Neighbor of his should die before he had done him any good; it is some
affliction to me, if I must be forced to spread Rabshekahs papers before God
and men and thereby be hindered from more Important affairs, that the
necessities of self-destroying souls call for: how many are there round about
that there is but a step 'twixt them and the Grave? and 'twixt them and Hell?
What haste are many making to everlasting woe? and must I forbear crying,
Return, Return, why will ye die? to vindicate my name from the Apersions of
an inconsiderable penn? Oh when I think of Psalm. 7.11. That God is angry with
the wicked every day, he has bent his bow, and made it ready, he has also
prepared for him the Instruments of death, Me thinks I should leave my name to
the fury of the pamphleter, whilst I advise these mad traitors against the
majesty of heaven, and beseech them with tears and cries to throw down their
arms, and to seek peace on a bended knee, according to the Articles proposed
in the Gospel: How can I look these in the face, and think how likely they are
to lie in perpetual misery, and not break forth into tears (as the Prophet did
when he looked on Hazael) and fall on with the most importunate exhortations?
how can I, how may I leave them in such apparent danger to take notice of the
reflections of T. A?

Secondly: But then in the other scale, I found a bleeding name, and thereby
the Gospel suffering, I found the Churches and people of God were to be
satisfied, that had a chief interest in my reputation, least my person might
prejudice my Doctrine, a Suspicion of sin in an exemplary person (and such are
all Ministers) denies his labors their desired acceptance; and therefore
Augustine says, nec audendi sunt etc. Those are not to be hearkened to, who
having Suspicion raised of them which they know themselves to be free of shall
say, their Conscience in the presence of God is enough for them, and
imprudently contemn the Esteem of men: Well then a good name is to be kept up,
or redeemed from the attempts of men and divils, it is that which our Savior
expressly Commands, when he says, Let your light so shine before men, that they
may glorify God, Matthew. 5.16.

I know also how Catching a thing falsehood is, and that there are too many
spirits in the world that are as dried tinder to the fire of a Malicious
Detractour.

Besides I find the Apostles wipeing off blots from their persons that the
Gospel might not be hindered; some there were that prated against John, with
malicious words, and he assures the Saints he will remember them. So the
Apostle Paul, when some of the Corinthian Church had bespattered him, he
accounts it worth a double Epistle, to give Antidotes against that poison, and
to wipe off that spittle which some foul mouths had debased him with.

And the Apostle is express, that the mouths of vain talkers and deceivers
(that attempt to deceive though with never such slender artifices; for any
thing will serve to deceive the simple) must be stopped. Tit. 1.10, 11.

More-over, hereby Satan's design may be frustrated, who has always attempted
to cloud, bemist, and asperse the servants of God, as knowing if he can but lay
them low in the eyes of the people, their Gospel and Ministry will soon tumble
after them: were I to suffer alone, it were no great matter, but when I
consider, the Gospel will suffer, and my labors to many may be obstructed by
silence under this man's calumnies and mis-representations, I cannot hold my
peace: If it is come to this, that the Preacher must be vindicated, that his
Doctrine may be accepted, I think I am bound in conscience, of two evils to
prevent the greater, i. rather to publish my want of Judgment, discretion, and
parts, then to lie still and be condemned for a liar, slanderer, and
unrighteous Judge, etc.

But before I make any animadversions on the late pamphlet, I cannot but
observe somewhat of greater Moment then I can find in it.

1. That I being a man subject to great infirmities, yet it has pleased God to
hide them from him, who watched for my halting, and so to govern and order the
ill will of my adversary, that he seldom or never hits upon these, but lays
the burden upon the whole shoulder, and charge me with that which I can
easiest wipe off; blessed be God, that if at any time my nakedness has been
more then ordinary, yet this Cham has not found me in it, for he would soon
have published it to his brethren; did he but know my often indifferencies in
the ways of God, my often starting aside, my unbelief, together with all the
aggravating Circumstances, so much as I do, how would he glory over my
infirmities? qui alterius vituperatione laudari putat; who knows no other way
of Commending himself, then by disparaging others; herein I desire to adore the
Love and goodness of God to me and others.

2. That God should draw good out of evil for the good of me and others, Shimei
his railing tongue, and Rabshekahs letters, should conduce to our reputation,
and that the wrath of man in the Lords hands, should be as a file, to make the
innocence of his people the brighter; this I desire with reverence to lay to
heart; how should I and others adore the wisdom of God who converteth all the
soil (that can be raked together out of the draught, either of our infirmities
or of the passions of this man) into Fullers Soap to scour our names and
persons to a greater brightness; they say of false dyalls, that is best which is
most false, because it will deceive fewest: It is a favor for me and others
(not intended by T. A. but directed by providence) that seeing we must be
traduced, it should be done so palpably and grossly.

3. I cannot but adore the Justice of God toward this Mr. Allien who hoping to
raise up his wifes lost fame upon the ruins of a Church, has but exposed her
scandalous actions and his own to the more shame; and going about to asperse
the censures of the Church, has thereby ripened his own Judgment, which yet
may eventually prove a mercy to him; it is so dangerous a thing to go along
with impunity in any lewd course that the greatest mercy to a malefactor, is
to arrest him in his Carriage.

And now Reader, least thou be offended at the tartness of some passages in the
following Book, I am forced to this Apology, That I divulge little more of Mr
T.A. then what is divulged by himself: the Law of nature teaches me to do
right to my self, and therein to prove (what I may) that I am slandered, and
therefore I hope for a fair opinion from thee, if I give thee a farther light
of what was done on March the 18th Against Mrs. M. A. which is by her husband
very ill represented to the world; my reflections on him are not so much to
uncover him, as the truth; expect no more then this from

June 2. 1658. Thy Friend. LEWIS STVCLEY.

BEfore I examine the inside of Mr. Alleins Book, I must needs fix my eye a
while upon the Frontispiece, Testimonial and Epistle.

First, The Frontispiece. And here we shall gaze a while on the Title, Author,
and a Scripture quoted.

1. The Title, Truths Manifest: Here he flourishes over the design, as if it
were (at least in the principal branch of it) the rectifying of mistakes, and
manifesting of Truths; yet this outside, compared with the inside of the Book,
shows it to be but like the Apothecaries box, which has Pharmacum in titulo,
in pixide venenum, Physic in the Title, but poison in the vessel: Before I
have done with him, I shall prove mistakes and lies enough to show his Book and
Title have no sweet accord. We shall put it to the issue, whether his Narrative
be so full and faithful as he pretends, and whether it satisfyeth all that
desire to know the Truth? or rather, whether those that have been before
deceived by reports, be not now cosened in print? If it be found so, it is a
double fault, the falsehood in the Book is one, Truth in the Title another. Here
might I present thee with a Catalogue of those many shameless untruths which
lie thick scattered like dung upon the face of his Pamphlet. Something might be
said against the Manifest, though I dare do nothing against the Truth; but I
shall choose rather to take them up as they lie in my way, before I can view
them in his Epistle or Narrative.

2. I am not to pass by the Author, Toby Allein, a late member of the said
Church. Mr. Toby, your membership I own, but late member gives the Reader to
imagine, that either you are already excommunicated, or that we have dismissed
you, or that you are an apostate from us; I would not have your Reader
mistaken, we have not taken those advantages against you, which you carriage
may (in unprejudiced men's judgments call for) and I am sure we have not
dismissed you unto any others Congregation; whether you are an apostate you
best know; I do not intend to say farewell until you have satisfied the
Congregation why you leave them: you are not ignorant that the Church has
summoned you before them, which call of Christ hitherto you have refused: will
you separate from them without giving them the reasons of your withdrawing?
This seems not fair, you will lessen the credit of your History, if you are
found Schismatical: but I shall give you a little respite to consider of the
consequence of such a course, whilst I veiw.

3. The Scripture quoted in your Title Page, Prove. 26.5. Answer a fool
according to his folly, least he be wise in his own concen: I have viewed this
Scripture, with the fourth verse, Answer not a fool; they are both the counsel
of Solomon, and would require the advice of as wise as he, to distinguish which
one should follow: But Reader, I may not hold thee in the Porch, neither can
thou pass into the inner rooms without some observations, of several names
subscribed to a Testimonial in the behalf of the Author: It will be an
incivility to let them pass without taking notice of them, and the Contents of
their certificate; and therefore this is the second thing considerable.

Secondly, The Testimonial: We must carry our selves warily here, least we be
bound to the good behavior; but I hope without offense, we may put a few
Queries to Mr. T. A.

1. Why do you disparage your self and credit in the world, as if you may not
be delivered without any certificate? Good wine, we say, needs no bush.

2. Why will you prove so injurious to the Major and Chamber, as for the future
to weaken their Testimonies, in case honester men should need them? If I prove
you guilty of base putid lies, will it not be a reflection on the certifiers,
as being too facile and easy to give testimony for some men; (A vice I confess
too common every where)

Quem cui Commendes iteram atque iteram aspice, ne mox Incutiant aliena tibi
peccata pudorem. 3. But if there must be a certificate had from them, why had
you not procured one for your wife and dame, I think (of the three) they needed
it most.

4. But pray Sir, seeing you cannot come abroad without some Compurgators, why
had you not got letters Testimonial under the hands of the Ministers, as well
as Magistrates? they are better able to judge of your godly conversation: Or

5. Rather, Why had you not tried the officers and members of that
Congregation, with whom you have walked for several years? Sure they had the
fairest advantages of giving you what you might justly claim: I am somewhat
suspicious of some Ministers, who are forced to borrow hands for their good
behavior, from persons of a remote habitation from them: it was no longer
since then the 17. of May last past, that speaking of our Church, you said, we
were the honestest people that ere you came among: why had you not got a
certificate from them you thought most honest?

6. Does it savor of humility and modesty, to have so many lines affirmed of
you without blushing? and to get so much to be printed in your behalf? but

-- Sic notus Ulysses. 7. Why would you have such things to be inserted, as I
find in the testimony?

1. That you have been one of the Stewards of the City: May you not be a false
Steward in your account notwithstanding?

2. That you have been always well-affected to the Commonwealth: so you may and
not to truth.

3. That you have been active in, and as Captain raised a company for his
Highness service: so you may, and yet raise more false reports then you did at
that time men.

But pray Sir, why was all this inserted?

1. Was it not to insinuate to great men in power, as if all the subscribers
were men high praising you for your owning the present supreme Magistrate; you
know what I could retort to this, Spectatum admissi risum teneatas.

Or rather,

2. Was it not inserted to farther a belief of that which you write page 2, 3.
That the Protector might be assured he had a singular friend in T. A. who was
willing to discover what dangerous agitations there were in a Church at Exeter,
that they might be dealt with thereafter? Or at least that the affections of
the Supreme Magistrate might be alienated from me (which you know is the great
eyesore of the Chamber)

Well, I will examine you about this no farther: I take it for granted, among
other ends you hope to be looked on as an honest man by the help of these
Prolocutors (and I hope to be so owned without them) I commend this policy, you
will not venture into the field without your Seconds: Defendit numerus
junctaeque umbone phalanges.

But this I shall tell you, You have made so many accessories, that I cannot
see how with Justice on your part, and Safety on Mine, your Action on the Case
may be tried in Exon.

But what if you had a Legion of men to certify for you, nay and all good, yet
they cannot assure us, that your Narrative is full and true: There was a time
that Judas might have had a Certificate for his good Conversation and
Stewardship from all the Saints in the world, yet afterward he betrayed his
Master upon a Money account.

And yet me thinks I can fancy with what confidence you now appear in open
field, guarded with the Company; and now if simple people must believe all your
reports to be Oracles, for fear of displeasing the Chamber, if Credit must be
given to your words, I warrant you we shall see confidence enough in what
follows.

Well Sir, We will venture, pace tantorum virorum, to examine that which comes
next in order.

III. The Epistle to the Reader. Here the man seems so grieved, that he cannot
but vent his sorrows to the world: troubled he is,

1. At the censure of his wife which he calls unrighteous; for this I refer you
to the Notes of my Sermon printed lately, where you will find, that scandal and
contumacy was proved against her, page 19, 21.

2. He complains of hard measure, that my Notes were printed, the ends whereof
he says was to spread false reports raised by our selves, as far as we can.
No, Reader, there he mistakes, our end was, to satisfy and silence them who
pretended we had censured her for joining with a Congregation of different
principles from us: And the end of the Postscript was to show, how much I
suffered in my reputation by (abominably) false copies of my prayer. And
whereas he condemns us of spreading false reports, if any such shall be
represented or made known to me, there is no man (I hope) shall be found more
ready and pliable to make strait that which is crooked, or to make his pen do
penance in any sheets for any error or delinquency in this kind: so willing am
I to expose my self to the hazard of any discovery he can make.

3. He can hardly digest Mr. Malls quotations because of their impertinency.
What if I should tell this Pamphleter, that he understands not what the
impertinency of a quotation means, or wherein it consists? Sure I am, that if
they attain this end to satisfy the consciences of the Reader, That
Excommunication is a delivery of an offender to Satan, and that a particular
Church may excommunicate, and that not only great and notorious sins deserve
this correction, but also lesser crimes increased with contumacy and contempt
of the Churches admonition, become worthy of the same castigation; then are
they pertinent quotations with respect to his wifes case. And if these learned
and Reverend Men (as he is pleased to style them, though poor man, I think he
never saw one of them) do satisfy the Reader, that in dealing with a private
offender, he is first brotherly to be admonished alone, if that prevail not, to
call one or two witnesses, and if that do not profit, then to declare it to the
Officers of that particular Church: and if their admonition be succeslesse,
then the original crime, and his contempt is to be declared before the whole
Congregation, and upon remaining obstinacy, the offender is to be
excommunicated: Surely this is not Impertinent with reference to Mr. T. A.
though he is willing to wave such questions, referring his Reader to the
learned: Surely it concerned him to have studied those questions, and not to
content himself with an implicit faith in the learned.

There is one thing more that I shall take notice of in his Epistle, he can
hardly forbear challenging me and the Church to answer what we have done before
the tribunal of him who shall judge the world in Righteousness.

Mr. A. I bless God I can think of that day without any fear or horror upon my
spirits, that may arise from any malice I have borne you or yours: I know the
Lord will wittness for me in that day, that you, and your wife, and my self,
had nor been at this distance, wherein we now stand, but by her and your
miscarriage: then it will be known that your wife was not censured by us for
joining in other Congregations beside her own, and this book which you have
writ for vindication will be brought forth as a wittness against you, unless
that the Lord give you timely repentance, which I beg daily for you. But to
come to his Narrative.

It is the unhappiness of this traveller to stumble at his first setting forth,
p. 1. He would make the world believe as if he and his wife were members of Mr.
Mark Downs Church in 1648. whereas Mr. Nicholas Eveliegh and my self are ready
to witness upon our Oaths, that he told us, he only desired that he and his
wife might receive the Sacrament at times with them, until there was a
Congregation constituted, according to his own different judgment; elsewhere to
which, he and his wife would then join. And another of the Church will witness,
that Mrs. Allein did say she did join with Mr. Down on the same terms. A Crazy
conscience and a Brickle memory are very ill companions; but why do I blame his
memory in this, he lately averred the same before Mr. Ford Minister in Exon, as
he confessed to me and Mr. Eveleigh, and I have some cause to believe this, for
that since my coming to Exon, which was in 1651. he and his wife were my
constant auditors, and afterward joined in Church Fellowship with us. But I
never heard that Mr. Downs dealt with them for separating from him; having
prepossessed his Reader with his actual membership, under Mr. Downs inspection,
he gives us an account, when the Church (to which I stand related) was
gathered, ( viz. 1650.) Here he trips again (the man will be angry if I say he
lie, and so will his Prolocutors too) it was about the middle of the year, 1651.

After he gives the reason of their proposing themselves to this Church, namely
the report of what purity of Ordinances, and excellent administrations we had
amongst us, even to admiration, which great report he says even rapt them up
to a fools paradise.

Here Reader take notice upon what slender grounds this couple desire communion
of Saints; had they consulted with the Oracles of God to know his will, and how
he could be worshipped, they had given the world a better account of their holy
and tender consciences, then to engage so far, and so long in a fools paradise,
barely upon a common fame of pure administrations.

I am bold to say, that the rise of Apostasy has been hence, unsound
professors grow big with expectations in the ways of God, and then missing of
them like sick persons, that desire a change of beds and chambers: they are
restless in their spirits till (under a pretense of trying all things and
ways) they at length throw up all their religion; I cannot but take notice to
what a straight Mr. A. is brought, when he knows no way to vindicate his wife,
save by jeering at pure Ordinances, and confessing himself and his wife in a
fools paradise for years together.

But it seems, though they were proposed, they were put off; I do not remember
this, nor believe this part of the Narrative; but if they were, was it for
ignorance or scandal? some reason sure is given? why is he ashamed to discover
it? well, but the fault is mended, whatever it was, for they were afterward
admitted, p. 2.

True they were; but with how little freedom the Reader may see in the printed
notes of my Sermon, p. 21. They continued with us about four years: Reader, If
thou live near them, know of them, where they were communicants the other 3.
or 4. years? I warrant thee thou will never find them at Mr. M. Downs his
communion table: of what fold were they all that while? were they strayers, and
was there no shepherd to look after them?

Next I shall examine the grounds for Mris. A. Separating from this Church.

The first reason was a petition, the substance whereof was to pray the Lord
Protector, not to accept of the Kingly Office.

We are not ashamed to tell the world, that we and several other Churches, both
in Devon, and elsewhere, did petition his Highness; and we laid down our
reasons against his accepting the title of King: And whereas it is supposed,
that there was treason in the said petition, sure he showed little good will to
us, that he would suffer us to persist in any treasonable undertaking, and not
endeavor to hinder us, and as little affection did he show to the present
Government, that if we were guilty as much as the Archbishop, or Strafford, he
should conceal this, and thereby become guilty of mis-prision of Treason: may
not I say that this man is either a traitor or liar? let him extricate himself
from this Dilemma: The great certifiers for him are little beholding to him,
that they must tell the world that Mr. Toby Allein is a man to whose words
credit is given, and always well affected to the Common wealth, and yet here
charged with lying or concealing of treason: But we may say, as Genesis 49.23. The
Archers sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, but, etc. Joseph is
accused as an enemy to the Chastity of his Mistress, yet the true reason and
ground of his accusation, was not his enmity, but his faithfulness thereunto,
though the matter of our accusation be opposition to authority, yet I make
little question, but the true and real cause thereof, was my affection to it,
for which I have suffered sufficiently as a temporizer; he knows well what a
mercy we count it, that under the shadow of this Government we can enjoy our
consciences: but if he could by this artifice, alienate the chief Governors
affections from us, so as to deliver us into the hands of others, our ruin
would be sure and speedy; however we trust that our Lord Christ is as tender of
our lives and liberty as ever, and will continue to give a charge to them that
rule, to put forth their power for our preservation and comfort, though this
Tobiah (like him of old) endeavor our ruin.

He tells us, p. 3. That this was the first disrelish his wife had of our
proceedings. Here you may take notice, that for several years it pleased God so
to accompany us with his presence, that there was no just advantage given to
this woman, until this petition was signed; it seems then that our proceedings
against Mrs. Parr (whom we had long before with their consent suspended) were
liked by both: and yet in his Epistle he affirms, he saw no crimes proved
against his wife or Mr. Par, That might argue the parties guilty, and that both
have been before excommunication, and since unblameable in their walkings. How
could this man of such a good name and reputation, and so well esteemed of, and
beloved for his godly conversation, Consent to the suspension of Mris. P. and
walk with us so long after, and never discover to any fellow member or Officer
(that we can hear of) our wronging such an innocent.

But I may not leave him thus: was this the first disrelish? he is mistaken; my
faithfulness to his wife, in charging sin upon her, for defaming her sister in
law, swelled her with prejudice, and with such prejudice, that when I desired a
conference with her, she refused it, alleging that I forced her to that which
was against her conscience, in confessing her faulty carriage to her sister, as
the Reader may see in the notes of my Sermon, p. 22.

Well, However the dissatisfaction began, yet dissatisfied she was, and now
forsooth, she fears, the Church carried on some particular man's interest: I
wonder what that man should be, I bless God, I know not his name, I will not
plough with his Heifer, to know the meaning of this, but will contentedly let
it pass. Quorsum hoc, to what end is all this? but to insinuate with the
Reader, as if he and his wife alone were the people that had no state ends, nor
politic interests, nor worldly preferments in their eye: and yet in the next
lines she begs, that he would be exceeding wary, what he did and have respect
to himself, her, and her children; now Reader, the paint begins to wear off,
and self will be found the by as of this woman, the thread of self advantange
will be seen running through this whole piece: she had for sometime before
bewailed the bitterness of the Presbyterians toward her husband, because
differing from them in opinion, and perceiving some hazards to his trade
(should he abide among us) she has found out this expedient to alienate her
own and husbands affections from us: and yet, -- Primati nil habetista domus.

Although she thus reflect on us, yet if her husband may be believed, she was
yet to the Church very quiet; too quiet in one sense, that being offended to
our treasonable practices, and driving on particular men's interests, she had
not discharged her duty in giving admonition, and desired satisfaction from the
supposed offenders; but I think he means it in another sense, she is yet very
quiet, this the Reader must observe, least he think as some do, that she
deserves the Poets Character.

Molliter irasci non sciet illa tibi. 2. The second reason for her saparation
was, a members using such words in prayer as these, concerning the Lord
Protector, Lord humble him, what would he have, is not he high enough already?
well, I must profess my self to be a stranger, to any reflections of this
nature upon his Highness, and wish from my heart that T.A. and and all his
prolocutors were but as faithful hearty friends to the Protector, as that party
is whom he secretly fathers these expressions on. And though he insinuates, as
if he were of Mr. Feakes way, yet afterward confesses a day of thanksgiving
was appointed by the Church to bless God for his preventing some insurrection
by the fifth Monarchy men: Oportet mendacem esse memorem. But it seems this
kind of praying, so wrought upon T.A. himself, that he resolves, that if the
said member prayed so again, he would never hear him more: A strange
resolution! should he be impartial, from how many would he withdraw upon a true
account? Here I must caution my brethren to be wary for the future, how they
let fall words of reflection, least they thereby loose one of their Auditory.
Well, how slightly soever I look on this, it has so great influence on Mrs. A.
that hereupon she begins to flag in her affections to our way, as he tells us,
p. 4. did she but now begin to flag? it seems then the petition of pretended
treason was more tolerable then the prayer. And why had not so great an
offender been (at least) admonished, or why must her affections flag to the
whole Church and way she walked in from one man's delinquency? and why must
every thing that was amiss, now be thought on by her? here he would make his
Reader believe there were many things amiss amongst us, he names none, (I take
it for granted there are none) for he loves us so dearly he would be sure to
blaz on them) except what is given as a

3. The third Reason for her separation, the expressions of some members, who
in making out their experiences at their admissions, spoke of such sins as are
not to be named, which things she said bordered too nigh Auricular confession,
p. 4.

1. Let the Reader consider, that it is no new thing for persons when admitted
to discriminating Ordinances to confess their sins? compare, Mat. 3.6. with
Luke. 3.10, 14. as Mr. Hildersham observes in the Lectures on the 51 Psalm p.
148. The people came and cried out, O Sir, we have been unmerciful to the poor,
secking our selves only without all care of the good of others; the publicans
came and cried, we have been worse then so, for we have been shameful
extortioners, and under color of law and pretense of right, we have got men's
goods unjustly from them; the Soldiers came and cried, O Sir, We have been
worse then all these, for we have by violence, without all color of right,
spoiled many: see more Hild. p. 161.

2. If there were any undecencies in persons at their admissions, why had there
not been some faithful counsels administered to prevent what he would publish
for our shame?

3. His wife if not himself, show their ignorance, in thinking such a course
borders on Auricular confessions: Auricular confessions is a phrase used to
denote that which is required amongst the Papist, viz. that every one do
confess all his sins, though private to the Priest alone, Whispering the same
into his care, now what a shame is that put on us in the application hereof to
our course in our admission? surely the conscience of Mr. T.A. cannot but
acquit us of popery and treason.

There is somewhat more observeable in the 4. p. That his wife was much
discontented with him -- What need the world know more of that? but the cause
is weighty -- let it pass, though I cannot let pass the words, she then threw
forth; she apprehended that some of them did carry on a selfish carnal design:
A strange inference; He that can gather Grapes of thorns, and figs of thistles
may happily see the naturalness of this deduction; I will not asperse T.A. with
the filth of his own kennel; I will not say that his wife advised him to
separate from us, to save the incident charges of the church, to save a sum of
money, that he had subscribed for the erecting of a Gallery in Peter's in the
West, and to farther his trade in vending Serges; but ask him Reader, whether
the tenor and strain of this accusation be not purely satanical? being drawn to
the life according to that pattern. Job 1.9. Does Job serve God for naught? for
as the Devil there seeks to traduce, and imbase that external course of
sanctity and uprightness which Job held, by falsely charging it with sinister
ends and motives, so does the pamphleter most unworthily calumniate and deprave
the Candid intentions of a Church of Christ: but wherein lay the selfishness of
this design / He ill consults for self that joins to this Church in Exon, where
the way of God has the same portion of Calumnies, lying, reproaches, as in the
days of old, Acts 28.22. Against which as a sect, every one speaks liberally,
and where the spirits of men are so exasperated, that we owe our very lives as
well as liberties, to the restraining Providence of God, and the vigilant care
and tenderness of his Vicegerent.

Turpe est -- Cum Gulpa redarguit ipsum. But I pass on to the fourth reason

4. For her separation which was a Covenant, and therein two things distastful,
the one whereof was a tying of the members wholly to hear their own Officers,
when they preached, and no other without their leave: And the other was that we
were to expect a greater blessing from their ministry, then any others, p. 5.

To which I give this Answer.

1. There was no Covenant at that time, drawn up, much less to be taken by the
Church; and therefore that is false which the pamphleter suggests, only there
was a paper of mutual duties betwixt officers and people, with Scriptures
annexed to them, for the Church to consider of.

2. Whereas it is suggested, that all or a great part thereof was assented to
by the Church, p. 5. It is abominably false; for they did hardly debate the
tenth part of the said paper: you may see how bold and lavish this man is, now
that he is guarded with his Testimonial.

3. I am not ashamed to declare it as my judgment, that members ought
ordinarily to hear their own officers, and may expect a greater blessing from
their Ministry, then any others; and dare avouch that this opinion is no other
then what Prelatical, Presbyterial and Congregational men do generally own and
defend. In the same Page he would make the Reader believe, that forthwith his
wife joined to Mr. M. Downs, before any member had admonished her: which I am
confident is abominably false, and I have more then Ordinary cause to fear that
he himself was convinced in his own conscience of the falsehood of it, let his
own words be but weighed: who can imagine that she having professed so much
sorrow for her departing from Mr. Downs, and pretending the judgments of God
had followed her for the same, that her husband would after this, desire her to
join with us (against whom she was so displeased for the reasons aforesaid) as
a member with us, I cannot let this pass before I have taken notice of the
grounds of her (pretended) return to Mr. Down, namely Gods displeasure against
her, manifested in her childrens death, and her own sickness for departing from
him: surely as a late writer has observed, the providence of God are written
in the dark and unlegible Characters, which though they may soon be discerned
to be his hand, yet to decipher the sense and meaning of them is a task that
oft-times exceeds the line of humane wisdom: They are like the the
handwriting on the wall, Dan. 5.5. where part of the hand that wrote it
Belshazzer saw, but the meaning of it, neither he nor the most learned of his
Caldeans could find out: to interpret the mind of God in his providence
requires the skill and wisdom of a Daniel: and let the Reader take notice that
God has seemed to put a check upon this inferrence from Providence, by the
death of one of her children, since her separation and excommunication, and
whilst this lying pamphlet lay in the press, p. 6. He tells his Reader, that
Mr. Ford was traduced, but by whom I know not, only still I find T. A. peccant
in neglecting to admonish one with whom yet he was in fellowship: sure he that
allows himself in the omission of fraternal correption deserves not such a
Testimonial of his godliness. Immediately he charge us with common sleighting
of others that are not of our way (though never so godly): this is a false
imputation, and suggested by the accuser of the brethren: Had we commonly
slighted godly men of different persuasions, it had been an intolerable crime,
and he ought not to have put it up, without dealing with us about it: is there
no way for Mr. A. to make his own and his wifes face clean but by throwing dirt
in the face of a Church of Christ? p. 7. He confesses that the manner of his
wives withdrawment from us, was according as is set forth by Mr. Malls account:
She refused to obey the voice of Christ in his commands, Mat. 18.15, 16. She
refused to hear the first and second party, and so successively; and if the
Church did send for her, she would not come near them, for she did not mean to
be so tossed up and down as some others had been: so that, Reader, had her
grounds of separation been just (though the contrary does appear to all
uninterested persons) yet the manner of her separation is altogether
unjustifyable; and whereas she pretends she desired that the business might be
determined by two other Ministers, and my self with Mr. Mall. I shall reply two
things.

1. How does this accord with what is said by T.A. p. 8. where to find fit
persons for the resolving this question, we knew not; being both of us tender
to engage the Ministers of the City, lest it might prove of ill consequence, or
beget some anunosity between them upon the desiding of the question? why was
she not as tender of preventing animosities in offering the determination of
the business to two Ministers as in stating the question?

2. But to clear up matters more fully know, that toward the end of September
last, I occasionally met with Mr. Alleins father, who signified to me that his
daughter in law (the party censured) did with tears in her eyes profess her
willingness to leave her self to the determination of any two Ministers within
the City or without (she was indifferent) that might confer with me and end the
business in controversy, whereupon (though I told him it was a great
reflection on her Pastor that he could not be admitted to treat with her unless
others might be present; it was a tacit charging me with unfaithfulness, and
that I had never given her cause for such estrangements) yet however I pitched
on two Ministers Mr. Ferdinando Nicols and Mr. Thomas Down and sent her husband
notice of it, who was overjoyed at my condescentions, as hoping to reduce his
wife by this expedient; but she in stead of this flies off from her pretentions
to her father in law, and would not refer her self to them. p. 8. I find Mr. T.
A. and his wife agree to have the case stated whether those things before
mentioned (at which she was so much offended) were sufficient cause to withdraw
from my Church (as he calls it) and go to another? Had he consulted with the
Presbyterian books concerning separation, he might have been satisfied: Mr.
Brinsley would have told him that is an unwarrantable separation which is either

1. Unjust, When there is no persecution, no spreading errors or heresy, no
Idolatry, nor superstition maintained in the Church.

2. Which is either when the cause pretended is but light, or when the
separation is sudden and heady, without due endeavor and expectance of
reformation in the Church: Brinslies Arraignment, p. 24.25. Or he might have
perused Mr. Manton on Jude, who would have taught him that the only lawful
grounds of separation are intolerable persecution, damnable heresy, gross
Idolatry, p. 496. and that lawful separation on these causes, must not be
sudden till all due courses be tried, p. 497. And now Reader, do but reflect on
the four grounds of Mris. A. her separation and thou can not but descern, how
groundless and rash even in the account of brethren (dissenting from (...)
separation is: we are neither accused of heresy, Idolatry or superstition, and
she never declared her resolutions to leave us, or any grounds thereof, or
endeavored to be satisfied about any thing burdensome to her, until we
admonished her of disorderly walking in neglecting Church Fellowship with us,
we had not an hint of any of her discontents. Hitherto I have followed this
pamphleter to see and show his weakness in justifying this wises neglecting
Church Fellowship and withdrawing from us: I shall next take notice what he
pleades for her other sin of running from him: p. 8. 9. he pretends, as if the
end of that motion was satisfaction, whether she might withdraw from us; what
need so much impatience if she had actually been in Communion with Mr. Downs
people? Here Reader I shall give thee some probabilities that she intended not
for Taunton in this expedition.

1. At her departure from her husband in the morning she told him in a passion
she would leave him, as he confessed with tears in his eyes to Capt. Roll and
Lieut. Owen, about four of the Clock the same day; and yet p. 34. of his
Truths Manifest, he knows in in his own Conscience that she never entertained
the least thoughts of deserting him; is not this a bold liar?

2. Was she so poorly beloved in Exon that she could not borrow an horse for
love or money? where she had her birth and breeding, such as it was.

3. Was she not great bellyed, and consequently unfit for travel on foot? so
near her time, it seems, that p. 35. of his book she was glad to Carry her
midwife with her. Will any Reader think that she in such a Condition would take
such a Journey for such an end.

4. Would she have pitched on such an infamous woman as Dame, who had ran to
Ireland as her Brother Mongwel confessed after another woman's husband? Had she
no relations that she might trust to convey her in case her husbands Company
was not so proper?

5. Why did they not proceed in their journey? what though her brother could
not accompany her, must she needs return being in her journey more then half
the way, especially when she could go with more Credit to Taunton then before?
but,

6. If the Mare was sent for to convey her to Taunton, what should Dame her
Companion or Midwife do? must she ride upon the Muggle of the Mare?

7. But is it likely that she would send about fifteen miles for a Mare to
expedite this journey?

8. Is Honnington in the road way to Taunton?

9. There are several persons that then lay in the house that heard the
Landlady say, that Mr. T.A. could not be admitted for a while into his wifes
Chamber, and that Mris. A. did confess to her, that she left her husband
because of a different way from her. Well but he thinks to excuse, by a
friendly lodging he had that night with her p. 9. it was sure but part of the
night, I think it was near nine of the Clock before he took horse to find her
out: for her friendlinesse to him I will not meddle with it, only it Cost him
dear, to travel so unseasonably, and to engage (as was reported) that he would
never join with us more.

10. Her journey was sinful in the opinion of both husband and wife p. 10. he
says, she was sensible of her sin in going from him without his privity, and
desired the Lord to humble her for it, and desired him to forgive her. Well,
grant this, yet the offense became public, Honnington and Exeter Rang with
this scandal, and the Church account themselves obliged to take notice of it,
and they appoint members to admonish her of it, but she refuses to hear them
as she was wont: Now let the Reader Judge, whether this is so slight an offense,
and whether a Church of Christ have not power to deal with such an offender,
although she be forgiven seventy times seven by her husband, yet no appearance
of sorrow was seen by any of us, for her opening the mouths of wicked men
against Religion; therefore we expecting saisfaction but missing of it, we
resolved to follow this offender according to the instruction given us, Math.
18.15.16.17.

In the same page he advises his Reader to take notice, that the Church were
ignorant of the occasion and end of her journey, and yet, etc. Noe wonder if
Ignorant of the occasion of that scandalous motion, when her own husband knew
it not till he found her in Honnington; and as for the end, though he pretends
it was to Receive satisfaction Concerning some scruple, yet I do not believie
it: How ever he has been taught in Peter's, that it is a most sad thing, when a
man has nothing to say for the justifying of himself, but this, that he has a
good meaning in such an action; it is no question, a man may have a kind of
good meaning in that which is nothing but wickedness; the best intention in
the world is not good enough to make an evil action to be good. Good is a
perfection as evil is a defect, and all perfection must come from the
concurrence of all the causes to complete it: what think you of Lots Daughters,
their end was that they might preserve seed on earth, yet this would not
Justify them in such an abominable act as that was: yea, he has been taught,
that no man can have a good intention in a wicked action; how can a man have a
good end, as long as he walks by a crooked rule, and uses indirect means for
the obtaining of his end? it does imply, it is a contradiction: The obedience
of he Creature to its maker is the end for which it was made, honoring of God
by obeying him, is the end of a Christian: now how can he aim at the glory of
God that takes a direct course to disobey him?

But if his wives end was so good in that swift motion of hers, why had it not
been made known when the two others were sent to his wife? Why did she refuse
conference with them? She knevv well enough that the scandalousness of the
action was notorious, and did it not become her (or her husband in her behalf)
to satisfy us about this glorious end? Besides, why had she such a ruff
carriage toward those two Brethren, when coming to her in a message from
Christ, and his Church, p. 10.11. We know she is a ruff piece, but that was a
strange time so to express her self, when she lay under so much guilt, as that
he confesses, she ask't him forgiveness, and said, she was sensible of the
evil of that journey, and desired the Lord to humble and forgive her for it:
When David had truly repented of his sin, though a Shimei accosted him, he was
not rough toward him; though this pamphleter be overbold in his lying
imputations, yet the Lord did not Permit him to charge the brethren with any
uncivil carriage in their conference with his wife, only he confesses that
(which needed no proof) that his wife was rough, yet upon this repentance
(though questionable enough) he forgives her, so might we: had she with tears
professed (to us) Her self sensible of the evil of her journey, desiring the Lord
to humble her, and forgive her for it. To this was she bound by the Law of
the same God that obliged her to ask her husband forgiveness, her sin being
public, her repentance should have been public, she had scandalized the
Church, and she ought to have sought forgiveness from them, as well as from
her husband: There is a tvvofold forgiveness.

1. That which is opposed to hatred, grudges, and unjust desire of revenge,
thus we were to forgive her, whether she repented, or no.

2. That which is opposed to the censures of the Lord Jesus in his Churches,
and so we are bound not to forgive unless there be visible repentance; and
therefore we are not ashamed to say, that such a scandalous sin is
unpardonable to a Churchmember, without the Churches satisfaction, though he
as an husband may pardon the scandalousness of it, as relating to himself, yet
not as relating to the Church; and had he consulted either for the peace of his
own conscience, or the safety of her soul, he would have taken an occasion
from her private confessions to prevail with her for a public
acknovvledgment; but he neglecting his duty, and his wife hers the Journey
having opened so many mouths against Religion, and the pretended end being
concealed from the Church, they thought themselves bound in conscience to use
the last remedy that Christ had left them, namely to set apart a day to censure
her for her offenses, and contumacy.

At this he tells us, p. 11. he was so offended, that therefore he abstained
from our meetings: whereas long before we had brought his wives business to
an head; he was observed to neglect fellowship, vvhereupon he was summoned
to appear before the Church, and promised to come; but a common liar (as he
now proves himself in print) will break his word; instead of coming, he
writes a letter, and for the choiceness of it he has published it. p. 12.13,
14. which letter I shall branch into a double charge, and a threefold defense.

In his charge I shall consider, First, His charge of the Church in general,
for separation; we believe separation to be a very great sin. I am ready to
say with August. Contra parmen: non esse quicquam gravius sacrilegio
schismatis. How far T.A. is guilty of it himself, we may fear from his Title
page where he styles himself a Late member; but seeing he has laid the
charge, it will concern him to make it good, by shevving to what body this
Church was ever united according to the rules of Christ, and that such an
union has been desolved by them: Which I am sure he can never evince.

There is another charge of several members, who (he says) have much defamed
him, so as to make him a perjured person, because Mr. M.D. baptized his child.
This I believe is a lie, though I think he gave just cause of trouble to many
thereby; he pretends even in this letter that he forbore to partake with other
Churches, because he would not offend us, and yet he knevv that his carrying
his child to another Minister would offend them, as much, if not more: and
indeed has more offended, because of those many solemn serious professions of
his, that he was not changed in his principles, and had resolutions to
continue in our fellowship) but if there were any such as so defamed him, did
not they trespass against him; and why will he live in the constant neglect
of so plain a duty, as telling it betvveen him and the offender, and in case of
party or parties had not been reduced, to have taken others in order to their
healing; but be forgiveth without their asking him mercy. What ever principle
of forgiving an offending brother he pretends to, yet he should have studied
that in Luke 17.3.4. take heed to your selves, if thy brother trespass against
thee, rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him, and if he trespass against
thee, seven times in a day, and seven times in a day, turn again to thee,
saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him; from which words the late large
Annotators infer that charity must connive at sin, but discreetly reprove it,
and refer us to Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor and not suffer sin upon him; but
perhaps the captain is better for a desensive posture, then for a charge.

I shall now view him standing on his guard.

1. He seems to defend himself from any charge, for forbearing our company, by
saying, that after salutes, presently the discourse was about his wife, which
was as gravel to his teeth. Surely he hid it within his gums, I do not know any
persons, that he can justly charge with such discourses, but some of our
brethren did pity his condition, and labored to support him under troubles,
that his wife did occasion: this I say; this I know. I dare challenge him to
instance in any person, that so gravel'd him, as he complains; Mr. Toby his
memory is not so shallow, that he can forget what discourses we have had with
him about his wife, have been for reducement, and for his direction, rather
then for his wifes defamation: yea, he knows that I have desired conferences
with him about spiritual things of the highest nature: but if any of the
brethren fed him with gravel; nay, if any one said, if the unbeliever depart,
let him depart; I am very confident he never showed the least distaste to such
a person, or persons, until he went about to publish this grievance in the
Church.

2. Secondly, He goes about to defend himself, for his absence from our
Church Assemblies, which he calls private meetings: to which I reply, that when
a Church of Christ is convened for the worship of God, I know not how to call
it a private meeting, any more then the meetings of the Saints in the primitive
times, when though they met in houses, their meetings were public; one reason
of his absence seems to be taken from our debate, and discourses about his
wife. This is but pretended, and founded, upon a falsehood, a double falsehood;
1. We have had very seldom debates about her, in our Church Assemblies, the
works lying on the officers to prepare and ripen matters for the Churches
proceedings: and 2. To show the invalidity of his defense, both to this and to
the former charge; I do most confidently affirm, that he has several times
pretended another reason for both, viz. His hopes of reducing his wife by
forbearing our company a while; as for what he subjoynes of his being of
another apprehension, as to the matter in controversy between us and his wife,
then the Church was: this is a witnessing to the truth of what his wife charged
him with, that he was of her opinion, though he often denied it.

Another reason of his absence seems to be some brethren vilyfying his wife, at
their doors, shops, and tables: this is a false imputation, he will never be
able to prove his defense: besides the thread of neglecting fraternal corruption
runs through the veins of all his calumnies, as you will find anon.

3. He defends himself against an objection that he supposes might be made
against him for his absenting from the Lords Table: the reason whereof, he
tells us was because Mr. Savery was unsatisfied, and lest the Church should be
offended.

1. As to that branch of Mr. Saveries being offended: an understanding Reader
would rather think that he was offended that views, p. 11. saying, that his
letter to him carried so much, if not more in the terms thereof, as to set T.A.
at variance with his wife. But that the Reader may know, who is the offending
party, I have prevailed with him for a copy of his letter, sent to him, August
22. 1657.

Dear Brother,
And beloved in the bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ's Grace and peace be ever
your Portion.

Having of late not had an opportunity to confer with you, and fearing to come
to your house because of your wife, have made bold to present you with these
few (though much confused) lines, to give you to understand, how much my soul
is grieved for your disorderly walking; I mean your absenting your self from
our private meetings; to forsake the assembling of our selves together, is a
sin, and I may boldly say, such a sin as carries many others in the bowels of
it; you may see how the Holy Ghost does condemn such an unsaint like practice,
in Heb. 10.24, 25. your often withdrawing from us, has drawn these lines from
me; what your excuses be I know not, I must tell my fears and Jealousies;
which are, that they will not hold weight in the balance of the sanctuary;
if the wife of your bosom do divert you, give me leave to tell you, as my
Lord has told me in Luke 14.26, 27, 33. You cannot be his Disciples, if your
multiplicity of business in the world hinder you from waiting upon God in
those Galleries, where he has so eminently appeared: Oh sit down and
consider, that Scripture in Mat. 16.26. and so with 1 Ioh. 2.15. Love not the
world; and what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? what shall we
who profess our selves to be the children of the most high, live upon things
so lovv as the world is? what shall we be so earnest for a dying world
when our immortal and never dying souls lies at stake? Oh Dear Brother,
Remember God will not be mocked; if we bring forth the fruits of the flesh,
doubtless we shall reap corruption, and confusion of face forever; truly a name
to live and a report to be a Christian, will not stand in the day of
appearance: all that I shall say more for the present, is to desire, that the
good Lord would grant us such Revelations of Christ, as that it might make us
to cast out and cut off what ever is displeasing to him: I should not have been
faithful, had I not told you my mind. Now the Father of Spirits give you a
heart to receive it as an humble hearted Christian would do; and take it all
in Brotherly and Gospel love from him, who is,

Yours (whilst you are Christ's) in Gospel Bonds. THOMAS SAVERY.


I do not see that this Letter should breed strife betwixt him and his wife, I
dare be Compurgator for T.S. he never in the least intended it: but T.A. is
very exact in drawing thorns from Grapes; any man that does but compare his
after inferences from my Sermon, p. 26. 27. 29. 31. 35. may discern it. But
suppose he was offended with Mr. S. why did not he discharge duty toward him?
Would he suffer a person to lie in so great a sin from Aug. 22. to Feb. 4.
without following him by first and second admonition. But (to return to the
Letter) Mr. Savery is unsatisfied, and the Church knows of it, by what means
should the Church come to the knowledge of it, seeing Mr. Savery never brought
it to their hearing; they had indeed known it on February 4. if I had observed
his irregular desires. But was he unsatisfied with T.A. why did not T.A. agree
with him quickly, acccording to that Math. 5.25. If Church members take this
Liberty to dissatisfy persons in Communion with them, and do not carefully
discharge duties mutually, a Church will soon loose their purity and will
become a Babel: still Reader, Mr. Savery is unsatisfied and now T.A. grows
bold, satisfied or not; to the Lords Table he will, as if he had never read,
Math. 5.23.24. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, Leave there thy gift and
go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother and then Come and offer thy
gift. I wounder who those are, that he thinks more wise and Godly then
himself; that would advise him to go to that Love-feast, till he had made up a
difference between him and his brother? And therefore his desire was
unreasonable, to ask of us liberty to come to the Lords Table, when the
difference between him and Mr. Savery had disabled him, and being never
suspended, he needed not crave that privilege. In the close of his letter he
intended to oblige the Church, by wiping off an ill name, they had got: Did he
publish this letter and his Book for this reason? Or would any man think his
subscription, Yours to Command in any service for Christ, can possibly consist
with such passages as I find in his Book? where he accuses us of
unrighteousness in his epistle, and of raising and spreading false reports, as
Traitors p. 2.3. as slighting all that are not of our way p. 6. as glad of any
occasion to censure his wife p. 10. as overreaching Mris. Par p. 28. as proud,
as thinking there are no pure Ordinances but in such Churches p. 31. 41 as
tollerating of wicked persons amongst us p. 41. as miscalling other Churches,
looking on them as Babylonish and Synagogues of Satan p. 28.42. and compares
us to the Pope and Pharisees p. 32.39. is this the man to whom we are dear
still even to the fourth of February? And is this the way to wipe off what he
can, that ill name that is laid upon us?

Thus have I considered the letter whose Subscription runs to my Honored
friend Mr. L.S. to be Communicated to the Church who (they say) are
unsatisfied: Which was it seems the intent of that paper, and the subject
matter of it confirms it, though he would delude his Reader with another
inscription, p. 12. with this, A letter from Mr. Toby Allein To Mr. Lewis
Stucley, to be communicated to his Church before they excommunicated his wife:
here a simple Reader will think the intent of the letter, was to prevent the
excommunication of his wife, whereas he that Reads it narrovvly, will see that
it is rather to prevent his own: He does but as in a parenthesis name somewhat,
that his wife was dissatisfiea about, the invalidity whereof I have already
evinced to the judicious Reader; neither was that meeting (from which he
absented himself And therein broke his Solemn promise) appointed in relation
to his wives affairs, but his own. By this time I have given thee an account
that this Pamphleter does unjustly charge me with unfaithfulness to him, and
the Church for not communicateing it, according to the directions given p. 15.
Unfaithfulness supposes some preceding obligation; I know noe ties on any
Pastor to communicate to his Church all the papers that private persons would
have divulged to them, should I be bound to that, I might foone fill the ears
of my Congregation with rude undigested stuff, or with unseasonable matter: Was
it fit for me to countenance him in an irregularity, of bringing in several
charges, against some members, before he had admonished them privately? Or
would it have been wisdom in me, to communicate his reflections on the Church
in general, before he had made a Just defense for himself? Besides, in his
paper, there are some passages so obscure, that I could not understand, as p.
13. this and such like sayings, begat in me some dissatisfaction, which, for
want of better observation, I thought z^aie, which, when my good Father heard I
Remember etc. With whom he was dissatisfied I do not understand, nor what he
means, by zeal, whether he was disatisfied with his wife, or with the Church,
and what the antecedents are to those relatives.

p. 17. He gives you an account of a letter from Mris. Par (who he says was a
late member of my Church, and long since deserted them; how a late member, and
yet long since deserted us) and Mris Allein, to which I need not say much, any
judicious Reader may see, it robs parricular Churches, of that power and
Authority which Christ has entrusted them with, of trying and censuring their
own delinquent members, upon a pretense that the whole Church are parties; to
which we might retort many things, if it were needful; but he Pamphleter
takes it for granted, that a particular Church may excommunicate (in his
Epistle) and that which he dislikes in several Pages, is our censuring the
parties for petty small offenses; moreover so far are either of them, in this
paper, from confessing any of their scandals, that they rather would asperse
us, as if the evil we were censuring them for, was their communicating in the
Ordinances of Christ, with others of Gods people that will admit them to their
communion: Sure March the seventh was of all the days in the week, the most
improper to blot paper with slanderous reflection.

By this time I suppose I have almost wearied my Reader, with enlarging on the
unchristian liberty, which this Pamphleter has taken to make both my person
and the Church I walk with odious to the world, but I may say as it was told
Ezekiel, Behold yet greater abominations; he is not contented to falsify, and
pervert actions, but p. 20. he jears at the workings of the blessed Spirit, in
those mournings and lamentings which God was pleased to bestow upon his people,
upon that sad day; this he blasphemously calls a hideous howling cry, and
accounts so just a censure to be but like the Popes bull, a beast when it roars
the loudest, p. 33. I should the less wonder at these expressions, had not this
T.A. been once present, when this censure was inflicted on Ganicle; has this
poor soul forgotten how they sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it
wrought in them; yea, what clearing of themselves, yea, what indignation, yea,
what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge? The
Author of the History of the Council of Trent (though a papist) would have
taught him more Christianity, who says p. 330. That the excess of charity in
correcting (speaking of the censure of excommunication) did make the corrector
feel greater pain then the corrected, so that in the Church no punishment was
imposed without great lamentation of the multitude, and greater of the better
sort, and this was the cause why to correct was called to lament; so St. Paul
rebuking the Corinthians, for not chastifing the incestuous, said, you have not
lamented to separate such a transgression from you.

And must this scurilous tongue report that days mourning for his wives
misery to be howling and hideous howling? and compare it to the Popes roaring
Bull? how can this Ishmael that is grown up, and become a scoffer of Isaac,
hope to keep his reputation among them, who know what sighs and groans in
duty means? it was indeed a sad and black day, and this the excommunicates
will know to their everlasting shame and sorrovv without repentance;
hovvever this adamant heart may flout and jest at our sense of the misery of
these contumacious vvretches for a while: I know, and am persuaded, that we
have cause given us to glory in that which he would publish for our shame;
we bless God that the place of our assembling our selves together was turned
into a Bochim, and that the great holy God was pleased to give us frames of
mourning, becoming the work of such a day; we remember well, we are not the
first that have been so traduced, and if this be to be vile, we desire to be
more vile, if ever such a sad occasion present it self again.

This Pamphleter having cast such blase aspersions upon the workings of God in
the hearts of his people, and having mishaped the Congregation, his next work
is to lay me lovv in the eyes of al men, by printing somevvhat of my Prayer for
the Reader to view, to make way for his own false observations, that
afterward he annexeth.

I have already in a solemn place witnessed against those lies, with which I
am charged, and should have hoped for so much ingenuity from a professing
people, that they would have given credit to me, in my disovvning the
Blasphemy, Lies, Contradictions, and incoherences of such papers; but this I
feel and find by sad experience, that when persons are engaged in spreading
lies to defame their brethren, they will hardly be persuaded to retract their
uncharitable practices against them; it had suited with a Gospel Spirit in
Ministers, and others, to have known of me, whether I delivered such
passages, as the bold man fathers on me, before they had believed them, or any
way contributed to the spreading of them; this is not to walk by that
(generally applauded) rule, Mat. 7.12. All things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them; this is not to love thy neighbor
as thy self, this is not to uphold the credit of the Minister, and the esteem
of our brethren in the Ministry, this is not to deal faithfully with our
brethren, and not to suffer sin to lie upon each other, and freely and lovingly
give to, and receive admonitions from each other, for any evil that shall be
discovered in either of us.

I do once again profess to my brethren in the Ministry, and to all others,
that I am exceedingly vvronged by these reports, and if this do not satisfy
thee, if thou vvilt credit more on H.R. (a person so notorious, that I believe
fevv will certify for his godly conversation) rather then believe a Minister
of the Gospel: I may say, now walk not thou charitably; Religion will teach
thee to suspend rather thy determining any thing in this matter; I cannot force
the credit of any, but will commit my cause to God; I believe a day of Judgment
is hastening upon us, and then it will be known how much sin men of all degrees
have been guilty of in this matter, by saying, report and we will report. In
the mean while I shall give thee a double Certificate from the members of my
own, and some of other Congregations.

A Printed Pamphlet under the name of Mr. Toby Allein, coming lately to our
view, and finding therein somewhat styled a prayer, which is by him asserted to
be Mr. Stucleys, we cannot but judge our selves obliged in duty and conscience,
to testify to all that desire to be informed of the truth, that several
passages therein, are to our knowledge forged, and invented, and several other
material passages omitted, and several incoherences inserted; so that we are
verily persuaded it was framed and published out of a malicious design, to
traduce our honored and beloved Pastor, and to blast the reputation of his
name and Ministry, which is and will be as a sweet savor to us and many other
poor souls in these parts, who enjoy the benefit and comfort of his Gifts and
graces.

Signed in the name, and with the consent of the Church, by Thomas Mall.
Nicholas Eveleigh. John Whitehorne.



Having often heard of many scandalous papers spread up and down, and lately
seen in Mr. Toby Alleins Narrative, a Prayer said to be delivered March. 8. by
Mr. L. Stucley, we account our selves debtors both to the truth and reputation
of Mr. Stucley, to declare to the world, that having then been ear-witnesses of
what he delivered, we know him to be much wronged in it, for that several
things are omitted which he spoke, and other things inserted which he did not
deliver, we fear, that if Mr. Allein had not meant to abuse himself, he would
never have printed so gross an untruth.

Given under our hands the first of June 1658. Fortescue Lowman Minister Henry
Hill. Nich. Hitchcock. George Berry. James Wood. John Crossman. Allexander
Wood. Robert Gill.



I shall let the Reader pass on to what remains, when I have assured him, that
what a minister aspersed me with, as if one or more of my Congregation would be
sworn, that the copies that were scattered up and down, was a true copy of my
prayer, is a mistake, to call it by no worse name; and to assure thee of it, I
shall give thee part of his letter.

Sir, The Copy which I saw of your Prayer, was acknowledged by one or two of
your Congregation to be true, except the contradiction and mistake in it, all
the rest they believed was yours; the contradiction was (let us not pray for
them, let us remember them in our prayers; and the mistake, viz. God is
banished from their presence, instead of, they are Banished from Gods presence,
etc.

Now these two members I have talked with, and they are so far from swearing to
the truth of this assertion, that they affirm the contrary, yea, the contrary
is granted by the limitations annexed in the letter, for if there were a
contradiction and a mistake in the copy, then it was not a true copy; besides,
these two persons affirm, that H.R. told them, he had omitted one or more
particulars; and to say but this, thou will find upon a second view of the
pretended prayer, that the contradiction is now totally omitted, instead of
(let us not pray for them etc. but remember them in our prayers, let us
remember that such and such persons are this day accursed) now T.A. p. 23. has
these words; let us not pray for them, avoid their company, but remember in our
prayers that such and such persons are this day accursed.

But the malice of Tobyah is not yet quenched with the blood of my name, unless
he smites my worthy fellow laborer Mr. T. Mall. He advances himself in his
design, p. 25. to asperse him also, and at once condemns him for uncharitable
and invective resteotions (which he will never be able to prove) and for
weakness of parts, though that little part of the world wherein he has
exercised his Ministry will be sufficiently able to confute his slanderous
tongue without the need of any other Apologists.

The Author of Truths Minifest is high flown with confidence, that by this time
his infamous pen has sufficiently prejudiced his Reader, and made way for the
entertaining of what follows, the main design whereof is to give a lying
Testimonial, concerning his wives behavior and our opinions and practices: so
it will appear by and by, when I have but rectified the Readers judgment, that
may be misled by a passage in his 38, 39. p. Judge how fit it is for Mr. St. to
rake up this petty business, an offense indeed taken, and not given it, and to
aggravate it in Pulpit and Print, beyond all truth near three years after they
had been reconciled, and the same had been buried in oblivion, on purpose to
bespatter and abuse my wife. How many lies there are in these few words thou
will find anon: I might here refer thee to the 21.22. p. of Mr. Malls True
account, where thou will find that my endeavors to bring the two sisters to an
agreement, begat Rancor in her spirit against me; for she confessed that the
reason why she would not speak with me, though desired by me, was because of my
unfaithfulness, in forcing her to ask forgiveness of her sister, and that way
to make up that difference, whereby it appears they were not so reconciled as
T. A. pretends, and that I had cause enough to discover that fire for my own
vindication; and how petty soever this business seems to be, yet I am most
confident that in the solemn day, when the books, and hearts of men and women
shall be fully opened, it will appear, that it was not the want of purity among
us that made her neglect our fellowship, nor our intermedling with State
affairs, nor our tying our selves ordinarily to hear them that God has set
over us, that made her heart to groan, as he terms it, p. 3. but her
implacable malice against her sister, was the rise of her contumacy and
apostasy, her spirit was too full of wrath, and discontent to walk with her
sister, as Church-relation requires, and therefore embraced any the least
occasion to quarrel with us. In the same p. he tells the world, that when I
would write letters, I would have as much of reflection in them, as I could,
that they might be ashamed to show them. If I said so, I might ask of him yet
again, whether I spoke according to the Gospel or not? if I did, why did he
blame me? if not, why did he not reprove me? why did he lay it up in his
breast, to throw it up among his discontents? (I could never get an answer from
him by letter, to this) if ever I said those words, (which I do not remember) I
may have the liberty to put this sense upon them, that having to do sometime
with persons, that under pretense of affection and desire of satisfaction may
seek to defame me, and to take advantage against me, from my writings, I think
it some patt of wisdom, to interline truth with truth, that if my letters come
to the view of many, they may see the black side as well as the bright of men I
write to. But if this pamphleter intends by reflections, lies, I hope there is
no judicious Reader will think me so wicked, or if so wicked, not so much a
fool to lodge such a cursed defigne in the breast of T.A.

Reader, an advantage sufficient is given me to follow this pamphleter through
his observations, as before I have traced him through his narrative; but I
shall content my self in giving thee, but two general observations I have
observed through out his book, which I think justly stain him, more then his
Testimonial can credit him, with unbyas'd persons.

The first thing that I cannot but let thee see, is his constant neglect of
fraternal correption: when he was admitted to our fellowship, he solemnly
covenanted to admonish, and reprove those especially of that Church to which he
joined, according to that, Mat. 18.15, 16. that he has made little account of
his solemn engagement, will appear by an induction of particulars, wherein
(though in most things falsely) yet he has not walked according to the express
rule of our Savior.

1. In his Epistle he taxes the Church in general for an unrighteous censure,
and yet has forborne to tell us all this while wherein the unrighteousness lay.

2. p. 2,3. He charge us with intermedling with State affairs, so as to make
our selves guilty of Treason; he has suffered this supposed sin to lie upon us
without admonishing us for it.

3. p. 4. He was offended at a brothers expression in prayer: and yet I dare
say he never dealt with him about it.

4. p. 6. He supposed a brother to have scandalized Mr. Ford: but does not his
conscience tell him, he never rebuked him for that pretended slander?

5. In the same p. he says, we commonly slight others that are not of our way:
I never heard that he so aspersed us, before I saw his book, so far was he from
admonishing us, but has suffered this (with which he now charge us) to lie
upon us.

6. p. 7. He looks upon it as a dangerous principle, that no others were to
have to do with the business of our Church: and yet never endeavored to
rectify our judgments.

7. p. 11. He accuses Mr. Savery, as if he should set variance between him and
his wife: But why had he not admonished him? and in case he would not have
heard him, to have taken one or two more? etc.

8. In the same p. he asperseth another; with saying, if the unbeliever depart,
let him depart: but does not his own conscience tell him, he did not admonish
him? If he did, and the party received it, why does he rake it up? he seems to
blame me for this, p. 38. 39. though wrongfully; I may say to T. A. why behold
thou the mote that is in thy brother eye, but considerest not the beam that is
in thine own? thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam that is in thine own eye,
etc. Mat. 7.35.

9. page 12, 13, 14. He accuses several persons for defaming his wife, whereas
we cannot learn that any one was privately admonished for it.

10. p. 20, 21, 22. He has published a false copy of my prayer without
enquring of me whether it were true or no, or admonishing me of the evil of it.

11. page 25. He accuses Mr Mall of uncharitableness, but never endeavored
privately, to show him that he was guilty of any such sin.

12. p. 29. He says, That I accounted partaking at the Lords Table in the
Churches of Exon to be a partaking of the table of devils; though this be a
brazen faced ly, yet why had he not admonished me for so much wickedness?

13. page 30. He says, His wife and Mrs Parr never found that purity which
they expected, but were disappointed; But did he ever question the Church in
general, or any particular person?

14 p. 31. He says, Such is the pride of Independents, they think there are no
pure Ordinances but in their own Churches: But which of us did he ever
admonish of this great sin?

15. p. 35. He seems to be angry at me and some of my Church for speaking
freely of Dame such things, as we can never prove, and that we very much abuse
and slander her therein: to backbite is a sin, I confess, (and I wish many in
Exon were more convinced of the greatness of if) but if Dame was so slandered,
why had not Mr. Toby admonished such offenders?

16. p. 36. He accuses the Church, as being partly the occasion of Mris. Parr
lying, by our tampering with her; where also he vindicates her to asperse us,
but he has forgot what an hand he had in her suspension, and that he never
declared any dissatisfaction at our proceedings with her, till since March the
eighth.

17. p. 39. He says, I told him, That when I wrote letters etc. I would have
as much reflection in them as I could, that they might be ashamed to show them;
if this be a true charge and a charge of sin (for I profess as he has several
times applied it to me, I do not well understand what he means by reflection)
but if it was a wicked custom, in his opinion, how unfaithful was T. A. that
he did not admonish me of it, especially if I accustomed my self to such kind
of writing?

18. p. 41. He says he knows as bad tolerated among us, and nothing said to
them; the more is T.A. his guilt aggravated, that knowing such, he has not to
this day discovered them; how great is his sin, who shall accuse our Church
members of impurity, and yet not show who the delinquent persons are? He says
also, in the same page, that we have need enough of the last use of
exhortation, the Leaven being amongst us, the Leaven of the Pharisees, etc.
What an unfaithful man is this, that pretends to know so much wickedness
amongst us, and yet has concealed it all this while? That he may with the
greater advantage bury our names in the dust, and yet tells his Reader p. 32.
That he shall not asperse us.

REader, I shall not tire thee and my self, to follow this Phamphleter line by
line; instead of other particulars, take notice, that whereas the certifiers
testify, that to his words credit is given, I have therefore annexed, what I
find in his sheets, that in my apprehensions cross such a testimony, and
without offense may be called mistakes or lies. Which is the second general
observation.

1. In his Epistle to the Reader, he says, that Mr. T. M. has published the
notes of my Sermon, to spread false reports as far as possibly the Church can:
When he knows in his own conscience, that persons were employed to write after
me, and boasts were made, that they would publish that days work to the world
for my defamation, and that he was not contented to be very Instrumental in
spreading false copies of my Prayer, but also employed some to write out my
notes, in order to the press, and therefore to prevent his farther defaming me,
I gave way that M. Mall should publish my Sermon.

2. He says also in his Epistle, That he has made a true report of all
transactions relating to his wives excommunication; whereas he might have
published to the world all my care that I expressed to him, and all the Counsel I
gave him to prevent this censure.

3. He says in his Epistle, That he saw no crimes proved either against Mris.
Parr or his wife that deserved such a censure; and yet this very Mr. Allien
acted in the suspending Mris. Parr, as far as any of the brethren, and until
the eighth of March, and since, we never heard of any the least
dissatisfaction, at our proceedings against her; and though he now pretend that
his wife walked so unblamably before the censure, yet he has often professed,
in the hearing of several persons, that her carriage to the Church was (next to
his own sins) the greatest affliction that ever he met with.

4. Whereas in the epistle, he calls it, an unrighteous censure, he was so far
convinced of his wives failing toward the Church, that when I told him at Mr.
Eveleighs house, whether his wives carriage would lead her, and assured him,
that for his sake we yet spared her; he was so far from declaring a word of
dislike, that he told me (with outward expression of grief) he was sensible of
that, an^^^^ ^ired only our forbearance of proceeding against her, till she was
delivered of the child she went with.

5. In p. 1. whereas he would make the world believe as if he were a (fixed)
member (...) Mr M. Down his Church, he has often expressed the con^^^^ that he
and his wife Received the Sacrament upon conditi^^ to join to a Congregation
of their own principle, when God (...) give them that liberty.

6. In p. 2. He affirms, that he and his wife Communicated their experiences
to the Church, and were not admitted, That Is false, they were admitted (though
with much difficulty) as is to be seen in Mr. Malls account p. 21.

7. p. 5. He says, that all the greatest part of a Covenant was assented to by
the Church: in which words, there are no less then two lies; it was no
Covenant, and very little of that paper so much as debated, and what was
assented to, was not disliked by himself.

8. p. 5. In the same page he would have the Reader believe, as if his wife
joined to Mr. M. Down his Church, before she was admonished, which is also full
of falsehood.

9. In p. 6. The traducing of Mr. Ford I believe to be a lie; but that we
slight the Godly, is undoubtedly an egregious lie and slander.

10. p. 8. 9. He tells us, that his wife acquainted him, That she would go
some where to be resolved, and rising early in the morning, she went her way;
whereas the search he made for her, and the tears for her departure, evidenced
the contrary, and so did that consolatory language (if spoken to him) if the
believer depart let her depart.

11. Whereas p. 11. He pretends, that upon reports bruted that the Church had
an intent to excommunicate his wife, he therefore abstained from our private
meetings: this is also false, for he confessed to several of us, that the reason
of keeping off, was the better to prevail with his wife to return.

12. p. 12. 13. He says, the reason of his forbearing our company both in a
private, and more public capacity, was, our discourses about his wife; whereas
several of us are ready to prove, that the reason he gave, was, he hoped
thereby to bring his wife to the better compliance with the Church.

13. He says also, That he was of another apprehension then we were of as to
the matters in controversy between us and his wife; this is a witnessing to
the truth of what his wife charged him with, that he was of her opinion, which
he often denied.

14. p. 19. He says, After the Letter from Mrs. P. and Mrs A. was delivered to
me, I opened it, and with two others of my Church looked it over and pocketted
it up; whereas I did not open it at all, until I withdrew, and I remember not
of persons that saw it then.

15. p. 20. He says, that my prayer after Excommunication, was as there
follows; which differs from Ratcliffs own copy, and from another copy that
I have seen, but most of all from the Prayer it self, as appears by a
Certificate.

16. p. 24, 25. It is false that which he says concerning M. Malls standing up
after the prayer was ended, and saying to the Congregation, now we have
separated the precious from the vile, let us renew our solemn league and
Covenant; there are no less then two untruths in this, the one as to the
posture, and the other as to the words.

17. p. 28. He says, that neither his wife nor Mris. Par were looked on as
refractory, and rebels to God and man, till they had no more any mind to stay
with them, and for this they were excommunicated: this is false. Mrs. Par was
dealt with by the Church, before ever she declared her self altered in her
Principles, neither did Mrs. A. declare any dislike of us, or our way, before
she was admonished for neglecting Church-meetings.

18. In the same page he says, that we look on all other Churches (that are
not Congregational) as Babylonish and Synagogues of Satan; this is an egregious
lie, we hold communion in all ordinances, with some Presbyterian Churches.

19. p. 29. He says, that upon his reasoning with me about communicating in
the Lords Supper with us, and others also, (meaning the rest of the Churches in
Exon) that I should tell him be could not partake of the table of the Lord and
the table of Devils: to which I say, that it is noe wonder, if I understood not
his meaning, he has been such a Proteus; sure I am, I understood him not of
the Churches in Exon; I do not at all remember any discourses with him about
his Communicating with them; most sure I am, that I never called their
Communicating Table, the Table of Devils, and as an evidence, that this is not
my judgment, I dare challenge all the people in Exon, that have had discourses
with me about Church affairs, to be my compurgators: this I have evidenced to
some Ministers in Exon in my papers to them, (before this lying Pamphlet was
writ) in not admitting a fit person of one of their Congregations to join as a
member with me, which doubtless I should not have refused, had it been to have
delivered him from the tables of Devils. Yea, this Mr. Allein in a letter to
me, bearing date, April 19. 1658. draws an argument from my acknowledging the
Churches in Exon to be true Churches, to show how unreasonable it would be, if
I should be offended with him for his holding communion with them.

20. Whereas he says p. 30. I insinuate his wife to be a very strumpet: this
is no less then a lie: I must needs give this cerificate in her behalf, that
before March 8. or on that day, I had not a thought that she was such an one,
and still wish, that her husband had as much truth, as she honesty: and whereas
he suggests p. 35. that I omitted somewhat that I spoke in preaching, to
insinuate into my auditory a suspicion of his wives Chastity, I aver it to be a
most notorious falsehood.

21. In the same page he says, I care not what filth and dirt I cast upon any
that care not for my independent ways; this is a broad-faced lie.

22. He says in the same page, that the two censured persons, being
disapointed of purity amongst us, went about to mend their fault by returning
to those Congregations to which thy formerly belonged; this is also a lie, That
Mris Parr owned any of the present Ministers in Exon, as pastor, before she
joined with us; the same I can prove of his wife.

23. He says in the same p. that it is a most notorious belying his wife to
say she is a lawless women, that knows no subjection, etc. whereas he knows,
how she has taken the power of rule out of his hands by turning off a servant
or servants for hearing of me, and discountenancing her own sister, almost to
the turning her out of doors, even then when he manifested high affections to
me and the Church: I wonder what Conscience he has got, to account me a
defamer of her, by reporting her lawless toward him? Besides I may not omit her
journey to Hanniton, and her reflections on her husband another time, at Mr.
Eveleighs house, when we were debating the matters in difference betwixt her
and her sister.

24. p. 31. He says, that such is the pride of the Independents, that think
there are no pure ordinances but in their own Churches. I doubt not but he
accounts me one of those Independents, and therefore must profess this to be a
putid lie.

25. In the same p. he says, in what a sad condition I put all that are not
independents, as if such are not among Gods people and cannot enjoy the benefit
of the Covenant: this is also a falsehood of the greatest magnitude.

26. In 31. 32. p. He would make the Reader believe, as though none were Gods
people but my Church, according to my teaching; this is another lying
defamation.

27. p. 32. He assures the Reader, that neither he nor his wife could ever see
such eminency of Godliness in our conversations; and yet whilst his book was
printing, he professed to two brethren (that were sent to admonish him) that we
were the honestest people he ever came among (setting aside this business of
Excommunication.)

28. p. 33. He says, I Slur Mr. Rutherford in my sermon; it is false, and I
here publish it to the world, that I have high thoughts of him, his pious works
praise him in the gates.

29. p. 34. He tells us, that in his own conscience he knows his wife never
deserted him and his family, and that she never entertained the least thoughts
of it: the contrary to this is proved already from her own mouth by two
witnesses, to whom he confessed that she had left him soon after her threatening
to leave him.

30. p. 35. He says there was no exception against Dame, whilst his wife was
amongst us, and had her for her keeper: to my knowledge this is false, and he
himself was sufficiently burdened with her, and has been heard to call her old
whore.

31. In the same p. he is persuaded that what I hint and some of our
Church Members have said, we can never prove, but do very much abuse and
slander Dame therein, when (as has been said) it can be proved, he called her
whore, nay old whore; yea, his Br. in law Mr. Mongwel will be found a liar, if
he be not able to prove it.

32. In the same p. he says, his wife has ever showed him as much tenderness
and affectionate kindness as his heart could wish, and yet p. 8. confesses
words of heat and discontent toward him.

33. p. 36. He says in the behalf of Mris. Par, that the quarrel between the
Church and her, began in this, she had a mind to hear some other Ministers;
this is also false, the quarrel began in her contentious spirit and sowing
divisions, and was increased, by lying, as you may see p. 18. and 20. of my
Sermon: she was never questioned by the Church for hearing other Ministers:
that is also a lie which he adds.

34. In the same p. that because Mris. Par was peremptory in her resolution,
not to be tied from hearing others, that therefore she was excommunicated.

35. p. 37. He impudently charge me with neglecting the duty of reproof
toward his wife, for the space of four years. How dare this bold man assert
this? but now that credit is given to his words, he takes this unchristian
liberty to defame me, as he pleases.

But know, Reader, that I have admonished her, and more then once, for the
neglect of that duty toward her (supposed) offending sister: but besides in p.
21. of Mr. Malls book, my words are these, I think this I may say, there is not
a brother or sister here that can bare witness of her performing any Church
duty to them of admonition, exhortation or reproof, and if any of you can
witness for her in these things, I charge you to discover it. I speak this
because if she hereafter fling dirt in this, or that, or the other persons face
by reports, you may look on such things as slanders, or on her as a
Covenant-breaker in not observing the rule of Christ: what little reason then
has this pamphleter Ironically to note, what a good shepherd I am etc. or to
say that I can find it in my heart to curse her for neglecting to admonish
others.

36. In the same p. he charge me with a partial and untrue relation between
his wife and her sister in law. I do profess, with all sincerity, that there
was noe untruth in that relation, or any partiallity, unless in omitting some
Circumstances, that would have aggravated her guilt; and many are ready to
affirm the same.

37. p. 38. He speaks of his wives love, to her brother and sister in law and
desire of their thriving etc. whereas this is so contrary to truth, that she
persuaded her husband to be at no small charges to be rid of their company, and
she said to their friends in Wilt-shire, that she would give an hundred pound
out of her purse to be rid of them, and keep a day of Thanksgiving to boot.

38. That Is also false in the same p. concerning her advising her sister
against carelessness in her calling. For when the differences between them were
debated, it being demanded of her, by her brother, why she would go into
Wilt-shire to speak evil of her sister, and had not rather (if she had ought
against her) told her of it privately? she answered, she would have so don but
her husband would not suffer her: False also is what is annexed, concerning her
sisters taking great distaste at her for any such Counsel; how could she take
great distaste at that which was never spoken to her?

39. That Is a lie which follows, that when she was in the Eastern parts she
was so careful of her sister as to wish her mother to give her such good
Counsel: whereas the maine end of her going into those parts was to ease her
stomach against her sister, and she then told her sisters mother, that her
sister had almost broke her husbands heart, and brought him into a Consumption,
and would undo him, etc. and whereas he suggest, that her Mother gave her also
such advice agaiast the same fault; this ill agrees with that letter, that
followed upon it, from her Mother Mris. Thurman, which is as follows.

Poor Soul,
Be content to bear the burden, which it shall please the Lord to lay upon
thee, it will turn to thy comfort at last. Your Sister Allein might have
employed her self better when she came into our Country, then she did; but I
think she came to rout all the generation of you; she thought to rout me too,
but I bear of what condition she is, and I take her to be as she is, and I
desire thee to take no care for what she says, etc.


40. Whereas he says, that his sister in law had engaged a strong party for
her. Sure I am, that his own wife had vented her discontents and slanders to
many, and had so far possessed me with prejudice against her sister in law, that
I have confessed in my Sermon p. 21. that at that time, I came engaged to her as
the party innocent, rather then the other.

41. He says they frequented each others company in a friendly manner for the
space of above a year, it is false.

42. p. 39. Whereas, he says, the offense of his wife in that business was
taken and not given, it is very false. It was given and in several particulars.

43. Whereas he says, this offense of his wife was printed three years after
they were reconciled: It was not a year and half.

44. In this p. he is guilty of lying, in charging me with untruth; he would
insinuate, that we had nothing against his wife until she had left her
relation to us. Whereas she was admonished by several persons, for her
neglecting the Church, before ever she deserted the Church.

45. p. 40. He assures us, that his wife had not left us, if we had allowed her
to communicate in the Ordinances with other Churches as there was occasion.
This is also very false, she never desired it, and we never did forbid it.

46. He says in the 41. p. He and others know as bad as liars (if not liars)
tolerated in the Church and nothing said to them: I know non such, and have
publicly professed and since suffered it to be printed in Mr. Malls book, p. 90.
That I know none such in our assembly, if we know more such offenders, by the
grace of God we shall so proceed upon them; and for a trial, if any of you have
any thing to lay as a charge, do but observe the rule that Christ has
appointed of private, and then of more public admonition, and see whether
there shall not be impartial procedings against them, if not, then condemn us
of partiallity.

47. In p. 42. It is an abominable lie, that we have such great thoughts of our
selves as if we were the only Church and people of God in Exon.

48. He closes up all with a lying reflection upon Mr. Mall, that whole ^^^ft
of her discourse, on March the 8. aimed at this, that we or ly were Sion and
the Israel of God, and all others as had as she strangers from whom Israel
separated in Nehemias times if this man forsake the Devil and all his works,
who has so lived in the constant neglect of brotherly admonition, and has
vented more lies, then he has pages, to the number of about forty eight let
the judicious Reader determine.

READER,
IN the foregoing Pages thou have seen how weakly and sinfully this T. A. has
vindicated his wife; in what remains, thou maift observe the same methods and
wiles in his clearing of Mris, Par. He tells us in the Epistle to the Reader,
that there were no crimes proved, that might argue her guilty, or deserving
such a censure, and that her unblameable walkings before and since, may justly
challenge me and the Church to answer what we have done before the tribunal of
him, who shall judge the world in righteousness: p. 28. he says, Mris. Par. was
not looked on as refractory, till she had no more any mind to stay with us: p.
29. There is nothing in her for which she may not compare with the best saints
among us; again he tells us p. 36. that the quarrel began betwixt the Church
and her, because she had a mind to hear some other Ministers, and was
peremptory in her resolutions, not to be tied hearing of others; how far she
might forget her self in discourses with us (which we call tripping in her
tongue) he cannot say, only (if she did) it was partly occasioned by our
tampering with her for going out sometimes to hear some other Ministers of the
City; and p. 40. that she therefore relinquished this Church, because she held
it her sin to be tied to one Congregation, and to be debarred fellowship with
others; yea, p. 29 he tells us, he dare say, the city in which she was born and
bred, and has ever lived, can say no otherwise then that she may compare with
the best saints in the Church. How false this certificate is, concerning Mris.
Par, will appear by my giving thee an account, why she was suspended, and and
what her carriage has been since.

First, The ground of her suspension, I shall reduce to her contentiousness,
censoriousness, and lying.

The contentiousness of her spirit was proved by several witnesses in several
particulars, as

1. In very many, if not in most of those debates which have been in the Church
since our first coming together, she has been usually silent, until the Church
have been ready to come to some determination, or had determined, and then she
would object against what she perceived was the Judgment of the Church, and
pursued it with much violence; this the generality of the then Church Members
witnessed.

2. When it was moved in the Church to this effect, that it was very necessary
to have respect in our admission of Church Members, to Union in judgment (at
least in all the Ordinances of Christ) that peace and love in the Church might
be preserved, she did eagerly contend against this motion, and occasioned long
and sad disputes, between the Church, her self especially, concerning singing
of Psalms, the practice of which she absolutely denied, and declared, that
praises and Thanksgivings unto God in prayer were only that singing which the
Scripture requires: this also the generality of the then Church Members did
witness.

3. She has opposed several persons in their admissions, who have been known
to be of approved godliness and integrity, and those who have been most liable
to exception, she has most contended for; insomuch that the church having
respited the admission of a person concerning whose conversation they were not
sufficiently satisfied, she did openly declare against it, in these words, that
it was an unrighteous sentence: this particular was witnessed by four persons.

4. She opposed the admission of Mris. D.E. for her joining with the
Presbyterians in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and insisted upon it with
much earnestness, she then declaring, that she could not be satisfied
otherwise, then by her acknowledging it to be her sin in breaking the law of
Charity: this was witnessed by seven persons.

5. She caused a great deal of disturbance amongst us after the officers were
chosen, in pressing with much earnestness, that Mr. Stonham might be chosen
Pastor: this was witnessed by three persons.

6. She did for a long time contend for women's speaking in the Church, and
being admonished for practicing accordingly, she did openly profess, that she
would not be present at Church meetings, when matters were debated, unless she
might have that liberty, and being denied, she ever since contemptuously
neglected Church meetings, and slighted the officers of the Church.

The censoriousness of her spirit was evidenced in her uncharitable language
concerning the Presbyterians and us also, reporting one to be fallen from the
faith, another to have nothing of God in her, charging Mr. Stonham to have
walked contrary to the Apostles counsel 2. Cor. 4.2. and to have such
expressions in preaching and prayer as were but as chafe to the Wheat, and
imputing the afflictions of some of the Church, to their unworthy receiving the
Lords Supper, not discerning the Lords body; these were proved by many
witnesses and her own letters.

The Third Head of her Charge was Lying.

1. She affirmed that she always acknowledged Presbyterian Churches to be true
Churches in respect of Doctrine and worship, and that it was hard for her to
separate from the Presbyterians, in distinguishing Ordinances: whereas she
excepted against Mr. Toby Allein for having his child Baptized by Mr. Ford, and
opposed his admission on that ground; there were four witnesses to this.

2. She affirmed that she never opposed Mris. D. E. her admission, but was for
it; whereas the generallity of the then members of the Church witnessed, that a
long time she openly contended against it, to the grief of the Church.

3. She denied that she ever called the Presbyterian Churches by the name of
Babylon, whereas most of the Church witnessed, that she had often so called
them.

4. She denied that she ever endeavored to have Mr. Stonham Paster, and under
her own hand were these words, I never labored to bring him to that Office;
whereas the contrary was witnessed by three persons.

5. She affirmed that she never profited by Mr. Stonhams preachings, and never
approved his Ministry; the contrary hereto was witnessed by three persons.

6. She denies in a letter, that she suspected those that had kindred and
relations among the Presbyterians, whereas many witnessed the contrary.

By these passages thou may see how lavish the pamphleter is in his
testimonial for this woman: I should now annex her contumacious refusal of
admonition given according to the rule of Christ; I might tell thee, I have
several times endeavouered to convince her of her sin, yet I do not remember
that she ever acknowledged her self guilty: and that several persons that were
sent to her (or that went voluntarily) about the work of admonition came away
from her with a burdened spirit; but I shall refer thee to 20. and 21. p. of my
Sermon in the true account; her crimes and contumacy being very great, the
Church thought themselves obliged. to suspend her from Communion, before ever
she joined in the Sacrament with any other: This is the woman that T. A. saw no
crimes proved against, that might argue her guilty; and yet this T. A. objected
nothing against her suspension for these crimes proved against her; this is the
woman concerning whom T. A. boldly affirms that her unblameable walkings before
censure may justly summon us to Gods bar: and whereas he says that the quarrel
between the Church and her began, because she had a mind to hear some other
Ministers, that is abominably false, that was no particular, for which she was
ever admonished by the Church: indeed there passed several letters between her
and my self, wherein I endeavered to persuade her, that it was her duty
ordinarily to hear her own officers; which had they seen the Sun, the world
would have seen more of this woman. And here Reader, I shall once more take
shame to thy self, that I did not sooner excite the Church to their duty, as to
the last remedy for the healing of this woman: there are some who are full of
evil surmises about this matter, as if the Church would never have proceeded
against her, but upon a design to hinder others from deserting us: But this I
profess, that I have had no quiet in my spirit, that a person should lie so
long suspended, and give no evidence of repentance, but the contrary, and yet
should not be proceeded against; I took advice with several Ministers about
this matter, and at length was concluded by them and my own conscience, that
though she was gotten into another fold, yet the rod of discipline should be
exercised toward her; and though some men were angry at this, yet I can say,
we did not censure her to reflect on other Congregations, but to discharge our
duty to her, as Legally a part of our flock.

But Reader, that I may keep promise with thee before I close up this
unpleasant work, I shall,

Secondly, Give thee (briefly) yet a farther account of her carriage, since her
suspension; there have come several reports to my ears, of what she has
spoken, full of lying defamations, viz. that there were no lies proved against
her, that she was suspended only for hearing sometimes other Ministers, that I
should persuade her to deny holiness for Gods sake, that she was promised by an
officer of the Church, that if she would but desert the Presbyterians, she
should be entertained amongst us, without giving any satisfaction for former
miscarriages; and that being charged for lying, she pleaded, that she did not
remember any such thing, that one of the Church should offer to take his oath
for his hearing somewhat from her at such a time when he himself was not
present; that two others of the Church have defrauded servants of their ways,
that she was never questioned, till she discovered her resolutions to leave us.
But Reader, I am loath to blot paper with any more of this nature, only I shall
tell thee, that when I offered to some Ministers of the City, to prove the
charge against her; I told them, if they would be at the pains to receive her
defense, I was very confident (and still am) to prove the falsehood of it by two
witnesses at least. By this time I doubt not but the Reader is satisfied what a
confident liar T.A. is, but it has happened to him as to most malefactors, he
has revealed his own, his wives, and Mris. Pars guilt in his endeavors to
conceal it, I may say of his tongue, hand and pen. Heu quam difficile est
crimen non prodere. Thy mouth utters thine iniquity, and thou chusest the
tongue of the crafty; thine own mouth condemns thee and not I; yea, thy own
lips testify against thee, Job 15.5, 6.

I shall close with David's Prayer against Doeg Psalm. 120.2, 3. Deliver my soul
O Lord from lying lips, and from a dreceitful tongue: what shall be given to
thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?

FINIS.

