

Strange News FROM GRAVESEND and GREENWICH. BEING An Exact and more Full
Relation of Two Miraculous and Monstrous FISHES,

First discovered in Rainham Creek, and afterward pursued by Fishermen up the
River of Thames, who with Harping Irons and Fish-spears killed the biggest of
them at Gravesend, which after Thousands of people had viewed it, they hewed in
pieces and boiled in cauldrons for the Oil.

The other was taken and killed at Greenwich, which being measured, was found
to be One and twenty Foot in length, and Sixteen Foot over. And likewise a less
than either of these which was in company with them, which made his escape from
the Fishermen, and got away to Sea again.

This Relation being attested by many Thousands of Eyewitnesses, which have
seen them both.

Printed for J. Clarke at the Bible and Harp in Smithfield.

Strange News from Gravesend and Greenwich.
THat the wonders of the Deep are infinite, and that the water does afford more
various and sundry kinds of Monsters then the earth, is undeniable; In
confirmation of which Position happened, that Upon the Eleventh of this instant
August, some Fishermen and other Watermen being at a place called Rainham Creek
below Gravesend, they discovered (to their admiration) three Fishes (or rather
Sea Monsters) of a huge magnitnde and greatness, rolling and tumbling in the
water, whose huge unwe^ldy bodies did so disturb and trouble the Rives, that
the Watermen were amazed to see it: whereupon they call a great many more to
their assistance, and with Harping irons, Fish spears, and anchors they resove
to use their best endeavors to destroy them. They had not long pursued them in
their boats, before the least of the three made his escape, and got ou^ to Sea
again. But the other two they full followed, and ever as they saw an
opportunity, they wounded them with their fatal instruments and weapons.

These Monsters of Nature, when they felt the smart of the wounds they
received, they would ever and anon send forth whole floods of water like clouds
into the air, with a kind of a spouting trunk which they had, much like in form
to that of an Elephants: For not to make any digression, as the Elephant is the
Behemoth of the earth; so the Whale is the Leviathan in the Seas. And as the
Scripture says, Out of his nostrils goes smoke, as out of a seething pot or
cauldron. He makes the Sea like a pot of ointment. But to return where we
left; The Watermen and Fishermen still pursuing they drive them up by degrees
toward Gravese^d, the Fish still spouting forth great quantities of water into
the air, as they swim along. So that it was pleasant sight to all the
beholders, that saw the pursuit, especially to those that did not come within
the reach of their danger.

By that time they were come to Grave^end, the bigger of the two (which was
said to be a Whale) had rec^ived his mortel wound, which they haled to shore,
and after they had exposed him to the view of Thousands of people, they hewed
him in pieces with axes, and boiled him in cauldrons for his oil, which does
amount to a good sum of money.

Thus having dispatched the one, with great eagerness they follow the chase of
the other, still more and more people flocking, some to look on, and others to
aid and assist them.

The concourse of people thus gathering together, as if it had been to destroy
some Public Enemy, by little and little, at the last they force him up as high
as Greenwich; where with the Fluke of an Anchor they give him a large and
grievous wound, which disabled him from swimming any further; then with Ropes,
or Pulleys, they hoise him into a Hoy, or Lighter; when upon view they find,
that it was not a young Whale, but a Grampus: However, it is a Fish of an
extraordinary Magnitude, as all that see it can testify. Having laid him in
the Hold of the Vessel, to the admiration of the Beholders, his wound began to
purge with Blood, Oil, and Water, in such abundance, that they were forced to
throw it out by great Bucket fulls, the Blood and Oil still boiling fo^sh, as
if it had been a Pot upon a very hot fire.

The news of the taking of this strange Fish at Greenwich, being noised all
over London, caused multitudes of people to resort thither to take a view, and
for their own satisfaction, to be eyewitnesses of its huge proportion and
greatness, they procure a Carpenter to take the measure of him, who found him
to be one and twenty foot long, and sixteen foot over, which I think you cannot
deny but it is of a vast length and bigness; yet it is certainly affirmed, that
the other which was taken at Gravesend was full as big again as this.

The Citizens, and others of all sorts flocking thither, are more numerous upon
the way, by ten times, then if they were going either to Fair or Market, some
going, and others coming; so that it cannot choose but make well for the Town of
Greenwich, verifying the old Proverb, that it is an ill wind that blows no body
profit.

There are many of the people desirous to cut pieces out of his side, which is
granted to then; and it is observeable, that the Fish cuts very fat, and as
white as a handkerchief: If the weather had been cool, they might a kept him
exposed to view the longer, and without doubt they might have got a great deal
more money, but he being of a fat, and Oily substance, was presently corrupt,
and putrified in this hot weather.

It is conject^red by diverse, both Seamen and Fishermen, that these three huge
Fishes, being in pursuit of some less Fishes then themselves, which it is like
they use to prey upon, as Sturgeons, Salmons, or the like: They followed them
in Chase into the mouth of the River, and so could not find their way back
again; but rolling and t^m^ling further and further, at last came to the place
where they were discovered: And truly for my part I am of that Opinion too.

F^r it is known to be contr^ry both to Nature and Reason, that the Fishes of
that magnitude and kind, should forsake the Main Ocean, and betake themselves
into the fresh water (...) rivers, whereas I may say they have not room to
(...) themselves.

However it be, we are certain that it is not usual for any such monstrous
Creatures to come up so far into the River of Thames; which makes many among
the common sort of people to look upon with great admiration and wonder: as
though such Accidents never happen but they are presently followed by the Death
or Fall of some great person or other: as there happened a l^ke accident with
this of the coming up of a great Whale into the Thames not long before the
death of that much greater Monster, the Usurper Cromwell. And though we wish
this present Accident may foreshew the down^ull of all that are of the same
Traitorous and Rebel^ious spirit: yet the wiser sort of men account such
observations no better than Superstitious; for that such accidents, and greater
than this, do frequently happen, proceeding from pure Natural causes.

FINIS.

