STRANGE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, A true and perfect RELATION Of a Famous FISH
Taken at KINGSALE.

The manner of its taking, and description of its horrible Shapes; as it was
certified in a Letter from one Mr. Robinson, living in Kingsale, (an
Eyewitness) to Mr. John Davis a Relation of his, living in Westminster.

With Allowance.

To. L'Estrange.



London: Printed for C. N. 1677.

STRANGE NEWS FROM IRELAND: OR, A true and perfect Relation Of a famous FISH
Taken at KINGSALE.
ON the 26th of July last, one Thomas Davis and Andrew Simpson being at Four a
Clock in the Morning about their honest vocation of Fishing, in which they
labored an hour to no purpose; but at length they perceived afar off somewhat
move in the water, of an unusual shape and bigness; upon which they made unto
it, but as soon as it saw them it dived down into the water: so that after a
tedious and vain search, they returned back to the Town and informed one Mr.
Rock, a responsible Inhabitant there, of what they had seen; who with Three of
his Servants came forth with Muskets charged, one standing on the shore, and
the other two in the Boat with the Fishermen, with whom also was Mr. Rock.
They had not long rowed about the River, but they again perceived its head
popping up and down, at which they discharged their Pieces, but to little
effect: For it dived again out of their view, and did not appear in an hours
time after; but upon its rising again they shot it into the back; whereupon it
made with all possible speed toward land, where (though with great difficulty)
it was taken.

The description of its parts is as follows.

On the head of this wonderful Creature (which can be no nearer resembled to
any thing, than the head of a man) was long black Hair: its Face had the exact
shape of a Lion; so terrible and grim, that it struck terror on all that
beheld it. It had two fore-feet like those of a Bull, cloven; its hinder feet
being like unto an Eagles Talons, with very long and sharp Nails; so that where
Nature commonly orders Fins, there were perfect Feet of other Creatures of a
clean contrary Element. His mouth was guarded with three long sharp Horns, with
which when he was on Land he so dangerously wounded one of the foresaid Mr.
Rock's servants in the thigh, that he remains very ill of the same, insomuch
that his Recovery is much doubted by all, notwithstanding the Advice and
Assistance of the most skilful Surgeons in those parts. On its Back was the
perfect resemblance of an Hourglass, and the appearance (as some fancied) of a
Spade and Deaths head, to the amazement of all its Spectators.

It is in length Twelve Foot, and Five in breadth.

On each side its Breast are two Paps, like unto those of women.

Its Belly is smooth, being bespeckled with spots of diverse colors.

When this Letter came away it was not quite dead, though it had been much
wounded; but is with much ado brought into the aforesaid Town of Kinsale, where
it now remains the Wonderment of all its numerous beholders.

FINIS.

