Imprimatur,

Tho. Grigg, R. in Christo P. ac Domino, Domino Humfr. Episc. Land. a Sacris.

TWO CASES OF Conscience: RESOLVED By the Right Reverend Father in GOD Robert
Sanderson Late Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

LONDON; Printed by E. C. for C. Wilkinson at the Black-Boy over against St.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet, 1668.

The Case of the ENGAGEMENT.
SIR,
I Have hitherto been very sparing in delivering my opinion, concerning the
point, now most in agitation, viz. Of the lawfulness, or unlawfulness, of
Subscribing the Engagement: considering the mischiefs that must needs have
followed, if it should be once noised abroad, that I had given forth any
determination, in so tickle a point. I could not but foresee on the one side,
if I should condemn it as utterly unlawful, how I should be looked upon, by
those that have all power in their hands, not as a refuser only; but a
disswader also of what they have thought fit to require: And on the other side,
if I should allow it in any case Lawful, what ill use would certainly be made
thereof by multitudes of people, apt to be so far scandalized thereby, as
either to swallow it whole without chewing, (that is, resting themselves upon
the general determination of the Lawfulness, to take it hand over head, without
due consideration, either of the true meaning of it, or of other requisite
cautions, and circumstances) or else to conceive themselves by so engaging, to
be for ever discharged from the bond of their former Allegiance.

Yet since by your Letter, and by sending your Servant therewith on purpose, so
many days journey, through unknown ways, and at this season of the year
(especially as the weather has proved, since his coming forth) scarce
passable, you have shown your earnest desire to understand what my opinion is
in this point; so great, both for difficulty and concernment; I could not think
it fit, nor consistent with that civility which is to be used, especially
toward Strangers, to send back your messenger, without the return of some
kind of answer: Wherein, albeit I shall not come up to the sull, of what your
Letter declares to be your desire, viz. In giving a particular Judgment, and
estimate of the Eight several Arguments, therein proposed, and the additional
Quaere in the Postscript: yet you shall find something, tending toward your
satisfaction therein, by touching upon those points (so far as the straits of
time would suffer) wherein the difficulty of the whole business, seems
chiefly to consist.

First then, it is to be considered, that Allegiance is a duty that Every
Subject, under what form of Government soever, by the Law of Nature, owes to
his Country, and consequently to the Sovereign Power thereof. For the very
same Law (which we may call the Law of Nature, at least in a large acceptance)
which inclines particular men, to grow into one civil body of a Commonwealth,
must necessarily withal, imprint a sense, and tacit acknowledgement of such a
duty of Allegiance, in every inferior member of the body, unto the Caput
Communitatis, or Sovereign Power, by which that Commonwealth is governed, as
is necessary for the preservation of the whole body. So that the bond of
Allegiance, does not arise originally from the Oath of Allegiance; as if those
that had not taken the Oath, had a greater liberty, to act contrary to the
Allegiance, ^^^cified in the Oath, then those that have taken it, have: or as
if, in case the Oath should be quite laid aside, there should be no Allegiance
due. But it is so intrinsecal, proper, and essential a duty, and (as it were)
fundamental, to the relation of a Subject, qua talis, as that the very name of
a Subject, does after a sort, import it; In so much, that it has thereupon
gained, in common usage of speech, the style of Natural Allegiance: Whence all
these inferences will follow.

1. That the bond of Allegiance, (whether sworn or not sworn) is in the nature
of it perpetual and indispensable.

2. That it is so inseparable, from the relation of a subje^^ that although the
exercise of it, may be suspended by reason of a prevailing force, whilst the
Subject is under such force, (viz. where it cannot be imagined, how the
endeavor of exercising it* can be effectually serviceable to restore the
Sovereign Power to the right owner, for the establishment of that Public
Justice and Peace, wherein the happiness of Commonwealths consists) yet no
outward force can so absolutely take it away, or remove it, but that still it
remains vertually in the Subject, and obliges to an endeavor (so soon as
the force that hindered it is over) of actually exercising of it, for the
advantage of the party, to whom of right it is due, and the advancement of the
common good thereby, upon all fit occasions.

3. That no Subject of England, that either has, by taking the Oaths of
Supremacy or Allegiance, acknowledged; or that not having taken either Oath,
yet otherwise knows, or believes, that the Sovereign Power in England, to
whom his Natural Allegiance is due, is the King, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, can without sinning against his Conscience, enter into any
Covenant, Promise, or Engagement, or do any other Act, or Acts whatsoever,
whereby either to transferr his Allegiance to any other party, to whom it is
not of right due, or to put himself into an incapacity of performing the duties
of his bounden Allegiance, to his lawful Sovereign, when it may appear to be
useful, and serviceable to him.

4. That therefore the taking of the late Solemn League and Covenant, by any
Subject of England (notwithstanding the Protestation in the Preface, that
therein he had the Honor of the King before his eyes; and that express clause
in one of the Articles of it, wherein he swore, The Preservation of the Kings
Person and Honor) was an act as clear contrary to the Oath of Allegiance, and
the Natural Duty of every Subject of England; as the Assisting of the King to
the utmost of ones power (which is a branch of the Oaths) and the assisting
against any person whatsoever, with his utmost power, those that were actually
in Arms against the King (which was the very end for which that Covenant was
set on foot) are contrary the one unto the other.

5. And that also for the same reason, no Subject of England, that has taken
the Oaths, and understands them, or is persuaded that the Sovereignty of
this, Realm, does of right belong to the King, his Heirs, and lawful
Successors, can without sinning in like manner against his Conscience, take the
Engagement now offered: if he so understand the words, wherein it is expressed
as if they did contain in them, and require of the Promiser, an acknowledgment
that the Supreme Power of this Realm, whereunto the Subjects ow their bounden
Allegiance, is rightly rested in those persons that now exercise it; or as if
they did import, an utter abjuration, or renouncing of that Allegiance, which
was formerly held due to the King.

II. This being cleared, the next enquiry must be, Whether or no the words of
the Engagement, will reasonably bear such a construction, as to the
understanding of a rational and conscientious Man, may seem consistent with his
bounden duty and Allegiance to his lawful Sovereign? Whereof (I think) there
need be no great question made, if it be well considered.

1. That all expressions by words, are subject to such ambiguities, that scarce
any thing can be said or expressed in any words, how cautelously soever chosen,
which will not render the whole speech capable of more constructions than one.

2. That very many men, known to be well affected to the King and his party,
and reputed otherwise both learned and conscientious (not to mention the
Presbyterians, most of whom, truly for my own part, when we speak of learning
and conscience, I hold to be very little considerable) have subscribed the
Engagement; who in the judgment of Charity we are to presume, would not so have
done, if they had not been persuaded the words might be understood in some such
qualified sense, as might stand with the duty of Allegiance to the King.

3. That (as you write) it is strongly reported and believed, that the King
has given way to the taking of the Engagement, rather than that his good
Subjects, should loose their Estates for refusing the same. Which as it is a
clear evidence, that the King and they who are about him, to advise him, do not
so conceive of the words of this Engagement, as if they did necessarily import
an abandoning of the Allegiance due to him* so it is (if true) a matter of great
confideration toward the satisfaction of so many, as out of that fear only,
have scrupled the taking of it. For the doing of that, cannot be reasonably
thought to destroy the Subjects Allegiance; which the King, who expects
Allegiance from all his Subjects, advisedly and upon mature deliberation
allows them to do.

III. But all this being granted, that the words of the Engagement, are capable
of such construction; yet is not the Conscience thereby fufficiently secured,
from justly scrupling at the taking thereof, unless it may yet further appear,
that the Subject has the liberty to make use of such a construction; which is
in effect the Quaere contained in your Postscript, viz. Whether upon
supposition, that the words of the Engagement, will bear more constructions
then one, the subscriber may take it in his own sense, or is bound to take it
in the imposers sense? or, Whether it be necessary, or expedient before he
subscribe, to ask those that require his subscription, in what sense they
require him to subscribe it? Upon the resolution of which Quaere, since (as I
conceive) the last resolution of the Judgment, wherein the Conscience is to
acquiesce, does principally depend; I shall endeavor to give you my thoughts
therein, (wherein I acknowledge to have received much light and satisfaction,
from a discourse written by a very Learned, Judicious and Pious friend, whereof
I lately had the perusal, but for some reasons, not thought fit to be
published) as distinctly, and clearly, as the time I have to do it in, will
suffer.

1. First then, for a man that is required of another to give faith by some
Oath, Promise, or other Engagement, to take it in a sense of his own,
manifestly different (even in his own apprehension) from the others meaning,
sufficiently expressed by words, according to the common custom of speech, and
the nature of the business which it concerns, is so gross a conceit; that had
not the impudence of the Jesuits, in maintaining the lawfulness of their
Equivocations, and the sad experience of these late times, (wherein thousands
have cheated themselves in perjury, by thinking to avoid it) evidenced the
contrary, it n^ght well have been thought a thing incredible, that any man of
common understanding, should suffer his reason to be so infatuated by his
affections, as to be deceived thereby. For if such latitude of construction,
should be admitted in Promises, and other Obligations of that nature, intended
for the preservation of faith amongst mankind, there would not remain any
possible means, whereby for men to have assurance of one another meanings.
Wherefore I take that for a clear truth, That all Promises, and Assurances
wherein Faith is required to be given to another, ought to be understood, ad
mentem imponentis, according to the mind and meaning of him, to whom the faith
is to be given; so far forth as the meaning may reasonably appear, by the
nature of the matter about which it is conversant, and such signification of
the words, whereby it is expressed, as according to the ordinary use of speech
amongst men, agrees best thereunto. The reason whereof is, because the faith
so required to be given, is intended to the behoof, and for the interest of him
that requires it; namely, to the end he may have the better assurance from him
that gives the faith, that what is promised shall be accordingly performed:
which assurance he cannot have, if after his meaning, sufficiently declared by
the words, it should yet be at the liberty of the promiser, to reserve another
secret meaning in his own breast, differing therefrom.

2. But Secondly, what if the intention of the Imposer, be not so fully
declared by the words, and the nature of the business; but that the same words
may in fair construction, be still capable of a double meaning, so as taken in
one sense, they shall bind to More, and in another to Less? I conceive in such
cafe it is not necessary, nor always expedient (but rather for the most part
otherwise) for the Promiser, before he give faith, to demand of the Imposer,
whether of the two is his meaning. But he may by the rule of Prudence, and that
(for ought I see) without the violation of any Law of Conscience, make his just
advantage of that ambiguity, and take it in the same sense which shall bind to
the Less. And this I ground upon the very same reason as before; For since the
Faith to be given, is intended to the behoof of him, to whom it is given, it
concerns him to take care that his meaning be expressed in such words, as
will sufficiently manifest the same to the understanding of a reasonable man.
Which if he neglect to do, no Law of Equity or Prudence, binds the Promiser,
by an overscrupulous diligence, to make it out, whereby to lay a greater
obligation upon himself, than he needed to do.

3. But then Thirdly, if it shall happen (as often it comes to pass, when we
have to deal with cunning men, and may possible be the Case now, and
undoubtedly was so in the business of the Protestation, when the time was) That
he that requires the faith to be given, do of purpose so contrive the words,
that there may be left an ambiguity and latitude of sense therein; yea, and
that it be very probable, and in a manner apparent, (upon the consideration of
the point of interest, or other strong presumptions, arising from circumstances
or otherwise) even to the apprehension of the promiser himself, that he has
some farther reach in requiring that promise from him, some more remote and
secret intention, then he is willing to discover. In that case, What is to be
done? I answer, That the Promiser in such case, is no ways obliged in giving
his Faith, to take notice of any secret intention; but is at liberty to make
use of that Latitude of sense, which the other, did rather choose to leave
undetermined, then to restrain, and so to turn the others cunning dealing to
his own best advantage, by taking it in the more favorable construction; and
that which binds to lefs. For it is the declared intention only, (viz. That
which the words, according to the common use of speech, do in relation to the
nature of the subject, most naturally and properly represent, to the
understanding of reasonable men, when they hear them) and not to the remote,
secret, and reserved intent, which the Promiser is obliged unto. The reason
whereof is manifest; Because he that requires Faith to be given from another,
by words of his own contriving, is ever presumed so to have determined the
sense thereof, in the contrivance of the words, as may sufficiently declare,
what he intends the Promiser should assure him to perform. If therefore he
have not so determined the words, as to signify the More; it is in all reason
to be presumed, that he intended to oblige him but to the Less. For being at
liberty to make his own choice of words, whereby to express his own meaning;
who can think otherwise, but that he would make the choice with respect to his
own Interest? And therefore though he might have a secret desire, which he is
loath to discover, that the Promiser should be bound to the More, and would be
marvellously well pleased, that he should so understand the words, as if they
intended to bind him to the More: Yet since it had been so easy a matter for
him, by adding or altering a few words, to have declared that intent, if he had
thought it conducible to his own ends, It will be presumed also, that it was
out of respect of self interest, that he forbear so to do, and chose rather to
leave his meaning, in such general words, as will not exclude the sense, which
binds but to the Less; and consequently that his declared intent obliges to
no more but to the Less only.

IV. To bring the matter yet closer, and to put it up to the present Cases,
there are yet two things more to be done.

First, To show what the different constructions (the highest, I mean, and the
lowest) the words of the Engagement are fairly capable of.

And Secondly, to find as well as we can, Whether of the two is more probably
the meaning intended by the Imposers, to be declared by the words.

The words are these:

I do promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is
now established without King or Lords. Wherein there are sundry ambiguities.

1. First, In the words true and faithful; by which may be intended, either the
promise of that Fidelity and Allegiance (which was formerly acknowledged to be
due to the King, etc.) to be now performed to those that are presently
possessed of the Supreme Power, as their right and due. Or else that promise of
such a kind of fidelity, as Captives taken in the War promise to their
Enemies, when they fall under their power; viz. to remain true Prisoners of
war, and so long as they are in their power, not to attempt any thing to their
destruction.

2. Secondly, In the word Commonwealth, by which may either be meant, those
persons who are the prevalent party in this Kingdom, and now are possessed of,
and do exercise the Supreme Power therein, as if the right of Sovereignty were
vested in them: Or else, the whole entire body of the English Nation, as it is
a Civil Society or State within it self, distinguished from all other Foraign
Estates. Taken in the former sense, the fidelity promised to the Commonwealth,
relates directly to the upholding of that party who are the present Governors
de facto, and imports subjection to them as de jure: But taken in the latter,
it relates to the safety of the Nation, and imports no more, as to the
present Governors, but to live peaceably under them de facto, and to yield
obedience to them in things absolutely necessary, for the upholding Civil
Society within the Realm; such as are the defense of the Nation against
Foraigners, the furtherance of Public Justice, and the maintenance of Trade.

3. In the words as it is now established, etc. which may be understood either
by way of approbation, of what has been done by way of abolishing Kingly
Government, and the House of Peers, and placing all Authority and Power within
the Realm, in the House of Commons. Or else (...) only, as a clause simply and
barely reciting what manner of Government it is, that this Nation de facto, is
now under; viz. a Government by the Commons only, without either King or House
of Lords.

Which Ambiguities considered; The highest construction that can be reasonably
made of the words, is to this effect. I acknowledge the Sovereign Power of this
Nation, whereunto I ow Aliegiance and Subjection, to be rightly stated in the
House of Commons, wherein neither King nor Lords (as such) have, or henceforth
ought to have, any share; And I promise, that I will perform all Allegiance,
and subjection thereunto, and maintain the same with my fortunes and life, to
the utmost of my power.

And the lowest construction that can be reasonably made of the same words, is
to this effect: Whereas for the present the Supreme Power in England, under
which Power I now am, is actually possessed and exercised by the House of
Commons, without either King or Lords; I promise that so long as I live under
their power and protection, I will not contrive or attempt any act of hostility
against them: but living quietly and peaceably under them, will endeavor my
self faithfully in my place and calling, to do what every good member of a
Commonwealth ought to do, for the safety of my Country, and preservation of
Civil Society therein.

V. Now comes in to be considered in the last place, the great Question,
whether of the two constructions it is, (That which binds to the Most, or
This which obliges to the Least, the words can well bear) that the formers of
the Engagement, did rather intend to declare by these words? They that think
the former, want not probability of reason to ground their persuasions upon.
For they consider, that those who are presently possessed of the Supreme Power,
are not minded to part with it if they can hold it. And that the likeliest way
to hold it is, if they can possibly bring the whole people of England, or at
the least the far greatest part thereof, to acknowledge that they are rightly
possessed of it, and to promise Subjection and Allegiance to them as such. And
that therefore the Engagement, being purposely devised and set on foot, as the
fittest engine to expedite that work, must in all reason intend to oblige so
far. Which being so contrary to their Judgment and persuasion, concerning the
duty and Oath of Allegiance, I cannot blame those that so understand the words
of the Engagement, if they abominate the very thought of taking it.

But there wants not great probability of Reason, on the other side, to
induce us to believe that the latter and lower sense, is rather to be deemed
the immediate, and declared intent of the Imposers, whatsoever cause of
suspicion there may be, that the former meaning, may be more agreeable to their
secret, reserved and ultimate intent; between which two, if there be any
difference (as it is not impossible but there may be) the Engager is not
concerned in it, or not yet: the Equivocation, if there be any in that, must be
put upon the Imposers, not on the Promisers score. For thus believing, there
are amongst others these Probabilities.

1. That many prudent and conscientious men of the Royal Party, as well Divines
and Lawyers, as others, have thus understood it: who we presume would not for
any outward respect in the world, have taken it, if they had conceived any more
to have been intended in it.

2. That it has often been affirmed, both publicly and privately, in several
parts of the Kingdom (if we may believe either common fame, or the reports of
sundry credible particular persons) by those that have persuaded or pressed
others to subscribe; that the same is the very true intent and meaning of it,
and no other.

3. That if the Imposers had been minded to have declared an intent of binding
to More, they might easily have framed the words so, as not to be capable of a
construction binding to Less.

4. That (as is also credibly reported) whilst the form of words was under
debate, the opinion of those that would have had it set higher, was not
followed, as held unseasonable; and the vote carried, for the more moderate
expression wherein it now stands.

5. That the Imposers, intending by the Engagement to secure themselves,
especially against the designs and attempts of those men, who they knew (well
enough) held them for no other then Usurpers, must be in reason supposed to
require no more assurance of them by the Engagement, then such as may and is
usually given to Usurpers; which is, not an acknowledgment of their title, and
a promise of Allegiance, but merely a promise of living quietly, so long as
they are under their power, and enjoy their protection.

6. That it is a received Maxim of Political prudence, for all new Governors,
(especially those that either introduce a new form of Government, or come in
upon a questionable title) to abstain from all harsh procedings, even against
those whom they know to be evil affected to their Power, and not so much as to
exasperate them (though it be in the power of their hands to destroy them)
especially in the beginning of their Government: but rather to sweeten them
into a better opinion of their persons, and to win upon them by Acts of Grace
and Oblivion (for Remissius Senec. 1. De. Clem. 24.
imperanti melius paretur.) So as they may have but any tolerable kind of
assurance from them in the mean time, of living quietly and peaceably under
them. We have no reason therefore to believe that the Imposers of this
Engagement, who have acted the parts of the greatest Politicians, so perfectly
and succesfully hitherto, as to possess themselves so fully os the Supreme
Power of so great and flourishing a Kingdom, in so few years, would be so
impolitick as not to proceed by the same rules, that all wise and succesful
persons have ever practiced in the managing, and for the establishing of an
acquired power.

VI. Out of all these premises together (waying my Positive conclusion, either
Affirmative or Negative, touching the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of subscribing
in universali) I shall declare my opinion only in these few following
particulars.

1. That it is not lawful for any man to take the Engagement with a resolution
to break it.

2. That therefore whosoever thinks the words of the Engagement do contain a
promise of any thing which it is not lawful for him to perform, cannot take it
with a good conscience.

3. That whosoever so understands the words of the Engagement, as if they did
oblige him to any thing contrary to his Allegiance, or render him unable to act
according thereunto, upon any seasonable emerging occasion, cannot with a good
conscience take it.

4. That if any man for any temporal benefit, or avoiding any temporal damage,
shall take the Engagement with a doubting conscience (that is before he be
persuaded in his Judgment, upon some probable ground of reason, that it is
lawful for him so to do) he sins therein.

5. That if any man after a serious desire of informing himself as rightly as
he can, what are the duties of his Allegiance on the one side, and what is most
probably the meaning intended by the words of the Engagement on the other side;
shall find himself well satisfied in this persuasion, that the performance in
the mean time of what is required by the Engagement so understood, is no way
contrary (for any thing he can discern for the present) to his bounden
Allegiance, so long as he is under such a force, as that he cannot exercise it;
and likewise that whenever that force is so removed from him, or he from
under it, as that he has power to act according to his Allegiance, the
Obligation of the Engagement of it self determines and expireth: and out of
these considerations, rather then suffer extreme prejudice, in his person,
estate, or necessary relations, shall subscribe the Engagement; Since his own
heart condemns him not, neither will I.

Sir, I have now two requests to you, which I doubt not but you will think
reasonable. The one, that whatsoever use you shall please to make of these
papers, or any thing therein contained, for your own or any friends
satisfaction; yet you would not deliver any Copies abroad, least they should
come to be printed, as some other papers of mine, written in this manner have
been, without my knowledge. This I desire, both in respect of the danger I
might incur from the displeasure of the Potent Party, if any such thing should
come abroad; as also least upon the consideration of some things here hinted,
they might think the words of the Engagement too light, and might thence take
occasion to lay some heavier Obligation upon us, in words that should oblige to
More. The other request is, that since I have not any other perfect copy of
what I now send you, you would procure it to be transcribed for me; and either
the copy so transcribed, or these very papers rather, when you have transcribed
them, transmit enclosed in a Letter, or by some Friend that will be sure to
deliver them safe, with his own hands, to my Son -- in London, to whom I shall
write shortly that he may expect them.

Sir, I desire that my best respects may be presented, etc. -- God endue us all
with grace and wisdom fit for these evil times; to whose mercy and blessing
commend us all, I rest,

Your loving Friend and Servant.
B.P. Dec. 20. 1650.
The Case of a RASH VOW Deliberately Iterated.
The Case.
A Gentleman of good Estate, has Issue one only Daughter, who placing her
affections upon a person much below her rank, intends Marriage with him: The
Father hearing of it, in great displeasure Voweth, and confirms it with an
Oath, that if she Marry him he will never give her a farthing of his Estate.
The Daughter notwithstanding Marryeth him: After which the Father sundry times
iterateth and renews his said former Vow, and that in a serious and
deliberate manner; adding further, That he would never give her or any of hers
any part of his Estate.

QUAERE: Whether the Father's Vow so made, and so confirmed and iterated as
abovesaid, be Obligatory or not?

The Resolution. My opinion is, That the Vow was Rash, and is not at all
Obligatory.

1. The Question here proposed is concerning the Obligation only; yet I deem it
expedient to declare my opinion concerning the Rashness also: and that for two
reasons. First, Because there seems in the proposal of the Case, to be some
weight laid upon the after iterations, which were more deliberate, as if they
added to the Obligation. And Secondly, Because I think it needful that the
Vower should as well be convinced of the greatness of his sin in making such a
Vow, for the time past, as satisfied concerning the present and future
invalidity of it.

2. It is easy to believe; that the Gentleman when he first made the Vow, was
possessed with a very great indignation against his Daughter, for her high and
inexcusable disobedience to him in so very weighty a business. And truly it
must be confessed, he had need to be a man of a very rare command over his own
Spirit, and such as are scarce to be found one of a thousand, that could so
contain himself within the bounds of reason upon so just a provocation from an
only child (possibly some other aggravating circumstances concurring) as not to
be transported with the violence of that passion, into some thoughts and
resolutions, not exactly agreeable with the dictates of right reason. It can
therefore be little doubted, but the Vow made whilst the Reason was held under
the force of so strong a perturbation, was a rash and irrational Vow.

3. Nor will these after-acts in confirmation of the first Vow, though having
more of deliberation in them, be sufficient to redeem either it or themselves
from the imputation of Rashness: understanding rashness in that latitude as the
Casuists do, when they treat de Voto temerario, under the notion whereof they
comprehend all such Vows as happen per defectum plenae and dis^ussae
deliberationi, as they express it; For it is to be considered, that when an
injury, disobedience, or other affront is strongly resented, it many times
takes a very deep impression in the soul, which though after the first impetus
have a little spent it self, it begin somewhat to abate, yet it does so by such
slow and insensible degrees, that the same perturbation, which first
discomposed the mind, may have a strong influence into all succeeding
deliberations for a long time after. Even as after an acute Fever, when the
sharpest paroxysmes are over, and the malignity of the disease well spent,
although the party begin to recover some degrees of strength; yet there may
remain for a good while after such a debility in the parties, as that they
cannot exercise their proper functions, but with some weakness more or less,
till the party be perfectly recovered. Since therefore the after-iterations of
the first Vow in the present case, did proceed apparently from the rancor and
malignity remaining in the mind, as the dregs and relics of the same
perturbation, from which the first Vow also proceeded: they must upon the same
account (to wit, per defectum plenae deliberationis) undergo the same censure
of Rashness with the first Vow. The same I say for the kind; some difference I
grant there is for the degree: but Magis and Minus non variant speciem, we
know. And the consideration of that difference is only thus far useful in the
present Case, that the more deliberate those after-acts were, the more culpable
they are, and the less capable either of Excuse, or Extenuation; and
consequently do oblige the party to so much the more serious, solemn, and
lasting Repentance.

4. But concerning rash Vows (in as much as the knot of the Question lies not
there) it shall suffice to note these few points. First, That every Rash Vow is
a sin; and that upon its own score, and pre^isely as it is rash, although it
should not be any other way peccant. All acts of Religious worship (by the
importance of the third Commandment) are to be performed with all due sobriety,
attention, and advisedness: how much more than a Vow? which is one of the
highest acts of worship, as being a sacred contract, whereunto God himself is a
party. See Eccl. 5. 1, etc. Secondly, That Rash Vows are for the most part,
(besides the Rashness peccant in their matter also; For they are commonly made
in passion, and all passions are evil Counselors, and Anger as bad as the
worst. The wrath of Man seldom works the righteousness of God. Thirdly, That
a Rash Vow, (though to be repented of for the Rashness) may yet in some cases
bind. As for example; A man finding himself ill used by a Shopkeeper, of whom
he had formerly been accustomed to buy, voweth in a rage, that he will never
buy of him again: This is a Rash Vow; yet it binds, because if the party had
never made any such Vow at all, it had neither been unjust or uncharitable,
(nor so much as imprudent) in him for to have done the same thing, which by his
Vow he has now bound himself to do. So if a man impatient of his ill luck at
Cards, should Vow in a heat never to play at Cards any more; he were in this
case also bound to keep his Vow: because there neither is any sin in keeping
it, nor can be any great necessity why he should break it. That therefore
Fourthly, if at any time a Rash Vow bind not; the invalidity thereof proceeds
not merely (nor indeed at all) from the Rashness (which yet is a very common
error amongst men) but from the faultiness of it otherwise, in respect of the
matter, or thing Vowed to be done; when that which is so Vowed, is either so
evil in it self, or by reason of circumstances, becomes so evil, that it
cannot be performed without sin.

5. That therefore concerning the Vow in the present case, I declared my
Opinion that it is not at all obligatory; it is done upon this ground (which is
a most certain truth and consented to by all) That Rei illicitae nulla
obligatio. If a man shall Vow any thing that is contrary to Piety; as if having
taken offense at some indiscreet passage in a Sermon of his own Minister, he
should vow that he would never come to the Church, or hear him Preach again: Or
that is contrary to Justice; as to take away the life of an innocent person, as
those 40 persons that had vowed they would neither eat nor drink till they had
slain Paul: Or never to make restitution to one whom he knew he had wronged: Or
contrary to Charity; as to be revenged of, or never to be friends with, one
that had done him wrong: Or that is contrary to Mercy; as if having lost some
money by lending to his friend, or having smarted by suretiship, he should vow
never to lend any man money, or become surety for any man again. Let such a
vow, I say, as any of these, or any of the like nature, be made either rashly,
or deliberately, and strengthened with Oaths and Imprecations, in the most
direful and solemn manner that can be devised to tie it on the faster; yet it
is altogether null and invalid as to the effect of Obligation. Whence those
common sayings, In ma^le promiss is rescinde fidem; Ne sit juramentum vinculum
iniquitatis, etc. And we have a good president for it in David, after he had in
a rage vowed the destruction of Nabal, and all that belonged to him; which vow
upon better consideration, he not only did not perform, but he blessed God
also, for so providentially preventing the performance of it, by the discreet
demeanor, and intervention of Abigail.

6. Now the reason why such vows are not binding, is very cogent and clear;
Even because the party at such time as he is supposed to have made such Vow, as
aforesaid, lay under another (a former and therefore a stronger) obligation to
the contrary. And it is agreeable to all the reason in the world, that he who
either by his own voluntary act, has bound himself (where lawfully he might so
do) or by the command of his lawful Superior (that has a right to his service,
and may exact obedience from him) is already bound to do or not to do this or
that; should not have power ^o disoblige himself therefrom, at his own
pleasure, or to superinduce upon himself a new Obligation contrary thereun^o:
Obligatio prior praejudicat ^osteriori. As in the case of Marriage, a
precontract with one party, avoideth all after-contracts with any other: And if
a man convey Lands to several persons, by deeds of several date, the first
conveyance stands good, and all the rest are void; and so in all cases o^
like nature. The Obligatory power therefore that is i^ Vows, Oaths, Promises,
etc. i^ rightly said by some, to be (...) constructive, not a destructiv^
power. The meaning is tha^ such acts may create a new Obligation, where was non
before, or confirm an old one but it cannot destroy an ol^ one, or substitute
another contrary thereunto, in the plac^ thereof.

7. And the reason of this reason also, is yet farther evident; for that
Quisquis obligatur, alteri obligatur. When a man is obliged by-any act, it is
always supposed, that the obligation is made to some other party: to whom also
it is supposed some right to accrue, by virtue of the said act obligatory; and
that that other party is by the said act sufficiently vested in that said
right, Of which right he cannot be again divested and deprived by the mere act
of him, who instated him therein, and is obliged to perform it to him (unless
himself give consent thereunto) without the greatest injustice in the World.
Now God having a perfect right to our obedience, by his own obliging Precept,
both for the not doing hurt to any man, and for the doing good to every man,
upon all fit opportunities: and this right also confirmed, and ratified by our
own obligatory act in a solemn manner, before many witnesses at our Baptism,
when we vowed to keep all Gods Commandments: it were unreasonable to think that
it should be in our power, by any after-act of ours to disoblige our selves
from both, or either of those obligations. For then we might by the same reason
free our selves from the obligation of that latter Act also (suppose an Oath,
or Vow) by another subsequent Oath, or Vow; and from that again by another: and
so play fast and loose, make Vows and break them in infinitum. Evident it is
therefore, that every vow requiring any thing to be done, which is repugnant to
any office of Piety, Justice, Charity, or Mercy, which we owe either to God or
man, is void, and binds not; because it finds us under the power of a
former contrary obligation, and has not it self power sufficient to free or
discharge us from the same.

8. The general rule thus cleared, it remains to examine concerning the
particular Vow, now in question, whether it be void upon this account or no? It
will be found hard I believe to free this Vow, from being repugnant to the
rules of Justice, but impossible I am sure, to reconcile it with the perfect
Evangelical Law of Charity and Mercy. First, Civil and Political Justice,
requires that every man should obey the wholesome Laws of his Country, and
submit himself to be ordered thereby. Now put the case (which is possible
enough) that the Daughters Husband should for lack of support from his
Father-in-law, or otherwise* live and dye in great want, leaving his Wife, and
many small Children behind him, destitut^ of all means for their necessar^
sustenance. The Law would (as I suppose) in that case, upon complaint of the
Parish, and for their ease, send the Daughter and her Children to the Father,
and compel him to maintain them out of his Estate. Which order he ought to
obey, nor can refuse so to do, without the high contempt of public Authority,
and manifest violation of the Civil Justice, notwithstanding his Vow to the
contrary: The Law must be obeyed whatsoever becomes of the Vow; in that case
therefore it is evident the Vow binds not.

9. But say* that should not happen to be the case (which yet is more then any
man can positively say beforehand:) the Parent is nevertheless in Moral
Justice bound to provide due maintenance for his Children and Grandchildren if
he be able. St. Paul says that Fathers ought to lay up for the Children. True
it is, he speaks it but upon the by, and by way of Illustration, in the
handling of another argument, very distant from this business: but that does
not at all lessen the importance of it, such illustrations being ever taken a
notiori, and from such common notions as are granted, and consented unto by all
reasonable men. The same Apostle having amongst other sins of the Gentiles,
mentioned disobedience to Parents in one verse, in the very next verse,
mentions also want of natural affection in Parents. And the disobedience in
the Child can no more discharge the Parent from the obligation of that duty he
owes to the Child, of affection, and maintenance, then the unnaturalness of
the Parent, can the Child from the duty he owes to the Parent, of Honor and
Obedience. For the several duties, that by Gods ordinance, are to be performed
by persons that stand in mutual relation either to other, are not pactional and
conditional; as are the Leagues and Agreements made between Princes (where the
breach in one part, dissolveth the obligation on the other) but are absolute
and independent; wherein each person is to look to himself, and the performance
of the duty that lies upon him, though the other party should fail in the
performance of his.

10. Something I foresee, may be objected in this point, concerning the
lawfulness of the Parents withdrawing maintenance from the Child (either in
whole, or at least in part) in the case of disobedience. Which how far forth it
may, or may not be done; as it would be too long to examine, so it would be of
little avail to the present business. For it is one thing to withold
maintenance from a disobedient Child for the present, and to resolve so to
continue till he shall see cause to the contrary. And another thing to bind
himself by Vow or Oath, never to allow him any for the future, whatsoever
should happen. Let be granted whatsoever can be supposed pleadable on the
Fathers behalf, in the present case: yet there will still remain two
particulars in this Vow, not easily to be cleared from being unjust. First, let
the Daughters disobedience deserve all this uttermost of punishment, from the
offended Father; yet how can it be just, that for the Mothers fault, the poor
innocent (perhaps yet unborn) Children, should be utterly, and irrecoverably
excluded, from all possibility of relief from their Grandfather? Secondly, It
is (if not unjust, yet what differs very little therefrom) the extremity of
rigid Justice; that any offender much less a Son or Daughter) should for any
offense, not deserving death, be by a kind of fatal peremptory decree, put
into an incapacity of receiving relief from such persons, as otherwise ought to
have relieved the said offender, without any reservation either of the case of
extreme necessity, or of the case of serious repentance.

11. However it be for the point of Justice; yet so apparent is the repugnancy
of the matter of this Vow, with the precepts of Christian Charity and Mercy;
that if all I have hitherto said were of no force, this repugnancy alone were
enough (without other evidence) to prove the unlawfulness, and consequently,
the invalidity, or inobligability thereof. It is (not an Evangelical Counsel,
but) the express peremptory precept of Christ, that we should be merciful, even
as our heavenly Father is merciful. And inasmuch as, not in that passage only,
but for the most part wheresoever else the duty of mercy is pressed upon us in
the Gospel from the example of God: God is represented to us by the name, and
under the notion of a Father, although I may not lay much weight upon it, as a
demonstrative proof; yet I conceive I may commend it as rational Topic, for
all that are Fathers to consider of, whether it do not import, that mercy is to
be expected from a Father as much as (if not rather much more then) from any
other man; and that the want of mercy in a Father, is more unkindy, more
unseemly, more unnatural then in another man: But this by the way. From that
precept of Christ, we learn that as there is in God a twofold mercy, (a giving
mercy, in doing us good, though we deserve it not, and a forgiving mercy, in
pardoning us when we have done amiss:) so there ought to be in every good
Christian man, a readiness (after the example of God) to show forth the fruits
of mercy to others, in both kinds upon all proper, and meet occasions. So that
if any person, of what quality or condition soever, shall upon any provocation
whatsoever vow that he will never do any thing for such or such a man; or that
he will never forgive such or such a man: every such Vow, being contra bonos
mores, and contra officium hominis Christiani, is unlawful, and binds not.

12. The offices of mercy in the former of those two branches, viz. of doing
good, and affording relief to those that are in necessity, are themselves of so
great necessity (as the case may be) that common humanity would exact the
performance of them from the hand, not of a stranger only, but even of an
enemy. If a stranger, or an enemies Beast lie weltering in a Ditch, a helping
hand must be lent to draw it out. The Samaritans compassion to the wounded
Traveller, in the Parable, Luke 10. (There being a feud, and that grounded upon
Religion, which commonly of all others, is the most deadly feud between the two
Nations) is commended to our example, to the great reproach of the Priest, and
Levite, for their want of Bowels to their poor Brother, of the same Nation, and
Religion with themselves; For the nearer the Relation is between the Parties,
the stronger is the obligation of showing mercy either to other. And there is
scarce any relation nearer, and more obliging, then that of Parents and
Children.

Our Savior, who in Matthew. 15. sharply reproved such vows, (though made with
an intention to advance the Service of God, by enriching his treasury) as
hindered Children from relieving their Parents, will not certainly approve of
such vows (made without anyother intention, then to gratify rage, and
impatience) as hinder Parents from relieving their Children.

13. If to avoid the force of this argument, it shall be alleged, that the
Daughters disobedience, in a business of so high concernment, might justly
deserve to be thus severely punished, and that it were but equal that she, who
had so little regard to her Father, when the time was, should be as little
regarded by him afterward: All this granted, comes not yet up to the point of
showing Mercy according to the example of God. No Childs disobedience can be
so great to an earthly Parent, as ours is to our heavenly Father: Yet does he
notwithstanding all our ill deservings continually do us good, communicating to
our necessities, and causing his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall, and
infinite benefits in all kinds to descend upon mankind, not excluding the most
thankless, and disobedient, and rebellious, from having a share therein.

14. And as for that other branch of Mercy in pardoning offenses, God gives a
rich example to all men, of their duty in that kind, (and to Fathers
particularly) by his great readiness to pardon the greatest offenders, if they
sincerely seek to him for it. If the Father in the Parable, Luke 15. had
proceeded with such severity against his riotous Son, as to have vowed never to
have received him again; he had been a very improper exemplar, whereby to
shadow out the mercy of God to repentant sinners. Concerning the great
importance of this duty, which is so frequently inculcated by Christ, and his
Apostles, and so peremptorily enjoined, as not any other duty more. See Mat. 6.
4, 15. Mat. 18. 21. -- 35. Ephesians, 4. 32. Col. 3. 13. James 2. 13. See also Sirac.
28. 1, etc.] I shall not need to say much: only as to the present Case, it
would be considered, how perverse a course it is, and contradictory to it self,
for a man to think himself obliged, by one inconsiderate act, never to forgive
his Daughter; when as yet he cannot beg pardon of his own sins, at the hands of
God, (as he ought in his daily prayer to do) without an express condition of
forgiving every body, and an implicit imprecation upon himself, if he do not.

15. But shall the Daughter that has thus grieved the spirit of her Father,
thus escape unpunished, and be in as good a condition, as if she had never
offended? And will not others be encouraged by her impunity, to despise their
Parents after her example? There is much reason in this objection; and
therefore what I have hitherto written, ought not to be understood, as if
thereby were intended such a plenary indulgence for the Daughter, as should
restore her in integrum, but only that she should be made capable of receiving
such relief from her Father, from time to time, as in relation to her
necessities, and after carriage, from time to time, should seem reasonable; and
that his Vow ought not to hinder him from affording her such relief. But by
what degrees, and in what proportion. the Father should thus receive his
Daughter, into his fatherly affection, and relieve her, must be left to
discretion, and the exigence of circumstances. Onlyl should advise (in order to
the objection, viz. for examples sake, and that the Daughter might be made,
even to her dying day, and kept, sensible of her great and sinful disobedience
to her Father) that the Father should cut off from his Daughter, and her
Posterity, some meet portion of his Estate, (as perhaps a fifth part at the
least; or if a fourth, or a whole third part, I should like it the better:) and
by a solemn deliberate vow, dedicate the same to be yearly employed in some
pious and charitable uses. These times will afford him choice of objects, if
God shall move his heart so to do; and by so doing, he may, First, in some sort
redeem and make a kind of satisfaction for his former Rashness, (not Popishly
understood, and in regard of the Justice of God, but) in a moral sense, and in
regard of the world, and his own Conscience. Secondly, it may be a good means
to keep the Daughter in a continual fresh remembrance of her fault, that she
may not, after a short and slight repentance (as in such cases too often it
happens) forget the same; whereof she ought to have some remorse all the
days of her life. Thirdly, he shall thereby after a sort, perform his first
vow; I mean according to the general intention thereof, and the rational part,
(which was to make his Daughter repent her folly, and to smart for it:) the
overplus more then this, being but the fruit of rancor and perturbation.
Lastly, he shall in so doing, doubly imitate God, our heavenly Father. First,
when a rash, or sinful act is made an occasion of a pious, or charitable work;
it bears some resemblance of, or rather is indeed it self a gracious effect
of that goodness and wisdom in God, whereby he brings light out of darkness,
and good out of evil. Secondly, God himself when he graciously pardons a high
presumptuous sin, as he did David's great sin, in the matter of Uriah, commonly
lays some lasting affliction upon the offender; as he did upon David, who
after the sealing his pardon for that sin by Nathan, scarce ever had a quiet
day all his life long. The reason whereof seems to be double, partly for
admonition to others, that none presume to provoke God in like manner, lest
they smart for it also in like manner: and partly for the good of the offender,
that he may by the smart be brought to the deeper sense of his error, and be
eft-soons reminded of it, lest he should too soon forget it.

Thus have I with very much ado, (in that weak condition I have been in, ever
since the question came to my hands, and wherein I yet continue) declared my
opinion fully concerning the whole business as far as I understand it. More
largely I confess then I intended, or perhaps was needful: and with greater
severity, then (it may be) the parties will well like of. But truly I desired
to do the part of a faithful Confessor, and the sores on both parts seemed to
be such as were not to be touched, with too gentle a hand: In the Daughter, an
act of high disobedience, transported by the passion of inordinate love; and in
the Father an act of great Rashness, transported by the passion of inordinate
anger: both beyond the bounds of right Reason, and Religion; and both to be
deeply repented of. Howsoever, I cannot be suspected to have written any thing,
either out of favor for, or prejudice against either party; not having the
least conjecture, who the persons are that are concerned in the business: nor
so much as in what part of the Nation they live. I shall pray that God would
direct them both, to do that which may best serve to his glory, and bring the
soundest comfort to their own souls. Amen.

FINIS.

