The Swedish Cloak of Religion: A POLITIC DISCOURSE Between two Citizens of
ELBING, Occasioned by the publishing of a Proclamation, by the Swedish
Governor of that City.

Wherein is laid open to the view of the World, How the whole Palatinate of
Marienburgh in Prussia is made desolate, and brought into Slavery, by the
Swedish Religious Pretexts, and Introduction of a New Church Government.

And consequently, The grand mistake of all such as have conceived an
Impression that the present King of Swedens Martial Undertakings were really
intended for or toward the Propagation and Defense of the Protestant Cause.

-- Saepius olim
Religio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta.
Times bypast have produced in many Acts and Places
Most impious Designs under Religious Faces.
First printed in the German Language, and now faithfully Englished.

London, Printed for Isaac Pridmore and Henry Marsh, at the Golden Faulcon near
the New Exchange; and at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street,
MDCLIX.

The Swedish Cloak of Religion: OR, A Politic DISCOURSE Beeween two Citizens
of ELBING.
Simplicius. GOodmorrow Sir, how are you in your health why look you so
melancholy?


Constantinus. I thank you good Neighbor, all is not well; and truly, in this
Juncture of Affairs, Mirth is become a stranger to me.


Simplicius. What Is the matter? will you alone be sad, while we have so great
occasion of rejoicing? Has not Almighty God mercifully visited us, by bringing
us under the Government of a Prince sincerely devoted to the unaltered
Confession of Augsburgh, who has not only discharged the singing of the
Psalms of David translated by L^bwasser (which has been for a long time the
Apple of strife in this City) but also ejected the Roman Catholics out of the
Cathedral Church, set up an high Consistory, and thereby made the Lutheran
Doctrine in great purity to shine again both here and in the Country, to the
grief and astonishment of Papists, Calvinists, and all such Sectaries as grudge
and repine at the Lutheran prosperity? Hence we may see the truth of that
Inscription written by a zealous Lutheran upon the Frontispiece of his house in
the Suburbs of this City [Gods Word and the Lutheran Doctorine never perish
can.] Likewise the Proclamation of our favorable Lord Governor demonstrates
the great affection our present King and Sovereign bears to us, with how much
diligence and serious care he minds the advancement of the honor of GOD, and
the welfare of the Churches; and how on the contrary, he endeavors the
extirpation of all impious abuses. There Is a Remedy for a dejected countenance;
wherefore cheer up your self.


Constantinus. Shall I confess ingenuously? The Remedy you have prescribed for
my Ease, has renewed my Grief. It Is this glorious Reformation is the chief
cause of my sorrow.


Simplicius. I am very much mistaken, but you are of those who pretend to be
Lutherans, yet are really Calvinists; hence it is you cannot relish and comply
with this Reformation.


Constantinus. You will not (I hope) misconstrue my freedom, when I tell you
that you are of that batch who aim to render all such men odious, under the
names of Calvinists, Papists and Libertines, as do not sympathize with, and
yield their concurrence to the promoving of these subdolous and prejudicial
Designs, masked with a show of Reformation; this (believe me honest Neighbor)
is a Machiavilian Trap, wherein the rude Multitude has not been caught and
cheated once.


Simplicius. You speak like a discontented person; what is the business? It it
our new Ecclesiastical Government wherewith you are displeased? pray you impart
it to your friend; I am desirous to know it.


Constantinus. I will not conceal it from you; It is indeed this innovation
(term it as you please) which renders it self justly suspected to all prudent
men, since (according to the common Proverb) it is always dangerous. But
passing that, there are many other things couched under it, which are not
discovered by many good people, the event whereof (I wish I be mistaken) will
prove very hurtful and noxious to us.


Simplicius. Good Sir, let me entreat you to communicate that to me; for I
confess, I can perceive no evil at all therein.


Constantinus. The easier I believe you, neither do I think it strange to find
you of that stamp, since you lodge this persuasion in your breast, That
Almighty God has mercifully visited this Province and City, by bringing the
Inhabitants thereof under the government of the present Swedish King.


Simplicius. I never called that in question; and so much the rather, because
the same is verbally expressed in the Preamble of the Ordinance published by
our Lord Governor: Is there any ground of doubt left then?


Constantinus. The Truth of that, the deplorable condition of this Country and
City under these new Governors, does sufficiently declare. Under our lawful
King, we enjoyed Peace and Quietness, we lived amicably amongst our selves; no
Contributions, Excises and intolerable burdens were exacted, except those which
for our safety, and better accommodation, we voluntarily advanced: the Right of
Patronage was in our disposing; we ordered our Garrisons without the imperious
commands of Foreigners and Starosts; Trade and Commerce was free; we kept good
correspondency, and were always in much estimation with our Neighbors, and
many others abroad: this condition deserved indeed the name of a merciful
visitation from above. But now instead of Peace, behold a bloody and unnatural
War, a pleasant and fertile Country laid waste and desolate, free Trade
interrupted and at a stand, Liberty is exchanged with Slavery; for mutual
amity, we have intestine Discord and Hostilities: Contribution and new
Exactions (that know no end) are daily extorted from us; the right of Patronage
of Churches and Schools is usurped by strangers, who now Garrison our City;
uncouth Starosts and Commanders rule over us at their pleasure; finally, we are
become a reproach and hissing to our Neighbors, and that not unjustly, seeing
we have so vainly and inconsiderately violated our solemn Oath of allegiance to
our lawful King, and subjected our selves to a Forraigner: Yet this, forsooth,
must be interpreted Mercy, when (if we will allow it a name suitable to its
nature) it is nothing else but Gods displeasure, written in capital Letters,
and a visible judgment broken forth out of the North upon on all the
Inhabitants of the Land (according to that of Jeremiah, chap. 1.14. and 6.1.)
from whence I pray God no greater evil may befall us.


Simplicius. What Sir, is not this a special mercy of God, that we are come
under the government of a Prince who stands constant to the unaltered
Confession of Augsburgh?


Constantinus. Simply considered in it self, it might justly be acknowledged a
singular mercy from God; but that we have so slightly set by honor, loyalty,
and the Oath of Allegiance, renouncing our lawful Superior for Religion sake,
cannot (as I conceive) be defended by the word of God, nor yet does it consist
with the Augsburghs Confession; especially since the free exercise of our
Religion was never hindered by our lawful Lord and King; yea, on the contrary,
he granted and graciously confirmed our Privileges for the same, conformable
tot he Confession of Augsburgh, and at all times did protect us therein. Our
Neighbors do no less adhere to the Ausburghs Confession then we, yet they, to
their perpetual praise, remain loyal to their King; whilst we, on the other
hand, by revolting from him, have contracted a more heinous blot of Infamy then
can be washed off or obliterated by the whole Baltic Sea.


Simplicius. What we have done was out of necessity, because our King was fled
the Country, and the Enemy standing upon our neck.


Constantinus. There was no such necessity; our Fortifications were good and
strong, we had of levied men and Train Bands sufficient; the Elector of
Brandenburgh offered to protect and assist us; Marienburgh did the same really,
but all in vain. Our walls are defended, Arms and Soldiers ordered not as
against an Enemy, but as to the reception of a Friend; our Reliefs were
rejected, partly betrayed; and when we should have proved most faithful to our
King, in defending his and our own Rights, we basely revolted from him, and
engaged our selves in slavery; and for this (amongst other motives) because the
Enemy was Lutheran, which I can neither justify nor defend: but you may, if
you please, for your further satisfaction, read the printed Copy of an Epistle
lately published, wherein this Question is resolved, [ whether the Evangelical
States which adhere to the Augsburghs Confession, may fall off from their Liege
Lord, in hopes to advance Religion?] where expressly you will find that to do
so, is neither Just, Christian nor Lutherish.


Simplicius. I will, upon your recommendation, take occasion to read that
Epistle, and then answer to this point. But in the interim, I hope you are not
displeased with the discharging the singing of the Psalms of David, translated
by Lobwasser.


Constantinus. I mind not to question Lobwassers integrity, nor am I anxious
whether his translation of the Psalms be sung amongst us, or not; yet could I
never relish these great contests and debates upon this subject, from whence so
many inconveniences did arise, fearing and foreseeing the bad consequences
that have come to pass.

Plato and other Philosophers have taught and observed, that the very changing
of Music has commonly produced the change of Government; which holds true
amongst us: for those itchers after change and novelty, did first begin at
Lobwassers Psalms; but finding the Magistrates unwilling to countenance their
factious inclination, they endeavored to make a party among the people: in the
mean time, the Swede coming before the City, they and their newfangled
accomplices ventilated their debate with greater animosity then before, and so
prepared the way (in a tumultuous manner) to such an casie surrender of this
strong City to the King of Sweden.


Simplicius. By your expressions, I perceive you differ from the judgment of
the most part of the people in this City; and I confess, I know not how to
defend all these passages handsomely: However, I doubt not but you approve of
this, That we are put in possession of the Cathedral Church, and that the Roman
Catholics are expelled.


Constantinus. Had we attained this possession by lawful means, should relish
it very well; but believe me, it had been more commendable and advantageous for
us, to have followed the footsteps of our neighbors of Thoren, and (as they
did) suffered the Catholics to enjoy their Privileges with our selves.
Moreover, in our own Church we had more room then we could take up; so when we
go to the great Church, the other is empty: whereby we make our Cause worse,
and render our selves hateful to others. For whereas heretofore those our
Catholic Neighbors did modestly exercise their Devotions in that Church,
they now, since they were expelled, have no public meeting, nor Divine Worship
at all, but go up and down at random. And let me tell you, When we deal so
ungratefully with the Roman Catholics, contrary to the true intent of our
Privileges, which we had from them, we lead them by the hand, teaching them
how they shall deal with us, in places under their power, as in due time we may
expect they will do.


Simplicius. Yet for all that, we are now by Authority made Uniform in
Religion, which many other Cities have earnestly wished, but never could
obtain. We have one Consistory, one Superintendent: could better means be found
out for ordering all aright, settling Peace and Uniformity amongst our Preachers
and People, and for supplying of every vacant Charge with Men fearing God and
hating Covetousness?


Constantinus. To be Uniform in Religion, to have one Consistory, one
Superintendent in the City, all these in themselves considered, are not to be
rejected: But whether it be intended for our good, and will prove so as is
pretended, there is great cause of doubting; and believe me good Neighbor,
here lurks the Serpent in the grass.


Simplicius. In the entry of our discourse, you could not conceal your
suspicion; wherefore I entreat you Sir show me where the Serpent lurks.


Constantinus. It was my meaning to discover this to you before, had I not been
interrupted by your digressive Questions: It is likewise not without hazard for
any to speak their mind freely upon this subject; since every one that do not
conform themselves exactly to this New Ordinance, may expect no less then a
Citation by the Fiscal-Royal, before the Lord Generalissimus at Marienburgh,
and there to be severely punished according to their demerits.


Simplicius. To act and do contrary are forbidden indeed, but not to speak
against it.


Constantinus. I will then adventure to proceed, and tell you in confidence, to
what end this present Reformation (you so highly extol) is undertaken by the
Swede. Not (truly) for the advancement of the glory of God, not for the
maintenance and prosperity of the Church, not for establishing of good order,
not for settling peace and unity amongst Preachers and people, as they pretend:
but for their own safety, that thereby in this conjuncture of time, when the
whole burden of War is drawing hither, they may render themselves more secure.


Simplicius. How can that be? I pray you make me understand it.


Constantinus. To tell you briefly, these practices which you dignify with the
name of a glorious Reformation, are only Machiavilian, Campanellian and
Achitophel's contrivances, which are not discovered in their birth, by the
Multitude: and do you doubt but the Swedes know very well, that Religion (be it
true of false) is most powerful and prevalent upon the minds and consciences
of men, to cause them actively concur to the promoting of any Design that is
presented with a religious Livery? hence amongst other Arguments brought in to
justify this Invasion and breach of Truce, they would have us and the world
believe that their Zeal to Religion, the propagation of the Evangelical
Doctrine, and extirpation of Papacy, caused them chiefly to take up Arms. These
plausible Pretexts have not only illaqueate the rude Multitude, but also
begotten an impression upon many great ones (as if God had raised up another
Gideon, to deliver his people, and vindicate the oppressed Evangelical
Doctrine) yea, they extend themselves to the persecution of all men without
exception, (albeit Lutherans) who do not willingly submit to the Swedish
Government, and applaud their Hostile Invasion. So you may see how from the
beginning we have been abused, in suffering our selves by these Religious
persuasions, to be seduced to this rebellious accommodation. And for our just
reward, we have gotten Soldiers to be our Lords and Masters, who cunningly
improving our perfidious diligence, and perceiving divisions amongst us,
concerning Matters of Religion, do not only secretly foment and highten these
debates (that so they may divide and overcome) but decide all controversies in
favor of the Multitude, as most numerous and useful for their designs: It was
upon this account the Roman Catholics were expelled the great Church, and the
Lutherans possessed of it, that by this gracious Testimony of the Swedes, the
common people might upon all emergencies, be so much the more engaged to them.


Simplicius. Since the Swede has settled the affairs of our Church, I think it
our duty to give him a requital; one good turn deserves another: for my part, I
confess I now favor him more then I did at first; and only for his religious
Zeal, whereby we are put in this happy condition, which I and many others have
heartily wished for long ago. But go on in your Discourse, and excuse me for
this interruption.


Constantinus. The Swedes perceiving that (according to your own confession)
they had by Religion gained the hearts of the subjects of this City, have
bended their thoughts how to keep this good impression of their zealous
inclination, upon our affections, and how their respect might thereby be
increased amongst us.

Therefore they judged it expedient to indear themselves with the Preachers,
and especially such as the common people most applauded; well knowing, that so
long as these did stick close to their party, the multitude would never forsake
them. To this purpose, and that they might more surely compass their Design,
by preventing the admission of any to the Ministerial function, which were of a
contrary stamp, they have invented this new Consistory, and chosen an
Arch-Prelate (wholly devoted to them, Soul and Body) to be Superintendent, and
have strictly, under the highest pains, discharged the accustomed choosing and
calling of Preachers by the Suffrage of the People, who on the contrary, are
commanded to make their applications, and give due reverence unto the
Superintendent and Consistory; and in case of vacancie, an address must be made
to them for an Upright and Godly man (doubtless also a good Swede) and upon
their Approbation, (which is to be observed) to accept of him. Hence the Swedes
expect a twofold advantage; First, a full assurance of our love, fidelity and
constancy, especially when the exhortations of our Pastors have a joint
tendency that way, so that a few of their own Forces, with those inhabitants of
the City and Country, shall be sufficient to stave off any danger that comes
from without. In the next place, they (having this assurance) need not be much
afraid of those to whom this Reformation is not acceptable, as Papists,
Calvinists, a part of the Council, and some of the Commons, which cannot digest
the taking away their Privilege of calling their own Preachers, or the Jus
Patronatus, because the Multitude will easily balance them, unless they resolve
to expose themselves to the greatest hazard of life and limb.


Simplicius Hold good Sir, you tell me of such strange passages as are an
astonishment to me.


Constantinus. Suffer me yet to add one word, wherewith I will conclude at
this time. You know the Swedes have us now in their power, and probably
foreseeing, whilst they and their adherents are necessitated to make a shameful
retreat out of Poland and Lithuania, that the Polonian King does intend with
all his force to overrun us here in Prussia; therefore they have betaken
themselves to Achitophels counsel; and as he advised Absalom to lie with his
fathers concubines, whereby all Israel might know he was abhorred of his
father, and so the hands of those that were with him, would be more strong, 2 Samuel 16.21. even so this unseasonable Reformation cannot but highly displease
the King and States of Poland, it being intended for no other purpose, but to
make us stink before them, to deprave us of all hope of reconciliation with our
lawful King, and consequently, drive us into despair; for the wider we make our
breach, so much the closer we must stand by the Swedes; and the more
desperately we hold their party, so much the better and longer will they be
able to keep their station. If this Parallel hold not, let impartial men judge.
But what will be the event, time will show. I pray the Lord preserve us, that
this tend not to our total subversion.


Simplicius. God in mercy pity us, make all of us sensible of our dangerous
backslidings and re-establish us in tranquillity.


Constantinus. I join with you in the same wish, leaving these matters to your
further meditation, reserving the rest till next meeting.


Farewell.

The Swedish Proclamation, Published at Elbing: faithfully translated.
By the Counselor of His Royal Majesty, and of the Realm of Sweden, General
of the Infantry, and Governor of the Palatinate of Marienburgh.
IT is hereby declared and make known, to all and every the Subjects of the
Marienburgish Palatinate, That since Almighty God has mercifully visited this
Province and Country, and brought the inhabitants thereof under the most
Illustrious and Magnipotent Prince and Lord, Lord CAROLUS GUSTAVUS, of the
Swedes, Goths and Vandals King, great Duke in Finland, Duke in Ekstland,
Carelen, Bremen, Veurden, Stettin, Pomeren, of the Cassubes and Wensden, Duke
at Rugen, Lord over Ingermanland and Wismar, as also Count Palatine on the
Rhyne, in Bavaria, at Gulick, Cleve and Berg, Duke, etc. His Highly Renowned
Royal Majesty, as a Prince affecting the unaltered Confession of Augsburgh,
has spared no industry to try how the Doctrine of Gods holy Word (heretofore
suppressed) might again be preached in public, without any hinderance, how in
the Churches there might be established a decent Order; true Peace and Unity
erected amongst Preachers and Congregations, Profaneness and Impiety discovered,
so as hereafter in all things, the glory of God, the safety and happiness of
the Church might be endeavored and maintained. Yet could not His most Renowned
Royal Majesty find out any better means whereby to settle the spiritual
Government of the Church, (which hitherto has been defective,) then by
constituting a Superintendent and Consistory. To this end, His Royal Majesty
has chosen, deputed and confirmed the Right Reverend Lord and Magister, David
Klugh, sometime Arch-Prelate of the Marquisate of Prussia, and District of
Lu^emuk, etc. to be Superintendent over the whole Marienburgish Palatinate, as
well Elbing, and other Cities, as over all the Country. And it is His Royal
Majesty's most gracious pleasure, that the said Lord Magister Klugh shall every
way behave himself conformable to the Instructions received from His Royal
Majesty. But above all things, to endeavor the maintenance of Peace and Unity,
Vprightness and Honesty, and other suchlike Christian Virtues, as he shall be
answerable before God and the Kings Majesty. And it being necessary that the
premises be known unto all the Subjects of this Palatinate; Therefore in the
name of His Royal Majesty, and with the approbation of His Illustrious Princely
Highness, the Lord Generalissimus, I do hereby declare and publish the same,
exhorting them, that according to His Royal Majesty's earnest and most gracious
pleasure, they acknowledge the aforesaid Lord Magister Klugh, for their
Superintendent, duly to reverence him and the said Consistory, by rendering unto
them submissive obedience, diligently to take notice of all exorbitancies in
every Parish, and in case of any scandal, undecency, or injustice appearing in
the same, to bring in their immediate complaint thereof before him. These are
likewise to advertise the Laick people in particular, henceforth to abstain
from their usual custom of choosing and calling their own Preachers: but when
any place is vacant, they are to apply themselves to the Superintendent,
inquire for an upright godly man, and upon his approbation, too accept of him.
Also when they find any thing worthy of reproach in their Preachers, they
shall be obliged duly to complain of the same, and not, without having first
given in their grievances, obstinately (as heretofore they did) put them, out
of their Ministerial Charge. And forasmuch as in pursuance of His Royal
Majesty's most gracious Command, the Lord Superintendent shall be presented on
Aug. 22. in order to the then opening of the Consistory: These are therefore
earnestly to admonish all and every the Preachers within the Palatinate of
Marienburgh, whether in great Cities or small Towns, and Country Villages, as
also the Professors, Rectors, and Office bearers of Colleges and Schools, that
they be personally present, the day aforesaid, within the Church of Elbing,
there to assist and countenance the said presentation of the Lord
Superintendent, and opening the Consistory. And if any shall in the least do
contrary to what is above expressed, let him expect no other but to be cited by
the Fiscal-Royal to Marienburgh, before His Illustrious Princely Highness, the
Lord Generalissimus, there to answer for his Transgression, and to be severely
punished, according to his demerits. Whereunto every one is to regulate
himself, and avoid his own hurt.

Signatum Elbing. Lorents Vander Lind.

FINIS.

