A PANEGYRIC On the Most Auspicious and long-wish'd-for Return OF The Great
EXAMPLE of the Greatest Virtue, The FAITHFUL ACHATES Of Our ROYAL CHARLES, AND
The Tutelar Angel (as we justly hope) of our CHURCH and STATE,

The Most Illustrious JAMES Duke, Marquess, and Earl of ORMOND, etc. Lord
Lieutenant and General Governor of His Majesty's Kingdom of Ireland, His Grace.

BY F. S.

Nemo confidet nimium secundis
Nemo desperet Meliora lapsis.
Seneca. -- Deus nobis haec otia fecit.
Virg. Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, for Sam. Dancer, Bookseller in Castlestreet.

A Panegyric To the Most Illustrious JAMES Duke, Marquess, and Earl of ORMOND.
Lord Lieutenant, and General Governor of His MAJESTY'S KINGDOM of IRELAND, His
GRACE.
TO speak Your Welcome (most Illustrious Sir) in as high a Key as our Hearts
conceive it, is as nigh a kin to an impossibility, as to speak Your Merit: The
one, the unkind Fate of our feeble Organs deny us to reach unto, the other the
expanded Glory of Your Heroic Actions, and the unexemplar'd Magnanimity of
Your Great Soul, will not admit. Yet herein do we find our Wants reprized,
whilst Heaven sweetly indulging our Inabilities, looks on the Quality, not
Quantity of our Returns, and from an humble grateful Heart, values the cheerful
Sacrifice of a pair of Mites, more then the hidden-Treasures of the lower
World. If Heaven then be so propitious to the incurable Malady of our Natures,
how can we despair of a candid Acceptance from You who are her Favorite, and
One who in the various Assaults of the most imminent Dangers, and severest
Temptations, have born the signal Impress and Character of her Love and Favor.
Were not this true, this happy hour had never been ours, that now seems to
secure our Harvest of Joy for our Seed of Tears, and Promises us as much of
Earthly Foelicity, as can possibly be expected under the best of Kings, and the
best of Subjects. Think not then (most redoubted Sir) our Duties Flattery, nor
the dilated Joys of our Loyal Hearts, a Design upon Your Power: Let those that
juggle with their Allegiance, that Obey because it is not safe for them to
Rebel, and love their King, Religion and Laws, because they dare not do
otherwise, feel the smart Effects of that; whilst we lose our Selves in the
Contemplation of that Blessing we have received; a Blessing of that miraculous
Magnitude, that our Posterity must have the Influence, We only the Wonder.
Thus Zion's Captivity when reversed, became a Dream, being (like ours) so far
above their Merit, or their Expectation, that it was above the Capacity of
their subtilest Faculty to believe it Real. Contraries put together (says the
Philosopher) are their own best Illustration, and if we be not afraid to look
back upon our former Bondage, it may perhaps endear the Blessing of our
Redemption the more unto us, by how much we dispair'd of ever seeing it
effected. What rigid Stoic can reflect on our past Distractions, without
Distraction? Three Kingdoms which for Riches, Strength and Policy, were no way
inferior to the greatest of Europe, how have we seen (like Joseph) sold to
Uncircumcised Ishmaelites, and their Beauteous Garments (their Cities, Temples,
and fertile Fields, like his Coat) died in the Blood of their own Children? How
have we seen Religion degenerate from its Primitive Simplicity, and the
ravishing Beauty of its Celestial Features, vitiated with the Paint and Fucus
of our own Frantic Imaginations? How have we seen the Arms of the Church, from
Preces and Lachrymae, converted into Sword and Pistol, the Pulpit, by its
Bloody and Sophistical Oratory, seeming to re-invest the lying Author, or the
Father of Lies, in his lost Oracles? How have we seen the Face of Majesty
bespattered with the virulent Poison of the Tongue, and Asps, the sworn Subject
of His Crown and Scepter? How have we seen our now Glorious Master belied by
those that began the second Massacre of Innocents, but something bloodier then
that of Herod's, when they made the credulous World believe, they had the Royal
Assent for their unheard of Cruelties? How have we seen Him sold, Cum petiit,
Fato supplice, nudus, opem. And such a Master, that his price was far above
Rubies, or the Gold of Ophir? How have we seen him murdered, and the Parricide
afterward justified by a Law? A Crime so opposite to to Nature and Humanity,
that a Heathen Lawgiver could not conceive, the thought of it could enter into
the Heart of Man, much less the perpetration, and therefote made no Law against
it. Nonne haec sufficient? Is not this Impiety enough for one Age? Yet we may
say, as the Queen of Sheba, of that great King's Wisdom, Ecce non indicatum est
nobis dimidium, We have but a part, though a large one, of our enlarged
Sorrows. Methinks I hear a Voice behind me, asking where were those Teneri
Agnelli, the surviving Hope and Props of the mourning Diadem; Though the Hand
of Violence had seized the Life of the Father, yet Hae Oviculae quid fecerunt?
What had They done to be Disfranchis'd from their Royal Right? Where was then
CHARLES the Little, now greater then Charles the Great, but like young Joash,
hid in the Temple of Divine Providence, from the merciless Hands of a cruel
Usurper? Where were those Twin-Reserves of the British Crown, but seeking
Protection in a Foreign Air, whilst their Unnatural Nurse bestows her Milk
upon the Bastards of her Lust at Home? Where went the Widowed Mother, but to
the Solitary Grove of a Recluse Life, there to bewail Her Glorious Princes
Fate, and her Childrens Danger? Where lay the Honest Man, when the Artifice of
Hell was invoked to Unrivet his Allegiance? What Oaths, Rapines, Murders,
Sacriledges, did every Day present us with? Nay what gross Impiety was there
(if it had a name) that wanted a Professor? Peaceable and Inoffensive Carriage,
and as Innocent as the Doves, would not be trusted without a Perjury: The
demolishing of Churches was nothing, without shaking the Foundation of the
Peoples Faith: The Estates of Gentry and Nobility, without their Blood and
Exile; nay the Crown it Self, without the Life of the Prince, of little value.
-- What Hyperbolical Crimes were here? Such as -- Vix novit Ethnicus vel
publicanus. Yet these, and more, (most Renowned Sir) if more can be imagined,
Your Grace too sensibly knows to be the sad Product of our late Confusions.

But why do we grate Your Ears with the Repetition of our past Miseries, and
instead of welcoming You ashore, afflict Your Eyes with the Landscape of Your
own Shipwreck? Against such melancholy Entertainment, though from the fair
Hands of a Beauteous Queen, we find a great Reluctance in the most courtly
Trojan, Infandum, Regina, jubes, etc. Yet as that Noble Prince would rather
cruciate his own Soul, then disoblige so sweet a Lady, that loved him the more
passionately for his Sufferings: So we (my Lord) do hope that You, whom we
equally love for Yours, will not only pardon us for what we have done, but
from the General, give us leave to touch at those Particulars that concern this
Kingdom; if for no other Reason, yet because it has been the Theater of Your
own Misfortunes, and that without an olim meminisse of what we have suffered by
your long-mourn'd-for Absence, we shall hardly with Moderation manage that Joy
and Contentation, Your longed-for Presence has brought amongst us.

Be pleased then to remember (most Excellent Sir) when our Royal Master of
Glorious Memory, pricked at the Heart for the sad Calamities of this Bleeding
Kingdom, had sought by all means possible, by stopping the Flux of her bloody
Issue, to restore her to her former Health; and after a strict and earnest
search, found no way properer then to put her under the Tuition and Care of an
Able and Faithful Physician: How welcome, how generally applauded was His Royal
Choice, when he pitched upon Your Grace as the fittest Person for so Knotty and
Mysterious a Piece of Service. And if it be not a Sin to speak Truth, What was
there wanting in that Election (if we had not been wanting to our Selves, and
frowardly spurned our own Happiness) that might give a Disgust, to the most
cross-grained Humorist? Was High Blood, flowing from the Veins of as Noble, as
Ancient Progenitors, inferior to no Subject, and that without the least
Attainder of Disloyalty for so many Hundreds of Years, of no consideration?
Were rare Endowments of Mind, (the special Marks and Tokens, whereby wise
Kings choose Instruments for their most weighty Services) as Wisdom to Contrive,
Courage and Resolution to Execute, Sweetness and Affability to Invite and Win,
Bounty and Clemency to Reward and Cherish; and a just Fidelity that crowns all
the rest of the Sister-Graces, of no Value nor Estimation? Yet these and many
other Ornaments of no common Luster, (most Noble Sir) which the unblinded part
of the Kingdom saw like Celestial Diamonds made up the Constellation of Your
Gallant Soul, could not with their Harmonious Influence, charm the Serpentine
Spirit of that froward Age. -- May we be so bold to examine -- Quae causa
indigna serenos
Faedavit vultus?
What it was that re-immerg'd this unfortunate Island, when her Head began to
appear above the Deluge her own Blood had made? What it was that made You (my
Lord) who had so freely sacrificed the Life of Your Estate as well as Person,
in her Vindication, to be the Object of her foul Ingratitude, as the murmuring
against Your Power at that time, must necessarily infer. We confess (Sir) when
we think on You, and the wining Candor and attractive Sweetness of Your
Nature, we are all Wonder; but when we cast the Nature of Treason, and of those
State-Insidiaries that then lay in wait to rob us of our Peace and
Satisfaction, our Wonder cease. For it is no new thing to see Machiavil
confute St. Austin, and Modern Policy to laugh at Christian Simplicity, and the
Innocence of Obedience; though an indifferent Eye may through the Prospective
of a Rash Enterprise, see the just Fate of Phaeton and Icarus in the foolish
Undertakers. We need not trouble our Selves much in the search; It was because
we distasted Your Vice-Regencie over us; And what was the Reason of that?
Because You (my Lord) would have had us Christian Subjects, that is, so
obedient to our Religion and Laws, as not to be our own Carvers, and stain with
an Hot and Unwarranted Prosecution, what before was Ennobled with a Matchless
Innocence and Justice, our Cause and Quarrel: A Cause that a good Christian
would have gloried more to have suffered wrongfully in, then we have since
unjustly to have fought in: A Cause that History it self could not produce a
better, nor a good One so much abused. But where Ambition and Covetousness
pretend under the Veil of Piety (like the Jesuits in the Indies) the Cure of
our Distempers we may be sure to find them worse. For where were the Symptoms
of our Destruction more apparent, then in that grand Exigence of Affairs, when
Ingratitude and Disloyalty affronted CAESAR, and CAESAR's Image (for so You
were then, most Worthy Sir) aspersing the Paternal Care of the one, and the
Loyal Duty and Fidelity of the other, with the bitterest Invectives Malice
could invent, or Madness durst publish. Was not the Act of Cessation (all the
Hope we had to recruit our lost Breach and Strength) cried down as a Design
against the English Interest? Though a more probable means to preserve the
Remnant of our Brethren that had escaped, could not be found, then in the nick
of time to stop the Bloody Hands of their Powerful and Desperate Pursuers. Yet
this was the Divinity then of the raving Pulpit, but so Haeretically
Calumnious, (as it has since plainly appeared) that I might as rationally
conceive that Man mine Enemy that should interpose his Life between my Safety,
and the Fury of an Enraged Lion. Surely those shrill Trumpets of Sedition,
those Mushrome-Levites, sprung up in a Night, Matriculated, Graduated and
Ordained all in a Breath, had very much forgot themselves, when in their
Clamorous Devotions, they set forth their Condition in such pity-craving Terms,
calling Themselves a Flock of Kids, an Handful, One to a Thousand; but their
Adversaries, the Children of Anak for Proportion, and for number like the
Grasshoppers of the Field; not considering that those Allegations (if true) were
the only Motives, that induced the King to compass that Act of Accommodation.
So that next the Sin of those that made the Fire, theirs must needs be, that
kept it in with the violent Breath of Frowardness and Dissension, and prolonged
the War by obstructing those Aids that were then intended, and which (very
likely) if legally followed, had soon put a period to the Force and Heat of
that Unparalled Rebellion. But such a Preposterous and Unevangelical Zeal
(they are the Royal Martyrs own Words) as some Men were then endu'd with, could
not endure any allay of Moderation, but had rather be counted Cruel then Cold;
the Confiscation of the Irish Estates being more Beneficial then the Charity of
Saving their Lives, or Reforming their Errors. Well! They had their Will, and
the Cheat succeeded. The Kings Angelical Disposition could deny them nothing,
whom he thought Friends to Truth, and really touched with the Severity of this
Kingdoms Sufferings. The Throne shall do Homage to the Footstool, and the
Indispensable Jewels of the Crown, shall be engaged for their Satisfaction. But
what do we find to be the Fruit of this Royal Bounty? Why the very same that a
Graceless Child most commonly returns an Indulgent Parent, to grow the Worse,
the Better he is used; and to gratify his Sordid Lusts, and Unworthy Desires,
prefers the Gold and the Estate, before either the Life, or the Honor of the
Unfortunate Father. -- Mutato nomine de quibus fabula? Who more obliged then
we? Who less concerned? What Monarch (like ours) did ever divest himself of his
Prerogative, to please the humor of a peevish and unreasonable people? How
injuriously was the Sword of Justice wrested out of that hand that knew its
temper and its use, and (like the Chariot of the Sun) entrusted into those
hands, whose furious driving discovered their ineptitude and unskilfulness to
manage it. How generous was his Charity, that stripped himself to cloth a naked
Army? and how brave his recompense to have his precious life in danger to be
made the interest of his Courtesy? What did ever that sweet Lady do (whose rare
and constant virtue her very enemies admired, and whose desert they wanted
power to reward) that she must Petition for a subsistence out of her own
Fortune, and with a great deal of difficulty obtain the tithe? Wherein did ever
the hopeful Branches of your noble Family merit a deprivation of their
maintenance, whose tender years as well as inclinations, seemed to plead their
innocence before God and Man? And for a Close, what did ever your Excellency
act (while chief among us) that might disoblige the meanest person, though
scarce worth an obligation, but what the Laws of God, Nature, and Humanity have
imprinted in the heart of every man that is Master of his Reason? Where then
lies our Gratitude, or where are but our Footsteps of a real acknowledgement
of our being faulty? No (My Lord) when we once shake hands with desperation
(that is) when we have finn'd beyond Pardon and Reprieve, that reprobate Axiom
will prove current Divinity; Scelera sceleribus tuenda, too demonstrative in
that Mirror of Princes, who when he had given all He had to satisfy their
hellish Appetites, must give His Life at last, to make their Policy and Villainy
the more exquisite and complete: What else did they do (in Lieu of all the
Kindnesses they received) but assist at the Horrid Sacrifice of the Prince of
Martyrs, their Lord and Master, and (notwithstanding their seeming disrelishes
of that unpresidented Act) enthroned the Regicide, and after his death, owned
the Legal Succession of the Crown in that Poor-spirited Impostor his Son Dick,
with as much zeal and faithfulness, as a Loyal Subject would his Lawful Prince.
Now by this We may see, what Goodness, Virtue, and Honesty must expect, when
ever Treason Usurps the Chair of State. Lucerna and Piedmont may be objects of
Compassion, but it is mistaken Charity to allow Loyalty a Penny, either abroad
or at home. Though (truly) I am apt to believe they were not much more the
better for it then we; For it is a true Doctrine, though a rebellious Principle,
That he that dares break up his Masters Treasury to back his Treachery, will
not scruple much to rob the poor man's Box. Poor Ireland can witness this too
well, whose condition once would have extorted pity from the Frozen Breast of
the most Savage Scythian, though it had but little from her nearest Neighbor:
A large Relief (We know) England had designed her, but how it was disposed of,
they know best that armed the Traitor and disarmed the King. It Would ask a
longer time then a Winters tale, to particularize the several Ingredients that
Amasse our Sorrows; We may giv't in brief -- We were the Sons of Sorrow.

But now! But now! (Heaven have the Praise and Honor) We find our Filiation
transverted, the enlivening Beams of Your delightful Presence (most honored
Sir) Re-creating us the Legitimate Sons of Joy and Cheerfulness.

Since then the All-powerful Directer (whither out of Love to You, or
Compassion to Us, we will not dispute) has brought You Home again, and maugre
all the Stratagems of Hell and Darkness, has settled You in greater Honor then
ever, upon that Ground, which but a few Months ago, it had been Treason for
You, or any of Yours to have put Your Foot upon. Forget not (O Beloved and most
Welcome Sir) the greatness of the Obligation: Remember whose Hand it is, and
whose hand alone, that has once again given You to Us, and Us to You. Be as You
were ever, vere Romanus, ever Victorious, Victorious over Your Self, yet nec
victoria elatus nec infortunio dejectus. 'Twere a saucy Folly to dare to assume
the Liberty to Advise Your Grace in any thing, Your own Quick and Judicious
Eye, being able to penetrate beyond our weak Conceptions and mean Capacities.
But seeing the Greatest Emperor of the East, though in the Head of an
Invincible Army, rejected not the well-meant Intelligence of a poor Shepherds
Boy; We hope we may without Offense presume to offer a little of what we know,
to Your Graces Eye, our Design being no other but the tender Care and Love we
have of Your Graces Honor. We are then Your Humble Supplicants (most Welcome
Sir) That You would distinguish between Your Real, and Your pretended Friends:
And though the Convert may be justly deserving, yet not to think that Soul that
has had a Mischance, to be as Chaste as that, that amongst so many pressing
Temptations has kept her Virginity Pure and Immaculate. Above all, (my Gracious
Lord) we hope You will not let Loyalty, like a neglected Orphan, languish in a
Corner, or like Lazarus, find more Charity from Dogs then Men, Whilst
Rebellion Revels in her Glorious Possessions, and like Dives, pampers her Self
with the Choice Delicates of this Worlds Revenue. Nor would we have You (my
Lord) to draw the Sword and throw away the Scabberd: It Is the Traitors Maxim,
That. Throw away Clemency, and throw away one of the Most splended Jewels of
Your Nature, Fide, sed Cui, Vide. Let not the fawning Smiles, nor the
obsequious Flexures of the Man of the Times any more beguile You; nor let any
Man persuade You to the contrary, but that he that Rebels to Acquire an Estate,
will Rebel to Keep it; And that this new Way of Curing Rebellion by Rewarding
it, a contrary Way to what it was in former Times, will without Doubt tempt
itching Posterity to imitate their Forefathers. But stop awhile! I fear we
have rebelled in our Adress, and have committed Treason against the Truth. If
we have, we shall lay claim to no other Reward, but that of Pardon, and (like
the condemned Person) return our Thankfulness in our Heartiest Devotions, for
that Liberal Hand that gives it, and that Tutelary Angel that conveys it to us,
GOD SAVE THE KING! Let Him live the Joy and Wonder of the whole Earth: Let
Heaven be His Guardian to keep Him from the Hand of Violence, and let the Holy
Angels be the Attendants of His Bedchamber: Let His Fair Queen be the joyful
Mother of a Race of Princes, that the Royal Line in that Family may have no
end, but when all things must end. May Your Grace (whose Constant and Unspotted
Faith to Your Exiled Master, stands an Indelible Monument to after-Ages) have
as ample a Reward as Earth can give here, or Heaven hereafter! And may a heavy
Curse light on the ill-working Pates of those that shall ever go about to
dissolve that reunion so happily confirmed between You and Yours! May the Good
Fortune of Your Noble Ancestor, who (as our Irish Chronicles report) had the
Sun his Companion in Arms, and signal Part-Taken in that Great Battle against O
Connor, standing still three Hours, and casting such dazzling Light in the Face
of His Army, that he left his Life a Satisfaction for his Treason, and the
Conquest of his Army a special Feather in the Triumphant Plume of that
Victorious Earl, always attend You; May the Sun and Moon, the Stars in their
Courses, and all those refined Bodies that have an Influence upon us, fight
against all those that fight against You! May all that is Good, love You, and
Evil fear You! But may the KING delight in You, and You in Him, and We in You
Both! May all Enmity be laid aside, and every Blessing that shall hereafter
befall Us, bear its Date from the seven and twentieth of July, the Happy Day of
Poor IRELAND's RESTORATION.

Sic precatur FRANCIS SING.

FINIS.

