A Supply to a Draught of an ACT or SYSTEM Proposed (as is reported) by the
COMMITTEE FOR REGVLATIONS Concerning the LAW: Wherein are Provisoes against
several Inconveniences which may befall the Free-People of this Nation
thereby, unless seasonably by the Supreme Power, or otherwise prevented.

To which is added, A short Treatise of TITHES, showing their Original Rise, to
whom Due, how they have been disposed of from Age to Age; with seasonable
Proposals for the future Preservation and Advancement of Religion and Learning,
and settling a Competent Maintenance for Ministers and true Laborers therein,
for perpetual quiet of the Nation.

Published by diverse Officers and Soldiers of the Commonwealth and Army, being
the second part of their Antidote, and tendered to the same Consideration.

Printed for the use of the Commonwealth and Army, and to be sold by Tho:
Brewster at the Three-Bibles, by Paul's, 1653.

The Publishers Epistle. To all faithful in CHRIST, whom it does or may
concern.
HAving lately heard of some Propositions called The System of the Law, which
are said to be intended Preparatives to several Acts of Parliament, touching
the Regulation of the Law. We cannot but with thankfulness acknowledge the
Care and Industry of those worthy Persons who contrived the same, it containing
many good and wholesome Provisions for the future perpetual Good and Quiet of
the Nation. Nevertheless we do humbly conceive that there are some unsafe
Results (said to be) thereby offered; which (if they should be confirmed by Act
of Parliament before a further Supply of what is conceived Necessary and
Convenient to be also added) may very much tend to the prejudice and disquiet
of the People: We (having formerly as well in this kind as otherwise
contributed our weak Endeavors for general good of this Nation) knew not at
present, wherein we could give a more visible Testimony of our Affections to
the peaceable Government of the Free People here, than by offering to the
seasonable Consideration of them and the Supreme Authority, what we humbly
conceive prejudicial and inconvenient to well-Government, in Case that System
(as it is said to be now prepared) should take Effect: We therefore make bold
to offer unto public Consideration such further Provision as we humbly
conceive most fit and convenient, for Supply of what is thought to be omitted,
mistaken, or unprovided for therein (intending shortly to set forth further
Discoveries of this Nature:) To which we have added a small Treatise concerning
Tithes, with the original Rise thereof, to whom due, and how fraudulently
deteyned and exacted by Vndeservers and disposed of from Age to Age, with
Proposals for Preservation and Advancement of Religion and Learning, and future
competent Maintenance of the Ministers and the true Laborers therein (being
Necessary for general Quietness;) and for Redress of some Inconveniences
relating thereunto that have formerly befallen this Nation, hoping that
something may therein appear to the Supreme Governors worthy of Consideration
and acceptance for Public good; which is the real Desire and Endeavors of,

E.L. T.P. H.W. S.G. etc.

A Supply to an ACT Desired to be Proposed (as is reported) by the COMMITTEE
FOR REGVLATIONS Concerning the LAW.
IT being reported, That some persons have proposed in writing, or otherwise,
or have such intent, several things which may tend to inconveniences, if
needful provisions be not in the same.

One of them being, (as is said) That no Arrest shall be before Summons,
without any provisio^ either by speedy Arrest, or Restraint of any sculking
persons, Out-lyers, or Fugitives, from going out of this Nation; or lying
hidden, or obscuring of themselves, or giving out that they will, or running,
or going about to run away, after they have gotten great Estates or sums of
moneys into their hands, by flatteries and feigned machinations, and
inventions, on a sudden, and so dasling the eyes of many Conscientious people,
which (if so should take effect) is to be feared, will be to the great loss of
many, and undoing of diverse of them, by many of such, which will have suddenly
away to Amsterdam, Constantinople, the East or West Indies, and never come
again to make any satisfaction to any of their Creditors; or give recompense to
any of those, which they have defrauded: but for any way of prevention of such
inconveniences or mischiefs, we forbear to write, being (as we conceive)
sufficient has long since been published for that purpose.

Another of them (as is said) is, for putting the Laws of this Nation against
Drunkenness in strict execution; (which as said is very well done) to which is
wished might be added, That none might drink Healths to each other; which is
very like would prevent much Excess in that way: such doings being thought one
of the principal causes of the fall of the African Churches; which loathsome
and odious sin, was much cried out against by St. Augustine Bishop of Hyppo, in
his time.

Another of which (as is also said) is, That no person shall be arrested,
attached, molested, or troubled by any Original, or other Writ or Process
thereupon issuing, without any provision for declaring or proceeding in
Actions, which are necessary to be joint against such as shall or may be
compelled to appear, with such of them as be or shall be Fugitives, or obscure
persons, and cannot suddenly be found to be proceeded against, with the other,
and some of them not in a long time; whereof (it is hoped) serious
Consideration will be had by the honorable Commissioners, or Committee for
consideration of the regulating of the proceedings in the Law, that no just
cause or suit may be lost for want of such provision.

Two other good things (as is said) be also proposed, (that is to say) no more
collateral warranties may prevail to bar the Nephew or the Niece, and that no
Occupancy, or Entry (by any stranger or other than the Heir of the Lessee)
shall be concerning, into, or upon any Lands or Tenements, after the decease of
him who was thereof seized during the life of an other, and dyed so thereof
seized; together with which we could wish might be taken into consideration,
whether or not it be necessary that the Statute of limitations of Entry should
as well extend to the bringing of writs of Entries, Assize, Formedons, Ayle,
Besayl, etc. and the taking away trials by wagers of Battle, which is
conceived to savor so much of Heathenism as trials by ordeyl, or the custom
of Villenage although not so obsolete) but sometime have been put in practice
in these modern times; and of wagers in Law, which many know do much hurt.

Another of them (as is said) is, That no matter to be proved, or given in
evidence, shall be avaylable, unless it appear to be proved to be within
thirty days next before or after the time laid in the Declaration, or to the
same, such, or the like effect; which is conceived to be too short a time of
limitation for such purpose; for if the matter come in question within a year,
it is thought difficult for any ordinary man to tie his remembrance within such
time, much less after 4, 5, or 6 years or more, which often may fall out in
such case; but it is conceived, that within the limitation of half a years time
it may be remembered by such, and very well by many, having regard to the
seasons of the year (that is to say) temperature, heat or cold within such
times, or some remarkable thing happening.

Another of them is reported to be, that no writ of Error hereafter shall be
brought, or to such effect; which if it happen, to what infinits would appeals
come (if any shall be) and how then should matters of error in fact be tried?
Is it not (as a^tiently has been) convenient, that it should be tried in the
Country, where the cause did arise? and amongst others by some of the
Hundredors there? and if the cause of challenge in such case should be taken
away, many may imagine what inconvenience may happen; for in ancient times
Hundredors were accounted all honest according to those times, and none others
suffered by the residue of the Hundredors to remain or abide there; nor any
stranger at all permitted to come to reside there, without putting into the
same Hundred pledges of some of the inhabitants thereof.

And as concerning writs of Errors when that ready drawn come out, (it is not
doubted but) it, will appear that (if it be a effected) there will be seldom
any cause of bringing many writts of Errors, or Appeals, but that very few may
serve for that purpose.

An other of them being reported to be, that if any person (who does not sue in
form of poverty) be adjudged to pay costs, in any cause, the same shall be
paid by the Attorney in the suit, if such Plaintiff cannot be found in the
Commonwealth.

This (is feared) will be another occasion in putting off all of ability in
estate, experience or Judgment, from being Attorney.

And that thereby few or no pledges will be found other than the imaginary
names of John Do, and Richard Roe, if the Plaintiff be not enforced upon
commencing his suit to find better, as by the ancient law of this nation he
ought.

Another of them is said to be, that after issue joined, the same shall be
tried that day sevennight in the place where the same is tryable, if the Judges
shall be then and there sitting, otherwise at their next sitting in such place
after those seven days, at the request or prosecution of either the plaintiff
or Defendant, or to the same, such, or the like effect.

And in others also (is said to be) that Judges without consent of parties,
shall not defer any trial above 15 days longer than seven days after Issue
joined: And that only for some just cause to appear to the Court upon oath, and
upon payment of such costs to the adverse party, as he shall make appear by
oath, he is or shall be put to by reason of such delay, before any longer time
be granted.

If these two should be observed how will Plaintiffs or Defendants, which have
witnesses in several or many places fadistant from the place of trial, speed?
Or can it any otherwise be imagined, but that he, she, or they, which cannot
prove their Declaration, Plea, or Issue, without such witnesses to be brought
from several places, shall unavoidably be triced, and injured, it being
impossible to have them brought to such places of trial in so short time?

Some others of them being (as is also said) (for Forms of Declarations in a
short manner as follows, or to such or the like effect) one, that a president
is contrived in an action upon a promise, only reciting that M. SS. the
Plaintiff complains against the Defendant for not paying (...) pounds,
according to his promise, being so much indebted to him, the (...) day of (...)
to his damage of (...) If this should go so, how can the Defendant imagine
what promise or consideration, or debt, the Plaintiff will insist upon at the
Trial? Be not some promises made without any lawful consideration, and many
promises made that do not amount to any debt, nay not so much as to be demanded
by the Plaintiff, until some Act be performed on his part? And may not many
promises be made for debts, duties or demands, which may be honestly satisfied
by the Defendant, and so by him proved, if he knew what would be stood upon at
the Trial? And will not many Defendants in such cases be triced, and others of
them constrained to produce Multitudes of Witnesses to Trials at their great
Costs, trouble and charges, to prove multiplicity of Matter?

Another that M. SS. the Plaintiff complains against the Defendant for
trespassing him the (...) day of (...) in Close called (...) at (...) to his
damage of (...) without expressing, whether by walking with feet, or with
cattle, or digging, cutting, lopping or topping: which is like more to puzzle
the Defendant, than to lay it so uncertain, that the Defendant must be
constrained to put in a common Bar, to enforce the Plaintiff to a new
Assignment of the place in certain: and further, by such courses the Defendant
is like to be put to such other Inconveniences, as before is mentioned.

Another M. SS. A. B. complains of C. D. for not delivering him (...)
quarters of Malt, which the (...) day of (...) he promised for Corn to
deliver, to his damage of (...) without mentioning when the Malt should be, or
when the Barley was delivered: which leaves the Defendant to such uncertainty,
that he cannot tell how conveniently to defend himself at the Trial.

Another H.SS. A. B. complains of C. D, of (...) (...) for not paying 20 l.
debt, and 5 l. damages, which is due from him by Bond dated the (...) day of
(...) to his damage of (...) for not paying it, without reciting to whom it
should be paid, or the Bond to be produced into Court, whereby neither the
Defendant nor his Clerk, or Attorney, can see whether his name be thereunto
subscribed or not, nor what witness did or have subscribed thereunto their
names as witnesses, or to see whether or not their names be counterfeit; or the
wax new or old according to antiquity of the Bond; or whether or not the seal
be counterfeit (such wicked courses having been more frequent of late years
than formerly) and many beggarly persons more expert, and dishonestly bent to
act such things than in those times; many being so cunning at that work, that a
man cannot know his name so counterfeited from his own hand writing, without
diligent care, and long viewing and comparing, and consideration had of other
circumstances. And besides the Defendant cannot come to the sight of the
condition of the Bond, that he may see whether it be performed or not: which
things cannot be conveniently done at the trial, there being always little
time to perform any such thing; whereby the poor Defendant is like to be as
much perplexed as before is mentioned.

Another for breach of Covenants, only setting down the Breach, and the date of
the Indenture, but not wha^ the Covenants are, whereby the Defendant is left in
the same case, as before is mentioned, and besides most commonly a Defendants
takes no counterpart of Covenants: and likewise the breach may be of covenants
in a Deed Poll, whereof no counterpart uses to be made, and thereby how can a
Defendant defend himself against a thing falling upon him from a place out of
his sight?

Another L.SS. A. complains of B. for that A. being a tradesman, the said B.
the (...) day of (...) spoke these false and scandalous words of him (that is
to say) A is a Bankrupt, to his damage of (...) without mentioning of what
trade the Plaintiff is, or upon what occasion the words were spoken, that the
Defendant may be provided to bring his witnesses (if he have any) to
counterprove the trade if certainly laid, as well as the manner and occasion of
speaking of the words, in which the Defendant will receive prejudice if the
Declaration should be so generally laid, and be put upon diverse
inconveniences as before is mentioned, for he may be a tradesman and yet
neither buy nor sell, or at least not buy upon trust, which few handicrafts men
do to any considerable value, and the words may bear actions, by reason of many
circumstances, without which they would not lay. Other Presidents, (is said)
there be so proposed (the observing of which may tend to much intricacy) but
very few, not near so many as will be necessary to be used, for which there be
very good old Precedents; in which most (as is conceived) is necessary and
little surplusage in them; and besides many actions upon the Case; be new
Precedents, and diverse others, for which no Precedents can be contrived before
they happen; so that upon the whole matter, the old way and course concerning
these things, is conceived to be the best; but with this, that if any shall put
any apparent unnecessary surplusage in any Declaration, Bill, or Pleading, he
shall be allowed nothing for such matter. And if no other forms should be, but
such as is so proposed (as is said) shall not the Defendant then be as a man
alone, brought, sent, put, or left, without Arms or Ammunition in the field, to
fight with, or defend himself against another armed with several sorts of
weapons and company?

Another of them (as is given out) being that no Attorney should be admitted to
appear for any person, until oath be made of serving of a summons, unless he
make oath before the chief Clerk that he had order from his Client to appear,
and produce a warrant to the chief Clerk under the hand and seal of the Client.

Nor shall any Attorney confess Judgment in any cause, and if the Attorney
shall appear without Warrant from his Client, or confess Judgment against his
Client, to suffer punishment.

And if it should be enacted in such manner, without any further provision or
limitation, together with laying aside all penalties (which is hoped is not
intended, though it is said it is proposed) then would there be four times as
many Trials as formerly usually there have been, (about six Judgments being
usually entered to one Trial, wherein neither party to the Suit have been at
Charges of Counsel, as they usually are at Trials and Enquests of Office)
which is doubted will continue the charges in Suits at Law as high as formerly,
if not increase the same; but there being so much already written, and long
since published in print abroad concerning these things; And examination of
Witnesses; For prevention of perjuries, and excessive charges in Trials, and
abatement thereof; For sale of Distresses taken for Rent; For enlarging the
Statute for tender of Emends for Trespasses, and that it may be in Replevins
after Cattle in Pound, and for goods and chattels after the same taken into
custody with damages and costs to the time of such Tender; And of Motions and
Orders; Undue Courses of Jurymen by receiving Rewards; For procuring speedy
appearances at small Charges; Prevention of Arrests without cause; For Relief
of Creditors against wilful prisoners, and poor prisoners against merciless
Aversaries Excessive Charges by Bills and Answers, etc. Frauds by Monopolizing
Officers and Attorneys; For an easy way without charge to either party,
Electing or to be Elelected, and without favor, or affection, or fear of any
person for election of future Parliaments or Representatives; Relief of honest
Executors and Administrators, against payments of Debts and Demands out of
their own Estates due from Testators and Intestats, more than the value of the
Goods or Chattels, of the Testate and Intestate, which shall come to their
hands, and of Debts not due, and of Creditors against dishonest and fraudulent
Executors and Administrators; For preservation of Shipping from wilful
destruction by deceitful persons, to defraud Purchasers and Creditors of their
Ships; For compelling of Defendants speedily to answer, when the Plaintiffs
Witnesses be sick, or going beyond the Seas, and such Witnesses immediately to
be examined; for speedy appearance upon serving Writs or Warrants in Chancery,
or to have Decrees within a short time for Default thereof; For enabling a
Conusor or Plaintiff in a Judgment or Statute (if he will) to make his Entry
and Claim, and then bring his Action for Recovery thereof, which he is driven
to after with much Trouble and Charge about Executions concerning the same; And
for Recording and Registring of Deeds and Conveyances, Judgments, Statutes,
and other Incombrances upon Lands and Tenements, For prevention of Frauds and
Deceits in Sales, and quieting of possession of Purchasers, And for enabling
Creditors to have the benefit of Coppyhold and Intayled Lands and Tenements for
their satisfaction, as far as may be conveyed by Surrender, or cut off by Fine
or Common Recovery, And of all Chattals Real as well as Personal, it is
forborne further to write of or concerning those things.

And as concerning the necessary continuance of Writs of Error in some cases,
(which (as is also said) is proposed to be taken away) which if it should
happen is doubted will be an occasion of Appeals (if any shall be) to run to
Infinites, in such manner, that it will be impossible to have any considerable
number of any Appeals to come to a period by that time (as is given out) is
proposed concerning the same, but that the same rather will remain several
years undetermined.

And as concerning diverse other things necessary to be taken into consideration
(they being ready written to be published in convenient time) it is forborne
further to mention any of them.

Another (as is also said) is to the effect, That Distresses taken for live
goods preserved by the space of ten days, and not replevied, and of dead goods
not replevied in 15 days, may be sold, which shall be in this manner, (that is
to say) The party distraining, or some on his behalf, shall acquaint the
Sheriff therewith, who shall at a Court, etc. cause twelve persons to be sworn
to deal uprightly touching the apprizement of those goods, and giving the
parties who distrained them just satisfaction out of the value of them
according to their best skill and judgment; And the parties so sworn shall
thereupon make apprizement of the goods, and likewise set what is due to the
party who distreined them, with his damages and full costs, and the charges of
the following of the Distress.

And the Sheriff shall thereupon sell the goods, and by the price pay the party
distreyning his full debt, damages, and charges so found by the Jury; (if the
value will extend thereunto) and if there be a surplusage, to restore it to the
owner of the goods, all but his own Fee, which he is to retain, and shall in a
Court cause the apprizement and distribution of the money to be entered: And
these proceedings to be final, without further question to be had in Law or
Equity.

But may not there be Error, or cause of Attaint, or an Appeal in this, as well
as in any other cause, although the first part of this is like to be a very
good course? And in such case it is just, that relief in some way should be to
the party grieved.

And another of them (as is also reported) is, That an Assignee of a Debt after
Entree of it in the Registree shall be enabled to sue for it in his own name.

But yet it is hoped that such Proviso will be made, that no unlawful
maintenance may be introduced, whereby any may be deprived of any just Debt, or
the Debtor thereby disabled to satisfy his former real Debts. And that the
Debtor may first pay off all he owes upon matter of record appearing to be
due, or entered in the Registry, etc. before any such Assignme^t shall be
available. And that such Assignment, if it shall after appear to be fraudulent,
or for a feigned Debt, or upon any matter fraudulently devised, shall not be
available against any Creditor, for good or valuable consideration.

Another of them is given out to be, That an Executor or Administrator may pay
a Debt without specialty, due by the Testator or Intestat, before any other
Debts upon specialty, or upon Judgment, Statute, or other matter of Record, to
the Commonwealth, or to any other person, (if the Executor or Administrator
shall not have notice of such other Debts.)

Without any proviso, or limitation of time, after the death of the Testator or
Intestat, to give such notice, of which it is hoped that due consideration will
be had that the Testator or Intestat (continuing a wicked, avaritious, or a
Heathenish, or Atheistical life, and condition.) Diverse before alteration of
their Wills or Testaments, and many of them before the making of any, (being
too many) may not contract fraudulent or feigned Debts in such secret manner
that it cannot be discovered (which has been too frequently used) and thereby
many defrauded of their just Debts and Demands; or that notice may be in such
like case in like manner as has been written, and lately published in print.

Another of them (as is said) is, That if any shall send a Challenge or Duel
to any, and he accept it both of them to suffer death, the one for sending, the
other for accepting, and the Messenger to lose his hand: A doubt in this may be
of occasioning Assassinations by the parties which shall so send such Challenge.

Another of them (as is said) being, For erecting of new Courts of Record and
Judicature in all Counties of this Nation, consisting of five Judges in every
of the same (whereof one of them at least to be a Counselor at Law) without
respect of the greatness of some, and smallness of others of those Counties;
or of the multitude of People in some of them, and the paucity in others of the
same; And that Judges shall be tied to often sitting without adjournment above
(...) times in the year, and not above one week at a time; which course its
feared will be very chargeable, and little amend the former chargeablenesse of
the proceedings in the Law; for it is like, that no Counselor will be willing to
neglect, forbear, or forsake, all his practice during the time of three years
together, (which he must do if he be and sit as a Judge) without good allowance
or salary; And how then can any council be found to be Judge? and is it not
convenient that Council be versed in the Practick part, as well as the I
heorick of the Law, before he can be able council to be a Judge? and will any
other Gentleman in any County undergo such trouble and charges (which they
necessarily must do if put upon such employment, and forbear the most part of
their domestic and necessary affairs during that time) without some
recompense, and not altogether to be at their own charges; as Justices of Peace
which are not tied to such care, duty, and attendance, in such troublesome and
chargeable manner by many degrees?

Another of them being, (as is said) That no Attorney shall take above 6 s 6 d.
for suing out the first Writ, drawing, copying, and engrossing the Declaration,
including the fee for the Plaintiff. And the like for Appearing, putting in a
Plea either General or Special, Copy of it, and the fee for the Defendants
Attorney 3 s. 6 d. at a Trial, or Writ of Inquiry, and the like for
prosecuting and suing out the first Execution. And that no Attorney shall
receive any fees exceeding 10 s. in any one cause, besides the forementioned,
and some other small matters, or to such effect, and yet shall continue and use
his best endeavors to bring the Cause to a speedy end, or otherwise shall
restore all the fees which he shall receive.

In which, if it be meant until the money be paid, or satisfaction given to the
party, much inconvenience may be, for the Declaration may fall out to be
special upon some contingent occasion, for which no precedent has been, and it
may be necessary that many long recitalls of several Deeds, Escripts,
Minuments, and writings, parcels and particulars of goods, and sums of money,
accounts, and several times, and places of acting diverse things, which will
require two days time of study, writing, and pains about many of them, and
necessarily may be very long, many of them 40 or 50 sheets of paper, and some
of them more; and the like concerning special pleadings. And if some short
forms of pleading (as is said be proposed) should be only used (of which herein
more is written) then it is thought necessary to set down and express in
writing, what matters only shall be insisted upon to be proved, or given i^
evidence at the Trial, and a copy thereof to be delivered to the adverse
party, or his Attorney, a convenient time before the Trial, to consider of
drawing up bills of Exceptions, Demurring upon Evidence, or praying a special
Verdict, otherwise the poor Defendant may be triced and deprived of his just
defense, when his cause is good, and be overthrown against all right and
reason: and is not this as convenient to be done, and put into writing, as upon
General issues pleaded according to the new Act (which as is reported is
proposed with a prescription of how many things only shall be insisted upon at
the trial, which is thought to be very well done?) And w^ll it not be as
convenient, or much more, to have the body of the Declaration according to the
old ancient Forms or Precedents, contrived at first by very learned,
judicious, and conscientious men, at the request or appointment of our
^ncestors, for the quiet of themselves in their times, and us their posterity
after them, in avoiding of vexatious, unnecessary, troublesome, trivilous, and
chargeable suits, which is conceived by many are more like to increase than
abate, if those laudable Forms or Precedents should be laid aside? And will it
not be as chargeable to have such things put into writing at last, as at the
first? And will not the Defendant have the better time to defend himself if
done at the first? and will it not thereby be discerned, whether the cause be
good or not, and save much charge before it proceed, and many frivolous and
unjust suits then die in the breeding, and thereby Suitors have the better
content? And if the matter should be put off to the last, before it should be
put into writing (that is to say) until a Demurrer upon the Evidence, the
finding of a special Verdict, or Bill of Exception, will or can any be found
or heard of after a small number of years to do or draw the same? And will not
then Learning, Knowledge, and ludgement in the Law be at, or fall to a very low
ebb?

And will not then many Suitors be much prejudiced or wronged by reason of many
of their just Causes going against them, contrary to all right and reason?

And will not that endanger such things as here in another place is mentioned?

And if a stranger should have a Cause Tried and go against him, would it not
be a better satisfaction to him and his Countrymen (to whom he should show his
Cause) to see the Cause appear in writing, that they may know the justness of
the passing, finding, and judging the Cause against him; than to have the
matter stood upon, to be blown away, or vanish in the Air, or be as obscure and
mystical to him, or any of his Countrymen, as if it were in the Clouds, and be
an occasion of suspicion in them of some unjust carriage in the business? And
what danger such obscurity may be to the alienating of the affections of
Strangers to the people here, many make doubt.

And as for having such to be Clerks or Attorneyes in the Innes of Court, or
Chancery, as many have been (and as is said is proposed should be, and none
other) how can such be expected hereafter? will any be at the charge to train
up their Sons that way? or will any bend his study to that (which is most
difficult, and troublesome, and chargeable, and so difficult, that few who have
long studied in the same have attained to any considerable perfection,
knowledge or judgment therein) And none can be good Clerks in the Law without
it, or any Attorney considerable; by which after he shall perceive that he
shall not be allowed to live, or so much as be recompensed for his pains in any
considerable manner, no not so much as a Cobbler or Porter in their ways, and
yet to be censured in their reputations, as to have been as bad as if some of
them had acted such things, for which ignominious penalty (as is reported) is
proposed to be imposed, and for such things as were never heretofore done, to
the discouragement of Clerkship and all manner of learning? And how can it be
imagined, that any such should subsist in these times, if he must not take so
much, nay not half so much as in ancient times, when they might have had better
Diet by the Week for 2 s. and 6. d. than for 10 s. in these Times, for studying
contriving, and drawing of pleadings, that is to say, Bills, Declarations,
Answers, Pleas, Special Writs, Special Verdicts, Bills of Exceptions,
Demurrers upon Evidence, etc? about the studying and contriving of many of
which (to do the same aright) the time of a day or two, or more, may be
required, and yet the Declaration when done very short, not above one, two, or
three sheets of paper, although some of the same may be very long, as herein is
mentioned in another place: which trencheth most concerning Special pleadings,
for which some Council and Clerks have deserved sometimes 5 li. when as others
have not deserved 5 sh. Which things proposed (if they should take effect,) is
feared will be an occasion of the perishing of causes, which shall happen to be
difficult, being most commonly concerning weighty affairs, and causes of great
value; for few or none will undertake to meddle with them, when they shall
perceive that they shall not be paid near to the worth of their pains. But in
easy and petry Causes it is like to fall out that many will have great gains,
and more than formerly, for doing little.

And if some Proposals take effect (given out to be proposed concerning
Paupers) are not Counselors and Attorneys like to be troubled with many more
Suits in form of poverty hereafter, than formerly they were? which will take up
much of their employment.

And are not Attorneys like to have much more trouble, turmoyl, and travel in
difficult cases, which are like to be put off from Trial, one day appointed
after another, by reason no Provision is made for examination of Witnesses
dwelling or residing in places far distant from the places of Trial* For which,
if provision were made according to some Propositions formerly published in
Print, great quiet would be in this Nation, and Trials abated, Perjuries
seldom committed, and Verdicts found, and Judgment given to the content of
most, and at small charges: And yet such Attorney, unless he be (as it were) a
slave to his Client, must restore all the money which he received (as is given
out is proposed) which is like will cause all Attorneys of ability to be weary
of, and forsake their practice in a short time, and leave the employment about
such things off, to such as will deal as bad as Monopolizing Attorneys that
have bought their places, or crept into the same by Gratuities or Rewards have
done, in betraying their Clients causes by reason of bribes, or Gratuities
received of, or from the adverse party; which they frequently have practiced:
For if such Monopolizing Attorneys be not waited or attended upon by the Suter,
their Solicitors Friends or Servants, they usually permit good causes to
perish, and seldom or never have used to send to their Clients for to come to
them, or send instructions to prevent any danger: so that upon the whole matter
it may easily be perceived by any that look into, or inquire after the dealing
of Monopolizing Attorneys, that they are not only mere useless, but
burdensome and mischievous in a Common wealth, as bad as Mise in a Barn, and
if such should be in the new erected Courts (as some have said is proposed,
others the contrary) as be in corporation Courts, they must be attended upon by
the Suitors, their Servants, Friends, or Solicitors; which would better serve
for that purpose, without any Monopolizing Attorneys; but that all Attorneys in
private men's causes, may be in general, and at large, in all Corporations and
Courts of record, as by Law they anciently have, and now of right may, until
they were injuriously hindered, debarred, and interrupted by buyers and sellers
of attorneys places contrary to Law; for the Judges of the superior Courts at
Westminster, never debar any of ability of Attorneys in the Inferior Courts, to
practice in the Superior, (such Judges knowing the Law) but the ignorant Judges
of inferior Courts have been usually wrought upon by Monopolizers for rewards,
to debar and exclude the learned and able Clerks, and Attorneys, from
practicing in the inferior Courts, which has been the occasion of buying and
selling men in such inferior Courts, and if such courses should continue, would
they not then multiply? and if people see that they cannot have Justice and
Right, may it not be feared that they will go to Cutting and Slashing? And then
how can it be expected, that after a small number of years, any Attorneys of
understanding or ability are to be found, or heard of? And must not then all
Suitors go first to Counselors to have their Advice to their Causes stated in
writing? Or can it be expected, that any Counsel will give his Advice (without
the Case be so stated; or draw into writing any thing at all, where much pains
is required) when he must take nothing for it? And who shall state such Case
into writing if the Suter be not of Knowledge, and Ability sufficient of
himself to do it, when no Clerk or Attorney can be found to do the same? And if
any Such should be found, how can it be imagined that he will do any such
thing, if he may not be suffered to take any thing for it? and is not the
Profession of a Clerk most troublesome of any, and greatest Trust and Care to
be had therein? and of the Attorney nearest to it in that respect, and of the
honest, learned, and painful Council next? and yet do not favorite Counsel,
by favor of, and combination, and sharing with -- take much for doing little,
and sometimes nothing at all, or no Good at all for, but mischief to their
Clients, and have they not many times taken great Fees, and done nothing for
the same, but deceived their Clients? And when that such Clients have gone to
such Council for their money again, have not such Counsel put them off and
sent them to their Attorney, saying that they would speak with him about it?
and durst any such Atrorney go to any such Counsel, upon any such occasion?
And has it not been usual with such favorite Council to find fault with any
Declaration or Pleading at Trialls and Assizes, in which they have not had
their fees nor meddled with at first, and endeavored to put their Client off
after they have received Fees there, and very high, until another day of
Trial or Assizes, and yet detain those Fees, when such Declaration and
Pleading, has been drawn and penned, well and better, and by far better
Counsel than such Favourit, and is it not generally thought that such Favorite
Council so use to do for their own only lucre, prejudicial to their Clients,
and have they not prevailed with many Clients, and effected their purposes
therein?

And have not honest Council, Clerks, and Attorney, when there has been only
jealousy, suspicion, or report of dishonesty in them (though without cause or
feigned) been scandalized and clouded for some time? And have not Ambodextry,
etc. been connived at in some other Sorts (those thereby grieved and some
others knowing thereof, not daring to call them in Question by reason of (...)?)

And will not such Suitors as be of Knowledge and Judgment (being avaritious,
cunning, and subtle, and unconscionably, and deceiptfully bent) undo,
grievously oppress and vex other quiet People deficient in those qualities, in
wringing many of their Estates from them without any just cause? And will not
People then be constrained to follow their Suits in their proper persons, or by
their Domestic and Meniall Servants, Neighbors, or Friends? And will not then
many good Counsel forbear pleading or speaking at Trials and Hearings? etc.
And will not then such cunning Suitors plead their own Causes, and wrangle and
scould out honest and plain-dealing and meaning men, and such Council as then
will be had, out of many a good Cause? And will it not cause great trouble and
charges to Suitors? And will not ignorant people then run headlong in unjust,
intricate, and frivolous Suits (like a blind horse running his head against
every Post, Wall, or other thing in his way, and many times into a River or
Ditch?)

Another (as is given out) is, That no Sergeant at, or Council of Law, shall
take or accept any thing of any Client but only as follows (that is to say)
for subscribing his Opinion to a Case stated in writing, or for speaking at a
Trial, or for making a Motion, ten shillings; for arguing a Demurrer or
speaking at a Cause in Hearing in Chancery, twenty shillings.

And where can Learned or Judicious Council or Sergeants at Law be obtained at
such low rates, and will continue their parctise?

And after the departure of those which be now of such; when will any other of
the like be hereafter?

Can any Imagine that any will be at the charge or trouble of such hard study to
gain his living by practice, when sometimes he must wait, as is formerly
proposed and published, before he can be heard a Motion?

And can any learned Council afford for twenty shillings to study and draw in
writing an Argument in Law, about which many times they have been a month, and
sometimes more?

And why should any be at the trouble of drawing or perusing, or amending of
any Bill, Declaration, or Pleading in Law, of great length, and subscribing it,
and be allowed but ten shillings for so doing? or drawing of Breviats of the
like kind, and be allowed nothing for so doing, though they have been a whole
or several days about it? Is it not the best, most conscionable, and equitable
way, that without penalty, by Council, Clerk, or Attorney, they may take
according to their Desert, or as much as the Client will willingly give,
according as by the laudable Custom approved by our Ancestors for several
ages they have used? And have not such as have transgressed therein undergone
the penalty as Extortioners, and been prosecuted? And is there not sufficient
provision in the Law already in force and use for it?

And it is thought the more necessary and convenient, that this old way, the
true Labourer to have his just hire, convenient to continue for the
preservation of Learning, which otherwise will decay, and the way of true
instruction of People in the Christian Religion, and the Law fall, and with it
(which God forbid) the quiet of this Nation, (which is doubted) will endanger
the ruin and destruction of the People here.

And if Council should be so restrained, would it not be an Occasion of the
neglect of Learning and Study, and yet to do as some ignorant Lawyers, or
Advocates do in the Country, where small Fees be allowed, in minding nothing,
but contriving their own Gain, and not at all regarding their Clients good, in
taking such small Fees for every single Question, and another such Fee for the
same, if they forget the Resolution of such Councellor or Advocat in going out
of his door, and returning again to ask of him the same Question? And how long
together have any Nation where any such usage has, or Self seeking men only
have been (governing by Laws made on a sudden) continued in Quiet? And if
Physicians should be so limited and constrained, would they regard their
Patients, or leave them to beggarly Mountebank and Quacksalvers to perish under
them?

And if Counselors, Attorneys, and Clerks, should (as anciently in the times
of our Ancestors) receive according to their Deserts, as (after all such
unlawful combinations and practices in Monopolizers abolished) they have used
(many of them having deserved five pounds when others not five shillings, and
yet have took much more for doing little, than the best Deserving have done for
doing much) Then would not all manner of Learned and Judicious Practisers,
which attained to considerable Learning and Judgment in the Law (few or none of
which have been heard of to be other than Honest, or any Dishonest to bend
their minds in studying for any such thing; for if those of such Profession,
according to their respective Numbers, should not be (as they have been) more
honest than any Professions of like Number, they would soon be found out, and
by many Degrees sooner than any other of any other Profession, and be accounted
the worst of Men) as formerly, willingly give Advice to some Clients (that is
to say, such as have formerly gratified them according to their Deserts)
without any Fee, Gratuity, or Reward whatsoever, asking, or accepting if
tendered?

And have not such learned and judicious Practizers almost always done so,
when it has not been like that the Client should have any Benefit in those
things for which they have asked Advise? And will not such Counsel, Clerks and
Attorneys thereby grow and proceed to be expert in the Law, as formerly, and be
a means of preservation of the Ancient Laws of this Nation, being grounded at
the first upon the Old and New Testaments? according to the Direction of Papa
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, to noble King Lucius of this Nation of Britain, and
first Christian King in the World, in his Christian Epistle (in answer to the
Message sent by King Lucius to him for the Roman Laws to govern the people of
this Nation by) putting him in mind that when he was at Rome (where he was
trained up in the Christian Religion during his youth, among the Christians of
the Primitive Church, in the second Century after the passion of our Savior)
with his Christian Brethren there, he received the Old and New Testaments;
advising him, that out of the same he and his People would take a Law to Govern
by: intimating to him that thereby he should govern well, and that so long as
he should govern well he was K. otherwise cease to be King. And after continued
accordingly in the time of Constantine the Great, a Native and King of this
Nation, and first Christian Emperor in the World; the Grounds of which Laws
have ever since continued by Custom according to the Word of God, and so long
always accounted good, but otherwise not good, and so adjudged from time to
time: And when anciently any thing has appeared to the Great Counsel here in
their judgeme^ts (according to the Light which they had in those times) to be
introduced into the Laws, contrary to, or dissenting from the Word of God, the
same has been abolished and rejected, and the Laws, according to their
Abilities, amended and reformed from time to time, and all things savouring of
Heathenism rejected, and not all our Laws abrogated and laid aside, and New
made on a sudden, which neither could nor can be suitable to the well being of
this Nation in many years. And to alter or change Fundamental Laws here, on a
sudden (excelling others, before corruptions crept in) may be dangerous to this
Nation, which has so long been well governed in Peace and Quiet beyond other
Nations; may bring the People here to the same Condition as others, and subject
to the same Calamity, and as much threatened to Ruin as Others, and therefore
is it not convenient that the ancient and main Fundamentals of the Laws of
this Nation agreeable to the Word of God may be preserved, and those things
thereunto dissenting abrogated, to continue the same not only from being a
Scandal, but that the same may be a Precedent to other Nations for their and
our Union, for a perpetual Peace and quiet living of them and us in Amity, for
their and our preservation in the Christian Religion against all Opposers
whatsoever? For effecting whereof (omitting all which may stop, stay, smother
or bury in obscurity any good things) hope is in the honorable the Committee
of this present Parliament for consideration of the Proceedings in the Law,
etc. to perfect (after serious consideration and mature Deliberation had of
things proposed in their Judgment necessary to be Enacted) before they present
the same (with their many good things which (as is said) they have in
readiness) to the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of England
(being few things new invented can be perfect at the first) that the same may
remain as a Memorial until the coming of our Savior Christ in Glory.

And that as this Nation has been honored with the first Christian King and
Emperor in the World, so it may with the true and purest Reformation of
Christian Religion, and most quiet Government.

A short Tract of TITHES, To whom Due, etc*
IN the Infancy of the Church after the Passion of our Savior, till about the
end of the lives of the Disciples and Apostles, all things were common among
some But that was only voluntary in times of great Tribulation of Christians,
when they close adhered to the Apostles for advice and protection, and there is
no Command for the continuance thereof, neither ought the same to be drawn into
Example for any such purpose; since Christians have had the Government among
themselves, and not under Heathenish Persecution: yet many unstable people in
this Nation would have the same here put in practice, which convenient that
those, who affect such practice, should collect themselves together, and repair
to some unpeopled place fit for Plantation (of which there be sufficient in
Number, and Goodness of Soil in many places, and to try their Conclusions
there, that People may see whether or not any good will come of such doings)
and not to trouble, and perplex, and put the Nation here into a confusion; to
which end, it is doubted many malevolent persons to the People here have set
diverse giddy people at work, and those malevolent persons are thought most fit
to be sent, to or with such giddy People, Ranters, or Lubber-Landers into their
Settlement and Government in their new Utopia, or Lubber-Land. For there be too
many here already who (some through envy, others by sottishness) have
obstructed the best Improvement of Lands and Grounds, by hindering necessary
Enclosure for that purpose; whereby in some Counties a third, in others a half
part of the benefit of Lands has been hindered, and fewer People maintained,
to the great prejudice of many, and in some measure to such envious and other
Obstructors, which every Honest and Experienced man well knows, and others
(who please) may well be informed of the Incoveniency thereof, by the Books
concerning Husbandry writ by Mr. W. Blyth, and others before,
Christians, And in those times of the Infancy of the Church, had the Pastors,
Ministers, Teachers, Preachers, and other Officers of the Church, and also the
Poor of those, as good allowance as in those times could be afforded; and then
no need was for the payment of any sort of Tithes, where such Usage was. And in
the first three Centuries next following no Tithes were paid, but the Pastors,
Teachers, Ministers, and Poor, maintained by Voluntary Contribution, (which
cannot be denied by any who have been in any considerable manner read in
Ecclesiastical History) nor by many for several Centuries after; Neither when
such who have consented to the payment of the same, and they or others denied
further to pay them; had they (who claimed them) any remedy for recovery or
obtaining of the same, but only have frighted simple People with threars of the
Curse of Bell, Book and Candle, to pay Tithes; Nor ever had the Priests any
strong Obligation to bind any to such payment to any particular Priest, but
that they might pay the same to any Priest; until the Pope and his Counselors
in the second Counsel of Lateran (being in the time of the Reign of K. John of
England) made a Decree for the paying Tithes to the parochial Priests. And yet
many Portions of Tithes remained to be paid, and were paid by owners of Lands
in some Peculiar places to Priests residing in other parishes, some of which
remain to this day: And besides, Tithes within this Nation have been possessed,
given, rendered, and paid in various manner, as appears by the History of
Possessors, and Owners of Tithes in this Nation, were sometimes the Kings or
Princes here, at other times the Archbishops in their Jurisdictions, at other
times the Bishops all over their respective Diocesses, and these were out of
those Tithes to provide a competent Maintenance for every Parson, or Incumbent,
and to distribute the residue among the poor: And sometimes the Lords of the
Manners have held some of them in their hands, and have presented fit Parsons,
or Incumbents to Parsonages from time to time: And at other times some Owners
of Lands have made some Tithes Fewdall or Infeodations by granting the same to
other Laymen: Or have given the same from time to time, into, or for
Free-Almes or Frank-Almoygne, or to or for Superstitious uses to pray for the
souls of them, and sometimes for their Parents, Children, or some of their
kindred, and such like Fopperies. And some have been so besotted that they have
granted some Tithes to Monasteries in one Nation issuing out of Lands in
another; but none such can be found to be paid out of any Lands in this Nation
to any Monasteries in any other, nor any, or but few Fewdall or Infeodated
Tithes can be found here. See the History of Tithes, and Review thereof,
written by Mr. John Seldom.
Tithes, against which much has been written. And although nothing be urged in
that History against the Divine Right of giving, rendering, or paying Tithes any
other ways, but only a Commemoration how, to whom, and to what uses they have
been so given, rendered, or paid from time to time, in the several Ages,
Nations, and Places therein mentioned; by Sir Fa. Sempell, Dr. Ti^sl^y Ri.
Mountagu.
which any man may ground his Opinion of the justness of paying Tith to any,
or for any use, as it shall please God to enlighten him in his Judgment; yet *
diverse have written for the payment of the same to be due by Divine Right; And
many small Tracts have been written for the payment of the same to
Impropriators, as conscientious, See some of the small Pamphlets, which within
these 7 or 8 years have been scattered abroad: how some in a barking, and
others in a whining way have written for the same, and thereby run into
Nonsense, and lost themselves in the Briers and Brambles of Inconveniences.
although the same has been found quite contrary to all Reason, and
Conscience. And in the judgments of most honest men, against, or for the
damning of which payment to Impropriators, or any other besides the Clergy, a
Priest (who has written against that History has much labored, And barked
lowdest to cry it down, using very many vain words and expressions to disparage
the same History, by reason of the favor which he expected of one, bearing his
name, then in high place, whom he boasted to be of very noble Birth, and of
great Learning and Religion, but whether or not the last be true, has appeared
by the works or deeds of his bragged of namesake, whose Learning also (in any
thing, but only for unlawful gains in causes which have come before him) has
been much suspected; by his gaining of which, many have been much damnified;
for whom it is hoped satisfaction shall be had out of his ill-gotten Estate
which he had; and as for all that which in his name is published in print,
concerning any goodness, it is thought to be done by others, (at his request) or
stolen, or borrowed from others; the expressions therein being contrary to his
Actions; but by those means that Priest was exalted into a Bishopric, though
he run into, and lost himself in a Labyrinth, in his gyddie writing concerning
the Duty of paying of Tith by Divine Right: which (in the opinions of
conscientious and Judicious men) has not at all diminished, but fortified the
worth of that History to remain as a Memorial for the honest people of this
Nation, to learn how to know from time to time the ancient Manners of Tithing,
and Maintenance of the Ministers and Poor; which History for the benefit of
this Nation (being it could not be collected without great trouble, study,
labor, and pains, and much charges) is thought by the honest and judicious
people of this Nation) who have read or been informed of the contents thereof)
convenient to be preserved. See that History and the Diatrib^ against it.
and showed many strong Reasons against the payment of Tith to Impropriators;
and has, as other Divines besides have, branded the Exactors thereof as
Sacrilegious, and Church Robbers; so that upon the whole matter it appears,
that he who had, or held Tithes, was bounden to, as a duty to have, or procure
to be had the Care of Souls, and relieve the poor, or one of them, according to
the worth of such Tith, which was as an Office; the non using or misusing of
Offices according to Trust, having been always accounted and have been adjudged
forfeiture thereof, and agreeable to Right reason; therefore if such Misuser,
Non-user, or Dis-user happen, may not every owner of Lands keep the Tithes
thereof in his own hands to pay for his instruction in his Souls health, and of
his Family, and to plead the matter thereof in Bar, or give the same in
Evidence against any who shall sue or prosecute for Tith, or not perform; or
procure some other to perform such duty? And why should not such Plea, or
Matter to be given in Evidence be allowed for a perpetual bar against the
payment of Tithes in such Cafe?

And yet such undeserving Tith-takers, or Patrons, or Disposers of them, most
commonly have kept or maintained Dove-houses or Pidgeon-houses; and with their
Pigeons therein devoured much of the Corn of their Parishioners, and formerly
did very much labor to debar all others besides themselves from having any
such Dove-houses or Pidgeon-houses, until above twenty years since, the matter
concerning the same upon solemn debate was adjudged, That any Freeholder might
have and maintain Dove-houses or Pidgeon-houses as well as such Tith-takers, or
Disposers, or Patrons of them, since which time Pigeons (being greater
devourers of Corn than any sort of Vermin, especially of Wheat and white Pease)
have not only devoured much Corn, but spoiled much more in bearing and beating
the same down To the destruction thereof, and moreover the Priests have been
the chief obstructors of improvement of Lands in commencing and threatening
chargeable and troublesome futes against poor laborious men, and they causing
them to Plough errable Lands so long, and put the same out of heart, that after
the Tith exacted out of them, such poor laborers have not had increase
answerable to their labor and seed, though they have paid no Rent for their
Lands, and at other times they have not had their seed again, and by such means
many poor undone, and much Land spoiled for many years together, to satisfy
the greedy appetite of such Tith-takers, and thereby many people constrained to
work so hard for a poor living, that they scarce have had any time to eat,
drink, or sleep at quiet, or had any time for devotion, but have fretted
themselves to meagernesse, cursing and banning not only their poor Cattle, but
also their dead Ploughs. Harrows and Carts, diverse of whom has continued so to
their ends, and died in a doubtful condition of their saltation, after by
sottishness they have wrought out of heart and spoiled much Land for many
years.
; And after the Priests or Monaches had by craft and subtilty (among their
great possessions) crept into very many of the best Lordships and Manors, the
ancient Lords whereof formerly (before such Monches got in) have presented and
procured to be put into Benefices, Teachers and Preachers of the Christian
Religion, Devout, and very good Pastors, Honest, Able, and Conscientious
Christians to teach the people (as the dark times then could afford) but after
the Abbey-lubbers had gotten into those possessions they starved the ignorant
people for want of spiritual food, only putting in a poor Sir John the Priest
to say Mass at such Parish for a small Salary of 20 Nobles a year, and
sometimes less, and to Riddle up the same in the Latin Language by Rote, which
neither he nor his Auditors or Spectators did or could understand, only about
three or four times in a year, such Monaches have sent out a Franciscan or
Dominican to Preach the Common People into the besotted imaginary opinion of
Purgatory, and duty of paying of Tith, and such like errors, and obedience of
their Papal Doctrine, for increase of the Riches of the Clergy, with a
direful Curse denounced against them which should not obey them, of Hell and
Damnation. But as for the Tithes of every Parish so gained into their Clutches
or Tallons (being of great value) they took to their own uses and appropriated
the same to their Denns of Although at the first gaining of such they were
charitable to the Poor of the Parish of which they had so appropriated the
Tith, but when they began to be lazy and idle, their Charity waxed so cold,
that they neglected the Needy, and entertained out of their abundance the Rich
to gain their favor, sometimes by feasting them in a Gluttonous manner.
Idleness, to feed them fat for the slaughter of the Devil.

And so were such Tithes stolen by such Abby-lubbers from the true Laborers
in the Harvest of the Conversion of sinners, and Instructing them in
Righteousness, and annexed to their stately Palaces for maintenance of their
Pride and Lust, in the height of which, by the just Judgment of God they fell
and were dissolved; And after that King Henry the eighth had taken the Abbeys
and other Monasteries into his hands, the same and Tithes so Appropriated were
by him, some parcels, and the residue otherwise, given, and some sold to, and
exchanged with Corporations or Colleges, Lords, Great men, and others, at as
low rates as Thieves stolen goods use to be sold for, in respect of what was
p^id or exchanged for them, and after the Tithes so appropriated, or annexed
have been so given, sold, exchanged, or bartered away, the same have been, and
yet are called from the Names of Appropriations, Impropriations, and have been
departed with from time to time, far more often than any Manor, Message,
Lands, and Tenements, for very little, (regarding what other Lands and
Tenements have gone for for many years) and never were Rated in value of
Purchase near to the Price of other Lands, and rare it has been for an eminent
Lawyer to purchase Tithe. And they who have held any of such Tithes long, have
seldom prospered, but most commonly betook themselves to Idleness and Lust;
and the holding of the same has been as it were a rust or Cancker, in causing
of diverse (who have had other great possessions) although some of them at their
first possessing of the same (they allways entering upon them as good bargains)
have been Charitable, but (as before is mentioned, for the most part) have soon
left off Charity, to Negligence, Gluttony, Drunkenesse and other Wickedness)
to wast and consume all or a great part thereof; and in some Corporations or
Colleges, and such like places, (with which some of the same have been held)
those persons therein Living upon the same, thereby have been so full fed, that
they have betook themselves to Idleness and lasciviousness, and in some of
them to the most Abominable, Odious, Beastly, Unnatural and Cursed sin of
Sodom An example for this of many in Eminent Colleges, now forborne to be named.
And yet, some have desired the continuance of the same, as the most equal way
for the Comfortable Maintenance of a Godly and conscientious Ministry, although
it has appeared that the same has gone to the Maintenance of Catterpillers
and Locusts, as bad as the Abbey-lubbers or Drones before mentioned; and the
Poor Vicars (diverse of whom have been very honest, and written, and published
pious and learned Books, and took most pains in the Gospel,) lived very poorly,
and some of them in great want, notwithstanding all their care taken for the
feeding of their Flocks, when such Locusts and Catterpillers have out of their
fat Benefices betook themselves principally to Drunkenness, Beastliness,
Sottishness, and Idleness, and yet Domineered, and Tyranized over such poor
Vicars, having been as diligent as Saint Cyprian, and other ancient Fathers of
the Church, (who lived in Poor, Wattled Cottages, and fed sometimes only upon
Pulse) before Poison was put into the Church by large allowances, which began
to multiply (together with Pontifical Titles) about the time of Phocas the
Adulterer and Usurper (who Murdered his Master Mauritius the Emperor, his
Empress, and Children, and by the help of Boniface the third, then Bishop of
Rome, in gratifying him as a Pontifex, Universal Chief Bishop, supreme above
all other, equal with Rome before, and generally the whole Clergy with large
allowances) obtained the Empire, and reigned like a Murderer, as did his
Successors after him (by one of whom himself, his Wife and Children were slain)
until by the Popes they were outwitted, and Outed of their Regal Power in
Rome, who after did the like or worse (using not only all fraudulent dealing,
but Sodomy and Sorcery) and by those means about the same time did Tithes
generally begin to be paid, but not to the Parochial Priests, until the time
of King John before mentioned, (being hundreds of years after) which have
continued so long in such manner, that some (not very knowing, we will not say
altogether ignorant) have Idolized the same so far that they have cried them up
to be due (by Divine Right) and admitted of the claim of them from the Levites,
among whose Tribe out of those, besides Priests, as Namely the holy Butchers
for killing and dressing of the Sacrifice fit for the Altar, the holy Wood
mongers for provision of Wood about the same, and the holy Porters for bearing
the Arc, for none other but men then being or accounted holy might meddle with
such things, besides others which in the written word of God, any (who have
read and desire the understanding of the same) may with ease understand; for
the maintenance of which there is no warrant; for there was a particular
command from God for payment of Tith to that Tribe, and none for the payment of
any such thing to any since; and by what right any one can claim the same, they
seek far to find it to be due by Divine Right, and others have been so simple,
as to derive the payment of the same from the payment of Tithes by Abraham to
Melchisedeck, which can be made appear or thought none other than a voluntary
gift, to one that in those times some ways (though not revealed) had a right
to, or deserved the same for some good deed done; and it cannot be imagined any
other, than that the same, if not so given, was only a Gratuity or deed of
Charity by our Father Abraham, or that he had a secret command from the
Almighty for rendering the same as to the Priest of the most high God: but
cannot with Equity or any solid Judgment be drawn into example to be paid to
Drones, or Locusts, in these times of their permission in several places. And
for mainteinance of the same, diverse (when they have been convinced in the
bygone things before mentioned) have been of such affectionate Opinion, or so
seemed, or made show, as to say and divulge, that although the same should be
taken from errable Lands, and such like places, where much labor and travel
has been in Plowing, Sowing, Manuring, and buying of Compost or Manure, and
Rent, and otherways, and consideration had of their one only considerable Crop
in 3 years, (against exacting of Tithes, out of which diverse have complained
and Petitioned) yet would not that be beneficial to any poor Countrymen (who
have taken or shall take such Labor, Travel, and Pains, and be at such
Charges) but that only the benefit would redound to the Purchasers and
Landlords, in the rise and improvement of Rents or otherways, which every
conscientious and judicious man knows to be otherwise) for can any man imagine
that such Heathenisme is intended, or any other thing, but that there shall be
a Competent Maintenance for a Godly and Conscientious Ministry, and is not that
most convenient to be imposed upon such things which use to be Tithable? and
what cause then can there be of increase of Rents? but that something
(accounting one thing with the other equivalent to Tithes) should go out of
the same and otherwise for good purposes, and not for the maintenance of
Locusts and Catterpillers; for if the people and their Children should depend
only for their Teaching and Instructing upon such Tith-takers, as for the most
part have been, (they having been accounted the most vicious of any sort of
men, according to the respective Numbers) they may be as ignorant as any
Heathens for ought any of them have had or could have of such Locusts or
Catterpillers, for such (as have been intent and desirous to be instructed in
true Holiness and Righteousness, and have thirsted after the way of
Salvation) have been constrained (according to their respective Abilities) to
contribute toward Maintenance of Godly, Conscientious, and sincere men,
Learned in the Written Word of God, to instruct them in that way, and those who
have received Tithes have not benefitted them at all, but have wasted,
consumed, and employed the same in such courses above mentioned, which they
have practiced and misspent the same, as bad as the Heathenish Priests (who
before received Tithes) and sacrificed to Devils, Idols, and Oracles. See the
History before mentioned.


And further, as for the loss of Such who may be damnified by the taking away
of Tithes, that is like to be the loss for the most part of such, by whom and
their Ancestors they have been long enjoyed, and therefore such in Equity ought
to expect little or nothing for forgoing the same, in respect of the low Rates
which they have paid for them at the first, regard being had to the great
profit which they have received by the same, far beyond the profits of any
other Lands purchased; and if any who have purchased the same, since the
written word of God has shined in a more bright manner to us, than in other
former dark times of ignorance, they deserve to bear the loss in forgoing
thereof, for not endeavoring the knowledge of the Scripture, and thereby by
what Right any Tith can be claimed, the loss of which may more benefit those
as now hold the same, or that hereafter shall purchase any of them, for their
Souls health (in searching the Scripture concerning the same) and so to be
brought to true Christianity, in the reading the written Word of God with
serious deliberation, than the loss which they shall receive in departing with
such Tithes; for how can they think that in Law or Conscience they may expect
the same, when they cannot find them to be due by Divine Right, but crept into
as aforesaid, by Crast, Subtilty, and Deceit? And how may Tithes be required,
seeing their foundation is so sandy, as before is mentioned, if the same were
put upon solemn Debate, by Argument of Learned and Conscientious Counsel, and
Mature deliberation thereupon had is a great question; and thought by many that
their foundation would sink or slide away (the same to this day never having
been tried by such a touchstone) but as is thought our Ancestors (coming out of
the dark Clouds of Antichrist, and but newly peeping into the light) could not
conveniently on a sudden consider of another way more equal and convenient,
for the maintenance of a Godly Ministry to be settled on, and satisfied to them
without care or trouble of Collections, or tedious Suits to obtain the same?
for since those times the Ministry has for a great part happened to be of such
Drones, Locusts, or Catterpillers, who for getting in of Tithes have Commensed,
Prosecuted, and Stirred up much trouble, and many Chargeable and Tedious Suits,
and diverse of them very Unjust (whereby many poor honest people have been
undone) and neglected their duties and Callings; which Mischiefs and
Inconveniences would be prevented if every one respectively (according to his
Ability) may be taxed to the Competent Maintenance (regarding desert) of
Pastors, and Teachers, that the greatest burden may not lie upon the Poorer or
Meaner sort, and the Usurer, or Rich bear a Feather, respecting the Weighty
burden lying upon those, comparing their Estates together, all which would be
remedied, if all persons should be taxed equally and respectively for such
Maintenance, as for other things, and that if such Maintenance should be
competent, and according to the deserts of such Pastors, Ministers, or
Teachers, then would their Congregations be better Taught, and lead out of
Blindness, Ignorance, Heresy, and Heathenism. And as for Custom, by which
some Challenge Tithes to be due, how can that stand? And if the Original
thereof be searched into, may it not be found by Record when the same began See
the History first mentioned, and Sr. E. Cook his Comentaries.
, and then there it may be found how slender the ground thereof is; and
besides, if the contrary thereof could not be found, being the Custom (as to
those of such ill lives and conversation, before mentioned, who have had an
exacted the same) is dissenting from the Word of God; and so consequently not
good therefore in Law, Right, Reason, and Conscience to be abolished; and why
may not Purchasers of Lands hold the same without paying Tith with a safe
Conscience, though great benefit accrue thereby, in respect that then (no
doubt) it will be provided, that every one should be taxed equally, to the
Maintenance of a Godly and Conscientious Ministry of Pastors and Teachers, and
they truly to be satisfied the same without trouble, or substraction, as has
been too often used by many Haethenish, Hypocritical, and Atheistical people
from many Vicars, by craft and subtlety, by putting them upon, and leaving them
to stuntling, or Starveling Calves, Lambs, and Piggs, addle Eggs, and
Worm-eaten, and Wasp-eaten, rotten Windfalls or other fallings of Apples, and
such like Trash? and those Heathenish, Hypocritical, and Atheistical
Substractors have took no regard of the fearful end of Ananias and Saphira.

And also in regard such Purchase may on a sudden by Fire, Inundation, or
otherwise be ruined or wasted by accident, or the Purchasers thereof cheated in
a Cracked Title, by reason of former Dormant Sales, or otherwise, or after by
Enemies, Thieves, Woolves, Foxes, Weesels, Polecats, Rats, or Mice, etc. entered
upon, and haunted, and great spoil by them made there, before the Purchasers
can thence rid the same, of all which the Purchasers must bear the loss, and
why not the benefit of Improvement or other beneficial Contingencies after the
riddance of those, and all manner of other Vermin from the same?

But it is to be doubted, that many great men of Wealth, or otherwise of Power
and Subtelty have been, and are the greatest Sticklers in upholding the
exactions of Tithes, by reason they have grasped great Possessions and
Inheritances, and Leases of Impropriations into their hands, and therefore much
argued and discoursed for, and made great means about upholding the same, and
caused others ignorant to be beguiled into obedience, and diverse simple to be
of opinion of the duty thereof by Divine Right: And such have been the
Obstructors of ridding this Commonweal of the most subtle of those Vermin.
[*The before mentioned Tith-takers.] And that has been the occasion of
depraved Lords of Manors (wanting the true knowledge and power of Godliness)
for secret Rewards (or, as they may be more fitly be called Symony or Bribes)
for the most part to present and procure into Benefices ignorant Parsons, of
bad life and conversation, who have entered into the same by Perjury or false
Oaths, and lived in the same for many years together, and the Inhabitants of
the Parish received no benefit, but mischief by them, in keeping them in
Ignorance, and preaching false Doctrine and Heresy; and railing and scoulding
(those seldom times they have prated in the Pulpit) and giving evil example by
their Cursing and Swearing, and Whoredom, Gluttony, or Drunkenness, undoing
some of their Neighbors by unjust Suits, and vexing others of them, sometimes
for substraction, or supposall of withholding of very small things, as with the
not rendering of two Eggs, or such like, or other Trifles, whereby such as have
been no better taught and instructed; than by such like Parsons, have been no
better than mere Infidells: And many such Bribing, and Symonizing, and
Perjured, or Forsworn Parsons, (who have been Avaritious and Ambitious) from
time to time have gotten to be Doctors, Deans, etc. and into places of great
profit, and by that means soared to a Bishop, and sometimes higher, and by
those means gained power, that none should Preach, but by their permission, and
also be derived from them as they themselves from Age to Age, one of them from
another, which they can draw from none but the Pope in the Original, to go on
successively as they claim their call; and that can be proved only as well as
the Pope is Supreme of the Church, or that he is the successor of Peter, or
that he was ever at Rome; Or whether Lynus or Clement was his immediate
successor, or Cletus or Anacletus or one of them, about which much Debate has
been between the Papalls (among whom the claim of Tithes were first hatched, as
they of late have been paid. And such Bribing and Symonizing Parsons as before
mentioned, with their Associats and Adherents, had gained such power (which
they had an endeavor to continue) that the people (by themselves or their
Representatives) should have no Election of Pastors, Ministers, or Teachers,
but what should be imposed by them, and went about to prove it to be due to
them by Divine Right, and to none other: which they can, or did as well prove
as the succession of the Pope from Peter, or they theirs from the Pope, whose
Authority, (as appears by Record in the Tower) was from hence banished in the
time of K. E. 3. therefore let those who can, show when the same was brought
hither since; the superiors of whom notwithstanding have assayed utterly to
keep the poor People in Ignorance, and to debar them from having any hand in
Election of any whom they should be constrained to maitain for their spiritual
Instruction, but to assesse such upon them (whom they should be compelled to
maintain, or pay Tithes to) who neither should or could any more benefit them
than Monopolizing Counselors, or Advocates, or Attorneys, or Proctors Which go
for, and be but Servants to their Clients, and yet have been in Chancery,
Civil Cerporation, and suchlike Courts by the chief Monopolizers there
assessed or imposed upon Clients, and they constrained to pay them Fees and
other great Rewards or Bribes, or to sit still and lose the benefit of their
Suces, Moneys, and Demands to great value, whereby many have been undone, and
diverse much impoverished.
, their Clients: which courses have proved Mischievous to many, and is
accounted no better, then if a Servant should be imposed or assessed upon a
Master to keep, and pay wages unto, although he should know that such Servant
could, or would do unto such his Master little or no service, but to be
vehemently suspected to cut his Throat, or do him other mischief, when he
could have an opportunity for that purpose, and such Master to be constrained
to a continual Vigilance (for the prevention thereof) and not only to pay, but
pray, scrape legs, and stand Cap in Hand to his Servant, to have his business
done, or to have the same left undone, and thereby the Master utterly ruined.

To the end therefore that Learning may be preserved for the necessary Quiet of
this Nation, and that Tithes (being accounted the most unequal way for
maintenance of the Ministry, the greatest part thereof having been taken by
Undeservers, and the same falling most heavy upon the poor, honest, painful
Husbandman, many times happening to sweep away a third part, and sometimes more
of the Fruit of his Labor, and diverse times All, and sometimes more than All,
out of his errable Land) may be taken away and abolished.

1 It is wished that a Law might be made, that hereafter no Tithes may be
exacted, or received by any; but that all people may be quiet and freed from
giving, rendering, or paying, any manner of Tithes from henceforth. 2 And that
all persons may be taxed in every Parish equally, according to their respective
Estates, for the Maintenance of a Godly, Solid, and Conscientious Ministry. 3
And that such Maintenance may be competent It is thought 100 li. by the year to
be little enough for the meanest Minister; and 300 or 400 li. a year for
Provision of Books, and other Necessaries for Such as shall be to study in
Controversies, or Disputations; or to argue, or dispute for the Maintenance of
the true Christian Religion in this Nation against the Opposers thereof.
for every Minister of every respective Parish, and Place thereunto to be
annexed (for small Parishes) according to the Number of People there. 4 And
that such Tax may be in like manner as for the Poor, and the same Remedy for it
by distress and Sale thereof, imprisonment of the Body, and all other means,
and that the money thereby received may be rendered unto him without trouble or
charge; or himdering him from his Study and Care.
So that every Minister may with willingness, cheerfulness, joy, and delight,
attend, as necessity or occasion happens, to go from House to House to visit,
instruct, and comfort, the Sick and Weak, and to follow the residue of his
Calling in Preaching to, Instructing, and Teaching his Parishioners to repent
of and avoid (according to their best endeavors) all manner of wickedness,
with Courage, that the Power of Godliness may take Root in, and work upon
them; and they not delude or solace themselves in vain terrestiall Riches
Injuriously by forged or feigned Cavillations, without desert, exacted out of
the Estates of the Poor, and Others, in which they cannot have any true or
real Joy or Comfort, or their Children after them in this life; but the same
will rather be a Means to draw them into Wickedness, and therein most commonly
depart this Life in a doubtful Condition; And diverse of themselves (which make
wealth their God, though some of them may conceal it from Public view by
their Hypocrisy) be in as miserable Condition as Francis Spira, of whose
fearful End any (who desire) may be fully informed by Learned and Godly
Divines: The sin of Avarice being the most difficult to be repented of, and
rarely atteined to; in the repentance of all other Sins Spira went far: but
although he made large acknowledgment of all his evill-gotten Goods, yet could
neither he, nor many more abate or diminish from the Camel of Avarice, and
creep through the Ey of the Needle of Restitution, as far as Ability of
knowing, fraudulent gained Estates to the true Owners, (without which those
Divines can more fully relate the Judgment of the ancient Orthodox Fathers of
the Church, as of their own, of the falling short of unfeigned Repentance, none
other being effectual) and thereby be contented with their well-gotten Goods
(wherewith God will furnish those that trust in him, and observe his
Commandments, for sufficient and competent Maintenance) and then they shall be
in Heart rich enough, and better satisfied in their minds, than those that gain
Riches in any unconscionable way (to work themselves into terrene Wonder,
Admiration, or Vain Glory) of whom none other can be imagined but Atheism,
whatsoever their outward / profession be.
, Honor, or Greatness, as a King in a Comedy, or as the great Heathenish
Kings and Emperors, with their Nimrod, Ninus, Craesus, Alexander the Great,
Julius Caesar, etc. in their Magnificence and Wealth, and especially Craesus in
his inestimable Wealth horded up, and Caesar in his invaluable Treasure,
(enough to purchase all the Estates of a whole Nation) suddenly seized upon in
the Capitol at Rome, with which he shortly after departed.
imaginary Conceit (by the old Romans of future Bliss in the Elizian Fields;
Or of the Mahumetan, Saracens, and Turks, in their conceited Paradise after
this life With Rivers and Streams flowing with Milk, Oil, and delightful
Waters, etc. and Women of the fairest and most choice Beauty to continue as in
the Prime of their years, and other Fopperies.
;) But that the People of this Nation may by the (Preaching, Instructing, and
Teaching of such Ministers) be brought into the Knowledge and Practice of, and
Continuance in, (with delight) the true Christian Religion, and the way of
walking in a Godly Life and Conversation; that they may grow in Grace and
Righteousness more and more unto the Day of Judgment; And set their Minds
principally upon doing the good pleasure of God, wherein they shall have much
Joy (if they do it really) and have the principal Comfort in this Life of all,
of Assurance of Salvation, and the enjoyment of the unspeak-able and
incomprehensible (in humane Capacity) Ioys of Heaven, where every Saints Joy
shall be full, with our Savior and his Righteous Servants in the Celestial
Kingdom, according to the Decree of the living God, which was, is, and ever
will be, from and to all Eternity.

FINIS.

