A CHRISTIAN, SOBER and PLAIN EXERCITATION ON The two grand practical
Controversies of these Times; INFANT BAPTISM, AND SINGING OF PSALMS.

Wherein all the Scriptures on both sides are recited, opened and argued, with
brevity and tenderness: and whatever has been largely discussed by others,
briefly contracted in a special method for the edification of the SAINTS.

By Cuthbert Sidenham, Teacher to a Church of Christ in Newcastle upon Tine.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, and are to be sold by Francis Tyton at the
three Daggers in Fleet Street, near the Inner-Temple-gate. 1653.

Are to be sold by William London in Newcastle. 1653.

To his dear and honored Brother, Mr. William Durant, my faithful
Fellow Laborer in the Gospel; And the Church of Christ, over whom the Holy
Ghost has made us Joynt-overseers.
Dearly Beloved,
I Present you these first fruits of my poor labors, as a pledge of my love,
and testimony of my unfeigned desires, and longings after your settlement, and
comfort together. I am indeared to you in the bowels of Christ, and for his
sake ow my self unto you: My highest ambition in this world is, to see you
stablished in truth, and flourishing in the glorious graces of the Gospel. I
have treated on these two subjects, because I know they are the tempting
errors of these Times, and have the fairest glosses set on them, and have too
much influence to disturb the Peace and Order of Churches: The first
especially, which eats out men's affections, and creeps at the heart like a
gangrene insensibly; an opinion which has been always ominous, and of a
wonderful strange influence, accompanied with the most dangerous retinue of
errors, since the first Embrio of it was brought forth; whether by a judgment
of God, or from its natural and secret connection with other principles of
darkness, I will not determine; only God has showed some black characters on
it in every Nation where it has prevailed; though we cannot but say, many
Saints are innocently under the power of it.

For the second, I hope when men's hearts come in Tune, their voices will
likewise: The former denies more Fundamental Principles, as the Covenant in its
extent, and subjects; the freeness of Grace; the riches of its workings in the
New Testament; and contracts the Gospel; leaving more Grace visible in the
Legal and Old Testament dispensation, then in the New.

I have only summed up what others express more at large, with something new,
and never yet touched, that I know of: And as to the method, all is new, and
made fit for your use, if Christ set it home on you. I have nothing else to
add, but to tell you, you have been yet kept pure in the midst of many
Distractions, and the violence of desperate Opinions: Take heed of plausible
errors that come painted to you with the name of the most glorious truths:
Lose not your glory at last; try and weigh every tittle that is propounded:
It Is my desire you may have the glorious Title given to you the Bereans had, to
be ((...)) men of better breeding then to take up any thing on trust, though
from the Apostles themselves, until you know how they were inspired: Compare
Scripture with Scripture; do not distract your selves in the Gospel* lay truths
together, they will shine in their proper glory: Part not so easily with
ancient enta l d privileges: Have so much pity to your Children, as not to
blot their names out of Heaven by your own hands, until God do it by
sovereignty; do not bury them alive: Those that know the riches of such a
privilege, will not easily part with it upon such poor terms as most propose.
I plead for poor Infants; and it is but charity to speak for those whose tongues
are tied. I intend brevity in this, as in all the following Discourse. The Lord
fill you with wisdom and understanding, and give you to know what his perfect
will is, and hearts to obey it: And thrive like Saints of the New Testament,
that lie at Christ's breasts night and day. These are the desires of

Your unworthy Teacher, Cuthbert Sidenham.

CHAP. I. Several Considerations premised, as an entrance to the Discourse.
BEFORE I enter on the main questions handled in this Discourse, it will not be
unnecessary to premise something in general concerning this Controversy, which
is such a bone of contention among the Saints, for to make our way clear before
us.

And 1. Let this be considered, that there is nothing in all the N. T. against
the baptizing of Infants, not one hint from any express word dropped from Christ
or his Apostles; not one phrase, which though never so much strained, does
forbid such an act; but there is much for it in diverse Scriptures compared
together; and what is wanting in the one, is supplied in another abundantly, as
hereafter will appear.

2. The sum of all that our Opposites have to say, though they make a great
deal of noise in the World, is only this, that they can find no syllabical
precept, or word of command in terms, saying, Go baptize Infants; or any
positive example where it is said in so many words, Infants were baptized; only
actual believers, as they believed, were baptized: all that they say besides,
is only to quarrel with our arguments, and make shift to evade the strength of
them: but this is their only argument, and their all; for however they talk of
the Covenant, and fleshly and spiritual seed, yet this is the Goliahs sword,
none like to it; I would therefore fairly encounter with it in the Portall, that
I may see all their strength before me.

Concerning which, take in these considerations: First, this argument is built
on this false principle, That no direct consequences from Scripture are
mandatory, and so obliging, nor of Divine Authority, which all Orthodox
Professors and Divines grant, but these which are against Infants baptism; and
it is most clear: for,

1. The way to know Scriptures, is by comparing them together, 1 Cor. 2.13. and
this must needs be by their Harmony, and by deduction from one to another.

2. Without True consequence were as Scripture, no one could speak truth but
these that speak just the very expressions of Scripture.

3. There could be no spiritual reasons nor arguments used in any Discourse to
be of any force or consequence, though from the Scripture; for there can be no
arguing from Scripture, but by consequences and deduction; for in all arguments
there must be a medium and a conclusion, a proposition and an inference.

4. Nothing upon this account can be Scripture but the very letters and
syllables in the Bible; nothing of the meaning or sense is Scripture; for you
must draw out the sense and meaning from the letters by rational consequence,
as the conclusion from a proposition by a fit medium; and how absurd would this
prove, that letters should be Scripture, and not the sense? and so it must be
according to that Maxim of theirs.

5. This is against all preaching, and expounding Scripture; nothing must be
read but the very bare characters for to draw any deductions from; it is to no
purpose, though never so direct and full; for if they be not Scripture, they
cannot bind consciences; and to what end is preaching, but to open and apply
Scripture?

6. The searchings of the Scripture were the most useless undertaking that
could be imagined; for what need I search, but read? for no consequence, by
comparison of Scripture, is of authority to satisfy my conscience, if I draw a
conclusion from a text, and perceive the meaning of it to be thus; if nothing
without it be laid down in so many syllables, how many such strange absurdities
would follow the denying consequences from Scripture, which are purely
deducted? and by this principle, that where there are not so many letters put
together in one sentence, there is no command, men would soon draw Religion
into a very narrow compass.

7. This would be as much against themselves; For,

First, They have no command in so many words, Go and baptize actual or visible
believers: if they say such were baptized: it is answered, that is not to the
purpose: for it is a verbal command required by them to give warrant to an
ordinance.

Secondly, That they must prove by consequence also, believers were baptized,
Ergo there was a command: Neither,

Thirdly, Can they prove one act concerning their own form of baptizing by any
command, but by consequences: When they say Infants are not to be baptized,
they draw it from consequence thus, because there is no command in their sense;
When they affirm the Covenant is not made with believers now, and their seed,
as with Abraham, it is drawn by consequence, because, say they, Abraham is no
natural father to us, as to the Jews, and because that covenant was a mixed
Covenant, etc. When they come to prove baptizing to be by plunging, they argue
by consequence, because the word signifies it, because they went where much
water was, and went down into the water, etc. though they are mistaken in all
their consequences, as I shall hereafter show; yet this is full ad hominem, and
against themselves, who deny consequences to warrant institutions, and yet have
nothing for to prove their own way, but what is by consequence from Scripture.

8. It Is common among the Apostles to argue in such a method, and to deduce one
thing from another, to make out what they intended; 2 Cor. 5.14. We thus judge,
if Christ died for all, then all are dead; if the first be true, then the
latter; so 1 Cor. 15.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and all that Chapter,
arguing out the resurrection by fit mediums: so about the Ordinance of Baptism,
Acts 10.47. Can any man forbid water, why these should not be baptized, who
have received the holy Ghost as well as we? There was never any command to
baptize these that had received the holy Ghost, nor any example of any baptized
on these terms; but the Apostle argues from the equivalency of the mercy, and
the reason of the state they were in; the same method he uses 1 Cor. 10.15, 16,
17, 18. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.

9. There will be hardly found a definition of the most doctrinal and high
mysteries of the Gospel, but by comparing Scripture with Scripture, and so
making it forth by consequence: what perfect definition of justification, or of
justifying faith, in so many formal expressions in all the N. T. but what must
be deducted by comparing Scriptures together to make one result? where are
women either by such a wordy expression commanded to receive the Lords Supper?
or any example? if they say ((...)) signifies both sexes, yet it is still by
consequence, no command or example: and why not ((...)) as fit to signify
Infant-Saints, as grown Saints, Infant-holiness, as perfect holiness? it is
applied to both; if they will stick at a syllable, we may stick with them on
the same grounds.

10. Deny consequences to have the strength of commands, and you will leave
very few duties to be practiced, or sins to be avoided, in the Old or New
Testament: Expound the ten Commandments, the sum of the Law, without
consequences, and very few shall be found literal transgressors, but most
desperate debauched persons. Mat. 5. Christ expounds the whole Law, and by
consequences from the inward meaning, draws out new considerations of duties;
and since the Bible is but a short systeme of Religion, every place is fitted
to expound each other; and this must be done by rational-spiritual comparisons
and inferences; but enough to the first consideration on this head of commands
and consequences.

2. Where we have a promise laid as the foundation of a duty, that is
equivalent to any express command; for as commands in the Gospel do suppose
promises, to encourage us to act them, and help us in them: so promises made to
persons do include commands, especially when the duties commanded are annexed
to the promises, as all New Testament Ordinances are, as well as Old.

3. We have as much in the N. T. to prove Infant Baptism, from the true
principles of right to Ordinances, as they have for these whom they baptize;
for they baptize grown persons on such and such considerations; and we shall
hereafter show, we baptize on as strong and equivalent grounds; and that is
enough to warrant a command, to demonstrate the same substantial grounds of the
command to reach the same case.

4. If we can find no positive command in so many words for their baptizing
(showing the same fundamental grounds) it is requisite they should show us some
express command to the contrary, and some authentic repeal, seeing Infants so
long enjoyed such a like Ordinance: upon the same grounds Christ would not have
taken away such an ancient privilege, when his grace abounded, and
super-abounded, but he would have left some characters of it in the Gospel, and
entered some formal discharge in his Word of such persons, and given a warning
of it to the Gentile believers to expect it; but he has both by his words and
carriages left clear demonstrations, that he is so far from repealing, as he
confirms it to Infants; let the Scriptures opened hereafter speak to this.

The third Consideration premised is this, as all that they urge as to examples
of actual believers being baptized, all along the New Testament, especially the
Acts, and that if thou believe thou may, etc. we can freely grant without
any damage to this truth: For,

1. We say as they, professing believers, grown men were first baptized, and so
they ought to be, who are to be the first subjects of the administration of an
Ordinance, persons able to give an account of their own faith; it was so with
Abraham, Genesis 17* 24. he was 99 years old when he was circumcised. and he must
be first circumcised before he could convey a right to his seed; now you may as
well argue, Abraham was first circumcised when so old, therefore old persons
are to be circumcised, and none else; as because grown persons were baptized,
therefore not Infants, when they must be first baptized themselves; for
Children are baptized by the promise first to them, and in them to their seed.

2. An affirmative position is not exclusive of subordinates; because believers
were said to be baptized, Ergo not their seed* is not true reasoning; for their
seed were comprehended with them in the same promise.

3. A non dicto ad non factum, non valet consequentia, as Divines say; because
it is not expressed in so many words, therefore it was not done, is no argument;
especially when there is enough to show it was done, though not written; Christ
speaks short, that we may search; he expects N. T. Saints to be so ingenuous as
to take more by a hint, then those of the Old who were not so bred as we now;
they had every pin of the Tabernacle appointed; it is not so punctually set down
now, either as to Churches, or Government, but only the main Substantials laid
down, and it is left to the ingenuity of the Saints to draw forth the
consequences.

Lastly, to premise no more; God has always ordained some Ordinances; in the
administration of which, for the most part, the subject has been purely
passive, to express his own free grace most eminently, as Circumcision on
Infants: And can we think he has left no Ordinance now as a visible character,
only to hold forth his mere grace in the N. T. where he reigns by grace? And
there is no sign so fit to express it as Baptism, and no subject so capable as
poor Infants.

CHAP. II. About the nature of the Covenant made with Abraham.
THE first great thing in this Controversy is, to consider the nature of the
Covenant, which is the first foundation of the privilege to believers, and
their seed, as it was first made with Abraham and his seed, in the name of all
believers, and their seed, both Jews and Gentiles; for so large is the extent
of that Covenant to both, as hereafter shall be proved from New Testament
expressions; and if we find the same Covenant reaching Gentile-believers, and
their Children, as Abraham and his, we cannot be denied the new external sign
and seal of the same Covenant; for though the outward signs may be changed, yet
there is no change of the privileges, if the Covenant remain entire. For the
opening of which we shall consider, 1. The nature of Abraham's Covenant. 2. How
persons may be said to be in that Covenant.


For the first, we must begin with that place, Genesis 17. where God began not
only to express the Covenant in larger terms then formerly, but to add a
visible seal to it, viz. that of Circumcision: There be many conjectures about
this Covenant; those that differ, conceive it to be a mixed Covenant, made up of
spiritual and temporal blessings together, and not of the same purity with the
Covenant in the New Testament, and so make a carnal part, and a spiritual part
of it, and Circumcision to be annexed especially to the former, not so to the
latter; this is the true relation of their judgment about this. Let us review
the Covenant, and its terms, and we shall soon find the mistake.

First, and chiefly, We affirm this was a Covenant of pure grace, the same in
substance with the Covenant administered now under the Gospel, since Christ's
coming in the flesh and spirit.

1. It was founded upon pure grace, Gods love to Abraham, and it is not any
thing in Abraham, or his, to move God more then to the Gentiles.

2. It was a Covenant without works, therefore of pure grace, Romans 4.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. and all along the Chapter.

3. It was a Covenant made only with a believer upon Gospel terms; the same the
New Testament holds forth in the 3, 4, and 5, v. of that Chapter; now faith is
the only condition of the Covenant of grace.

4. It was a Covenant made in Christ, and therefore a pure Covenant of grace,
as any can be in the Gospel, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, and 29.

5. Consider the tenure of this Covenant, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my
Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations, to
be a God to thee, and thy seed after thee. Here is the substance and strength
of this Covenant, to be a God to Abraham and to his seed; and what can be more
then to be Jehovah to him? can there be any expression more high, or that can
set forth more grace in purity then this? It Is more then can be expressed, that
God ingageth his Deity to him; and it is as much as if God had said, whatever I
am in mine own Godhead, I will be to thee and thy seed, to make you happy and
blessed: this is the first and main thing premised, and it comprehends Christ,
grace, glory, all blessings above imagination; the Apostle in Heb. 8.10. uses
the same expression as the sum of all, when he speaks of the new Covenant, I
will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. We need add no more,
if that were not a Covenant of pure grace, the Gospel knows none other.

That which they have to say why it is a mixed Covenant, and a temporal, as some
of the most ignorant affirm, is from the following expression of Genesis 17.8. And
I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a
stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession, etc. Now, say
they, if the promises be mixed, so is the Covenant.

To which I answer, that the Land of Canaan, and such like promises, were but
additional, and added ex superabundanti, to the first promise, not at all
incorporated to the bulk and body of the Covenant which was made in Christ, and
consisted of more pure considerations; these promises were but fitted to the
outward administration of the first promise of grace, and the state of Abraham's
family, but there was no mixture; For,

1. The Covenant with Abraham is repeated in the New Testament entire, without
any of those additions, as is proved formerly.

2. The promise of Canaan was typical of Heaven, and so did but more open the
first promise, to be their God; showing them that God would bring him and his
to Heaven, and the fullness of his glory, as he would bring them to an outward
Canaan; and this was suited to Gods design, in administering that vast promise
by types and outward figures: so Abraham closed in with it by faith, as a
promise expounding figuratively the substance of the Covenant, Heb. 11.8, 9,
10. so 13, 14, 15, 16. So that the first promise was positive, and showed the
nature of the Covenant; the other was typically expository, Canaan setting out
Heaven, and the eternity of their rest with this God in Covenant; and this will
no more make a mixed Covenant, then the type and the substance when they meet
together will differ in signification.

3. We may as well say, these promises in the New Testament make up a mixed
Covenant, and so of a different nature, when God says in Mat. 6.33. Seek first
the Kingdom of God, and all things else shall be added; and 1 Timothy 4.8.
Godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to come; which are
as much mixed as ever the Covenant made with Abraham was; whereas all know,
these are but accidental appendixes of the promise of grace, and dispensed
according to the use he has for, and the conditions of his Saints: thus Canaan
was added to the Covenant, as all other things to the Kingdom of God.

4. If this be a mixed Covenant, because Canaan is added, and the like, then how
comes it to be the same in the N. T. and to be of force now, when no notice is
taken of Canaan, and the temporal promises? Sure in this mixture the promise of
free grace was primary, and like oil, at top; for Abraham's Covenant the very
same for substance, is clear, and without mixture in the Gospel, though it is
administered externally, as it was then, and the blessings of Abraham come on
the Gentiles, though not of an external Canaan.

If they say that Canaan was added only for the dispensation of the Covenant to
the Jews, it is granted; but that it should make a mixture in the Covenant, is
most false, which is the same for ever, though the outward administration be
different; things may be added, yet not mixed, as a man's clothes to his body,
and yet there is no mixture between a man's flesh and his clothes.

But let us come to Circumcision, the seal of this Covenant; it sealed it, say
they, as a mixed Covenant.

Then 1. It sealed the one part as well as the other; take it in their own
sense, that is, it sealed God to be their God, as Canaan; and so it was not a
seal merely to a temporal promise.

2. If the Covenant was so mixed in the nature of it, then Circumcision sealed
unequally, though it was added to a mixed Covenant, for it sealed the promise of
Canaan to those that never went into Canaan, as many that died before that
time, and afterward many that were circumcised died in the Wilderness, and
under Gods wrath, and so sealed nothing at all, neither part of the Covenant
visibly; and that is hard, that to so many there should be neither the
fulfilling of spiritual, nor temporal part of the promise.

3. Grant them this Covenant was mixed, then it was either in the substance, or
circumstances; if in the substance, then Abraham's Covenant was not Gospel, and
believers must seek for another Father, as to the example of faith, and that
were to make it rather like Nebuchadnezzars Image of Iron and Clay, then made
up of Gospel materials; If in circumstances of administration, and additaments
of external types, it is granted, and we have the same promise now, with new
outward administrations; if this mixture were in the nature and substance of
the Covenant, then it must remain as long as the Covenant lasted, and so unto
this day; for no man is so bold (though many are bold enough) as to say that
Abraham's Covenant is abrogated; if it be under any other consideration, it is
easily waved, and the truth the same: So that Circumcision sealed the Covenant
primarily in its nature, as a Covenant of grace, and God being a God to
circumcise their hearts, etc. and Canaan, and other things consequently and
accidentally, as God made a promise of them, for the better visible
administration of the Covenant to them in that external polity. And surely it is
beyond an ordinary reach to believe, that God should make a Covenant with
Abraham, and for his faith in it should create him the Father of the faithful
in all ages, and this Covenant should be brought in the N. T. and renewed, and
the tenure of it freshly held forth to believers there, and yet at the first
making of it God should mix temporal promises with the spiritual substance of
it, and annex a seal that should only or specially seal the temporal part of
it, and so poorly confirm the main and essential nature of it, especially when
God speaking of Abraham's faith, styles Circumcision the seal of the
righteousness of it, Romans 4. But of this more in another Chapter.

CHAP. III. The distinction of Abraham's seed into fleshly and spiritual, into
natural and believing, considered; whether the Infants of believers may not be
called in the New Testament the seed of Abraham?
THE next thing which must have its place of consideration, is that question of
Abraham's seed, with whom the promise was made; and upon this hinge hangs all
the main weight on both sides; and if we make out Infants of believers in the
N. T. to be in Covenant, as Abraham's seed, the controversy would be at end: To
make out this, the most of the following Chapters are designed; only in this we
shall fall more directly on the question it self.

Those that differ from us make many distinctions of a fleshly carnal seed of
Abraham, and of a spiritual seed, a believing and a natural seed, which
distinctions are taken out of Romans 9.7, 8. Gal. 4.23. and Chap. 3.16. and most
true, if well applied; but before I come to open the Scriptures, I would
premise these considerations concerning Abraham, and his seed.

1. That Abraham's spiritual seed were as much his fleshly seed also, Isaac as
Ishmael, except Proselytes and Servants.

2. The Covenant was administered to all Abraham's natural and fleshly Children,
as if they had been spiritual, and before they knew what faith was, or could
actually profess Abraham's faith.

3. It Is no contradiction in d fferent respects, to be a seed of the flesh by
natural generation, and a Child under the same promise made with the Parent;
for they both agreed in Abraham's case; none was a Child of promise, but as he
came of Abraham's flesh: and as he came from Abraham's flesh, so every one had
the seal of Gods Covenant on his flesh: Thus a spiritual promise was made with
Abraham and his carnal seed.

4. There was no distinction of Abraham's fleshly seed and his spiritual seed,
in the O. T. but all comprehended under the same Covenant, until they
degenerated from Abraham's faith, and proved themselves to be mere carnal* and
rejected the promise.

5. There is a carnal and spiritual seed of Abraham, even under the N. T. as
our Opposites must acknowledge, as well as Infants; so are the most visible
Professors which they baptize; which may have no grace; and many prove carnal
indeed, through the predominancy of their lusts and corruptions.

6. When there is mention of Abraham's carnal seed in opposition to spiritual
seed, it cannot be meant primarily or solely of those that descended from
Abraham's flesh: for then Isaac and Jacob were the carnal seed, yea Christ
himself, who as concerning the flesh came of Abraham; it must be therefore of
those of Abraham's seed which degenerated, and slighted the Covenant of the
Gospel, and these were properly the carnal seed.

Suitable to this is that distinction of Abraham being a natural and a
spiritual Father: For,

First, He was a natural Father to these to whom he was a spiritual Father, as
to Isaac and Jacob, and the godly of their posterity.

Secondly, All to whom he was a natural Father were under the Covenant, and had
the seal, until they rejected themselves; the promise took in both relations,
as to outward administration, Romans 3.1, 2, 3, 4. And if men truly state things
you may argue as much against Abraham's natural seed from enjoying these
privileges, as believers natural seed now, and with as much evidence of truth.

But let us weigh these Scriptures which are brought by our Opposites: First,
consider that of Romans 9.6, 7, 8. They are not all Israel that are of Israel;
neither because they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed be called; that is, they which are the Children of the
flesh, these are not the Children of God: but the Children of promise are
accounted for the seed.

The Apostle in this Chapter does with a bleeding heart begin the sad story of
the Jews rejection from being a Church, and speaks as one loath to mention it,
and therefore brings it in with a passionate and hearty Apology, v. 1, 2, 3. he
was in heaviness, he could wish himself (...), accursed from Christ, for his
brethren, his Kinsmen according to the flesh, that is, for these that we call
Jews according to the flesh.

Q. But what needed all this trouble to have a carnal generation of men cut of?
why does Paul Paul take on so heavily?

Sol. In the 4, and 5, v. he tells you, Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the
adoption of glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the service
of God, and the promises, whose are the Fathers, of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came: Here is a Catalogue of high privileges which belonged to
the Jews, which they were to be cut off from, which lay on Paul's heart, and was
like to sink him.

Ob. Well, might some say, v. 6. then the promise of God is in vain, if they be
rejected unto whom the adoption and the promises belong.

Sol. The Apostle anticipates that Objection, Not as though the Word of God
has taken no effect; no, the promise is the same, and immutable; but they are
not all Israel which are of Israel; neither because they are the seed of
Abraham, are they all Children, etc. This is the very natural coherence of
these words; let us now use our judgments to distinguish and review the place,
and we shall find it a weapon whose edge is turned against these that count it
their own.

1. The Apostle is sadly troubled for his kinsmen after the flesh, for their
rejection; his reason is, because of the Covenant, and the promises made to
them, because they were the natural seed of Abraham: which holds forth that the
promises and the privileges of the Covenant were made indefinitely to all the
Israelites.

2. That it is a most sad thing to be excluded from the outward and general
administration of the Covenant. Why should Paul thus break out in his
affections, for the loss of outward privileges, if it were not such a mercy to
be under them?

3. The Apostle holds forth, that persons may be under the outward
administrations of the Covenant, and yet not get the efficacy of it; v. 6. They
are not all Israel that are of Israel; the Covenant was made with Abraham and
his seed, all that were of him: and yet all were not Israel, that is, partakers
of the inward life and efficacy of the Covenant; the Apostle only in these
verses endeavors to take off that Objection, that God had broke his Covenant
by casting away the Jews, and so distinguishes of these that were merely of
his flesh, who had the outward administration, but not the inward fruit, and
these which were elect in the promise, In Isaac shall thy seed be called; the
rest he calls the Children of the flesh, the former the Children of promise, v.
8. and so though they were under the outward dispensation of the Covenant, yet
God was not mutable, nor his promise, though he rejected them because of their
own degeneration; so that the sum of this place is,

1. That the Covenant was made in general with Abraham's seed, to all that came
from him.

2. That in the administration of general and indefinite promises, there is a
secret distinction, and a vein of election carried through the administration,
that takes hold of some, not of others.

3. That none are the Children of promise, real Saints, but those that have the
true effects of the Covenant in their hearts.

4. That all Children of Believers, though the promise visibly belong to them,
as to Abraham and his seed, yet may not follow their Parents faith, and so not
be Israel, though of Israel.

But here is nothing at all to demonstrate that Infants, because Children of
the flesh, are not under the promise: but rather the contrary; for in Isaac
shall thy seed be called, says God; now he was a Child of Abraham's flesh, as
well as these which were cast off, and yet a Child of promise; so God makes his
Covenant indefinitely with believers and their seed, and yet the efficacy of
the Covenant may reach but some, an Isaac or a Jacob, an elect vessel* and yet
the other under the outward administration, until they manifest the contrary:
But more of this from that, Acts 2.38, 39.

I come now to that other place so much urged by them, Gal. 3.16. Now to
Abraham and his seed were the promises made; he says not, to seeds, as of
many, but of one, which is Christ: Now by Christ here cannot be meant barely
Christ personal: for then no believer should be accounted for the seed but only
Christ; it must be meant of Christ mystically or Politically considered, as the
visible Head of the Church; if to Christ mystical, then to all the Elect as in
him, and so to Infants as well as grown persons, who make up that mystical
body: but thus the promise is conveyed under ground as it were, none knows the
veins of it* thus in the Old Testament flesh and flesh came from Abraham, the
Covenant administered to them both by its seal, yet one flesh enjoying the
spiritual blessings, the other rejected.

Take the promise to be made to Christ, the seed, as the Head of a visible
Church, then still it speaks for us; for Infants of believers were never cast
out of the visible Church they were once in; and the promise is made now to
them with their Parents, as shall be hereafter proved at large: but if we look
no further back then the 14th v. of this Chapter, we shall receive some light
to this: It Is said in the 13th v. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us, etc. that the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles through Christ: Abraham's blessing what was it, but the promises,
and the fruits, and privileges of the promise and Covenant made to him and his
seed? The same blessing is now come on the Gentiles, but through Christ, who
took away all obstructions in the passage of the Covenant by his death: Now,

1. This blessing of Abraham was not personal, but to him and his seed.

2. This very blessing is come on Gentile believers, as on Abraham: therefore
it must come on believers of the Gentiles, and their seed also: For,

3. It cannot be called Abraham's blessing, except it come on the Gentiles
according to the substantial terms of Abraham's Covenant: Now this was the
absolute form of Abraham's blessing, I will be a God of thee and thy seed; and
this very blessing is come on the Gentiles through Christ, as it came on
Abraham; and therefore it must be to believing Gentiles, and their seed: else
it will neither be Abraham's blessing in the form, nor fatness of it; Abraham's
blessing will descend on the Gentiles clipped half off, not like it self: And it
must needs be a very uncouth saying to all judicious ears, to say, that
Abraham's blessing is come on the Gentiles by Christ, as it was on the Jews by
Abraham, and exclude half the Subjects at once from any right to it; for so you
must, if you cast out the seed of Gentile believers.

And to what end should the Apostle say The blessing of Abraham, and not the
promise or Covenant is come to the Gentiles, but that he intended it to the
Gentile believers and their seed, as formerly it came to Abraham and his? This
shall be further cleared from Acts 2. and Romans 11. in their order.

But in Gal. 3.29. the Apostle (say they) describes who are the seed; If you be
Christ's, then you are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise: So that
now no Children born of believing Parents can be the seed; for they must be
Christ's, according to that in v. 26. We are all the Children of God through
faith in Christ Jesus.

In general, not to omit that which Beza says on the place, that Claromontanus
Bible has the words thus, and as he thinks more right, (...), If you be one in
Christ, then are ye Abraham's seed: This is suitable to the former verse, where
he says, There is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, etc. but ye
are all one in Christ Jesus; and if ye be all one, then Abraham's seed: From
which,

1. It Is clear the Apostle is endeavoring to take away all d fference between
Jew and Gentile, and to hold forth their unity in Christ, where there is no
distinction as formerly: but now the Gentiles being one in Christ, are Abraham's
seed, as well as the natural and believing Jews.

2. The Apostle here has no intent to show the distinction of Abraham's seed as
the subject of the outward privileges, and administrations of Ordinances, but
to show that none are spiritually and really Abraham's seed, and heirs of
promise, but such as are Christ's, one in him with Abraham: For if this should
be the distinction of seed as the subject of outward Ordinances, it would be as
much against professing believers as Infants; for there is a carnal profession
as well as a fleshly generation, the former more abominable.

The Proposition from this expression, as they draw it, is thus; None but these
who are Christ's are Abraham's seed, and none are Christ's but real believers,
and therefore none but they must be baptized.

Thus some say (though weakly) The spiritual seed are now the subject of
Baptism, the new Creature, the man in Christ, Baptism knows no flesh, with many
such like expressions from this and other places: But let us weigh things.

1. If none but such are Abraham's seed, and so none but such the subject of
Baptism, then visible believers are not the subject of Baptism; for they may
not be Christs', or new Creatures, no more then Infants; hardly one among
twenty that are truly in Christ among the most glorious of them, and so not
Abraham's seed.

2. None must be baptized at all upon this account; for who knows who is
Christ's according to election and saving faith?

If they say We have charitable grounds to believe so of visible Professors,
until we see the contrary;

I answer, This is nothing to the Question, as it is stated, nor as it lies in
the text; the text says, If ye be Christ's, then ye are Abraham's seed: You say
none are in Christ but real believers, and you must baptize none but a
spiritual seed, and new Creatures, which will require not only a judgment of
charity, but infallibility to determine.

2. The Apostle is here describing what the real seed and spiritual seed are,
as having an inward right to Christ, and not what the apparent seed of Abraham's
was: For,

1. Mark whom he speaks unto; to grown persons, the Galatians, who were visible
Professors and Believers.

2. He puts them to a trial of themselves, whether they were Christ's or no,
after they had made a profession; for they having legaliz'd, and returned to
look after Jewish Ordinances and works, he tells them, their Ordinances were
nothing, their privileges nothing, being Jew or Greek, but as they were in
Christ: The same he follows on, Chap. 6.15. In Christ neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature: So that the Apostle here
puts an [If] to the professing Galatians, If ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's seed.

3. If you have no more but the judgment of your charity to distinguish thus
of men in Christ, real believers, and Abraham's seed, then we have the same
ground of charity to act on Infants of believers: For,

1. They may be Christ's as well as grown persons.

2. God would have us account them holy, as we shall prove from that, 1 Cor.
7.14.

3. Seeing they have been taken into the same Covenant.

4. Seeing Christ showed so much respect to Infants, when brought to him. To
judge a visible Professor to be Christ's and Abraham's seed, I have nothing but
the purblind eye of my probable judgment. To judge a believers Infant
Christ's, I have a general Scripture assertion, and the ground of an indefinite
promise, which is more then all my conjectures: So that,

1. Visible Professors are not the spiritual seed of Abraham; for they may not
be Christ's; therefore there is no spiritual seed but these that have saving
faith, which all have not.

2. Infants of believers are as much the spiritual seed of Abraham as visible
professing believers, and we have as much ground to judge of the one as the
other, until they manifest the contrary; and our judgment on them may have
less deceit in it then there is in that we pass on grown persons.

3. If you will distinguish of Abraham's fleshly seed and spiritual under the
Gospel, you cannot apply it to Infants, but to professing believers; for the
Children of believers are not the fleshly seed of Abraham; but if there be any
such distinction, it must be between visible grown Professors, of whom some are
spiritual, and Christ's; and others carnal, and born under Mount Sinai, and not
Christ's.

4. It Is a true rule in Logic, that in every good division, Parts debent
inter se opponi, The Parts ought to be opposite: Now to be born from Abraham
both as a natural and spiritual Father, was both common, through the promise in
the Old Testament, and not universally opposite; and so it may be now; an
Infant is born of the flesh of a believer, yet the Covenant makes the believer
a spiritual Father in some respects, as well as a natural.

5. The seed takes its denomination from the Covenant, and its tenure; and if
the Covenant be made to Abraham and his seed, and these were at first Infants
of his body, and renewed with believers in the N. T. as we shall prove in the
following Discourse: then Infants of believers are the seed now as well as
formerly, Abraham only being the first root and Father.

6. Visibility of profession does no more make a man of the spiritual seed, and
so Christ's now under the New Testament, then the Covenant in its outward
administration in the Old, made all the Jews and their Children really new
Creatures, and a spiritual seed; for under the one, and the other, persons may
be carnal.

All these considerations are to show that these places of Scripture are
mistaken, and do not show who is the seed as to Ordinances, but who are the
seed as to election and salvation; and that Infants may be as well the seed,
notwithstanding all these places, as well as visible Professors.

Q. If any say, But we have no warrant to judge of any but by visible
profession.

Sol. 1. Let us judge as God would have us, and we shall find as much ground to
pass such a judgment on Infants as them; if God call them holy, we may do so,
and it will be dangerous then to call them unclean.

2. The promise is the surer way of judging, seeing at best we can but judge
externally, and with hopes; and it is better to rely on God, and to expect what
he will do through his promise, at least on some, then to trust my own
judgment.

3. The Word owns Infants of believers visibly, as we own visible Professors,
as the Scriptures following will demonstrate.

For the present, seriously view all these places together, Genesis 17.7. Acts
2.38, 39. Deuteronomy. 30.6.11, 12, 13, 14. Romans 10.1, 6, 7, 8. with Heb. 8.10, 11.
Jer. 31.22. Esaias 65.23. with many such places, that hold forth the seed to
Infants as well in the New Testament as in the Old.

I end this Chapter with this consideration, that if you exclude Infants of
believers to be Abraham's seed, upon this ground because they are not the
spiritual seed: then dash out the name as well of grown Professors to be
Abraham's seed, who are no more so really because of that, then these Infants,
and we shall quit the one with the other, and then there shall be found no
visible subjects of Baptism, either of Infants or grown persons: for they are
both, as to election and inward grace, unknown to us to be Abraham's seed; they
were both formerly accounted Abraham's seed, grown persons, and Infants
especially by the Covenant; and now the one is to be accounted Abraham's seed,
viz. grown persons professing, though they may have no right to the inward
grace of the Covenant; and Infants who had first right next to Abraham, must be
excluded, though they have never so real an interest, because they are Infants,
and cannot speak for themselves: But so much of this; the next Chapter will
second this.

CHAP. IV. How any person may be said to be in the Covenant; the diverse
considerations about it.
TO the former let this be added, because it seems strange how any can be in
Covenant, and yet not partake of salvation: In opening of this, the common
distinctions of all Divines must be repeated, that according as there is an
internal and external administration of the Covenant, so there is a twofold
being in the Covenant:

1. Secundum propositum electionis, According to the purpose of election in
Gods heart, and his eternal decree; so only the elect, and these which have
saving faith, are in Covenant: this some call, and not improperly, to be
intentionally in Covenant, God principally intending the Covenant to them;
others call it spiritually and savingly from the effect.

2. There is a being in Covenant In facie visibilis Ecclesiae, In the face, or
according to the judgment of a visible Church, where judgment and charity are
mixed together, Romans 9.4. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 12, 13, 14. John 15.2. John 1.11. Psalm.
50.5. with variety of Scripture: And of such there are two sorts.

1. Such as stand by their own visible profession, as all first Covenanters
do, so all visible Saints now, and so many Proselytes in the Old Testament,
Exodus 12.44, 45. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. Genesis 12.5. Or else,

2. As in a Political Moral consideration, as in the right of another through a
free promise; as if a Prince give a title of honor, or a piece of land to one
and his heirs, they are all interested it, yet some prove fools, or traitors,
and are afterward incapable: It Is so in this, and was with Abraham and his
seed: Now that this distinction holds in the New Testament, I shall thus
discover to you.

1. If men deny an external, as well as internal being in Covenant, none can
administer an external Ordinance, an outward sign to any; for we must go by
external rules in these actings.

2. Visible Professors will have the worst of it; for we must administer no
Ordinance to these which are not internally in Covenant; and we have no proof
but their own expressions, and our good hopes, and present probable judgment
to warrant us, and many visible miscarriages to contradict our judgments and
hopes at special times.

3. We set a seal to a blank to all grown persons who are baptized, or receive
the Lords Supper, without we know them certainly in the Covenant; and that who
knows? for our judgment will no more hinder the seal from being a blank to
grown Professors, then to Infants, without they prove real at last.

4. The best evidence you can have from any, of their being in Covenant, is but
visible expressions, suppositions, and hopes, and probabilities, all which you
must help out by your own charity, and fallible observation; for God has
promised no seal on my spirit for another man's condition; it is a blessed mercy
if I get the seal on my own heart for my self.

So that the great Question will be answered from this, which Mr. Tombs and
they all urge, That if God made the Covenant with believers, and their seed,
they must all be saved, etc. With which I shall but thus parley.

1. Does God make the Covenant of salvation with every visible Professor whom
they baptize? or with every visible Saint? or do they baptize them out of
Covenant? Then how come any to fall off, and be damned? or what rule have they
to baptize by?

2. Why should it be thought more heinous to set a seal on Infants, as in the
Covenant, then on these Professors which afterward prove not to be in Covenant?

3. Or do they baptize, because that persons are in the Covenant? If not, then
upon no spiritual account; if upon their being in Covenant, then either
internally or externally; on the first it cannot be absolutely, but as
manifested externally; not upon a mere external being in Covenant; for then
they may set a seal to a blank: if upon both together, the one externally
demonstrated by the other, then it is still by the external being in Covenant
that we judge with hopes of the other. There is a trick that some have got,
whereby they think to evade this being in Covenant, as the fundamental ground
of Baptism, by this distinction; That it is not being in Covenant, but being an
actual Believer, gives right: To which I answer,

1. That the Covenant, take it spiritually, is the ground of faith, not faith
of the Covenant.

2. If the Covenant be the ground of faith (for who can believe without a
promise?) it may well be the ground of an outward privilege.

3. To separate the Covenant from the conveyance of actual privileges, is
almost as dangerous as to separate actual faith from the Covenant; for the one
gives a right as well as the other.

4. Infants in the Old Testament were thus as really to be esteemed in the
Covenant as actual visible Believers are now; and under the external
administration of the Covenant, as the Proselytes, who came in to the Jewish
Church, and were the first fruits of the Gentiles.

For that there is an external administration of the Covenant of Abraham, or
rather of God in Christ, even in the New Testament, is clear; for that many
were baptized who proved hypocrites, and many believed visibly likewise, as
Simon Magus, Hymenaeus, Alexander, Philetus, etc. many in all the Churches: and
yet these must be accounted the spiritual seed, though most wicked, because
they can profess their own present sudden faith: and poor Infants of believers
must be accounted the carnal seed, though so long under a Gospel promise; of
which you shall not want proof hereafter.

Now that all which are baptized, or have any Ordinance, have it administered
fundamentally on the ground of the Covenant externally administered, I prove
thus.

1. God administers all his graces by Covenant, much more outward Ordinances.

2. Souls can have no challenge, or interest in God, but by some Covenant or
other; God is tied to none, but as he ties himself.

3. If there were not a visible and external administration of the Covenant,
none should know of the invisible design of it unto any; all things would be in
the dark to us, as to Gods Covenant, in a visible dispensation.

4. If this invisible design were not secretly carried on in an outward visible
dispensation, there could be none condemned by an outward rule; for who can
condemn these who are intentionally and invisibly in Covenant, or for Re? And
if every one visibly in Covenant be intentionally and spiritually in Covenant,
it is just the same.

The whole is this; None are in Covenant (say they) but real believers, the
spiritual seed, so none to be baptized but such: when it comes to application
of the Ordinance, then none are the spiritual seed but visible believers; and
these visible believers can be judged by no way but by an external profession
to be in Covenant; and Infants are no visible believers, therefore no spiritual
seed; when as the one is as visible by promise, as the other by profession.

CHAP. V. Opening that place in Acts 2.39. (...).
THIS Text I first hold forth as fit to discover the New Testament application
of the Covenant of grace, and its continuation to believers and their seed, as
to Abraham and his in the Old Testament: It Is the first Argument used after
Christ's Ascension, to provoke the Jews to repent, and submit to Gospel
ordinances; and the first open promulgation of the Covenant both to Jew and
Gentile, with the prime privileges of it; in which is contained the
Gospel Covenant made with believers and their seed.

1. Here is ((...)) the promise; which can be no other then the promise of
remission of sins, and so of salvation; suitable to that in Genesis 17.7. and
repeated at large in Jer. 31.34. For it must either be a promise of temporal
things, or spiritual; of temporal things it cannot be; for there is no absolute
promise of these things in the New Testament, but as included in, or following
spiritual mercies, as Mat. 6.33. Neither is there a syllable in this Chapter
pressing men to look after temporal enjoyments, or engaging them to embrace the
Gospel by any outward emoluments.

Ob. The great and only interpretation of this promise by these that differ,
is, that it has reference to v. 16. and is meant of the promise of the holy
Ghost prophesied of by Joel, Chap. 2.28. which was to be poured forth in the
latter days, and now visibly and eminently begun to be fulfilled at the day of
Pentecost.

To which the Answer will be clear and fair, though that be granted; and not at
all weaken, but strengthen the former sense: For,

1. That promise is a spiritual promise, and more large and comprehensive of
spiritual mercies then any other; the promising of the spirit is as much as to
promise all at once, graces, gifts, yea Heaven it self, for all are but the
fruits of this promise; Christ in the Old Testament, and the Spirit in the New,
contain all the promises in an eminency. When Jesus Christ was to leave the
World, and speak all his heart at once, and leave his last blessing, that
should be better then his bodily presence among them, he expresses all in this,
that he would send the Spirit, Joh. 14.16, 26. Chapter 15.26. 16.7. And of this
large promise, as well according to Christ's promise before his Ascension, as
Joels Prophesy, the Apostles and Believers received the first fruits in this
solemn day of Christ's triumph: So that to say it is the promise of the Spirit,
is as much as to say it is the promise of all spiritual things: For this read in
Gal. 3.14. the Apostle speaking of the fruits of Christ's death, says, It was
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ,
that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith: The same phrase
that is in this 38. And in the promise of the spirit, which is to be received
by faith, is included justification, sanctification, yea all graces, and it is
here joined with the blessing of Abraham: But,

2. If they take the promise of the Spirit in a limited and restrictive sense,
for the external gifts, as the most do, for the gifts of tongues, and miracles,
and prophesy, they both clip the promise, and make the argument and comfort
from it invalid, and of no efficacy.

1. It Is a mighty wrong to that famous promise of the Spirit, to circumscribe
it in these accidental gifts which were especially necessary, and almost only
for that season: when it is a promise that reaches all the latter days, and is
still accomplishing, though all these extraordinary gifts are ceased.

2. This straightened sense is expunged by the manner of the expressions of that
Prophesy, both in Joel, and this in the Acts, I will pour out of my spirit on
all flesh, and on your servants and handmaids will I pour out of my spirit:
Which shows the universality and variety of the subjects, and blessings in this
promise, that it shall be so large and full a mercy, as if there were to be no
limitation of its measure.

3. If it were meant merely of these gifts, why then there is no more benefit
of that promise after the Apostles days, but that Christ was out of date, and
did expire with that age; whereas it is a promise made for all the time of the
New Testament, which is expressed by the latter days, and the last days, up and
down the Scripture.

A parallel promise to this you have in Isa. 44.3. I will pour water on him
that is thirsty, and floods on the dry ground; I will pour my spirit on thy
seed, and my blessing on thy offspring: Now the promise of the spirit is
always appropriated to the New Testament days.

And secondly, This cannot be the meaning of this phrase, if we consider to
whom the Apostle speaks, to persons pricked in their hearts, wounded for their
sins in crucifying of Jesus Christ, crying out, v. 37. Men and Brethren, what
shall we do to be saved? Now what comfort could this be to tell them they
should have extraordinary gifts? their hearts were bleeding under sin, their
eye was on salvation, they saw no hopes of it, nor knew the way to obtain it;
the Apostle bids them repent and be baptized; they might have said, What shall
we be the better? why (says the Apostle) You shall receive the gift of the
holy Ghost; for the promise is unto you: What promise? of gifts, of tongues and
miracles: What is this to our souls? how will this save us? might they well
object. It would be but a poor comfort to a wounded soul for to tell him of a
promise of gifts, not of spiritual grace; and the holy Ghost is a better
Physician then to apply such a raw improper plaster to a wounded heart, which
would hardly heal the skin: this promise is brought in as a cordial, to keep
them from fainting, and to give them spirits to believe, and lay hold on Jesus
Christ: And truly no other promise but that of free grace, in order to
salvation, can be imagined to give them comfort in that condition.

But to put all out of question, That the promise prophesied of in Joel, and
quoted here, was the promise of salvation, and the same with the Covenant of
Grace, Consult the Original in Joel, and the parallel in this of the Acts; in
Joel 2.27. the Prophet founds all the promises that went before, and all that
come after, on this, That he is the Lord their God, and none else; which was
the very express words in that Covenant made with Abraham: And then afterward,
viz. in the New Testament, to make out this fully, He will pour out his spirit
on all flesh, etc. v. 32. which is a part of that prophesy, and is quoted again
in v. 21. Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved; one
grace put for all; and salvation being put at the end of the promise, must
needs be the aim of it. The same expression you have again repeated, Romans 10.13.

And in the former v. 38. he exhorts them to repent, (...), for the remission
of sin; the exhortation is to a Gospel duty; the effect and profit of it was to
be remission of sins, and receiving the gift of the holy Ghost; and the promise
must needs be answerable, by which all is enforced; and it must needs have been
a mighty low and disproportionable way of persuasion, to put them upon such
high things in the former verse, and to encourage them only by the narration of
a promise of some temporary gifts in the following, when their eye and heart
was set on remission of sins, and salvation by Jesus Christ; and nothing but a
promise holding forth these mercies could have been considerable to them.

And it is very observable, in that verse he joins remission of sins with the
gift of the holy Ghost; and then adds the promise to both, as the ground of one
and the other, and comprehending both: And for that expression of Receiving the
gift of the holy Ghost, it may well be noted, that it is (...), the free gift;
not (...), the gifts of the holy spirit; noting the very sending of the spirit
as a free gift to bestow all mercies on them; and so respecting rather the free
and bounteous manner of bestowing the holy Ghost on them, then any limited
effects of his reception.

By all which it is demonstrated, that this is no ordinary, common, no temporal
promise, or of mere gifts, though never so extraordinary, but a promise of free
grace.

I only add this to all the rest, as undeniable by the principles of these
that differ; it is a promise made not only to these Jews, but it is universally
to the Gentiles, and to all the called of God: but all that are called have not
received such gifts of the holy Ghost which then were given: but every one that
is effectually called does receive the promise of remission of sins, and the
free favor of God, and therefore this promise must be taken mainly in that
sense.

But the great difficulty is in the following part of the verse, and about the
interest of their Children in this promise; and therefore the next work must be
to make out this, that the Children as well as the Parents are included in this
promise, as they were in the promise made with Abraham.

1. Let us consider to whom the Apostle speaks: to the Jews, who were pricked in
their hearts; The promise is to you and your Children: He speaks to them after
the wonted manner of expression in the Old Testament, when ever the promise is
mentioned; and uses their own language in which they were trained up in from
their Fathers; I will be the God of thee and thy seed, Genesis 17. The promise is
to you and your Children: If the Apostle had intended to exclude their Children
from the same privileges they had formerly by the Covenant, he would never
have spoken in such a known dialect of the Old Testament; and to Jews, who
could take it in no other sense but this, that the promise shall run as
formerly, to them and their seed.

2. Let us mind on what ground this is brought in, viz. as an argument and
strong inducement of them to repent and be baptized, as in the former verse;
for the promise is to you and your seed: He encourages them from this to
receive the Ordinance of Baptism themselves, for the promise was still the same
to them and their Children; only now they must first believe and be baptized
themselves, ere their Children could be considered in the promise: If the
Apostle had not intended to hold forth to them now believing and being
baptized, and their Children, the same privileges they had before as to the
promise, it would have been the greatest delusion instead of an argument to
persuade them to be baptized on this ground, because the promise was to them
and their Children; they had been rather deceived by it then enlightened; and
stumbled by such a proposition more then informed of a New Testament
administration.

3. Upon what hinge can this Exhortation turn? where is the virtue and strength
it has to move them to be baptized themselves, but on this consideration, that
they should not only enjoy blessings themselves, through the promise, but their
Children with them? The promise to them was enough for themselves to submit to
that Ordinance: but the height of the enforcement is from the riches of the
promise, that it was not only to them, but their Children; they might bless
themselves and theirs by submitting to the Gospel; else to put in the name of
their Children speaking to the Jews, was but to lay a temptation before them,
and rather to puzzle them then encourage them: And doubtless the Holy Ghost
would never in the first opening of the Gospel, and encouraging souls to
embrace it, use such a language and expression that might deceive those he
spoke unto: for what could the Jews imagine or conceive upon such a discovery,
but that if they themselves did repent and were baptized, the promise should be
the same in the N. T. to them and their Children, as it was formerly to
Abraham, upon his believing and being circumcised, to him and his seed? there
being no expression the Jews were so accustomed to, and more delighted in, then
that of the promise to them and their Children: And but to mention their
Children with the promise, if it was not meant to hold forth that they were
still in the promise, was sufficient to have deceived them, who were never
instructed in any other method: The great design of the Apostle was to open the
N. T. promise, and by that to encourage the poor wounded Jews to repent and be
baptized: And that they might have no cloud on their apprehensions, or
discouragement, he utters it in lingua vernacula, in the phrase the promise was
always expressed in the Old Testament.

4. If the intent of the Apostle were not to hold forth the sameness and
identity of the privilege of the promise to the Jews and Gentiles now
believing, as was formerly; he would never have mentioned Children when he
mentions Baptism, and especially not in the same line with the promise made to
the Parents; and with one breath express the promise to both, and make that the
strength of his argument to put them on the practice of that Ordinance: And
doubtless it had not been so candid a way, nor suitable to the simplicity of the
Gospel, to tell them of their Children, just when he tells them of being
baptized themselves; and name them immediately with the promise, if the design
was utterly to exclude them both from the promise and Baptism. I have been the
longer inculcating these considerations, because there is much in them, and
engaged persons can slightly pass over the most eminent places with a mere
glance.

Ob. But it is objected, That the latter clause, ((...)) As many as the Lord
shall call, is a limitation of the verse, and no more are under the promise;
and so Children, if God shall call them, shall also enjoy the promise.

Sol. For answer to this last Objection, which is the strength of their
confidence from this place, we must consider these particulars.

1. That in this verse you have an exact distribution of the world into Jew and
Gentile, according to the usual distribution in other Scriptures; the Gentiles
being usually called these afar off, and the promise equally distributed among;
only he adds (as many as the Lord shall call) to these which are afar, as most
proper in that place: but it can in no sense be referred to the former part of
the verse, either to Parents or Children: For,

1. He changes the tense in both parts of the verse; in the first part unto the
Jews, he speaks de praesenti, of the present application of the promise; Repent
you, and be baptized -- for the promise is to you and your Children; even now
the promise is offered to you; and they were then under the call of God: But
when he speaks of the Gentiles, because they were yet afar off, and not at all
called, he speaks de futuro, as many as God shall call, even of them also;
which is the first express hint of the calling of the Gentiles in all the Acts
of the Apostles.

2. How unequal would the distribution be of this verse, not suitable to the
laws of expression among rational men? If As many as the Lord shall call,
should be a limitation to the former part of the verse, the word, Children,
must needs be redundant and superfluous; for Jews and Gentiles comprehend all
the world. Now Children must either be one part of the world, or comprehended
under one or both names, or be a distinct world by themselves, neither Jews nor
Gentiles: And this must needs follow on such a reading of the words; for the
design of the Apostle is to hold forth the freeness of the promise to Jew and
Gentile, and their Children; to these Jews at present, to the Gentiles and
their Children when God should call the Parents, as he did these Jews. Now put
Children by themselves, as a third party, and add whom the Lord shall call, and
you exclude them from being either Jews or Gentiles, and so excommunicate them
from any hopes of calling, or being saved: Now this is,

1. Contrary to that known rule in Logic, That Omnis bona distributio debet
esse bimembris; only of two members, and these opposite one to another; to
bring in a third marrs all. So that it is most clear, the words must be
understood as they are translated; The promise is to you Jews, and your
Children at present, and to those afar off also, and their Children, when God
shall call them; else calling can with no sense be applied to any tittle of the
former part of the verse, without you make it monstrous, and unlike it self.

2. It Is against another rule about distribution, which is, That Parts
divisionis ambulent aequali passu, That the parts of a distribution should be
equally set together. Now here will be a mighty inequality, as to the
communication of the promise; if the words should be taken in their sense, the
Jews will have a greater privilege then the Gentiles, if Children be not
equally added to both; the Jews had the promise made to them and their Children
at present; these afar off shall only have the promise to themselves, but not
their Children.

3. Consider how comes this word (your Children) to be kept in, for what end
and use, if it were not to show some special privilege they have with their
Parents, when God calls or converts the Parent? what stands it for but a stone
of offense to conscientious hearts?

OBJECTION.
All they answer to this, is, that the Apostle names their Children to comfort
their Parents, because they had wished Christ's blood on their Children, and so
to give them hopes they might yet be saved, if God should call them.

SOLUTION.
To see the sad shifts of error, is wonderful: Can any man imagine, that the
Parents could doubt more, or so much of their Childrens being accepted and
saved, when God should call them who were innocent, and only under the sudden
rash curse of their Parents, when they saw that the promise was to themselves,
and Christ offered pardon to themselves, who were the actual murderers of the
Lord Jesus.

2. Such a consideration would rather sadden them then refresh them, to mention
the calling of their Children: For they might more doubt of that, then of any
thing, whether God would call them or no, and be as far to seek as ever they
were, that they would have but cold comfort upon this account; this was enough
to break their hearts if that were in their eye; the old way of conveying the
promise is cut off, no promise but to called ones; our poor Children are
uncalled, and God knows whether ever they may be called of God: Thus might they
reason: But when he includes them in the same promise with Parents, and exhorts
the Parents to repent, upon this ground, that the promise is to them and their
Children; this savours like a Gospel-comforting-exhortation, and could not be
but of great efficacy upon their spirits.

4. What strange mysterious tautologies would be in this one verse? if that
last sentence should refer to all the former expressions, we must read it thus
to make out their sense.

The promise is to you Parents of the Jews, when God shall call you (and they
were then under the call) and to your grown Children, when God shall call them;
and to all which are afar off, when God shall call them: Can any man with his
understanding about him think the Holy Ghost should faulter so much in common
expression of his mind, when there was no need of adding or calling to any
part, but to these that were afar off, who were never yet under Gods Gospel
call?

Lastly, the word, Children, may and must be understood of Little Ones,
Infants, not of adult and grown persons, for these reasons,

1. The word here ((...)) properly signifies an offspring, any thing brought
forth, though it be but of a day, of a moment old: Thus when a woman is said to
be in pain, and to bring forth, this word is used, John 16.21. Luke 1.31. Mat.
1.26. Luke 1.57.

2. It Is an indefinite word, and therefore may not be restrained to grown
Children, except God had expressed it in a peculiar phrase.

3. It must needs be especially meant of Little Ones, because they are
distinguished from themselves, who were men of years. Now when we distinguish
between Men and Children, we suppose the one adult, the other under age, and
not grown up; and it is contrary to all ways of expression to think otherwise.

4. It cannot be rationally conjectured otherwise because the Apostle does join
them with their Parents in the same promise, and not leave them to stand by
themselves, as grown persons must.

So that all things weighed, this Text of Scripture, if there were no more,
holds forth the fameness of the promise to Believers of the Gospel, both Jew
and Gentile, and their Children, as ever it was to Abraham, and his natural
seed.

CHAP. VI. Their great Plea from Mat. 3.8, 9. concerning John the Baptists
Speech to the Pharisees and Sadduces, made vain, and that Text cleared from
mistakes.
THAT we may still take off the main Objections, let us view that place so much
stood on, Mat. 3.7, 8, 9. When John saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come
to his Baptism, he says, O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to
flee from the wrath to come? bring forth fruits meet for repentance: And think
not to say within your selves we have Abraham to our Father; for I say that God
is able of these stones to raise up Children to Abraham. From this Text they
gather, that the pretense of being Abraham's Children could not give them a
right to Baptism; and if John denied Abraham's natural seed on that account,
much more would he the adopted Children.

That this is no such ominous place against Infant Baptism, Consider,

1. Who they were he speaks unto, the Pharisees and Sadduces, men at age, and
degenerated from Abraham's faith, persons that lived on their own works and
righteousness; therefore he calls them (...), A generation of Vipers; which was
not as they were Abraham's Children, but as they had not walked in Abraham's
steps, but were quite degenerated: Thus he did not refuse them because Abraham
was their Father, or upon that account that Abraham's seed had not right to the
promise; but as only pretending Abraham to be their Father, when they walked
contrary to the principles of Abraham's faith.

2. This is the same now as to grown visible Professors, who have related their
faith to the Church, and so are baptized upon that account of faith and
repentance; yet if afterward they grow carnal and apostate, and if such should
come to receive the Lords Supper, and challenge it because they are baptized,
we might say the same as John to the Pharisees and Sadduces; Do not think to
say that you are baptized, or that you have had godly Parents; for you are a
generation of Vipers, you have cut off your own right by contrary actings in
your own persons; and yet it does nothing at all impeach the truth of this
position, That Believers and their Infants are in Covenant, and ought to be
judged so until they manifest the contrary; or that if they believed themselves
afterward, the promise should not be unto them and their Children: And that
Text holds not no more then this, That when persons are grown up to years, and
come to understanding, they must then stand on their right, and look to make
out personal qualifications for new Ordinances.

3. This was at the first institution of the Ordinance, when Baptism was newly
administered: Now new institutions (as before) require grown persons, and actual
visible believers to be the first subject of them; they could not baptize their
Children first; for then the Parents would be neglected; and the bringing in of
a new Ordinance requires renewing of special acts in these which partake first
of it; as if an old Lease which is made in the name of a man and his Children,
be at such a season to be renewed upon some certain terms, the man himself must
come, and acknowledge his owning these terms, and then it is to him and his, as
before: So now in the New Testament God renews the Covenant of Abraham, adds a
new initiating seal to it; it was before entailed in such a line, which is cut
off; it is now of the same nature, only every one must come in his own person
first, as Abraham, and enter his own name, and then the promise is to him and
his seed: Thus it was in the former place, where when the Jews came to be
baptized, they were exhorted first to repent and be baptized themselves; then
the promise is to you and your Children: So that this we affirm,

1. That no man must be baptized, or receive an Ordinance by any fleshly
prerogative; but where there is an entail of a promise, there is a spiritual
ground of administration.

2. That no person grown up to years of understanding, has right to a sealing
Ordinance, but upon his own personal qualifications.

3. That persons may have present capacities, and visible right to Ordinances,
and yet afterward cut off themselves, and be found incapable, as Ishmael; and
here the Pharisees and Sadduces.

4. That the exception of some persons, upon the account of their degeneration,
and personal defects, does not hinder but the old privileges of the promise
may be conveyed to these which do really embrace the Gospel, and to their seed;
all these are undeniable in themselves: And this Text reaches no further then
to the exclusion of these which had demonstrated themselves to be only the
Children of the flesh, and not of the promise also; which is a demonstration
only a posteriori, from their after actings; and teaches us that these that
boast in outward privileges, without looking after personal qualifications,
and holy frames within, may be as well judged carnal, as Heathens and profane
persons.

CHAP. VII. That special place in 1 Cor. 7.14. opened, and argued; Else were
your Children unclean, but now they are holy.
THIS place of Scripture, though it seems to stand by it self, yet has full
correspondence and harmony with all other places in the N. T. concerning this
truth. As the former did hold forth the promise, the Covenant to Believers and
their Children, in distinction from all the world: so does this leave a
character of special qualifications suitable to a subject of such an Ordinance;
and when the promise and the qualification shall meet together, there is enough
for to capacitate to any Ordinance.

The Apostle is in this verse answering a scruple which might arise in the
hearts of the Corinthians concerning abiding together of married persons; the
one being a Convert, and a Believer; the other, whether man or woman, an
Unbeliever; as it was a common case in the Apostles times, the Husband might be
converted, the Wife not; and the Wife converted, and not the Husband; the Word
working on the one, not on the other: this begat a doubt in the believing
Party, whether he or she might with a good conscience live together in that
state.

The Apostle answers it, ver. 12, 13. positively, That they ought not to
separate, or leave each other, notwithstanding that the one was an Unbeliever:
And he gives in this ver. 14. a strong and peculiar argument, which he makes
instar omnium; for the unbelieving Husband is sanctified in the believing Wife,
etc. Else were your Children unclean, but now they are holy.

The scope of the Apostle here is to hold forth some special Gospel-priviledge
annexed to the state: and he frames his argument by no ordinary medium, of the
lawfulness of the marriage according to a natural, moral or positive rule, but
a majori, from an eminent advantage they had together in the Gospel: For,

1. The unbelieving Husband is sanctified in, or, to, or by the Wife.

2. The Children in such a state are holy, as if they had been both believers.

That the Apostle holds out a Gospel-priviledge, not common to mere unbelievers
in their marriage state, is clear;

1. Because the Apostle puts the advantage on the believers side, and there
fixes it; the unbelieving Husband is sanctified in the Wife, as believing; and
so contrarily, the unbelieving Wife in the Husband: So Beza affirms, that in
two special Copies he finds the words thus read, (...): neither can it hold
sense with the former words but as thus read: And if it had not been the
Apostles proper meaning to show the special privilege the believing party has
notwithstanding the unbeliever, he would have only said, the Husband is
sanctified to the Wife, and the Wife to the Husband; that would have been the
plainest and least ambiguous expression of such a sentence: and the Apostle
would never have made an argument of four terms, when three could only
satisfy; for all know, that an argument with four terms is most deceitful and
false.

2. The Apostle does use higher terms and phrases in this argument, then is
ever used in Scripture to express a mere lawful or common privilege; as to be
sanctified in the Wife, and the Children to be holy; expressions of another
dialect then to hold forth a civil, or natural, or legal conjunction; being
singled out in Scripture, to hold forth the best state of persons and things,
in relation to God and his use.

And the Apostle uses two terms, both negative and affirmative; they are not
unclean, but holy; the opening of the use of which two words will clear the
point under consideration.

The word here ((...)) unclean, in the Old Testament, is commonly used for
those legal pollutions and uncleanness which made men to be separated from
the Congregation, and excommunicated from the privilege of Ordinances, until
they were washed and sanctified: Thus in Levit. 5.2, 3, 4. Chap. 7.19. and
14.7, 8. Isa. 52.1. Hag. 2.13. with many other places, where unclean is opposed
to a present suitable capacity for Church Priviledges: But that famous place in
Acts 10.14. shows it most clear what the proper use of this word is; he joins
it there with what is common or profane: When the vision came to him of eating
all sorts of Creatures, he says, Not so Lord; for I have not eaten any thing
that is common or unclean ((...)) This vision was about his going to Cornelius
to open the Gospel to him, and bring him into the Church who was a Gentile, and
so common and unclean, not fit for Gospel-priviledges, as the Jews were thought
to be. Now in a civil sense things that are common are not unclean; but in a
religious sense, what is common is adjudged unclean: Now Cornelius being a
Gentile, without the pale of the Jewish Church, he calls him common and unclean,
as all the Gentiles were before they came under the promise: but God answered,
What God has cleansed, or sanctified, call not thou common: Cornelius was not a
Bastard, nor unlawfully begotten; but he was not accounted a fit member, he was
without the Church; therefore the Apostle calls him common and unclean: Just in
the same phrase with the Apostle here, when he says that Children are not
unclean, he must needs mean they are not of common use, or to be excluded from
outward privileges of the Church: But that is not all, but he positively says
they are (holy) (...); not only (...), not unclean: And this latter word is
most used to express the Hebrew word (...), which ever signifies what is usui
Divino accommodatum, that which is appropriated to a Divine use; which is the
proper notion of holiness in the Old and New Testament, and never taken
otherwise: For the proof of which, I have compared above three hundred places
in the Old Testament according to the Septuagint, and all the N. T. places
where the word is used. And this all do grant, even Mr. Tombs himself, that
the word generally is taken in Scripture to express a separation of things to
God, and he only brings these places wherein he thinks there is another use of
it. 1 Timothy 4.5. Every Creature of God is good, and not to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the Word and Prayer ((...))
Hence, says he, is meant only the lawful use of the Creature, in opposition to
what is to be refused. It is a wonder, but that God leaves men to blindness
when they leave truth, how any man of common understanding, finding the Word
holy and sanctified, always used in a religious sense, should fly to this
place to make an exception. The Apostle says first, Every Creature which God
has made is good in it self; and none to be refused: that is, all may be
lawfully used without any legal pollution, as formerly: But then he goes
higher, speaking of a religious use of outward things; They are sanctified by
the Word and Prayer; they are all good, and lawful in their use to every man:
but they are only sanctified by these holy means, the Word and Prayer. And he
might have as well said, that the Word and Prayer are not holy means, but only
lawful to be used; as that the sanctification which is by the Word and Prayer,
is to make the Creatures only lawful to be used. If a wicked man eat his meat
without seeking a blessing on it, or giving thanks, will any one say that he
has not a lawful use of the Creature? but any man may say, it is not sanctified
to him. The Apostle in these 2. ver. goes on gradatim, by degrees, from a
lawful use to a holy use of the Creatures; All is good, and may be used, but
they are sanctified by the Word and Prayer: thus you see the nature of this
privileged place.

But the main place Mr. Tombs alleges for holiness to be used for what is
barely civil or lawful, is that 1 These. 4.3, 4, 7. This is the will of God,
your sanctification, that you abstain from fornication, and let every one
possess his vessel in sanctification and honor; for God has not called us to
uncleanness, but holiness. Here uncleanness is taken, says he, for
fornication, and holiness for chastity.

To which I answer with Mr. Marshal, That chastity among the Heathens is never
called sanctification, but among Believers it is, being a part of the new
Creation, and one branch and part of their sanctification wrought by the Spirit
of God. And though Mr. Tombs says this is but a shift, yet he shall see it
demonstrative, if he observe the phrases in the Text, and the nature of
sanctification; in the 1, and 2. ver. the Apostle beseeches and exhorts them
to walk as they had received from him how to walk, and to please God according
to the rules of Jesus Christ; and he urges it in ver. the 3. with this; It Is
the will of God, even your sanctification, that is, that you should walk in all
holiness, suitable to the blessed rules of the Gospel, and as one part and
expression of holiness, to abstain from sin: And he instanceth specially in
fornication, which was the common and reigning sin among the Gentiles: So that
if you view the place you shall find, That

1. He speaks of sanctification in general, in its full latitude, ver. 3. as
suitable to all the will and mind of God; This is the will of God, even your
sanctification; that is, it is Gods command, and Gods delight to see you
sanctified: then he brings in abstinence from fornication (the sin of the
times) as one part of that holiness God requires: For sanctification may be
considered as it lies in vivification, or in mortification, which for
distinctions sake we may call the two parts of sanctification. Now chastity in
it self, as in the Heathens and natural men, is not properly a part of
sanctification; some other Epithet becomes it better: Would Mr. Tombs call
all the abstinencies and actings of the Heathens by the name of
sanctifications, and speak like a Christian and a Divine? Would it be proper to
say in his Pulpit (when he was speaking of the nature of holiness and chastity)
sanctified Socrates, holy Aristides? And can he think the Apostle would express
that which is common among Heathens, in such a high Gospel-dialect as
sanctification is appropriated always in Scripture to God, Angels, Saints, and
their highest graces and workings, and to things raised above common use,
dedicated to God and his service, but that he meant it according as the whole
tenure of Scripture defines holiness? How much will the phrase of holiness and
sanctification be debased and made common, if that sense should be admitted,
contrary to the Scripture use of the Word? But that is a weak case that puts
men to such extraordinary shifts to maintain.

But to go on a little further; The same word is used by the Apostle in all his
salutations, and inscriptions of his Epistles to all the Churches; (...), to
the Saints or holy ones at Rome, at Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc. which when
appropriated to persons, always signifies a visible Saint: So here, when he
calls Children of believing Parents holy, he cannot but mean they are to be
accounted as visible Saints, until they do profess the contrary; and I know no
reason can be given why the meaning of the Apostle in his Epistles, when he
writes (...), to the Saints, should not be as well understood written only to
the legitimate, and those that are not bastards at Rome, Corinth, etc. as well
as for them to interpret the same word so in this place: For (...), when
applied to grown men, must signify visible and Evangelical holiness, and must
be translated Saints: but when applied to Children, it must only signify
legitimacy, that they are not Bastards; when all men know, that magis and minus
non variant speciem; and the word is of the same import in every place of the
New Testament.

Ob. If any shall be so critical as Mr. Tombs is, to enquire how they can be
said to be holy: what holiness is here meant, whether inherent, or imputative,
or visible?

Sol. I answer, It Is a holiness of special separation to God, and his use, as a
peculiar people: Some call it a federal holiness, from the ground of the
privilege; others an Ecclesiastical, or Church holiness, from the account and
esteem the Church ought to have of such Children: but the first more fully
answers the largest use of the word in Scripture. As for Infants,

1. They are capable of inherent holiness.

2. They are in Covenant, as we have proved, and so have a holy relation on
them.

3. They are capable of separation to Gods use from the womb, and so of being
holy to God.

4. By the same reason we account grown men holy, we may account Infants of
believers holy; for these that make a profession, may have no inward and
inherent holiness; and a bare profession is not holiness; we only account them
holy by a judicious charity; and we are often deceived, and have cause to
repent of our judgments: Infants may be inwardly sanctified, and God has
taken them into the Covenant with their Parents, and would have us look on them
as separated to himself; which is ground enough to build our charity on, as to
esteem them holy, as grown persons. There is no difference but this in it; That
concerning the holiness of persons at age, we trust our own judgments; and in
judging of Infants we trust Gods Word, who has comprehended them under the
promise with their Parents; there has been as many deceits in the event, in
our judgment of those of riper years, as in that which is acted through a
mixture of faith and charity on Infants. And Gods promise, though never so
indefinite, is a surer ground for hope, then my probable judgment; which is
the most I can have of the generality of Professors of riper years.

Q. But if any one say further, What is this to Baptism? here is no mention of
it in this place.

Sol. It Is true, Baptism is not mentioned here; but here is mention of a
qualified subject for Baptism, which is all that is contended for: And if the
Apostle had said they were believers, then these of the contrary opinion would
conclude, here is enough for Baptism; but it is all one, in that he calls them
holy, which you see is more then legitimate; and you may translate it with as
much propriety, Else were your Children impure, but now they are Saints; that
is, so to be esteemed through Gods Covenant, as if they had professed their own
faith.

Lastly, As it would be most absurd to imagine the Apostle should use a pure
religious word to express a common and ordinary privilege: so there would be
no considerable medium for augmentation in that sense, and no such force in
(...) (else were, etc.) which has force from the specialness of the privilege
to their issue, not only to be lawfully begotten, as the Children of
unbelievers are, when lawfully married: but to be in a peculiar state of
separation to God, and to be accounted fit members with the believing Parent of
the visible Church of Christ.

And what a poor and cold answer, as to comfort, would it be, when the believer
was scrupled about abiding with his or her unbelieving yoke fellow, to tell
them, Continue together; for your Children shall not be Bastards: but how full
of strength and sweetness must it be, if taken in the contrary sense? Remain
with your yoke-fellows, though unbelievers; they are sanctified to you, and you
shall notwithstanding bring forth a holy seed; a seed of God, as the Old
Testament expression; in Covenant, as if you were both believers: this sounds
like a medium most demonstrative and consolatory, both for satisfaction and
comfort: What plainer testimony, or fairer character can be written to show
the qualification of Infants of believers, then to write them holy, and give
them the same name that is given to Christ, and Saints in Heaven and Earth?

CHAP. VIII. The Harmony that notable Chapter, Romans 11. has with the former
Scriptures; the 15, 16, 17, verses especially opened.
THAT the Adversaries of this truth may see we want not a harmony of
Scriptures to confirm our judgment, the next place to be considered of is
that, Romans 11. especially ver. 15, 16, 17. of that Chapter; which if well
weighed, will demonstrate the holiness and Church Membership of the Children of
believing Gentiles, as much as of the Jews Children that descended naturally
from Abraham.

The scope of the whole Chapter is to discover the breaking off, or casting
away of the Jewish Nation from being a Church, and the privilege the Gentiles
get by this, and their ingraffing into the same root; and the promise of the
restoration of the Jews again, when the fullness of the Gentiles should come
in; and every one of these expressed with variety of notions, and interlined with
many cautions concerning Gods actings in this great dispensation. Concerning
the full explication of this Chapter, Mr. Cobbet and Mr. Baxter have done
worthily, and have with much clearness argued for Infants Church Membership
from it. I shall only for methods sake, and your satisfaction, open the main
and most controverted terms in this Chapter concerning this subject. As,

1. What this breaking off, or casting away of the Jews imports, and from what
they are broken off; from the visible or invisible Church, v. 15.

2. What is meant by the first fruits, and the lump, and the root, and the
branches; and how it can be affirmed, that if the root be holy, so are the
branches, v. 16.

3. What this ingraffing is, and how the Gentiles are said to be ingraffed, and
to be partakers of the fatness of the Olive, v. 17. For the first, This casting
off, and breaking off, is not from the invisible, but the visible Church.

1. This will maintain falling away from grace, and please the Arminians, the
great Enemies of the Gospel of free grace: but this the Apostle prevents, ver.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. by anticipation of that Objection, distinguishing the Elect, and
himself as one of them, from being cast off: I say then, has God cast away his
people whom he foreknew? God forbid. I also am an Israelite, etc. If the
casting off meant here was from the invisible Church, then Paul and the other
Elect among the Jews were cast off from that Church; but God forbid, says
Paul, v. 5. there is a remnant at this present time according to the election
of grace, whereof Paul was one; therefore it must be from the visible Church
they were broken off: But here the Arminians and Pelagians agree with these
that are against Infant Baptism, as they do in many other opinions. Mr. Tombs
has nothing to say in his Examen of Mr. Marshals Sermon, to avoid this
absurdity, but only this, page 64.

The meaning is not (says he) of some of the branches in the invisible Church;
but as when our Savior Christ using the same similitude, says, Joh. 15.2.
Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he takes away: The meaning is, not that
any branch in him could be fruitless, or taken away; but he calls that a
branch in him, which was so in appearance: so the Apostle speaking of branches
broken off, means it not of such as were truly so, but so in appearance. Thus
far he.

Which is a granting of what he denies; for to be a branch in appearance, is
only to be a visible branch; and no branch that is merely in appearance so, and
not really, is one of the invisible Church, nor can ever be said to be broken
from it, but only from his visible state which he has but ((...)) v. 15, 16.
as a branch in outward privileges, and seeming graces.

2. The breaking off, etc. it was of the Jewish Nation, of the collective body,
though not of every individual, and therefore it must needs be from the visible
Church; for as a Nation they were a Church, and the whole Nation was cast away
and rejected; now as a Nation they were not all members of the invisible
Church, ver. 7, 8. with ver. 17.

3. It Is a visible breaking off, therefore cannot be from the invisible Church,
ver. 3, 4, 5. 17, 18, 19. For as Mr. Baxter well observes, There can be no
visible removing from an invisible term.

4. It Is a breaking off the natural branches, so he calls the Jews: Now the
body of the Jewish Church were not natural branches in a spiritual sense; for
they believed not as Abraham did; but only called so as they were naturally
descended from his loins, and were members of the visible Church, and first
partakers of the outward privileges of the Covenant made with him: Thus the
Apostle distinguishes of the body of the Jewish Nation, Romans 9. where after he
had reckoned up all the privileges of the Israelites in general, ver. 4. Who
are Israelites, to whom pertains the adoption and the glory, and the Covenants,
etc. making way by this to show the sadness of their rejection, in ver. the 6.
to prevent the same Objection, the Apostle in this Chapter says, They are not
all Israel which are of Israel; that is, not all spiritual, though all natural
brances; and these privileges did visibly belong to all. As for that
distinction of Abraham's being a natural and a spiritual Father, it may go for
current until they come to apply it, and then it is most vain; for all that
came from Abraham as a natural Father, had a title to all these privileges
forementioned, which belonged to the visible Church until they did degenerate,
and cast themselves out, as Ishmael and Esau, etc. But of this formerly.

Lastly, If they were broken off from the invisible Church, it must be either
from union with Christ, or communion with Christ and his Spirit; for this is
the true definition of the invisible Church, that in it souls have real union
and communion with God in Christ through the Spirit: but none of the Jews that
were broken off had such a union or communion, and therefore could not be
broken off from it: But so far they may be said to be broken off from the
invisible Church, as by remote consequence, as they were excluded from all the
means of grace, and the Ordinances; which are the usual ways and methods of
God to bring souls into communion with himself.

2. Let us consider what is meant by the first fruits, and the lump, and the
root, and the branches: There be many opinions concerning this, especially two
must be debated; some think it Christ, as these that follow Origin and the
allegorical Fathers: Ego aliam sanctam radicem nescio, nisi Dominum nostrum.
Origin.
But that firstly and primarily by the first fruits, and the lump, and the
root, and the branches, cannot be meant Christ neither personally nor
mystically, is most clear if we consider,

1. Jesus Christ was not the first fruits in regard of the whole lump of the
Jewish Nation, and so cannot answer to the first similitude.

2. Jesus Christ cannot be said to be root unto these which were cast away; no
branches really in him are cut off, but so were they; for that place of the
15th of John, v. 2. which seems to speak of some branches which are in
Christ, and yet are taken away for not bearing fruit: it may be better read,
and according to the Syriack, thus; Every branch that brings not forth fruit in
me, he takes away; that is, that do bring forth some seeming fruit, but not as
in Christ as root and principle.

3. In ver. 24. the Jews when they shall be called, it is said, They shall be
graffed into their own Olive: Now Christ is not properly their own Olive, but
so is Abraham, etc.

4. The Jews are said (as formerly) to be natural branches of this root, but so
they were not of Christ; but Christ was a natural branch from that stock, Romans
9.5. Whose are the Fathers; of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came.

Mr. Tombs himself ingenuously confesses this, page 67. of his Examen, That
by the root cannot be meant Christ; and gives us the hint of another argument
from those expressions, v. 24. of some branches, wild (...), according to
nature; and of ingraffing in, (...), contrary to nature, into this Olive; he
concludes the root cannot be Christ: for Christ has no natural or
preternatural branches in him; all are wild ere they be ingraffed into him as a
living root: And the other expression, v. 18. of our not bearing the root, but
the root us, if we boast against the Jews, does evidently demonstrate, that the
root here is not properly meant of Christ, though he be the eternal root of all
spiritual happiness, set forth gloriously in many other places of Scripture.

Others by the root mean the Covenant: But the best and most genuine sense is
to interpret it of Abraham; with whom, and with his seed as so many branches,
the Covenant was made, and by which both the root and the branches were made
holy: And this answers fully to both the similitudes. For,

1. It Is an allusion to the Legal rights about the first fruits which were to
be offered up to God; and by that all the whole mass, all the fruits that came
after were accounted holy: Thus Abraham was the first fruits of the Jews: he
believing first, and being in Covenant, all the lump, the whole body of the
Jewish Nation were taken in to be a Church, and were accounted holy.

2. As a root it answers to him from whom all the Jews sprang up, and from whom
they drew all their Church privileges, as their breath: Thus the Lord by the
Prophet in Isa. 51.1, 2. bids the Jews to look to the rock out of which they
were hewn, and the pit out of which they were dug: he means it of Abraham
first, as appears by the second verse; Look to Abraham your Father, and to
Sarah that bare you; for I called him alone, and blessed and increased him, etc.

Ob. But what kind of consequence is this? and how does the Apostle make use of
this? If the first fruits be holy, so is the lump; and if the root be holy, so
are the branches: From what principle does the Apostle argue?

Sol. The Apostle in the former verse speaks of a receiving in again of the
Jewish Nation, and brings in this as a ground to hope for it, There is yet a
holy root which has an influence on the branches; and argues, that if the root
be holy, when the branches broken off shall be re ingraffed, they shall be holy
likewise. The like phrase you have in v. 28. As touching the Gospel, they are
enemies for your sake; but as touching the Election, they are beloved, (...),
for their Fathers sake; God having so cast his Election, as to run in that vein
most eminently: And some do render it, They are beloved through their Fathers:
But this is clear;

1. That Abraham, or as some say, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were the root.

2. That he argues from the holiness of the root, to the holiness of the
branches; that is, from them as Parents, to their posterity as Branches.

3. That this was an usual and common principle of arguing in Scripture, from
the Parent to the Posterity; for else he had spoken in the dark, and had proved
notum per ignotius, if they could not universally reason from it; and if you
observe, he writes it as an Axiom of the greatest demonstration, and never
stands to prove it further.

4. It had been an argument of no force for to prove the calling in of the
Jews, and their happy state upon re-ingraffing, to tell them, If the root be
holy, so are the branches; and they are beloved for the Fathers sake, if there
were not a virtue still in the root to derive holiness to them, when they
should be received in, and ingraffed to their own Olive; he lays all the
weight on the root, being still holy and fresh, though the branches be broken
off. And what can you make of this as to argumentation? If the root be holy,
Ergo the branches: and apply it to Persons, and Parents, but in a moral and
imputative consideration.

Ob. But holiness is not propagated by nature, from the Parent to his Child;
and we all derive sin by nature from our Parents; and are, as the Apostle
says, Ephesians. 2.2. by nature the Children of wrath, etc. and as David says,
Conceived in sin.

Sol. 1. It Is true, we are so; and there is no holiness propagated by nature,
take it for internal habits; as a wise man does not convey his wisdom, or a
virtuous man his virtues to his Child, neither can a Believer convey his faith
and other graces to his Child; and in this sense Abraham is not a root, he
begets no Believer; and under this consideration the argument cannot hold;
Abraham in this sense is only a root, (...), exemplary only; Christ is (...),
effectually, to convey similar graces: But,

2. There is a holiness by gracious estimation or imputation, which flows from
Gods Covenant, or some special privilege given to such a stock, or kindred, or
Nation; God taking such a family, such a stock, and separates it to himself for
some holy use, and so blesses them: And thus it was with Abraham, and is most
common in the Scriptures, and according to the nature of privileges among men,
where the son of a Freeman is free, and the son of a Nobleman a Nobleman; and
by way of allusion, (though it does not hold in all particulars) as in
justification, Christ's righteousness is imputed, and we accounted holy by it:
So as to some special privileges, the root, the Parent being holy, and in the
Covenant, his Child has the advantage of it; not meritoriously from the
Parents faith, but virtually through Gods gracious promise to the Believer and
his seed. But,

3. This is not by natural generation, for then it should be to all Children;
but by grace and proportion; it is Gods good pleasure thus to derive the
privilege, and out of special respect to the Parents; and to encourage them in
their own faith, and strengthen them in their hopes concerning their seed: thus
did God choose out Abraham and his family from all the world, and blessed him;
yet it was not from nature his seed were more blessed then all the world
besides. But as Dr. Willet says well on this place, The branches are holy
because of this holy root; not by an actual and inherent holiness, but by a
prerogative of grace grounded on the promise of God made to believing Fathers
and their seed; which is the same in the New Testament as in the Old; and in
this sense the argument is strong, and enforcing the scope of the Apostle. So
that though the generation be natural, the derivation of a Title to Church
privileges, and the characteristical note of holiness is given them by grace
in the Covenant, which takes in the branches with the root. In no sense besides
can this argument be true, without you make the root Christ: which you see
cannot be meant in this place without great absurdities.

The third and special term to be opened, is, what this ingraffing is of the
Gentiles into the root, and how they are ingraffed? v. 17, 19.

For the understanding of this, Mr. Marshal has laid down a sure position,
which neither Mr. Tombs, who is the most learned Adversary of this Truth, nor
any other has or can shake; and that is, That the ingraffing in of the
Gentiles must be suitable to the breaking off the Jews; as they were broken off,
so are we ingraffed: This the Apostle clearly proves in every verse. In v. 17.
Thou being a wild Olive, speaking of the Gentiles collectively considered, were
ingraffed, (...), in, amongst them; so Grotius translates it, Positus es inter
ramos illius arboris, Thou art set among the branches of that tree; and so
referring to the first words of the verse, which is employed, that some remained
still; for but some of the branches were broken off, and the Gentile-believers
were inoculated among them, and by a special adoption were partakers of the
same privileges; according to that of the Poet Ovid: Venerit insitio: fac
ramum, ramus adoptet. But the best reference is to the former part of the
verse, as it speaks of these branches which were broken off; the believing
Gentiles were ingraffed, ((...)) that is, as Beza and the Syriack translates
it, pro ipsis, for them, that is, in ramorum defractorum locum, in the room or
stead of the branches which were broken off; they were taken away, we
ingraffed: Others translate it, cum illis, with them, which remained when we
were inserted: but either interpretation will become the sense of the place.

Now the reasons which flow from this Text concerning the subject which we have
in hand, may be easier slighted then answered: This position being laid down,
We believing Gentiles are ingraffed into Abraham's Covenant, in the room of the
natural branches which were broken off: Now,

1. The Jews and their Children were broken off from the Church, their Children
being members as well as themselves: therefore believing Gentiles and their
Children are ingraffed in, the ingraffing in is suitable to the breaking off:
they have nibbled about this reason; but the best of the Adversaries have never
said any thing yet, as to satisfy a rational Saint.

2. Some branches were not broken off; for so it is employed in that he says, If
some were broken off; and if they were not broken off, then not their Children;
for it was not only a breaking off personally, but of succession, and of their
posterity with themselves: Now if we be ingraffed among these, or with these
that are not broken off, we and our Children must likewise be ingraffed in;
else there will be a schism between Jew and Gentile, in enjoying the
privileges naturally flowing from the same root: No man will be so bold as to
say, that the believing Jews were broken off; and if not they, then not their
Children which were then Infants, and had not acted unbelief: For either they
must be broken off for their own sins, or their Fathers; not for their Fathers,
for some of them were Believers, and not broken off; not for themselves, for
some of them were Infants; therefore some Infants were not broken off; for
their Fathers continued in the faith; and we believing Gentiles are ingraffed
in among them; therefore our Children also.

3. In the latter end, when the Jews shall be ingraffed in again to their own
Olive, which is promised in this Chapter, they and their Children shall be
taken in, v. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved; and our ingraffing in is
still suitable to theirs.

4. The Gentiles are said to partake of the root, and the fatness of the Olive
tree, in the same verse: this ((...)) signifies the full participation and
fellowship in all the privileges and advantages of the root, as the Jews had.
Now their privilege was not personal to themselves, but to their posterity;
and therein lay the fatness of that Olive, in the fullness and large extent of
its privilege and seminal virtue, that it comprehended Parent and Child. So
that as the Jews casting off was not only personal, but Politic, that is, of
them and theirs; so our ingraffing in their room is; and as they had the
fatness of the root and Olive once, so have we: Now we could not be said to be,
((...)) To have a mutual fellowship with the Jews in the root and fatness of
it, if we be only personally ingraffed, and they and theirs broken off
oeconomically; if there be a fellowship, it must be at least in substantials:
And this was the most eminent and substantial privilege of the Jews, that they
and their posterity were taken into the same Covenant: The Apostle opens this
further in Ephesians 3.6.

And especially, if we remember, that their breaking off, and our ingraffing,
is into the visible Church, as is formerly proved, and must needs be granted;
for all that were broken off, were not broken off from election, and the
invisible Church; neither are all the Gentiles which are ingraffed in, elected,
and really of the invisible Church. So that the result is this;

1. That there is a real ingraffing of the believing Gentiles into the same
root from which the unbelieving Jews were broken off.

2. This breaking off was from the visible Church, and its privileges, not
from the invisible; so is the ingraffing of us into the visible Church.

3. As their casting out was of them and their posterity, so is our graffing in
of us and our Children; These conclusions flow naturally from the Text; and all
other deductions will be but as dregs after the spirits are extracted.

4. And to add to the rest this consideration, That if the posterity of the
Gentiles be not taken in, as the Jews were, there will be the greatest
inequality of the communication of the fatness of the root that can be
imagined; and the Jews may rather boast against the believing Gentiles, then
they against them; seeing the root conveyed privileges to them and their
posterity, but only personal privileges to the believing Gentile; to the one a
double mercy, to the other only a single.

Ob. But this great Objection may be made; No Believer is now a root as
Abraham, he is but only a branch; and therefore it is not to be conceived how it
can be argued from this to every Believer, If the root be holy, so are the
branches, as it may be to Abraham.

Sol. It Is granted, every Believer, nor any, cannot properly be called the
root, as Abraham was, and in a strict sense: Yet,

1. They are ingraffed into the same root, and convey the same privileges to
their branches, as Isaac, and Jacob, and the twelve Tribes did to their
posterities, who were not properly nor absolutely the root, but branches of it;
and we all know, that a Slip well inoculated or ingraffed, becomes afterward a
natural branch; and receives as much from the root, as these which grew
naturally on it: So that it is as strong to argue on the Gentiles side after
ingraffing; If the root be holy, so are the branches; as from Abraham to the
Jews, who were natural branches; As an adopted son, him and his have as full a
title to the inheritance as a natural son.

There is only this difference between the conveyance of privileges of the
Jews as natural branches, and the ingraffed Gentiles; That the whole body of
the Jews, good and bad, were called branches; now only Believers of the
Gentiles, who are called by the Gospel, with their Children, are ingraffed into
that root.

2. Though every Believer is not the proper root, but only a branch of that
root; yet for being ingraffed, he is naturalized as the Jewish branch, and so
must have the same privilege.

3. There are branches of branches; and the poorest branch has some twigs, and
spreading sprigs growing from them which are of the same consideration, and do
receive of the fatness of the root as well as the main branches; and in this
sense every branch may be said to be the immediate root of the lesser twigs:
Thus Believers ingraffed into the root, are holy, and their Infants that are
branches of the branches immediately sprouting forth from them, are holy also,
and under the same consideration; and the argument holds still for the
ingraffed branches, as for the natural.

And as Mr. Blake says well, The branches of Ancestors are roots of posterity;
being made a holy branch, in reference to their issue they become a holy root.
This might be much more enlarged, but that I would not be voluminous; it is
enough that Believers are ingraffed with their Children into the same root, as
is formerly proved.

And then the argument holds firm, That these that are in the root, must
partake of the fatness of it; and they which are in the Covenant, cannot be
denied the privileges of it.

CHAP. IX. Wherein Mr. Tombs his eight Arguments in his Apology against Mr.
Marshal, for the ingraffing in, mentioned v. 17. to be of the Gentiles into the
invisible Church by election and saving faith, are examined and answered.
THE great endeavor of these who are of the contrary opinion in opening this
Chapter, is, To prove that the ingraffing of the Gentiles into the root is by
election and saving faith, and so into the invisible Church; for they see their
case is in hazard if it should be meant of the visible Church: And therefore,
though enough be spoken before to prove what we affirm; yet because Mr. Tombs
has laid down eight Arguments with so much confidence on the other side as
unanswerable; I think it not amiss to bestow one Chapter in the discovery of
the unsoundness of his reasons, that the truth may have a fairer passage into
your understanding without clouds or demurs.

His first reason is, Apology p. 71. That ingraffing which is by Gods sole
power, it is into the invisible Church: but so is the ingraffing of the Jews,
v. 3. Ergo. For God is able to graff them.

Sol. 1. As to argue from Gods power to his will, is always unsound in
Divinity and in Reason; God is able, therefore he will: So,

2. To argue from power to election, is of the same nature; for election is
seldom or never attributed to Gods power, but to his will or good pleasure.

3. To argue from Gods power in general, to the putting of it forth absolutely
in such a determinate act, is as strange; God is able to graff them in, Ergo it
must be into the invisible Church; as if God showed nothing of his power, but
in the workings of saving grace; especially if we consider what a power it is,
and only from God: But to take the very prejudice the Jews have even from the
letter of the Gospel to bring them but to confess Christ, after so long a
darkness, as it was in the beginning of the Gospel: but to make the Gentiles
but outwardly own and profess the Gospel, and yet not members of the invisible
Church; to take away the very grossness of natural darkness and ignorance, is
a work of mighty power; And to an outward conversion, where persons have been
long under the power of darkness, there needs the sole power of God.

4. The Apostle may well put in rather Gods power then his will, when he speaks
of the ingraffing in of the Jews; for it will require an act of power to gather
them but visibly once again, and bring them into one entire body to make a
visible Church, when they are so scattered up and down all Nations; and at such
a distance one from another, that it is as the gathering of the bones of dead
men; and so it is likened to the resurrection from the dead, v. 15. So that we
need go no further to enquire why their ingraffing should be attributed to Gods
power, seeing there is need enough of a Divine power but to gather them
together from the four winds, to make a collective body, and so to be a visible
Church.

Besides, when the Apostle speaks of power in working of saving faith, he does
put other Epithites to set it forth; and not only barely speaks of power which
God puts forth in all acts, but exceeding greatness of power, Ephesians. 1.21, 22.

Arg. 2. His second Argument is That ingraffing, which is called
reconciliation, opposite to casting away, that is by election and giving faith:
but so is the ingraffing called v. 15.

Sol. If he means reconciliation in the strictest sense, as it denotes pardon
of sins, and being made friends with God by Christ's atonement and mediatorship;
which must be his sense if he speak like himself: Then many absurdities may
follow.

1. That the Jews and their rejection was the ground of the Gentiles
reconciliation unto God.

2. That no reconciliation was obtained for the Gentiles before the Jews were
broken off.

3. That those which are reconciled, and their sins pardoned, may be cast off;
for so were the Jews; and the Gentiles threatened with the same misery on the
same ground, v. 20.

4. As there is external and eternal salvation spoken of, 1 Timothy 4.10. so there
may be an outward and inward reconciliation; the Gentiles were cast out from
the visible Church for so many hundreds of years, without any hope or promise,
And strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. and so visibly cast
off; and it was a great reconciliation but to break down the middle wall of
partition between Jew and Gentile, as to visible privileges and Ordinances:
And so by the reconciling the world may be more properly meant the bringing
them in under the means of the Gospel, and the outward dispensations of the
Church; which is Gods common way and method of salvation; and which to some is
real and effectual unto inward grace, unto others only to outward privileges.

And the very phrase, the reconciliation of the world, to Orthodox ears,
deafens and dasheth the other interpretation; for the body of the Gentile-world
(which he means) are not so reconciled as by election and saving grace, though
the sound of the Gospel has gone through all the world.

Ob. 3. Thirdly, says he, the ingraffing must be meant of that act whereby the
branch stands in the tree as a branch: but that is by giving of faith. The
minor is proved also, v. 20. they were broken off by unbelief, and we stand by
faith, etc.

Sol. It Is true, the ingraffing is by faith, as their breaking off was by
unbelief: but as their unbelief was shown in a public rejection of the
Gospel, and by it they and their Children were broken off; so the Gentiles are
ingraffed in by public profession of faith, and acceptance of the Gospel for
themselves and their Children; and this must needs be the Apostles meaning: For,

1. Ver. 18. He bids the Gentiles not to boast against the branches that were
broken off. Now how could they boast against them but for visible privileges?
invisible, are out of cognizance to others: Do Saints boast against one another
for election and reprobation? these secrets of the Almighty: This Argument Mr.
Baxter urges with much advantage, in his Book.

2. In v. 19. he explains further what the nature of their boasting might be;
thou will say, The branches were broken off, that I might be ingraffed: now can
any man conceive they should boast because the branches the Jews were broken
from election and true faith, that they might be graffed in by a new act of
Gods election, and by true and saving faith? So in ver. 20, 21, 22, 23. he
exhorts the Gentiles to look to their standing, and to take heed lest they be
broken off also; For if God spared not the natural branches, etc. much less
will he spare thee: What, are they exhorted to look least they be cut off from
Gods election, etc? Will Mr. Tombs turn a downright Arminian, that he may have
any plea against the baptizing of poor Infants?

There is a twofold way of ingraffing, either by spiritual implantation into
Christ, or by visible profession of faith; and both these should meet in one
person, though they may also be separated; a visible Professor may not have
saving faith within, yet may have: So here, the ingraffing in is into the
visible Church by visible profession; among which some are, some are not
invisible members: but the very terminus of ingraffing is not into the
invisible, but the visible Church; for neither the Apostle, nor an Angel could
tell who were ingraffed into the invisible Church, nor who broken off, but only
from the visible Church, first as the proper term, and then by consequence from
the invisible; for from this Church none were absolutely broken off that ever
were in, and into it few ingraffed.

So that if the ingraffing be visible, the term must be visible also: but the
ingraffing is visible, Ergo the term is so: This is according to Mr. Tombs his
own form of argumentation, from the term to the ingaffing; the major is proved
before.

Ob. Fourthly, That ingraffing is meant v. 17. whereby the wild Olive is
co-partaker of the root and fatness of the Olive; but such is only election and
saving faith; be proves the minor, by distinguishing who the root is, which he
well affirms to be Abraham.

Sol. To which there needs no other Answer then what Mr. Blake has given him;
If the root be Abraham, and the ingraffing in be only by election, and
derivation of saving graces (which he means by the fatness of the Olive) then
it must be that we are all elect in Abraham as a common root; Abraham may say,
Without me you can do nothing.

To which Mr. Tombs only answers by confession, That it would follow if he
made Abraham a root as Christ, communicating saving faith: But I make Abraham a
root as the Father of Believers, not by begetting faith, but as an exemplary
cause. How poor an evasion is this of so confident a man in his opinion, I
submit to judgment.

Let him mind his Argument, and the force of it; That ingraffing is meant
whereby the wild Olive is partaker of the fatness of the root: but that is only
election and saving grace, etc.

1. Were not the natural branches which were broken off partakers of the
fatness of the root? and were they all elected and partakers of saving graces
or outward privileges only? and why then should it be thought absurd for the
Gentiles by ingraffing to partake of the fatness of the root only in outward
privileges, seeing it was so with the natural branches, and they all grow on
the same root?

2. The old absurdity will arise still from this, That Saints may fall away
from election and saving grace.

3. How can he imagine Abraham to be the root, and the fatness of the root to
be election and saving graces, and that engraffing the way of being
co-partakers with the root, and yet deny Mr. Blakes Argument, That we are
elected in Abraham?

1. It Is improper to call a root an exemplary cause; there is no harmony
between them; an example conveyes nothing; here is a conveyance of fatness.

2. How unsuitable to good language is it to say, That such are partakers of the
fatness or fullness of an example? can we think the Apostle would so far
overreach?

3. Were the Jews partakers of the fatness of Abraham in the Covenant, merely
as from an Exemplary cause? had not they it from him as a natural Father, God
making the Covenant with him and his seed? and do not ingraffed branches
afterward become as natural?

He only adds, p. 73. That if it were meant of outward privileges, it were
false; for the Gentiles were not partakers of the outward privileges of
Abraham.

Sol. Abraham is a root in the New Testament as well as in the Old, and still
stands by virtue of the Covenant to Believers and their Children: And though
Old Testament Ordinances were taken away with the Jews, and that Church state,
yet the root is not taken away; but the New Testament privileges grow on the
same root; and our ingraffing in gives us to be partakers of the fatness of
them, as well as it gave to the Jews the participation of former privileges
until they were broken off.

All the rest of his Arguments are much of the same nature; only a touch
further of each of them.

Ob. 5. From v. 25. If the breaking off the Jews be by blinding, then the
ingraffing is by giving faith; but the former is true, so the latter.

Sol. This is the same in effect with the third Argument: Yet,

1. There is not the same reason, seeing he takes it of giving saving faith;
their blinding was judicial, a punishment for their unbelieving, rejecting of
the Gospel, though they had not saving faith to embrace the Gospel; the giving
of saving faith is not on such terms; neither is saving faith so absolutely
antecedent to make a man a member of the visible Church, as blinding is to Gods
final rejection.

2. Blindness came but in part on Israel; it fell only on the mere visible
members, not the invisible and elect: therefore, the ingraffing must be only of
visible members into the visible Church, v. 7. The election has obtained it,
but the rest were blinded.

Arg. 6. If re-ingraffing of the Jews produces salvation, is by turning them
from their iniquity, etc. then it is to the invisible Church: but so it is, V.
26, 27. Ergo.

Sol. To which I give this fair Answer, That doubtless according to those
promises, when the Jews shall be called in to be a visible Church again, there
shall be abundance of more glory be brought in with them, then ever yet the
world saw; and the new Heavens and the new Earth, the coming down of the new
Jerusalem, and all those glorious things are fitted to fall in with that time.
And from these considerations many do interpret v. 26. literally, And so shall
all Israel be saved. But yet,

1. They shall be ingraffed in as a visible Church; else Abraham and the
Fathers would never be mentioned as roots.

2. They shall be ingraffed in as they were broken off: now they were broken
off as a visible Church.

3. All that can be gathered is this, That the fullness of salvation, and the
virtues of the promises, shall more fully and universally take effect on the
Jews, even to the salvation of all of them; and so the invisible and visible
Church be more pure, and as one in the earth: but this fullness shall be to them
as a visible Church, and on the earth.

Arg. 7. If the re-ingraffing be by virtue of Gods election and love, then it
is to the invisible Church: but the former is true, v. 28. Ergo.

Sol. 1. It Is said, That as touching election, the Jews are beloved for their
Fathers sake; hence it follows, God has a love of election to Believers, and
their natural seed; for so the Jews were the natural seed of Abraham. But,

2. It Is granted that the calling of the Jews shall be according to Gods
election and first love; and that Gods election shall more fully take hold of
the Jews at their re-calling, then of any Nation: but yet still the Argument is
of no force to prove that their re-ingraffing, and so ours, is only or firstly
into the invisible Church; for they are elected as well to be a visible Church,
as to be partakers of inward graces; and their re-ingraffing must be specially
and firstly into the visible Church from which they were broken off, or else
there will be no correspondence between their rejection and re-ingraffing.

The last and weakest Argument is this; If the ingraffing of Jews and Gentiles
be the fruit of Gods mercy, the breaking off by shutting up in unbelief; then
it is into the invisible Church by election, etc. but so it is. Ergo.

Sol. You see he has spent his stock and strength to be so low at last: This
Argument needs no Answer, but by showing you the unsoundness of this universal
proposition on which the Argument is built. Whatever is a fruit of Gods mercy,
is from election, and ingraffing into the invisible Church: Which proposition
is most false, universally considered: Are not health, meat and drink,
preservation, all outward privileges, fruits of Gods mercy? Is not
long-suffering to these that perish, and the affording the means of grace and
salvation, the institution of Ordinances, fruits of Gods mercy? and yet must
they be given only to elect ones? and do they ingraff to the invisible Church?
but satis est repetere: you have seen the utmost strength of the greatest
Antagonist to the Truth we hold out.

Chap. X. The Harmony of Mat. 19.13, 14. with Mar. 10.13. and Luke 18.15, 16,
17. concerning the bringing of Infants to Christ, his acts to them, how far it
contributes to prove Infant Baptism.
YOU have seen how the Scriptures agree in holding out some special privileges
in the New Testament, as in the Old, to Believers and their seed: Let us now
come to view Christ's own carriage and actions to Infants; which shows both the
special respect he had to them, and would have his Ministers and Churches to
have likewise. For this, compare Mat. 19.13, 14. Mar. 10.13, 14, 15, 16. with
Luke 18.15, 16, 17. Where, when little Children were brought to Christ, and his
Disciples did forbid them, Christ was angry, and charged them not to hinder
them; for theirs was the Kingdom of Heaven; and he took them up in his arms,
laid his hands upon them, and blessed them. For the opening this place more
clearly, Consider,

1. Who they were which were brought to Christ.

2. Who brought them.

3. Why the Disciples did forbid them to be brought.

4. Christ's reason why he would have them not hindered.

5. Christ's actions to and on them, what they amount unto.

For the first, who they were which were brought to Christ; in Mark they are
called (...), and well translated little Children, or Infants; the word is a
diminutive word, and is specially to be applied to Infants. Luke 1.76.
Zacharias uses the same word of John, when he was newly born; And thou Child
((...)) shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, etc. Videtur esse aliqua
emphasis diminutivi, hoc saltem loco minime negligenda, says Beza. The same
word is given to Christ when he was in the manger, Mat. 2.11. The Wise men
found (...), the young Child, or Infant, with Mary, etc. Heb. 11.23. Moses is
called (...), when he was hid among the Flags. (...), test Hippocrate, de
primo vitae septennio dicitur; (...) autem de secundo. Gurtl.
This word, says Hippocrates, is given to these which are under the age of
seven years; and it is mostly used among the Evangelists for to express the
tenderest age of man, which is Infancy: So Spanhem. dub. Evang. But in Luke the
holy Ghost uses another word of full signification for Infants ((...)) which
word is used for a Babe in the womb, an Embryo, Luke 1.41. When Elizabeth heard
the salutation of Mary, the Babe leaped in her womb; (...); it is the same word:
but more properly it is used for a Child newly born, a sucking Babe that we
carry in our arms: Thus 2 Timothy 3.15. Timothy is said to know the Scriptures
from a Child, (...), from his Infancy; not when he was an Infant, but from his
Infancy; that is, as soon as ever he was past a Babe, and came to understand
any thing, he was learnt the Scriptures. The same word, (...), is given also to
Christ, when the Wise men found him in swaddling clouts, Luke 2.12. So that this
is most clear, that they were Infants, tender young ones, Babes which were
brought to Christ; And if the two words did not properly signify Infants, yet
in that it is said they were brought to Christ, would prove it; for the word
(...), properly signifies to carry, as it is used mostly in Scripture for. But,

2. Who those were that brought them, it is most probable that their Parents
brought them; and these had believed themselves, or made some profession of
faith; for they bring them to Christ to be under his blessing, for some special
favor to be shown by Christ to them; it was for a spiritual end they brought
them, to be touched by Christ, etc. to have some virtue from him; and who could
have such bowels to bring Infants to Christ, but their own Parents? and to
abide the frowns of the Disciples, and their checks, but Parents, who love
their Children next themselves, and would have them blessed together with them?
so that it is more probable it was their Parents which brought them then any
others; and that they were believers, who had such a sense of their Infants
conditions, and of Christ's respects.

And besides, they were then in the Coasts of Judea, where many had professed
their faith, and were baptized by John, and longed to have their Infants
confirmed by Jesus Christ; especially when we look on Mat. 19.13. They brought
them to Christ to lay his hands on them, and pray over them.

3. If we consider why the Disciples should forbid them, and rebuked these that
brought them; surely it could not be out of any cruelty to Infants, or that the
Disciples had no bowels to Infants, or desire they might not be happy with
their Parents; their affections could not be so straightened and bound up in
unnaturalness: but it must be from some such principle which these of the
contrary judgment take up, That they were not capable, and were first to be
taught; That only grown men, and Professors of faith, were fit for Ordinances;
and therefore they rebuked or chid them, and forbad them to do so any more: As
if they had said, What have we to do with Children, as to outward Ordinances?
they are not capable, they cannot profess their faith; and we must have persons
able to hold forth the Gospel, which must be visible subjects of Christ's
Kingdom: Doubtless some such grounds they must needs go on, or else they must
show a strange kind of passion against Children, most unbecoming these which
had but the rags of natural affection left in them.

4. See Christ's affections to them, and the reason of it; When Christ saw it
((...)) he was much displeased: It Is a word that is used to express such a kind
of sorrow as breaks the heart; also to stomach any thing, and to have the
spirit raised in contempt of an unworthy action or person: Thus Christ was
grieved at them, and he looked with contempt on his Disciples, as dealing most
unworthily with poor Infants, in forbidding them to be brought to Christ; and
therefore he commands them to suffer them to bring Infants to him, and not to
forbid them. These two words shows how vehement Christ was, and how much his
heart was set toward Infants. You find sometimes that Christ gave some sharp
words to his Disciples, and to Peter especially; but never to have his spirit
to rise in indignation against them, as when they would forbid Infants to be
brought to him; and that which makes Christ so earnest, must needs be of great
weight; he was never so moved when they all forsook him, and Peter did forswear
him, as when they denied Infants to come to him.

I could wish that these which with so much contempt and scurrilous language
forbid Infants to be baptized, might read this place with observant spirits,
and at least grow more sober and less violent in their expressions concerning
poor Infants; doubtless it is a warning to all Christ's Disciples.

Now the reason which Jesus Christ gives, is, Of such is the Kingdom of God:
The reason shows what the privilege was they would exclude Infants from, viz.
being visibly judged to belong to the Kingdom of God; and Christ says, Of
such is the Kingdom of God. Now take the Kingdom of God either for Heaven and
Glory; or secondly, by way of allusion, for the Church, and the state of the
Gospel, it will serve as a full reason: Of such, that is, of Infants, is Gods
Kingdom made up, as well as of grown men, and they are as fit subjects as you
are: But doubtless he especially means by the Kingdom of God, as well the
Kingdom of Grace in a visible Church, as the Kingdom of Glory; because else
this could be no reason to convince the Disciples of their error, for they
were against the visible bringing Infants to Christ for to get some outward
sign of favor to them; and Christ tells them, they may be as well brought to
Christ, and receive a visible sign, as grown persons; for the Kingdom of God is
made of such, as of others.

1. Christ shows their interest in one of the highest privileges, The Kingdom
of God, and that visibly.

2. He speaks it de praesenti; not only respecting their future estate, what
they may be; but that even now the Kingdom of God is of such.

3. He uses this as a common instructive principle for the future, never to
forbid not only these, but such like Infants to be brought to him: For (...),
Of such is the Kingdom of God, Christ would have them take it as a constant
principle, That wherever they found such like Infants, they should not reject
them, but look on them with Gospel respect.

Ob. These that differ have nothing to say to this, but That Christ means it of
such as Children for humility, and meekness, and lowliness; and therefore in
the following verse he says, He that shall not receive the Kingdom of God as
a little Child, shall not enter therein.

Sol. It Is true, Christ takes an occasion to exhort them to humility and
meekness, from the pattern of these little ones. But,

1. Christ shows Infants right to the Kingdom of God, as well as the
Disciples, and grown persons, who can profess their own faith.

2. If Christ had meant only to make an example and resemblance, he might have
taken Sheep, and Doves more properly; for they are more meek and gentle then
Children, who are commonly froward and peevish.

3. This crosses the end of Christ's reason, which was, That Infants should not
be hindered from being brought to Christ, For of such is the Kingdom of God,
Now if he had meant of such as were only like them in some qualities, not of
themselves, there was nothing at all in Christ's reason: And thus must the words
be rendered on that account; Suffer Infants to come to me, and do not forbid
them; for not of them but of humble persons that resemble them, is the Kingdom
of God. Men will rather make Christ speak nonsense, then lose their opinions.

4. Can we think Christ could be so displeased with his Disciples for hindering
little ones to be brought to him, meetly to show them as resemblances and
patterns to grown men; and add this reason, For of such is the Kingdom of
God, when he had examples more fit to that purpose, even among the mere
sensible Creatures? No, Christ shows the privilege of such Infants; and checks
his Disciples pride, who would have none but themselves and grown persons to be
esteemed as having any visibie interest in the Kingdom of God.

Lastly, Let us view Christ's carriage and actions to these Infants; he did not
only show them as examples, but took them up in his arms, laid his hands on
them, and blessed them: all expressions of the most signal love, and favor,
and of great import, if duly considered.

1. He took them up in his arms, (...); the word signifies to embrace with
special affections; so the French Translation Embrasser, Piscator embrachiare,
amplexabunde gesto, Bud. Christ took them up in his arms, and held them forth
as Monuments of his love; and doubtless to show his Disciples, that he would
have some outward sign and character of peculiar respect set on them by his
Church and Saints: Such a carriage was not out of a natural affection only to
these that could not pity themselves, but from a heavenly strain of love which
he bore to these little ones, as to the highest professing Disciple; and must
needs be symbolical to his Churches, to take heed how they reject them wholly
from any visibie right to the Kingdom of God: Christ was to leave the world
shortly, but he leaves it as a rule to his Disciples.

2. Christ lays his hands on them; which was used among the Jews as a form of
special blessing, and in the N. T. for eminent ends.

1. For to cure all sorts of diseases by a miraculous power, Luke 4.40.

2. For consecration of any to a Divine work and service; thus Church Officers
were solemnly separated to Christ's work, as peculiarly fit for it, Acts 6.6.
Acts 13.3. 1 Timothy 4.15. and 5.22. 2 Timothy 1.6.

3. It was used for confirmation after Baptism, and as an outward way whereby
the holy Ghost was conveyed; and this is the most common use of it in the Acts
of the Apostles, Acts 8.17, 18, 19, and 19.6. where those that were baptized
had the Apostles hands laid on them, and they received the holy Ghost: And to
this purpose may we apply Christ's act to these Infants, to confirm the promise
solemnly after Baptism. For,

1. It was ever used (except to sick persons) after Baptism.

2. As it presupposes Baptism to precede, so it is an outward sign of a special
significancy, and holds forth as much as if Christ had baptized them; for in
that outward rite the holy Ghost was conveyed; and by laying on of hands others
received the holy Ghost, as the former Scriptures express; and why not in this
act of Christ on them? Take all the circumstances together, and you cannot
imagine it to be a complemental act: And if this were as an outward sign of
their receiving the holy Ghost, What should hinder water that Infants should
not be baptized, seeing they have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Acts
10. 47. Christ laid his hands on them, Benedictas scilicet manus in quas a
Patre suo acceperat omnia bona Coeli and Terrae, says a learned Divine on this
place; He laid those blessed hands on them, in which he had received from the
Father all good things in Heaven and Earth. This act shows,

1. That Christ would have some outward visible sign of favor set on such
Infants by Churches: And Imposition of Hands being one of the choyfest, Christ
uses that as most proper to show his Authority.

2. That holds forth, That if they be capable of imposition of hands, they are
of an Ordinance of like nature, which especially looks at a subject purely
passive.

Ob. If it be Objected, Why did not Christ baptize them as well as lay his
hands on them, if he meant to hint out their right to Baptism?

Sol. It Is easily answered, That Christ baptized none at all; but he did that
which was an Ordinance usually in those Primitive times administered after
Baptism, and equal to it, as to its dignity; and so far above Baptism, as it
was more extraordinary in its practice: And so we may argue from this to
Baptism, either inclusively, or a majori, from the greater; and I have more
from this place to confirm me, that if Christ baptized any, he would these
Infants; seeing he shows so much respect to them, more then to an grown person;
and did to them those acts which were equivalent, if not supereminent to them,
then any can have against it. Let any that differ from us, show anywhere in the
Gospel where Christ laid his hands on any but desperate diseased persons to
show his power, or on Infants to show his love, and confirm their ancient
privileges, or upon any person in this latter sense unbaptized.

Ob. 2. If it be said, This was an extraordinary act of Christ, and no ordinary
pattern may be drawn from it.

Sol. I answer; Grant it to be extraordinary, yet it argues more strongly, if
Christ used an extraordinary act to show his affection and love to Infants,
much more may the Church show ordinary acts to them.

2. Christ showed this extraordinary carriage, the more to check and convince
his Disciples for their extraordinary contempt of poor Infants, who would not
allow them an ordinary interest in visible privileges. And it is considerable,
that Imposition of Hands was not an usual Ordinance, or administered by any but
Christ, before the ascension of Christ, and the sending of the holy Ghost.

3. Though Christ's act should be extraordinary, in regard of the imitation of
that act by us; yet he grounds it on an ordinary rule and principle; For of
such is the Kingdom of God; which he lays down as a fundamental rule. And this
is the least that can be gathered from it; That if Christ on this ground set an
extraordinary sign on Infants, because the Kingdom of God did visibly belong to
them; we may on the same principle set an ordinary initiating sign on them, as
visible members of that glorious state, as well as on grown visible Professors,
who are but probable members, according to the most judicious charity;
especially if we will think Christ's judgment in such cases equal with our own.

But lest all this should be thought but a mere outward act of Christ's, that
carried nothing of any inward design of grace, he blessed them after all, as
the fullest expression of his heart; and to demonstrate, that whatever grace he
had should be theirs as others: for so the word, (...), signifies, either to
speak well of, or to any concerning persons or things; and thus Christ may be
thought to speak much of the state and privileges of these Infants; or else to
bless them, by desiring for them, or communicating to them all sorts of
mercies, as blessings; according to that Ephesians. 1.3. And what can be more then
for Christ to take up Infants in his arms, lay his hands on them, as an outward
sign, to consecrate them to himself, and to show their capacity of receiving
the holy Ghost, and then to bless them; which comprehends the communication of
all graces, and good things? And yet we must with scorn (poor probable
Disciples our selves!) deny them a little water; and think it too much to have
them named among the lowest sort of visible Saints, when Christ own them
publicly, and says, that of such at these is the Kingdom of God; and they may
have more interest in that Kingdom, then these that exclude them: but I shall
rather believe Christ's testimony, then any man's froward opinion: It Is only a
wonder how Saints, that have felt Christ's bowels themselves, and read this
Text, can be so rigid to Infants of Believers, to whom Christ has been so
kind, and exemplary in his carriages; and stamped such visible characters of his
love on, even in administration of outward signs. To what end should Christ do
all this in such a high and peremptory strain of affection, if it were not to
teach us charity and respect to Infants, in these ordinary administrations they
are capable of; and to confirm their old state in the Church, by such a new and
unwonted carriage; Christ abounding to them who were most undervalued, and
could say nothing for themselves? And how harsh is it to conceive, that Christ's
intent was hereafter to cast them out of the visible Church, and from the
participation of all outward signs of salvation, when his carriage was thus
transcendently loving to them; and so only to give them a lightning before
death? Let men's consciences, not gulph'd in prejudice, judge: This Text, if
there were no more, will fly in the Consciences one day of the most confident
Contemners of Infants, and their Baptism.

I shall only add, to satisfy the learned, the consent of godly and eminent
Authors on this Scripture.

Non est ulla historia in toto codice Evangelico, quae frequentius in Templo
legatur, quam haec ipsa. Quoties enim Infans ad sacrum baptismatis fontem
affertur, toties etiam ex agendis Ecclesiasticis haec historia recitatur; sed
admodum raro eadem in Ecclesia recitatur. Chemnitius and Polycarpus, Lyserus in
Harm. Evangel.

And doubtless it is no ordinary note, that three of the Evangelists should so
punctually relate this story, without any considerable change of words or
sense. All the Objection is, because the word Baptism is not inserted, when as
much as that comes to is; and that Christ baptized no grown persons.

Hinc jam illud est quod dixisse Dominum, omnes tres memorant, talium enim est
Regnum Coelorum. Non sane adultorum tantum, qui ut Infantes sese humiliarunt,
quod Anabaptista contendunt. Hoc enim sensu, quod dixerat sibi Infantes
apportandos esse, tanquam subjecta, ratio minime cohaereret, etc. Facessat
igitur stulta ista vestra sapientia; Sinite Infantes mihi adduci, ajo enim non
solum horum esse Regnum Coelorum: sed nullum omnino Regni hujus fore
participem, nisi Infantibus his similis evadat.

Si jam ad Ecclesiam pertinent, and ipsorum est Regnum Coelorum; eur eis signum
Baptismi quo in Ecclesiam Christi, qui ad eam pertinent, recipi solent,
negaremus? Siqui hoedi inter eos sunt, tum excludendi nobis erunt, cum id esse
sese prodiderunt; interea ne simus severiores Christo -- aut est nostrum
baptizare plusquam Domini amplecti, imponere manus and benedicere fuit? quae
fidei aut charitatis jactura, per Baptismum Christo adducere quos adduci sibi
jussit?

Much more then this has Bucer on Mat. 19.13, 14, 15. full of spiritual
consideration.

To this does Musculus, Calvin, Beza, add their holy testimonies: But I spare
these quotations, because it is ad homines, to men like our selves: Let these
which dissent read impartially, and consider if this place should stand alone,
without any harmony of other Scriptures, whether there be not more in it for
Infant Baptism, then anything they have against it: I would be so ingenuous
with them, as to deal with any of their awaked Consciences.

CHAP. XI. Wherein is considered the method of God in the Old Testament, of
administering Ordinances in Families, and baptizing Households in the New
Testament; and how far it contributes to Infant Baptism.
IT IS not a slight thing to consider, how that ever since the Fall this has
been an usual method of God in administration of the Covenant, and privileges
of grace, to make it run through families and households of Believers, as the
special veins: Hence families, as they were the first natural societies, so
they were the first Churches; the Covenant and the privileges of it was among
them; from Adam to Abraham it went on thus: And when the Covenant in Abraham's
time came to be more expressly opened, and fairer expounded, God goes on still
in the same method, makes the Covenant with Abraham and his household; only the
family was enlarged, it became a greater household, according to the vastness of
the extent of the Covenant; yet still it was dispensed as to a family. Now if
you come to the New Testament, there you see God going on in the same method,
as if he had cast by an eternal decree this platform: Baptism, the New
Testament Ordinance, is administered according to the same design to families
and households. Let us consider what Christ himself says to Zacheus, Luke 19.
who was a Gentile, and one of the chief Publicans, upon occasion of this man's
conversion, to open the nature and continuance of the Covenant to the Gentiles
in the same form as it was to Abraham; This day is salvation come to thy house,
forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham: Here is the same language used in
administration of Circumcision in the Old Testament; and the same reason,
forasmuch as he also ((...)) is a son of Abraham: What can be drawn from this
place more proper then these conclusions?

1. That as soon as ever he was converted and believed, Christ applies the
promise to his house; if there were not something more in it, he would have
only said, Salvation is come to thee.

2. It Is clear that he opens the Covenant made with Abraham; not only to
himself, but his house; and argues from his being a son of Abraham, that
therefore the Covenant is not only made with him, but with his house, that is,
his seed; it were enough for to call him the son of Abraham, and to say,
salvation is come to himself: but to mention his house, together with himself,
and give this as a reason, because he is the son of Abraham, is as much as to
say, the privileges of the Covenant is the same to you and your house, as it
was to Isaac and Jacob, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham, as well as
they. Now for Christ to speak in this dialect, and to tell them of their
households, and of favor to them in the beginning of the Gospel, and yet at the
same time exclude their Infants from all outward signs of the promise, which
they ever had in the darkest days of grace, is a strange policy, unsuitable to
the simplicity of Jesus Christ.

Concerning this continued method of God, though this Zacheus be a singular,
yet he is not the only example, if you read all along the Acts of the Apostles;
these which had households, the promise runs with a gracious entail. Acts 11.14.
Cornelius has the promise to him and his house. Acts 16.15. Lydia was
baptized, and her household. Ver. 31. the Apostle exhorts the Jailer to believe,
and he should be saved, and his whole house; Just as God made the Covenant with
Abraham, Walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1, 2.7. And I will be a
God to thee, and thy seed, or household. In ver. 33. its said, he was baptized,
and all his ((...)) he and all that were of him; a most emphatical expression
to set forth his Children, who are the natural offspring, and who are properly
a man's own; he changes the general phrase of a house, which may sometimes
comprehend more, and comes more close home; when he says he was baptized, he
says, all his ((...)) of him; which cannot be meant of servants, who are our
own as goods and lands are, but not of a man: but must firstly and primarily
referr to his Children, who are begotten of him; and it may be secondarily to
his kindred; in the same phrase you have it translated, Romans 16.10, 11. The
household of Aristobulus, the household of Narcissus: but it is, (...), and
(...); These of Aristobulus and Narcissus: which must especially be meant of
their Children, and these that descended from their loins.

The only Objection is from the following v. 34. where it is said, That the
Jailer believed with all his house; and so none were baptized but Believers.

To which I answer, That is not a restriction or exception of all that were
baptized, but a description of the power the Word had upon all his house with
himself; for he said in the former verse, that he was baptized, and with his
those which were begotten of him; and in this verse he shows the actual
influence of the Word on all his house likewise: So that the words are an after
description of the mighty workings of the Gospel, not only to himself, who was
baptized, and so his; but on all his house besides.

2. Others, and men of good account, do relate (...), with all his house, to
the Jaylors rejoicing, not to his believing; and so read it thus, And when he
had brought them into his house, he set meat before them, and rejoiced,
believing God, with all his house; And it may be as well referred to the one as
to the other.

However it is very observable, That when he speaks of the Apostles preaching,
and their believing, he names his house in the largest term; v. 32. They
preached the Word to him, and all that were ((...)) to all that were in his
house: But when he speaks of baptizing, he says (that you may be sure his
Children were baptized) that he, and all of him, or all his, were baptized. Now
he does not say, all that believed, but all his were baptized: though there is
no doubt but all that believed were baptized also.

But if there were no such emphatical expression, as is by the holy Ghost in
the baptizing of the Jaylors house; yet there is enough to make forth an
example of Infant Baptism from the very notion of baptizing whole households, so
frequent in the Gospel.

1. It will be very strange confidence to affirm, that in all these houses
there were no Infants, or little Children.

2. There is greater probability, and stronger grounds to believe, when he
names households, that there were little ones in them, then that there were not.

3. Especially when the word, house, in all languages in the world is most
usually put for Children of the house, who maintain and keep it up; and so
often in Scripture, Genesis 30.30. and 45.18, 19. N. 3.15. Psalm. 115.12, 13. 1 Timothy 5.8.

4. Where whole houses are baptized, there Infants are not excluded, if they be
in the house; and if not excluded, they are included; they cannot be excluded,
for they are principal parts of the house; and if only adulti, or grown persons
should be meant, when Children are named, that would be to exclude Infants from
being Children, as well as from being parts of the household.

When Abraham and his house were circumcised, Abraham's Children were the
principal parts of the house; and they were first circumcised, and then his
servants, and all in his household were circumcised also, being Prosessors of
the same faith; for Abraham had a godly family: Yet upon a different account;
the one by virtue of Abraham's Covenant, which was made primarily with him and
his Children, with all his family likewise; as they professed Abraham's faith, and
served Abraham's God; and so it may be easily conceived how whole households were
baptized in the New Testament; the Children as in the Fathers Covenant; the
Servants and others by virtue of the same profession: And in this sense there
will be no ambiguity in the phrase of baptizing whole households.

Lastly, That the Apostle should borrow an expression always used in the Old
Testament to include Children especially, and make use of it in the New to
exclude them, would be strange but to conjecture: Now when ever the household is
spoken of in the Old Testament, it always includes Children. This is still more
for the baptizing of Infants, then any thing they can say against it; and
compared with all the former Scriptures, may make up a full demonstration to a
judicious conscience.

CHAP. XII. Circumcision and Baptism compared; that they have both one
spiritual signification; the true nature of them both opened, and what
influence this consideration has to prove Infant Baptism.
IT IS well known among these that are against baptizing of Infants, what weight
they put on that Ordinance of Baptism, that all other seem light in their eyes,
and of no account in respect of that. When they speak of Circumcision, they
usually call that a carnal Ordinance, sealing only carnal and temporary things,
and only reaching the outward man; the one requiring only the flesh for its
subject, the other a spiritual man, a new creature, etc. And so much do they
idolize (for so I fear it is among many) Baptism, that even faith it self seems
little without it: But that I may wash off this paint, and make Ordinances look
like themselves, let us compare these Ordinances together, and view them in
their dignity, and worth, and significations. And,

1. In general for Circumcision; We all know how much it was prized among the
Jews above all other Ordinances, and that it was the last that was taken away
with the greatest difficulty; about which the Apostles had more ado, then about
the taking away all the Ceremonies; whereby we may judge, the Jews did look on
it as the great seal of all their privileges; which when that was lost, all
was lost. Read the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 2.3. when he would speak all
their outward privileges at once, he says, What advantage has a Jew? what
profit of Circumcision, etc? So in the Galatians, Philippians, Ephesians,
Colossians, many Chapters are spent to take them off from Circumcision.

2. Circumcision was that Ordinance which was immediately annexed to the
Covenant, and a confirmation of it, Genesis 17.7, 10. therefore called the
Covenant.

3. It was an Ordinance instituted long before the Legal and Mosaical
Ceremonies of an elder date: It was not a type of Canaan, but of Christ to come
in the flesh of the seed of Abraham, and of the circumcision of the heart,
which Christ was most fully to perfect in the Gospel.

There is only one Gentleman that writ a Book of Baptism, printed in the year
1646. will have Circumcision to be a type of Baptism; which cannot be: For,

1. Types must have something in their outward face to represent another thing
more eminent and real: Now Circumcision has nothing in the outside to set
forth Baptism.

2. It is not so handsome to make one outward sign the antitype of another.

4. Circumcision was as holy an Ordinance as Baptism in the New Testament; for
they are both in themselves outward acts, and no holiness more in one then in
another, but as they have from institution; only Baptism is more easy to the
flesh then Circumcision; and yet not more easy, if that way of dipping should
be the only way of baptizing, especially at some seasons, and to some bodies.

5. The N. T. gives as large and honorable characters of Circumcision as it
does of Baptism: thus the Apostle calls it in Romans 4. The seal of the
righteousness of faith: A character so resplendent and glorious, that the
Gospel can give no higher to an Ordinance. And as much as he says of Baptism
in effect, 1 Pet. 3.21. that Baptism saves through the answer of a good
conscience, the contrary Opinionists are put to hard shifts to avoid the
strength of this place; and therefore some would evade it thus, saying, That
the Apostle does not call it a seal of the Covenant or Promise, but of the
righteousness of faith.

Sol. A miserable evasion! as if the righteousness of faith were not included
in the Covenant, or there were any righteousness of faith but what comes by the
Covenant* and so would make a separation between the promise of righteousness,
and the righteousness promised.

Others would cloth the Text with this disguise, That it sealed it only to
Abraham, whereas it was so to Isaac, and Jacob, and David, and all that were in
the Covenant.

This is held forth most clearly in that verse.

1. That Circumcision was a seal of the pure Covenant of grace, in which
righteousness was promised to Abraham and his seed indefinitely.

2. That this seal was applied to all the seed that were but externally and
visibly in Covenant, to Infants; and the same sign that Abraham received upon
profession of his faith, his Child received; and therefore he is said to be the
Father of Circumcision, as of Faith, ver. 12.

3. Doctor Willet from this place holds forth the sameness of the substance of
the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament, both which do seal the
righteousness of faith; and lays it as a great error on the Romanists, who
affirm, That the Old Testament Sacraments did not exhibit the graces of the
New.

4. This cannot be denied from the place, without men will wilfully put out
their own eyes, that Circumcision had as glorious a use as Baptism, viz. to
seal the righteousness of faith; which must be as well to others that had the
true efficacy of the Covenant, as to Abraham himself; and no higher mercy can
any Ordinance of the New Testament seal to any.

There were many other circumstantial and accidental uses of circumcision
according to the Jewish state, as we will grant Mr. Tombs, as

1. To engage to the performance of the whole Law, Gal. 5.2, 3. Acts 15.10.

2. To be a partition wall between Jew and Gentile, Ephesians. 2.14.

But when the Apostle would give circumcision his true character, and show what
the primarie, and substantial use of it was, he calls it a seal of the
righteousness of faith.

6. Circumcision and baptism signify one and the same thing, and so agree in
being signs of the same grace; compare Coloss. 2.11, 12, 13. with Romans 6.3, 4.
and 6. v. circumcision signifies the putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh; baptism is into Christ's death, and to testify the crucifying the old
man with him, that the body of death might be destroyed, as by the comparing
these two places it is most clear, and 3 v. and 6 ver. of Romans 6. chap. only
baptism has this larger consideration in it, as that it takes in Christ's
resurrection with it, and also the quickening of the soul together with him,
which was not so fully signified in circumcision, but implied, according as the
Apostle argues in the same place, Romans 6.5. v. for if we have been planted in
the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of his
resurrection; the one being a consequence of the other; and as circumcision did
cut off the foreskin in token of the destruction of sin, so baptism by washing,
signifies the taking away the pollution of sin; thus, God when he would promise
to kill sin, and work all grace, he expresses it by circumcision; I will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Apostle,
Phil. 3.4. says, We are of the circumcision, that is, we have the true work of
grace in us.

The reason why I urge these considerations, is to hold for the capacity of
Infants, as well for Baptism as Circumcision; there is no reason why they
should be thought more unfit and incapable for the one then for the other: For

First, if Circumcision were a seal of the righteousness of Faith, and yet
applied to Infants, and Baptism can seal no higher mercy, why should it be
thought such a strange and unmeet thing to baptize them, more then to
circumcise them? they usually say you put a seal to a blank in baptizing
Infants; the same might be said as to Circumcision; yet they were circumcised
as well as Abraham that professed his own Faith. I must acknowledge I never could
yet understand why Infants should be thought fit to have that seal applied to
them in the Old Testament, which the New calls a seal of the righteousness of
Faith, and yet be denied it in the New Testament as incapacious, when Baptism
can seal no more. I wish it were seriously considered;

Especially, Secondly, when Baptism shall signify the same thing in substance,
be both signs of the same grace; the one cutting away sin as with a knife, the
other washing it away with water; and yet Infants capable, and most fit to have
the administration of the one ordinance, not of the other; if these of the
dissenting judgment, did with more sobriety weigh such considerations as these,
they would not with so much foolish contempt write and speak of Infants Baptism.

A knife may be applied to an Infant, as to Abraham, though old, and in the
height of his Faith, and seal the righteousness of it; but water must only be
poured on actual believers, and grown persons, such as Abraham, but not on
Infants, though it has no more to seal; as if there were some strange
excellency and virtue in the nature of water, that it were too precious to
wash the Infants of believers: For, if there be no more virtue in the water
that baptizeth, then in the knife that circumcised, you see there is no more
glorious use of the one then the other. And what end God should have to put
such a Seal on Infants in the Old Testament, and exclude them in the New, when
the Ordinances both signify the same substantial grace, let any Christian
heart imagine.

CHAP. XIII. That famous place, Coloss. 2.11, 12. opened; the correspondence
between Circumcision and Baptism further cleared.
THe scope of the Apostle in the former verses is to dissuade the Christians
from Jewish ceremonies, especially from Circumcision; and he does it especially
from the discovery of Christ's fullness, and our being complete in him; that is,
you need nothing out of Christ now; but they object we want Circumcision; he
tells them they are circumcised in him, 11. v. where the Apostle distinguishes
of a twofold Circumcision, one (...), made with hands, the other (...), made
without hands, which he calls the Circumcision of Christ, but it is wrought by
him, and is by union with him; and you being circumcised in Christ, and have
the grace signified by outward Circumcision, you need no more; but there be two
things they might object;

First, that this is nothing to the question; you would take us off from
outward Circumcision, by telling us we are inwardly circumcised, whereas the
sign and the thing signified should always go together; Abraham had this
Circumcision and others, and yet were outwardly circumcised.

Secondly, they might object we are not so complete in Christ as Abraham and
his seed; for, besides the inward grace, they had an outward sign and Seal to
confirm it to them.

The Apostle in the 12 verse answers both at once, they were not only
circumcised inwardly, with Christ's Circumcision, but there was an outward sign
in the New Testament to be applied to them, of the same consideration; Buried
with him in Baptism, etc. This is the sum of the words, let us now consider
what may be fairly deducted from them.

Many, and the most of our Divines, do conclude from hence the succession of
Baptism in the place or room of Circumcision, that this Ordinance is appointed
in the New Testament in lieu of the former, and for the same ends and purposes;
which doubtless is true from this place, if men would truly weigh the import of
the words, and not fight with their own shadows.

First, this compleatness in Christ is as well to enjoyment of Ordinances, and
outward privileges, as inward graces; else he would never have mentioned
Baptism outwardly, when in the former verse he speaks of inward Circumcision;
he would have kept still in that strain.

Secondly, observe how he joins them together, and makes them one, the inward
circumcision confirmed by the outward baptism, circumcised with the
Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism; now this could not be
proper, not of any possible connection, but by putting the outward sign of
baptism instead of the outward sign of Circumcision; that is, you are
circumcised because baptized; you change but the outward element, or
instrument; but the same inward grace is confirmed by both; thus the words are
legible, and to be understood, without difficulty; but any other
interpretation will be found most rugged, and unsuitable: For,

Thirdly, as the Apostle could not say in the former v. that they were
circumcised in Christ, but from the analogy between the outward sign, and the
inward grace; that is, if the outward sign of Circumcision had not signified
such an inward work; so neither could he have found they were circumcised in
Christ, being buried with him in baptism, if that Ordinance of baptism did not
as an outward sign answer to that inward Circumcision, and were in stead of
that sign which did directly represent it formerly.

Fourthly, the nature of the Apostles design holds out this; for he would take
them off the practice of Circumcision; and this he does by discovering of
another Ordinance, more suitable to the Gospel, which should signify the same
thing unto them, in a more large and emphaticall manner, signifying not only
Christ's death, but his resurrection; so that in the very import of the phrase
he calls baptism a Gospel circumcision; and this argument he uses as most
effectual to take them off Circumcision, by showing them they were complete in
Christ in the New Testament, as to inward graces, and outward Ordinances, for
though they were not circumcised, they had baptism to supply the want of it
with advantage, so that they should not lose an Ordinance, but exchange. In
whom you are circumcised, etc. buried with him in baptism; if baptism did not
seal and confirm the inward Circumcision, it could not be said circumcised in
Christ, being buried with him in baptism, and baptism could not seal inward
Circumcision, but as it was of the same use with outward Circumcision, which
did most directly signify the circumcision of the heart; and baptism held the
same analogy, and was instituted to the same end; therefore it is called the
washing of regeneration. Suppose the Ordinance should again be changed, and the
inversion should be thus, That baptism should be abolished, and circumcision
set up again, and the Apostle should express himself after the same manner;
intending to take them off the use of baptism, and to be circumcised; and say
ye are complete in Christ, in whom ye are also baptized with the baptism of
Christ, being circumcised with him; would not the deduction be clear, that
circumcision was ordained instead of baptism, and to supply the defect of that
Ordinance? the same conclusion must be according to the words as from
circumcision to baptism.

The sum of all is, That as inward circumcision was signified by the outward
circumcision; the circumcision made without hands, by the circumcision with
hands, as the proper and direct sign of it; so is that inward circumcision, as
really and fully signified, and confirmed by baptism; and that Ordinance is
appointed to represent and seal that, as the outward act of circumcision was
formerly: so that circumcision and baptism, as to the thing signified, and the
inward intent of their use, are made all one: else it will be very hard to make
sense of this place of Scripture.

The Pleas against this interpretation are of little worth, if weighed; some
say it is only meant of the inward circumcision, and inward baptism, which
interpretation will serve us better then themselves; for if inward graces, and
of the same substantial work be done on us, as circumcised and baptized in
Christ, it shows the oneness of the outward signs in the same signification.

Mr. Tombs says in his Examen p. 93. That there is an analogy between
circumcision and baptism: yet says it is rather between circumcision and
Christ's burial, then between circumcision and baptism, as Chrysostom, and
after him Theophylact on the place.

All which will still make out the truth of our interpretation; For,

First, if there be an analogy between them, as is, and must be granted, then
there is some proportion and agreement between these two Ordinances; now it is
not in the outward administration, nor the external sign, in that there is no
proportion between a knife and water; and therefore it must be in their proper
signification and real use, which is the Apostles scope in this place: and
therefore he expresses the inward grace properly signified by the one
Ordinance, and yet confirmed by the other; Circumcised in him, being buried
with him in Baptism.

2. If the analogy be between Circumcision and Christ's burial, not between it
and Baptism, yet it will come all to one, yea be our advantage: For,

1. That shows that Circumcision did hold forth as much as Baptism, viz.
Christ's death and burial.

2. That when we are said to be buried with Christ in Baptism, and that is the
outward sign to represent our burial with Christ, we are as if we were
circumcised; Circumcision holds analogy with Christ's burial, and so does
Baptism with both: And thus take it in what sense you will, the Text will clear
it self.

CHAP. XIV. A clear Explication of. Mat. 28.19. with Mar. 16.15, 16. wherein
their argument from the first institution is opened and confuted.
LET us at length come to view that prime Text, Math. 28.19. on which these
that are against Infant Baptism lay the most weight. As from the very first
institution of that Ordinance, Christ gives his Apostles there Commission to
teach and baptize; Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost. Hence ((...)) which they translate,
Disciple all Nations, and then baptize them, they argue, None are to be
baptized by Christ's institution, but these which are first taught, and so made
Disciples: But Infants are not capable to be taught, or to be made Disciples.
Ergo, They may not be baptized.

That I may show the errors of this argument, and so fully clear up the point,
the terms with their connection both in the major and minor proposition must be
examined from the words of the Text, and that parallel place, Mar. 16.15, 16.
which for methods sake I shall hold forth in these following considerations.

1. For the word (...), we shall not much stand on, whether it be translated to
make Disciples, or as it is in our common version, Go teach all Nations; for it
is sometimes a verb transitive, to teach by writing, or viva voce, with a
living voice; and so it is to be taken here, says learned Whitaker De Script.
and most agreeable with Mar. 16.15. where he bids them Go preach the Gospel to
every Creature.

2. The strength of the argument lies (if there be any strength in it) on the
absolute supposed connection between discipling and being baptized; therefore
they say, None but these which are capable of teaching, are capable of Baptism;
which is Fallacia a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, a Fallacy to
take that absolutely which is meant only according to some respect. But to show
the idleness of the connection;

1. You find preaching or teaching the Gospel to be separated as to the
administration, and necessary and immediate connection, by Paul himself, 1 Cor.
1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; so he says in
the former verses, He taught many, baptized few.

2. Compare this with Mar. 16.15, 16. which expounds this, you will find
believing and being baptized as close connected to salvation, as here Baptizing
to Teach; He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved. Now if any will
stand on the order of words to prove an institution, we may as well argue from
Mark, as they from Matthew; None must be baptized but these which are taught; so
none that believes and is not baptized can be saved; and that Baptism is as
necessary to salvation as believing; for in order of phrase they are absolutely
joined together: And what a strange inference would that be to make Baptism
equal with faith to salvation? and yet we have as much ground to argue from the
one place so, as they from the other; without they will admit some other
qualifying term to make it up.

3. The order of things is not always, or commonly so exactly expressed in
Scripture by the position of the words; for sometimes one thing in the order of
words is put before another, which in order of nature and consideration is
antecedent to it; as Mar. 1.15. Repentance is put before Faith. Romans 10.9.
Confession with the mouth is put before believing with the heart, as to
salvation; with abundance of other places of Scripture. Thus many things in the
Evangelists are left out by one, supplied by another; and the same word
directly uttered in one, inverted in another, especially about the
administration of the Lords Supper. For to avoid tediousness, consult the
places your selves. Mat. 26.26, 27. Mar. 14.22, 23. Luke 22.20. 1 Cor. 11.25.

3. A third consideration to open this Text in Matthew, is from comparing it
once more with its parallel, Mar. 16.15. there it is, Go preach the Gospel;
here it is, Teach and baptize: Now hence it follows, that their teaching was by
holding forth the Gospel: As much as if he had said, Open the Covenant, tell
men the riches and fullness of grace: Now if they must teach the Gospel, they
must needs instruct them in the Covenant, which was to these that believed, and
their seed. Now suitable to this Commission, Peter, when he comes to open the
Gospel to the Jews pricked in their hearts, presently holds out the promise to
them and their Children; Acts 2.38, 39. and by that to make them both
Disciples. So Gal. 3.13. The blessings of Abraham to come on the Gentiles, is
one of the main parts of the Gospel. Now if they teach men Gospel, they must
preach as Peter did when he had converted the Parent, The promise is to you and
to your Children. Thus in Luke 1.72. this is made one great end of Christ's
coming, to perform the mercy promised to our Fathers, and to remember his holy
Covenant; so that preaching the Gospel is preaching the Covenant. Now that
Infants are in the Covenant as well as grown persons, we have formerly proved.

4. This is no more then was required of Abraham at the time of Circumcision,
and yet his Infants were not excluded from the Ordinance. Genesis 17. Walk before
me, and be perfect. Chap. 18.19. Abraham was to command his Children, and teach
them to keep the ways of the Lord: and yet his Children were not to be kept
from the sign of the Covenant, until they were taught, and had walked before
God in uprightness, as Abraham.

5. To come home to the word, in their own sense, (...) signifies Make
Disciples; now Children are not capable of being made Disciples, say they.

I answer, 1. Some have been made Disciples before they were distinctly taught,
as the twelve, whom Christ called, and they followed him, and became his
Disciples, and were real Disciples, yet as ignorant as Infants, and were taught
afterward by degrees.

2. One is said to be made a Disciple even in vulgar phrase, as well who is
listed in the School to be taught, as one that is teaching or already taught,
though he has not learnt a letter: Thus in all Schools it is a usual phrase at
the first entrance of a Child, he is called a new Scholar, or a new Disciple:
Thus Infants being entered into Christ's School, and given up to be taught in
time, and by degrees, may be accounted Disciples; it was so in the former
instance, and it is no strange expression in civil Schools.

3. Infants are expressly called Disciples in the New Testament, as well as
grown and taught men: Thus Acts 15.10. Circumcision is called a yoke put on the
neck of the Disciples, that is, on Infants, who were the special Subjects of
that Ordinance, and bore the burden of it, and not properly the Parents; and
yet the Parents had the deep sense of it reflecting on themselves and their
little ones, and therefore he calls it a yoke that they nor their Fathers were
able to bear; especially because it did bind them and their Children to keep
the whole Law; there is no evasion of this; if they say it was meant of the
Fathers, and of the doctrine of Circumcision, which did bind themselves: yet
they must grant the yoke was on their Children as to the act; and that if the
doctrine was so burdensome, much more the practice, which the poor Infants are
under; and they are called indefinitely Disciples, either by themselves, or
with their Parents; And the argument is thus: Those were Disciples on whom the
yoke of circumcision was laid; but on Infants was this yoke laid. Ergo Infants
are Disciples in the New Testament expression. If you will make any
distinction, it must be in the manner of laying on the yoke, viz. on the
Parents doctrinally, on the Children actually: but there can be no restriction
of the word, Disciples, from these on whom that yoke was laid, as is expressed in
that Chapter. Consider,

4. Let us come to the subjects to whom the Gospel is to be preached; and they
taught and baptized; it is in Matthew, (...), all Nations; in Mark it is, Preach
the Gospel, (...), to every Creature: Now that Infants should be none of all
the Nations, and excluded from being of this creation of God, who were included
as special subjects when the Church was in but so small a spot of the world, is
from our narrow apprehensions in the Gospel Times of dispensation of grace.

And the argument our Divines bring from this place is strong and most
considerable: The Gospel is to be preached to every Creature, all Nations must
be discipled; but Infants are a part of this creation, are included in all
Nations; therefore they must be made Disciples also. Read the Text again, Mat.
28. Go teach all Nations ((...)) baptizing them ((...)) which must needs
refer to ((...)) though the one be masculine, the other the neuter; or else
must relate to nothing, for it has no Relative besides to answer unto: This is
very common in Scripture, and the same phrases, as those well know that
understand the Greek in Rev. 2.26, 27. and Chap. 19.15. there is (...) with
(...), as Mr. Cobbet of N. E. well observes. Consult Acts 15.17. and 26.17.
Acts 21.25. Ephesians. 2.11. Masculines joined with ((...)) that signifies all
Nations. Now are Infants none of the Nations, or none of the National creation
which the Gospel may reach? God forbid.

The words hold forth only the general commission given to the Apostles after
Christ's death; which was an enlarging of their bounds, who were only formerly
circumscribed in Judea, and charged not to go into the way of the Gentiles: but
now the empale is broken down, they must preach the Gospel to every creature,
teach all Nations, and baptize them: but it does not hold forth either the
proper subjects of Baptism, or the form or manner of baptizing, which should
not be delivered (according to their own rule of institutions) in general and
indefinite terms, as, Every Creature, all Nations; and by transitive words, as,
Preach the Gospel to them, teach them. If this be the prime institution of
baptizing, from which place they exclude Infants, when Christ uses such
universal and comprehensive expressions; we shall desire but to deal with them
on their ground, and the same Text will serve to prove our positions more
demonstratively then theirs: And this Text shows, that Christ gave commission
to the Apostles and Ministers to preach and baptize; but in what order to do
it, or what should be required to the qualification of the subject as
absolutely necessary, is not at all discovered in this Scripture; they must
look for another Text to exclude Infants besides this, else give up their
confidence.

Either this place is the full and exact rule of institution of baptizing, or
not; if they say it is, then it would describe the persons, and the manner, the
matter and the form of baptizing, and that in the usual phrase with other
Scriptures: but here is only a general commission to two great acts, viz. to
preach, teach and baptize; and we may say in the same place, that whoever are
outwardly taught, or do but hear the Gospel (though they walk never so
contrary) must be baptized; for the commission is, Teach and baptize, nothing
of the parties entertainment of it is mentioned in this Mat. 28. nor of the
qualification of the subject with any distinguishing character* If they say
this does not hold forth all the institutions in every particular, as they must
grant, then we may compare other Scriptures with this, to make out the full
institution, as these where Infants are mentioned with so much gracious
consideration, as has been formerly expressed.

CHAP. XV. Concerning the signification and use of the word Baptism, or to be
baptized; the genuine Etymology of it in the Old and New Testament; the places
in the New Testament brought to prove it signifies to plunge the whole body,
answered.
THE confidence of these that differ has, been so great, that as they have
excommunicated Infants from the capacity of such a privilege, which they had
so old a title unto; so they have forced this only sense from the word to
baptize, that it must signify to plunge the whole body under water; and deny
that to be true Baptism, which is not so administered; and so make it as
essential to the manner, as visible profession to the matter.

For clearing up of this mist, I have diligently enguired into the propriety of
the word, and its use in the Greek Translators of the Old and New Testament,
which are the best guides in this case; and if we look narrowly, it will be
very hard to find, and very seldom, that ever the word in Scripture is used
for the total immersion of the body, or being absolutely under water.

The word ((...)) signifies among all Writers, both Heathen and Ecclesiastical,
promiscuously to dip into, or wash with water, by pouring on of it, or
sprinkling; and there is nothing more usual in the New Testament expression of
it, then to hold forth any kind of washing: It Is expressed in Authors by
madefactare, lavare, abluere, to wet or wash: thus Budaeus, Scapula, Pasor and
Grotius do interpret the word, though they grant it is, and may be taken more
strictly for immersion: but let the Scripture explain it self, Mar. 7.4. it is
used for the washing of hands, and of cups, and beds, and brazen vessels, and
of tables; which is not by plunging them in the water, so much as washing them
by the pouring forth of water on them; for so it is expressed, when they came
from the market they durst not eat ((...)) without they were baptized, that is,
washed; which could not be their whole bodies, without both excessive trouble
and danger, for which times and seasons must be observed: And besides this
(says the Evangelist) they retained many other things in custom, (...), etc.
as the Baptism of cups, that is, lotiones, or the washing of cups; which may be
as well done by pouring on water, as by plunging into water, and was and is
usually done in all Nations. So in Luke 11.38. the Pharisees wondered at Jesus
((...)) that he was not baptized before dinner, that is, did not wash. And Heb.
9.10. all the Ceremonial washings or sprinklings are called Baptisms; in a
metaphorical sense it is used for the pouring forth of the spirit.

And further, when it is translated to dip, both in the Old and New Testament,
it signifies commonly the least touch or taste of any thing that is liquid. So
Luke 16.24. Dives begs that Lazarus might be sent ((...)) that he might
baptize, or dip the top of his finger in water to cool his tongue; the least
drop would have been prized by him. 1 Samuel 14 27. Jonathan is said to dip the
end of his rod in an honeycomb, that is, but to take a very little; and the
word is ((...)) so it is used in Exodus 12.22. Joh. 13.26.

But to put it out of question, that there needs no such rigidness; and in
pressing this method of plunging from the word Baptism, let us compare it with
other phrases. Differt a (...), quod est prosundum petere, and penitus
submergi. Pasor, Lexic.
When the Scripture would express a covering of the whole body under water, and
so a submersion, or being wholly under water, it uses two other words, as
different from baptizing, viz. (...), and (...) and (...). Compare 1 Cor. 10.2.
All the Fathers and the Israelites are said to be baptized in the Cloud, and in
the Sea; they had only the dewings of the Cloud, and the sprinklings of the
water on them as they past through: But in Exodus 15.4, 5. when he speaks of
Pharaoh and his Host, he does not say they were baptized in the waters, but
uses these two words, (...), they were drowned in the Red Sea, submersi; and
he adds, the depths have covered them; and (...), they sank, or as the word is,
doused themselves into the bottom as a stone, while the Israelites were but
baptized under the gentle droppings of the Cloud, and of the Sea. And the very
same distinction did the Greek Writers make between baptizing and dousing, or
casting under water; expressing by baptizing, to be in the water as a Bottle
is, or Ship that is seldom or never wholly overwhelmed: And this appears most
demonstratively to be their meaning by the verse of the Ancient Oracle of the
Athenians, who well knew how to speak and distinguish Greek.

(...).
Baptize or wash him, utris instar, as a Bottle in
water, but do not drown him, or utterly plunge
him.
Whereby it plainly appears that the word (to baptize) signifies any kind of
washing, whether by sprinkling or pouring out of water, or dipping into water;
and that it is specially distinguished from these words that do signify a
total submersion; and these men do rack the word only to speak for plunging
under water, excluding the usual and more common sense of it, which is to wash
or cleanse.

But let us view the Scriptures which they bring for the maintenance of this
signification, Mat. 3.13.16. Jesus after he was baptized, went straight ways
up out of the water, ((...)) which may be translated, he went up from the
waters, (...) signifying more properly ab then ex, from then out; and it is
most suitable to translate it so, because all rivers, for most part, lie low,
and in valleys, in coming to which we are said to descend, and coming from to
ascend; thus when Christ ascended, in Act. 1.9. He was taken out of their
sight, that is from their sight.

Of the like consideration is that other place, which they lay so much weight
on for to hold forth plunging, Act. 8.36, 37, 38. Of Philip and the Eunuch, it
is said they went both down into the water ((...)) which may as well, and
better be translated, they went down to or toward the water; it seems they
being the upper ground, spied water below them, and so went down to it to be
baptized, as it is a common phrase among us, to go down to the water side.

But secondly, should we grant them this interpretation, that they went both
down into the water, which is a straining of the words, yet it can never be
proved from this, that their whole body was dipped all over, a man may go into
the water, and yet not be over his shoes; and how can they prove by this place
they went in any further, or how far they went; or whether Philip did not take
up water, and poured it on him; or whether he duckt him under water, or dipped
only his head; nothing can be proved from this place; but if they conjecture
one thing, we may another, with as much evidence. In the 107. Psalm. it is said,
They that go down to the sea in ship, see thy wonders; when they go down into
the sea in ships, is the ship plunged all over? or are they under water in the
ship?

Yet thirdly, it is evident that their going into the water, is distinguished
in the same ver. from the Eunuchs being baptized; they went down, or to (or
according to their own mind) into the water, and he baptized him: so that the
going into the water, take it for dipping and ducking, is not baptizing, but
something distinct, another act; and if they will prove going down to the
water, or into the water, in this place denotes the dipping of the whole body,
then he must be dipped before he was baptized; for Philip baptized him after they
went into the water.

Again, there is as much from this phrase to prove Philip to be dipped as the
Eunuch; and if dipping be baptizing, for the text says expressly, they both
went down to, or in the water, if you interpret it after their own heart, that
they both went into the water, Philip was as much in the water as the Eunuch;
for there is no exception made, but both went in together, and who should then
baptize the Eunuch? if this seem to be an absurdity to them, how can they from
this expression, in the severest acception, conclude the Eunuch was dipped? but
they both went into the water together, seeing the Text speaks as much of
Philips going into the water, as of the Eunuchs: But if we take it according to
the first translation, that they went both down toward the water, there may be
some reasonable account given how the one was baptized; which seems to be most
probable, by pouring out water upon him.

If any one object further from the next verse, that they ascended out of the
water, here is not ((...) as in the former place, but (...)) out of the water,
yet it will not at all help them; for it is said of them both, they came up out
of the water, and it speaks as much of Philips dipping himself as the Eunuch;
and you may as well argue that Philip was new dipped, as that the Eunuch was
baptized by dipping, because they both came up out of the water; besides, one
may be said very properly to come out of the water, if he put but his foot into
it; and thus you see on what weak foundations these high structures of
confidence and rigidness are built.

The third and most triumphant place, which they cry up, and adore for this
manner of baptizing by dipping, is John 3.23. And John was baptizing in Aenon
near to Salem, because there was much water there.

If we consider impartially, here is but a Geographicall description of this
place, of it is situation, nigh Salem, and of the benefit they had of water, in
regard of the most places besides in the country, Aenon lying nigh the banks
of Jordan; and whereas they lay the weight on this, that he gives it as a
reason why John was baptizing at Aenon, because there was much water there; it
may be a very good reason why he chose that place for the country to come in,
and be baptized, because they might go many a mile in these hot countries, and
not meet with a drop of water, and it was a great privilege accounted to these
places that banked on Jordan, that they had much water; but what argument is to
prove that John plunged all he baptized?

The Argument according to their form must be thus. John baptized in Aenon,
because there was much water; Ergo, baptizing is by dipping all the whole body;
this is a dangerous and ominous way of arguing to those who deny consequences,
and deductions, for to warrant duties without express syllabical precept; I
hope they will allow us the same privilege of demonstration, when we say whole
houses were baptized, Ergo Infants and Children, who are the pillars of a
house; is not this more fair and probable, then that John plunged their whole
body, because there was much water? There is none of our consequences for
Infants baptism so strained and far fetched, as we have demonstrated formerly;
it was necessary for them that had so many of several parts to baptize, to go
where there may be much water, when they could get hatdly a drop many miles
round about, and yet not immerse every one they baptized; you may in England go
20 miles in some countries, and not find a river to plunge a man's whole body
under the water, what would it be in Spain, and the other hot countries, where
water is sold as wine and bear with us, how far might they go ere they could
get a river to plunge themselves in? Thus you see how little reason they have
from these Scriptures to be so peremptory and rigid, as to make the essence of
baptism to be dipping, or plunging all the body.

The last pretense commonly urged for this dipping, is from the analogy it
has with Christ's burial, from that Romans 6.4. Col. 2.12. Buried with him in
baptism; hence say they it is clear one must be dipped under water, else it will
not represent a burial. In this they put all their confidence, and therefore
let us seriously view their strength.

Sol. First, let it be considered that they still make use of consequences, to
prove institutions, which they will not allow us.

But more particularly, 1. Plunging the whole body into the water, does not
hold similitude neither with Christ's burial, nor the manner of burials in the
most part of the world; for first, for Christ's burial and the manner of it, was
not by throwing under the earth, for Christ's body was wrapped in a linen cloth
by Joseph, and laid in a Tomb, or Sepulcher, hewn out of a rock, for that was
the custom of the Jews, e rupe specum excavare condendis corporibus: Matthew.
27.60. To cut out a place like a cave, or den, out of a rock to lay their dead
bodies in, as is observed by a man of great learning, and diligence; thus when
we sleep in our houses we may be said to be buried, having something over our
heads.

Secondly, the manner of burying in Europe is not by plunging the body into a
pit of dust, but by casting dust or dung on the person: so that their pouring
out water on an Infant as a passive subject, seems more to answer the
similitude of burying, then the casting into the water, wherein there is some
motion of the party himself contributing to his baptizing.

Thirdly, no man is said to be buried who falls into the water, or under earth,
without he stay there some considerable time.

Fourthly, we are said to be buried with Christ in baptism, in regard of the
spiritual union we have with Christ in his death, and burial; and this is as
much signified by pouring water on a person (as earth on a dead body) as well,
I say, as by plunging.

Let us now consider what remains to be said against this absolute rule, as
they would make it; you have seen all their main places for plunging, with what
demonstration, at the best ex probabilibus and incertis, out of probable and
uncertain conjectures, which they so much tax us withal, and yet the eye sees
not it self.

Let us now go on, and consider what other places of Scripture speak more
direct to qualify this rigid opinion of plunging.

When John began first to administer his office, it is said Mat. 3.5. That
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the regions round about Jordan went forth to
John, and were baptized of him in Jordan: A man had need have good store of
confidence to persuade himself and others, that all these people were baptized
by plunging their whole body into Jordan, or that they were dipped in their
clothes, or came with any prepared garments for that purpose; all which are
necessary circumstances to be considered; doubtless they were many thousands
that came forth, for the denomination is from the greater number; all Judea and
Jerusalem, etc. that is, a very great many, or the greatest number of these
Inhabitants; and how they could be thus baptized, men and women, in their
clothes promiscuously, or how they could get garments so ready as to make the
act decent, or what places they could have, seeing there were so many, for the
women and the men, to prepare themselves for the comely administration of such
an Ordinance, I cannot imagine; we hear John baptized so many, but in what
manner is uncertain; and that which is so hotly contended for most improbable,
all things duly considered.

The like is of that, 2 Acts 41. where 3000 were baptized in one day by the
Apostle, which if it were performed by plunging, could not but be accompanied
with the like inconveniences: so that it is only said they were baptized, not
how; and the word, as you have seen, is not so strictly to be appropriated to
dipping, but admits of a more large signification.

First, of the same consideration is that place, Acts 8.12. where it is
expressly said, that men and women were baptized together, and on a sudden,
which can hardly be conceived how it could be done with that gravity the Gospel
requires, by plunging in their own proper habits; and such sudden acts could
not be done with suitable preparations of garments.

But to come to particular instances, and parallel them together with former
places, which are brought to prove this kind of dipping; and let us judge which
has more demonstration. Acts 9.18. Paul was baptized in the house of Judas;
there is nothing of a Jordan or Aenon, a river that he was carried unto;
neither can they by any thing prove that Paul was thus dipped, but only their
good will to have it so; neither is it probable that every house had a deep
pond belonging to it, or a river running through it, or so vast a receptacle or
cistern to hold water as to plunge a man's whole body in it.

Secondly, consider the Jailors case, Acts 16.33. he was baptized in the
prison, and at midnight, he and his house; he washed their stripes, and they
washed him in token of remission of sins.

All that the most rational and profound Critic of that judgment can say, is
only this; That it may be supposed he had some great vessel, which some had in
these hot countries for washing themselves in, and so made use of it himself to
be baptized; but what a poor supposition is this? there is nothing either in
the text, or from reason to countenance it; who can imagine that in these hot
countries where water is so scarce and precious, a poor Jailer should have such
a vessel of so large and vast a continent, which must cost much; or that the
State would provide such a vessel in the Prison to bathe and refresh Prisoners
who are under suspicion, or censures of all sorts of crimes against the State?
but no more of that; it is too gross to conceive: And why may not we as well
argue thus; The Jailer was baptized late in the night in the Prison; Ergo not
by plunging, but washing or pouring out water on him, as they argue from Joh.
3.33. John was baptizing in Aenon near Salem, because there was much water
there; Ergo he baptized by plunging; I leave it to any sober judgment to
determine; if the one prove that baptizing may be by dipping, the other proves
it may be by some other way.

Thus you see the Scripture is not so peremptory as these men are, but has
left the method of baptizing in general, and under a latitude: Neither can they
bring one express place which holds it forth either in precept or president
(which they call for from us to show them for our judgment, and will not be
satisfied in all other considerations) and have no more but conjectural
consequences to prove their absolute determinations, but what their confidence
supplies: And if there be any absolute need of dipping, it is to cool the heat
of these men's spirits, who deny Baptism to be true, because they have not been
plunged.

The sum of all is this; They affirm the word, To baptize, signifies only
immersion, plunging or dipping the whole body under water; we deny it, and show
that it signifies to wash by pouring on water, and more often in the Old and
New Testament; and that when this word is used in the Scripture, it is opposed
to other words that signify properly dousing, or casting under water: And I
think I may say it without too much rashness, that they can hardly bring one
explicit place in the Old or New Testament, where the word, To baptize, is used
positively for plunging or dousing under water; and doubtless the most of that
judgment know not what the meaning of the words are, else they would not lay
the essence of Baptism on a word of such a large use.

The Scriptures being thus cleared, to speak at least, that plunging is not
absolutely necessary to constitute the truth of Baptism: Let us now come to
consider the morality of this judgment, and the practical conveniences or
inconveniences of this way of plunging; for if it be the only and pure
Gospel-way, it will have no ominous or uncomely aspect on other rules, which
are from the same authority, nor any way asperse the Gospel.

1. I know no how to believe that Christ would ordain any Ordinance, and tie
souls strictly to it, that cannot be practiced universally by all, and but in
some places, and at some seasons, without manifold inconveniences and dangers
unto nature: For if only dipping should be baptizing, and every one that
believes ought presently to be baptized, how shall they do that live in those
hot and dry Countries where water is so scarce, as it is in many places of the
world, who must be forced to go so many miles to come to a River, and yet may
only find it a small Brook, with which they can hardly wet their feet in
passing over, as it is in many places of the World?

And if there were in every place never so much water, yet how dangerous is it
for some bodies who are rheumatick, and subject to Catarrhs and defluxions, in
the winter time (for no season should hinder a man from the practice of an
Ordinance) in cold and wet to be plunged into the water? it were enough to
beget diseases in the most healthy bodies; Christ is more tender of the bodies
of his Saints, then to put them into such hazards; and I hope no one will
conceive Baptism to be a charm to prevent all inconveniences and diseases on
the body: yet the zeal of these of that way carries on so furiously, that they
think it is impossible for them to get any hurt, though they plunge themselves
into the water in frost and snow: but it is dangerous to tempt God out of his
ordinary way of preservation, when there is no absolute necessity for such a
practice. Besides, this Ordinance would be a greater yoke and burden then
Circumcision, if this rule of theirs should be so universally followed; for
there was no danger to the Child by that act, though it seemed bloody and hard:
But if all persons (for none are excluded by any weakness or indisposition)
should be thus baptized, how eminent a danger would many be in? And if it prove
so hazardous to the bodies of many healthy ones, that have in winter time but
accidentally fallen into the water, though they have not been under water, that
it has cost them their lives, the violence of cold so piercing their bodies
and animal spirits (of which we have many experiences) how would it be for
others, who labor under daily weakness? And there is no promise that the water
shall have no power to hurt those which after this manner are baptized, no more
then others. Flesh and blood is the same in all, which is the immediate subject
of such an act; and God does proportion his Ordinances to keep correspondency
with his other rules of mercy, and prescriptions for use of means. In a word,
if this be the only way of baptizing, happy are those that live in hot
Countries, or have bodies of brass.

It Is said, if it be an Ordinance, God will preserve; but that is the question;
and that which demonstrates it, is not the only way; if it be a way at all, it
is That it crosses Gods rules for preservation of a man's self; the practice of
it at some times being a kind of a degree of self-murder, and very unsuitable
to the laws of mercy and tenderness, that command the very heart of Christ; and
such an absolute unqualified command does not look like an Ordinance of the
Gospel: For if baptizing be immediately to be practiced after believing
(according to their principles) then what should hinder water that they may not
be baptized? Suppose they be sick and weak, suppose the season be unsuitable,
and yet the soul desires to be baptized? You must either go against all rules
of nature to plunge that person, or else find out some other way of baptizing;
or else a Gospel command must be neglected; for there is nor precept nor
president of delay of that Ordinance (still to their own positions) in all the
New Testament; and so both the baptizer and baptized must sin in performance of
a duty; for the one sins if he by any pretense destroys his own health; and the
other sins in being an instrument in it. I wish men were considerate of the
nature and effects of these things; which if it were more commonly practiced,
we should have heaps of instances to make good this consideration.

2. It Is very much to be observed, that Christ who has bid us avoid all
appearance of evil, should ordain any Ordinance wherein there must needs be
some such appearance fit for flesh and blood to act on; I have so much modesty
as only to present this, how women, take it in what habit you will, can be
baptized publicly, where all may come with men, and by men, without appearance
of evil. And if the Apostle would have women to be veiled or covered in the
Congregation, because of the Angels, take it either literally or tropically, to
show the modesty of Church Assemblies, and to prevent any shadow of temptation;
how can we think that it is suitable to Apostolical rule, that women should
appear in the open air, out of their wonted habit, in a garment next to
nakedness, and so be plunged into water? But I am loath to enter into these
secrets.

I only propound this, Whether or no that this baptism by plunging, be not
rather a baptizing of men's clothes, and upper garments, then of the body, if
the person baptized be not naked? and if he or she be, how odious a custom
would that be? I cannot but think that that part that is baptized, ought to be
naked, that the water may immediately fall on that place; else something else
must be baptized primarily, and the flesh secondarily and by consequence.

This is the reason why we only pour water on the face, because it is the
principallest part wherein the image of God most appears, and the soul shines
forth most eminently, on which all the workings of men's humors and affections
leave the visiblest impression and symptoms. And it is observable, that the same
word in the Greek ((...)) signifies both the face and the person, because the
whole person is represented by the face. And thus we baptize the person in
baptizing his face, which we can look on, and wash naked, and not be ashamed.
Let these men that are so zealous for dipping and plunging the whole body,
consider from all this, what warrant they have from Scripture for their so much
rigid confidence.

CHAP. XVI. An explication of that place, Heb. 10.22. About washing the whole
body with pure water; the improper application of it to their manner of
baptizing by plunging the whole body.
AFter all strainings and shifts of the Antipedo baptists, this place in Heb.
10.22. is forced in to give evidence for that manner of baptizing, formerly so
much contended for. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water; from hence they infer baptizing must be by dipping and
plunging, or washing the body throughout.

Let us review it with it is context and we shall find they chew but upon a dry
bone. For,

First, the scope of the Apostle in all this chapter, is not in the least to
discover the manner of baptizing, but to open two things.

1. The fullness of the satisfaction and merit of Christ's offering himself, and
being a sacrifice for remission of sins, in opposition to all Legal, and
shadowy offerings, as appears from the 1. v. unto the 29. which was begun to be
demonstrated in the former chapters, especially the 9. chap.

2. To encourage souls in their approaches to God on such a glorious account
now in the New Testament, so in the 19. ver. Having therefore boldness ((...))
or freedom, to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and
living way, etc. In this 22. v. he bids them draw nigh with a true heart, and
full assurance of faith, etc.

Secondly, that his scope or intent is not to open the manner of baptizing, is
evident; for he writes to those that were baptized already as these Hebrews
were; for you have no controversy in this Epistle about circumcision and
baptism, as in the Romans Gall. Phil, Colos. but only concerning Christ's priestly
Office, especially compared with the Levitical, Aaronical Priesthood, and the
virtue of Legal-ceremonial sacrifices, and the sacrifice of Jesus Christ as
High Priest, as any one that runs may read; now either they must say these were
not baptized before, or else must conclude that his design is not to inform
them (and that so transiently) of the nature or manner of administering of that
Ordinance.

Thirdly, the Apostle here does directly instruct the soul how to make
confident addresses to God, viz. from the sense of our justification and
sanctification together; for so by our hearts being sprinkled from an evil
conscience, is meant, and can be meant no other then Christ's blood sprinkled on
our souls, in the assurance of our absolution from sin, and the washing with
pure water no more (but by this outward expression) of the purity of our
conventions, as to sanctification, that we may not come with scandal of
external unholiness, when we pretend to be justified by Christ's blood.

Fourthly, the usual word is here left out which expresses that Ordinance; and
it is your bodies not baptized but washed ((...)) which is a clear allusion to
that of Levit 16.4. from whence it seems to be excerpted; when Aaron the
High Priest was to enter into the holy place, and before he was to be attired
for that work, it is said, He shall wash his flesh in water, and so put them
on; the 70. translate the words thus, (...), He shall wash his whole body with
water, to signify the holiness he should have in his person, as from external
public pollutions; the very same intent of the Apostle is here, that if we
would be confident before God, when we approach unto God, we must come with
Christ's blood on our consciences, and no known pollution on out conversations;
and if we will follow their grounds from comparing these two places, we may
conclude that baptism was as much an Ordinance of the Old Testament, as the
New, for washing; the body was used in both.

Fifthly, it is a usual phrase in Scripture to express the sanctification of
our persons, from inward and outward defilements, by the washing of water and
washing the body; and yet not in the least to hint out the manner of baptizing
by water, as into the special administration of that Ordinance; thus in Esa.
1.16. when God says to his backsliding people, wash you, make you clean; must
he needs mean, go and be baptized? but that outward expression is put for the
reforming of their ways, and expounded by putting away the evil from their
doings or works; thus in Ioh. 13. Christ expresses justification and
sanctification, by washing in general, and then washing the feet; he that is
washed, (which is not baptized; for Christ says he must wash, or else Peter
could have no part in him; and Christ did not baptize) such a one need no more
but to wash his feet, that is, walk holily; so that here is washing, and
washing of the feet, and yet neither meant of baptizing nor washing: Thus
likewise in the Corinthians it is said, as to their sanctification, Now you are
washed, now you are cleansed, now you are justified; he means not Now you are
baptized, but of the special purification of their hearts, and lives from their
former pollutions of flesh and spirit; which though signified by baptism, yet
so remotely, as no man can gather the constant method of external baptism from
it.

Sixthly, he says your bodies washed ((...)) with clean or pure water; now I
hope, as to baptizing, none are so foolish as to stand on it, whether they be
baptized after a rain when the water is puddled, or whether only in pure and
crystal streams, from an unpuddled spring or ocean; and yet they must be tied
to the one as the other, if this Text be their president; and we may as well
question from this Text, whether they be rightly baptized, if there be any mud,
or slime, or filth in the water, as whether we baptized if all our bodies be
not washed; but now this expression to set forth holiness and sanctification,
is most apt and full of life: our hearts and conversations, in drawing nigh
unto God, should be as if externally they were washed with clean water,
transparent and spotless before him, shining with an Evangelical brightness,
and spiritual purity; for it will be very hard to draw nigh to God with a good
conscience, and a tainted and besmeared body or conversation, with unholy acts,
whereby God is so much dishonored; especially to come as the Apostle says in
the former part of the verse, with a true heart and full assurance of faith.

Seventhly, if he had meant by this washing of the body, baptizing, he would
not have made such a disproportion (according to their own rule) between the
sign and thing signified; for he speaks of the heart being only sprinkled, and
yet the body washed with clean water; now if baptism does not signify and seal
justification, as well as sanctification, it is not a seal of the Covenant of
grace; and if it do signify, it cannot go beyond the thing signified in
expression and outward representation. And if Christ's blood in Heb. 12.24. be
called the blood of sprinkling, and it be one of the main things signified and
sealed in baptism; well may we answer it by an outward act, without offense or
sin.

Eighthly, grant that by washing the body is meant baptizing here (which you
see cannot be extorted by violence, or extracted by any chemical virtue) yet it
will not serve their turns: For,

First, the body is said to be washed, when any one or more of the principal
parts in sight or use are washed; and what is done to any eminent or commanding
part, it carries the denomination of the whole with it; for Mary's anointing
and washing of Christ's head and feet in Luke 7.44.45. is interpreted in John
11.2. for the anointing of the Lord, as much as if she had done it to all his
body throughout; though it is only expressed in the former place of the anointing
and washing his head and feet. This is most usual in Scripture.

Secondly if they will go to the strictness of the term of washing the body;
then,

First, it must be washed naked, or else it is not a a washnig of the body.

Secondly, it must not be a bare dipping or plunging into water, but some other
act must be done with the body, viz. a rinsing or rubbing, as we do pots or
clothes which we wash, which are not said to be washed because dipped under
water, but so rinsed as the filth and dirt is taken out; I only urge this to
show the inevitable inconveniences these men will bring on themselves by such
interpretations of Scripture.

Many other considerations might be added, if this Tract would bear the weight
of them.

CHAP. XVII. A short summing up of the former principles, and arguing them from
the method of the Apostle Peter about those he baptized, Acts 10.47.
THat we may bring up all unto a full conclusion, let that place be considered,
Acts 10.47. and the manner of the Apostles arguing in it, which is most
special to what we would prove; his argument lies in this, they have received
the holy Ghost as well as we: Ergo, what should hinder water? where there is a
qualification, there may be an administration of that Ordinance; this is
grounded on a common principle; now if we observe,

First, the Apostle changes the usual expression, and faith not, Seeing they
have believed as well as we, but seeing they have received the holy Ghost as
well as we, What should hinder? The argument is from the equivalency of the
qualification; for whereas he says all along formerly, they believed and were
baptized; and to the Eunuch, Acts 8.37. If thou believe thou may; but here,
seeing they have received the holy Ghost as well as we; this change of phrase
shows the qualification not to lie in one term or expression, but in the
universal equality of Gospel manifestation, to some one way, to some another;
that if any title in the Gospel can be found properly, either by Gods promise
or our judgment, applicable to any person, we may say What should hinder water?
now to receive the holy Ghost, is the largest and most vast expression, as to a
qualification, that ever could be mentioned, taking in both real graces and all
external gifts and privileges, which are all conveyed by that holy Spirit,
whether common or special, as is before expressed in another Chapter.

We shall desire on the Apostles account to argue from all these pregnant Texts
of Scripture concerning Infants; and having the same premises we shall not
certainly draw a wrong conclusion, when we find the Scriptures giving such
titles to Infants, and so many special carriages of Christ to them, which
amounts to as much as is spoken of any that were baptized, why may not we say
with Peter, What should hinder Water? as for instance,

If Infants be in the Covenant, that Abraham's promise belongs to them, as we
have proved, What should hinder water?

If Infants be holy, What should hinder Water? These which are visible Saints
may be baptized; but so are the Infants of believers; for they are called
((...)) 1 Cor. 7.14. The same name given to denominate all Saints; now to be
holy is as much as to be a believer; as to receive the holy Ghost is made all
one with being a believer; and what then should hinder water?

So again, when the Gentiles and their posterity are ingraffed into the same
root, Romans 11. which is Abraham and the Covenant, and the branches holy as the
root, what should hinder water?

If Christ was angry when Infants were forbidden to come to him, and charged
his Disciples to suffer them to be brought, who can forbid water? especially
when Christ took them up in his arms, laid his hands on, and blessed them,
which is as much and more then is done in baptism, what should hinder water to
be cast on them? and so we may argue from every place in the former discourse,
upon this very principle; for the Apostle argues neither from precept nor
example, but from a parallel qualification, because they had received the holy
Ghost; and surely all these places of Scripture concerning Infants; will fully
amount to make up an equivalent qualification in them to a visible profession
of grown persons, and so we may argue on the same ground with Peter; besides,
Infants are capable of receiving the holy Ghost as well as grown persons, and
why not capable of water? if they say it is only a visible believer, a visible
professor that is the subject; We answer,

You see the Apostle uses several expressions about it, sometimes actively,
sometimes passively, sometimes if thou believe; here, seeing they have
received the holy Ghost, but never says a visible Saint, or a visible
believer, or one that actually professes; and so may we say, seeing the
promise is to them, seeing they are holy, seeing they are called Disciples,
seeing they had Christ's hands laid on them, and were blessed, seeing they are
capable of receiving the holy Ghost, what should hinder water?

Quest. If they say still there is no command; I answer,

First, there is as much as is said of others that were baptized.

Secondly, there is no command in terms from Christ or his Apostles to baptize
professing believers, or those that should receive the holy Ghost; yet they
were baptized.

Thirdly, where there is parallel characters to show qualification, there may
be the same outward sign applied; on this principle the Apostle reasons in this
Scripture; it is only to be wondered how so many direct places of Scripture,
which cannot but sparkle in the consciences of those which are diligent and
diving into truth, can be so lightly evaded and made nothing of while men
pretend to search truth impartially, without deceit or guile.

CHAP. XVIII. Wherein is showed who is to administer this Ordinance of baptism,
according to the rule of the Gospel.
AS these that are contrary to Infant baptism are strict, and most severe in
other circumstances, which they think must be in that Ordinance, so they are
most slight and rude in their considerations and practice, as to the
administrator of that Ordinance, making every male Disciple, or any one that
can give an occasional word of exhortation, the minister of this Ordinance,
which they do otherwise shut up, as in the most holy place, and put the very
substance of the Gospel in it; this is most unsuitable to the Gospel, and makes
baptism one of the poorest and lowest Ordinances, and of no such solemnity,
seeing every Disciple may baptize another, and he that can speak any thing of
the Gospel may do such an act.

But if we trace the rule, we shall see, that as it is an Ordinance of public
cognizance, so it must be administered by a public Officer, who has received
commission authoritatively from Christ and his Church, and that it was never
administered by any one but he that was either ordinarily, or extraordinarily
called thereunto; begin with John the Baptist, so called from his work and
designment to the administration of that Ordinance; he was extraordinarily
called, as the prophesies of him witness, with the circumstances of his birth
and behavior, Luke 1.7. etc. Matthew. 3.1, 2, 3.

All the time of Christ's ministry, his Disciples by immediate commission from
himself baptized, and none else; and we all know how they were called, and who
gave them power.

When Christ gave up all his power and authority to be continued to the end of
the world, or his second coming, Matthew. 28. Go teach all nations, baptizing
them, and gave them their general and public commission, he gave it to these
that were to be Apostles, and to these that should succeed them in ordinary,
and as by settled commission, not to every one that should be made a Disciple;
this was a commission to them at large, and yet appropriated to such an order,
without we will say all are commissioned to teach and baptize.

Afterward, when the Gospel order of Churches came to be settled, and
particular instructions given, as to the foundation and method of
administration in Churches, it was never administered by any but those that were
for the time extraordinary, or ordinary settled Officers of the Church, whose
names are summed up in 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. and 4. Ephesians. 11. Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers; besides these, none have office or power to
such administration but only these.

Those that are the more sober and intelligent sort of our opposites, grant us
this, that the administration of baptism is of public cognizance; and that
ordinarily it must be administered by those which are in public and set office;
but generally every brother among them of any supposed gift may be a baptizer.

As for Philip and Ananias, who baptized, the first was an Evangelist, an
extraordinary officer, as the Apostles, raised and inspirited, and empowered
much after the same manner; and if we consult with Acts 8. he had special
commission and authority from heaven, by a Divine call, to perform that act on
the Eunuch; and so for Ananias who baptized Paul, as one of their own judgment
says well* he was deputed in an extraordinary manner to that ministry, Acts
9. the Lord appearing to him in a vision; and these examples cannot be drawn
into an ordinary rule, without the same circumstances be found usual.

And it must needs be so that none but one of the settled officers of the Church
who is to preach the Gospel may be a baptizer.

First, because it is a Church Ordinance; Christ has now left the keys to the
Church, set in the Church successively such persons, who are actually to
administer all Ordinances in it; and if it be a Church Ordinance, only these
may administer it who are called to one of these offices in the Church; all
grant this, that it is a Church Ordinance, though some take the Church more
largely, others more strictly.

Secondly, it is an act of power to baptize, Mat. 28. All power is given to me
in heaven and earth; Go teach and baptize; now power is conveyed by a special
commission and call. For a man to exercise a gift of knowledge by utterance,
needs no such solemnity; but to baptize, it being a sealing of a special
privilege to others, must come from an office-power, and so cannot ordinarily
be administered by a gifted Disciple.

Thirdly, there would be no distinction as to power, between Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, in administration of any Ordinance, and
every brother of the Church, if their rule stand; this is the common confusion
of the most of the contrary judgment, which utterly overthrowes the other of
Gospel Churches.

CHAP. XIX. On Christ's being baptized by John, when he was about the thirtieth
feer of his age; whether any thing can be gathered from it against baptiZing of
Infants?
THis is the last plea urged from Christ's example, that he was not baptized
until about the thirtieth year, therefore none but grown persons ought to be
baptized, if there be any force in Christ's example.

To which is answered, 1. In general, actings are not always to be our
examples; for some act he did merely as Mediator, God-man, unimitable by us,
as to be crucified for our sins; some he did out of special reason, and
eminent emergency, as to fast forty days and nights in the wilderness, with
many such like, up and down the Scripture, that are no rules to us; his
personal and representative acts, and these which have been acted upon
extraordinary occasion and reason, cannot be drawn into practical rule of
example to us.

2. If we will take Christ's example for a rule in this, that he was baptized
when so grown up, why th n we may as well take Christ's practice, as our
example, in the active sense, he baptized none, therefore none are to baptize;
the same holds as strong as the other; if any say the rule afterward warrant
that, so it does the baptizing of Infants, as has been formerly proved.

3. And more home, Christ was a Saint in the womb, he professed his faith from
a Child, disputed with the Doctors about Divine things when he was but 12.
years old, so that he could be baptized with an infallible eveidence at first,
and yet was not baptized until such an age; hence if we will follow Christ's
example, though men be known to be professors, and never so godly, yet they
must not be baptized until just they come to the same stature, and term of
years that Christ was baptized in; the reason is stronger for the one then the
other, because Christ, though he had such a visible, such an infallible right
to it, yet did abstain from the practice of it, until just such a time, which
he chose out as fittest, so that the time has as much force to make an
example, and binds as strictly to the observance of it, as the general
consideration of him, as a grown person: upon this account no man must be
baptized until he be 29. or full 30. years of age.

4. There may be many considerations why Christ was baptized at years:

1. That he might enter on his public ministry with the more greater
solemnity of such an Ordinance, and have a testimony from heaven to him in that
Ordinance, which was given, The Holy Ghost descending on him in the form of a
Dove, Mat. 3. two last verses. Now Christ's entrance into his public
ministry, began imediately after his baptism, how he converst for the most
part of the former years, is very dark in Scripture.

2. It might be also, because he would give a testimony to John Baptist, who,
though he was designed from the womb to that work, yet began to act his
office but a little while before, and had soon done. It is a question whether
he baptized any considerable time after he baptized Christ; but just as Christ
did arise in his ministry, John fell in his.

3. As there is no reason to be given why Christ should live so long, and not
take on him his public ministry, until such an age, nor may it be urged as
such an example to us; so there is no reason peremptorily to be given why he
was not baptized until then, and so the rule is uncertain, and of no value.
But this example is contrary to the following rule left for baptizing,
according to their own principles: For,

1. That Ordinance was immediately administered (as they) after believing, and
profession; Christ was a known Believer, and Professor before; neither did he
make a new profession to John when he came to be baptized; but John rather
scrupled it as an act too high for him to perform, as to such a glorious
person, Mat. 3. suffer it to be done (says Christ,) etc. It would be a sin for
us to delay so long.

2. Christ's Baptism was upon no other grounds then ours, his to fulfill all
righteousness in our stead, or to wash away unrighteousness, the filth of the
flesh, and spirit, as an outward sign of it, and so cannot come under the
common rule; this I conceive sufficient to be spoken as to that consideration;
there only remains, that question which will easily be answered on the former
grounds, if they prove true, as they are demonstrated, The Lord give a blessing
to these considerations on your heart.

CHAP. XX. That Baptism does not form a Church.
SO much do our opposites advance Baptism, that they make it the only
constitutive principle of a Gospel Church, by which men enter into the Church,
and are made visible Members only by its administration, and in their own
method. But we shall soon dethrone that position by the authority and force of
Scripture and rational argumentation.

Only in general, I doubt our Divines have unwittingly given them too much
ground to affirm as they do, calling it an entrance into the Church, an
initiating Ordinance, seal, and by their practice of late to set the Font nigh
the Church porch; though I would not much stand upon it, how proper it is to
call it an initiating Ordinance; (a phrase I have used in this discourse Pro
forma) without it be because it is the first seal to be administered in the
Order of Sacraments; but it will be easily proved that Baptism gives no
essence or being, either to a Church, or membership.

1. Because a man must be a member, and of a Church, ere he can be Baptized
according to the Gospel rule.

2. Sacraments are Ordinances to be administered in the Church, and to the
Church, which supposes the existence of the Church before; thus 1 Cor. 12. 28.
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. the Lord has set in, and given all officers to the Church,
if so, Sacraments, which must be administered by officers, if rightly.

3. A Church may be without Baptism, and yet be as true and as real a Church;
as the Isralites were so long in the wilderness without Circumcision, which
was as much an initiating Ordinance, as ever Baptism was; now nothing can be
without its form, and exist.

4. That cannot be the form of a Church, or make a man a Member, which
remains the same, and untouched after excommunication, whereby a man is cut
off from membership at present, but now though the Church may take away his
membership, they cannot his Baptism, which is the same still, and is not lost.

5. For this is an absolute rule, that that which gives the form, or being to
a Church, it must cease when the Church cease, or when a Member cease to be
a Member, it must cease with it; and that must be renewed, as often as
membership is renewed, and so one must be Baptized again, as often as he
renewes Membership; this is most absurd, yet must follow from such a principle.

6. Baptism is a sign, and seal, therefore gives no being to any thing, but
confirms it; It is a consequent act, and supposes something pre-existent.

Obj. As for that place they so much stand on, Act. 2.41. As many as received
the word gladly, were Baptized, and there was added that day about 3000.
souls; hence they say they were added by Baptism.

Sol. The words say not, they were added by Baptism, but puts a full point, or
stop after that sentence, as many as gladly received the word, were Baptized.
There that sentence ends. And the Apostle goes on a new account; and says
there were added that day 3000. souls, but does not at all show the manner of
their adding; so that these words are rather a recapitulation, and summing up
the number of Church Members added that day, then any description of the way of
their taking into the Church: as if one should say, he had 3000 l. in gold
added to his estate, he only shows it is so, but not how he came to have that
added, so it must be here; and the former reasons prove the impossibility of
such an interpretation.

2. Obj. There is one place more urged to prove Baptism to be the form of a
Church, and that which makes a Member, which is, 1 Cor. 12.13. We are all
Baptized into one body, there Baptism only embodyes members.

Sol. To which I answer first, The Apostle speaks there primarily of this
Baptism of the Spirit, not of water; So by one Spirit, we are Baptized into
one Body, not so much of Baptism by water.

But secondly, grant it to be meant of Baptism by water, yet it proves nothing
that Baptism is the form of that body, which has its matter and form,
holiness, and union before Baptism; baptized into one body, does not here
show the essential constitution of a Church, but the confirmed union.

For first, we are said in Gal. 3.27. to be Baptized into Christ; now none will
conjecture that Baptism gives the form of union with Christ, but only seals
it; so into one body, may be as to the unity of communion in the same body.

2. The phrase of Baptizing into, or in one body, shows the body existent, and
in perfect being before, else we could not be Baptized in a body, or into a
body; for when one is Baptized first, into what body is he, and the second, and
third incorporated? until a body be complete, they cannot be said to be
Baptized into it, or in it; therefore Baptism cannot constitute the form of a
Church, which is this body, saying, we are Baptized into it, that is, to hold
union and communion with such a body.

3. This argument is inserted more to prevent Schism, then to express the way
of first embodying or constitution of Churches, as the whole context
demonstrates.

4. It is the same reason with the Lords Supper, and we may as well be said as
to the first constitution, to constitute Churches by that Sacrament, as by
Baptism, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing we bless, is it not the
Communion of the blood of Christ? the bread that we break, is it not the
Communion of the body of Christ? for we being many are one bread, and one body,
for we are all partakers of that one bread. So that we may as well be said to
be gathered into a Church by the Lords Supper, as by Baptism, for by it we are
made one body, and one Spirit.

But lastly, if Baptism does essentially constitute a Church, and is its
form, then all who are Baptized are real Members of the Church, and must have
all privileges, be they never so loose and vain; for they have the essential
qualification, and the perfect form, and what will any desire more? and strange
consequences must needs follow: you may make whom you will Members, and make
them Members before they are Members, and Baptize into a body before there is a
body or any knowledge of what frame the body is; you may Baptize and have no
Church, for they may never come into Union, and Communion, who are Biptized
upon these terms, and then no Church can be constituted; for who shall Baptize
first? for he must have an extraordinary Commission, for he can have no
ordinary delegation, until the form be introduced which makes the Church, and
that form is not, until a competent number be Baptized, and so Church power
must be exercised first without a Church, and political power without a body.

It is wonderful to imagine how these that differ, slight and unchurch all the
Congregations, though made up of the purest, and speciallest Saints, without
mixtures of humane allay, and merely in this principle they are not Baptized
in their form, nor plunged under water, which with them is only Baptizing;
and under this principle, Faith, and Repentance, and the most resplendent
graces of the best Saints must lie buried, and no Church, if not thus dipped: I
hope you see the fallacy, if not the perfect folly of this position, and how
Churches stand upon other principles more firm, and sure; though we would not
lose any ornament of the Gospel to adorn this body, yet we dare not
constitute it of such ingredients.

A GOSPEL-ORDINANCE CONCERNING The singing of Scripture-Psalms, Hymns and
Spiritual Songs; the lawfulness of that Ordinance.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. and are to be sold at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. 1653.

CHAP. I. Concerning the singing of Scripture Psalms Hymns, and spiritual
Songs; the lawfulness of that Ordinance.
THe next public controversy, which Satan has raised to disturb the
Churches, is about the practice of singing Scripture Psalms, on purpose to
deprive the Saints of the benefit of that soul-raising, and heart-ravishing
Ordinance, by which God is publicly and solemnly praised, and the spirits
filled with the glory of God; and because your hearts may be stablished in
every truth, and not so easily persuaded to part with such a holy Ordinance, I
could not but endeavor to clear up this also, which you have in this method.

First, that singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, vocally with the
voice and musically, is an Ordinance of the New Testament, constantly to be
practiced in the Churches of Christ.

Secondly open unto you the three expressions, Psalms, Hymns, and Songs,
wherein they agree, and whether there be any difference between them.

Thirdly, show you that it is the Psalms of David, Asaph, Heman, and the Hymns
and spiritual Songs of these holy men, which are recorded in Scripture, that is
the matter ordinarily to be sung.

Fourthly, answer the main objections of the dissenters; these are scattered up
and down this small Treatise.

For the first, it is clear from Ephesians. 5.19. he bids them be filled with the
Spirit, (...), speaking to one another; and in Col. 3.16. Teaching and
admonishing one another, (...); What ever these be as to the matter of them yet
the singing of them is commanded as an Ordinance, and a special Ordinance for
edification; That the Apostle exhorts here to this as an Ordinance, is clear;

First because he speaks to the whole Church, and as a public duty, not
appropriated to any Office, but as a commandment universal on all;

Secondly, he does distinguish this Ordinance from that of preaching or
teaching doctrinally, which belongs to the Officer, or occasionally to a gifted
brother; for he does not only say, as in other places, teach and admonish; but
in Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, which shows the manner of the teaching and
admonishing, not in the general, but in such a way as by singing with Psalms,
etc. and as Mr. Cotton well observes, if the Apostle had meant the ordinary and
common way of teaching, he would have said, teach one another out of the
Psalms, or from them, rather then in or with them, which is the usual language
of the holy Ghost in expressing such a duty; so in Paul's example, Acts 28.23.
and so Philip is said to preach Jesus to the Eunuch, ((...)) from that
Scripture in Esaiah; and surely he would never have added the word ((...)) in
the following part, singing with melody in your hearts, if this teaching and
admonishing were not to be discovered in such a peculiar Ordinance. To which
places we must add that of the 1. Cor. 14.15, 16. where the Apostle speaks to
the Church, as to the orderly administration of that Ordinance 16, 17. v. where
he speaks of singing as a distinct duty, and to be done in public before the
Church; and that phrase of singing with the spirit, and with understanding, is
very emphatical, as Divines observe; for I cannot sing with the spirit, but I
must also with understanding; but the understanding here, must be meant of
others who hear me, and join with me in that act; however, public singing was
then an Ordinance solemnized in the Church; and we shall hereafter see what
kind these Psalms were they sung; Thus James 5.13. If any be merry, let him
sing Psalms; though this be particular in the Text, yet it is of the same
consideration with the former; and these places hold forth the inst tution;
singing is an Ordinance and a special one in the Gospel.

Secondly, that it is not only meant of an inward frame of rejoicing; but that
it is of the voice, is most apparent:

First, from the very words of these Texts; Speaking to one another, teaching
one another, in Psalms, and Hymns, etc. Now no man can speak to edify others
by inward workings, or silent rejoycings.

2. Besides the melody to be made in our hearts, we must sing with melody,
which shows not only the inward frame, but the outward act, and order; for
melody in the heart were enough to express the inward grace; but he adds an
outward expression, Singing with melody in your hearts; so that it is with the
voice as with the heart.

3. Singing in Scripture is ever put in distinction from bare reading or
speaking; and commonly signifies a modulation of the tongue, or expressing any
thing musically and in tune, and so it is a musical speaking.

4. There would be the greatest confusion of Ordinances; for preaching and
prayer would be made all one with singing; nay, internal works would be found
contrary to outward expressions; and if there be any such thing as preaching,
and prayer, and exhortation, it must be different from singing, even to the
most ignorant; for no man will say, when a man merely speaks or preaches, he
sings, without his tone do make them call him a singing preacher or talker, as
too many either out of affectation or custom, have given just cause to suspect.

5. This is undeniable, if there be any such command as to sing, it is visible;
for else no man could at any time be said to sing or not sing; it must be an
outward act; for else we must say we have only souls for that Ordinance, and
bodies for all the rest.

6. All that ever sung in the Gospel, as to practice, sung vocally, Matthew.
26.30. They went out and sung an Hymn; that must be with an audible voice, Acts
16.25. Paul and Silas sung, and all heard them; and if it be an inward act
only, who shall know when men sing or think; or would they have men to be gods
to judge when men sing Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs inwardly? what
need these names outwardly? A more ungrounded opinion was never invented by the
devil, and surely he has fitted it for the weaker and most perfectly
captivated sorts, of proselytes, who have first lost their reasons, and then
their consciences.

Can my inward joy teach another? or my private ejaculations admonish another?
I wish Satan have not these men at his will: they would have singing to be an
Ordinance, but no man to hear them; So that if singing be not a distinct
visible Ordinance, then no man can tell what it is to sing at all, but the same
with preaching, praying, talking, or only an invisible motion of the soul,
known to God only: which is most absurd, when we look on the weight of these
places of Scripture mentioned formerly.

Ob. If any object, If singing be with the voice, why not with other
instruments, as lute, and harp and organs, etc, as in the O. T.

Sol. First, in the New Testament the voice and the heart are only Gods
instruments; this holds forth the special way of worship from soul and body, as
from one person; artificial instruments are laid aside, not natural ones.

Secondly, the voice is still required, because it is the most immediate
Interpreter of the heart, and no outward instrument besides is so.

Thirdly, nothing can be expressed so significantly in outward characters, as by
the voice; and the best expressions of God we have in words, and the tongue can
best make out them.

Fourthly, the union of heart, and tongue, or voice, makes up the complete
expression of Gods praises, without any other consideration; for we have not
now any thing as typical to look at; as Lute, and Harp, etc. were in the Old
Testament to praises; so ceremonies were to Christ's sacrifice; when the
substance came, they ceased; there is no need of them now, the spirit being
more abundantly poured forth; and they have no significancy; but their needs
soul and body always to sing out Divine stories, while in this world.

Fifthly, this has been prophesied of, and long before the New Testament
days, by the Prophets, of singing to God with a lively voice, when the voice
shall be as Lute, and Harp, and all instruments to God, as in Esa. 52.8. (as
Mr. Cotton in that precious Treatise of his, worthy all men's consideration)
compared with Romans 10 14. Psalm. 100.1. Psalm. 95 1, 2. all places referring
prophetically to the Gospel.

Sixthly, if they dare grant this, that there must be no singing by voice, then
they cut off themselves from any sort of singing by gift, in Psalms, or Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, and any outward way of expressing Gods praises; and must
blot out singing in any way publicly as to be looked after, though a person
never so much inspired by the holy Ghost (after their own sense) should
extemporarily compose, and breath forth the most glorious Sonnets, or heavenly
Anthems; for what is not a duty in it self, and general in the nature of it, is
not a duty to the most raised spirit, if never so well gifted in such a mystery.

But the wiser sort of the contrary judgment, who consult with Scriptures and
the nature of things, will not own the dissent of others as to this, but
confess singing of Psalms must be by voice, and lay it on another foundation;
that it is Psalms, etc. but not these we sing, that the command speaks of, but
Psalms of another constitution, from a peculiar gift, and so to be looked on by
the Church, viz. not to sing David's Psalms, or Asaphs, or the like; but from
the fillings of the Spirit in such a person, and on a sudden breaking forth for
the edification of the Church.

I end this with what Zanchy faith on these places, These words (...), and
(...), singing with grace in your hearts, non excludunt vocem oris, verum
excludunt hypocrisin and vanitatem, ex qua fere loquuntur ebrii vino (and (...)
valet atque(...)) they do not exclude the voice, but hypocrisy, and vanity,
from which men drunk with wine do sing; and in your hearts, is as much as from
your hearts, that is, not vainly, or as hypocritically, but as from inward
sense: So the Greek Scholiasts, (...).

CHAP. II. What Is meant by these three expressions, Psalms, Hymns, Spiritual
Songs; how they are used in the Old Testament and the New Testament; from which
the matter of singing is cleared.
THE next difference is about the matter of singing, which all must grant to be
Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: but what these Psalms were, etc. and
how to distinguish them one from another, must be debated ere we can clear the
point between these three expressions; some constitute one difference, some
another.

(...), Psalms, say some, are such Songs which were sung with other Instruments
besides the tongue.

(...), Hymns, such as are made only to express the praises, Zanchius.
and set out the excellencies of God. (...), Songs, such as contain not only
praises, but exhortations, prophesies, thanksgiving; and these only sung with
the voice and tongue.

Others difference them thus: Psalms are those which were penned by David and
others, drawn up into meeter to be sung in the Temple in a musical strain.
Hymns are those extemporal praises which break forth upon occasion from a heart
filled with the Spirit, Grotius.
and observant of Gods goodness. Songs or Odes they call such that were
premeditated not without some art: These they call the Songs of Moses, Deborah,
Hannah, Simeon, Mary, etc.

But we shall find, if we consult the use of the words, the difference will not
be considerable between them, and that they are used promiscuously in the Old
Testament, from whence we must learn how they are to be taken in the New: Now,

1. I find they are used in general as the title of David's Psalms, which are
named promiscuously by these three words.

2. That the three Hebrew words, viz. (...) Mizmor, (...) Schir, (...)
Tehillim, to which these these three, (...), do fully answer, are used in the
Psalms one for another, without distinction; and sometimes two of them joined
together as the title of one Psalm; sometimes all three joined together in one
title; we could heap up examples in this kind. Judges 5.3. says Deborah,
(...), I will sing, I will sing unto the Lord; it is translated by the 70,
(...); here is two words; the one used for a Psalm, the other for an Ode or
Song put to express one act. 1 Chronicles. 16.9. the two same words are translated
thus in the 70, (...), Sing unto the Lord, sing a Hymn unto the Lord. In Psalm.
105.3. which is the same Psalm, only inserted into the body of the Book of the
Psalms; the former word (...), is rendered by (...), sing Psalms: And thus the
same word in the same verse is expressed by these two words, yet hold forth one
thing. In Esaias 12.5. (...) is rendered (...). In the title of Psalm. 38.1. Mizmor
is rendered by (...), which is here translated a Song: and in most of the titles
one is used for another without distinction: and (...) Schir, which is most
usually rendered by (...), a Song, yet is also rendered by (...), a Psalm. Psalm.
45.1. and 47.1. And by (...), a Hymn, Esaias 42.10. As for the other word (...),
Tehillim, that comprehends fully both Hymns and Songs; it is the general title
of the Book of Psalms, where the variety of them are contained. And as some
particular Psalms are called in the Greek Hymns or Odes, according to the two
former words: so this word is put at top, holding forth the significancy of all
the rest, and distinguishing the Psalms from all other Books of Scripture, as
these that know the superscription of that Book understand; and it signifies
the most universal and full way of praising God, especially by singing; and
it is expressed by various words, as ((...)) to praise; ((...)) to commend or set
forth the reputation of another; ((...)) to glorify or discover the glory of
another; ((...)) to bless, with many other expressions: So in particular
((...)) Psalm. 145.1. but most especially is this last word ((...)) which is a
word for all Psalms expressed by ((...)) a Hymn; as 2 Chronicles. 7.6. and 23.13.
Psalm. 39.4. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. Psalm. 21.13. Psalm. 64.1. and 99.3. where the one
word is translated by the other.

For their conjunction of each of them together in one title of a Psalm, is
very usual, and often inverted: The title of Psalm. 29.1. is in the Hebrew,
(...), Mizmor Schir; in the Greek Translation it is (...), A Psalm of a Song, or
a Song and a Psalm. So 64.1. and 47.1. and 86.1. but in 65.1. there the title
is (...), and translated (...), A Song of a Psalm, or a Song and Psalm. So
Psalm. 82.1. But unto the title of Psalm. 75. the 70 Greek Interpreters (from
whom these words are borrowed in the New Testament) do add all the three
together; (...); A Psalm to Asaph in or with Hymns; a Song to the Assyrians. By
all which we see, and might by many more,

1. That there is not such a critical distinction to be made between a
spiritual Psalm, and a Hymn, and Song, but that they are put indifferently one
for another.

2. Having opened the words with their use (I hope with advantage to those that
know the language of the Hebrew with the Septuagint) let us now consider them
as the matter to be sung, and what these Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs are;
whether David's, Asaphs, Hemans, and such other which are found in Scripture
penned by holy men upon special occasions, or another of a new composure; the
former of which I affirm to be an Ordinance of the New Testament.

1. These are the titles given solely to David's Psalms, and the other
Scripture-Songs, which these holy men, Divinely inspired, breathed forth, and
left on record: And as Mr. Cotton excellently argues, What reason can there be
why the Apostle should direct us in our singing to the very title of David's
Psalms, and other Scripture-Songs, if he meant we should not sing these Psalms
and Songs? Either we must exclude David's Psalms and the rest from being called
Psalms, or Hymns or Spiritual Songs, or else they must be sung as well as
others.

2. The names are borrowed from the Greek Translaters of the Old Testament, and
there is no distinction of them in the New; neither can any one tell what they
mean, but as by their use in the Old Testament: Now these names were used there
as peculiar characters to express and distinguish the works of David, and the
rest, which were penned to be sung in the Church: Let these which are against
singing David's Psalms, and of other holy men, show us any one word or syllable
in the New Testament, where any of these words are taken in any other sense
then as they were in the Old, and yet we are commanded to sing them in the New;
on this ground the case would be soon concluded; when the question is
propounded, (granting this is a command for singing) what shall we sing? why,
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs; how shall we know what these are? we
must look in Scripture, where these words are used; now we find them nowhere
explained so properly as in the Old Testament; where they are the usual titles
of David's Psalms, and the Songs of other Holy men, and no other use of them
expressed in the New; why may not we judge then, these are the Psalms, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs we are there commanded for to sing? But;

3. Come to the New Testament, and there when ever Christ or his Apostles speak
of Psalms, they refer us to Scripture Psalms, Luke 20.42. (Christ says) As
it is written in the Book of the Psalms, that is the 110. Psalm, The Lord
said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand: in Luke 24.44. when Christ would
make an exact division of the Old Testament, he divides them into the Law of
Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, distinguishing the Psalms from all other
Scripture, as a peculiar book by it self; And as when we are commanded to
read the Law, and the Prophets, we cannot think them to be any other then the
writings of Moses and Samuel, and the rest of the Prophets in the Old
Testament; So when we are commanded to sing Psalms, not the Law or the
Prophets: how can we imagine it unlawful to sing that part of Scripture which
is properly called the Psalms, as the writings of David, Asaph, etc? So the
Apostle, Acts 1.20. speaking of Judas his fall, and ruin, says, as it was
written of him in the Book of the Psalms, Let his habitation be made
desolate, etc. Psalm. 69.26. and in the 16. verse (says Peter) the Holy Ghost
by the mouth of David spoke this concerning Judas, and v. 20. for it is written
in the Book of the Psalms. Acts 2. Acts 25. and 29. in stead of saying as in
the Psalms, he says, David speaks of Christ thus and thus in Psalm. 16. Acts
13.33. speaking of Christ again, he says, As it is written in the second
Psalm, and v. 35. As it is written in another Psalm, which is the 16. By all
which is clear what Christ and the Apostles would have us understand by
Psalms (when we are commanded to sing them) especially these Psalms, which
are called the Book of the Psalms; and there is no other Psalms spoken of in
the New Testament; and the Holy Ghost is the best Expositor of his own
commands. Now men must either deny these of David's, (as before) to be Psalms,
or else they are bound to sing them as for Hymns and Songs; they are
comprehended under this general word (Psalms) being all expressed in the Book
of the Psalms, as has been demonstrated.

4. Let us consider the vanity of the contrary opinion, in regard it utterly
makes way for will worship, which they seem to be so much against. For first,
I am commanded to sing Psalms, Hymns, Songs: the Old and New Testament speak
of no other Psalms then of David's and Asaphs, and of such like inspired
persons; and they are called the Psalms by Christ and his Apostles, but you
must not sing them (say they.) I ask what Psalms then must you sing? there is
no light in Old Or New Testament to warrant any other; either you must fancy a
Psalm, and say Christ meant this way, when he spoke of the Book of the
Psalms, and devise a new way of worship out of your own brains, or else sing
these Psalms, which Christ and his Apostles call Psalms. Besides, 2. How can
any man persuade himself, or others, when he sings, that he sings a Psalm,
when he does not sing that which in Scripture is only called a Psalm? Or how
can any man distinguish, now I sing a Psalm, now a Hymn, now a Song, when
there is not one word in the New Testament to distinguish them one from
another, or the two latter from the Book of the Psalms? if any man from the
New Testament can distinguish a Psalm from a Hymn, or a Hymn from an Ode or
Song, or any one from another, but as they borrow it from the Old Testament,
erit mihi magnus Appollo; he shall be an Oracle I will consu t more then with
Scripture. They tell us David's Psalms, and the like are not to be sung: Christ
and his Apostles call them specially by the name of Psalms, and command us to
sing Psalms. Now let them show us any other Psalms from Scripture, and we are
satisfied; but its hard to be persuaded from such a precious Ordinance, by a
mere Negative, and the workings of a melancholy fancy, or the presumption of a
hot brain that he has a gift of composing Psalms, and Songs, and Hymns, for
the edification of the Church.

Let us go on further, and try the Scripture examples; and begin with our Lord
Jesus Christ, and his Disciples, after the adminstration of his Supper; its
said in Math. 26.30. and Mark 14.26. when they had sung an Hymn (or a Psalm)
(as the margent expresses it,) and its all one, they went forth to the mount
Olivet; the words are, (...) etc. Take it either as all Translators interpret,
having sung an Hymn, Hymn dicto Arab: They went forth, or they went forth
hymning, (or singing of a Psalm,) its not material: But 1. Its clear they
sung openly with their voice. 2. They sung a Psalm or Hymn; now what this
Hymn should be, is the question, whether one of David's Psalms, or any in that
Book; to which I answer: 1. Its only said they sung a Hymn or Psalm, and
its most probable, yea demonstrative, that it was one of these Psalms, or
Hymns of David and the other Holy men, because Christ himself speaks of no
other, as before: 2. Because Christ was so much prophesied of in these Psalms,
which were formerly sung prophetically, and with thansgiving for these very
acts beforehand. 3. Because Christ did still quote the same Psalms, to prove
both his Divinity and sufferings; so did his Apostles. Now it was no more
dishonor, or unsuitable to Christ to sing with his Disciples one or more of
these Hymns or Psalms, then it was to prove himself, and his mediatorship by
them, which he does in all the former places, yea the very nature and manner of
his sufferings. 4. We have Scripture ground from Christ's expression to believe
the one, and only our own conjectures that he sung any other Psalms, or
Hymns; and that Christ both before and after his death should bring his choice
proofs of his person, and humiliation, and glory from the book of the Psalms,
and when he was to suffer it should be found they sung a Psalm, or Hymn, and
yet not one of these Psalms, is very hard to press on a Scripture conscience,
especially when the act expressed is in general, and the same word used for
singing such Psalms, and no other determination of it in the N. Testament: let
men but weigh things in an equal balance of the Sanctuary and Judge; yea, let
them who are so high on the other side, show us from Scripture what that Hymn,
or Psalm was, which Christ and his Disciples sung after the Supper, and give
us any place as a comment on it, and but the hint to our demonstration, and we
shall think our selves well quit of such a mistake: in the mean while the
argument stands thus untouched, Christ and his Disciples sung an Hymn, and
Christ and the Apostles speak of no other Hymns, or Psalms, but these
recorded in the Old Testament, especially these in the book of the Psalms;
therefore they sung none other. And surely Christ would conform his practice
to his expressions, or would have made some distinction.

The second great example of singing, is that of Paul and Silas, Acts 16.25.
where it is said, They sung an Hymn to God, or gave praises in the prison at
midnight; we are still on the same account as formerly, and ask what this
Hymn was they sung, if not one of these Psalms of Scripture which they might
have chosen for this present condition? If any one can say it was an
extemporary ejaculation, let them show us their proof; we show them the
Scripture-use of the word, and which was known to them; and these that oppose
must have something from the reason of the Text, or use of the Word to
contradict us, and confirm themselves; they did not barely sing, but (...),
they sung Hymns; and do not we go on surer grounds that sing these Psalms
and Hymns, which in the New Testament Christ and his Apostles do call so,
then what we imagine to be Psalms, and Hymns, etc. by an unscripturall
supposition? so that the sum of all may be drawn up thus to argue.

1. It is our duty to obey Divine commands; It is a command to sing Psalms,
Hymns, spiritual Songs; ergo, it is our duty.

2. It is a command to sing Psalms, Hymns, spiritual Songs, as to the
matter; but there is no other Psalms, Hymns, or spiritual Songs mentioned in
the Old or New Testament, but these which are penned by Holy men, inspired to
that end; ergo, it is our duty to sing them.

CHAP. III. An Answer to that Objection concerning singing by a gift, not set
Psalms.
ONe special Objection that is made against singing Scripture Psalms, etc. is
that it hinders the exercise of gifts, and so its but formal; all duties in
the Church must be done from a gift.

Answer. 1. You see here is a duty laid on us, no such limitation as from a
gift.

2. The matter is prescribed you, Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, and to these
you are especially enjoined: now the limitation of the matter limits the duty.

3. There is no promise of such a gift in the Gospel, to compose Psalms, and
Hymns; God has provided matter sufficient; there is a promise for the spirit
of prayer and supplication, Zach. 12. and of preaching and prophesying, in
Joel, repeated in Acts 2. but no distinct promise for a gift of spiritual
Poetry, or Singing; for there are but three things required to singing; fit
matter, a voice, and heart; all which may be performed without any such
special gift of composing; the matter is ready, if the heart and voice be
present.

4. It is a duty laid generally on the whole Church, without any distinction of
gifts: all are commanded to sing, etc. Here is no hint of a gift required.

5. Christ would not ordain an Ordinance of such consequence, which the
Churches should want the use of; some utterly; and not one among many should
know what it means; for there is hardly one among a thousand of Saints which
has such a gift of composing Psalms, and Hymns, etc. and if it be an
Ordinance in one Church, all others may want it, and so be deprived of the
comfort of such a sweet Ordinance for want of a pretended gift, when they have
matter enough of praises before them.

6. It is lawful to make use of the gifts of others, as well as to use our
own; when a man has a gift of prayer, I join with him, and make use of his
gifts, etc. So is it much more lawful to make use of the gifts of holy and
blessed men in Scripture, who had that glorious gift of composing all sorts of
Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs, and when we sing them with melody in our
hearts, we manifest all those treasures of the gifts of the spirit, that
breathed in these Psalms, etc. as if we had from a personal gift composed
them our selves; for if we sing them with the same understanding, with the same
inward affection of love, joy, etc. we sing them with the same spirit.

7. If there were such a gift promised, it would have been mentioned by Christ
or his Apostles, as the gift of tongues and miracles were, and Saints would
have been instructed to seek for it, and these that had it, would have been
commanded to wait on it, as the Elders are on exhortation, teaching, ruling,
the Deacons on administering, and distributing, etc. Romans 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

8. It is Antichristian to introduce an Ordinance to be practiced among the
Churches, which has not been commanded by Christ and his Apostles, (these that
differ, make much use of the word Antichristian) and cannot but grant this
principle to be undeniable; now I assume but to introduce; A way of singing by
a gift, with casting off Scripture- Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, was never
commanded by Christ or his Apostles, ergo, it is Antichristian; the minor has
been proved before; there is no mention in the writings of Christ or the
Apostles, of singing Psalms by a personal gift, or of a gift of composing
Psalms either for our selves or the Church; neither is there mention of any
other Psalms, Hymns, and Songs, as the matter to be sung, but such as are
penned in Scripture, and left to be sung by all the Churches. Thus if men will
being in a new Ordinance, they must show their authority from the Word, or else
apply the word Antichristian to themselves.

For that expression in 1 Corinthians. 14.26. When you come together ((...)) every
one has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, etc. from whence they gather they had a
gift of composing Psalms by the Spirit, which they were to sing in the Church
if they did it orderly.

To which I further answer, there is not any thing to explain what Psalm this
was.

2. We have more reason to think it was one of these Scripture Psalms, which
the New Testament always calls a Psalm (as he says, in the second Psalm, and
in another Psalm as before) far more reason then they have to say it was a
Psalm of their own composing by a gift; every one has a Psalm, that is,
this and the other have a Psalm, that is, one had this Psalm in Scripture
which he thought most proper; another, another of these Psalms; for (...) is
not to be taken universally of all, but singularly; one has this, another
that; thus some; but rather the meaning is, not as if one had this Psalm, and
another another; but one has a Psalm, another a Doctrine, another to speak
with tongues, another to prophecy; now thus there was a confusion among them;
one would have a Psalm sung, another would have his Doctrine, or word of
Construction as most fit, another his Revelation. Now the Apostle only tells
them they might all be done one by one, and in order; he that had a Psalm to
be sung, might in its proper place; but this does not prove that it was a
Psalm extemporarily composed, or by a personal gift, or that it was not one
of the Psalms in that which the Scripture calls the Book of the Psalms.

Object. If any say further, It must needs be from a gift, because it is joined
with other acts which were merely from a gift, as Doctrine, Tongues,
Revelations, Prophecy, Interpretation.

I Answer, Of these things here named, some are accounted extraordinary, and
peculiar, as gifts of Tongues, Revelations, fitted for these times; the other
ordinary, as Doctrine, Interpretation, Prophecy (though some think this last
extraordinary also) so having a Psalm, may be accounted ordinary, and not from
an extraordinary gift, as the gift of tongues was; however you must not make a
particular argument from things of diverse considerations and uses.

2. Other Scriptures have determined what a Psalm is, and it may be easily
gathered what it is in the Corinthians for one to have a Psalm: we prove they
had a Psalm; let them prove what that Psalm was, besides these Scripture
Psalms only mentioned in the New Testament.

It is most evident that the matter of singing is determined by the words of
the Apostle, in Colos. 3.16, Let the word of God dwell richly in you, etc.
which in Ephesians. 5. is more in general, Be filled with the Spirit, which do not
make any difference; for the Word and the Spirit must make up the melody in our
hearts: but still the word of God is the matter to be sung with the Spirit, as
it is the matter for reading, preaching, intepretation; but he here names that
part of the Word which belongs to the duty he enjoynes, as a special part of
that Word which ought to dwell richly in them, as to such a duty of singing: So
that,

1. If Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, be part of the word of God, then they
may be sung.

2. If that part of the Word be more properly fitted to the duty commanded then
any other, it must be so restrained here.

3. That it is so, appears, because he speaks so particularly, That the Word
might dwell in them richly, teaching and admonishing one another; not in
general, as by Preaching, Doctrine, or the like; but in Psalms, and Hymns,
and spiritual Songs, which must needs be the great duty in the Text, and all
before restricted to that.

4. Then the Word of God in general, or any special Word of God may be said
to dwell richly in a person, when the spiritual intent, sense, and meaning of
it, with the inward spirit, and power of it, upon all occasions does appear in
the duties commanded by it; and thus you may see the verse in its parts.

1. Here is the duty, singing.

2. The Word of God, the matter.

3. The specialty of the Word so fitted to the nature of that duty, Psalms,
Hymns, and spiritual Songs.

4. The peculiar way how to be a perfect spiritual Singer; it is to have this
word dwell in a man, and richly, having the true sense, sweet experience of
this word in the heart, being upon all occasions able to cull out in the
language of Scripture, Psalms, Hymns, and Songs, suitable to our own
conditions or others.

If the Apostle had meant here a gift of composing new Psalms, etc. as he
would not have used the Old Testament language without an explanation; so he
would not have mentioned the word of God in such a close limitation as in
Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, which are exegeticall to the word of God to be
sung, if he had not intended that part of the Word as fitted for that
Ordinance; for no man knows what these expressions hold forth, but as they are
found in the word of God, and as a distinct and eminent part of it. It were
more proper to say, Let the grace of God dwell in you, or the goodness of God,
that you may from the sense of it break forth upon all occasions to praises.
But to name the Word of God, and name it with that modification, as Psalms,
Hymns, Songs, which we all know is a part of it, and bid us sing, and deny us
in his intention for to sing these Psalms which are part of that Word, is too
unworthy a reflection on the Holy Ghost, and the Penmen of Scripture. And that
seems very strange to affirm, that I may not sing that Word of God which is
called by the name of Psalms, Hymns, and Songs, when this Word must dwell in
me richly to that end and use.

Lastly, the singing of these Psalms, Hymns, and Songs, as the Word of God,
is most adapt and proportioned to the particular use the Apostle intended, by
singing in the Church, which was to teach and admonish one another. Now no gift
of any Saint can be so powerful, and authoritative to teach, as the Word of
God in these Psalms, which were penned by the spirit, as a rule to all Saints,
and their gifts; and as the Word of God is made use of several ways to teach,
and admonish, so this is one special way, by Psalms, Hymns, Songs. When I
sing by a pretended gift, I see cause of jealousy, that it may be more a fancy
then the spirit; every man has cause of suspicion, from whence it comes, and
ere I can be satisfied I must compare it with, and try it by the Scripture
strain of Psalms, Hymns, and Songs. But by singing the very words of
Scripture with sense, and experience, I teach both by my holy carriage in the
action, and the word it self commands by its own authority as when it is read.

But that I may more clearly open this, how that the Word of God in Psalms,
Hymns, and Songs, is the most fit matter of singing, let us view that part of
the Word called by these names, and see how far it will reach this kind of
edification, beyond all that which may come from a present gift to compose
matter for such a duty.

1. Besides the spiritual elegancy of phrase, the inspired style of that part
of holy writ, which is beyond ordinary with the height of matter, of no vulgar
composure, it having such a standing stamp of Divine authority on it, must
needs conveigh its sense with more weight and power, then any thing from
particular invention, though assisted by a gift of the spirit, which comes but
in the second place, and cannot be put in any consideration with that authority
as the other, nor inserted among the heavenly Canons and Scripture rules for
Saints to build their faith on, or direct their lives.

2. The largeness, and comprehensivenesse of the scope of the shortest Psalm,
is so, that it will give matter to study and ponder on, and give advantage to
enlarge our thoughts and affections on more then any particular gift of any
Saint now can be rationally conceived to afford; for commonly the best gifts
are but an enlargement of the first text, and bring forth nothing de novo, no
new thing; and all these Saints with all their gifts must be glad to have
recourse to that part of the Word, as the rest, for the fullness of teaching
and admonition.

3. The variety of matter in these Psalms, etc. is so wonderful, that they
do provide beforehand by an eternal wisdom, for the conditions of all
Saints, either personally, or mystically, that no man sing any thing, but if
that Word dwell in him richly, he may find a suitable Psalm prepared for him,
by the foresight, and wise, and infallible directions of the Almighty; and in
this, the Book of the Psalms transcends all other parts of Scripture, and may
be called the Epitome of the whole Bible. In some Scriptures you have little
but matter of precept, in others little but historical relations of persons,
and actions; but in the Book of the Psalms you have the variety of matter
contained in all the whole Scripture, most suitable to the vast duty of singing
praises.

1. Matter of all sorts of prophesies referring to the very latter end of the
world.

2. All sorts of general and special directions, either for Faith or Life.

3. All sorts of promises fitted to particular conditions.

4. All sorts of experiences in what condition a soul may be in, either of
trial or triumph, either to soul or body.

5. All sorts of signs, and characters of heavenly motions and frames to God.

6. All sort of thanksgivings and praises for spiritual or temporal mercies,
with their various discords, which makes up the harmony of the whole. He is a
child in the Scripture, that does not admire the unparalled variety of truth
in that Book, so that if I were raised by some extraordinary gift to the
greatest enlargement of composing a Psalm, or spiritual Song on a special
occasion, I should come short of the variety, and fullness of the least of
these Psalms, and yet the ignorant standers by might more admire my gift, and
there would be more danger in it, then to sing the Scripture Psalms which have
nothing from men to grace them but their own native majesty and authority. And
truly, it is somewhat odd for one to be set up by others, or for any one to be
set up himself as a spiritual Poet in the Church, and the Church to sing his
thoughts, with the neglect of the Word of God, which it furnished with such
variety for the conditions of souls.

And as the Word of God in general is so large, and vast, and various, that
all the Saints with their highest emprovements can never come up to the
fullness of it, and all the vast folioes that have been written by commentators
of all sorts, have hardly pierced the bark, the shell, the letter, and all
Saints of the highest attainement, must dig into it as the only visible
Mine, and we must not exclude the Psalms as to singing, from that fullness and
variety, seeing Christ himself when he distinguishes the whole Scripture,
gives the Psalms an equal part.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Translation of David's Psalms, and other spiritual
Hymns, and Songs, with the Answer to the Objection arising from it.
I Have endeavored to prove the duty; let us consider the strength of the
maine Objections against it.

Ob. The first in order is that which carps at the Translation, and that into
Meetre, as the humane invention; the Translation (say they) is corrupt, and
especially as into Meetre, and Tune; if you will sing David's Psalms, sing them
in Hebrew, as they were sung formerly: this they much stick on.

Sol. To which I answer, That in these Psalms, and Songs, there was a set
Meetre, fitted to Tunes, and Voices, and musical Instruments; none can deny
that observes the Dedications of most Psalms, and those of understanding that
can read learned Gomarus may see it fully, and with great exactness; where the
spiritual poesy of these Psalms is excellently set forth.

2. So far as there is corruption in the Translation, it is spurious, and not
to be approved of but corrected.

3. But Translations according to the import of the words and sense of the
text, are as much the Word of God, as the Text in the original; for the
coherence of word and sense make up the copy entire and perfect.

4. Which follows, the Translation of the words in Meetre, if it have the full
sense of the words, is as much the Word of God as if it were translated in
prose, or ordinary sentence for reading; for it is not the way or method, but
the sense and meaning of the words, that is the Word of God. So that I may as
well say when I sing in such a composition, it is as much the Word of God as
when I read the same words in the Bible, only they are orderly disposed for
that action. None must by this reason, pretend to know the Word of God in
reading or expounding, but he that knows the Hebrew, and Greek; and that must
be also in the first perfect copy, immediately transcribed from inspired
understandings; for all things besides are either translations, or additions,
or substractions, from which two last comes perfect corruption.

So that a translation for singing, or reading, is the same Word of God as long
as it has the same substantial truth in it; and sing them which way you will,
either as they lie in the verse, or as the same verse is digested into staves,
and with musical notes, it is all one as to the nature of singing, and the
translation may be as Orthodoxe in Meetre, as in Prose; so that you see what
force, efficacy; that objection from the translation carries with it; I
confess there are many defects in the translation into Meetre, but there are
the like in some copies in prose, or continued sentence; but as to the nature
of the thing, one verse may as well he made two, according to musical
notation, and yet retain the same continued sense, as remain one, only bounded
by Arithmeticall figures, as 1, 2, 3, etc.

Ob. But if any one say the Psalms, as thus translated into Meetre, are but an
humane invention, and you worship God only after a humane form.

Sol. The Answer is at hand.

1. To know the significancies of the tongues, and how to translate them to
edification, is a special gift of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. 1 Corinthians.
14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

2. On this ground we read humane inventions when we read the Old or New
Testament in any translation, but the first copies of Hebrew and Greek, wherein
they were first written.

3. Is it not more a humane invention for to sing any thing of my own
composing, then for to sing the very matter, and sense of the Word of God in my
own tongue? and yet its usual among these that are against this Ordinance, to
cry aloud, It is a humane invention, Antichristian.

4. The translation of the Scripture for to be read, is as much a humane
invention, as in poesy to be sung; out this is an Objection urged for want of
a better.

Ob. The next grand Objection is, that we may as well use a set form of
Prayer, as of singing Psalms; the one is as lawful as the other, the one
stints the spirit as much as the other.

Sol. 1. There is no Divine holds that a set form of Prayer is absolutely
unlawful, for then no man may meditate beforehand what he ought to pray for,
nor consult with his own mouth, or Gods promises; for if I meditate on what I
need, and what God has promised, I form such petitions, and tie my self to
them as necessary to be petitioned for, and it may be I may have no occasion
for a long while to beg any thing of God, but the substance of these
premeditated considerations of my want.

2. Here lies the unlawfulness of set form of Prayer, that it is composed by
one, and imposed by another, to which I am limited, let my wants be what they
will, requiring further additions when I neither study my own wants, nor am
permitted to urge them to God in my prayer.

3. This is a more suitable Objection against those that pretend to sing by a
gift, and do make Psalms, or Hymns, or Songs, for themselves and others,
with neglect of inspired Psalms, and Hymns. So singing of Psalms, and using
a set form of Prayer, are very nigh of kin, and hold much correspondency.

4. But to sing the very words of these Scriptures with understanding, is a
command, as has been formerly proved; and if you take a set form of praying,
for praying Scripture words, and speaking to God in that language, it is not
only lawful, but is the excellency of some Saints, who seldom make a
Petition, but they urge it in Scripture dialect, and show the Word of God to
dwell richly in them; thus for singing to praise God, or sing to God in his
own form of words in the spirit, and understanding, what can be more suitable
to God, and sweet to the soul?

5. There is a great deal of difference between praying and singing, as to
the method of performance, though praying and praises may be considered in the
same duty, yet praying and singing require a distinct method; for the very
words, to sing Psalms, and Hymns, and Songs, import a special method of the
voice in a set tune, and proportion, whereas prayer in the method of
performance requires no such exactness; if one should take on him to sing, and
not in a set form, and tune, he would be ridiculous to all hearers: but a man
has a larger liberty in prayer, and is not tied to such strait connexions,
heighths, and falls, stops, and pauses; but the nature of this Ordinance calls
for it, else it cannot be done gracefully, though there be grace in the heart.
And if the Apostle had not meant by singing of Psalms, singing musically, he
would have only bid them praise in the general, and have left out the outward
expression of it, which cannot be acted but in a set form.

6. If singing were not in a musical manner, (as before) it were the same with
prayer, for you may sing out a prayer, and praise in praying. Thus in David's
Psalms. How many Psalms which were matter only of petition, yet were sung
with faith, and confidence in God? For performance, the Apostle James
distinguishes them apparently, Is any sick? let him pray; is any merry? let
him sing Psalms; and the other Apostle, Let us pray with the Spirit, and
understanding, and sing with the Spirit, etc. Now wherein lies the difference?
In prayer you have variety of workings, and considerations; there is
Deprecation, Imprecation, Acclamation, and Admiring, Pleading, and urging
promise, and the like. So in singing, there are the like; the difference is
only in the set, and musical way of expression, which requires a more set
form beforehand to rule my outward carriage by, in that Ordinance, whereas in
prayer we are not tied to such a severity of method, and so need not have our
words so formed.

Another plea which is somewhat scurrilous, by the ruder sort, yet much urged,
is, that we lie when we sing Psalms, and affirm that we cannot but lie when
we sing the phrases of many Psalms. As that of David, O Lord I am not puffed
in mind, I am as a weaned child, etc.

To which I reply, in general, that some may not have the frame of these
expressions, when they sing, and so may perform a duty which may be but as a
lie to them. But,

1. In special, there is no Saint but can in some measure say what ever David
says in that or any other Psalm, describing the spiritual qualification of
his heart; all graces are in every Saint there in the seed, and habit, and in
a proportion, though all are not so eminent and apparent in the bud and fruit;
though no godly man is free from pride, yet he cannot be a godly man that is a
proud man in actu signato, which has never been humbled, and brought out of
himself; thus all along the 119. Psalm, that Anatomy of a Saints inward
parts, when David says, He delights in the Law of God, He hopes in Gods mercy,
His soul longs after God, He keeps his Commandments, He hates every evil
way, etc. every godly man may sing these and all other Psalms, and speak
truth; for the reality of these frames are the same in every gracious heart.

2. Whatever, I find to be the case of any Saint, I may make it mine according
to the likeness of my condition to it, and yet not a lie.

3. One great use of singing is to commend the excellency of such graces which
are and have been in others, to sweeten the harshnesse of other duties, and to
stir and quicken the heart to the endeavoring after such like frames:
therefore some Lawgivers have put their Laws into verse first, that the
people might take a pleasure in them, and sing them as their recreations, and
be the more insinuated into obedience.

4. I can tell no lie so long as in the sincerity of my soul I study my duty,
and sing with desire after such qualifications, from the contemplation of the
beauty of them in such holy men, though I do not find the present frame so
high as I breathe after, and such men found at present.

Ob. But this Objection, grant it in its full Latitude, proves nothing against
the nature of the Ordinance of singing, but the persons who sing, who are not
fitly qualified to some expressions.

Again, others plead, Psalms that are sung are not suitable to my condition.

Sol. 1. That is nothing still against the Ordinance of singing; if it do not
fit you, it fits others. But,

2. There is nothing in Scripture-expressions but all Saints at all times may
make some use of in the very reading or singing; if not so particularly, yet as
to the general nature of instruction, and edification, it is profitable;
Saints must read all Scripture, with faith and understanding; though every
place may not so directly open their present condition; and why may not they
sing as well all Psalms?

3. It should be the care of Officers in the Church, to be very choice in
picking out Psalms fit for the Church, according to the nature of the body, and
times, and seasons; and I could wish there were more choicenesse observed in
that particular; yet the Ordinance remains still the same.

4. When I sing any of these Psalms, I should by Faith personate the same
state of the Church, or the Saints, as when I apply promises made to others, I
do their conditions, as if it were spoken to me.

5. It is for want of Divine study of the nature of these
Scripture-expressions, and the mystery of them, that we say such a Psalm is
unsuitable to our conditions; for if when I read understandingly, I can get
profit by them, I can the same when I sing them.

6. If it do not reach my condition, as to a particular case I am troubled
withal, or the providence I am eminently under; yet it concerns the state of
the Church, and I may sing them as a Member of the same Body, and sympathising
with them either in sorrow or joy, in afflictions or triumphs; which is a
special way to act the graces of Saints, sometimes to sing what concerns
others as themselves, as to pray for others as themselves; this is like Christ's
heart in heaven.

Lastly, you have opportunity enough to choose Psalms for your emergencies. It
is good to keep the harmony of the whole Body in the maine.

Ob. That which follows next as urged against this truth, is, that its
confusion to sing together, and that but one should sing at one time.

Sol. Still this is not against the Ordinance of singing. But,

1. Singing is more melodious and suitable, when performed by many, then one
several instrument at one time; and so several voice make the greater
Harmony: the exellency of singing lies in the Church, which is made up of
diverse voices.

2. Christ and his Disciples sung together, Mat. 26.30. (...), they sung, Paul
and Silas Act. 16.25. sung together in the Prison, not one after another, but
together.

Ob. But if any one say, when one prays, all may be said to pray, though he
does but consent; it may be so in singing of Psalms.

It is Answered, 1. All Ordinances must be considered according to their proper
nature; some Ordinances are so to be administered, as that only one at once can
perform it, as public prayer, and preaching, and yet there must be a;
distinction even in these: my silence in prayer ought to be when I pray with
another, and yet I may be said to pray as well as he which is the mouth of the
whole, because my heart is with him in the same petitions, and my desires go
equally With him; but it is not so in preaching, where silence must be likewise
from the nature of the Ordinance; yet though I consent fully with the matter,
and agree in all that is said with never so much affection; yet I cannot be
said to preach, but only he that speaks preaches. So now as to singing
there is a difference likewise of another consideration; if only one sing,
none else can be said to sing, though they join with the matter, and agree to
it in their hearts; for its an outward act, and terminated in the person that
performs it; and though in my silent conjunction, I may really praise God, yet
I can in no sense be properly said to sing with others, without I do use my
Voice and Organs as they do. This consideration will give light to men that
mind the nature and distinction of Ordinances in their outward administraions.

2. That which is the confusion of other Ordinances, is the beauty of this; for
two to preach, or pray together at the same time and place, were the greatest
confusion imaginable; but for a hundred to sing together is most harmonious,
and pleasant; so far from the breach of order, that harmony is most discovered
by it.

3. It has been the custom of the Churches always thus to practice; and
there is nothing in the nature of the Ordinance, or Divine precept, or example
against it. I shall conclude this with a word from Antiquity, concerning this
practice.

Eusebius. in his Eccles. Hist. l. 3, cap. 33. quotes two Epistles of Plinius
Secundus to Trajan the Emperor, testifying that Christians were wont to gather
themselves before day to sing Psalms and Hymns together: the same does Philo
Judaeus testify, who lived in the Apostles time, as the same Eusebius. says,
lib. 2. cap. 22. Now in the time of Plinius and Trajan, did John the beloved
Disciple live, says Zanch. in Ephesians. 5.18.29. whereby it appears an
Apostolical institution.

Tertul. in his Apol. c. 19. says, that it was a usual custom among the
Christians, after their Love* Feasts, canere de Scripturis Sanctis, to sing of
the Scriptures; his meaning is, doubtless, out of or from the Scriptures: In
the Western Churches this has been the constant practice, though much
corrupted by the Roman additions to Saints method; but yet that blessed
Ordinance is now more specially recovered, and made pure for Saints according
to primitive institution.

CHAP. V. The great abuses of the Roman and Episcopal Church about this
Ordinance, whereby many stick not to call it Antichristian, has been;
1. THe introducing musical Instruments together with, as Organs, Harps,
Viols, etc. whereas in the New Testament God requires the Voice as the only
Organ of the heart in worship.

2. They had a mere order of Singers to whom they gave pensions unto for that
purpose, and excluded the Church from the persons of that duty, which is of so
Universal a concernment.

3. They would sing in Latin, and with such strains of their Voices that the
words might not be understood.

4. They spent most of the time in singing, and gave not other Ordinances, as
preaching, and praying, their due time of exercise. Thus have precious
Ordinances been abused by the corruptions of men; but are now restoring unto
their purity, and will every day be more gloriously practiced in the Churches.

CHAP. VI. How we may be said to teach and admonish one another, in Psalms,
Hymns, and Songs, according to that of Col. 3.16, 17.
MAny think there can be no such use of singing, as to teach and admonish one
another by it; but if we consider, there are many lessons to be learnt one
another from this public conjunct, singing Scripture-Psalmes.

1. They teach one another, and by the very act admonish one another to get the
same frames these Holy men had in the penning the Psalms, and in the variety,
and spirituality of them; to get David's frame, in singing David's Psalms: and
so for the rest.

2. Its by this they teach one another the Unity and Harmony that is and should
be among Saints as one body, that their happiness and joys are bound up
together, and so the misery of one, is the misery of the whole; and this is a
glorious lesson to know their Union together, as a body equally concerned in
the glory, or shame of one another, equally interested in the praises of God;
there is no duty practiced in all the Gospel that does fully express the
Communion of Saints, and represent Heaven, as the Saints singing together; the
Lords Supper does represent the Communion of Saints very lively, but not so as
mutual singing, when all at once, not by consent only, but expressly speak the
same thing in the same moment, in the Lords Supper, though afterward they were
all one bread, yet they all do not receive it at the same instant of time, but
take successively the Elements; but in singing they all join perfectly at once
to sound Gods praises, as if they had but one Lip, and one Voice. This is the
perfect Emblem of Heaven, no jerring, all with one Voice and Heart crying
Hallelujah, Hallelujah.

3. They teach one another this lesson also, viz. with what alacrity and
cheerfulness they should perform all their duties together; with sweetness
of love, and joy they ought to walk together.

4. They teach one another how to carry themselves in all conditions with
joyful and praising frames of spirit, for matter of the Psalms; and are
various, not only affording matter of exultation, and gratulation; but also
reciting the sadness and low condition of the Church; yet all are fit matter
to be sung; Lachrymae must be sung, sad things with a spiritual joyful heart
in God and his promises; mercy, and judgment in the same song, expressed in
melody of the Voice, and Heart; and it shows a soul is not in a right temper
when he cannot sing over his condition.

5. They teach one another by singing, and admonish one another to avoid any
thing that may hinder their joys in Communion, and break their Harmony in
spiritual actings; all which and many more are great exhortations, and are
taught naturally by Saints mutual singing together.

CHAP. VII. Concerning singing with a mixed multitude.
MAny who grant singing to be an Ordinance among Saints, yet stumble to sing in
promiscuous manner with others; especially because there are so many Psalms of
such composition that does not seem to concern a mixed multitude.

For opening of this, I must lay down this general position; that prayer and
praises are natural duties belonging to all men, men as men; though only the
Saints, can do them best, and spiritually; it is upon all men by the Law of
Creation, to seek to God for what they want, and to thank him for what they
have: this is due unto God, owning him as a Creator, and Benefactour; and
though singing be a part of instituted worship, yet its only an addition of
Order, and a regulation of a natural duty. And as there is no man but is bound
to pray for mercies, so none are exempted from praising God for mercies, though
they sing in a lower tune then Saints. Thus David calls in all creatures to
bless and praise God, as a nanaturall duty according to their several
capacities, Psalm. 136. Psalm. 117. Psalm. 107. Psalm. 103. Ps. 20, 21.22. Praises,
its the natural duty of all, the proper duty of Saints, the perfect act of
Angels.

Ob. You will say they cannot perform it aright, and gloryfie souls.

Sol. 1. Their want of ability does not discharge them from such a duty
engraven on their Consciences, and arising from the natural respects they have
to God as a Creator; to perform which, God gave full power at first.

2. Let every man do his duty conscientiously, he may afterward come to do
it spiritually; though I should lose the sense of a duty in my conscience, yet
the duty lies on my conscience from Gods authority, and my relation to him.

1. By the same rule every one should abstain from performance of a duty for
want of present ability, whereas the duty must be done, and the strength
expected from Heaven, and waited for according to the Divine manner of
dispensation.

2. Its not unlawful to join in any act with others, or to countenance them
in it, which is really their duty as well as our own; I cannot sin in joining
with any one in that act to perform, which is the duty of another, as mine,
though he may want the present ability.

For duties must be measured according to the rule, not the abilities of the
performer; now its no duty for any man to receive the Lords Supper, or be a
Member of a Church in order to Communion, without he find himself in some
measure fitted by grace; these fealing Ordinances of the Gospel, suppose, and
require some other qualification, and are peculiar to visible Saints; but where
there is a natural Character, or an Ordinance as to the substance of it at
least equally concerning all; there it is no sin to join in the administration
of it; and if we consider of it warily, unregenerate men are great sharers in
the mercies of the Churches; besides their own particu!ar, that they may well
afford their voice without sin, and we join with them in setting forth Gods
praises: But more closely, and particularly.

1. When the Church and Saints of God are gathered together to worship him, in
singing; it is no more unlawful to sing with others that stand by and join
their voices, then when in prayer they stand by, and give their consent, we do
not so much join with them as they do own Gods actings among us; it is no
sin in them to join with us in such a duty, neither can it be any sin in us to
sing, though others very carnal will outwardly praise God with us.

2. The carriage of Saints in their hearty and real expressions of praises
may convince others in the coldness, and lowness of their spirit, and stir
them up to some spiritual apprehensions.

3. Though it be lawful to join with them in such a duty generally
considered, yet it were to be wished in a mixed multitude, there were more care
in the choice of Psalms, to fit them to the very duty of praise and thanks,
which is so really belonging to all the Congregation; and that must be
lamented, that the choice of Psalms, to a mixed multitude, is not so considered
as it ought to be, which makes the Ordinance so much slighted in its public
administration. But however the incapacity of others to their duty, should not
hinder me from performing mine, especially when I cannot, nor ought not to
hinder others from such an act.

FINIS.

