A sudden Essay or subitaneous Conceit, occasioned by the last Clause in the
second Quaere upon the Armies late Declaration by a lover of Truth, and a
constant Friend to the quiet and repose of his native Country.
The Clause of that second is, Whether their refusal to dis-band, or to remove
farther off from London, or obey the Parliaments present just Commands (upon
what ever specious printed pretexts) be not a very sad public president,
likely to conjure up a spirit of Universal Disobedience to Parliaments,
Magistrates, and superiors of all sorts throughout the Kingdom, to its utter
ruin, if not timously prevented, disliked, opposed by all well-wishers to the
weal and tranquillity of Church and State?

MEthinks Sir, you should have consulted with your fellow-Advocates for
defensive Arms; who will Authorize (against the Oxonians) and legitimate such
an armed resistance, of all destructive Commands, from any superiors
whatsoever; without all fear of overthrowing government or obedience; whom the
Author of that seasonable advice to the City of London seems to follow;
confidently averring, that neither Fathers, Masters, Kings, nor Parliaments,
are to be obeyed if they command things unnatural, impious, or unjust: Nay,
that they are to be resisted, whenever they reach toward the ruin or
bondage of those who trust them; and that he who assisteth not to their
suppression, shall be guilty of siding with the murderous malefactors, etc. If
you say, he is a partial Advocate for the Armies party, then I must tell you,
by the pretty title, in probability, he is and has been an able Proctour, and
studious Solicitor to the Parliament. But because in favor of tyranny (as some
say) you urge here the inconvenience of subverting all Authority, and hint so
heavily upon a sin, which our surly adversaries (the Royal Doctors) do so
sadly damn from Romans 13. that they do privately conceit, and publicly
proclaim, how that many of the Parliament side, must needs in trouble of
spirit, wish that very Text expunged. Therefore for mine own and others
satisfaction, I only crave unto some Quaeres upon that Text, your punctual
resolution; the only Antidote to preserve from error, and remove all doubt, as
touching the chiefest thing in debate.

1. WHether it enjoyne subjection active and passive, unto all manner of
Magistrates, (though entering the office by fraud, treason, or tyrannous
usurpation, and exercising the same, by acting arbitrarily, and setting forth
Edicts, authorizing all injustice) or only unto such, as lawfully enter the
office, and rightly exercise the same. If you maintain the former, you avow
the arrant flattery of Anaxarchus, (so much abominated by John Bodin.) If the
latter, you comply with Thrasimachus in Plato, viz. That a Magistrate cannot
err as a Magistrate; for in that he erreth, he digresseth from the rule of his
office; in which exorbitancy, neither person nor action, can retain any stamp
of Power and Authority. Let us therefore see how you can by any reason divine,
or humane, regulate, limit, or circumscribe the Authority or Power of the
Magistrate, and not by the same rule make him resistable.

2. How it may appear from any part of Christ's Testament, that ever he
intended to have any sort of persons, (especially in a mere Christian society)
under any pretext whatsoever, in the exercise of injustice, rapine, murder, or
tyranny, to be held sacred and inviolable.

3. Seeing that all along Paul's time, the chief Magistrates (as Histories
manifest) have spared only the base and bad, that they might have upon whom to
exercise the burning ardour of Domination; and raged only against the good and
worthy, least there should be any that would or could resist them. In what
sense could the Apostle promise, from the Magistrate praise and security to the
pious, upon their uprightness and well-doing?

4. Does Paul here authorize error, falsehood, vice, and iniquity, (most often
possessing the chair of Authority) with power of definitive judgment over
laws and persons, and so to try sentence, and punish truth, virtue, and
innocence, which are bound to submit without verbal or real opposition, after
the Apostolical example of such as were enabled thereunto by the Spirit powered
out according to promise, Joel 2. And whether the sheepish sufferings of such,
as wanting the same Spirit, will yet (from humor or heat of proceeding against
the violence of power or impression of danger) imitate those supernatural
examples: tend not to the great encouragement of tyrants, whilst their
constancy is interpreted folly and obstinacy, and their patience and silence
after such extraordnary patterns, is mistaken, for the weakness of an
indefensible cause?

5. Whether the Ordinance of our God (who is goodness it self) can ever tend
to the trouble, ruin, or affliction of his own children, when they are most
obedient to his will?

6. Whether the weakness of our condition only, do absolutely require that
Lawgivers, and Law-rulers, must be held in undoubted admiration; without which
advantage no wit of man, can ever secure, order, and government from subversion?

7. Whether this Text do not enjoyne more obedience to the Army in the upright
prosecution of just and honest designs, then was ever due to the Caesar's in
their usurpation; or is now to the Othoman family in the administration of the
Empire; or whether time and custom only, can legitimate violence and tyranny,
and canonize the same for an Ordinance of Christ?

8. Whether you your self have not known this very Text, of late years to
have been irreligiously wrested, rejected, and taken up again by all sorts of
time-serving Zealots, with a strange impudence and unheedinesse. If you please
to satisfy my scruple in these particulars, I shall presently pay all humble
obedience unto the Parliament, and as freely reprove the Army without fear of
their shot and powder.

Postscript. The Corrector to the Reader.
THe Author of these Quaeres (as himself said) taking notice of the zealous
digladiation now stirring, between some aemulous Antagonists; saw them
effeminately chiding, and by light skirmishing, daily increasing the
difficulty. But never kindly closing, like brave spirits, more covetous of
truth, then victory. Therefore as an essaying prabationer made to submit unto
common and lawful resolution, he published this subitane apprehension, therein
addressing himself, unto the only determining man of England, hoping that for
the Public satisfaction, he will briefly and rightly represent the sense of
the rule, so that we may all submit, and stagger no longer in uncertainty.


