AN ANATOMY OF Lievt. Col. JOHN LILBVRN'S SPIRIT and PAMPHLETS.

OR, A VINDICATION Of these Two Honorable PATRIOTS Oliver Cromwell, Ld Governor
of Ireland, AND Sir Arthur Haslerig, Knight Baronet, FROM THE Unworthy and
false Aspersions by him cast on them in two LIBELS; The one entitled, An
Jmpeachment of High Treason against OLIVER CROMWELL, etc.

The Other, A Preparative to a Hue and Cry against Sir ARTHVR HASLERIG: Wherein
the said LILBURN is demonstratively proved to be a common Liar, and unworthy of
civil Converse.

Prove. 10.31. The mouth of the just brings forth wisdom: but the froward
tongue shall be cut out. Prove. 4.16. They sleep not, except they have done
mischief; and their sleep is taken away, except they have caused some to fall.
Jude, verse. 9. The Lord rebuke thee. LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Francis
Tyton, and are to be sold at his shop at the three Daggers near the
Inner Temple, Fleetstreet. 1649.

To the Right Honorable House of Commons THE Supreme Authority OF ENGLAND.
Noble Senators,
I Need not make my Apology, if I dedicate this little Discourse to You,
because it most concerns You, not only for that the Dishonor of Your own
Members reflects on You all, but also for that You are first struck at, and
these are but sparks of that fire, that have been first kindled (if possible)
to consume You. As I have with much joy and admiration, in my solitary and
private conversation, viewed the eminent actings of providence among You; so I
have, with almost as much lamentation and wonder, bewailed the unhandsom and
unsuitable deportments of men's spirits and actions, opposing of You; But most
of all the exceeding boldness and impudency, together with the transcendent
rage and venom of that generation of men which are truly called LEVELLERS, a
Faction grown out of Your own Bowels, whom I know not what to call, but the
putrefaction of GOD'S Mercies and Your Indulgencies, whose Principles, as they
are begotten by the corruptions of Persons and Governments, so they are
maintained and only thrive by Tumults and Confusions; a People who have as
many Governments as Religions, and as little of the true Religion, as they have
of Estates and Fortunes in this Nation; men of no more reputation, then what
they get among discontented and bank-rooted persons, by holding forth taking
and seeming Propositions of Levelling and Licentiousness: And yet these men are
suffered (in perpetuum nostri seculi infamium) to scandalize Your Supreme
Authority, to raise Mutinies and Tumults against You, to slander Your most
public and active Instruments, and tolerated, yea, by many countenanced, as
if they were the most useful Instruments, or had some mysterious glory in their
Persons and Pamphlets, that it were Blasphemy for any sober man to speak
against. But, among all this popular and seditious Gange, there is none has
more dishonored this Nation, and contemned Your Authority, then Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburn, their desperate and wretched Instrument, who thinks he
can attain to no higher reputation, then to deny Your Authority: He has called
You once and again, a Junto, Colonel Prides Junto, a Mock-Parliament, a company
of Thieves, and Murderers, and Felons; made public Libels against the
Council of State, the Army, General, Lieutenant General, all Your Officers;
slighted all Your Orders, Ordinances, Acts, and glories in it to Your very
faces; What a Reproach is this to Your Government? What a Weakening to Your
Cause, and Discouragement to Your Friends? What an emboldening Your Enemies,
that John Lilburn, a man of such an inconsiderable Interest, one who could
hardly ever challenge more Land in England then might Geometrically serve to
make his grave, should be suffered thus publicly, and upon Record, to defame
not only Your Persons singly, but scorn Your very Government and Authority, as
honest men do tyranny and inhumanity, without any signal punishment to the
terror of the rest? And, if I may speak vox populi, the Vulgar think, Your
Guilt is the cause of Your Patience, and his Innocence of his Boldness: and
what arcanum imperii there may be in Your breasts, I know not; But You little
know, how these foolish Papers do Gangrene the most of men, and according to
their different tempers and affections, have their diverse and ominous
operations: The worser sort of men rejoice, and take heart, and feed their
Malignant humors and discontents by them; The indifferent and moderate ones
know not what to say, but think enough; The better sort, and Your Friends, are
much disheartened, and staggered, and have cause to think You are doubtful of
Your own Authority, since You are so cold in maintaining it. Pardon me, if I,
out of the abundant sense of Your Honors and the Nations Happiness, be somewhat
zealous in stirring You up to look about You. England has been a stage of
Glory and divine Manifestations: You have been carried on, by a wonder of
Providence, through many Difficulties, and have been made Instruments of
gallant actions, among all which, that Act of Justice, done by You on the late
King, renders You a Glory to This, and a Terror to all other Nations: And shall
the Honor of these transactions (wherein the finger of the Almighty himself
has been demonstrable) be undermined by the discontents of a few Mechanic
Levellers? or be suffered to be blasted by the puny pen of a distracted
Humorist? What will after ages say? What will other Nations think? Either
maintain Your Government, or give Commission to all men to affront You: It Is
Equity and Justice that some should be made Examples to others, now, as others
have been made to them heretofore: If You give way to this, You shall not want
abuses, and all Your Friends.

It is the opinion and serious judgment of many sober and wise, yea godly men,
that bless GOD for this Change, and lament the miseries of the times, that one
great occasion, if it be not a cause of this sort of men's opposition to you,
flows from that unlimited Toleration of RELIGION which is yet granted in this
Nation, and think that there is somewhat divine and judicial in it, that the
first fruits of their new Opinions and Principles should be the abusing your
Authority and Government, that you may see betimes what the end of such a
Toleration will be, and prevent it. For it is most observable, that as it was
the great and fundamental Principle in their Agreement of the People, (without
which all other civil Grants was nothing,) so it may be almost mathematically
demonstrated, that all that turn Levellers, first leave the Principles of
Scripture-Religion, that they may be without check of conscience for any civil
disorder. Religion is a sacred bond and tie on men's spirits, as well to Civil,
as to Spiritual Rules, and when once men forsake these Principles, no hearty or
cordial obedience can be expected: As Tyrants and Politicians first strive to
enslave men's consciences, and then they are sure of their persons; so when men
mean to level all things to their lusts and humors, they first make shipwreck
of a good conscience. And it is not to be wondered, that men should deny the
common and ordinary Rules of Civil Government, who have professedly denied all
Rules and Institutions both of Law and Gospel; for though Religion and Civil
Government be of different natures, yet they are commonly inter-woven together,
as to the flourishing of each other; that Government shall never thrive where
Religion is not advanced, nor will Religion much flourish in the midst of
Factions or Schisms, or under Popular or Tyrannical Governments of States; yet
commonly the one is blessed by the other, Gods design being to advance himself
first, to set up his own Name, and then to prosper Nations.

I am constrained (Honorable Worthies) to represent this Consideration to you,
that you would vindicate your own names in advancing Christ's, and expect no
hearty conjunction of any with you, in this Government, but honest and
conscientious men, who can only be engaged by Principles of Religion, and Civil
Freedom; for men that have left the Principles of the Scripture, the Rule of
Religion, expect nothing else but they shall, as they find their l^st act, soon
oppose the most fundamental Maxims you can lay down as a basis to your
Government. It is the fear of this unlimited Toleration makes many honest
Presbyterians stand at such a distance, and so unwilling to submit to this
change; yea, that makes you lose many a godly heart, which else would rejoice
in former acts done by you, while they see no more signal Character of favor
and respect professedly set on the Principles of the Gospel, then on
Heathenism, or Judaism, and continually hear Blasphemies spoken cum privilegio,
at least without punishment. Is our Religion so uncertain, or doubtful, that it
need to have false Religions to try it by? Is Blasphemy a less sin then it was?
or, is Gods honor fallen in its worth and excellency, that it should not be as
much preserved as ever? God forbid. Liberty of Conscience must be given only
to men that can be supposed conscienciously to differ, not only from Religion,
but some external way of practicing the same Principle. But I leave it to Your
wise and serious Consideration, only present You with this Vindication of two
of Your faithful and active Agents of this Nation, You have Power enough to
vindicate Your own Authority; I can do no more then witness against the false
and wicked aspersions of Lievt. Col. John Lilburn against them, and submit it
to Your Judgments, as those who ought to take the prime cognizance of it, that
You may know what Servants You, and this State has, and what an evil and
intolerable person this John Lilburn is to live under the favor and smiling
aspect of such a State, or, which he makes the only Butt of his madness and
malice.

Your Honors most humble Servant, T. M.

AN ANATOMY OF Lievt. Colonel John Lilburn's SPIRIT and PAMPHLETS.
AMong all the Exorbitancies of this last age, there is none has stained the
Glory of this Nation more then the multitude of licentious and abusive
Pamphlets that continually fly abroad like Atoms in the Air, whereby the Press
is made a common Strumpet to conceive and bring forth the froth of every idle
and wanton fancy, or to vent the malice and venom of every discontented and
debaucht spirit: and Books, that were wont to be monuments of the industry and
seriousness of men's spirits, and records of the virtues and noble acts of brave
men, adorned with Reason and Judgment, and ordained to be as embalmings to
their names, are now turned into Pasquils and Libels, stuffed with the rancor and
rage of these men, who know no way to recruit their own lost reputation, but by
defacing the names of their betters. But of all the Pamphlets that I have yet
seen, there are none that express such a dangerous and unworthy spirit, as
those that go under the name of Lievt. Colonel John Lilburn. Some Pamphlets,
though they have little of truth, yet have nothing of falsehood: Others, though
of little concernment, yet may serve to divert a studious head from the
continual pressures of more serious thoughts. Others are pretty essays, and
done on purpose to engage better pens in manifesting Truth; and the continual
writing, or rather scribbling of the most, demonstrates that men are not idle,
but that the Nation is big with something that will be brought forth at last in
form and beauty. In Diurnals (those lean and miserable sheets) you have some
things true, among many mistakes, and lies but probably reported; and you may
know how the days pass away by them, though there be little else. In
Pragmaticus and the Man in the Moon, with the rest of that bauling Crew, you
have some wit, with their malice; But this man (especially in his two last
Pamphlets) breaking all the bonds of Religion, Civility, Humanity, professing
open defiance to the Laws of Grace and Nature,) has devoted himself to
slander, reproach, defame, rack, and crucify the names of all sorts of men
that have the face of honesty, or that cannot comply with him in his Levelling
Designs; swelling up his Title-pages with horrid and nasty expressions, as
Polecat, Foxes, Wolves, and such like, as if he had been newly come out of the
Deserts of Arabia, or been conversing with Nebuchadnezzar seven years at grass,
interlining his sentences with barbarous and cruel Invectives against men in
Authority, calling them Murderers, Thieves, Robbers, threatening them with the
worst of deaths; quoting himself and his own Pamphlets as often as others do
the most learned and orthodox Authors, with such like expressions as these, P.
2. See to this purpose my Impeachment of High Treason, etc. See my Arguments or
Reasons in the second Edition of my Book of the 8. of June, 1649. entitled,
The Legal and Fundamental Liberties of England, etc. P. 3. Peruse carefully, I
entreat you, the 6. and 8. pages of my Impeachment, etc. as also the 12. and
16. pages of the second Edition of my forementioned Book. So P. 4. See my
second Edition of my Picture of the Council of State. Making bold and daring
Titles, that men may expect great things from; and when they are engaged to
look after the proofs, find nothing but a heap of Impertinencies, and a
Catalogue of his Petitions, and Letters, and Conferences, and References to his
other Pamphlets for satisfaction; but satis est repetere. He that loves the
smell, may have enough of these noisome weeds almost in every line or sentence.
As for sober and serious men, I know their stomachs rise at first sight: But my
intent, in this Discourse, is not to run through all his Volumes, by which he
has defiled the Press, and brought himself into a labyrinth of just Troubles
and Miseries, lest, in raking such a Dunghill, I should raise too great a stink
in the nostrils of my self and Reader; I shall follow his own request, and
refer it to any, who have patience enough, and are not subject to fall into the
same distempers, unto the perusing of them: But shall view him in his last
works, which should be his best and most solemn manifestations of himself,
especially seeing he thinks he is so nigh his death.

I have read, of late, two Pamphlets under his name and authority, and by them
you may probably guess of the rest; The Title of the first being An Impeachment
of High Treason against Mr OLIVER CROMWELL and his Son in Law HENRY IRETON, (for
so he is pleased to style them;) and the last A Preparative to a Hue and Cry
against Sir ARTHVR HASLERIG: At the reading of the Titles I was much amazed,
the accusations being so high, and affirmations so positive, and the language
so terrible, that I began to reflect on the Gentlemen with strange
apprehensions, and to wonder that such men should live, and be so much in the
eyes of honest men, and yet be guilty of such Crimes, that all the Villains and
Traitors in this Nation never equalled them; and was impatient to be in the
midst of his Pamphlets, to hear their Charge, expecting the Titles to be but a
shadow and a name only to that substance of proof I should find against them;
not dreaming that any man could be so impudent, and carry such a face of brass
and wickedness, as to abuse not only others, but himself so demonstratively,
if he had not much against them, and that by the evidence of noon day: But,
contrary to all this, when I looked for to have seen the horrible Crimes
written with a Sun beam, and terrifying my spirit at the first appearance, I
could find little else but the Copies of Letters and Petitions, empty and
foolish gloryings in himself, railing upon other men, and the whole Parliament
equal with them, which made me much more to wonder what was become of the
Religion, Conscience, Modesty, and Sobriety of the man; and to conclude, that
certainly he was either drunk, or in a dream, when he writ these sheets.

But, that all honest men may know him for the future, I shall take so much
pains as to consider his Charge against these two Gentlemen, viz. against
Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, now Lord Governor of Ireland, and Sir Arthur Haslerig, now
Governor of Newcastle on Tine, men of such integrity and honor, that John
Lilburn could not pitch on two less capable of his malice and reproach then
they, and that (though against his will) his calumnies will be but foils to set
off their honesty and innocence with greater grace to all ingenuous and sober
men.

To his Impeachment of High Treason (of Mr Oliver Cromwell, as he calls him,)
the first question, by any man that reads the Charge, will be, Where are the
Articles? I have looked over the Pamphlet with as much diligence and observance
as his method would permit me, and I find not one distinct Article of any
misdemeanors that has the shadow of a Charge, much less of High Treason, and
the Highest Treason, but only a Letter to Mr Holland, and a Challenge, and a
Prayer wherein he abuses the blessed Name of the most High God, and invocates
him to destroy and root out the name of Cromwell and his posterity, with such
hideous imprecations, that any Christian tongue would fail and stammer but to
repeat, much less to urge to God as a Prayer; and some loose expressions about
Cromwels complying with the King, and his shedding the blood of War in the time
of Peace: but it may be this he intended as the Charge, for which he calls him
a Murderer and a Traitor, and says, He deserves to dye rather then the late
King, or, then all the Judges and Villains that have been condemned ever since
the Conquest: And if his meaning be so, (for there is nothing else that looks
like it) let the World be judge of the Treason.

For the first, His compliance with the late King, I shall say no more to it
but this;

First, If there were any such compliance or engagement, doubtless the King
would have made advantage enough of it, especially would have manifested
something of it to the world, or given some hint of it that might have
reflected on Cromwell, while he lived; and most especially when he saw what was
like to be done with him by the Power of the Parliament and Army: But the King
neither by word, nor in that Book which goes under his name, does give an
intimation of any such compliance: And secondly, He has manifested the
contrary by his practice and constant opposition to him, and his party, ever
since; and of late, by his strenuous endeavors to bring him to Justice; by
which all honest men may well be satisfied, that it was but a slander, and a
whelp of John Lilburns malice.

Were John Lilburns compliance with Malignants in the Tower, and other where,
printed, we should soon have cause to sequester him from his 3000 l. in the
Bishopric of Durham: It Is well known, besides his trading in Cooks Institutes,
what Malignant converse he and Judge Jenkins have had together, some fruits of
it we see in his Pamphlets, but I will not impeach him; you see, Reader, what
his first Article amounts unto.

His second Charge, whereby he calls him a wilful murderer, is, For that he,
about the 15 of November. 1647. near Ware in Hartford-shire, wilfully and of set
malice murdered Rich. Arnell, and so shed the blood of War in the time of
Peace.

That you may see the malice of this man, and his unexpressible rage, he taxes
Cromwell with that which was done by the whole Council of War, and by the
General, rather then by him, who was but a Member, and had only a single vote;
and he might rather say, that the General and Council of War murdered him,
then of Lieutenant General Cromwell; yea, he may as well say, That it is murder
to shoot a Soldier to death for any Mutiny or enormious crime whatever, as for
that; and whereas he thinks to make up his Treason by this expression, That it
was the blood of War in the time of Peace. Can he call it a time of Peace, when
an Enemy is but newly subdued, and an Army kept up, and an Enemy feared?
However (that he may have his desire) grant it to be a time of Peace, that is,
that no visible Enemy appears; yet does not he deserve to dye that shall begin
a new War in a time of Peace? And shall, when there is no common Enemy, raise a
Mutiny among the Soldiers, which is the first principle of a War? Nay, is not
he rather to be adjudged to death, that, when an Army has conquered a common
Enemy, will begin a new War among themselves? This is Richard Arnels cause, who
was a Ringleader in that first Mutiny, which was the first discovery of the
levelling Agitators, and their wicked intentions; and had John Lilburn his due
(who was then coming to the Army, but durst not appear among them) he had not
had the opportunity to have burdened the world with his scandalous Libels, as
now he has. Thus you have John Lilburns Impeachment, and these his horrid
crimes of Treason, for which Lieut. Genesis Cromwell deserves to dye so many
thousand deaths, according to his Law: Can any man believe, this man ever
consulted so much as with his sensus communis, much less either with God or
Nature, when he writ this Pamphlet? Or that ever he reviewed his expressions
after they dropped from the fury of his spirit? Or can any man imagine, that this
man is not more fit for Bedlam, then for the drawing up fundamental Principles
of Government? But I pity him, for certainly he never thought any man of
understanding or seriousness would ever read his Pamphlets: It has been a just
judgment of God on him, since he left off conversing with the Principles of
Religion, to let an unclean spirit possess him, whereby, that he might follow
the devils art exactly, he has ever opposed those, and delighted to cast dirt
in the faces of those that have been most public Instruments, and God from
heaven has most honored to do service to his people. But I have done with his
Impeachment, and only add this, The Gentleman who he thus slanders, has that
character of respect in the hearts of all that love the good of this Nation,
that no such Momus can deface by the blackest slanders he can lay on him. For
me to make encomiums of his virtues and deserts from this Nation, were but to
set paint on burnisht marble, he is now gone to do more work in another Nation,
and may he do as faithful and gallant service there as he has done in England,
while John Lilburn swells up himself in rage and malice, vomits nothing but
Treason and Murder against him, and other true-hearted Englishmen.

I am now come to his preparative to a Hue and Cry after Sir Arthur Hasterig,
(for the Gentleman you see is big with more wrath,) and because Cromwell is
gone, and he cannot follow him to Ireland, that he may not be out of action,
Sir Arthur must be the next subject of his envy and wrath, as if railing and
lying were his element; he is so endeared to it, that he is resolved to hazard
his very life in the acting of it. I dare not repeat his Title, with all the
expressions of it, lest I trouble the Reader again with the ill savor of them,
he that reads them, would think Sir Arthur had been a monster, and no man, that
he was not fit to breathe in a common air. But that now at last the world may
see what a man of discontent and unhappiness this John Lilburn is, before the
end of the story, you shall find him a perfect Liar, one that cares not what he
says, so he may say something to disgrace.

I confess I have had but little personal acquaintance with Sir Arthur Haslerig
(or with the other Gentleman) and know not what invisible and particular
infirmities, common to mankind, he may labor under: I am not of that opinion,
but that the best of men have their Errata's, as well as Lieut. Col. John
Lilburn.

But for his public transactions in the North, I have followed this Hue and
Cry throughout the four Northern Counties, the public stage of his actions,
and find his name exceeding precious among honest men, and I can say with the
vote of all but Malignants (unto whom he has been a just terror) that they
bless God that ever he came to the North, and do think it was as seasonable and
prudential an act to send him to be Governor of Newcastle, as any act of a like
nature done by the Parliament, and could heartily wish every Garrison had such a
Governor, and every Regiment such a Colonel: But John Lilburn, as if he were
the Epitome of all Freedom and Liberty, the Center of all Oppressions, the
public and great person against whom only Treason and Murder can be
committed, Presidium, and dulce decus, the safeguard and glory of the Nation,
complains, and cries out on Sir Arthur, for but a common, an ordinary act
(which yet is most falsely reported) as a Felon, a Murderer, etc. though all
the North rejoice, and bless God for his presence, and honesty.

But his diligence and industry, his vigilance and interest the last year, when
the Scots came in, may well be printed as one great cause of the Preservation
of the North, notwithstanding his brother Henry Lilburn, at the same time,
betrayed Tinmouth Castle: His fair and equal carriage and respect to all honest
men, though of several judgments, his discountenancing Malignants, his severe
and careful improvement of Sequestrations for the use of the State, make his
name more precious to honest men, then all, or any, or a thousand like
expressions can to render it unsavory.

But let us follow the Hue and Cry, and see more particularly what the man
storms so much for: The Reader may see that the ground of this Hue and Cry is a
Letter written from George Lilburn, whom he calls Esquire, that the World may
believe he has a Gentleman to his Uncle, though it is well known, before these
times, he never had the birth, breeding, nor estate of a Gentleman; his
carriage in the Parliament service will be shortly discovered, that if you
consider but the Letter a quo, and the Letter ad quem, you will be pretty well
satisfied of the ground of the Pamphlet; a suspected and guilty Uncle writes to
a discontented and malicious Nephew, and between them both they bring forth a
Monster called A Hue and Cry: The Uncle is under examination, and like to have
strange things proved against him, viz. That he has been a Malignant formerly,
and since he has professed to be a Parliamenteer, has cheated the State: And
has now no way left him to make the world believe he is honest, but by
defaming Sir Arthur, before whom most of his Knaveries are already, and are to
be heard: And no fitter Instrument for to do it, but John Lilburn, a man of a
desperate and lost fortune: Two things he lays to Sir Arthurs Charge, as
heinous and unpardonable Crimes; First, That he has Feloniously robbed him of
between twenty four and twenty five hundred pounds. Secondly, That he has
bribed false witnesses to take away his life. For proof of the first, page 3.
he says, He cannot but wonder upon what pretense Sir Arthur Haslerig and
Colonel George Fenwick, and the rest of the Committee at Newcastle, can seize
upon his Estate in the hands of Sir Henry Bellingham and Thomas Bows, and stop
his Rents due from Sir Henry Gibb his hands, to the full value of betwixt
twenty four and twenty five hundred pounds: So that it is most apparent by his
own exprrssion, That if any thing was done, it was not by Sir Arthur alone, but
by the whole Committee: He says, That they have stopped Rents, due to him from
Sir Hen: Gibb his hands, to the value of about twenty four or twenty five
hundred pounds.

In answer to that, the Order of Parliament commanded, That all Delinquents
Rents, not excepted from Pardon, and Papists, should be stayed in the Tenants
hands till the first of September last; and this Letter of Lilburns bears date
the 18. of August: So that then both Bellinghams, Bows, and Gibbs Rents were
all stayed by Authority of Parliament, and not by Sir Arthurs arbitrary
tyrannical will and power; But to obey Orders of Parliament is Felony in John
Lilburns Law: And for Lilburns estate, seized by Sir Arthur, in the hands of
Sir Henry Bellingham and Thomas Bows, they have both made their Compositions;
the Moiety of Bows Fine came to Two hundred pounds, which was paid into the
Treasury; the Moiety of Sir Henry Bellinghams Composition, for his Lands in
Bishopric (which did only concern John Lilburn) was about One pound; and his
chief Estate being in Westmerland, Mr Richard Lilburn, Father to John, and one
of the Committee, gave his free consent, and was very well contented, that the
Committee of Westmerland should receive that first Moiety due to his Son John,
and that Sir Henry Bellingham should pay the Moiety of his whole Fine to the
Committee of Westmerland, for the speedy disbanding of their Horse; So that
there was but only Thomas Bows Two hundred pounds, either of Rent or
Composition-money, due to John Lilburn, that came into the Treasury; and Mr
Richard Lilburn complaining to the Committee of his Sons great wants, and
necessities, and desiring maintenance for him, being in prison, and relating
his sad affliction by the sickness of his Wife, and death of some of his
Children, and infection amongst the rest, the Committee gave an Order to his
Father for the receiving of that Two hundred pounds, which accordingly was paid
him, and no doubt John Lilburn received it long since, the Order being granted
before his Letter bears date: And thus you see, not one penny, either of Rents
or Composition-moneys belonging to John Lilburn, was before the 18. of August
remaining in the Treasury, neither is there, as yet, one penny of his money
paid in; Let all honest men therefore judge whether Sir Arthur Haslerig has
robbed John Lilburn of between Twenty four and Twenty five hundred pounds, and
whether Sir Arthur Haslerig deserves, or, as John Lilburn prints, may, or
ought, to be knocked in the head, as a Polecat, Fox, Wolf. What humor and
desperate fury possessed the man that he thus foams out his own shame? You see he
has perfectly learnt Machiavils great Principle of wickedness, Calumniare
audacter aliquid haerebit; Slander to purpose, something will stick: But enough
of that.

For the proofs of Lilburns second Charge of Sir Arthur, bribing false
witnesses to take away his life, and to murder him, it is in page 7. because
he was one of his unjust Judges that, for nothing, committed him: This needs no
large Answer; It is notoriously known the Parliament committed him for High
Treason, and his Pamphlets do sufficiently declare their grounds; and surely
such stuff was never written and published against any State, or Supreme
Authority of any Nation, and the Author most audaciously to justify it.

For his second proof he prints a story of one William Blank, this William
Blank, about the 13. of April last, came to the door, where the Council of
State then sat, and delivered a Paper to Mr Frost the Secretary, wherein he
informed, That one Sir Peter Rocket a Frenchman was in London, and contriving a
most dangerous Design against the Public, and that the said Sir Peter Rocket
had been in London the year before, stirring up the Citizens to rise in arms
about the time of the siege at Colchester, and that diverse Citizens and
Apprentices were combined with him. After the Information was read, the Council
of State appointed Lievt. General Cromwell and Sir Arthur Haslerig to speak with
Blank, from time to time, for discovery of that design, and before that day Sir
Arthur never saw him, nor heard of him: Blank thereupon went to the Lievt.
Generals house, and finding his employments so great that he could not often
speak with him, went to Sir Arthur Haslerig, and told him, that two of Mr
Rushworths, the Lord Generals Secretaries servants were in the Plot against the
State, and named diverse Merchants of quality in the City, and told of their
Meetings, Debates and Resolutions in several places, both in City and Country,
and that himself was present at their Meetings, and heard their Debates, and
saw such and such men at those Meetings, and at last, that the Resolution was
the surprising the General, the taking of the President of the Council of
State, the Speaker of the Parliament, L. Genesis Cromwell, and diverse of the chief
Officers of the Army, and to destroy them and others; And that this way was
carried on by a Committee, half of John Lilburns party, and half of the Kings
party, and that they were all under an engagement by oath, and named some
members of one Mr Lambs Church, and then told the appointed day when it should
be put in execution, which was about the 24 of April: Blank spoke not a word to
Sir Arthur, but he made him to set it down with his own hand, and put his name
to it, and kept a Diary of all his Informations, from the time he came first to
the Council of State, to the 24. of April, the time when the Plot should have
been acted; and Blank gave the reason why that 24. day should be the day,
because that then such Officers were to be both at the Lord Generals house, and
upon the Guards, as were privy to the Designs: Then Sir Arthur, with the advice
of the Lievt. General, acquainted Commissary General Ireton with it, the day
growing very near when the Plot should be effected; and that very night, as
Blank informed, the Malignants should rise upon the winding of a Horn. Sir
Arthur carried Blank to Commissary General Ireton at S. James's, and He, and
Colonel Pride, and some other Officers, marvelling at Blanks confident speeches
concerning the Design, and examining him in all his Papers, he affirming that
these things were true, they presently apprehended two of Mr Rushworths
Servants, and they were brought to S. James's face to face before Blank, they
denied their ever seeing him, or being at any such place as he mentioned, and
he affirmed, and they denied; Commissary General Ireton and Colonel Pride then
took care of the chief Officers of the Guard, and sent some Officers with Blank
to apprehend some of the Citizens, viz. George Almoner, William Seubal, John
Arrowsmith, James, Eddington, whom they found in their houses, and in bed; and
they brought them about one a clock in the night to S. James's: when they came,
it appeared they were the Parliaments very good friends, and all the
Informations that Blank had given, were all false, and had not the least color
or shadow of truth in them; and Blank did before their faces acknowledge, that
what he had set under his hand was false, and that he had never seen them at
any such Meetings: The Gentlemen having seen the Reason, why they were sent
for, and saying that Blank was a very naughty young fellow, and they knew both
him and his Father, returned to their houses, and the Commissary General and
Colonel Pride kept Blank and the said Eddington, which Blank said was Sir Peter
Rockets Servant, for a further discovery of the truth: Then it being between
two or three in the morning, Sir Arthur Haslerig went from S. James's to his
Lodging, and never since that time ever saw Blank, or heard from him; neither
did he, at any time, give him any money, or promise of money; But about two or
three days after, speaking with the Commissary General, he told Sir Arthur,
that what ever Blank had said or written, were lies, and that Blank was
adjudged to run the Gantlope, and surely if he were not well whipped, the
Soldiers deserve to be blamed; and whereas Lilburn says, he was no Soldier,
it will be affirmed on Oath, that Blank confessed to an Officer of the Army, that
he was of Col. Hortons Regiment of Horse, and that of the Colonels own Troop,
and that his horse stood at Sawpots the King's Head in Grays-in-lane, and
desired a Certificate to Col: Horton to excuse his absence from the Troop: Then
Sir Arthur hearing that after he had run the Gantlope, he went to the Tower to
John Lilburn, and thereupon Lilburn began to blazon these false reports that he
has since printed. Sir Arthur being to go into the North, delivered all Blanks
Informations, with his own hand, and signed with his own name, to Mr John Price
at the Exchange, entreating him to publish the truth of that story, if need
required: And thus you see how guilty Sir Arthur is of murder, in conspiring
to take away his life; but the man has got Cains spirit, and is afraid that
every man that sees him will destroy him; see what it is to have a guilty
conscience.

But his fear yet increases, and page 9. relates a long story of one Thomas
Varney, which Sir Arthur employed to entrap him, and so to take away his life.

As for this Varney Sir Arthur verily thinks he never saw him, unless it should
be one Varney that was son to the Marshal that was killed at Edg-hill, that was
a Trooper under him, and ran to the Enemy when he was in the West; if that be
the man, he has not seen him, nor spoke with him, nor heard from him this five
or six years; if it be not the man, he knows neither first nor last any thing
of him, nor the design, before he saw it in Lilburns Pamphlet. Parturiunt
montes; What is become of all these high and great expressions? Do not you
think, Readers, that Sir Arthur Haslerig is a man not fit for humane society,
that he deserves death more then the Earl of Strafford, and may be knocked in
the head, like a Polecat? etc. I need make no Application.

There is one additional Charge yet which I will but name, that is, That Sir
Arthur was none of the Committee, and his Uncle George thinks the same, whereas
Sir Arthur Haslerig was authorized by the Parliament to sit in all Commissions
and Committees in the four Northern Counties, and it is happy for the Bishopric
he is one, else his Uncle would play as mad pranks there as John does above.

You now see, Reader, the picture of John Lilburn, what a fair and lovely
aspect he casts upon honest men, what a precious savor flows from his Pen, how
worthy this man is to live among humane society, or to model States and
Governments, that makes no conscience of traducing, scandalizing, lying; what
desperate and dangerous principles he acts upon, holding private murder, in
revenge, to be lawful, esteeming the life of an honest man, if but dissenting
from him, or doing him any particular wrong, to be no more then the life of a
beast of prey; and if these be his serious thoughts in cold blood (if you can
imagine him to be at any time in a cool and sober temper) what may he not
attempt to do in his raging raptures? It maybe very probably expected, that he
which has given such a license to his Pen to vent his malice, may let loose
his hands to do some such horrible act as private, and wilful murder, that he
may confirm by his practice what he entertains as his principle; and it is just
with God that these which make lies their refuge, should make destruction their
end.

But to come more specially to a review of the great Charge, and consider the
damages between Sir Arthur and John Lilburn, he charge him with robbing of
him of 24 or 2500 l. which you see is every word of it false, with endeavoring
to take away his life, which you see is a lie: But what recompense may Sir
Arthur Haslerig demand? nay, what recompense can John Lilburn give to him, and
the other Gentleman, (considering the disproportion of the persons,) who has
endeavored to stretch the utmost limits of malice, to blast their reputations,
and take their good names from them, which Solomon professes in Prove. 22.1. is
better, and rather to be chosen then great riches? What is robbed and stolen from
me, may be made up again sevenfold; but my name, that, is like a glass, that
holds some precious liquor, once broken, can hardly ever be made up again in
that beauty and firmness as it was before: A good name it is the perfume of
noble spirits and actions, without which men stink as they walk in the world,
and is the only reward in this world of virtue and prowess, by this men live
when they dye, and are famous to eternity. What a Cannibal is this Lilburn
then? And what a ravenous spirit has he, that nothing but the ruin of the
honor and good names of the most deserving men can content his malice? What is
Lilburns 24 or 2500 l. to make up such a breach? But the man is sensible of no
dishonor himself, his person or fortunes being never yet capable of any.

The Romans were so sensible of the names of the Citizens or Freemen of Rome,
that they made special Laws, with most severe punishments, against Libellers,
or any that should write Pamphlets to defame any Freeman, or take away his
good report, Cicero lib. 4. de repub: flagitium capital esto, Let it be a
capital offense, that is as he expounds it, quod capitis poena luitur, which
shall endanger a man's head, but publicly to defame any man, without legal
conviction.

And in paudectis ex ulpiano, he that shall write to defame and scandalize a
Citizen, whether without name, or in the name of another, or by his own name,
Intestabilis ex lege esse jubetur, that was the character the Law gave him,
(that is) qui nec testamentum facere potest, nec ad testimonium adheberi
testis, was never to be believed more in whatever he said, nor his testimony
ever more to be credited: And Horace observing the same Law and Sentence,
Intestabilis dixit pro detestabili, a man detestible, and to be abominated by
all men of any honesty or integrity; and that the world may further see the
hainousness of this Crime, the Graecians (as Budeus observes in his
Commentaries) were wont to call the same men ((...)) velut fortunis omnibus
aversi, civilia jura non retinebant, men forsaken of all fortunes, that keep to
no civil Rule or Law, as banished, and dissolute men, that enjoy nothing, and
care to live by no rule but their lust, presidii legum exortes, out of
protection of Law and Justice, and yet he gives a further description in the
same place of those men, ((...)) dicti fuerunt, (...), men of dishonor, that
act wickedly, and talk wickedly, to whom no respect, nor esteem is to be given
on any terms. You see how libelling was resented among the wisest and best
governed States and Kingdoms; and doubtless the Laws of England are not
defective, as to this offense. Murder and slander seem of a like heinous
nature; yea, slander to an ingenious and raised spirit, seems the greater
misery; many would rather choose to dye, then to live basely: Murder to an
honest man, is rather the sin of the murderer, then the hurt of the person, he
being better provided for; but slander kills the man, while he lives, and
without any hope of reparation; the death it self of the libeller cannot make
up the loss, for when he is gone, the man that lives under that reproach,
suffers a daily Martyrdom, and lives as a forlorn and dead man, without love or
respect, telluris inutile pondus, as the burden and misery of the earth.

What a sentence then of Condemnation would be past on this man, if he had his
due? How will his name rot to posterity, who has so unchristianlike and
unworthily slandered these two Gentlemen? As I dare say, never any were by the
most horrid and wretched tongue in the world, yea the very language of Bedlam
and Billingsgate is smooth and comely to his expressions.

But I cannot wonder that his rage is so much against them, seeing the very
Churches of Christ (those sacred Bodies and Pillars of Glory) are the butt of
his fury, calling Mr John Goodwins Congregation, A knavish Conspiracy: and in
other Pamphlets doing the like to other Churches: What will this man come unto?
Where will his malice center? Will it not at last end in trampling on the
Gospel, and the Name of Jesus Christ, who doubtless stands in diametrical
opposition to his spirit and actions.

And that he may prove himself to be a perfect Ishmaelite, to have his hand
against every man, and satisfy his envy at once, he slanders the whole
Parliament, Council of State, Army, calling them Col: Prides Iunto, a mock
Parliament, a company of Thieves, Robbers, with a thousand such like Monsters,
and, which is intolerable, glories in this his shame; never was any State so
publicly affronted by such a pedantique Pamphleter, and yet so patient and
indulgent to him; yet though he denies their Authority, and professes contempt
against them, as no Parliament, this Gentleman, upon an Agreement of the People
(that grant Idol of the Levellers) though it were but of the thousand part of
them, and consisting only of a few Apprentices, and Bankrupts, and men of
inconsiderable interest in the Commonwealth, could be contented not only to
purge but dissolve this Parliament, and choose whom they pleased, and have put
the stamp of the Supreme Authority of this Nation on it. It Is well known, that
there are far more of all sorts that have heartily and freely consented to this
present Authority, then ever would have done on such an Agreement of the
People, (according to his model,) in which there was such Popular Principles,
such a loose and licentious Liberty, to be given to all sorts of wicked
Blasphemies and Opinions, that all godly and conscientious men abominate; if
the Army would have agreed with him, and two or three more Mechanic Levellers,
though neither Presbyterian nor Independent, neither one party nor other, but
themselves had consented to it, they would have (if they had power) subjected
all men's judgments and consciences to it, and have cried it up for the first
Parliament of Freedom and Liberty that ever England enjoyed: And had that party
prevailed against the Army, which mutinied of late, and gathered a Head at
Burford and Oxford, we should have soon seen what a Parliament and Council of
State we should have been blessed with: And this very Parliament, in its
illegal estate, yea, the Council of State it self, if it had but John Lilburns
hands laid on it, should be the Supreme Authority in a moment. But what need
all this spending of paper and words on him, who is resolved to die a royal
death with the King, and end his days like a Malignant, denying the authority
of these, who found a just power of condemning him. The Government is now
happily changed, both by the Principles of Reason, Necessity, and Convenience:
If guilty persons hate the Authority by which they must be condemned, I shall
not wonder: For John Lilburn, I know his nature is only disposed to
opposition, and no Government whatever shall be appointed, without that wherein
he might be Supreme, but he would cry it down as illegal and tyrannical. But if
he thinks to dye a Martyr, in opposing this present Government, I shall not
envy him the glory to be canonized with King Charles in the Malignant and Popish
Calendar. I shall say no more as to this, but leave him to the righteous
execution of their Power, whom he denies to have Authority.

And whereas he still pleads to be tried by the known Laws of the Land, you may
see he is put to his shifts; when he fought against the King, he could find a
distinction between the sense of the Law, and intent of it, and the letter; and
now he is come to be tried by the Parliament, he flies to the letter of these
Laws, by which he could not, without Treason, fight against the King; but any
thing to escape the Gallows: Had he stood to every Statute Law formerly, where
had John Lilburn been? Nay, did not John Lilburn justly deserve all those whips
and scourges, by the letter of some Laws then in force? Particular Laws are
made according to particular occasions and conveniences, and bind not ad
semper, especially no occasional Statutes can bind up the hands of the
Legislators; the Parliament being the Representative of the People, are the
Supreme Authority, and what they enact, or do, in the time of their Session, is
to be accounted as absolute a Law (at least as long as they shall think fit to
continue it) as any other Law made by former Parliaments; and to tie the
Supreme Authority to former presidents, is all one as to give Laws to the
Legislators. And whereas John Lilburn will have the Parliament, both now, and
formerly, to follow the form of every common Statute in making an Order for his
imprisonment, it is as much as to say, that the Parliament has not power to
repeal, or, as they see occasion, to suspend the execution, or alter the form
of any Statute; or that their Orders, in the time of their Session, though but
occasionally made, and pro tempore, according as they see necessity or
convenience, are not as legal and just, and to be obeyed, as these Statutes
which other Parliaments made on the sight of the same convenience, or reason:
But there is no doubt but they have Laws enough to prove John Lilburn a
Traitor, and a man which deserves the last punishment; But if there should be a
defect of any express President, or Law, whereby he may be punished, it is
because he has gone beyond the common strain of former offenders, and is
without president and example in his miscarriages; and no Parliament could ever
imagine, there would any man be so quite destitute of the Law of Nature, as to
abuse himself, and affront Authority so impudently, as he has done; But new
sins must have new punishments: Some must be made examples now, as well as
others formerly. It was the Earl of Straffords plea, there was no Law and
president for his censure, who acted it better then John Lilburn, and yet John
was one of the Apprentices that cried out for Justice, which was legally
executed then; And the King denied the Authority of the High Court of Justice,
and yet justly lost his Head: Let John Lilburn take heed next, The Parliament
has made a Law, and it is published, That who ever shall speak against the
present Government, or for the title of Prince Charles to the Crown, shall be
punished as a Traitor; How far the Gentleman has sinned against this known Law,
he may shortly know.

I have now done with his terrible and hyperbolical Charges, though it seems he
means never to have done, for he styles his last Pamphlet but A Preparative to
a Hue and Cry, and in the latter end of his Preparative, calls for more fuel to
the fire, commanding his Uncle (as if he were the god of this world) to send up
to him intelligence what Sir Arthur Haslerig does, and Let me know, says he,
if he do not this, and that, professing he will not abate him an ace, be it
true or false, which he can but scrape out of any Malignant Letters concerning
him; But I hope by this time all sober and honest men know what use to put his
Pamphlets unto hereafter: And to those that have a mind to buy a shillingworth
of lies to carry in their pockets against they shall find use of them, or
would learn the art of railing and slandering most exactly, I shall commend the
buying of Lievt. Col. John Lilburns Pamphlets, and reading of them with the
most care and diligence that they can afford; For my part, my stomach is full,
I shall only desire these two Gentlemen, that are thus the objects of his
revenge, That though your Names and Honors are untainted, and shine clear
through the cloud of his Calumnies, yet you would make this advantage of it,
and so honestly cheat him of his hopes, to spur you on to more gallant and
brave actions, and to improve your Interest for the advancing Religion, and the
Power of Godliness in this Nation, as well as Civil Freedom and Liberty, then
shall your names be written in Brass or Marble, to posterity, as they are, and
will be, in the hearts of godly and conscientious men, when John Lilburns shall
be written in the dust.

I expect another Hue and Cry after me shortly; But I intend to foul my hands
no more with him; but leave the discreet Reader to judge, and bestow what Faith
and Charity he has to spare upon his former and ensuing Pamphlets.

FINIS.

