AN English Translation OF THE Scottish Declaration AGAINST JAMES GRAHAM ALIAS
Marquess of Montrosse.

Wherein many things are set Right between the Kingdom of Scotland and
Commonwealth of England.

With many Observable Passages, concerning the Transactions with the late King,
and their now Declared King.

PROVE. 12.6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood, but the
mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the three daggers near the inner Temple in Fleetstreet.
1650.

AN English Translation OF THE Scottish Declaration Against James Graham, alias
Marquess of Montrosse.
WEre it not that the Glory and Honor of the Commonwealth of England, and
these great Transactions of Divine Wisdom and Providence, are more principally
besmeared in this Declaration, then the person or party of Montrosse, I should
soon consent with them, in the beginning of that Paper, That as they think
others may well wonder they should take pains to answer him, so much more that
any one should undertake to vindicate or apologize for his person or Papers:
He, with the rest of his party, can never be too much abominated, when Religion
and true Liberties are mentioned, being the most desperate engaged Instruments
of carrying on the design of misery to the three Nations.

But seeing the whole strain and scope of that Declaration is to reflect on the
Proceedings of the Parliament of England, who are the true and lawful Heirs and
Successors of the Mercies and Providence of God to this Nation, and not so
much against Montrosse, and the Royal Party, though they make his Paper the
occasion of the Discourse; I shall take liberty, with a serious wariness, of
giving any offense to the honest and godly party in Scotland, to set some
things right in that Declaration, and vindicate the late honest and just
Proceedings of our Parliament, to maintain yet the Union between us and our
Brethren of Scotland, almost quite broken by the Malignant Interest in that
Nation, that while we keep evening reckoning we may be long friends, and that
in their excusing themselves they may not so accuse us before our and their
Enemies, and so be devoured by them both together.

But before I come to the Declaration it self, I cannot pass by some things
which pass up and down, less discernable, which are matter of the greatest
wonderment unto rational and sober men.

1. That the height of their Zeal and Indignation should be vented on
Montrosse, calling him Excommunicated Traitor, That viperous Brood of Satan,
etc. and yet still keep up their esteem of the late King, and their calling
him, His sacred Majesty, with many such clawing expressions, abhorring the
least thought of dishonor to him, when Montrosse only acted as his Servant, and
all that ever he did, in the strength of that Commission and Authority, he
received both from the Father and the Son. Let it be considered for what is
Montrosse proclaimed Traitor by the Committee of Estates.

He must either be a Traitor to the King, or the Kingdom; to the King he was
not, for he acted by his Commands, according to his will: It must be then
against the Kingdom, and then much more is the King the Traitor, who created
him to that work, if that Rule in Logic be true, Quod efficit tale est magis
tale; though it is true, the Instrument is not excused for the principal Agent,
yet the principal Agent is most to blame. Montrosse was but a puny Agent to
other great Traitors that the King made, who has made thousands in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, in that sense, and yet he himself must not so much as be
be thought on in such a capacity.

Had Montrosse never acted, King Charles would have made another Traitor; and
when Montrosse was suppressed, and gone out of the Kingdom, and all the Traitors
in both Nations under hatches, yet we found where the root of our misery lay,
and were put to it, and pusled more by the grand Traitors own person, then by
all his Army and Royal Instruments besides.

God himself has given out a Statute Law from Heaven not to respect the
persons of men in Judgment; and it is Justice and Equity to lay the saddle on
the right horse; yea the King himself was to be commended for his plain actings
according to his principles and apprehensions, who in the beginning of this
War, thought it not only fit to proclaim the Earl of Essex and his Army
Traitors, but both Houses of Parliament, as those that gave him the only
Commission and Power to that work. And it may well be wondered, that the Scots,
who were wont to be men plain and broad enough in their expressions when they
will, and have done ordinarily to our Parliament, and many honest and godly
men, should now complement so grossly, as to call the Servant Traitor, and the
Master, under whose power he acts, sacred and spotless.

But if the man such blame must have,
What Is due to the Master of the knave?
Do the Committee of Estates mean to revive that old Maxim in the the end of
the War, that we fought against in the beginning?

That the King can do no wrong, That he is not accountable to any but God, and
so incapable of any Charge. Either lower Monarchy in your thoughts and
pretenses to it, or never solely tax these gallant and stout spirits, who act
under it out of the true sense of what you in words pretend, and who have
wanted nothing to make them fully honorable, but a good Cause and Principle. It
cannot choose but be a double grief to them, that they should be condemned for
doing their duty to him who is incapable of guilt in commanding, and that they
should have not only part of the misery, but the whole guilt, who were but
Instruments, and he free that is the Efficient; as if the sword should be
arraigned for Treason that killed the man, and the person that struck the blow
discharged.

If England had not left off that method of Courtship and Complement, we had
been as far to seek of our just Liberties, after the beheading of these
Traitors, which were thought most notorious, as we were at first; and let
Scotland look unto it, if they make not better distinctions, they may find
other kind of Traitors, more dangerous then Montrosse, shortly entertained in
Scotland with joy and acclamations. I have been the longer on this observation,
to learn the Committee of Estates to speak plain English betimes, lest they get
that English Tyranny that we have happily and hopefully freed our selves from,
and we be troubled with a Scottish War; they are a little longer learning this
lessen then we are, being yet fain implicitly to hold forth what we practice,
but must come to it shortly, when some vails are off, and they see both root
and branch together among them: only it is pity that these which have been
first in the War should be last in enjoying the Peace: But that fault is not
ours.

The next thing which runs along the whole Paper, as the burden of the
Declaration, is, (and which I cannot pass by) the great reflections they cast
on the Parliament of England, and that honest party that joins with them
joining them with Montrosse together, as if they kept mutual correspondency,
calling them at every turn, The Sectarian Party, The now prevailing Party,
Heretics, Schismatiques, as if they meant to supple and make up their harsh
expressions against Montrosses person, with his party, by inveighing on the
Parliament of England, and these which join with them, excommunicating them out
of their affections and love, as they have done Montrosse out of the Kirk.
Expressions exceeding dangerous, and too much provoking, that when we shall
call them, Our Dear Brethren, especially after an Army came from them into our
Nation to destroy (using the same expressions.) Had they but reflected on their
condition but the last year, when Ham^lton was the prevailing party, and what
sort of people they were that set them free, and made the Committee of Estates
the prevailing party, with the dissolution of their whole Parliament, they
might have fitted more handsome and tender expressions, at least, if they meant
to have kept up any brotherly Union and Correspondence between the two Nations.

Does the gentle streams of a River between England and Scotland so alter and
change the nature of Transactions, that the purging of a Parliament in Engl nd,
over grown with Malignant and Predominant humors, should be less lawful then
the breaking up of one in Scotland? Or is the natural working out of distempers
worse then a violent dissolution?

It has been the happiness of England, for some few years, that the Parliament
has been the prevailing party, and why it should be now our misery after we
have conquered our visible Enemy to see our friends prevail, is too great a
Paradox to be suddenly expounded: Some must be the prevailing party; and why
not these that are? who have hated these complemental Compliances with the
Royal Interest, and have followed the first Principles of the War, to the best
advantage, for Peace. But I was very unwise to tax the Declaration with that as
a fault, the expressing of which is our mercy: As I doubt not but they think of
it concerning themselves, that it is a happiness to Scotland that this Committee
of Estates is now the prevailing party, though it was brought in without any
legal or orderly dissolution of Hamiltons Parliament, and Committee of Estates,
and by these Instruments that they can now gratefully call Schismatiques and
Sectaries. But the ill Conjunction of the Sectarian party, and the prevailing
party, sets forth the mind of the Committee to the full. And yet what is meant
by the Sectarian party, is yet a greater Riddle then all the rest; for, set
aside the secret Placitum of the Committee of Estates, it stands without its
signification in England, without it be a Title imposed to divide between
honest and conscientious men, that some may reign.

But it may be they have some secret and multiplied meaning in this phrase,
that must be enquired into; if they call them the Sectarian party, because they
have justly divided the Kings Head from his Body, and so have made a Schism
between Prerogative and Tyranny, they shall willingly own the Title with a
Crown of Justice, and glory in the head of it.

But it may be they call them Sectaries, because they have made a more exact
division of the true and right English Interest, and that of Scotland, and
between new and old Malignants in the three Nations.

Or it may be, they derive it from the word Sectari, because they have more
closely followed the ends and intentions of the Covenant, then the literal and
ambiguous expressions in it, and have prosecuted the greatest enemies of
Reformation by Acts of Justice to their graves.

But if by Sectaries the Committee mean these men that are of diverse factions
and parties, and interest in England, as we have cause to bewail it, so we may
in part thank some of that Committee for it, who have cast so many bones of
division among us, to set up the Royal, and their own interest, as the
Parliament have publicly declared in their Answer to the Scots Paper of March
13. 1647. p. 1. 2. complaining of the sad divisions among us, express
themselves, etc. Unto the advancing of this design of the common enemy, the
Commissioners of Scotland have for a long time made themselves, or have been
made by others very isntrumental, whilst forgetting the work they came about,
and the true interest of those from whom they came, have made it their work by
their practices and purposes, to disaffect the people of both Kingdoms unto
the proceedings of the Parliament of England, and on the other hand to incline,
and dispose them to the King, and his party upon terms apparently destructive
to both Kingdoms. That it seems it is no new thing for the Committee to frame
words of division in this Nation, but I am loath to repent these old Quarrels,
if there were not new occasions given.

But if they mean by Sectaries these which are given to blasphemous Opinions
contrary to the Gospel, though there are but a few in comparison so left of
God, yet we will join with them, not only to write against, but weep, and lie
in the dust for any such abominations, and we can never bewail enough these
things, that on the one side formality and mere shadows of Religion should be
taken up, and all holiness be only outward and external, and on the other
side, that fancy and delusion should prevail to cheat men of their souls, and
cloud the glory of the truths of Christ: But it is a great wrong to join in
this, since the prevailing party with the Sectarian, whose hearts I doubt not
but bleed as truly inwardly for these things, as they have expressed an outward
detestation of them, in burning some of their books, and casting shame on their
persons; but as none of these Opinions are vented in public, but with public
Declaration against them, so these which are vented in private, are but by a
few inconsiderable and contemptible persons, and (we bless God) with little
success at present.

And I doubt not, if we can agree in civil Principles with our Brethren, we
shall soon in Religion, in the Doctrine and substantialls of it, wherein the
life and power lies, and if we differ in Discipline, it will not be in the
things themselves, but in extent and latitude of its power, that there will be
no more dstinction, but as of an English and Scottish Government of the Church.

I have only surmized these things, that the Reader may take notice of the
common design in the Declaration, which seems to be very strange that in one
Paper made against a great Delinquent, the Parliament of England (who have most
opposed the Malignant interest) should be specially aimed at, and their
transactions inserted in the same Calendar; but it is well they cannot call them
Traitors, we may possibly e're long see what new names we shall enjoy, when
Charles Stuart and Montrosse shall both join together against the honest party
of Scotland, and when they have got a King, who will be his favorites in
Scotland? I pray that the same names be not justly retorted on themselves by
that party which they are feign now to court with expressions of disgrace on
their best friends.

But to the Declaration it self, and the maine things Montrosse lays as a
charge on them, which they strive to free themselves from, I shall follow their
own method, and give them their due in what ever is just and right, and excuse
them wherein they do not entangle themselves.

The first thing Montrosse taxes them withal, to which they reply, is for
hatching a Rebellion in their own Kingdom, with promoting the like in England,
and because they are both of the same nature, or as the end and the means, the
same Reply will salve both; I need to comment little on this, but to improve it
on the same grounds and reasons: only this is worthy to be observed, that what
we account our duty and safety, they account rebellion unto this day; that
which the Committee calls their just defense, as they do well express it in
the second page: Did we offer to stir until Religion and Justice, the main
pillars of Government, were shaken, and near to be overturned? and shall the
standing upon our defense for the preservation of our Religion and Liberties be
accounted Rebellion?

You see how the just and righteous grounds of your proceedings are
interpreted, and that which you think honesty is still called rebellion, though
but in the first motions of it, much more in the propagated necessary actings
of that principle; and you now see what ever gloss is put upon your
transactions, you shall be no more free of Rebellion then England, but rather
be accounted the first and principal powers in all the rest of the acts,
though done by us, and it is well you and we have a clear conscience, for else
we shall not want Records and Remembrancers of our former actings, though never
so honest and necessitous; and if you think it is only Montrosse's malice, you
are as much mistaken in politic, as he was in legal and just actings; he dare
speak nothing but what the King his Master first dictates: if you compare the
Kings Pourtraicture in his last Book, and his thoughts of your Nation there,
with his practices to you, you will not find it a delusion: And if your new
King did not account you Rebels, he would soon have complied with you, his
principles leading him to a union with any party, but those that mean to make
Religion and Liberty their interest; and whereas you call Montrosse Traitor,
and he calls you Rebels, who shall decide the Controversy between you, when
your King himself thinks the same, and you in your consciences think him a
Traitor? And has not Montrosse more ground (as to the world) to call you
Rebels, who will own not only the same power, but the same persons who have
acted point blank against what you call Justice, then you to call him Traitor,
who acts (though it may be more violently under that power you account sacred)
and cannot live without that person that he serves as his Sovereign? We have
found the misery of dawbing with the King, we have changed oftentimes not only
our motions, but many times principles to win and gain him, but he never
charged his, but always gained by our retreats, and what ever plea we or our
Brethren may have for the first ground of our actings, it is otherwise, nay
quite contrary apprehended by the King and his Party; and to those that know
what nature is, or education, they can easily judge how hard it is to change
the first idaea and impression of things, especially when it is accompanied
with glorious Prerogatives, and apprehensions of self-advantage, and in royal
breasts it is commonly seen, that injuries and affronts are written as in Marble,
while respects and kindnesses are thought due, and of necessity to be
successive, and only valid and hic, and nunc, according to an immediate
circumstance and present convenience: and if they will abstract that which they
call policy, and a little while look into the nature of things, they shall soon
find that there is not a motion of the hearts either of the King of Malignants,
or the Malignants themselves changed from what their first apprehension, only
they are fain thorough providence and design to complement with us, and then as
our Brethren too grossly do at present with them, until they get as the Scots
say, to be the prevailing party; but I know they are sensible enough of
theafter-reckoning, notwithstanding they sum up at present.

And therefore in vindication of themselves and us, they honestly and
ingeniously state the first grounds of the quarrel both in England and
Scotland, which is well done; and it were to be wished that it were imprinted on
all our hearts in both Nations with a point of a diamond; and it had been happy
these virgin, and untainted principles had been always kept unto in Scotland.
They tell us p. 3. that when they were living quietly and peaceably, a new
Service Book was imposed on them to introduce Popery, etc. and relate the Kings
invasions of them for but refusing it against their consciences, charge him
with breach of trust after Articles given: And as to their conjunction with
England, as their assistance was desired, so they saw further cause and reason
then formerly: p. 3. they notably express the pranks of the King and his
adherents, not staying in Scotland, but traversing Ireland, in a bloody
Rebellion, against thousands of Protestants; who had the Kings Commission, and
with whom he afterward made an Agreement, rather then submit to any just
condescentions of the Parliament, and Protestants of England, and Scotland,
though he had declared them formerly Traitors, for their bloody massacres;
having also entrusted diverse Popish Commanders in his Armies, contrary to his
first Declarations, that no Papist should be in arms, or about his person.
Upon these, and such like reasons, they and we joined together in Covenant. To
which we may add his perfidious Treatings with us oftentimes, especially at
Brainford: his hatred of the Covenant, his impenitency, continued actings in a
second war, more dangerous then the former, with a thousand more desperate
transactions both by himself, and Son, and all these propagated and continued
without any hope of remedy, but by losing all the blood, and expense of an
eight years wars, with danger and hazard at the best for the future. All
these are sufficient grounds for honest men to look to themselves at first, and
defend themselves in the beginning, and much more to provide for themselves at
last: Only the misery is in the use, and application; The Scots can find
enough to vindicate themselves from rebellion at the first of these motions,
and yet can willingly tax us at the end for doing the same things. They can
justly (but upon a thought of fear, and danger in some unfit overtures) find
ground to make use of the sword to defend themselves, and cut off their enemies
in general; and yet when the same things come to be heightened, and break out
in a greater flame, and continued without hope of redress, they will condemn
us for striking the last blow, upon the same and greater grounds, when they
began the first; as if the continuation of the same cause more desperately
should not produce more notable effects; or that the modest and secret essays
of things should be more desperate, then the strenuous propagation, and
prosecution of them, and that aggravated, and multiplied acts of tyranny should
be more venial, then bare attempts, which may be easily reformed by maturer
counsel. If the Kingdom of Scotland, and England had sufficient ground to take
up arms against the King at first, when the sparks were but as under ashes,
much more ground had England when the flame was not only broken out, but daily
fed, and increased, to make use of these arms to extinguish the chief
Incendiary. But conscience, it seems, made the principle, and policy, and
design the application. If they justify the beginning of the work, we may well
the end of it, on the same, yea more absolute and necessitous grounds. However
Montrosse is deceived in both, yet we should not put arguments into his hand,
by parting the actions which have been correspondent to the same principle. Yet
this is the happiness of England thorough mercy, that our Brethren shall have
the scandal, or rather glory of the beginning of the war, and we of the end,
yet they will be as much, and more hated for what they acted first, then we for
what we have done at last, having improved both their principles and our own,
together with the Kings tyrannical power, to our own safety, and his deserved
ruin; while they complementing but with a name (which they will find to be, as
most insnaring, so like the name of the Beast which has a mystery of deceit
wrapped up in it) are not only like to be where they were, but in a far worse
condition then ever Scotland was in, if God suffer but that young Spark to King
it among them.

But to come to his more special charges, which p. 4. they call his last, and
main forgeries; they are reduced unto three heads.

1. That his late Majesty being redacted to think on extreme courses, did
engage us by a Treaty, and having got all assurance from us, did cast himself
into the hands of our Army, and that we contrary to all faith and paction sold
our Sovereign. 2. That they now complotted his destruction, and begin on the
same score with his Son, declaring him King with proviso's, etc.

Of all these charges they say there is not one word true; But that his late
Majesty was redacted to an extreme course. It were well first to consider,
whether in a true sense these are charges worth the observing or answering;
that is, first whether the delivery up of the King to the Parliament of England
when in England, notwithstanding any private treaty, or particular promise of
any Officers, were not just, and their duty. 2. Whether the taking away by
death, such an implacable and gangrened person, were any complotting his
destruction, but a legal execution of justice; and whether the declaring his
Son King with proviso's be not just and fit, no King being fit to reign, but
he that means to compact for the safety and liberty of that Kingdom he is
called to exercise that Office in.

But seeing the Committee take all these as heinous and blasphemous charges on
them; I shall give the reader a particular account of each of them; not to
confirm Montrosses paper, but to clear some things concerning our selves, and
them, and let truth and reason reign.

In vindication of themselves from the first, they spend several pages, and
strive to give a narrative of all proceedings in the Army and Parliament both
in England and Scotland, from the time of his coming in to their Army in the
month of May 1646. unto May 1647. with the many Declarations both of the King,
and their Parliament concerning the end of his coming in to them, which I am
loath to repeat, least I give too much offense to our Brother, or puzzle the
Reader with transcribing; only give in what I know concerning the truth of the
charge, and meet with some extravagancies in their Narrative.

For the first, Though I hate the charge as it comes out of Montrosse's mouth,
and under so unclean a hand, yet for truths sake, and seeing they are not
content to free themselves, but to charge us, and mix therewith many ominous
reflections on this Nation, I shall present something more then probable, that
may make the penners of that Declaration think that though they have engrost
the Prerogative of imposing names, yet they have not the Sovereignty of truth
in all they write. They say p. 5. that after many essaies for London, and the
Sea, he came to the Scots Army without acquainting those that had the trust,
and the charge of the Army; and ask (I hope to be resolved) where was there any
time or place for a Treaty here; and what were those assurances that were
given? Let it be but asked the Committee, whether Montrill the French Agent was
not in the Scots quarters at Southwel, and Hudson sent many times, and what
they did there, and the question will soon be resolved; the truth is, as Hudson
himself related, and professed to some of honesty and integrity, that the King
employed Montrill for that end, and often sent Hudson to treat about his coming
in, who came often unto three of the Lords, I will forbear to name them for his
honor sake, and propounded three Propositions concerning the Kings security,
and other things, which he pressed them to sign, but they refused to give any
thing under their hands, least it should be discovered, but that it should be
as truly performed, as if they had done it; at which Hudson professed that he
would not trust them with words, seeing they had deceived the King so often
before, and that he would never persuade his Majesty without some paper
security, and confirmation, under their hands: but their particular Engagements
were at last accepted, thorough the mediation and assurance of Montrill; and
the General moreover said, that he would willingly go on his knees to meet
them; these things were the professed relation of Hudsons own mouth; now what the
capitulations were, and how far security was given, I will not determine, but
the world may judge they were not in a dream, as they profess in their paper
to the Parliament immediately on his coming into them, and that they need not
be so absolute in their challenges of any one to produce any testimony or
demonstration for any such overture; Hudson very well knew what he came at
Southwell for, and what he did there, and this is faithfully his account from
his own mouth, with many more circumstances of a strange nature, which out of
love, and tenderness I omit. Yea Hudson would often say, when he heard that
they denied any such knowledge, with much vehemence, that they grossly lied.

I shall relate but one story more, which makes it out of doubt; and it is a
relation I heard with my own ears given in upon Oath, by one that had relation
to the Bedchamber, viz. that one night at New Castle the late King coming out
into the presence Chamber to supper, not very well pleased at something
concerning the Scots dealing with him, was reading in the window a Pamphlet
that came out about that time, entitled, A game at Scotch, and English,
wherein many particulars were discovered about the conveighing away of
Ashburnham and Hudson, and something about his coming in at Southwell to the
Scots Army; at which he was much pleased, and said they were most truths: He
turns about to Sir James Lumsdale then Governor of New Castle, who stood by
with several Lords, and says to him, you did not know of the conveighing away
of these two, and he answered no, if it like your Majesty: he turns to one of
the Lords (I take it it was the Lord Dumferlin) no nor you did not know (says
he) of my coming in to your Army at Southwell, and he answered no he did not;
the King after his wonted manner swore thus, by God, but you did; I am sorry I
should swear such an Oath again in print, but it is lawful, because it is for
the public deciding a controversy, and confirmation of truth; that you have
two Oaths, if the world will believe the Kings Oath, who knew well enough what
was done concerning himself, and another Oath confirming that he heard him
swear thus.

But I leave it to the judicious Reader to consider, I believe it was done but
by some particular persons, and very privately, that the Parliament of Scotland
knew it not, and the fair delivery of him, with their quiet march out of
England is sufficient satisfaction to us, and to acquit them for that private
miscarriage. I wish they had been as faithful at the Isle of Wight as they
were with him then, and that they may come as fairly and honestly off from this
King at Breda, as they did from his Father at New Castle.

Only I cannot but observe one passage ( p. 13.) where though we and all
honest men will join issue with the Committee, that none can imagine they sold
the King for money, but did their duty in delivering him up to the Parliament,
yet I wonder they make the demonstration of it to be that they only got two
hundred thousand pounds of the Arrears due unto them for a very laborious
service, and as a part of the great expenses they had been at by their
expedition into England for the ends of the Covenant: two hundred thousand
pounds is not so small a sum to be given for Arrears, especially if they
considered the vast expenses England had been at first, and last, and what
great sums of money they received at several times from England, besides the
Assessement of the four Northern Counties, and free quarter, which came to
far more (as it was audited by the Parliament) then the Scots pay, and
arrears came unto: especially if we consider what two hundred thousand pound
sterling is accounted in the Kingdom of Scotland; but most especially, seeing
it was for the ends of the Covenant, and that we must pay them for doing their
duty, and that in so great sums, and be slighted for our love, is strange, we
could give our brethren 300000. l. for but beginning to resist Tyranny, though
principally relating to themselves, and think nothing of it, and since for but
assisting in a cause of common concernment, wherein they were equally engaged
with us, and for following the ends of the Covenant, they have had first, and
last viis and modis, above a million of money in England, and yet they go about
to lesson our favors, and heighten their own Engagements and services for the
Covenant, though all upon our score: but these things are slips, and must be
past by as lesser Errataes that do not spoil the sense; I only add this,
that never had Scotland so much of Englands wealth, and treasure in such round
sums in all the Reigns of the Kings either of England or Scotland, as they have
had from this Parliament, and it is bad parting with such friends.

The second Charge is, That they have complotted the late Kings destruction; to
wipe of which aspersion, they labor as in the fire; and I shall freely acquit
them only because they think it a Charge of so heinous a nature to have any
hand in that legal act of Justice on him, and insinua^e the guilt of it on us.
I must crave leave to vindicate that act, as no^ only most necessary, but just,
and an act of the most celestial and divine disposal and import, as any civil
act done in England since its first constitution.

For the lawfulness of bringing Kings to Justice, and to condemn them, if they
be found Tyrants, its not so much as questioned in politic Casuists, and in
reason if they may be deposed for ill Government, as we have instances both in
England and Scotland, they may be executed on the same ground, without we will
take the notion of Kings in that large and vast capacity that the late deluded
and blinded Royalists have used it, That the King is a creature only of Gods
making, all other Magistrates being acknowledged to be the creature of the
people but only Kings, and they exempted from, and independent to any power but
only Gods. And if Lex be Rex, as Mr. Rutherford proves at large, and Kings are
under and subject to Laws, why should we suppose them above punishment, when
they are found the highest Transgressors of those Laws? Grant them all that
diety the Scripture invests them with, yet when they come to dye, it is as
other men, it may be for the same offenses, as well as in the same condition of
nature; yea, it is against Reason and Nature (though through usu ped custom it
has got some credit) that all Magistrates should be liable to punishment, in
case of mal-administration of th ir office, and only that one order excepted.

But to come nigher home, and consider what our first Arguments and
Distinctions were of making a War against the King, and the same will hold for
sharpening the Sword now, and cutting more keenly, and closer to the root.

The Royalists always told us, we sinned in fighting against the Lords
anointed, and took up Arms against that power which God had made sacred, and so
called us Rebels against Gods Ordinances; we then in both Nations found out a
distinction (which doubtless was proper and rational enough) of a politic and
a personal capacity of the King, the one never dyed, and was in the supreme
Judicature, the Parliament, though the person was absent, who was but a
public Officer of that power; and therefore answered, We fought not against
his legal capacity, but his personal, commanding and acting those things which
were contrary to Law, and the good of the Kingdoms. Let us but improve this
distinction to what is done in the execution of the late King. If there may be
a separation between the King and his Power and Office, and so he may be fought
against, and all weapons of death taken up to oppose him, why is it more
unlawful to separate his Head from his Body by the same distinction? F^r what
is his Person, when you abstract his Power? or where will you find it but among
the common rabble of mankind? Let Charles Stuart be considered without his
public capacity and what will become of then name King? All the while you
fight against his personal capacity, which is but as Charles Stuart, you fight
against but an ordinary and common man; for it is the (...) fear of him with
such an office that ma^es him in more then (...) ^^in^ry condition. The same
Objecti^ns of the Royal (...) will prove (...) be as ^o^e^ (...) up (...) him,
as taking away his life for the same, and farther reasons: for they rightly
say, as you cannot consider Kingly power without a person in whom it is
invested, but in a metaphisicall abstraction, so neither can you act against
the person, without considering of him as one without the power, and so as a
private man: if our Brethren can maintain the first, and hold it lawful upon
ill government or tyranny to separate the person, and the office, we shall
easily maintain the last, when he is publicly divested of all, and reduced to
a common condition, to use him as an ordinary person in case of felony and
treason: for his public capacity was at Westminster, when his person was at
Oxford, when we besieged him, and fought against him, so the same capacity was
at Westminster, when his body was on the Scaffold at White Hall, paying unto
Justice for his mis-government, and tyranny; and we beheaded him as a Tyrant
not as a King.

Let our brethren find out some new distinctions, or else we are as far from
being murderers, as they from being Traitors and Rebels, which are much of
kin together.

But farther as it is unquestionably lawful on serious, and real grounds to
depose, and do justice on Kings, and Princes as other Magistrates, so never was
there a greater, and more universal concurrence of all reasons and
circumstances, and a greater harmony of the Laws of nature, reason, prudence,
and necessity to warrant any Act, then was found, and may be discerned in that
Act of Justice on the late King, it will be too large to repeat, let us only
rub up our memory, and wipe our eyes, and we may soon glance at that which may
easily satisfy us.

First, Let us but consider the beginning of the actions and tyranny of that
person in Scotland, the inhumane promotion of that bloody massacre in Ireland,
which unto this day cannot choose but make a trembling in the souls and bodies
of any tender heart, which the Scots themselves freely charge him with in the
beginning of their Declaration, the gross, and sad oppressions in England both
in conscience, and the estates of most of this poor Nation, sadly being since
set forth, that the Parliament of both Nations in the most mature, and serious
Counsels thought no way fit to remedy the three Nations, but to assist one
another in Arms against him, who had left the protection of his people,
withdrew from his Parliament, and like a Butcher rather then a Prince of
bowels and affection raises Armies in every part of the Nation, of the most
desperate Malignant, and Popish spirits, to destroy and ruin the Parliaments
of both Nations, and after a seven years war with the expense of an unspeakable
treasure of riches and blood, the most precious blood of thousands of
Protestants, yea Saints, God having given us victory over his Armies and
Forces, as a just determination of the cause we appealed to him to vindicate;
yet as a man of blood, while all essaies and meanswere using for peace, by his
instrument and commissions, raises a second war in both Nations, as if the
Nation had not drunk deep enough of that sad cup, and without any remorse,
gives new Commission to Ormond to be sure to make peace with the Irish Rebels
on any terms and conditions, though not one Proposition for the good of this
Nation could be heartily consented unto by him; and yet because we would try
all means, followed him up and down with Propositions, sending Commissioners
sometimes two hundred miles, sometimes a hundred, all to beg his assent to what
we had fought for, crouching and cringing as if we were still his slaves, and
he had regained his negative vote by our victories; and yet no one
Propositition of any concernment after all reiterated essaies, that might
secure us in our liberties, or Religion granted, but apparently found all the
ways used for to gain him, were turned into designs of dangerous consequence
against this Nation especially: neither in his most retired and solitary
condition, could any perceive the least sense of remorse from him, for all the
blood shed in the three Nations, delighting commonly in private to discourse of
the wars, and how many were slain, and laughing at every fatal expression,
which every Christian heart can never sensibly enough lament, and yet this man
must be untouched, and all the blood as utterly forgotten, as it was freely and
violently spilt on the ground, and thought sufficiently satisfied for, if he
would but set his hand to a few Propositions, though loathing it in his heart:
and the same things we proposed in the beginning of the war, and yet we could
not obtain that favor from him, freely, and with sense to grant those just
desires we had got by the blood of our friends, and the overthrow of all his
Armies. Let the Committee of Estates speak from their consciences, and hearken
to the secret whisperings of their own spirits, and tell us plainly, whether
ever there was any hope of ever settling Reformation, and liberty by that
person, whether such crimes found in any one person on earth, were not
meritorious of the utmost punishment; or whether divine Justice, and vengeance
would not have followed this Nation, had we spared that persons life, with the
careless oblivion of all that innocent blood shed merely by his Commission,
and for his will; and doubtless had not God raised up the spirits of a remnant
to do Justice in so public, and glorious a manner, and so have prevented
Gods judgment on us, the cry of blood was so loud in Gods ears, that God would
stretch forth some immediate hand and have done it himself, with terror and
amazement to all the Nations. And had there been any probable hope of better
things from him, yet the good that we should have got by him, would be nothing
to the weight of blood that would lie on this Nation unsatisfied for to procure
judgments: But what hope was there, was his constitution or affections either
to Episcopacy or Malignancy, altered or abated; had he any lower thought of
himself and Prerogative, was not the Queen as nearly related to him as ever,
did he not as much hate the Covenant as ever, did he want any thing but power,
and opportunity to react his old principles? Let us not trifle in these serious
concernments; political complements will not save Kingdoms, the blood-thirsty
man shall not live out half his days, says holy Writ, neither is it murder,
(...) execute the murderer, but reason, and justice, there is no reason in
nature or divinity, that tells us, that Kings are of such pure and refined
flesh, that they must in no cause be let blood: what has been done by the
Parliament of England on that man of blood, Heaven, and Earth has and will
witness unto, and we doubt not now justice is done (though it should be but
from a raised zeal as Phineas act was, yet the person being the deserving
subject of it) the plague shall be staid.

And yet however we have all this reason and necessity for that Act, with many
eminent providence of God to show concurring with, and following it, yet we
free our Brethren from the guilt of the blood, and wish heartily that they may
be as free from the consequences of their politic compliances with the late
King and his Son, as we are before God of the crime and fault of that
honorably memorable Act; they have (if they would speak out) more reason to
thank these instruments then charge them who have cut off the visible root of
their and our miseries, which neither they nor we know how to make a good use
of, and be true to our Covenant and consciences; but though the root be cut
down as rotten, they intend to preserve the most natural branch to graffe on
the old stock of Malignancy, that what the one could not do, the other may if
possible, effect.

But let things be but accounted right, was it not better to do an Act of
Justice at once, in taking away the Kings life, then to have left him dead
while he lived, and to have crucified him all days of his life with Papers and
Pamphlets, with reproaches and continual representations of his unworthy and
bloody actions, and to have wished the same end? yea, only to have let him
live to see his misery, and to have beheld those actings, which he accounted as
the greatest and highest affronts, and worse then death; it would be a great
controversy to determine whether the King thought his imprisonment and
restraint more infamous and cruel, or his death: if in the first, the hope of
an opportunity of revenge did not refresh and comfort him, certainly it must
needs be more honest and just before God and man, for wicked and notorious acts
to cut him off from his Kingdom, then by degrees to complement him out of it,
and let him live to see it; in the one shines justice, in the other baseness
and deceit: Had he reigned with all the qualifications and limitations we could
for the present have put on his Government, we had been ruined, and had he not
reigned, we had let him see his best self dead as a King before he died as a
man, which is a double death, and so had as it were strangled him, a more
ignoble death then beheading. The Committee of Estates might well remember on
whom both their Kirk and State, and our Parliament did often on more then
shrewd suppositions, lay the death of King James, the loss of Rochell, etc.
and with one voice, ye at the last personal Treaty in the Isle of Wight, did
law the whole weight and charge of all the blood spilt in the three Nations
directly on the Kings head, and either it must lie on him or both Nations; and
was it fit in conscience that such a head should stand on his body, which was
full of so much innocent blood? let justice and reason blush, and Traitors and
Murderers, Parricides and Patricides put on white garments, and rejoice as
innocent ones, if this man should escape the hands of justice and punishment:
Yea, let Montrosse himself, whom the Kirk calls a monster of men, a child of
the Devil, clap hands, and be canonized for a Saint, who rid but post, as it
were, (and for a little time) through Scotland, destroying and murdering, in
comparison of the late Charles Stuart, who has been the maine and only cause
of the death of thousands, shall I say, millions of men ever since his reign
in England Scotland, France and Ireland, Nature, Reason, Religion, did cry loud
for vengeance, and I had almost said, and I may speak it without passion, God
himself had eclipsed, yea, lost the brightest beam of his divine justice that
ever shined on this lower world, if he had not some way or other brought that
person to some eminent and preternaturall punishment, and that way which God
acted by was the most eminent and glorious: But enough of this, they are
satisfied, and so are we, and if honest and just actings now follow, we shall
never have cause to repent of that act.

The last thing he taxes them withal, is that they have declared his Son King
with proviso's, robbing him of all right, etc. I shall say little against the
justness of that proceeding, if they will have a King they had need provide
first for themselves, yet there is much which may be objected, and to speak
truth, as what ever they may expect from their new King will be but out of
design granted, and until he get the Kingdom, so their actings seem to be
but a bespeaking of a refusal, and though the things they propound be never so
necessary and just, yet he has his negative voice and power to deny them, and
yet be their King notwithstanding. It had been a more fair way and less
subject to misprision of deceit, to have sent their conditions first, e're they
proclaimed him King, and so to have let him know he injoyes not the Kingdom by
succession, but by election, and compact on such conditions, rather then first
to declare him King, give him full right, and then put conditions without which
he must not expect to be King; that his Kingly right and power is involved in
their conditions, not in any natural right of succession or heirship, and as
much as to tell him plainly, you have no right nor title to the Kingdom of
Scotland without you grant these terms which we think^^, and though we have
proclaimed you King, will not own you as a King, but really and implicitly
depose you, and so found your power only in election and these qualifications,
which had they expressed, they laid down the right and true grounds of all power
in Kings and other Magistrates which flows immediately from the people, and
that mutual compact and agreement that is between them, without which they are
but Usurpers and Tyrants; and this is virtually and truly the construction of
their carriage to the King, though very commendable and laudable, and if they
have a King that will not heartily comply with them in their own just desires,
they may think upon a second defensive war in Scotland; yet it is a hard case,
that they must travel up and down on the will of a young Malignant, to beg
confirmation of Propositions absolutely necessary for their own safety, and the
estate, and wisdom, and Religion of a whole Nation hang on the placet of a
creature of their own making. They may have time to see, and feel yet, what a
snare they are brought into by that one sudden act of proclaiming him King:
For, notwithstanding he should grant all their desires for the present, and
come in as their King, and royallize it among them; and they as they express
it p. 20. should embrace him on these terms, do they imagine whom they lay in
their bosom? the Son of a bloody Father, Heir to an entailed curse, more
certain then to his Kingdom; trained up himself in blood all his days, one
that is set up to follow on where his Father left off; one that never sucked in
any other principles, but prerogative, and tyranny, bred up under Bishops and
Ceremonies, which the air of Scotland seems to have a natural antipathy unto;
one whom they themselves see is far off from hearkening to any sound counsel
or advice but of those whom both Kingdoms have proclaimed Traitors; who hates
the Covenant, and can never take it, but to take them in their own share. Alas,
who knows the consequence? who, as soon as they receive him must set him on
horseback, and engage against their Brethren of England, who have helped and
succored them in their distress, and fight the old quarrel only in the name
of Charles the second. My pen trembles to write; and do not the hearts of the
Committee of Estates, and the godly party in Scotland shake, for fear he may
seal, and sign to these Propositions? Let him have an Army, he will soon be
General, and once a horseback, his young head will carry him far enough. Alas!
to see Bishops and Ceremonies in Scotland again, to behold the old Malignants
triumphing on the ruins of the Kirk, what a doleful story would that be! Does
not every godly eye foresee this in the dawnings of the day? Has Chaales
Stuart learnt so much goodness and honesty, to forsake all his Fathers best
Friends, to be quite out of correspondency, and affections to his Mother, and
Cosins the Popish and Malignant Party in all the three Nations, only to betake
himself to live under the good and wholesome Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland?
Or can it possibly be conceived, that they should entertain him without his
train, either at present, or suddenly to follow after him? Ah poor Scotland,
once the terror to Episcopacy and Malignancy, the first promoters of
Reformation; and art thou at last feign to take the grand Enemy of Church and
State into thy bosom, and do beg but to enjoy him? Art forced to seek thy
peace in thy enemies quarters? God forbid: these sighs will be aggravated in
honest hearts, if ever such a change should come to pass. Do not they know
that God will visit the sins of the fathers on their children, especially the
sins of those parents which have been persecutors of the Church, and hinderers
of reformation, and have unnaturally spilt the blood of Saints; and most
especially when the children have likewise been accessories and actors in the
same design? How sad is it, that when God is dethroning Kings, and casting
shame upon Princes as the great enemies of his Church, Scotland should be
setting them up, and him that never had yet his face toward Sion. This story
is too sad to be long insisted on. And therefore on the other side, if he
should deny to grant these their desires, or pick, and choose, and propose
terms of his own, as his Father did with both Kingdoms formerly, what a snare
will yet lie on them, that they should not let their King reign, without
prostrating his Conscence and Honor (as he thinks) unto their desires? And may
not Montrosse justly tax them with proclaiming him King with Provisoes, etc?
And whereas they may say, they have given him right ad rem to the Kingdom, but
not in re to the lawful and actual exercise of his Power, it will not serve the
turn; for it is as good never proclaim him King, as not let him reign; yea to
proclaim him King, and deny him the exercise of his Kingly Power, is clearly to
depose him before he comes to reign, deposing being nothing else but excluding
Kings from the exercise of that power they were formerly invested with: And let
the world judge who deals more heartily with the King, the Parliament of
England, or the Committee of Estates; the one tells him plainly, He has no
Right, but what he gets by the Sword; and the other proclaims his Right, and
will not let him exercise it, without either he give them their own terms, or
conquer them. Kings use not to pass by such courtesies, they take deeper
impression then most imagine; he that is not worthy, nor fit to exercise his
office, it is pity he should have the name; neither do Kings love to have their
pictures drawing when they are dying. Our Brethren are yet treating with the
old Enemy, and must pump what they can from his will and pleasure, with
continual hazard, while we are trying how to propagate our Liberties and
Advantages to the utmost, and under a full sail of Providence: We might have
been all this while treating, and have given as much time to our Enemies to
plot, as we to settle; but God will countenance and prosper the most sincere
and plain honest dealings; and if we perish, (which would be more sad
otherwise) yet it is in doing our duty, and as seeds of a more glorious Church
and Commonwealth.

There is one thing more in the conclusion of this Declaration, wherein they
say, That they hope there is none in that Land, or if any be found so base,
foolish, and treacherous, as to harken to the vain promises of James Graham,
etc. they do declare all such as join with him, or his Adherents, in Arms, to
be guilty of high Treason, etc.

But what if their King join with him? he is truly proclaimed a Traitor: Nay,
what if the King gave him that Commission to be Lieut. Governor, and Capt.
General for his Majesty, etc. which Paper expressing this Commission, they say,
page 11. They have burnt by the common hangman at the Cross at Edinburgh: And
have they not then burnt the Kings Commission? and in an idem, and
representation, held forth what they mean to do with his person, if he prove
the Author of the Commission, and be found to join with Montrosse. Its
accounted in the Civil Law, and I think in the Laws of England, That what is
done to the picture, or public representation of a person, is much more done
to the person it self: for if they vent their malice to the dead image, much
more would they to the living person: The image and portraiture of Kings are
not seen in the lineaments of their faces or bodies, drawn by the mixture of
colors, and the fancy of a painter, but in their public Representations, in
their Commissions and Grants, wherein they appear in their office; for else as
fair and authentic, grave and majestique faces may be drawn better to
represent nature, then in the best of them.

But all these things, formerly excepted against, are but mistakes, and
politic Evasions by the Committee of Estates: Let us now consider (waving all
personal and particular Engagements, (and supposing an error in our
Proceedings) and seriously consider together what may unite us, or rather
recover the fence of our Union, and reciprocal Concernments: We are not
conscious of ever sinning, or transgressing against the Privileges of
Scotland, (though we are loath to repeat their Actions in England, and
concerning it,) if we have offended or done any thing against their real
Privileges, we shall humbly acknowledge it with great sense; and wherein the
Union has been broken on our side, shall endeavor to make it up with
satisfaction: but if our Brethren think that the King will unite more then the
Covenant, we are sorry we must not only dissent, but differ: There is no means
left to preserve these two Nations in the eye of Reason, but their Union
together in common principles, (waving the particular miscarriages of both
Nations: And how ever we may imagine, and make a fancy of Sectaries, equally to
be opposed with Malignants, we shall find, and they, with a witness, that the
one is possible, and easily curable, by a strict Conjunction with the honest
and prevailing party, the other engaged against both.

There is no difference between our Brethren and us of moment, but about Kingly
Government, and the persons which must reign, against which we have upon just
Reasons protested; and it will be hard for them to bear the single burden of
that Monarchy, which expects to be maintained by the three Nations.

And though we dare not dishonor our Cause and Nation, to beg a Union, and
their Correspondence, (which yet will be both honorable and safe to both
Nations,) and scorn to stoop the grandeur of this Commonwealth so much as to
entreat them into the consideration of their own condition, as they do
mechanically follow their and our Enemy (called their King;) yet we shall be
glad to renew any ways of amity and affableness with that Nation, and shall
account it a high and special favor from Heaven, if he give us wisdom to join
our Interest together, in the preservation of the true and right ends of the
Covenant, which will else be forgotten among us, and to settle Religion against
these which may be truly called Sectaries, and Government contrary to
Episcopacy, and most proper for Reformation, in the settling of an able and
powerful Ministry, and purging Congregations: In a word, the countenancing all
the ways of godliness, which we have an happy opportunity now to effect, the
principle Obstante removed out of the way (upon whose voice we put the
determination of the welfare both of Church and State;) and if our dissenting
Brethren in England, and those in Scotland, would but lay aside private and
special Interests, and mind the public, and take advantages of Providence,
how soon might they have both Kirk and State reformed, even unto the utmost
period of all desires: If there be any defect in setting up Presbyterial
Government, in taking care for the Ministry, I wish it may not prove to lie on
the Ministers themselves, who, out of Principles of Royalty, or private
Engagements do not only withdraw from, but speak against this present
Government, and the righteous Constitution of it. But if our Brethren will wave
the Covenant, and make the King the medium of our union, we have done our duty.
Let the Issue be tried, we shall venture on the same Providence, maintain the
same Cause, however the change be in persons and spirits: Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine and Discipline, Civil Liberties, a universal Propagation
of the Gospel being our end. Let them see if K. Charles be the fit Instrument to
effect these honest things. If the Parlia. of England follow not the most
adequate and best means to that end, viz. of the setting up pure Religion, and
just Liberties, after all the Mercies they have enjoyed from Heaven; and if the
Kingdom of Scotland join not with them on these Grounds, waving all other
considerations, they will both be Anathema Maranatha: And if Reason and
Religion cannot decide the Controversy between Brethren, the Sword will never
do it, especially when enemies shall manage it, but endanger the ruin of both.
If our Brethren will not harken to terms of Peace and Love, but, besides their
own danger and hazard, will embrace the Enemy of this Commonwealth, not only
to sojourn, but reign among them, they must give us leave to secure Religion
and Liberty as well as we can, and once more leave it to Providence to umpire:
Only it will be sad, that while we are trifling about names, and punctilioes of
things, our common Enemy should grow strong, and destroy us. I have nothing
else to add, but to retire my self into my Closet, and bewail the Divisions of
both Nations about Ceremonies and Shadows, while their and our Enemies laugh
and design; and to lament for our ignorance, who think that a Malignant King
can be brought in to reign without a Malignant Interest, and that we should be
all the days of our lives pruning the branches, and cutting them off, and yet
be strengthening and fatning the root of our miseries. I end with prayer to the
Almighty, That both Nations may have a true sense of the Glorious Actings of
God these last years, and may know the true and proper Interest of Religion and
Liberty, and both unite once more in common Principles, That the good Work of
Reformation so blessedly begun, notwithstanding the Malignant Parties in the
three Nations, may receive no obstruction in its perfection by these that
profess to intend the growth and glory of it, that while we are striving who
shall have the Shell, Prelacy and Malignancy may not get the Kernel, and
recover their lost Interests by our private and particular Discontents.

FINIS.

