Heaven and Earth, Sea and dry Land, hear the Word of the Lord, sounded through
an Earthen Vessel; who has seen, heard, felt, as he does declare.
I Have seen Ariel, the City of Abominations, cast as a stone into the midst of
the Sea, without remedy, without recovery. Amen Hallelujah, Glory, Glory for
ever to the Lamb; whose is the Dominion over all for ever and ever. Sing and
rejoice ye Lambs, and little Ones, whose glory, whose strength, whose
deliverance, is in, through, and from God alone; whose expectation is not from
the Hills and Mountains, but from God alone; sing, I say, and rejoice and shout
for joy and gladness of heart, for God comes with thousands, and ten
thousands; nothing, nothing, nothing shall let the Deliverance; he will work on
your behalf within and without: Sing and rejoice ye single-hearted Ones, whom
nothing can satisfy but God alone, God alone to reign, rule in you, to be over
all the Earth, and none besides him; all flesh laid low, humbled, blown upon,
silenced, the glory of all flesh stained. Sing and rejoice ye little
single-hearted Ones; this shall be, and is the tendency, the plain tendency of
all these things, is to this; Fear you not, nor be discouraged, all ye that
thirst, breath after, long for this, and yet cannot see it, but are ready to
sink and faint, and be discouraged, by letting many things, appearances, enter
you; faint not, nor be discouraged, God is at hand in all these things, his
Hand in all is over all, and will break forth through all these Clouds of
darkness and confusion, to your joy and gladness, even to your exceeding joy
and gladness of heart; you simple single-hearted Ones, who seek the Lord God,
and not another, who seek, breath after the Exalting of God, and not another;
who breath and groan in the Singleness and Simplicity, and Uprightness of your
hearts, that all in you, and every where, that is contrary to God, may be
broken down, burnt up, slain, without reserve, for ever, and nothing else. And
groan, thirst after, breath after, pant for the day of God, to break forth in
Power and great Glory, for the relieving of the Creation, that groans to be
delivered, that if possible, all, even the worst of men may be saved, delivered
from the bondage of Corruption, and may come to know, feel, possess the
Liberty, the Freedom of the Sons and Daughters, the Redeemed of God, and may
know what they have been doing, are doing, and may do no more so.

O ye Single-hearted, who thirst after the Living God, whom nothing can
satisfy but God alone, his Will to be over all established, done in you; fear
you not, nor be not discouraged, nor drawn forth in this hour, but be still,
and wait, and be patient, and contented in the stillness of your minds, and
keep out of Appearances; for our God is at hand to execute the Vengeance
written; and your deliverance upon all accounts, lingers not, is the Word of
the Lord God to all the Upright-hearted upon the face of the whole Earth, more
especially to any that may be under trial, or deep temptations, inward or
outward, whose hearts are single and upright toward God, who love no Iniquity,
who wait, pant to be perfectly delivered from all for ever, whom nothing less
can satisfy, than to be free indeed, and there abide for ever; even to be
freed from all Deceit and Violence, delivered from all evil, and every
appearance thereof, for ever, is your desire and expectation, even that the
Will of God may perfectly take place in you, and abide in the Dominion over
all, for ever.

JOHN SUINTON.

POSTSCRIPT.
And O, how far from single Upright-heartedness is it, has it been to rejoice,
be glad at, watch for, the Divisions of Reuben, the Envyings of Ephraim and
Manassah? O that such may find a place of repentance, if possible, for dreadful
will be their Cup of Judgment and Desolation from the hand of the Lord. And
Israel shall be saved from all adversity, inward and outward. The Mouth of the
Lord of Hosts has spoken it: and all that wish her evil, shall be ashamed,
disappointed, and confounded. This is the Word of the Lord God, that shall
stand for ever, over the Heads of all the avowed and secret heart-Enemies of
Israel; She shall be built up, and not broken down. Therefore hear and fear,
and consider all ye Rebellious Ones, all ye treacherous deceitful Evil-Willers
of the People whom the Lord God has blessed, against whom no Enchantments shall
prosper, no Violence, no Deceit within or without. This I do declare in the
Name and Authority of the Living God, shall stand, is sealed, for ever, Amen
Hallelujah. Howl, howl ye Rebellious, tremble ye Hypocrites, be covered with
shame, confusion, disappointment, ye Envious Ones: for the Lord our God reigns,
and is over all for ever; and all the Sincere in heart shall see, understand,
rejoice in it, though many may be under mistakes at present: but as sincere,
mistakes seen, will not be justified, covered, but given up, confessed: and these
things God will in due time reveal. In the mean while, let patience and
forbearance be the place of all, to be exercised in tenderness and compassion
toward all, especially such as are in a measure of Sincerity, in whom Deceit
rules not, to wait upon such, and follow them in much meekness and compassion:
for to the Sincere in heart God will in due time reveal; God will not deny
himself; Light is sown for the Righteous and sincere Single-hearted, even
though for a time they may be under some mistakes in some things, yea, even in
many things sometimes. Therefore let none curse, whom the Lord has blessed; and
will bless for ever: but let patience, and forbearance, and tenderness,
compassion and readiness to forgive, and heal, and cover, bind up, be the place
of all.

Written at Franly in Chesshire the 27th of the 6th Month, 1664. J. S.


