SATISFACTION CONCERNING Mixed Communions: In Answer to the Doubts of some, who
abstain from the SACRAMENT OF The Lords Supper; BECAUSE Wicked persons are
present.

I Approve this Book, entitled Satisfaction concerning mixed Communions, as
sound in doctrine, and profitable in use for these times.

John Downame.



LONDON Printed by John Raworth for Samuel Gellibrand, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Brazen Serpent. 1643. July 8.

Satisfaction concerning Mixed COMMVNIONS.
BEfore I proceed to answer your Doubts, I must premise a word or two, that I
be not mistaken, and supposed to maintain that which I oppose. 1. I say not
that wicked persons ought to come. 2. Nor, that they ought not to be kept away:
For in this I agree with you, that they ought not to come (unfit) though they
might be admitted; neither ought they to be admitted (by those who have power
to keep them away) though they would dare to come. 3. But I say, their undue
coming, is no sufficient ground for me or you to keep away.

Again, I propose it to be well considered; That the Omission of an undoubted
Duty, is not excused by my mistake concerning some circumstances. And
therefore, the Celebration and Participation of the Lords Supper being
undeniably my Duty, which I may not decline (at least, constantly, or even for
any long time) without a just impediment: It is not a sufficient excuse for
Omission, that I think my self bound in Conscience to abstain, because of such
an Impediment, unless that Impediment be really sufficient. For it is not a
Supposed Impediment, but a Real Impediment, that will warrant my Omitting a
Duty commanded. Uzzah, no question, thought himself bound in Conscience to stay
the Ark, rather then to let it fall: But yet his thinking himself bound in
Conscience, did neither excuse the Action from being a Sin, nor the Person from
being Punished. The like must be said, in case a man should abstain from
Prayer, from Hearing, from Confes^ing his Sins to God, from Humiliation for
sins, from Sanctifying the Lords Day, or the like, because he thinks himself
bound in conscience not to do it (as suppose, he think himself bound in
Conscience not to hear such a Minister, whom he conceives to be a wicked man,
and therefore rather then hear him, he will never come to Church at all; or
that he think himself bound in Conscience not to Pray daily, but only as the
Spirit moves; that he ought not confess his Sins, or be humbled for them,
because he thinks there is no use of such Duties in the time of the Gospel; or
the like:) I say, his thinking himself bound in Conscience not to perform such
Duties, does not make these cease to be Duties, nor excuse his Omission of
them. For if my Conscience be in an Error in so judging, it is a Sin in me to
Omit the Duty, whether I think it so or no. Ignorantia juris non excusat;
Ignorance does not absolve from Duty. This I propose, because people are so
apt to be satisfied presently in abstaining from the Sacrament, if they can
say, They think themselves bound in Conscience not to come, (for such and such
reasons) as if they were then out of all danger of sinning in staying away, and
bound in Conscience so to do; And never consider in the mean time, that, if
their Conscience be in an Error, they sin notwithstanding. For it is not my
Opinion, (or what I think my self in Conscience bound to) but the Truth of the
thing, that makes an Action Lawful or Sinful. And therefore, though I think
my self bound in conscience to stay away, yet (if I think amiss) I sin in so
doing. This being premised, I proceed to answer your Doubts.

We may not, you say, Communicate at the Lords Table, with profane persons.
Your reasons. 1. They discern not the Lords Body. 2. Nor have right to it. 3.
It Is a Spiritual Banquet only for the Saints. 4. Christ said, It is not meet
to take the Childrens Bread and give it to Dogs. Answer. All this concludes
well, that Profane persons ought not to come; or if they do come, they ought
not to be admitted, by them that have power to keep them away; But it does not
prove, that another private person, in such a case, ought not to receive. They
discern not the Lords Body. What then? Therefore they ought not to come. True;
But ought not I to come neither? Must not I partake of the LORDS Table, because
another discerns not the Lords Body? They have no right to it. True; And
therefore ought not to intrude. We grant it. But because another has no right,
may not I challenge mine? It Is a Spiritual Banquet only for Saints. True; But
what follows? Therefore the wicked should be kept away. I grant it; But in case
I cannot keep Them away, must I stay away my self? It is not meet to give the
Childrens Bread to Dogs. True; (though doubtless Christ, when he spoke it,
never intended to restrain that speech to the case of receiving the Sacrament)
and therefore the Dogs ought to be kept away: But in case the Dogs be not shut
out of the room, but catch a piece, must the Children therefore leave their
Bread? If Dogs be suffered to snatch some of the Childrens Bread, yet the
Children must not leave their parts and run from the Table; much less forbear
to come to their meat, because there be some Dogs in the room who will catch a
part, or some will be given them. The Arguments conclude well, That profane
persons, if known, ought to be kept from it, by those that have authority:
Which if the people should have together (which I do not now dispute) yet
certainly, not every private man (or woman much less) alone. The sin of their
Admission is theirs, and only theirs, who have authority, if they know them
such; or theirs who can prove them such, and do not: which is hard to do,
though one be certain of it in his own mind: Even Authority must not censure
without just proof. This then is nothing to private persons; who are no
otherwise guilty of the neglect of Ecclesiastical Authority, omitting to
Censure, then they may be guilty of the neglect of Civil authority omitting to
Punish; and yet none hold themselves bound to depart out of Civil Society,
merely because some evil doers are not duly punished: No not a Justice of Peace
to go off the Bench, because some of his fellow-Justices are corrupt.

Besides, the business is first to worship God and Christ, and to remember and
show forth his Death. How dare I forbear this, when his Children are met to do
it, because some others thrust themselves in, who pretend to worship him too?
and join rather with me (though unwarrantably, in regard of their sinfulness)
then I with them. Mark this difference, it is very material. You say, and say
truly, That the Sacrament is a spiritual Banquet only for Saints, that is,
Christ will only bid them welcome. I say it also. And the Saints honoring of
Christ so at the time appointed, I and you (as Saints) are called by Christ,
and cannot answer it, if we come not, not having some outward hinderance, and
that more then supposed too. It is our Business, our Homage, our Banquet; If
now others, that have no right to it, thrust in (as Satan among the sons of
God, Job 1. and 2 who did not therefore run away) they join with me, I join not
with them. I desire not their company, (as such) I approve of none of their
sins, nor join in any of them. If S. Paul, though it were against himself,
rejoiced that Christ was preached; not that it was not sin in them to do it out
of envy and strife, supposing to add affliction to his Bonds: So, that God is
worshipped, is a matter of joy, though their failings, which do it amiss, be
sinful. There is some Honor to Christ in the public profession of his Death,
by those who yet sin grievously in the manner of performance; yea what greater
sin, then to malice the Apostle in Bonds for the Gospel? If then they outwardly
profess Christ, though not to their own good, yet is it so much comfort at
least, that they bear outward witness, that Christ's servants must do as we do;
and so pretending (though falsely, to their own hurt only) themselves to be
such, and come to do so too, these join with me then, not I with them; they
profess to join in that true Service to God that I perform; I do not profess
(but disclaim) to join in that sinfulness which they bring. They should not do
it, if I had authority: Now I can but be sorry for them, and pray.

But you offer to prove, that these persons do defile the Communion of Saints.
1. By the example of Achan. 2. That Ordinance is a joint act, We being many are
one Bread, 1 Cor. 10.17. 3. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor.
5.6, 11. 4. And all Scriptures are written for our learning, and example. This
last is true, but we must look for right understanding.

1. Therefore I answer to the first. 1. Achans sin was secret. If you will have
it parallelled; it makes Hypocrites to defile as well as profane, and then you
can never be secure that we may come to the Sacrament, for there may be a
secret Achan, to defile all. 2. It was a singular case of which God had
forewarned, Josh. 6. with threatening; Joshua and the governors should have
searched all places and tents, which they did not. 3. And every man we know is
liable to Judgments for the offense of Governors, or their neglect to search
out offenders. 4. Yet for all that, not every man guilty of sin. God may and
does punish temporally, upon the occasion of others Sins (as Israel for David's
numbering the people, of which they were not guilty) because every one has sin
in himself, which is the rooted cause, though not the Occasion. 5. But God
never punishes spiritually for another sin; therefore it is quite contrary to
the Inference. A Civil Body may be politikely guilty by one (as in War, by
one breaking a Truce) but in the conscience, thousands cannot defile one, no
where, and least of all in the Ordinances of God; which is my Sanctuary, and so
every faithful man's.

2. For the place, 1 Cor. 10.17. You both mistake the sense, and stretch it too
far however. If my communicating with a profane person make me spiritually one
body with him, then either he becomes a true member of Christ's Body, or else I
cease to be a true member, and become a member or limb of Satan, as he is yet.
The former, I am sure, you will not hold; nor yet the latter, because such an
act, how sinful soever you suppose it to be, nor any act indeed, nor acts, nor
any thing else, cannot make a true member of Christ to become a limb of Satan.

Besides, if his guilt defile me, it is either in the nature of the sin, and
then even secret guilt would defile, and so there would be (as I said before)
no security: or because I consent to it, which I do not; or at least, consent
that he should come to the Sacrament, which I do not neither. I may not
forbear, because God calls me as his servant, so to honor him and his Son, and
to benefit my soul. If I be sorry any that thrusts in is not prepared, I can do
no more, nor did God ever bid any leave his Ordinances for the presence or
intrusion of a sinner.

But I have not yet told you the meaning of the place you appeal to. The phrase
of being one bread is obscure, and I know not whether I can give a right reason
why it is used, not finding it neither cleared by Expositors: But the sense is,
That all true Christians partaking together of the Sacrament, are one Body with
Christ, and so one with another, of which their partaking of one Bread is a
pledge. Hypocrites may partake outwardly, and so profane.; but the sentence
concerns not them, more then to tell them what they lose while they pretend to
partake of it: But even the outward partaking binds them, and all true
partakers much more, not to partake of Satan's sacrifices, verse. 20. And this
is all the Apostles drift in these words, and not to signify any Spiritual
Conjuction with all that partake of that Sacrament outwardly.

3. Your third place, 1 Cor. 5. seems most to your scope, yet comes not home to
it. The words you mention verse 6. A little leaven, leaveneth the whole lump,
is a proverbiall speech, and figurative, and so must not be strained beyond
their scope; That was to show the necessity of the incestuous (and such like
persons) excommunication, because of the danger of infection by example (as one
root of bitterness springing up, endangers to defile many, Heb. 12.15.) even
of the whole multitude, who are apt to follow the same, or the like
wickedness. ( Grex totus in agro, Unius scabie pcrit, and porrigine porci;
Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva. Horat.) not that every one would be
infected, much less that every one was already guilty by his sin, even before
infection, but because there was danger of infection, in case he were not
punished: As that, 1 Cor. 15. Evil communication corrupts good manners, does
not show what will certainly be, but what there is danger of; yet this
suffices that it should be put away: So here. More then this it cannot
signify (unless you would also interpret it, of making the whole Church
liable to some outward judgment; but that will scarce agree to the Metaphor,
and however not reach to your supposall.)

You point also to verse 11. where the faithful are forbidden so much as to
eat with a scandalous brother: whence you would infer (as some do) Much less
at the Lords Table. I answer; There can be no such consequence drawn thence:
For first, the Apostle forbids not all converse with all heathens, because then
they must go out of the world: So I say; not all Sacramental communion with
every wicked brother, because then they must go out of the Church, and join
with no Church in the world after a while, but make separation upon separation,
and so no Communion of Saints, or participation of Sacraments at all; as
experience has showed more then once, and more would, if the Separatists had
public liberty and room; or else they would renounce their own Principles in
many cases of practice, as in the Low Countries of late, and at this day. But
secondly, As in the case of Natural or Civil necessity they might eat with
such. As if of the same Family, if together in a Ship, or in an Inn (where the
diet is common, as in many other Countries) a faithful person was not bound to
fast because of them. So for Spiritual necessity; You are not bound to sast
from your Spiritual food because of them, and leave off all, or forbear the
public serving and honoring of God which he calls you to in the Sacrament.
They might fight together as Soldiers, work together as servants, lodge
together, if husband and wife, be friendly, if brothers and sisters, or
kindred: But not unnecessarily show friendship, or entertain familiarity with
those that they were no otherwise bound to, then by the bonds of Christianity,
they behaving not themselves as Christians. So then, all that can be gathered
hence toward the Sacrament, is, That those who have Authority, should not admit
such; so verse. 5. and 13. But this (I say everlastingly) it is impossible every
private man should have alone. Christ bids such only tell the Church; and if
they that offend hear not the Church, repute them as heathens, withdraw as much
as may be (and as the Church directs) from them: But he says not, If the
Church hears not you, count it Paganish or profane; much less, Forbear to
worship me, or come to my Sacrament, as defiled or profaned by their presence:
which certainly is a matter of so great importance, as that there need be a
clear and peremptory command to secure a conscience refraining, or else they
will have but small thanks one day from Christ.

Arguments against this Opinion of the unlawfulness of Mixed Communions.
On the contrary, see briefly what may further be said against this conceit:

First, It is certain Christ admitted Judas to the Passover: And S. Luke,
Chap. 22.21. telling us of Christ's warning of Judas his Treason, The hand of
him that betrays me, is with me on the Table, immediately after the
Institution of the Sacrament, bids me believe he received the Lords Supper
also. However, it is all one for the Passover; Christ knowing him, and as man
(for he designed him to John, as he had also told of him generally before) yet
he sends him not out before he had eaten and communicated with them in this
Sacrament, and none of his disciples say, Master, Thou have told us a Satan is
amongst us, a Traitor, send him out, else he will defile us. To know that there
is such an one certainly, is all one in sense and effect, as to know who he is,
for that matter. Say, Would you not startle (upon your grounds) if one should
tell you, I know certainly that one of your company that is coming to the
Sacrament with you is an adulterer, or a whore, and lives in such wickedness,
could you choose but forbear? But so did not the disciples.

Secondly, It is no less certain there were great offenders at this time, in
the Church of Corinth; some that made themselves drunk at their Love Feasts, at
the Sacrament, Chap. 11. some that even denied the Resurrection, Chap. 15. and
sundry others grievous offenders, 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. Yet are they still a
Church, though these uncast out, and he no where blames for coming to the Lords
Table because of them, no not in that fifth Chapter which you mention.

Thirdly, No such word of forbearing for another sake, when he speaks of right
receiving, chapter 11.

Fourthly, He bids examine themselves every one (not others) and so bids every
one come.

Fifthly, He says the unworthy Communicant eats and drinks damnation (or
judgment) to himself, not to others. Weigh these things well in the fear of
God (as I trust you will) and then I trust you will see that God never meant to
debar his servants from their comfort in his Ordinances, nor excuse them from
his service, for others faults. Every one (in this sense) must bear his own
burden, Gal. 6.5.

Sixthly, Add hereunto, That whereas to the just debarring of any one from the
Sacrament, there must go a great deal of examination often times about the
fact, and whether the party be indeed guilty; of some there is a great and
strong suspicion: It were a very torture to consciences, to think, That
another wickedness, which according to the news that is brought them, is
certain, or near it, should debar from Gods Ordinances, and yet there is not
sufficient proof to convince such, or a neglect in others to cast him out. So
one, or some few, shall sin, and another shall be punished, and that
spiritually, deprived of the Sacrament, and (if I may so say with reverence)
God is punished by it, and Christ wants that honor his servants should give
him in coming to his Table.

Seventhly, Divines use to give three Rules to judge of Doctrines;The Glory of
God, The humbling of man, and The Comforting of poor souls: If these stand for
good ways of trial, the judgment will be on my side. First, it is for Gods
glory, that I come to worship him, and that others faults should not keep me
from performing my homage. 2. It is also for the humbling of man, when his
goodness or illness makes the Ordinances of God no more, nor no less
effectual to others. We abhor the Popish Doctrine, That the Ministers
intention is necessary to the Sacrament for the Peoples right Receiving; and
that if he wickedly have no intention to consecrate it, let him speak never so
well in words of prayer, etc. it is no Sacrament. This Opinion of yours is but
too near it; That even a private wicked man's formerly showed wicked mind,
though he behave himself outwardly never so well at the Sacrament, now defiles
it to other Receivers. 3. It is greatly to my comfort, that another sin cannot
hinder me of that pledge of my Spiritual Union with Christ. I remember I have
heard some malicious people threaten, To keep others from the Sacrament,
because themselves would refuse reconciliation. But I have taught such, that
their wickedness did not reach so far; and that if the comers did seek
reconciliation, and offer satisfaction when it is fit, they should be welcome.
It were lamentable else, and I might be kept back from the Sacrament all my
life when it were administered, and I called to it by the Church, to whom yet
perhaps I cannot prove the others malice if they deny it; when yet as soon as
they and I were alone, they will say the same to me again, and so both vent and
conceal their malice. If their wickedness thus known defile, woe is me to be
Spiritually defiled, and deprived of the Sacrament without my fault. If a whole
town were Traitors, a King that knows one to bear him a loyal heart, would
accept him, notwithstanding the enmity of all the rest: And shall one Traitor,
joning in an outward act of homage, make all a company of loyal subjects
offenders even in doing their homage* It cannot be. Being known a Traitor, he
should now be thrust out of loyal subjects company* I will rather have none of
you come at all, then that one Traitor come among you: Which (as I touched
before) Christ our King is so far from saying, that he admitted a Traitor to
the like, to the same homage, when he first ordained it. In sum then, Christ
having required the performance of such a service, not only as a means for our
own good and comfort, but also as a duty of homage to him, to show forth his
death till he come, we may not dare omit this service, this homage, in such
cases as wherein we have not a clear dispensation from God for not performing
it; which dispensation can never be shown by any private person, in case only
that those who have power shall neglect to keep back some unworthy COMMUNICANT.

FINIS.

