Prometheus Christianus: OR, A TREATISE Showing the FOLLY and VANITY of
ATHEISM, AND Containing the Solution of the main Arguments of the SOCINIANS,
the ARRIANS, the DEISTS, and other Unitarians, which have a direct and
immediate Tendency to the Utter Ruin and Subversion of the very Foundation of
Christianity.

Whereunto is annexed, The Refutation of some Dogmatical Points of a Modern
Author relating to the TRINITY.

By JOHN SAVVAGE, Gent.

LONDON Printed, and are to be Sold by Rich. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
FInding the Innumerable number of Heterodoxical and Profane Errors which in
these dissolute Times make the Novellists to Swarm with the frequent new
Accesses of their Proselytes, I deemed it expedient to Propose the Grounds of
their several Errors, and so to Refute them, which here I undertake.

THE CONTENTS.
SECT. I. Showing the Nullity and Vanity of the Atheists, Page 1 SECT. II. The
Main Objection of the Heterodox Unitarians is fully proposed and solved by the
Orthodox Trinitarians. p. 5 SECT. III. A farther Attempt of the same
Adversaries is proposed and solved, p. 11 SECT. IV. The Objections against
Circumincision solved, p. 13 SECT. V. Wherein the rest of the Unitarian's
Arguments are proposed and solved, p. 16 SECT. VI. Certain Absolete Opinions of
another Author are proposed and solved, p. 19 SECT. VII. Two other Opinions of
the same Author are proposed and solved, p. 23.
Prometheus Christianus: OR, A TREATISE Showing the FOLLY and VANITY OF ATHEISM.
SECT. I. Showing the Nullity and Vanity of the Atheists.
THIS Profane and Pernicious Error has drawn many a Soul to their utter Ruin
and Perdition; for their Position is, That there is no Supreme Deity nor
Godhead existent, to govern and regulate the Natural and Moral Transactions of
this Universe.

The Grounds of their Doctrine are settled upon their insatiable Avidity to
satisfy the Suggestion of their Sensual Appetite, not invoking the least
Dictamen of Reason to their support and conduct. Hence they let the Reins loose
to all Lasciviousness, Delight, and Pleasure that Sense can dictate to them.

To convince these Miscreants of their dull and stupid Error, I must first
desire them to take a survey of the admirable Products and stupendous Variety
of this inferior Orb. Let them consider, that there can be no Effect without a
Cause; and, where will they find a Cause that is empowered to produce such
variety of Creatures as do embellish the Globe of the Earth with such due
Subordination, Stability, and Natural Instinct, for the preservation and
propagation of each Species in their kind? Let them consider, that there is no
created Power that has any Proportion to be is no created Power that has any
Proportion to be the Cause of such admirable Effects; for it exceeds the
Capacity of all Created Power, whether Human or Angelical, to produce one Blade
of Grass, or one Leaf of a Tree, in perfection, much more to create such a
copious number of Vegetables and Animals as furnish this World for the use of
Man. All this argues the Certainty and Infallibility of the Existence of the
Original Cause of such variety of Products, and convinces, that it must be an
Omnipotent, All-wise, Prudent and Provident Creator.

Then let the dull and stupid Atheist cast his Eyes up to Heaven, and
contemplate the Variety of the superior Orbs of the Sun and Moon, with the
rest of the Planets and their Attendants, with the fixed Stars that are
immovably seated in the Firmament, which are more in number than the Sands of
the Sea: Let the Atheist consider how all these, by their rapt morion, are
daily carried in their Sphere round this inferior World once every day,
without leaving their stations where they were first fixed: let him consider
moreover the regular and constant motion of the wandering Planets and their
Concomitants, how they are all rapt by the First Mover round this World once
every day, while at the same time, by their natural motion, they are in
progress of effecting their natural course, which the Moon accomplisheth in
Eight and twenty Days, the Sun in one Year, the rest of the Planets in a longer
time; and thus by their various Aspects and benign Influences communicate to us
all the Blessings of a munificent and benign Creator, as Corn, Wine, Oil, and
all the Fruits of the Earth, which are abundantly sufficient not only for Man's
necessary support and maintenance, but also for his pleasure and delight: Which
made St. Chrysostom say, In paginis Coelorum legitur divinitas; In the Book of
the Heavens is read the Divinity. And St. Augustine cries out, O altitudo
sapientiae and scientiae Dei! O the altitude of the Wisdom and Science of God!

Add to this the general and universal Consent and Agreement of all Nations
contained in the whole extent of this Universe, whereof there is not one Nation
that denies the Existence of a Deity. Now, if this general Persuasion should
prove false or deceitful, to whom could this Error and Deceit be imputed, but
to Him that imprinted this general Belief and Persuasion into the Minds of all
Nations, it being wholly impossible that the Great Omnipotent Creator of the
Universe, whose Providence is infinite, and who is Veracity and Truth itself,
should deceive any one, and, by reason of his Omniscience, should be deceived
himself, who penetrates the most abdit and most secret Recesses of the
superior and inferior World by his Omniscience? Yea, it is the Opinion of
most learned Divines, that it is impossible that any one Person, having
attained to the perfect use of Reason, should be ignorant of the Being of a GOD.

Now, if all this will not convince the Atheist of his black Error, I will give
him a Metaphysical Demonstration a priori for the Being of a GOD.

And first, I will settle the true Notion of a Deity or Godhead; secondly, I
shall prove the Possibility of the Object of this Notion; and thirdly, I shall
demonstrate the real Existence of it.

As to the first; a True GOD is that, and only that, which has all Perfections
possible, and no Defect; and whatsoever has all this, is completely God; and
whatsoever fails of any part of this, is not, nor cannot be GOD. This being
presupposed, as the Ground and Subject of my Demonstration, I thus proceed to
prove the possibility of it, which was the second thing proposed:

All that which is not a Chymerical Fiction is possible. This Object is no
Chymerical Fiction. Therefore this Object is possible.
Nothing can be here denied but the minor or second Proposition, which I thus
prove:

A Chymerical Fiction has a great Defect, to wit, its impossibility to exist.
This Object has no Defect. Therefore this Object is possible.
Now for the third thing proposed, which was, to demonstrate the Real Existence
of it:

All that which is possible, and has no Defect, is existent. This Object is
possible and has no Defect. Therefore this Object is existent.
The major or first Proposition of this last Syllogism cannot be denied; the
rest is clear and evident: and therefore I here leave the inconsiderate Atheist
to ponder the Force and Energy of this Demonstration, and so I proceed to the
Socinians.

SECT. II. The Main Objection of the Heterodox Unitarians is fully proposed and
solved by the Orthodox Trinitarians.
HERE our Adversaries do agree with Us, in the acknowledgment of One Only
Omnipotent and Infinite Wise GOD; but they deny the Divinity of the Three
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, acknowledging but one Hypostasis or
Suppositum in the Deity. To prove which, they propose this following Argument,

The Divine Nature is the Father. The Son is the Divine Nature. Therefore the
Son is the Father.
So likewise, to prove the Holy Spirit to be but one and the same Person with
the Son, as they suppose, they have proved the Father and the Son to be but One
Person: and thus they reduce the Trinity of the Persons to only one Hypostasis
or Personality. To effect this, they frame this Syllogism,

The Divine Nature is the Son. The Holy Spirit is the Divine Nature. Therefore
the Holy Spirit is the Son.
By these two Syllogisms they intend to reduce the Paternity of the Father, the
Filiation of the Son, and the Passive Spiration of the Holy Spirit, to be but
one Hypostasis or Personality, grounding themselves upon that Orthodox
Principle of ours, That there is a real Identity between the Deity and each of
the Three Persons, without which Identity they could not be Divine.

For Answer to this Achilles or efficacious Argument, (as the Socinians do
suppose) I reply by denying the Consequence of both Syllogisms; for neither of
them concludes, for want of the distribution of the medium or middle Term,
which is the Divine Nature.

To this the Socinians answer, That the two forementioned Syllogisms are both
expositary, and therefore do conclude with greater Perspicuity and Certainty
than either of the Moods contained under the three Figures which Aristotle has
settled for the Rules of Disputation; which likewise is the Opinion of all
Philosophers and Logicians since Aristotle's Time: The reason is, because an
expositary Syllogism has all its three Terms singular, and neither of them
capable of Multiplication; so that the distribution of the medium is needless:
as in this Syllogism,

This Angel is sent from God. Gabriel is this Angel. Therefore Gabriel is sent
from God.
In this Syllogism grant the Premises, and deny the Consequence if you can: And
a Thousand more such Examples might be produced, wherein the distribution of
the medium is superfluous.

To this I answer, by granting the Force of an expositary Syllogism, but
denying that either of the two first Syllogisms is expositary; for, though the
medium in them both, which is the Divine Nature, appears singular, yet it is
capable of Multiplication, by reason that it contains not only all the Infinite
Perfections and Attributes of the Deity, which are all singular, and constitute
but one singular Divine Substance, yet the Deity contains in it also the
Notional Predicates and Relative Perfections of Three Persons which are really
distinct from each other: And therefore, if the medium be not distributed, the
Syllogism is not in form, and concludes nothing.

Here the Socinian, out of a civil compliance, rather than lose his fast hold,
will accommodate himself to the Genius of his Adversary, by distributing his
Medium, which he thus effects:

All that is contained in the Deity is the Father. The Son is contained in the
Deity. Therefore the Son is the Father.
This Syllogism is in form, and concludes rightly; neither can you deny the
major; for you acknowledge, that the Deity is one singular, indivisible and
individual Substance: you grant also a real Identity between the Father and the
Substance of the Deity; therefore by a rigid necessity you must grant a real
Identity between the Father and the whole Real Substance of the Deity; for, it
contains no Parts nor Particles really distinct from each other.

I answer by distinguishing the major, All the absolute Perfections contained
in the Deity are the Father; I grant it. All the notional Predicates and
relative Perfections contained in the Deity are the Father; I deny it: for the
Filiation of the Son, and the passive Spiration of the Holy Spirit, are
contained in the Deity, and yet are really distinct from the Father.

To this the Socinian replies, That according to this distinction we must admit
two Parts really distinct from each other, whereof the one is Identified with
the Father, the other not: where, of force, we must swallow a plain
Contradiction, or admit two Parts in the Deity really distinct from each other,
and both completely endowed with the Deity; which is to admit two Gods, and so
to dethrone and ungod the Omnipotent, who is the great Creator, Framer, and
Preserver of the whole Universe.

To answer this Objection, I do declare, That it is very remote from our
Thoughts to admit in the Divinity more than one Real and Divine Substance; so
that your Allegation of our granting Two Gods is frivolous and injurious to us.

As to the other part alleged in the Objection of admitting a Contradiction,
Scotus, with all his School of the Scotists, do answer you, That here is no
appearance of a Contradiction by reason of a Distinction which they call
distinctionem mediam, or Ex Natura rei; that is, not real, but more than
formal; which has no dependence upon the operation of the Understanding. By
this they distinguish between the Divinity and the Notional Perfections of the
Persons: so that the Extremes of your pretended Contradiction are not the same.

Many other Learned Divines do admit of a Virtual Distinction between the Deity
and the Notional or Relative Predicates of the Persons; by which your pretended
Difficulty vanishes to Smoke.

But because I have in the Treatise of the Trinity impugned and rejected both
these Opinions, my Answer is, That a formal Distinction, which is made by the
Understanding, and supposed by the very Objection, is sufficient to evacuate
this pretended Difficulty; for hereby it will appear, that the pretended
Contradiction is not ejusdem de eodem, as the Philosophers say; that is, both
parts are not of the same Predicate, in order to the same Subject, which is
necessary to make up a formal Contradiction, as all Philosophers do require. So
that we neither do admit Two Parts really distinct in the Deity, nor are we
hereby forced to swallow a Contradiction, as our Adversaries do most falsely
pretend.

SECT. III. A farther Attempt of the same Adversaries is Proposed and Solved.
HERE the Socinian begins to faint, as having run himself out of breath, and
spent the best part of the Vigor and Energy of his Intellectual Faculty to
support his Position, yet will not leave his Cause so incompleatly
accomplished, and therefore does summon up the remainder of the Force and
Vigor of his Understanding to accomplish his Design. And thus he proceeds.

The Doctrine contained in the Answer to my last Objection is not consistent
with what you have formerly acknowledged in this Dispute, which is, That there
are Three Hypostases, which are all Notional Predicates, belonging to the
complete Constitution of the Three Persons, which are really distinct from each
other, and yet all Three completely furnished with all the Perfections of the
Divinity, by a real Identity with it. How then does this consist with the
admitting no more than one singular and numerical Substance in the Divinity;
for you admit Three distinct Persons really Identified with the same Divinity?

To solve this, I must have recourse to the Doctrine of Circumincision. The
Object in question may be considered several ways; but, to accommodate my self
to the Fancy of the Socinians, I must consider it by way of Circumincision; for
when it is so taken, then the Divinity includes the three Hypostases, namely,
the Paternity of the Father, the Filiation of the Son, and the passive
Spiration of the Holy Spirit, as it were inveloped and implicated within it
self: and under this Consideration it is numerically but one singular and
individual Substance, because all the Hypostases, Relations, and Co-relations
of the Persons are really identified with the Divinity, and so make but one
Substance with it.

And it is in this sense the Council of Laterane, cited by me at large in the
first Section of the first Disputation of the Treatise of the Trinity, Cap.
firmiter, and Cap. daemianus De summa Trinitate, defines, That the Deity, with
all its Relations and Personalities, constitute but unam summam rem, that is,
but one chief Being; for, in this sense the notional and relative Perfections
of the Persons are not to be confider'd. And this is the true meaning of
Circumincision.

But if you will dissolve the Circumincision, and take abroad and unfold all
that is in it, then the Personalities of the Three Persons will appear really
distinct from one another, and yet are the same individual Substance with the
Deity. And herein consists the Mystery of the Divine Trinity, which all the
extent of Nature cannot furnish us with one Example to parallel: so that from
the different acceptions of the same Object you raise a different sense of it;
and hence arises the Difference between you and your Adversary: for, if you do
not cautiously distinguish between the absolute and notional terms, you must
needs confound the objective Signification of them, which notwithstanding are
very different from each other, and this grounds a Confusion in your
Understanding.

SECT. IV. The Objections. against Circumincision Solved.
BUT the Socinian is not satisfied with this Doctrine of Circumincision, but
objects, That we grant, with the Council of Lateran, but One Reality made up of
the Divinity and the Three Persons; and yet we admit, That when the
Circumincision is unfolded and taken abroad, there are Three Personalities
really distinct from each other: Which involves a plain Contradiction; for we
assert, The whole is but One Reality, una summa res, only One Reality; and yet
we likewise assert, That there are more Realities contained in it: which is a
plain Contradiction.

To this I answer,

That these Two Propositions there, is but One Reality.

There is more than One Reality. These two are not contradictory, if taken in a
different sense; for the first is meant by Circumincision, the second by
Extension; which hinders the Contradiction.

Here the Socinian replies, That these several Acceptions, or different Senses
of the same Object, are but different Considerations of the Understanding,
which constitute only Formalities; why then do you obtrude them in this
Discourse, where we dispute only of Realities, which is a mere Trick and
Evasion to involve the whole matter into obscurity and confusion, which in a
fair way of disputing ought not to be done?

Here the Socinian is brisk, and confident of his own Cause; yet give me leave
to answer, That my Solution of the Difficulty proposed is very proper; for, the
Divinity is a singular and indivisible Substance, and by a real Identity is the
same thing with the Three Persons; so that all together constitute but One
Reality: whereas, if you consider the Persons apart, you will find Three
Realities distinct, whereof the one is incarnate, the other two are not; which
is an evident sign of a real Distinction.

Here the Socinian replies again, alleging, That to solve one Contradiction we
incurr another: for, we say, That one Person is incarnate, the other not: so
that of the same Reality we say, This Reality is incarnate, and this same
Reality is not incarnate.

And thus we prove both parts of the Contradiction:

The Father is not incarnate. This Reality is the Father. Therefore this
Reality is not incarnate.
The affirmative part of this Contradiction we prove thus:

The Son is incarnate. This Reality is the Son. Therefore this Reality is
incarnate.
I answer by denying the two 'fore-mention'd Propositions to be contradictory,
for the negative Proposition is verified only of the Father and the Holy
Spirit, not of the Son: whereas the Affirmative is verified only of the Son,
not of the Father, nor the Holy Spirit. Whence you may plainly perceive the
pretended Contradiction is not ejusdem de eodem; it is not of the same
Predicate, in order to the same Subject, which is repugnant to the known Rule
of Contradictories, for else these two would be contradictory. Man is like
other Animals, and Man is not like other Animals; for, as being a living
sensible Creature, he is like other Animals, and as being endowed with Reason,
he is not like other Animals; and yet his Animality and Rationality are but two
Formalities, distinguished only by the Understanding. Now, if the passing from
one Formality to another hinders the force of a Contradiction, much more will
it hinder, by passing from one Reality to another; for the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Spirit are really distinguished from each other.

But now the Socinian is ready to prosecute his Design farther, which we shall
declare in the next Section.

SECT. V. Wherein the rest of the Unitarian's Arguments are Proposed and Solved.
HERE the Socinian pretends to drive us to another great Inconvenience, which
is, to deduce out of the precedent Doctrine a necessity of admitting Three
Gods; for we admit Three Hypostases or Relations really distinct from each
other, and every one of them to be completely furnished with the Divinity; and
each of them constitutes a complete Godhead, for they being Three in number,
there must of necessity be admitted Three Gods.

To this Objection I answer, That the denomination of GOD signifies principally
and in recto the Divinity, and in obliquio the Hypostases or Relations, and is
thus resolved; The Divinity fubsisting by Three distinct Hypostases. Now,
because there is but one singular and individual Divinity, there can be but one
singular and individual Godhead. Whereas the denomination of a Person signifies
principally and in recto the Hypostases or Person, and is thus resolved; The
Hypostases or Subsistonce of the Divinity. So that there being Three Hypostases
or Personalities distinct, there must be admitted Three distinct Persons of one
numerical Divinity.

Another Objection which they muster up against us is this: We teach that the
Persons of the Father and the Son are really identified with the Deity, and the
same thing with it, and yet we declare, that the Father and the Son are two
Realities really distinct from one another; which contradicts that first
Principle, known by the Light of Nature, Quae sunt eadem uni tertio sunt eadem
inter se; They that are the same thing with a Third, are the same thing among
themselves. Wherein all the Art of Syllogisms is grounded.

I answer by admitting that Principle, as being known by the Light of Nature,
and that the Syllogistical Art is grounded in it; but, I deny that our Doctrine
is not consistent with the Verity of it: for, if you consider the Three Persons
as contained in the Deity, and really the same thing with it, they all together
make up but One Reality, for in this manner you do not consider the Persons as
related to one another, but only as identified with the Deity, which is by
Circumincision. And in this sense the Council of Lateran has defined it to be
but one thing, or one individual Substance, by reason of the identity of the
Persons with the Deity.

And here I leave the Socinians to consider more nicely and minutely the
Difference between the absolute and notional Expressions in this Matter, and
their Objective Significations, which will prevent any farther progress in
framing any more Objections in this matter against us.

SECT. VI. Certain Absolete Opinions of another Novelist are Proposed and
Solved.
A BOOK fell lately into my Hands, in the perusal whereof I found certain
Paradoxical Opinions destitute of Reason, and backed only by the single
Authority of the Author, whereof one was, the description of the Essential
Parts and Nature of an Individuum, which he defines to be nothing else but a
Self-Consciousness, or an exact Correspondence with it self; which he produces
no Reason to prove, neither did I ever hear or read of any such definition of
an Individuum; for, all Antiquity does agree in this definition, That an
Individuum is Indivisum in se and divisum a quolibet alio; that is, it is
undivided in it self, and divided from any thing else: of which Definition this
Author makes no mention, and therefore does not impugn it.

The first Refutation of this Author's new Opinion is as follows:

A Self-Consciousness of a thing with it self, argues relation of the thing to
it self, which is impossible, for a relation cannot subsist, except it mediates
between two Extremes distinct from each other; the one is that whereon the
relation is founded, the other is that to which it is terminated; but between a
thing and its self there is no distinction, for a thing and its self are the
self-same numerical Object, which cannot admit of any relation, and
consequently is incapable of any Self-Consciousness.

The Second Refutation.
There can be no Self-Consciousness but by the Vital Acts produced by the
Internal Faculties, which must have an exact Conformity with the Natural
Inclination of the thing from whence they proceed; so that here can be no
Self-Consciousness of any Object to itself, but of the Acts to their Cause.

The Third Refutation.
This Self-Consciousness comes too late to constitute the Essential Notion of
an Individuum; for, separate this Self-Consciousness from the Origin whence it
proceeds, and I demand, whether this Origin, as now divested of its
Self-Consciousness, be not an Individuum: if so, then you have the Individuum
completely constituted independent of this Self-Consciousness; for, either you
must constitute the whole Essence of your Self-Consciousness in a certain
collection of Vital Acts, which are really distinguished from the Substance of
the thing whose Self-Consciousness it is, or else you must conceive it to be
really identified with its Subject whereon it is grounded; if the first, you
have the Ground and Subject remaining divested of its Self-Consciousness. Now,
I demand, whether this Substance that remains separated and divested from its
Self-Consciousness be an Individuum or not? If it be, then you have the whole
and adequate Essence of an Individuum, independent and precedent to your
Self-Consciousness: But if it be not an Individuum, then it must be a
Plurality; which is against common sense, for it is a singular numerical
Substance, undivided in itself, and divided from any thing else, and therefore
an Individuum. But if you choose the second by a real Identity with the
Substance, which is the Ground and Foundation of it, then you must by a
Metaphysical Distinction prescind it, and slice it as a Formality from its
Subject. And so, by your Understanding, consider that Substance as mentally
separated from its Self-Consciousness, and you will find a singular and
numerical Substance, which is undivided in its self, and divided from any thing
else: which is the essential Definition of an Individuum.

Here I might introduce other inanimate Creatures, as, the Elements, Metals,
Stones, and the like, which have no collection of Vital Acts, wherein to place
your Self-Consciousness, and yet they are all Individuums; as appears by the
definition by me given.

Another Opinion I find in this Author, whereby he asserts, That a Horse is a
Person; not regulating himself by any Definition or Description of a Person,
but goes on in a talking way, and still remains in the Praeliminaris of the
Question in debate, without ever penetrating into the Heart of the Difficulty,
or touching the Sore: so that by this not arguing, but talking way of Writing,
nothing can be substantially proved, nothing efficaciously impugned: Wherefore
this Author not having given any definition nor description of a Person, I have
nothing here to refute, but his Absolete Position of introducing unreasonable
Brute Beasts into the number of Persons, in order to which, I must here give an
essential definition of a Person, which is this: Rationalis naturae individua
and completa Substantia; that is, A Complete, Rational, and Individual
Substance. By which definition all Unreasonable Creatures are excluded from the
notion of Persons; and only GOD, the Angels, and Men, are admitted.

SECT. VII. Two other Opinions of the same Author are Proposed and Solved.
A THIRD Opinion I find in this Author, whereby he affirms to be contained in
the Deity Three Infinite Minds, not proving nor attempting to prove his
Position by any Argument.

This Doctrine, and the Consequence of it, I cannot brook; for, by admitting
Three Infinite Minds in GOD, he will hardly avoid the admitting of Three GODS:
which were Blasphemy to assert, and which I thus prove:

The Mind is a Vital Faculty, belonging and appertaining to the Understanding;
a Term not notional nor relative, but absolute and singular in the Deity; and
therefore to admit Three Infinite Minds, is the same as to admit Three Infinite
Understandings, which being an Absolute Attribute, can no more be multiplied
than the Godhead itself, which is common to all the Absolute Attributes of the
Deity, which all together make but one Substance with GOD himself; whence I
conclude, that the admitting of Three Infinite Minds in GOD, is of dangerous
consequence, and not easily to be maintained, for it has a direct Tendency to
Paganism.

A Fourth Opinion of this Author is, That the Unity of the Three Divine Persons
consists essentially in the Mutual Consciousness of them to each other, whereby
the Three Divine Persons are made One by their mutual correspondence and exact
agreeing in the Faculties of their Understanding and Will with each other.

This Opinion is no more proved by Reason nor Authority than his former
Opinions, but merely asserted, which Opinion I thus impugn: Separate at least
with your Understanding this Mutual Consciousness from the Three Persons, and
there will remain Three Substances without their Unity: These Three Substances
are either created or increated; if the first, then the Three Persons are mere
Creatures; which is rank Socinianism: if the second, then they must be really
identified with the Divine Nature; and if so, then in vain do you seek for
another Unity, for you have here the strictest Unity that possibly can be,
namely, by a real Identity with the Divine Nature, which is precedent to your
Mutual Consciousness. And this is the True Notion and Orthodox Doctrine of the
Divine Trinity.

Besides, this Unity that you affix to the Divine Persons is only moral or
metaphorical, no better than it would be between three Men or three Angels;
which is a great Indignity to the Infinite Perfection of the Great God, who has
in himself all Perfections possible, and no Defect.

Note briefly here, That an Object of Three Substances or Persons must first
have its complete Being before it is capable of your Mutual Consciousness:
Consider it therefore in its original Existency, which was from all Eternity,
and ponder with your self if there were not in that state an Unity in the
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, without the least mention or cooperation of your
Mutual Consciousness.

And here I conclude this Treatise of the Ever Blessed and Most Sacred Trinity;
all which, and every part thereof, I humbly submit to the Judgment and Censure
of Those upon whom it is incumbent to regulate the Faith, Belief and Doctrine
of the Protestant Church of England.

FINIS.

