THE DUE WAY OF COMPOSING The differences on FOOT Preserving the CHURCH,
According to the opinion of HERBERT THORNDIKE.

LONDON, Printed by A. Warren, for John Martin, James Allestry, and Thomas
Dicas, at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLX.

I Have found my self obliged, by that horrible confusion in Religion, which
the late War had introduced, to declare the utmost of mine opinion,
concerning the whole point of Religion, upon which the Western Church stands
divided into so many parties. And now finding no cause to repent me of doing
it, can find no cause why I should not declare the consequence of it, in
settling of that which remains of our differences. For, middle ways to so good
an end, are now acceptable, merely as middle ways, and tending to drive a
bargain, without pretending that they ought to be admitted. How much more an
expedient pretending necessity, from reasons extant in public, and not
contradicted?

The chief ground that I suppose here, because I have proved it at large, is
the meaning of that Article of our Creed, which professes one Catholic
Church. For either it signifies nothing, or it signifies that God has founded
one Visible Church, That is, that he has obliged all Churches, (and all
Christians, of whom all Churches consist) to hold visible communion with the
whole Church, in the visible offices of Gods public service; and therefore I
am satisfied, that the differences upon which we are divided, cannot be justly
settled upon any terms, which any part of the whole Church shall have just cause
to refuse, as inconsistent with the unity of the whole Church. For, in that
case we must needs become Schismatics, by settling our selves upon such Laws,
under which any Church may refuse to communicate with us, because it is bound
to communicate with the whole Church. True it is, that the foundation of the
Church, upon these terms, will presuppose the entire profession of
Christianity, whether concerning Faith or manners; For otherwise, how should
those offices, in which all the Church is to communicate, be counted the
service of God, according to Christianity? And this profession is the
condition, upon the undergoing whereof, all men, by being baptized and made
Christians, are also admitted to communion with the Church, as members of it.

But nothing can make it visible to the common reason of all men, what
communion they are to resort unto for their Salvation; but the visible
Communion of all parts of the Church; which, having been maintained for diverse
ages of the Church, is now visibly interrupted by the Reformation, and before,
by the breach between the Greek and Latin Church; and therefore, though it be
visible to reason rightly informed, what communion a man is to embrace for his
Salvation; yet it is not now visible to the common reason of all men that seek
it. If this be true, then, no power of the Church can extend to far, as to
make any thing a part of the common Christianity, which was not so from the
beginning; but it must needs extend so far, as to limit and determine all
matters in difference, so as the preservation of Unity may require. And
therefore the Unity of all parts supposing the profession of Christianity
whole, and entire; we shall justly be chargeable with the crime of Heresy, if
we admit them to our communion, who openly disclaim the Faith of the whole
Church, or any part of it. For, those men have been, and are justly counted
Heretics, as to the Church, that communicate with those who profess Heresy;
though no Heretics as to God, as not believing it themselves. But the unity of
all parts being subordinate, and and of inferior consideration to the Unity of
the whole; we shall justly be chargeable with the crime of Schism, if we seek
unity within our selves, by abrogating the Laws of the whole, as not obliged to
hold communion with it.

I confess I am convicted, that as things stand, we are not to expect any
reason from the Church of Rome, and those who hold communion with it, in
restoring the unity of the Church, upon such Laws, as shall render the means of
Salvation visible to all that use them as they ought. And this, and only this,
I hold to be the due ground, upon which we are enabled to provide an
establishment of Unity in Religion among our selves, (as heretofore a
Reformation in Religion for our selves) without concurrence of the whole. But
if we should think our selves at large, to conclude our selves without respect
to the Faith and Laws of the whole Church; we may easily bring upon our selves
a just imputation of Heretics, for communicating with Heretics; but a juster
of Schismatics, if we abrogate the Laws of the whole Church, to obtain Unity
among our selves; as declaring thereby, that we are not content to hold unity
with the whole, unless a part may give Law to the whole. So far am I from
that madness, which has had a hand in all our miseries; of thinking the right
measure of Reformation to stand in going as far as it is possible from the
Church of Rome. For, were it evidenced, (as it neither is, nor ever will be
evidenced,) that the Pope is Antichrist, and all Papists by their profession
Idolaters; yet must we either raze the Article of one Catholic Church out of
our Creed, or confess that the Pope can neither be Antichrist, nor the Papists
Idolaters, for, or by any thing which is common to them with the whole
Church.

I know some will think it strange, that the Pope should excommunicate us on
Maundy-Thursdays; that we should svvear in the Oath of Supremacy, that no
foreign Prelate has, or ought to have any Jurisdiction, or Authority
Ecclesiastical in this Kingdom; and yet we be subject to do such Acts, for
which the Church of Rome may justly renounce communion with us. But the word
ought in that Oath is Indicative and not Potential, not deberet, but debet; For
it were a contradiction for the Church of England to pray for the Catholic
Church, and the unity thereof, and yet renounce the Jurisdiction of the whole
Church, and the General Councile thereof, over it self. King James of excellent
memory, acknowledges the Pope to be Patriarch of the west; that is, Head of
the general Council of the Western Churches. And the right R. Father in God,
Thomas L. B. of Winchester under Q. Elizabeth, in his answer to the Seminaries
Apology, being demanded why we own him not so in effect, answers bluntly, but
truly, because he is not content with the right of a Patriarch. For, should he
disclaim the pretense of dissolving the bond of Allegiance, should he retire to
the Privilege of a Patriarch, in seeing the Canons executed, the schism would
lie at our door, if we should refuse it. Now, if they curse us, while we pray
for the unity of the whole Church, is it not the case of the Catholics with
the Donatists? For, these rebaptized them whom those had baptized, whited over
the inside of their Churches, when they became possessed of them, scraped over
their Altars, (being Tables of wood) in detestation of them, as Apostates and
persecutors; while the Catholics called them brethren, and acknowledged them
rightly baptized, and received them that were converted from that Schism in
their respective Orders. The unity of the Church is of such consequence to the
salvation of all Cristians, that no excess on one side can cause the other to
increase the distance, but they shall be answerable for the souls that perish
by the means of it.

And therefore, not departing from the opinion which I have declared,
concerning the terms upon which all parties ought to reconcile themselves,
until I shall have reason showed me, why I should do it; I shall now go no
further, then the matters that are actually questioned among us; not extending
my discourse to points, that may perhaps more justly become questionable, then
some of those which have come into dispute. Professing in the beginning, that I
believe they may and ought to be settled by a Law of the Kingdom, obliging all
parties beside Recusants. But, that the matter of that Law ought to be limited
by the consent and Authority of the Church, respective to this Kingdom. And
withal, that I think it ought to be held, and shall for mine own part hold it
an act merely ambulatory and provisionall for the time. For, though there is no
hope of reconcilement with the Church of Rome, as things are; yet is there
infinite reason for all sides, to abate of their particular pretensions, for
the recovering of so incomparable a benefit as the unity of the whole; If ever
it shall please God to make the parties appear disposed to it.

Now, the errors which we are to shut out, if ^e will recover the unity of a
visible Church, (that is, of Gods whole Church) are two in my judgment. First,
though some things have been disputed in other parts, from whence the same
consequence may be inferred; yet England is the place, and ours the times,
which first openly and downright have maintained, that there is no such thing
as a Church, in the nature of one visible Communion, founded by God. But it is
maintained by several parties among us, upon several grounds. For, some do
not or will not understand, that there can be any Ecclesiastical Power founded
by that act of God which foundeth Christianity, where there is Secular Power,
founded also by those acts of God, whereby he authorizeth and inforceth all
just Soveraignties. Though all times, all parts, all Nations of Christendom
since Constantine profess to maintain the Church in that Power, in which they
found it acknowledged by Christians, when he first undertook to maintain that
Christianity which he professed; all this must be taken, either for mere
hypocrisy, or mere nonsense. Others there are, that do not think themselves
obliged to the unity of Gods Church, upon far different Principles. There are
of our Enthusiasts, such as are themselves every one a Church to themselves,
and by themselves, as being above Ordinances, and the Communion of the Church
provided only for proficients. But all Independent Congregations make the same
profession, and are manifestly grounded upon the same. For, how can they
imagine themselves members of one visible Church, who profess that they cannot
be obliged to hold communion with any Congregation but their own?

And yet, with favor, the same consequence ensuing upon so different
pretenses, there must be some supposition common to both, upon which both do
ground themselves. And it is easily visible what that is. Both opinions must
suppose, that a man may be heir to Christ's Kingdom, and endowed with Gods
Spirit, without being, or before he be a member of Gods Church. And the
Independents indeed do manifestly profess, that, knowing themselves and others
to be Gods Children, and endowed with his Spirit, they are in a capacity to
join in Ecclesiastical Communion, with those whom they know to be such. So,
they become members of a Church, being Gods Children before, without
considering how they shall be members of the Whole Church. The others are
satisfied, that, by being members of a State which professes Christianity,
they are also members of that one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, which
by our Creed we profess to believe. A ground which holds accidentally, so
long as that State constituteth a visible member of the Whole, or the Catholic
Church; But not imaginable to serve the turn, when States differ in point of
Christianity, and may every day appeal to force, whither is the true Church and
whither the false.

For, is it not manifest, that the professions of the Lutheranes, the
Calvinists, the Greeks, the Abyssines are protected by Sovereign Powers, as
well as the profession of the Church of Rome, or the Church of England? Is it
not manifest, that the Powers that profess them, maintain them respectively to
be Gods truth? Why then do we dispute any longer, which is the true Religion
and which is the false, if it be enough for Christians to resolve all the doubt
they can have concerning Religion, into the command of their Sovereigns, only
professing Christianity? Is it not manifest that Sovereigns do use to punish
their Subjects, that conform not to their Laws concerning Religion, but follow
that Religion which is in force under other Soveraignties? Is it possible to
imagine, that Subjects can be obliged, by one and the same will of God, to
follow contrary Laws under several Sovereigns? Or that Sovereigns can be
enabled, by one and the same Law of God, to punish their Subjects, for serving
God according to contrary professions? True it is, Subjects that suffer in a
good cause shall be gainers thereby; gaining Heaven by their losses of this
world. But what shall become of the Sovereigns that persecute them, being in a
good cause? Or how shall not some of them bepersecuted in a good cause, who are
persecuted in contrary causes? I know not whither this peremtory difficulty was
the cause; But I am sure recourse has been had to a more desperate answer;
that every Subject is bound to profess the Religion of his Sovereign; yea,
though it injoin him to renounce Christ with his mouth; remaining bound all the
while to believe in him with his heart; and that by this belief, he shall be
saved as a Christian. Neither is this position tenable but upon this answer,
nor does this answer import any less, than the utter renouncing of
Christianity. I know, that in the records of the ancient Church, those who only
professed to believe Christianity, (who were called Catechumeni, or Scholars to
the Church) are sometimes called by the name of Christians. But I know withal,
that they were never counted in the state of Salvation, till they had taken
upon them the profession of Christianity, by being admitted to the Sacrament of
Baptism. I know also, that this Baptism, though it was not counted void, when
it was Ministered in due form; yet it was never counted effectual to Salvation,
but when a man is baptized into the true Faith, and that in the Unity of Gods
Church. For, though the names of Heretics and Schismatics, have been made
only Bug-bears to fright children with, in this time of our troubles; yet, so
long as Christianity continues, those that separate themselves from the Church
upon pretenses concerning the substance of Faith shall be properly called
Heretics; But, if the cause concern not the substance of Christianity,
Schismatics. And therefore, Christianity consisting not only in believing, or
purposing with the heart, but also in professing with the mouth; (first
sincerely, then the true Faith, and lastly by being baptized) he that
professes himself free to renounce his Christianity, as far as the mouth,
has effectively renounced it; Because he has effectively drawn back that
promise, upon condition whereof he was baptized; of professing Chistianity to
the death.

And truly, if every Christian State be the Church of God within the
territories thereof, then cannot all Churches concur to make up that one
visible Church of God which our Creed professes. For, there is nothing more
evidently true than the saying of Plato; that all States are naturally enemies
one to another, especially those that are borderers, And this enmity, in our
days, consists visibly in those differences of Religion, upon which the
neighbor Soveraignties of Christendom are now at distance. It is therefore no
way imaginable, how all Christian States should concur to make up that one
visible Church, whereinto by being Baptized, we obtain the spiritual and
eternal privileges of Christians. But, that it is the profession of the whole
Rule of Christianity, that makes any people or State a part of the visible
Church; being governed by such rules, in the exercise of Gods service, as may
make it the same Society with that, which was once unquestionably Gods Church,
or part of it. For otherwise, how should the visible Church continue one and
the same, from the first to the second coming of our Lord?

And here you have the second point of our differences; For, all our Sects,
under the title of Gods free grace, do maintain, that the promises of the
Gospel, and our right in them, depends not upon the truth of men's
Christianity. As if God were not free enough of his Grace, if he should reserve
himself a duty of being served, as by Christians, upon those whom he tenders
life everlasting to, upon such terms. It is no new thing in England, to hear
of those who profess, that God sees not, nor can see any sin in his elect;
So that in their opinion there is no mortal sin but repentance; because that
must suppose, that a man thought himself out of the State of grace, by the sin
whereof he repents? I think I am duly informed of a Malefactor dying upon the
Gallows, that professed, to the strengthening of his brethren, that he had
overcome all temptation to repentance; acknowledging that, since his being in
Prison, he had been strongly moved to repent. And, that one of Hackets three
conspirators, when he was come to himself, continued to profess, that he
thought himself in the State of Gods grace all the while. But I will go no
further, then the words which I have quoted in another place, out of a Pamphlet
written to satisfy the Godly party in Wales, being offended at the late
Usurpers proceedings; which alleges, that we are not to be judged at the last
day, either by our works, or by our faith; but by Gods everlasting purpose
concerning each of us; By virtue whereof Christ being alive at the heart, the
violation of all his engagements to them, by usurping over them as over others,
made no difference in his estate toward God. Whosoever writ this, I think I am
duly informed, that himself caused it to be published. But I am certain, that,
to the everlasting infamy of a Christian Nation, if reparation be not made, it
is supposed to be the sense of all the Godly in it. And to the same effect, my
memory assures me to have read in one of his speeches; That there are at this
day inspirations of Gods Spirit besides the Scriptures, though not against the
Scriptures. Now certainly, that which a man has by virtue of the Scriptures;
that is of Christianity; can by no means be understood to be besides the
Scriptures. And certainly, he that presumes upon any motion of Gods Spirit,
not supposing Christianity; that is, not supposing the Scriptures; may by the
same reason prefume of his own Salvation, not supposing that he believes and
lives as a Christian.

The same is the consequence of a Position, I will not say enjoined by any
party, but notoriously allowed among us; That justifying Faith consists in
believing that a man is one of them that are predestinate, whom God sent our
Lord Christ to redeem, and none else. For, how can he think himself obliged to
make good the profession of a Christian, who thinks himself assured of all that
he can attain to by so doing, not supposing it? Indeed it may be said, that our
Antinomians and Enthusiasts, and other Sects among us, (whom no conceit without
this could have seduced to their several frenzies,) do think themselves
justified from everlasting, by Gods decree to send Christ for that purpose;
whereas this opinion dateth Justification from the instant that God reveals
the said decree by his spirit, in which revelation they think that justifying
Faith consists. And certainly, there can be no reason why God, receiving men
into grace only in consideration of Christ's obedience, should suspend their
reconcilement upon that knowledge of his purpose, which he gives them by
Faith. For what can be more unreasonable, than that God should justify a man,
by revealing to him that he is justified? But the opinion is not the less
destructive to Christianity, because it is the more unreasonable. Now it is
possible that the effect of this position may bestifled, and become void in
some, by reason of other truths which contradict the same in deed, and yet are
believed by them, not seeing the consequence of their own persuasions. But
those who, besides this position, do pertinaciously hold absolute
predestination to glory, those I maintain are in an error destructive to
Christianity, that is, in an Heresy. And therefore this Doctrine being such, it
is no way enough, that it is no way enjoined to be taught; but it is requisite
that it be disclaimed, by those that pretend to recover the unity of a visible
Church. For there can be no Church, where any thing destructive to
Christianity, which the being of the Church supposes, is notoriously allowed
to be taught.

Now, betvveen these two points of our differences, I am to observe a vast
difference. For, this latter is necessary for all Christians to know, as being
the principle of all those actions, which, being just for the matter of them,
must render the men acceptable to God in order to life everlasting. And
therefore, he that thinks he can be regenerate, or justified, or the child of
God, or indovved with Gods Spirit, not supposing that he undertakes and
performs the profession of a Christian, renounces the Article of his Creed,
concerning one baptism to remission of sins. But the being of Gods visible
Church consists in that Unity, which arises upon the agreement of all
Christians, to hold communion in the visible Offices of Gods service. And
therefore, though it be an Article of our Creed, to believe one Catholic
Church, yet can it not concern the Salvation of every particular Christian, to
understand the nature of that Society or Corporation, which the bond of this
Unity creates. Nay, even they who are best seen in that Government, by which
this Unity is preserved, may well fail in comprehending the reason thereof, by
reflecting their discourse upon it. In the mean time, it is necessary for all
that believe their Creed, to think themselves tied by this Article to maintain
the Unity of the Church, according to their estate; That is, for every ones
part, not to be accessory to any Schism that dissolveth it. And therefore to
deny the crime of Schism is to deny this Article.

The consequence of this observation will be the difference which the Church
has reason to use, in reconciling parties at distance from it, to the unity
thereof, according to the difference of those pretenses upon which they are at
distance. For, those who have only disputed against the being of the Church,
upon misunderstanding the right of secular Power, which they think the being of
the Church inconsistent with, shall be sufficiently reunited to the Church, by
conforming to the Law by which the Church is, and was, and may be established.
For, that there ought to be provision against such disputes for the future, it
concerns not me to give warning. Only, where willfullness has proceeded so
far in maintaining a false position, as to make no bones of denying
Christianity, and teaching Atheism, (by obliging to renounce Christ, if the
Sovereign command it) it concerns the Christianity of the Nation to see
reparation made.

But, where the Heretical positions mentioned before have notoriously been
maintained, especially, where Congregations have been framed, and used, for the
exercise of Religion, upon pretense of them; there will it be absolutely
necessary, that they be expressly renounced and disclaimed, either by persons
in particular, or in Body by Congregations. To this head I reduce all
Anabaptists, and Congregations of Anabaptists; Those of the fifth Monarchy, and
Congregations of the fifth Monarchy; Quakers, and Congregations of Quakers.
Nay, all Independent Congregations, in my opinion, ought to be reduced under
this measure. Not only because their profession is grounded upon the denial of
one visible Church; But, because they suppose themselves Children of God, and
endowed with his Spirit, before they be members of Gods Church; That is,
setting aside their Baptism, and the Covenant which is solemnly inacted by it,
between God and each soul. And, though I do refer my self to the wisdom of
Superiors, in what form this reconciliation be solemnized; yet, I must express
my opinion thus far, that there can be none so fit, as that which the wisdom of
the Catholic Church, from the beginning, has always frequented; By granting
them the blessing of the Church; with Imposition of hands, renouncing for their
part their several Sects and errors, That is, by the prayers of the Church,
for the spirit of God, to rest upon them, who have barred their baptism to give
it by opposing the peace of the Church, which now they retire unto. For how
shall the unity of the Church be secured, but by declaring them who violate the
same accursed of God?

Nor let it be thought, that, our Sectaries of their own accord retiring
themselves unto the Communion of this Church, it will be requisite for the
Church to admit them, without taking notice of any thing that has passed. For,
neither is it to be presumed, that they, who have made their own wills their
Law for so many years, will so much as profess conformity to the Rule of the
Church; And, if they did profess it, there is no reason to think that they
should stand to it, having a dispensation dormant of the Spirit, to stand to
their profession, as the interest of their faction shall require. So, their
coming to Church would be only an advantage for them to infect others. And how
should that Communion be counted a Church, which intertains Heretics as
Heretics, and Schismatics as Schismatics; that is, without renouncing
positions destructive to the Faith; without obliging themselves for the future,
to hold Unity with the Church? Certainly there is no just answer for this, if
the Church of Rome should object it, for the reason why they refuse to hold
communion with us. Certainly S. Augustine, when he was charged by the
Donatists, that the Church received their Apostates without rebaptizing them,
and in their respective Orders, could have had no answer, if he had not had
this; That the Church received them not as Donatists, but as converted from
being Donatists; they not refusing to profess so much.

Certainly it may be, and perhaps is justifiable for the Secular power, to
grant them the exercise of their Religion, in private places of their own
providing, under such moderate penalties, as the disobeying of the Laws of a
man's Country might require. For, persecution to death for that cause, the
whole Reformation condemns in the Church of Rome; And I conceive there is no
reason for that, which will not condemn persecution to banishment. But this
would require the like moderation to be extended to Recusants of the Church of
Rome. True it is, in mine opinion, those Papists that think themselves tied by
the Bull of Pius V. against Queen Elizabeth, or that they may be tied by the
like Acts of his Successors against hers, are justly liable to the utmost of
penalties, as professed enemies to their Country. But, besides that it is
manifest, that all Papists are not of that opinion, which the said Bull
presupposes; The State may easier he secured of Papists, against all such
power in the Pope, than of our Sectaries, against that dispensation to their
Allegiance, which the pretense of Gods Spirit may import when they please.

And whereas it is manifest, that many Papists hold against those equivocations
and reservations, which destroy all considence of the Sovereign in his Subjects
allegiance; How shall a State be secured against that infamous falsehood of the
late Usurper, in any man that pretends Gods Spirit upon his terms, which I
mentioned before? Besides, the Recusants, being for the most part, of the good
Families of the Nation, will take it for a part of their Nobility, freely to
profess themselves in their Religion, if they understand themselves; whereas
the Sectaries, being people of mean quality, for the most part, cannot be
presumed to stand upon their reputation so much. So, if they cannot be
tolerated in the exercise of their Religion, it must be provided upon what
terms they may be received by the Church. And by that which has been said, it
may appear what my opinion will require of the Presbyterians, for the condition
of reconciling our selves into one Church again; Namely, in the first place,
their concurrence to the Act, or Decree, or Order, according to which the
Sectaries ought to be tied to renounce the damnable positions which they have
notoriously set on foot. For, if they should refuse this, what reason could be
alleged why they should be counted Strangers to that infection, which they
will not exclude? As for the other Article of the Creed, concerning one visible
Church, it is evident that they cannot belong to that Church, supposing the
Premises. For it is evident, that there was a time, when the whole Church was
governed by Bishops; and that not against Gods Law, for then there had remained
no Church. And therefore, for them to break the unity of the Church, upon
pretense of governing this Church by Presbyters, is to break unity, unless a
part may give Law to the whole, which who so do, are for so doing Schismatics.
And the Church of Rome would have due cause to cast us off for Schismatics, if
we should admit this pretense. But this is a point, the knowledge whereof cannot
belong to the substance of Christianity, for the reason alleged before. And
therefore, I do not think the Church tied to exact the express profession of
it, or the disclaiming of the error that is opposite to it. On the other side,
the Church, maintaining the Ordinations of Presbyters alone to be mere
nullities in themselves, can never own their Ordinations, without renouncing
the Catholic Church; yet may it consent in the persons, upon their consent to
the order, which shall be established for the future. And indeed, what can they
challeng by the mere consent of certain Presbyters, which the Ministers of
Congregations may not pretend to, by the consent of their respective
Congregations? And yet, I suppose, both parties are agreed, not to own them in
that Power which the celebration of the Eucharist imports? Let any man, that
is capable to judge of such matters, think upon the madness of the Lancashire
Presbyterians without prejudice; Of whom I am duly informed, that they caused
those, who were ordained only Deacons in the Church of England, to do the
office of Presbyters (which they had no title to) in celebrating the Eucharist;
And tell me what reason there can be, excluding the Ordinations of the
Congregations, to admit the usurpations of the Presbyterians. As for the form
and solemnity, in which the consent of the Church to their Ordinations shall be
celebrated, therein I refer my self to the wisdom of Superiors; Thinking it
would be a great impertinence in the Presbyterians, if, finding a necessity of
submitting those whom they have already promoted, to the judgment of the
Church, for the condition upon which they are to Minister; (which without
doubt, is the principal) they should insist upon the accessory, which is the
form, and solemnity, by which the power is visibly convayed. And thus I think
the second great difficulty concerning their Ordinations, may be composed.

But, supposing these great difficulties set aside, the composing of our first
differences, about the Order of Bishops, and the Service, cannot seem
difficult, if the parties be content to give up their engagements, to the
advantage, which the Christianity of the Nation may have by it. For, what
reasonable Christian can think much to acknowledge, that, by reason of those
partialities, which at length have produced this Schism, the Ecclesiastical
Laws of the Land are capable of amendment in those two points? On the other
fide, does not dear evperience tell all parts, that the change of them by
force, though it must be called Reformation, if the Law of the Land call it so,
yet it is not likely to be that which it is called? Besides; Consider the
kindness which his Majesty's return, and Gods goodness, that has overruled
men's hearts in it, has bredde in all parties consenting to it. For, can we
have this before us, and not hope that it will be enough to subdue all
prejudices and animosities, to the interest of our common Christianity? Had the
peace of the Church never been questioned, it might be charity in a discreet
Christian, not to call it into question, by proposing what might be amended,
because the hope of amendment might not countervail the danger of that Peace.
But, now that unity is not to be had, without settling of agreement in matters
of difference; to propose what may seem best for the Community of Gods Church,
in the cure of our breaches, is not to give offense, but to take it away.

I will therefore premise here one consideration, which I mean to assume for a
supposition, to ground that which I shall propose to this purpose. It shall
contain that which I observe in the New Testament, and the primitive practice
of Gods Church pointing out the meaning of it, concerning the difference
between the Clergy and People in all Churches, and the ground of it. For,
though the edict of our Lord in the Gospel be peremptory, that, who so
forsakes not all things, cannot be my Disciple; that is a Christian; (For,
they who were other whiles called Disciples, were called Christians at
Antiochia, as we read in the Acts,) yet common reason evinceth, that all
Disciples professed not to forsake the World, (which we all profess to forsake
at our Baptism) according to the same rate. For, we see by the Gospel, that
the voluntary oblations of those who followed our Lord, ministering to him, made
a stock of money, which Judas was trusted with, for charity to the poor, after
that his followers were provided for. But, it is against the evidence of
commmon sense to imagine, that all those who professed to follow Christ, and to
be his Disciples, were provided for out of this Stock. It is true, our Lord
promises in the Gospel, that whosoever shall forsake kindred, or wife, or
house, or goods, for the Gospel, shall receive an hundred fold here, and in
the World to come life everlasting. A thing visibly fullfilled in the primitive
state of the Church; when, whosoever was persecuted for Christianity, all
Christians acknowledged themselves bound to provide for his support. Neither
can it be said, how S. Paul's saying; that godliness has the promises of this
life and of that which is to come; could be otherwise fullfilled, when those
who had undertaken Christ's Cross where subject to powers, that did, or might
persecute Christianity at their pleasure. But, though all Christians, in case
of persecution, are bound by their Baptism to leave all they have, that they
may carry Christ's Cross after him; Yet it was something more that S. Peter
meant when he said; Lord we have left all to follow thee, what shall we have?
For, though a Net and a Fisher-boat were no great thing to leave; yet, so firm
a faith as to forsake a man's whole course of living, casting himself upon the
word of Christ for his very being, whither here or in the World to come, is
suitable to the promise that follows, of sitting upon xii. Throues to judge the
xii. Tribes of Israel. The Christians of Jerusalem, who parted with their
Estates, that the disciples might be maintained in their daily attendance upon
Gods service, cannot be said to have obtained thereby any common rank in the
Church; But it must be said, that, quitting their former course and state of
living, by quitting the means of maintaining it, they became from thenceforth,
either of the Clergy, or of the poor which were always maintained out of the
stock of the Church. For, by S. Paul's instructions to Timothy. 1. Tim. V. it
appears, that those Widows which were employed and maintained by the Church
for the common necessities of it, were to be taken out of such as were
destitute of means to live other wise.

Herewith agrees an infinite number of examples in the primitive Church, of
Godly Bishops, Priests, and others of the Clergy, who, taking upon them such
professions, divested themselves of their worldly goods; whither applying them
to the property, or only to the use of the Church; as reserving themselves
power to dispose of them, in favor of friends or kindred, at their death. And,
from the same reason and ground proceed all the Canons, whereby it was
provided, that they should not dispose of the Church goods to such uses, at
death, but of their own, well and good. For, whatsoever their estates were,
though they renounced them not, yet, it became necessary for them to live as
others of the Clergy lived; Who were generally poor when they were promoted,
and therefore professed to content themselves with mere necessaries, because
the Church goods, of which they lived, were due to the maintenance of the poor,
as well as of the Clergy. From whence we may see, what truth there is in those
sayings of the Fathers, which make the precepts of our Lord, in his Sermon upon
the mount, matters of Counsel. For, if all Christians be to leave all things
that they may follow Christ, it is certain that they are commanded, and not
only advised, to turn the other cheek, to quit a man's Cote to him that takes
away his Cloak, to undergo the rest of those precepts, whereby our Lord
describes the duty of a Christian; provided they be so understood, as the
maintenance of a man's estate in the World, and the obligations which it
infers, even by virtue of that Christianity which allows the same, will
require. But, if there be another estate in the Church, of Disciples which
profess to follow Christ, leaving the employment of the world for that purpose,
and therefore to forbear the pleasures and proffits thereof accordingly; That
strict Rate and that high degree, in which they profess to leave the world to
follow Christ, must needs be mere matter of Counsel; because no man is
commanded to undertake that estate, but invited to it, for the securing of his
Salvation, who knows he may be saved without it. Whereby it appears, that
this estate imports a profession of abstinence from the pride, the revenge, the
lusts and pleasures of the world, as well as from the riches of it; as well of
the humility, the patience, the continence, the meekness and obedience of our
Lord, as of the mean estate in which he lived; But that, for the means to
compass this end, it imports first a profession of renouncing the rank and
estate which every man holds in the world, and dedicating himself to the
service of the Church, and that employment which tends to the common good of
Christians.

If it should be inferred from hence, that the state of the Clergy, importing
the forsaking of the World, at this extraordinary Rate, must therefore import
the profession of single life, as some of the Church of Rome would have it; The
answer is, that it will not follow. And the instance is peremptory That the
Apostles themselves, who thus left the world, did not profess it. And if by
undertaking the Clergy, a man was not obliged to renounce his goods; As
appears by those Canons which enable the Clergy to dispose of them at death;
much less does that estate import a profession of single life; being more
difficult to perform, then to live as a Clergy man upon the Church goods. For,
it is possible for them who have wives, to live as if they had them not,
according to S. Paul; No otherwise, then it is possible for them who have the
dispensing of Church goods, to use them as if they used them not. The reason of
single life for the Clergy is firmly grounded by the Fathers and Canons of the
Church, upon the precept of S. Paul, forbidding man and wife to part, unless
for a time, to attend upon Prayer. For, Priests and Deacons being continually
to attend upon occasions of celebrating the Eucharist, which ought continually
to be frequented; if others be to abstain from the use of Marriage for a time
for that purpose, then they always. And this is the reason, that prevailed so
far, even in the primitive times, that the instances which are produced to
the contrary, during those times, seem to argue no more then dispensation in a
Rule, which had the force of a Law, when an exception took not place; That is,
when those that were thought necessary for the service of the Church, though
not fit to ty themselves to live single.

But this profession was evidently the ground for that discipline, which was
used all over the Church, in breeding youth from tender years, to such a
strict course of life as only use and custom is able to render agreeable to
man's nature. And to this education and discipline, all the authority and credit
of the Clergy over the people is to be imputed; the dissolution whereof, is the
true occasion of the miseries which we have seen. For, did the people think
themselves tied to depend upon the Clergy for their instructions, to admit
their admonitions and reproves in matter of Religion, (that is, did the
discipline and education of the Clergy maintain them in that authority with the
people) it is not possible, that the pride which has been seen, in setting up
new Religions, and giving new Laws to the Church, should take place. But this
authority is not to be preserved, without retirement from the world, that is,
from conversation with the People, of what rank or degree soever, whither upon
pretense of profit or pleasure. And therefore, being once lost, by the
debauches of the Clergy before the Reformation, it is not to be restored,
without restoring the ground of it, the said education and discipline; nor, by
consequence, the Reformation to be counted complete otherwise; Supposing
always the Reformation to be the restoring of that Church which has been,
not the building of that which has not been. The same education and discipline
is, by the express Canons of the Church, the ground of that title, upon which
promotion is due to the Clergy, in their respective Churches. For, what is more
against the Rules of the Church, then to take such men for Priests and Bishops
of such Churches, as men know not how they behaved themselves in lower degrees?
Those that talk of the Interest of the People in Ecclesiastical promotions,
without supposing this ground, do allege nothing but their own dreams, to bring
their own dreams to pass.

Having this premised, I must needs say, I see no manner of inconvenience in
that which the Presbyterians pretend for the chief cause of their distance;
that is, the concurrence of Presbyters with their Bishops, in Ordinations, and
the Jurisdiction of the Church; provided it be settled in that form, which,
being grounded upon the Rule of the Catholic Church, may tend to restore and
advance the common Christianity.

Now, I take the Rule of the Church to be as evidently this, as the common
Christianity is evident; that every City, with the Territory thereof, be the
seat and content of a Church. For, though it has been used with so much
difference in several parts and times of the Church, that those Countries,
which some whiles, and some where, might have been cast into fourscore
Churches, have other whiles, and else where, been cast into four; yet, these
are but exceptions to a Rule, which the Law says, do not destroy, but confirm
it. For, in matters concerning the whole, the Unity of the whole, may as well
be preserved by the concurrence of four, as of fourscore.

The Churches, (that is, according to this Rule) the Dioceses of England have
been constituted and distinguished upon occasion of the Soveraignties, in
which, and by consent whereof, the Christianity of the Nation was first
planted. He that considers with half an eye, shall easily see, how the
conversion of Kent, of the East, and South, and West Saxons, of the East Angles
and Mercians, and lastly of Northumberland, produced the foundation of English
Churches. For, of the British foundations, in the West parts of the Island,
from the two Forths to the Lands end, the same account is to be kept; the
Dominion of the Britains being for some time divided into several
Soveraignties. He that is convicted of this truth, (which no man can be
convicted of, but he that considers the case; But, who so considers the
case, must needs stand convict of it) will easily grant me, that, when the
Monarchy prevailed, and England came to be divided into Counties, the General
Rule of the Church would have required another course to have been observed.
For, had the Head Town of every County been made the Seat of a Church
containing that County, no man, that survayes the division of the Roman Empire
into Churches (made without the secular Power, as before Constantine) will
deny; That, the division so made, would have been more correspondent to the
primitive form, tending to the Unity of the whole.

But, let no man think, that, for the love of such a correspondence, I have any
itch to call in question the Unity of the Whole. The alteration is great, and
must needs produce a great motion, to ingraffe it into the Laws of the Kingdom.
And therefore, I am not of opinion to change the Law for hope of amendment,
with so much appearance of danger, to the being of the Whole. But I am of
opinion, that it would be easy to erect Presbyteries, that is, Colleges of
Presbyters, in all Shire Towns which have no Cathedral Churches, for the
Ecclesiastical Government of the respective Counties, with, and under the
Bishops; And that so, the Rule of the Church would be set on work, to the best
effect and purpose. For, those Towns have commonly Churches altogether
unprovided of means, through the horrible sacriledges that have passed; and
yet, in common reason (agreeing with the wisdom of Gods Spirit, from whence the
Rule of Episcopacy issued) ought to be Nurseries of Christianity to the
respective Counties. And that intent cannot so well be brought to effect, as by
planting the wisest, and those that have most of the Clergy in their lives, in
the most eminent places, with authority next to the Chief, over their
respective bounds. By the ministry of such persons, the Offices of Gods
service might so be performed in the chief places, as might be a pattern for
their Country Churches to follow. These Presbyters might grow up, by education,
in that discipline of the Clergy, which I have recommended upon the experience
of the whole Church. They might live a Collegiate life in common, with the care
and inspection of Inferiors, together with the charge of instructing, or
seeing them instructed in the Scriptures. The Canon of the whole Church,
confining all degrees of the Clergy to their respective Churches, might be
revived by their means; The superseding whereof, being certainly one of the
irregularities of the Papacy, has conduced much to the dissolution of
Discipline in the Church. For, in conscience, how can he that is obliged to any
Church, give account of himself to another, to which the first is not
subordinate? And therefore, though the Presbyteries which I propose be not
Churches, yet may they take account of their respective Clergy, and render it
to their Bishops. The promotion of inferior Orders, belonging unto their
account, may proceed upon the account which they give. The censures that are
requisite to pass in foro exteriori may pass them in the first instance, and
from them being transmitted to the Bishop, be either inacted or voided; Always
with right of appeal to the Synod of the Province, in cases of weight, and in
the intervals thereof, to their Deputies; To which purpose, and in which
nature, the High Commission ought to be revived. For, as it is by no means to
be allowed, that the Bishops negative be any way questioned; So is it no way
fit, that the consent of Bishop and Presbyters both be concluded in one and the
same instance. As for those Dioceses which are concluded within only one
County, there, I suppose I need not say, that the Chapter of the Cathedral are
by inheritance this Presbytery.

Now, these Colleges of Presbyters consisting of those only, that shall have
run the whole course of their lives in the education and discipline of the
Clergy; is there any possible pretense of burden upon them, if the condition
of single life should be required, to qualify them for their places? For, this
were not to tie any man to single life, seeing who will may go forth, and be
provided of a Country Church; But it were to maintain the discipline of the
Clergy, in the most eminent places, wherein, there is a course proposed to
them who embrace it, of ending their days in it. And the course of a
Collegiate life, which I propose, seems a sufficient means and advantage to
overcome those temptations, which in these days, may seem too difficult for
all the Clergy to undergo.

As for the means of supporting these Presbyteries, wherein the Cure of all
Parishes within the Shire Towns is provided for, and included; It is no
difficulty to him that considers with conscience, that originally, the
indowment of the Diocese was the Patrimony of the Mother Church; and afterward
appropriated to Parish Churches, by abating the right of the Mother Church,
upon particular contracts, appearing to be for the good of the parts. For, if
the Mother Church have abated so much of her common right, when it was for the
good of the Parishes; Is it not necessary, that the Parishes now abate of their
property in their respective indowments, by Pensions to these Colleges, now
they appear to be for the good of the Diocese? And this I am now bold to
profess, before the judgment of Superiors be declared, because I am confident,
that by this position, I abate not a hair of that Power which the Bishops in
England now use; But I add much to the strictness of discipline, (that is, in
effect, of Christianity) by requiring all Ordinations, all acts of Jurisdiction
in foro exteriori, to pass both the Presbyters and the Bishop in several
instances. And further then this I extend not the opinion of a divine to
particulars, but leave the rest entire to the wisdom of superiors. And this may
serve to show, that there is no cause why the difference on foot, concerning
the Government of the Church, may not settle into a change conducing to the
advancement of the common Christianity.

Which will hold till stronger in the other, concerning the Service, if men
take their measures by the common interest of Christianity, not by their
particular prejudices. For, I conceive, I may well suppose, that the Sectaries
pretense of praying by the Spirit, is content to be buried in oblivion and
silence; considering that the excesses are evident, and horrible, which that
pretense has brought forth. Besides, that no man now stands to that dangerous
position; That the offices of Gods service are of no effect, when they are
ministered by such as are not in the state of grace. For, I presume it is not,
nor can be supposed on any hand, that all whom the Church must employ, are
endowed with Gods spirit; that is, are in the state of grace. I suppose
further, as not questioned on any hand, that the public service of God is to
consist of the praises of God, (by the Psalms of David, and other Hymns of
Gods Church) of the reading of the Scriptures, of the instruction of Gods
people out of them, in fine, of the Prayers of the Church, and in the chief
place, of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and those prayers which it is to be
celebrated with.

Some of our Sects have been bold to pretend, that the Psalter, or Psalms of
David, are impertinent to the Devotions of Christians, as concerning the
particular condition of David, and composed whith regard to it. Whereby they
overthrow the foundation of Christianity, standing upon this supposition, that
the old Testament is the figure ad shadow of the new, and that Christ has the
key of the writings, as well as of the house of David. For, seeing Christ and
his mystical Body the Church are all one, the meaning and intent of the Psalms
cannot concern Christ, but it must end in his Church. But, seeing the Church is
but shadowed in the Psalms, being part of the Old Testament; I can expect no
dispute of the necessity of other Hymns, composed under Christianity, in the
solemnizing of Gods public service. And seeing the question on foot concerns
the settling of the form of Gods service by a Law of the Kingdom; there can
remain no dispute concerning the necessity of a settled Order in reading the
Scriptures, and using the Psalms and Hymns of the Church. Nor do I know any
man, sincerely professing the Reformation, that could not wish with all his
heart, that the whole order and form which shall be settled, with the
circumstance of the same, might be according to the primitive simplicity, and
naked plainness of the ancient Church; supposing the difference between the
state in which the Church lived under persecution; and now, that, being
protected by the secular Power, it receives all the World to take part in the
service of God. For, what difference this will infer in the Order and Rule of
Gods service to be inacted by a Law of this Kingdom, common reason, and the
perpetual practice of Gods Church, together with the precedents recorded in
Scripture, must be admitted to Witness.

These things supposed, no man doubts, that the form of service now in force by
the Law of this Land, may be acknowledged capable of amendment, without
disparagement, either to the wisdom of the Church, that prescribed, or of the
Nation that inacted it. For, what positive Law of man is there that is not?
Nay, what arrogance can it be in a particular person, (having bestowed more
consideration upon it, then it is possible, that those who had the framing of
it should have leisure to do) to think that he knows some particulars, in which
it might be mended? For, neither does it follow, that it is better to endanger
the spoiling of it by calling it in question, than to let it rest as it is; And
that particular person, whosoever he is, that should think his own opinion
necessary to be followed, without com-promising it to the public, would justly
incur the mark of arrogance. Since therefore, that this is the time for such
a debate, if any change be pretended; and that the reasons mentioned before, are
of sufficient consideration to oblige all sides, to prefer unity before
prejudice; what remains, but that, either it be left entire in that State
wherein it stands, or that nothing be changed, without sufficient debate of
reason upon the whole, what is fit to be changed, what not?

But one thing I must here expressly stand upon, because the form of Gods
service which has been usurped during the Schism, protests against the Law
in force. I acknowledge, that the whole Reformation protests against the
insufficience and defects of the Church of Rome, in the course which it takes
for the instruction of Christian people, in the duties of their Christianity;
against the abuses there practiced, in celebrating the Eucharist without any
pretense of a Communion, in private Masses, and in serving God in a Language
which the people understand not. For, these abuses are a principal part of the
ground for that change, which we justly maintain to be Reformation; The
boldness of those that opposed it, being come to such a height, as openly to
maintain; that it concerns not Christian people to know, or to mind what is
done at the Mass, (being the ordinary service of God, for which they come to
Church,) or what is said; But, that the intention of the Priest is enough to
apply the sacrifice of Christ to all that are present, (which they think it
does no less to them that are absent; and therefore leave us unsatisfied why
people should come to Church) who need do nothing but say their Paters and
their Aves. These abuses I do acknowledge. But, be the World my witness, and
all that know what has passed, for the matter of Religion, in the World; was
it ever protested, by those who demanded Reformation in the Church; that the
Eucharist cught to be celebrated but four times, or twelve times in the year?
That by Gods Law, there ought to be two Sermons every Sunday in every Church?
That other Festivals beside the Sunday, and set times of fasting oughr not to
be solemnized with the service of God? That the Church doors ought not to be
open, but when there is preaching? Take the primitive practice of the Church
along with the Scripture, and they shall tell you another tale; that Prayer,
and the praises of God, is the more principal end of Christian Assemblies; than
Preaching. The reason is unanswerable; For, the one is the end, the other the
means. That the celebration of the Eucharist, is the most principal Office of
Gods service under Christianity, is no less evident; For, other Offices are
common to Judaisme, this, consisting most in Prayers, consists of those Prayers
which are proper to Christianity; that is to those causes wherein our Salvation
consists. And can there be question how frequent it ought to be? Shall not
the practice of the whole Church, from the beginning, decide the question, if
any remain? The single life of the Clergy prevailed for this end, that they
might be always ready to celebrate the Eucharist; say the Fathers and the
Canons, which I alleged before. It is a question in Gennadius de dogmatibus
Ecclesiasticis, whither every man ought to communicate every day or not. But
therefore no question, that it ought to be celebrated every day, that who so
would might communicate. In conscience, would they be bound to Preach every
day, that are so much for Preaching? After the reading of the Scripture,
follows the Sermon, and after that the Eucharist; This is the primitive order
of the whole Church, at that solemn service when the Eucharist, (on
Fasting-dayes in the Evening, on other days before Noon) was Celebrated. After
the Scriptures were read, the people were taught their duty out of them. A
thing necessary and possible. Not that every Curate should be bound to declame
by the Glass; But, that he should be bound to instruct his Parish out of the
Scriptures which are read. If he be tied to Preach as often as the Church door
opens, the Church door must be shut, because no sides can hold out, so often as
Christians ought to meet for Gods service. I call the World to witness; Is it
not as much a work of lungs and sides, as an Office of Gods service, which
takes up the time of their Church Assemblies? Is not the way opened, by this
means, to declame of public Government in Church and State, to intertain the
Hearers? For alas, should men confine themselves to that which the generality
of their audience might edify by, in their Christianity, the Trade would be
obstructed.

For, let me freely say, the undoubted truth of the common Christianity, (which
no Sermons ought to exceed, because they pretend the edification of the
generality of Christians) is contained in so narrow a compass, that no
eloquence, (much less, the eloquence of all that must come into the Pulpit) can
change the seasoning and serving of it, so as to make it agreeable to men's
palats; without fetching in matter impertinent, if not destructive to the
common Christianity. And the same is, for more peremptory reason, to be said of
arbitrary Prayers. For, the very posture of him, that pretends to prefer the
devotions of Gods people to the Altar which is above, strongly impresseth upon
the hearts of simple Christians, an opinion, that thereby they discharge to God
the duty which their creation and redemption requires at their hands. Which, if
the matter of those Prayers be such as the common Christianity requires, they
may do indeed. But, if it be possible, that Rebellion, Slander, Nonsense and
Blasphemy may be the matter of them, as well as Christianity, then is it not
Religion, but Superstition which such devotions exercise; Nor, can that Kingdom
stand excused to God, which shall gratify that licentiousness, whereof they
see the effect before their eyes. All reason of Christianity concurres with the
practice of the whole Church, to witness; that the interest of Christianity
requires the service of God to be maintained and exercised daily, (yea hourly,
were it possible) not only by particular Christians, but by Assemblies of
Christians, so far as the business of the World will give leave, and as there
is means to maintain men's attendance upon it. There may come abuse in the
order, the form, the matter of that which is tendered to God for his Service.
But, instead of reforming those abuses, to take away the means, the Rule, the
obligation of such meetings, is mere Sacrilege, in destroying, (under pretense
of Reforming) his Church.

And, though I charge no such design upon those who maintain the obligation of
the Sabbath to consist in two Sermons; yet I do maintain, it is manifest to
common reason, that the form which that opinion introduces necessarily tends
to that effect. Strange it is, that a Nation capable of sens, in an age
improved by learning, should be entangled with the superstition of so vain an
imagination; that God by the same fourth Commandment, should oblige both Jews
to keep the Saturday; and Christians the Sunday; Especially, no man daring to
maintain, that both were, or are tied to the same measure of resting. And
therefore, though, (rather than cross the stream of such a superstition; For,
let no man think, that all superstition can be shut out of Gods Church) I am
ready to conform to the Order that shall take place, so far as the strength of
my body shall enable me; Yet, provided that the Ecclesiastical Laws of England,
being the Laws of the whole Church, be not abated, so as to stick an evident
mark of Schism upon the Church of England. For, the Law that is recommending
the celebration of the Eucharist, upon all Sundays and Festivals, but
commanding the service to be used, as well on Festivals and Fasting days, as
upon Sundays, (besides the week days) at the public Assemblies of respective
Congregations; To change this Order for two Sermons on the Sunday alone, what
is it but to renounce the whole Church, for the love of those that have divided
from the Church of England, upon causes common to it with the whole Church.

They that would have the Reformation of the Church to be indeed, that which
the Law of the Land calls it, should first provide a course to be established
for Law, by which, all Christian souls, (who have equal interest in the common
Salvation) might serve God in public, all Sundaies and Festivals. For, seeing
there was a course in Law, before the Reformation, for all servants, as well as
others, to be at Mass all Sundays and Festivals; And the Church was enabled
to require account of it at their hands; It will not be Reformation to abrogate
the abuses of the Mass, till a course be taken, that all Christians may
frequent that, which shall appear to be indeed the service of God instead of
the Mass. Let no Preachers flatter themselves with an opinion, that they shall
ever make Christians so perfectly Jews, as to persuade them to dress no meat
on the Sundays. If Servants must stay at home to dress meat on Sundays, (and
for other occasions they must stay at home, besides that) will not the way to
repair that breach, be to injoyne several Assemblies in all Parish Churches,
upon all Sunday mornings, that several Persons, of several Estates and
qualities, may have opportunity to attend the public service of God, at
several hours of the same Sundays and Holidays. For, though I understand very
well, that this would impose upon the Church, (that is, upon my hrethren of the
Clergy,) a greater burden, than an afternoons meal of a Sermon, (which all
men know, is furnished of the cold meat of the forenoon) yet, I would have the
Word cleared of this imposture that reigns, that two Sermons every Sunday, is
the due way of keeping the Sabbath among Christians, or of advancing Gods
public service.

I will not here dispute, that the Lent-Fast was instituted by the Apostles.
But this I maintain to be evident, that the Fast before the Resurrection of
Christ is and was as ancient as the Feast of his Resurrection; and that more
ancient than the keeping of all Lords days in the year; being merely the
reflection of that one, all the weeks of the yeaar. Nor will any man, that
knows what he says, ever question, that the enlarging of it to forty days is
a just Law, voluntarily undertaken by the whole Church, not to be condemned
without the like mark of Schism. For, since the World is come into the Church,
is there not manifest reason, that more time should be taken, for the expiating
of more sins, which are the sins of more people? to prepare, as well the Elder,
to renew their Christianity by communicating at Easter; as the younger to be
confirmed, and come first to the Communion at Easter, now they are baptized
Infants? Which, in former ages, was the time of their first coming to Baptism.
As for the Wednsdayes and Fridayes, if we shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, unless our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees; And, if it be evident, as evident it is, that the Scribes and
Pharisees prescribed Mundayes and Thursdayes for days of less solemn
Assemblies then the Sabbath; How shall we enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, if,
in despite of the whole Church, which has hitherto used Wednesdayes and
Fridayes, in lieu of Mundayes and Thursdays, used by the Synagogues, we void
the Law of England by which they are in force? Of the Ceremonies the same is to
be understood; Not because it can be within the compass of common reason to
imagine, that the same Ceremonies have continued, from the time that the Church
was persecuted into holes and caves of the Earth, to this time, in which the
question is of settling Christianity by the Law of this Kingdom. It were want of
common understanding to think that the same could serve. But, because so few,
and so innocent as we use, cannot be condemned, without condemning, not only
Gods whole Church, but also Gods ancient people; who will evidently be found in
the same cause.

One thing has been cast forth in bar to all this, which we must not swallow
whole, unless we mean to impose upon our selves. It is the pretense of
complying with the Reformed Churches. For, it is evident, that there are four
forms of Reformation extant; One according to Luther, another according to
Calvine, the third is, that of the Church of England, and in the last place,
(though first for time,) because least known, and protected by no Sovereign, I
name that of the Union in Bohemia. For, we are to know, that the followers of
John Husse having sent Deputies to the Council of Basil, they accorded to
reunite the Nation upon four Articles; The chief whereof was the Communion in
both kinds. They that stood to the accord are to this day called thereupon
Calixtin, or sub utraque in Latin. But another part of those that were at
distance, thinking themselves betrayed by their Deputies in that accord,
proceeded to settle themselves in a form of Religion, and the service of God,
by that which they held the pure truth of God, in all points that had been
disputed. The Emperor Ferdinand I. King of Bohemia, having subdued his
subjects there, that rose with the Protestants in Germany, cast a good part of
these out of the Country; who, finding shelter in Polonia, and Prussia, there
planted and propagated their form, till the troubles of our time, when by the
Emperors victory in Bohemia, and the late troubles in Poland, they seem to be
at a loweble, though they impute it to the decay of their first discipline.

They that would reform the Church of England, professing already that
Reformation which it found best, will they not first show us reason, why we are
to leave Luther for Calvine? For, if they mean his form, when they talk of
conforming us to the reformed Churches, because of the Scotts Presbyteries,
they must have better arguments, then either the learning or the Christianity
of the Scottish Presbyterians will yield, to persuade us. They say, those that
framed the Reformation in England, being bred under Melancthon among the
Lutheranes, followed them much an end in the order and form which they
prescribed. But is that any reason for any change, before it appear which is in
the right? I freely profess I find Melancthon the better learned, and the more
Christian spirit. But the Church of England, which in diverse points differs
from both, why should it be thought to follow either for any reason, but, as
either agrees with the Catholic Church? And for that, I prefer the Unity of
Bohemia before both; For, they had the rule of Vincentius given them, to take
their measure by the consent of the Catholic Church, and these things which
have always and every where been professed and practiced in it; And, had they
done nothing but what is justifiable by that Rule, I should not blame them for
that which I blame in them most. But where they agree not with Luther and
Calvine, wherein do they not agree with the Church of England?

In particular, they sent all over the World, to inform themselves of a visible
succession of Bishops, whose profession was such, that they might derive the
Ordination of Bishops, for their Churches, from their hands. They took the
superstitions of the Greeks to be such, that they could not own it from them.
In that I think they were in the wrong. For, I doubt not, the Greeks would
have granted them Ordination only under the profession of the Catholic
Church; and that had been enough. But, thinking themselves in a strait of
necessity, they chose twelve by lots; And hearing that the Waldenses lived in
Austria under Bishops, deriving their succession from the time of Constantine
(and therefore from the Apostles) they sent them thither to be Ordained,
protesting against their weakness, in going to Mass for fear. The protestation
was admitted, and the persons ordained Bishops. Now, I take not upon me to
maintain the truth of that information, concerning the succession of these
Bishops, whereupon they proceeded. But, they being reasonably persuaded of it,
and not knowing how to proceed otherwise, (through a mistake which they could
not overcome) and settling themselves upon an innocent presumption, why should
the effect of these Ordinations seem questionable? For, under these Bishops
they have subsisted from that day to this.

And, with what conscience is it demanded; for conformity to the Reformation,
that we acknowledge them Priests who are ordained against Bishops? If we do
not, we shall condemn those Reformed Churches, which have no Bishops. Is it the
fashion, that a man quit his Cloak, because his fellow has none? Or is it any
thing else, to renounce a good Title, because they cannot plead it? There was a
good expedient in the ancient Church, to refer things to God, which could not
be decided without a breach in the Church. Let their zele against the abuses of
the Church of Rome be counted pardonable with God, which caused them to think
the Order of Bishops a support of Antichrist; when as the Papacy is visibly
raised upon the rights of Bishops which it ingrosseth. Let the difficulty of
procuring Ordinations, and having Bishops, render them excusable to God. Those
that are ordained by Presbyters against Bishops, on purpose to set up Altar
against Altar, how can we count them ordained refusing the concurrence of the
Church to their Ordinations? They that would ty us to comply with the
Reformation, are first to show us, that the Unity of Bohemia is no part of it,
And, that their Reformation is not to be preferred, either before that of
Luther, or that of Calvine. For, can we acknowledge the Ordinations of
Presbyters against their Bishops, and not condemn them, that sought all over
the World for Bishops to ordain them Bishops, that the Bishops so ordained
might ordain them Presbyters?

But, not only in this prime point of our differences, but also in the
difference of the Clergy from the people, in the three Orders, of Bishops
Presbyters and Deacons, in the matter of Justification and the Eucharist, of
Confirmation, and Penance of the Festivalls and Fasts of the Church, one of
diverse Orders and institutions of less consequence, their profession agrees
with the ancient Church, and the Church of England, where it departs from
both Luther and Calvine. In the matter of Penance (though with much humility)
they tell the Lutheranes roundly, they have but one of the keys, viz. that of
loosing, but bind not; as pronouncing absolution without injoyning of Penance.
The discipline of Geneva they magnify indeed, as they find it described by
Bodine, in his method of Histories; But they distinguish not, whither they mean
the civil discipline, which the Laws of that State enforce, or that which the
Power of the Keys, exercised there according to Calvine, does constitute. For,
the Civil Law of a Christian State (especially, no bigger then that of Geneva)
may settle such a discipline over the outward man, as may restrain from the
outward act of sin, without mortifying the inward man to the inward love of it.
The late Usurpers Army we have seen well disciplined, against the ordinary
vices of the Camp; Who, appearing now to have been then enemies to their
Country, are thereby discovered, not to have followed the reward of Christians,
but of Soldiers. And the Laws of Christian States, by the means of
Christianity which they maintain, may reach to the mortifying of sin, and the
quickening of righteousness at the heart; But of themselves, being Civil Laws,
and proposing no further reward or punishment, then that good which a man's
Country signifies, they reach no futther then the outward man, for the better
or for the worse. Nor is it of any greater consequence to Christianity, that
the outward act of sin or virtue is repressed or encouraged, by the rewards and
penalties of Civil Laws. But, when the discipline of the Church takes place,
he who forfeiteth his Christianity by gross sin that is notorious, forfeiteth
also Communion with the Church; and recovereth it not, till the presumption be
no less notorious, that he has recovered his Christianity. Now, Communion with
the Church is the consequence of our Baptism, which intitleth us to life
everlasting. Therefore it is not duly forfeited, without forfeiting the effect
of Baptism, our right to life everlasting. So, our right to heaven depending
upon the Communion of the Church; the discipline of the Church, must needs
reach the inward man as effectually, as any outward application can reach the
heart, which is invisible. For, the presumption is grounded upon visible works
of Penance, the effects of that invisible disposition, without which they could
not be constantly brought forth. Whither or no this discipline be visible at
Geneva, I will not pronounce. This I undertake, that, comparing the Doctrine of
Calvine with their Orders, they need not set a value upon the Power of the
Keys exercised according to his Doctrine, in comparison of the same exercised
according to their own Orders. So that supposing, not granting, that the Laws
of the Church of England, (being the Laws of the primitive Catholic Church)
are to be changed for conformity with the Reformed Churches; it follows not
therefore, that they are to be changed, for those of the Churches reformed
according to Calvine. Certainly, the receiving of the Communion kneeling,
having been one of the Adors of their Reformation from the beginning, and so
stiffly insisted upon by them in Poland, they that pretend to change the Law of
England, in that point for conformity with the Reformation, think they have not
men but beasts to to deal with.

The Church of England, in the Commination against sinners, has declared a
great zeal for the renouncing of that ancient discipline of Penance, which was
in force in the primitive Church. And certainly, the Church of England is not
the Church of England but in Name, till the power of excommunication be
restored unto it, which there was not, nor ever can be sufficient cause to take
from any Church. But, the discipline of Penance, though depending upon the
Power of excommunication, is as much to be preferred before it, as it is more
desirable to bring men to the Church, then to shut them out of it. If prejudice
and faction have not more to do in the pretenses of this sin, then the truth of
Christianity, and zeal to advance it; it is a point that cannot be neglected in
any deliberation of Reforming the Church. I cannot render a more visible
reason, why so godly a zeal, in these that first prescribed our Reformation, to
the restoring of penance, has now been improved by their successors, then the
partialities which sprung up in it like tares in the wheat, and have now
prevailed to choke even the power of excommunication, wherein the being of a
Church consists. And though many sins of this Nation may be alleged, for
the cause why God has taken this sharp revenge upon us; yet can no reason be
so proper, why he should permit the hedge of the Church to be cast down, (for
all Sects to devour, and tread his vineyard under foot) by suffering the power
of excommunication to be taken from it; as the neglect of improving it, in and
to the discipline of penance. True it is, not only all capital, but all
infamous crimes, whereof men are convicted by Law, are thereby notorious, and
require this discipline, no less then those which the Law of this Land
punishes not otherwise then by penance. And if the Church did make a
difference among those that dye by public Justice; owning only these, who
approve their desire to undergo regular penance, in case they might survive;
then were this discipline visible, no visible crime escaping it. For, all
capital and infamous crimes, that are not actually punished with death, must
by that reason remain unreconciled to the Church, though free of the Law, till
penance be done. And seeing crimes that are not known cannot be cured upon
easier terms then those that are; would ^o^ the judgment of the Law,
authorizing the Church in the cure of known sins, move even them that believe
their Christianity, no further then it is authorized by Law, to submit
invisible sins to the same cure? For, what is it, but the slighting of this
cure, that makes men's sins fester and rankle inwardly, and break out into
greater and greater excesses? And therefore, to debate of Ceremonies, and words
in the service, and May-poles, and Sabbath days journeyes, not considering the
Power of the Keys, upon which the Church is founded, and the restoring of the
same; is to neglect a consumption at the heart, pretending only to cure the
hair or the nails.

Now if any of our Sects insist upon a pretense that deserves to be insisted
upon, far be it from us to cast off the consideration of it, because they have
unduely separated from the Church for it. Our Anabaptists, it is known insist
upon two points; The baptizing of Infants, and that, by sprinkling, not by
dipping. In both, they have neglected S. Peter's Doctrine, That Baptism saves
us, not the laying aside of the filth of our flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience to God. For, were the profession of Christianity, celebrated by the
Sacrament of Baptism, believed to be that which saves us, men would not go
to baptize them, as not baptized, who by their profession (which they
acknowledge by seeking the Communion of the Church) are under that bond, which
intitleth them to the Salvation of Christians. Nor can there be any greater
presumption, then the voiding of Baptism so celebrated, that they expect
Salvation upon other terms. But, in making void Baptism ministered by
sprinkling alone, without dipping, they neglect S. Peter again, when he makes
the Baptism that saves not to consist in cleansing the flesh, but in a due
profession of Christianity; signifying this to be the principal, that only the
accessory Ceremony, which it is solemnized with. And therefore, they are to
acknowledge this difference by acknowledging Baptism so ministered to be good
and valid, not void. But, this being acknowledged, well may they insist, that
it is unduely ministered. For it is evident, that, neither the Scripture, nor
the practice of the whole Church, can by any means allow the sprinkling of
water for Baptism, though the pouring on of water in case of necessity, be
allowed. Nor does the Law of the Church of England allow any more then pouring
water upon a Child that is weak, commanding therefore dipping otherwise. And
therefore this Law, being much weakened by the tenderness of Mothers and
friends, (supposing all Infants weak, which the Law supposes not) and by undue
zeal for foreign fashions ought to be revived and brought into use by all
Ordinances, that there may remain no color for such an offense. And therefore,
reparation is to be made for the sacrilege of the late Wars, in destroying
the Fonts of Baptism in Churches, and bringing in Christening out of Basins by
force.

I cannot say that I have touched all that is fit to be touched. But I hope I
have said nothing, but that which follows upon the ground, which I have
justified. That which is proposed, and is not so justified, seems to demand the
consent of those who propose it, as able to hold the Church divided, if they be
not contented; But that calls to mind a reason on the other side, that men use
to get a stomach with eating in such cases. The due measure is not the
satisfying of men's appetites, but the improvement of our common Christianity.

FINIS.

