A TREATISE OF THE SCHISM OF ENGLAND.

Wherein particularly Mr. HALES and Mr. HOBBS are modestly accosted.

By PHILIP SCOT.

Permissu Superiorum.

AMSTERDAM Printed Anno Dom. 1650

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY.
The Author Superviving intended to both the Universities, as a Theme to be
discussed in their next Scholastic Olimpicks.
WHen Fabius was asked who was a good Orator, he said he would give the same
answer, which the Stoics would give if this question were propounded to them
concerning Zeno, Cleanthes, or Chrisippus, whom they esteemed great and worthy
men; but not such as had obtained the height of which human nature is capable.

The same I confess of you, ye have made large progresses in the school of
wisdom, and many of you have almost reached the topp of human capacity, but yet
ye have not obtained pure wisdom: And truly, I fear as the old Platonists
confessed of themselves, ye will never reach it till your souls final
separation: when she will to her loss find where she mist her footing, except
ye would (which were a noble design) maugre the injuries of the time and place
where ye live, life up your eyes, and conclude with Epictetus (...), our aim
shall be to seek God with a pure Soul. This cannot be done unless without any
limitation ye submit to these (...) and (...) to those commanding Oracles (as
the Ancients call them) which God by his holy Spouse propounds to our
obedience; to this end it is first necessary to know which is the only Church,
whence all wisdom as from a pure source flows: to this the ensuing discourse
will enable the Reader.

Witten by your Servant PHILIP SCOT

A TREATISE OF THE Schism of England.
CHAP. I. The Church of Rome taken in the latitude of her Communion is God's
only Church.
THis titular Thesis will seem a Paradox, by reason of the strong prejudice our
Country is infected with against an apparent truth: but the succeeding
discourse will demonstrate by lineary deduction the most assured certainty of
it.

Paucis opus est ad bonam mentem litteris; Sen. ep. 106.

I shall be brief; yet I hope sufficiently large, because as St. Cyprian,
tract. 3. de simplicitate Prelatorum. Tractatu longo atque argumentis non est
opus. Probatio est ad fidem facilis compendio veritatis. Our holy faith needs
no tedious proofs, but only compendious declarations. That the Church of Rome
did hold, and openly profess the true faith of Christ in the Apostles time, St.
Paul Romans 1.8. is an abundant witness: That also the other Churches through the
world did in faith communicate with her, is there manifest; and that she kept
the same faith sure and untouched, for the first six hundred years from Christ
to Gregory the great; not only the learned Protestants for the most part
confess, but by this, even to the blind is apparent, that all Councels
assembled in those times, and especially the first four general ones; as is
most evident in the Acts or actions (as they call them) of each Council agreed
in the same profession of faith, held very strict communication against all
heresies; as in the condemnation of Arrius in the Nicen; of Macedonius in the
first Constantinopolitan; of Nestorius in the first Ephesian; of Eutiches, and
Diostorus in the Chalcedon Councels: So that thus far we are secured of the
integrity of the Church of Rome, that is, till St. Leo the Pope who was
contemporary with the Chalcedon: whence is concluded also that all Churches
then dispersed through the whole world; and their Doctors (except such as have
been branded with some heresy or other) did always communicate in faith with
the Church of Rome. The forenamed general Councels witnessed the faith of all
Churches; therefore if the erred, it is necessary that all the other Churches
erred also, and consequently that Christ had no true Church upon earth. He who
desires to look into these things in a most compendious way, let him only read
the Epistles of S. Leo, and the Register of St. Gregory, and there he shall see
most evidently, as in a mirror the connection and agreeing of things together
with the former and succeeding ages. I speak to those that know the Law,
therefore to have given but a hint is sufficient.

Now Gregory the great (who is not noted to have innovated any thing in the
faith which he received from his Ancestors, especially of St. Leo; who, as we
declared was contemporary to Chalcedon, and held by all the world entire in his
faith) this needs no other proof then the confession of the Greeks, who always
reverenced him and entitled him a Saint, and therefore numbered him among the
Fathers; as appears even by the Schismatic Greeks in the dispute of
Purgatory in the Council of Florence; St. Damasene, who was contemporary to Saint Bede, and a little above one hundred years after St. Gregory gives so much
credit to his writings, that he confesses all the East and West to adhere to
them, even in some smaller things which are not generally received amongst us;
whence it is most evident that he was Universally esteemed a follower of his,
and their forefathers in faith.

To bring this evidence more home, we will stay in the 4 first general
Counsels: They did before secure us of the integrity of the Roman Church, and
they will do as much for St. Gregory, for no man is ignorant that he taught all
the world to reverence their faith, next to the four Evangelists, whence is
concluded, that he was of the same faith with them; now St. Gregory sent over
the same faith to England, then involved with the darkness of infidelity by St.
Austin the Monk, and other holy and learned men, who devoutly received it, and
constantly and faithfully kept it until the revolt of Henry the eighth. But
that the Christian faith which we received from St. Gregory by St. Austin may
to every body appear to be the same, which not only the western, but the
Eastern Church did profess; that is, what the whole universal Church did
profess, besides what I have said before, it is demonstrable by the Epistles of
St. Gregory directed to the East, in which he signifies that England was
converted to the faith of Rome, as appears more particularly in his thirtieth
Epistle, which is to Eulogius the Patriarch of Alexandria, and by reciprocal
congratulatories received from them, for so great a gain of souls etc. whence
it follows manifestly, that the Greeks and the East were of the same
communion of faith with the Church of Rome, otherwise there had been no mutual
intercourse of congratulatory letters in things of this nature; this is clearer
then can be controverted. Moreover that England never erred from the faith
first received, or left in any thing that faith, is manifest even to children
if they cannot read; in looking upon the pictures in glass-windows and graves,
in seeing the altars still in some places extant, in seeing the very Churches,
Monasteries, old Hospitals and Colleges, with the old forms of government and
Statutes, which without book are conveyed from hand to hand, as in fasting,
keeping such and such holy days in memory of certain miracles obtained by
invocation of particular Saints, Annual obsequies and solemn prayers for the
dead benefactors, institution of certain Masses to that and such other ends: if
they can read, in running over the Chronicles and Histories of our country,
where you shall observe a constant memory of all these old truths, but not any
innovation or change of faith was ever noted by any Historiographer for so many
ages together; insomuch that our countryman Gulielmus Neubrigensis in his
History. l. 3. c. 3. witnesses, that neither Puritanisme nor any other heresy
could fasten upon England, though in alijs mundi partibus tot plluluaverint
haereses all other parts of the world had been infected with them. A great
testimony written by so knowing a man in point especially of our Histories: And
Wicklef's case confirms all, for he got grounds a thousand miles hence, as in
Bohemia, but here was decayed before he was well born: or what is more brief,
that the Church of England retained her primitive communion as well with the
Roman, as with all other Churches dispersed throughout the world (except those
which for heresy or schism, were noted by the Councels) besides our own
Histories, no Council, no Ecclesiastical History ever imposed the contrary upon
our nation; yea it appears by all monuments, holy and profane, that England did
positively and clearly communicate with all other, or what is all one, that
England conserved her primitive faith untouched: and that was, as is showed
before, the Catholic faith, or the faith of the Catholic Church: therefore
England till Henry the eighth was a member of the true Church of Christ; from
which he revolting, made her Schismatical. All this is witnessed by Ball in his
Catalogue, and Dr. Humfries Jesuitismes p. 2. and B. Usher in his tract of
Succession, whereunto an infinity of Protestant writers agree.

Some will say, as of late a Protestant Doctor did; that England was not
therefore noted in this, because there was none to note her besides her own in
the West; but it appears, that invocation of Saints and many other doctrines
were brought in as a matter of faith against the ancients: that is to say, that
the Church of Rome did bring in those innovations in the Council of Trent.

To this I answer: First, that the Doctor did not well observe into what a
precipice this would cast him; for if there were no known professions of Christ
but such who were ours, it is evident that then the Roman Communion was the
only Church of God, even then when it was in his judgment at the worst, or
else there was no Church: This many of their greatest men have acknowledged; as
Perkins says, that for many hundred years this Communion had possessed the
whole world; Napier upon the Revelations, that for a thousand years Popery had
over-swayed the world; to the same tenure many more of them speak: All which
concludes what I said.

I answer secondly: That the first and purest times of the Church taught the
same Truths, as almost every one of them is confessed by those of Magdeburge in
the fourth Century dedicated to Q. Elizabeth; where they give us a list of
Justification by works, merits, Sacramental confession, Tradition, Invocation
of Saints, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, the propitiatory sacrifice of the
Mass, miracles obtained at the relics of Saints, etc. This testimony had from
Protestants; that is, from a body of the most learned Protestants, who jointly
had studied and examined ex professo the differences betwixt us, were enough
alone.

Daneus, in his tract of the Church, a very fierce Protestant, dividing the
whole time since Christ into ages, giving to the Apostles the first age,
specifies that even then virginity was introduced as more worthy then marriage.
The Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ; and there was reverence used to
the very symbols Parum importune; a great deal to soon Traditionum indigesta
moles, whole heaps of Traditions were unwisely brought in; ordination of Church
ministers with anointing them, which was also used in baptism, extreme unction,
and the like, Bishops, Primatus ecclesiae Romanae nescio qua credulitate in
coelum sublatus est. The Roman seats Supremacy, I know not by what easy
belief, was even then cried up to the very heavens, and so began mysterium
iniquitatis the great mystery of iniquity.

A fair confession; and in the next age he is more prodigal, but here is enough
for any ingenious man; if you would also read him upon St. Augustine his tract
of heresies, how he inverts the judgment of the old Church, and will have
those doctrines which then were esteemed heresies, to be true doctrines; and in
this he shows how Protestants are constrained to turn the Church upside down,
which is indeed true Protestancy to make all old and first Christians
heretics with us. To whom our countryman Perkins in his Problems agrees,
bewayling that Gods Church above thirteen hundred years ago was polluted and
overspread with these errors. Usher in his latin book of Succession of
Protestant Religion, which in the frontispiece promises a deduction from the
Apostles downward; in the book it self he does not once make any real pretense
to it, as if he had wholly forgotten what was promised in the title; he turns
himself to discover where there is the least shadow, the imperfections of our
forefathers, as if he gloried to see their nakedness, which Christian Charity
and modesty would cover; but to show the existence of any Protestantisme he
does not once touch it, till the Albigenses began 1170. years after Christ,
wherein it is also most evident, that he gains little to his purpose, though
after much struggling. All this must needs convince what before in gross was
declared from consent of Councels, and the constant sense of the whole Church.

I answer thirdly: As Christians have in all ages upon the same pretenses
replied to sectaries, that some of these points were more explicitly declared
in the council of Trent against these new heretics; but they were generally
preached, and every where, even by the Greeks believed before, as all writers
even our adversaries confess: Nay, Luther's own writings free the council of
Trent from this calumny, because he accused the Church of all these things
before the Council of Trent was dreamed of; it being convocated to repress his
innovations, or new condemnations of these general received truths: otherwise
not Luther, but those Catholics which first opposed him, had been noted and
accused of novelty by the rest of the body of the Church: And further, no man
is ignorant, that before the Council of Trent, England by Henry the eighth, by
B. Fisher, by Sir Thomas Moore in his works, as also in his Tindal, etc.
Germany by Eckins, Daventrius, Vervesius, Hofmesterus, and others; yes the
universal Church by infinite writers of that age, of this and the other part of
the world, did rise against these upstarts, and laid novelty to their charge.

Therefore England and other nations remained in their primitive and
Apostolical faith, until the aforesaid revolt; nay, these upstarts themselves
never came to that impudency, to accuse Catholics of novelties then rising,
but referred it to former; that is, latter preceding ages, accusing their
forefathers of innovation; and this has always been, and is the practice of
upstarts: Therefore Catholics who embrace this faith derived from the Apostles
themselves, and established by continual succession, ought not to be too
solicitous of the truth of it, seeing they hold it by constant succession, and
no way interupted possession.

Neither will the breach which the Greeks have made from the Latins any way
help them; because they in England are as well broken from the Greeks, as they
are from the Romans: which evidently appears, in that they can not give their
letters of communication to them no more then to us. They hold the propitiatory
sacrifice of Mass; they hold Transubstantiation, seven Sacraments, prayer for
the dead, invocation of Saints, veneration of images, the Supremacy of a Tope,
though some of them pretend exemption, etc. As Balsamon for the patriarch of
Constantinople, which Zonaras, though a Greek Schismatic acknowledges to be
in the B. of Rome, as the rest were accustomed to do; nay Nilus, after he has
much violented authorities for his pretenses against the Popes Supremacy, in
conclusion yields up the bucklers, and confesses that they are bound to obey
him in all lawful commands. I said that the Greek Church acknowledges a
Supremacy: which I therefore said, because that some of those who follow
rigidly Photius his heresy, touching the procession of the holy Ghost, pretend
that the Latin Church for that lost the Supremacy, and ipso jure et facto it
was transferred to Constantinople, but the Abettours of this last point are
almost vanished, as by diverse councels, especially the great Laterane, Linos,
and last Florence general Councels sufficiently appears, where it was not once
arrogated, neither does Hieremy their patriarch, or any of their posterior
writers once say it. How ever this fundamental rock of scandal of the sea of
Rom's Supremacy, if removed according to those few Greeks pretenses it would
not avail you, for you deny any Supremacy: they grant this, and would only
challenge it for themselves injuriously which pretense is also ceased: These are
the stones of scandal betwixt you and us, which ye force all to abjure. So that
the main West and East Churches have nothing to do with you, ye are no members
of their communion; some small conventicles you may find here, and there in the
West in some things agreeing with you, though no notable part at all of your
communion, no not in this very nation. But the Roman in her communion over all
the world, communicates entirely without any dissection of faith; we therefore
have all security in religion: but the reason concerning Protestants is clean
otherwise, for seeing they have separated themselves from the Roman Church,
commended by the Apostles, the mother from whom they sucked their faith; in
which their forefathers lived, and continued, and what is proper to heretics
and schismatics, they went out from us, (as St. Augustiue used the like
argument against the Donatists, fusely and frequently out of St. John) they I
say, are bound to make inquiry into the cause of their separation, and not so
lightly believe the masters of their error, and as it were one part being only
heard to give sense in a matter of so high concernment, but they ought
diligently to hear the reasons of Catholics, and exactly to weigh all things
on which their eternal salvation depends, or if they fear any fallacies may be
used by us in proof of our Religion, let them judiciously read the reasons in
Chollingworth which moved him to become Catholic, and counterpoise them with
those which he puts down for his virtiginous revolt, and truly they will be
forced to confess, that the former are unanswerable, and the latter wholly
inconsiderable. The ground of our hopes of salvation depends upon the
integrity of our faith, and therefore we must look into it, for as St.
Augustine Cont. Lit. Petil. l. 1. c. 1. It is a dangerous thing to defend the
haughty perverseness of their forefathers with a more foolish obstinacy; neither
does it satisfy as St. Augustine there notes l. 3. c. 5. if one should say I
will follow him, because he made me a Christian for none preaching the name of
Christ, or ministering the Sacrament of Christ, is to be followed against the
unity of Christ. This is often heard from the mouths of many of the wifest
amongst them; here I wax baptized, here I will remain: but it is raw and filly
to be born and baptized in this or the other Church, except it be in the unity
of Christ; if from the other we or our forefathers have revolted, or been any
way separated, we must return from whence we have revoked by schism or heresy.
That therefore we may proceed in so weighty a matter, with more care and
solicitude, we will show in the following Chapters in what danger of eternal
damnation (I speak not of every particular person, whom how far invincible
ignorance may excuse, we leave to Gods secret counsel) they have miserably
precipitated, and cast themselves headlong by separating themselves from the
Church of Rome: I do not mean here to treat of the infinite subdivisions of
schism, which are this day risen up within the latitude of Protestantism (as in
time pasts amongst the Donatists) and what sort soever of seperatists have
always been, among whom they labor sometimes to patch up together, but never
so much as think to do it with Catholics: but I will consider how piously the
Catholic root diligently seeks the bough, that is broken from her, if the
bough likewise shall labor to close up that breach which is made by it.
August. apud Baron. 411.

Here therefore with all reason and truth may be averred, what Tertullian in
his excellent book of praescriptions Chap. 29. religiously incultateth against
all sectaries: If your state of division is lawful; if your souls are secure in
this lamentable separation, the holy Gospel has been falsely taught to all the
world, all Christians have salsly believed; so many thousand thousands falsely
baptized; so many acts of faith; that is, all Sacraments falsely administered; so
many acts of religion; so many miracles adulterously done; so many priesthoods;
so many Sacrifices; last of all, so many Martyrdoms falsely undergone for the
faith of Christ: all has been in vain which in testimony of Christ has been
performed, if Christ Church were not the Roman, in, and with her communion,
since there was no other acknowledged till ye came.

CHAP. 2. Catholics may certainly be saved.
IT may be convinced with irrefragable arguments; that Catholics in the Church
of Rome remaining, believing, and doing what she propounds and prescribes shall
attain unto eternal salvation; which sufficiently follows out of what has
been said in the first Chapter, if well attended; much more also might be
produced from Christian discoursing upon principles of holy Scripture and
consent of old and modern Doctors.

But to bring our Doctors here is superfluous labor, seeing Protestants with
whom I have dealt sincerely acknowledge, and ingeniously confess so much; and
many of them of no small account, have delivered in books that the Church of
Rome is the Church of God, and that the errors in her, are not so much as do
overthrow the foundation of Salvation; and therefore with them many have and
may now be saved: So Morton, Regn. Jer. page 94. the Papists are to be thought
of the Church of God, because they hold the foundation of the Gospel, which is
faith in Christ Jesus the Son of God. Hooker, Eccles. Polit. page 140. we
willingly acknowledge Papists to be of the family of Christ. Covel. Apol. ad
Archep. Cant. we affirm those who are of the Churh of Rome to be part of the
Church of Christ, and those who live and die in the Church of Rome may
notwithstanding be saved: and he accuses the Puritans of ignorance that think
the contrary. Soame, Apol. p. 146. if you think that all Papists that die in
the Papistical Church are damned, you think absurdly, and you dissent from the
judgment of learned Protestants. D. Burlo in his 3. Sermon ad Clerum says: I
dare not deny, etc. D. Laud, late Archbishop of Canterbury in his great volume
against the Jesuit, doubts not of ordinary Papists salvations; and of late
Doctor Taylour in his liberty of Prophesying; out of his principles necessarily
concludes so much in his twentieth Paragraph, and number the 3d. he speaks
thus. They keep the foundation etc. and therefore all the wisest personages of
the adverse party allowed to them possibility of Salvation, whilst their
errors are not faults of their will, but weaknesses and deceptions of the
understanding, etc. The foundation of faith stands secure enough for all these
vain and unhandsome superstructures, etc. Chillingworth has both the same
tenants frequently, and as you may gather by his manner of expression, he grants
them, yet very plainly, though unwillingly; sometimes he says that they are not
damnable, othertimes that they are damnable in themselves; but not to
Catholics except they stick to them out of affection of error: It was well he
added this, else he had in one stroke broken the whole fantastic fabric of
his verbal, not rational volume, flashy, no way substantial, as any sober man
will judge.

The whole result of his work, is; that every man believing Scriptures, and
feriously laboring to deduce a probable sense out of them, is sufficiently
provided for in order to his salvation; which is to exclude a necessity of
communion with any in point of Religion, as every man sees against all
Scripture, and the Creed. This is by the way.

There are indeed some amongst them, as Field, Usher, and others, who seem
sometimes to speak more rigidly touching Catholics Salvation.

But they observe not how repugnant this is to a generally admitted, and cried
up principle amongst them; which is this, namely, that they differ not from us
in fuundamentals or necessaries.

By this they labor hard to make their breach from from us, not to be
damnable, being they differ not in points of necessary belief.

Which if it has force, does it not inevitably, and with more strength
conclude a security for us?

We must therefore conclude, that whether they will or no, they do all conclude
a possibility of salvation for us, adhereing to our faith delivered from our
forefathers; and to omit innumerable others, King James shall serve for all,
for he speaks in the name of all in his speech to the Parliament, November. 9.
1605. we rightly (says he) confess that many Papists, especially our
progenitors, putting their only trust in Jesus Christ, and his merits, may,
and are frequently saved, detesting according to that, and judging the cruelty
of the Puritans worthy of fire, who will grant no salvation to any Papists.
Yea, D. Potter in his book set forth by the command of King Charles, page 76.
and 77. confesses that those things which Protestants think erroneous in the
Roman Church, are not in themselves damnable to those who believe as they
profess; and that all may be saved with them, who bona fide believe and profess
the Roman Religion, as long as they find no motives sufficient whereby their
judgment is convinced, that they be in error. To conclude all Protestants of
any moderation, who are not poisoned with the tincture of rigid Calvinisme,
freely confess, that Catholics in their religion may be faved, and do accuse
them of want of Charity, that they do not think so of them. So our adversaries
are our judges, as appears by their own confession, that we may attain unto
salvation in the Church of Rome. I could give you a longer list, but it were
superfluous in a confessed doctrine.

CHAP. 3. Schism is an enormous Crime.
SChism, if we look upon the force of the word, it signifies division; if it
be in the civil common wealth, it is called Sedition; if in the Church, Schism;
or the same word may be used for both, and be distinguished by Epithites: in
the one case it is civil Sedition, in the other Ecclesiastical Division. The
Church may be divided two ways; first, by revolting from faith, which does not
only make Schism but heresy: hence it is that they who fall from the faith and
doctrine of the Church, setting up their contrary opinions, as Arrians,
Macedonians, and the like, are not only termed Scismaticks, but Heretics.
Secondly, the Church is divided by revolting from the chief Pastor, or general
Councels by disobedience; or from communion with the other members, although
faith be conserved entire: and this makes pure Schism as it is distinguished
from heresy. So the Donatists, and Meletians at first keeping the faith of the
Church, but abstaining from communion with the other members in divine worship,
prayer, and other holy rites; or when they erected altar against altar, then,
and not before, they were properly accounted Schismatics; from whence it is
gathered that although Schism continuing, is wont to degenerate into heresy,
because as St. Hierom says in Tit. 3. There is no Schim which does not frame
to it self some heresy, that they may seem to have just cause to revolt from
the Church: Hence St. Augustine l. 2. contra Cresconium c. 7. Schism is a new
revolt; Heresy is an inveterate Schism: yet speaking in rigor heresy
violating the faith of the Church, Schism breaking her charity, they are both
grevious sins, seeing they separate from the Church, and consequently from the
head, which is Christ. But now we will only treat of the greviousness of
Schism.

There are a sort of people who cannot conceive, that a Christian
Commonwealth, remaining obedient to the civil Magistrate, can be guilty of
Schism: because they do so far subject Ecclesiastical persons and causes to
civil magistracy, that they do scarcely acknowledge any Ecclesiastical power at
all contradistinct from the Temporal in a Christian Commonwealth; except in
things internal: as Mr. Hobbs holds, Chap. 17. n. 21, 22. etc. though
afterward he gives some small nothings to them: he will have the Prince
supreme, even in spirituals; c. 18. n. 13. and therefore they must depend on
the Prince in the use of all; and at last in his last chapter and number, he
repeales all he had granted. The truth is, he is so zealous in his structure of
a civil Commonwealth (wherein he has some excellent things) that he either
neglects, or reduces the spiritual common-weath or Church almost to a
Platonical inexistent Idea.

Reason tells us, that as natural, so moral powers and offices are known to be
specifically different, and not only numerically distinct by their several
operations; the difference of operations is known by their several objects, or
sometime by the very several tending to the same specifical object as
Philosophers know.

Now the offices of ecclesiastical and civil magistracy are obviously known to
have these ways to declare their real and specifical differences. St. Paul in
his fifth chapt. to the Hebrews, even from the very beginning sufficiently
declares it from their operations and objects, and tells us that the Priest is
taken to his office from amongst men: by men is understood the temperal power,
from whence this other power is severed by St. Paul. I wish the ingenuous
Reader to peruse it all, and compare Mr. Hobbs his grounds to St. Paul and what
I annex in the ensuing discourse.

I am sure besides scriptures; the judgment o^ ancient Christians was fa^
otherwise. There were bounds for ecclesiastical and temporal magistracy always
acknowledged great Athanasius in his Epistle to these who observe Solitary life
to this purpose recites, and applaudeth an^ epistle of Hosius of Cordub^ to
Constantius the Arriar^ Emperor. Cease I beseech thee and remember that th^^
art mortal, fear the day of judgment, intermeddle not with ecclesiastical
matters, neither do thou command us in this kind, but rather learn them of us;
to thee God has committed the Empire, to us he has committed the things that
belong to the Church: and as he who with malicious eyes carpeth thine Empire,
gainsayeth the ordinance of God: so do thou also beware, least in drawing to
thee Ecclesiastical matters, thou be made guilty of a horrible crime: It is
written, give ye the things that are Caesar's to Caesar, and the things that are
Gods to God: Therefore neither is it lawful for us in earth to hold the Empire,
neither have thou (O Emperor) power over incense and sacred things. This extent
is far beyond internals, or Mr. Hobb's limits. St. Ambrose also to Valentinian
in his fifth book of Epistles in his oration of delivering up of Churches (
Valentinian by ill advise of his mother Justina an Arrian, required to have one
Church deputed in Milan for the Arrians) says thus, We pay that which is
Caesar's to Caesar, and that which is Gods to God: Tribute is Caesar's, it is not
denied: The Church is Gods, it may not verily be yielded to Caesar, because the
Temple of God cannot be Caesar's right. Which no man can deny but it is spoken
with the honor of the Empire; for what is more honorable then that the Emperor
be said to be the Son of the Church, for (...) good Emperor is within the
Church, not above the Church He is diametpically opposite to Mr. Hobbs.

Out of these, and infinite other texts, or monuments of antiquity it is most
clear; that all Christians grounded upon Scriptures, as they conceived, did
believe that the Church taken rigidly, and strictly was understood to consist
only of spiritual men; and a city, or a commonwealth did, and does import a
body of Christians considered as not consecrated to divine service and
functions, but as members of the civil or temporal body: and that therefore
though as civil persons, they were subject only to this, or that city or
country, namely in civil or temporal things, yet in Ecclesiastical they might
be subject to Ecclesiastical power; though sometimes seated in foreign
countries, (Spiritual things are not circumscribed by place) and consequently
my own temporal Prince according to St. Ambrose, might be a fellow subject with
me in this; which depends not at all upon the temporal power, but is wholly of
another, and a higher nature; though Mr. Hobbs denies it, which I wonder at;
reason methinks will necessarily carry us to prefer spiritual before temporal:
and therefore St. Peter in his first Epistle Chap. 2. calls temporal magistracy
a human creature, that is in a peculiar way derived from man: But St. Paul Acts
20. speaking of Ecclesiastical magistracy says, the Holy Ghost has placed you
to rule the Church of God: and St. Ignatius contemporary to the Apostles, gives
us his own, and the sense of Christians in those days, when he exhorts the
people of Smyrna in his Epistle to them, first to honor God, next the Bishop,
and then the King.

They are not therefore in the sense of Christians the same thing, a Bishop,
and Christian King, nor their office the same; the one tending immediately to
things which belong to God in order to souls: The other immediately to things of
this world, namely, to the external peace of Subjects; though secondarily with
reference to God also, but the Ecclesiastical by supernatural mediums; the
other properly by natural, which is more remote and indirect; and therefore St.
Paul to the Hebrews cap. 5. says, this power is conversant circa ea quae ad
Deum sunt, which is no where simply asserted of the other, and in the law those
are called Sors Domini in a peculiar strain.

And to speak truth Mr. Hobbs had done very well, if he had taken St. Paul
along with him in framing his new model of a Christian City; who distinguishes
each members office very often.

All authority is not in the Princes, but Hebrews 13. lay people are commanded
to obey their Provosts, and to be subject to them, etc. where he sufficiently
distinguishes the Tribunals. No Christian can be ignorant of the authority
which the Holy Ghost gives to Praelates regere Ecclesiam Dei to govern the
Church of God; so that this spiritual government is of God; and it is a
government, and therefore not only declarative or instructive, as Mr. Hobbs
says even of Christ himself, c. 17. n. 13. but it is a regitive power, else S.
Peter had most heavily transgressed his commission in adjudging Ananias, and
after his wife Saphira to present death for a spiritual crime: St. Paul in his
excommunicating the fornicator: St. John and the rest had abused their power
also; which I touch in the seventh Chapter, who went beyond pure declaration of
their guilt expected not the cities sentence in it. Mr. Hobbs acknowledges
indeed in Pastors a power to execute a spiritual sentence, in case the Church,
that is the city judges of the offense, and in like manner Priests may
absolve, if the city judges it fit, else not. St. Athan. in the place cited.
Quando ab avo condito auditum est; Mark M. Hobbs, Quando judicium Ecclesiae
authoritatem suam ab Imperatore accepit

It was never heard from the beginning of the world, that the Church has her
power from temporal power. In earnest I wish he had taken the sense of
Christians along with him; in his expounding holy Scriptures, he should have
read the old Councels in making Ecclesiastical laws, which power Christian
Emperors submitted unto as from God: Constantine in the Nicen, Martian, Leo,
and all others whom the Christian world esteemed not Antichristian, as they did
Constantius for intrenching.

St. Nazianzen in his oration concerning moderation in disputations, tells us
that Praelates have power to make laws, etc. in order to the soul. St.
Damascen in his second oration of Images says, Kings have no power to
prescribe laws unto the Church, and proves it out of St. Paul and therefore he
shows, that in framing the Church of God; that is, in declaring Christ's model
of his Church, St. Paul never at all mentions Kings.

In fine: I find all Christianity from the infancy to these days growth to
have conveyed to us this sense, as delivered from Christ without contradiction.

Which Topics, I insist upon, by reason Mr. Hobbs will not be thought to
reject them, neither does he use any other considerable principles, though
sometimes he glanceth at heavy inconveniences to a civil commonwealth, if this
be granted. But I am not willing to take too much notice of it, least any might
fear his aim to be, to destroy Christian Religion: for surely the Romans
insisted most upon that, as the Roman Histories show, and it is clear in Julian
the Apostate.

All which the very great Turk admits as a truth; namely, a spiritual power of
governing among Praelats, most consistent with his supreme rights over
Christians; and therefore stumbleth not at the spiritual power of the Patriarch
of Constantinople, which he exercises over Christians, and corresponds with
them in this kind, though not subject to the Turk; and therefore Mr. Hobbs
needs not fear in Christians, what the Turk doubts not. Out of all this it
follows, that there may be Schism in defect of obedience, in order to the
Church, without breach of duty to the Prince.

Sacrilege of Schisms says St. August. l. 1. cont. ep. Far. c. 4. exceeds
all other crimes: and St. Jerome. gives the reason, because they cut and divide
the great and glorious body of Christ, and as much as in them lies kill it:
and therefore as he who should tear in pieces the body or members of a man,
should be thought to do the greatest injury and damage: So he who divides the
Church, which is the body of Christ, which he so loved, that he gave himself
for it, does commit a grievious fin against him.

Therefore we find in holy scripture no crime more grievously punished, or
revenged with a more dreadful torment, then Schism.

For when Core, Dathan, and Abiron (by whom what other things is signified,
says St. Ambrose l. de 42. mansi. man's. 15. then, those who bring Schism
Heresy into the Church) had separated themselves by wicked Schism from Moses
and Aaron, not only they but their wives and children with all their substance
were swallowed up into the earth, and descended alive into hell: Numb. 16. and
this truly happened to them visibly, to be an argument to future ages, how
enormous the crime of Schism is before God, and to deter men from plotting or
following the same.

Neither are present Schismatics punished with lesser pains, though they
appear not to our eyes. By the aforesaid example St. Augustine ep. 164. writing
to Emiritus the Schismatic, gathers how much this crime of Schism is
esteemed in the divine judgment. Read, which I make no doubt you have read, you
shall find Dathan and Abiron devoured by opening of the earth, the rest who
consented to them consumed with fire, being in the midst of them. Therefore our
Lord God brandeth that sin with present punishment, as an example to be
avoided; that whom he patiently spares, such he shows to reserve to the last
punishment. For as the same St. Augustine elsewhere says: whosoever is
separated from the Gatholick Church, although he thinks he lives laudably;
for this only fin, that he is disjoynted from the unity of Christ he shall not
have life, but the anger of God remains upon him and after him: St. Fulgentius
de fide ad Pet. c. 39. Hold certainly and doubt not, that what Schismatic or
Heretic soever, is baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, if
he be not joined to the Catholic Church, what alms soever he shall do, though
also he shall spill his blood for Christ, can never be saved. In fine; we need
not go further then to blessed St. Paul to learn the horror of Schism, who in
the 1 Cor. 13. If I should speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and not
have Charity, I am but as brass sounding, or a Cymbal gingling; and if I have
the gift of prophecy, and shall know all mysteries and all sciences; and if I
have so great faith, as to remove mountains; yet if I have not Charity I am
nothing: If I shall distribute all I have amongst the poor; if I deliver my
body up to the fire; if I have not Charity, that is; if I shall adhere to
Schism, all is worth nothing. A heavy sentence, if deeply considered: Alas,
what will follow out of this, St. Paul's doctrine touching all those whom we have
known, and of others whom yet we do know; who have been of untouched lives,
liberal to the poor, of pious inclinations, or what you will; all is lost
according to St. Paul, being they were members of this Scismatical body.

Contrariwise, who do not only in themselves avoid Schism, and keep inviolated
the Church union; but where they perceive any danger of breach, each man in his
rank and degree endeavoring with all his possible diligence to preserve it;
they piously and laudably bestow themselves and their endeavors, and truly
merit much of God and man. Of such it may be truly said, that the Charity of
their neighbor does urge them, and the love of God as St. Augustine says, l.
15. de Trinit. does divide betwixt the children of the eternal kingdom, and the
children of eternal perdition, thinking, and worthily, that they have not the
charity of God, who do not love his Church, and as much as in them do not
procure her unity: It is all one from what head insolent disobedience
springs, from whence flows Schism; or I would say the reason of Schism is
not altered in it self, for the diverse motive of rebellion; for whether from
the ambition of Bishops, as too often it happneth, of which we have sad
examples in Histories; or whether from emulation of equals: or to conclude, for
what cause soever of the pride of subjects it arises; if it makes separation
it is Schism, and divorceth the souls of all those that formally and knowingly
adhere unto it, as from the union of the Church, so from the love of Christ.

I am not ignorant what the school men teach in a speculative sense touching
the extent and effects of invincible ignorance, in order not only to Schism
but Heresy; but we abstract now from speculations or from cases which are
accidental or only immaginary: and therefore considering Schism as it is
understood in the common and practical notion, which the word gives in the
sense of Christians; I have universally concluded that it separateth us from
the love of Christ, and consequently from heaven.

CHAP. 4. Catholics and Protestants divided by Schism.
WE said before, that Schism was sometime taken for Separation from the
Catholic faith, sometimes taken for separation from communion only, although
faith be kept entire. Now whatsoever may be said of Schism of the first kind,
of which for the present I do not treat: we say that Protestants are divided
and separated from Catholics, whom they term Papists, at least by Schism of
the latter kind, and that appears so manifestly; that it needs no proof; for
not only Catholics and Protestants do so abhor mutual communion in divine
worship, Sacraments, prayer, and holy rites; that no Protestant will frequent
Catholic service, especially the holy sacrifice of Mass: and every Catholic
will avoid whatsoever is esteemed religious among Protestants; as the bread of
sorrow, and esteem all that shall but touch them, contaminate and defiled.

Moreover, Catholics excommunicate Protestants every year, and Protestants
Catholics frequently in England, yea they exhaust such as in law shall be
convicted with pecuniary mulcts; and by the public statutes and laws of the
Land, any one who shall convert a a Protestant to the Catholic faith, is
guilty of death, but a Priest who shall celebrate Mass is made guilty of high
treason. How therefore can one Church grow up together of such different
members? Or who will deny that here is manifest Schism and division, if ever
any Schism was or can be made?

O how far is this from the spirit of old Christians: they gloried in that
which the ancient called (...), a sweet, humane, or neighbourly tenderness to
delinquents of this kind. Spiritual sins the old Christian Church cured by
spiritual Cataplasms, at most proportioned to them; when they contained not
themselves within the compass of spirituallity, but made eruptions into
sedition, and disturbance of the public peace; then their Authors justly lost
the benefit of Ecclesiastical mildness, and tasted sometimes the imperial
severity, but without death for many ages: If our persecutors would limit their
cruelties within this verge, it would be less execrable; they complain of the
severity of Q. Mary's days, and yet far exceed what they condemn in her.

Mr. Hobb's will put a difference in these cases, for Chap. 13. n. 5. he tells
us that Princes do against conscience, who permit their subjects to practice a
religion, which they judge to be damnable to them. This was Q. Mary's case as
all know; but the case is far otherwise with us, for it is evident that our
Princes have professed, with their Doctors, that Salvation may be had in our
Church; and therefore according to Mr. Hobbs they should not disquiet their
subjects in using their liberty in their Religion. But to let Mr. Hobbs pass,
and come a little nearer to the business, I will say one thing (though not
taking upon me to discuss or excuse her proceedings in every particular) that
the state of the question is wholly changed: She punished for innovation in
religion, which even amongst Jews, Turks, and the very Romans was reckoned a
most enormous crime. These punish us because we will not innovate, but stick
close to the religion of our and their forefathers; a crime unheard of amongst
all who have had any taste of God, but most especially among true Christians.

Many indeed have for some years cried out for immunitie, in order to tender
consciences: and yet they themselves; who were the heads of those Tenderlings,
did not endure to have Recusants accounted such, who have title to it above
all, all things considered, as being best able to manifest to the world, their
reluctancie in matter of conformity to all Changeable religions. Indeed to be
grounded upon true tenderness of conscience that is upon religious fear of
offense of God, and yet for this they are most strictly treated.

Is it not an unparalleled exorbitancy with such high cruelties, as quartering,
hanging, and setting up the disserted quarters upon gates, and cittadels for
fouls to tear, and devour, of persons most innocent in their lives toward God,
and men's laws, most quiet in order to the weal public; only for embracing,
or teaching that religion of Christ, which our and their forefathers in this
nation followed for almost a thousand years: a crime most horridly opposite to
the first principles of nature. Is it not parricide thus to profane the urnes
of their forefathers? Is it not to the uttermost of their power, to exercise
the forenamed cruelties upon them their own progenitors; in doing them upon
those who are guilty of no other crime, then what they knowingly professed and
endeavored to transfuse to their posterity? Their sanguinary proceedings
against these, clearly makes known to the world their hearts venomous and
bloody rancor even against their Parents.

They commonly say, that they do not punish us for religion, but for acts of
treason or felony, etc. but it is not so common as impertinent: Thus all
persecutors of Christians did palliate their cruelties. The Roman
Historiographers will tell us, it was for sedition that those cruel
persecutions were against us, the Jews thus labored to baptize their false
accusations against our blessed Savior, and after against St. Paul, Minutius,
Felix, and other ancient writers, as Eusebius, Theodoret, etc. will tell you of
Christians accused of confederate conventicles against all their laws when
they had their religious solemnities. Thus Julian to take the glory of
Martyrdom from our constant religious progenitors labored to deceive the
vulgar. The Roman Emperors made many edicts, and some capital against all
Christian conventions: Julian against Christians children frequenting their
Schools; against Bishops residing in their Seas, etc. For this point of
debarring Chistians from their schools, he had a specious prenence, which he
shrewdly urged, that is, because the Authors who taught in Schools (Christians
being not yet so commonly masters of Sciences) were Ethnicks, and therefore we
had no title to them; but this is far otherwise with you, for all your learning
is ours: examine all your Schools fee the prefection of your studies of
Philosophy, Theolgie, Can on or civil law, Physic, are they not all ours? Nay,
are not the founders of all Colleges ours? And yet beyond Julian ye debar us
of our own Schools. The truth is the laws are made against religion, and
against the propagation of it, against the professing of it, in frequenting
Sacraments, only administered by Priests.

When a town or castle is besieged, convoys stopped, all hanged who attempt to
bring ammunition, viures, has any intercourse with them; are not these in this
case persecuted for their allegiance, if they expose themselves to all these
dangers out of duty to their Prince, or whatsoever is Supreme Sovereignty? This
is our case, ye hang and quarter all who would bring unto us spiritual
ammunition, and Sacramental vivers, by death ye obstruct all convoys, and why
all this? Is it not to extirpate our religion; is it not to force us to render
the small holds we have, wherewith God almighty has entrusted us, of his holy
religion in our Souls?

There are some who would seem to abolish all persecution from Catholics, in
blood and fortunes, pretending it to be injustice to persecute for religion;
and upon this glorious title of Christian liberty, and neighbourly tenderness,
do cover malice beyond all proceedings of Christians, even against Jews, or of
the Turks, even against Christians, subject to their civil empire; and truly
what human nature abhors, namely to take their children from them, and educate
them in their own aerie and uncertain ways. The Church of God in her most
flourishing times as under Constantine, and Theodosius, when all Insidels and
Jews were under their power, never attempted such a cruelty, against the law
of nature.

Nay, the Turks never do it, except upon fail of their ordinary exactions:
which truly are nothing to the burdens of Catholics here. If it be unlawful
to persecute (as they hold) in their fortunes for religion, its most in
consequent to hold it more lawful to persecute in children. Lands and goods are
appropriated only, jure gentium, children jure naturae: wherein no power,
except God himself can dispense. To take away goods or land, is theft or
rapine: This must be reduced to Homicide. Nature is so little acquainted with
it, that there is not a proper appellative yet appointed for it. Christian
Divines out of this principle have judged it unlawful even to baptize Infidels,
or Jews children against their parents wills, by reason of the high title of
the natural law of parents to children: hence some have taught, that baptism so
attempted would not be valid. But to let that pass; here is a fortiori, as
Logitians speak, concluded: That to dispossess parents of their children, in
all schools of Christ, of law, of reason, is abominable; and therefore I cannot
believe, that our laws will admit such acts to be lawful: especially since by
precedent Sanctions its already felony to take away children upon any pretenses.

There are yet another sort, who seem more tender then all the rest; and
pretend to reduce all to an Henoticon, or Unitive; namely, that we may all in
offensively retain our own faith, referring the examine of all differences to
Gods court, to whom alone as the gift of faith; so the animadversion or
punishment of transgressions in it proportionably and consequently is to
belong, as they say: what real effect will this produce time will discover, if
they proceed consequently to their principles, it must needs take away many
unchristian-like animosities, which hitherto have been nourished. Michael
Balbut, as Zonaras in his Annals witnesses, promised in the beginning of his
Empire, that he would not compel any to follow any other opinions of God, then
what each man would himself: but soon after he persecuted Catholics cruelly,
permitting all others to do what they listed, he was a man indeed full of all
wickedness. But Josephus l. 2. against Apion says, that it was honorable in
the Romans, that they would not compel their subjects to violate their ancient
laws and neligion; but content themselves with such honors and duties, as the
giver may with piety and equity give them: for they account not of forced
honors, or duties, which come of compulsion. A course certainly worth all
Princes observing in order to their subjects, and the only way to be secure of
their loyalties; as the liberty of France in order to Protestants, and Holland
to Catholics manifestly show. However, it is evident out of these premises,
that there is a great Schism betwixt us in England.

Protestants are wont to say, that they are not separated from Catholics, or
the Catholic Church, no not from the Roman; but that they do communicate with
all the members thereof, fearing and worshipping God truly, and make one Church
with them: they only separate themselves from Papistry; which is not (say
they) the Church, but an Imposture, adhering to the Church, or an heap of
errors brought into the Church, by the tyranny and fraud of the Bishops of
Rome. That they and Catholics are not two fields, sepatated the one from the
other, but one; whereof one part is covered with nettles and darnel, oversowed
by the Pope, but the other part is purged by the labor and industry of the
Protestants; but this if it were true, does not infringe, but rather confirm
what we have said before: for when we see with our eyes Catholics and
Protestants to abhor from mutual communion, who in his wits will deny that
there is Schism and division betwixt them; or who will affirm, there is any
unity among them requisite to make one Church? And that they add, that they are
separated from Papistry, and the errors of the Pope; that they are as it were
the one part of the field, purged and cleansed; Catholics the other part
covered with errors: Although all this were granted (which yet is never to be
granted) it makes nothing at all to the diminishing, but adds much to the
augmenting of Schism, because according to this, Protestants are not only
separated from the communion of Catholics, which is sufficient for Schism; but
likewise from the doctrine, which as I said before makes heresy. So whilst
they strive to take away, or patch up Schismatical division, they bring in
heretical confusion; which is much more pernicious, and more difficultly
consistent with Catholics.

Therefore it remains for certain, that there is a true Schism betwixt
Catholics and Protestants, the question will be only to see, which of these
made first the breach.

The other main Achilles which they use, that they withdraw themselves from the
obedience of the Bishop of Rome without Schism; is, because he had only
Patriarchall power over them, introduced only by human right, and custom, is
frivolous for to omit that right, that he has from Christ over the whole
Church which is Papal.

I will only give this touch.

We indeed are principally accused for adhering to the Popes supremacy as being
a novelty: But how clearly it was acknowledged in the 4 first councels, needs
no other proofs then themselves: Nay, Tertullian, St. Cyprian, Ireneus, the
first writers acknowledge it, though in some perticulars they were offended
with the Popes. Tertullian though persecuted for Montanism, by that sea; yet
acknowledges the power. 1. de pudicitia: Audio edictum esse propositum et
quidem peremptorium, Pontifer scilicet maximus, etc. I understand that the Pope
has made a peremptory decree, etc. where he is angry at it, because against
his heresy, but doubts not of his power. St. Cyprian, as Erasmus in his
notes confesses, everywhere acknowledges it, even St. Stephen, and Cornelius
his adversaries. Usher who boggles at all things, because St. Cyprian calls
Cornclius brother, would seem to doubt, but Erasmus less squintsighted will
teach him, that it is in respect of his conjunction in faith, not equality of
person. St. Ireneus is so vulgarly known, that all confess it. Nay, even Usher,
who seems to have sworn to corrupt the clearest passages of antiquity; yet
confesses in the business of Easter, that St. Victor Pope, did then pretend
his supremacy over the rest of the Churches, as appears in his Catologue, as he
calls it in the second Century. So that it is no new title of the Popes, even
according to Usher; The full sway of this great Bugbear in every age, according
to the enlargment of Christian bounds, appears still more gloriously in the
Economy of the Church before, in, and after the four Councels to St. Gregory:
Therefore I touch this no more. every Abodary controvertist forces them to
confess it to be truth.

Mr. Hobbs indeed c. 17. in the end of n. 26. denies that there is, or can be
a Rector of the universal Church, by whose authority the whole Church may be
convocated: He ventures also to prove it thus; because to be a rector in that
sense, over the Church, is to be rector, and lord of all Christians in the
whole world, which is not granted to any but God.

If he had been a stranger in Christian principles, it had been no wonder to
have misunderstood so solemn and public a Tenet. The Supreme Pastor of the
Church has an acknowledged power for preservation of the Church in integrity
of faith, to convocate Bishops to a general deliberation, and determination of
things necessary to salvation; and to this end he has coactive power in the
exercise of his spititual sword, and no otherwise.

What connection this has with a Dominion over the world, I know not, which by
God himself is denied him in holy Scripture, and in this his power is
distinguished from temporal principality. His power is spiritual, his weapons
are spiritual, the objects to which he tends are spiritual: in this confinement
he commands without prejudice to temporal rights; wherein Princes are simply
supreme, and only have the coactive sword of justice, independently in respect
of him, and this only is dominion.

He thinks this too much, and therefore will not acknowledge that there is any
subordination in Christianity, out of each city or county; but every city is
supreme to it self in Spiritual and Ecclesastical matters; and therefore no
Prince, or city, or particular Church, can be excommunicated or interdicted.

Supposing the antecedent, the consequence would without much difficulty be
proved; for if the Prince is supreme in all things, he cannot be
excommunicated, which is an act of superiority: neither the commonwealth by it
self, for it were to dissolve it self into no city, if it should deprive it
self of mutual commerce, which he acknowledges to be an effect of
excommunication.

But he leapes over the proof of the Antecedent, which had been indeed worth
his doing by Topics fit for him, taken out of Scripture, antiquity or reason,
subordinate to these principles. At least, he should have showed an
inconsistency of the public welfare of a commonwealth, with the spiritual
subordination of particular Churches to a supreme, seated out of the temporal
confines. Surely if there were not a most ordinate subordination, all religion
would turn to a Hidraes confusion, which were to destroy Christ's acquired
spiritual kingdom on earth, and is evidenlty against the light of reason, and
one main article of the Creed, which he accepts of communion of Saints.

The excellency of Christ's kingdom is, that though universal; yet it troubles
not, but much conserveth each kingdom in their particular Economy, though much
different betwixt themselves. St. Augustine in his city of God, Orostus in his
History; and many others against the Gentiles, demonstratively show, the
benefits all places receive, by this spiritual subjection to Christian
principles: Amongst which this was always judged one of the most capital, as
St. Denise, St. Ignatius, and the rest show of this Hierarchy instituted by God.

He would tell us, not persuade us, c. 17. n. 22. that all power, which
anciently the Church of Rome exercised over particular Churches or Cities, was
derived from the Sovereignty of the Emperors, and was shaken off when their
Empire was abdicated: and in pursuit of this, he says, that the Roman Church
was indeed very large anciently, but always confined within the limits of the
Empire.

How false this is, no man can be ignorant, that has perused antiquity.

Prosper, assures us, that Rome is made greater by the faith of Christ, then by
the civil Empire, and so the rest of the Fathers; but especially he, de
vacatione Gentium, l. 2. c. 16. Roma per Apostolici Sacerdotij Principatum,
amplior facta est arce religionis, quam solen Potestatis. St. Ireneus indeed
tells us, that the reason why Rome was chosen for the head; was, because it had
been the head of the Empire, but none will say that it was confined by it, or
measured her spiritual territories by it. Who knows not that even in the
Apostles time, and ever since vast Empires were reduced to this spiritual
Empire of Rome, which never had to do with the Roman Empire. Our own countries
ever acknowledged subjection to the Church of Rome under this title. Scotland
also, and Ireland were most oxthodoxly subject to the mitre, though not to the
Scepter.

This is only by the by to Mr. Hobbs. But besides this the Patriarchal right,
which he has over this our nation, cannot be deposited by them: for by the
same causes, authority should be destroyed, by which it was set up; as the
Jurists agree: seeing therefore, that the Bishop of Rome, has had his
Patriarchal power granted unto him by general Councels; to wit, by those four
first, which St. Gregory received as four Gospels, and especially here by the
Parlimentary laws, are esteemed sacred, it follows manifestly, that by less
power then a general Council it cannot be abolished; for our Britany is one of
the seven provinces of the western Church, which are the ancient bounds of the
Roman Patriarchate, as all know. In times past I grant, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury was called Patriarch by Pope Urbane the second, with Anselme, and
Malmes, and the Gloss. c. Clero. d. 21. as also the Bishop of Algar in the
districts of Venice; but this was for honors sake, not for exemption, as the
thing it self speaks, and the perpetual style of the Church; yea, the very
Council of England convince in Spelman.

It Is true, those Churches which were out of the Roman Empire, were subject to
no Patriarch, as much as can be gathered out of the Canon of the Council of
Ephesus, except they put themselves under any one; or I think rather, that by
law they ought to be subject to that Patriarch, from whom by his Apostolical
Missionaries, they first received the feith of Christ, ob similitudinem casus
Bulgarorum. Nam secundum Juristas; similium similis est ratio. As we argue of
the Indies, and others lately converted Japonians, and those of China. It is
true, de facto, some Provinces against all Law, have revolted from the
Patriarch of Rome, to the Patriarch of Constantinople, after the division of
the Empire, and others from him to others: as Russia to the Bishop of Moscovia:
but these are done against all laws and government of the Church.

The shift which our Countrymen fly to, saying they were compelled unto it,
for the too much cruelty of the Pope, with the same facility it is rejected:
for it ought to have been examined by a general Council, and parts on both
sides be heard, as in the Council of Trent, an excellent occasion was given;
(but ours appeared not) because if it be lawful for subjects to withdraw
themselves from the obedience of their superiors, as often as they pretend
tyranny, or what oppression soever, so that themselves be actors, and judges in
their own causes, it is to be feared, that subjects of Princes, or whatsoever
soeveraignties, by this occasion will lay hold on easy pretenses of Rebellion:
for if the reason be good, it is everywhere in force, and so any province out
of apprehension of tyranny etc. may justly, and lawfully withdraw it self from
their Prince, or the Sovereign Magistracy.

Therefore it remains firm: that seeing England by the most ancient and strong
right was subordinate to the Bishop of Rome, neither has that subordination
been hitherto abrogated by any lawful and sufficient Council; yea, neither the
cause heard: therefore they ought to remain under obedience of the same sea,
until a full discussion of the matter; otherwise she can be no ways free from
the crime of Schism and rebellion, according to that of St Nazianzen, ep. 1. We
desire to know what this great lust of bringing novations about the Church is,
that every one that will: etc. For if they who now make the stir had any thing
that they might disprove, or condemn in us, about faith: not so truly, we not
being admonished, was it meet to commit such a wickedness: For you ought to be
willing either to persuade, or be persuaded (if so be also we are in any place
or number, that who fear God and for the defense of the faith have undergone
great labors, and have well deserved of the Church) and then (if also then) we
machinate new things, but notwithstanding by this reason, these petulant and
contumelious men might peradventure have some sufficient excuse. Behold how
this great Saint, and Doctor of the Church makes any recess from the Church
impossible and unlawful! The pestilent poison of Schism, covered over with an
ill plaster, may be judged sound by impudent men: but truly except it be
purged, and wiped to the very bottom of the soar with the plaster of
Christian peace, it will be Schism still, and consequently bring death to those
that are infected with it.

Some labor to cloak their Schism, and pretense of reformation under the fact
of Ezechias. Reg. 4.18. The business is this: The Jews had fallen into an
inveterate custom of erecting altars, and offering incense upon the mountains
to the brazen Serpent, etc. contrary to Gods command. The kings his
predecessors were often reprehended for their neglect herein, and Ezechiah much
commended for his zeal and fortitude in breaking this ill custom.

Hence they argue it lawful for kings to reform abuses in the Church, as in
England. All which is nothing to the purpose: For first, he did it with consent
of the high priest, as Josias also did, in completing the work begun by
Ezekias, as appears c. 23. Secondly, there is no doubt but Princes are obliged
by their office, as being nurses of Gods Church, to labor especially with the
Prelates of the Church, to suppress all emergent, insolences or innovations.

Thirdly, Which is the main point Ezechias did not erect any new altar of
division against the mother Church, Jerusalem, but took away the breach or
division which be found made by others.

In the case of, England, it is just contrary. King Henry the eighth began, the
rest have increased the Schism, and erected new altars of division, against
Gods ordinances in the old and new law, as Jeroboam did, Reg. 11.29. which God
so severely punished. So that I cannot see at all, with what modesty this fact
of Ezechias, or Josias could be alleged to warrant the dissection of our
Country from the Church, since it plainly infers the contrary; namely, that
abuses, though never so much authorized by wicked Princes, or long customs are
to be abolished by succeeding Princes, to redintegrate the primary union, and
conformity with the mother Church, which is the case of England.

A main Objection which they use for their Schism is, because as they say, we
forbid a discussion of our tenants by the light of reason, which they esteem to
be against reason, which should be our guide in all things, and especially in
matters of religion.

CHAP. 5. Of what use Reason is in disoussing of Faith.
PHilosophy and Faith go upon contrary principles; and hence peradventure they
lay hold of occasion of error: the antiquity of opinion in Philosophy, if it be
any thing, it must be fortified with new reasons, otherwise in process of time
it vanishes: but in Christian faith, reason it self, that it may be
efficatious springs from antiquity; otherwise, in that it is new, it
vanishes away, according to that of St. Augustine against two Epistles of the
Pelagiuns c. 6. The antiquity of our doctrine declares the truth of it, as the
novelty of the other shows it to be Heresy. In Philosophy reason reigns;
here it serves and consequently is captivated according to the Apostle: It is
not quite rejected, neither is it admitted out of the bounds of a servant: for
as Roger Bacon excellently speaks in his fourth part of his greater work: We
do not seek reason before faith, but after it. Here was Chillingworth's error,
in objecting that Catholics, as well as they, recur to reason in faith: we do
indeed use reason as a servant, not as a mistress. We put it, as Friar Bacon
notes, after faith, not before it: but these new pretenders to divinity, prefer
their reason before faith: Turn the cat in the pan, and make faith subservient
to their reason: as Teriullian against Hermogenes. They descend from the Church
to the School of Aristotle, they appeal as to the supremest court, to the seat
of common sense, and as St. Basil upon the 115. Psalm. They constitute their
sense the measure of all things; is not this to invert the whole frame of Gods
spiritual world? According to that of St. Basil in his 43. ep. As in things
which are seen with the eyes, experience is of more consideration then reason,
so in the most excellent tenants of our faith is of more force, then any
juncture of reason. O how St. Augustine meets with these socinians toward the
end of his 56 Epistle! To these straights they are driven, who finding
themselves most miserably laid on their backs, when their authority is put in
balance, to see how it will endure the test against the authority of the
Church. They do therefore endeavor, under the show and promise of reason to
quel the inmoveable authority of the holy Church; neither is it any news, for
it is the accustomary practice of all Here ticks: and in his, 22. Ep. he says:
That if a Catholic desires a reason of his says, that he may understand what
he believes, there must be an eye had to his capacity, that he may by reason
obtain a proportionable measure of understanding; whence we learn, that is the
regular discipline of heretics under a false vizard of reason to lay aside the
most firm authority of Gods Church. Hence we also learn, how Catholics make
due use of reason, in matters of Faith, explicating holy mysteries according to
each capacity.

I wondered to find Mr. Hobbs in his 12. Chap. n. 6. to be so positive, in
attributing it to an error of the vulgar, to hold that Faith is not begotten by
study, and natural reason. His principal ground is, because it were impertinent
to oblige us to give an account of our Faith; that is, to render a reason of it
as he would have it Englished, if our reason does not acquire it. Of how great
force this his reason is, I leave any man to consider.

He deals fiercely against inspiration of Faith; and says, all the world is
mad in asserting it, he conceives that every Christian would be a prophet, if
he had his Faith by supernatural infusion.

Therefore in order to him, Chillingworth, and the rest; and any who shall
desire to know in what manner, or how far Catholics use the assistance of
reason, perticularly in Faith: I will briefly decipher it, because here is the
main scruple of our new modellers of Christianity.

To this end, we must understand that Logic has two questions. The one is, An
sit? Whether the thing questioned has any real existence: The other is, Quid
sit? Or Propter quid sit? That is, what the essence of it is, or by what cause
it is?

In the first question, as Neophites, we make enquiry after the truth of
Catholic Faith, by weighing the motives: which being considered ab intrinseco,
or from the internal principles of them, we find profoundness, even surpassing
the greatest jugdments, with simplicity, proportioned to the weak, est
understandings, contempered with sanctity, compared to the tenants of all
sects, either of Infidels or Heretics, wherein they do infinitety exceed them
all.

If we do consider ab extrinseco; that is, by their inseparable annexed
habiliments: we find perpetual, and inviolable succession, delivered from hand
to hand, from the very fountain to us, witnessed sufficiently by the very
Church walls; we find also most exemplary holiness of those, who embrace this
faith, which St. Augustine celebrates, in his book entitled of the manners of
the Catholic Church: also wonderful change of manners in those who are new
converts by the ancient, much valued Angelical purity, and stupendous
austerity of both Sexes, who embrace Heremitical, Cenobitical, or Anachoretical
reclusions: also the gallows adorned with the blood of so many illustrous
martyrs, as in our Country, where so many learned men expose themselves to all
cruelties, for the good of others, and voluntarily under go ignominious death
daily for the confirmation of others: Lastly, the working of miracles, that is,
such wonders which either in substance transcend all nature, as to restore
sight to them that are born blind, or raise the dead, and the like, or in the
manner as to cure diseases, without applying causes, etc. Out of these and the
rest of the motives, by reason we attain to be able to make a firm judgment;
first, of the manifest credibility of Catholic mysteries: insomuch that we
clearly see, that it is more reason to be matriculated into the Church, then
into any other Sect. This step being made and digested, by further penetrating,
discursively all the motives, we find the conjunction of them all to be
impossible to the whole latitude of nature: which a wise man weighing, in
comparison to the continual mutation, and vicissitude of all natural causes,
will be able to demonstrate the Catholic to be supernatural, and absolutely
true, because reavealed and inspired by God, which is the last resolution of
our Faith; wherein as you see reason conducteth us in our enquiry, to the full
result; that is, to the formal object of our Faith; which is, God revealing,
where we stick not for our reason: but for the revelation of God, wherein
Christian Faith is completed. It is true, that the first Christians, to whom
these revelations were immediately made, were prophets: but to the especial
assistance of God in our assenting to these supernatural truths already
revealed, does not make prophets, which is an action of a different nature from
formal revelation, as schoolmen at large demonstrate in the tract of Faith,
and it is evident in it self; wherein Mr. Hobbs seems to have erred.

Hitherto we use reason in the disquisition of the truth of Faith according to
the question, An sit.

In the other question, called, Quid sit? Or by what means, or causes is it?
Which amongst Logicians is the nobler question. In this we proceed not by
doubtfully enquiring of the truth of objects of Faith, or of their real
existence, which is disputed in the State of our Neophitism; but all fluctuancy
and doubt deposed, touching the truth of them; wherein our Socinians boggle,
for they stick still at An sit. But our learned men proceed to the other
question, laboring to understand the truths, speculating the essences and
natures of each of them, and the Subalternal connection of them each to other,
which is the proper Sphere of a divine, or school-man, for his own and others
satisfaction. There are the bounds of our reason, intervening to attain and to
preserve already attained Faith; wherein as is clear, reason is the servant,
not mistress.

But on the contrary, ye give no limits to reason: but as in the progress, or
search, so in the possession of Faith, ye still stick most to your reason, and
therefore ye doubt or deny, what ye understand not, for ye persuade your
selves, that the mysteries necessary to be believed, ought to be per se nota
clear in their very terms; insomuch that every one of you brag your absolute
comprehension of them. And hence it comes, that the Socinians call in question,
if not absolutely deny the diety of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; hence with
the Pelagians, they reduce Christ's death to example of our imitation only, not
to be the price of our redemption; hence generally they profess with
Chillingworth and others, whom I could name; that holy Scriptures are to be
understood according to each man's small reach of reason, as if nothing were
contained in them, what is not commensurated to our understanding, and
therefore needs not any supernatural aid from God; which Mr. Hobbs very well
confutes, Chap. 17. n. 28. Yet he says, it belongs to the City to interpret
Scriptures, at least in all such things, which he will please to call
juridical, or Philosophical, which have far too great latitude in his sense.
For purely supernatural, he speaks more reason, then any others of these new
ones: from whom has proceeded contempt of Prelates, and Doctors; because every
one of the most inferior Laytie of these Enthusiasts by their impetuous
imaginary instinct, and private spirit: or what is the same, their particular
ratiocination, though most groundless, are supreme and infallible Masters and
Doctors to themselves. Neither do they believe any thing to be Divine, which
flows not from the senseless impetuosity of their imaginations, without any
respect to higher considerations.

Yes truly, those who are esteemed the wiser sort, following Socinas, stick in
the same puddle; expounding holy Scriptures and all mysteries of our holy
Faith; not according to the universal reason of the Church, delivered by the
hands of the ancients to us as Catholics do, but by their private spirits, or
by the conduct of their private reason: A thing ridiculous to conceive, that
the profoundness of Christian mysteries, should not exceed the shallow reach of
our reason. Which error is the Source of all dissonancies, and inconstancies
amongst them: which even by intrinsecal and necessary consequence, must needs
cause a perpetual flux, or issuing out of changes of conclusions of Faith: for
the effect cannot be more noble then the cause.

On the other side, Catholic tenants must by a great necessity be always
constant: because they depend not upon our daily changable reasons, or
ratiocination, but upon the unvariable word of God, revealed and delivered by
the Church.

The sum of all is: that the verity of a Philosophical conclusion, is
demonstrated by the verity of human reason: the verity of Christian reason is
proved by the verity of ancient faith; indeed one verity may be diverse, but
never adverse to another. Neither does Divine contradict human; but often
surmounteth it: and therefore it is comprehended by the sparks of our scanted
reason, but it is setched from else where, Ask thy Father, etc. This is a safe
way, in which there is no danger to be dashed upon the rocks of errors,
according to that of Athanasius in his Epistle to Epicietus, teaching how
Heretics, and Schismatics are to be treated with. There is no better way, and
indeed it is alone sufficient to answer them: Those things not to be
orthodoxall, which our forefathers have not taught us. This is plea enough
against all pretenses, in the judgment of Athanasius: let therefore Christians,
and they that bear the name of Christ, be ashamed; if leaving the fountain of
antiquity, from whence all sound doctrine flows, to follow certain small
rivolets, full of vanity and foolery, shadowed under a precious show of reason:
which from whence they had their Source and beginning none for certain know. We
Catholics therefore adhere to the holy Councels and ancient Fathers in the
first place after the holy Scriptures: neither dare we accuse them of foolery,
a Christian mind will hurdly permit them to be rashly and presumptuously
defamed: But these men, and others of the some tribe, who make the glimmering
of their reasons the rules of Faith and Religion: easily reject them. It is a
wonder rather, that they do not with their supercilious spectacles clime up the
heavens; and there with the Albumazar, Aicabatius, Massaeius, and infinite
other Astrologers, seek out the verity of all Religions: and one while, for the
conjunction of Saturn with the Sun adhere to Judaismes; another while, for the
conjuction of Mars with Jupiter, promote the Chaldaick Sect; if with Venus, the
Mahumetical; if with Mercarie, the Christian. So by some little show of reason
drawn: from the heavens, they may change their religion (as for the most part,
they are wont to do) several times of the year, according to the several
dominations of the planets, or certainly every year according to the annual
dominion: or if this seems to much aerial, they may according to the Successory
government of those intelligences, which they call Seconds, appoint the
stations, retrogradations, and cadences of their diverse sects and religions, as
some not without applause of such lunitick persons have unhappily enough
attempted: as especially some attribute the innovation of Luthers sect, to the
new lunary inteligences then 1517. undertaking the worlds government. And Ticho
Brahe affirms that those sects, which indeed are derived from men's brainsick
fancies, may be found out in the heavens, both in their risings and fallings:
Of which this present age administreth change enough.

The truth is; Judas the Apostle touches these home: whatsoever they do not
know they blaspheme; whatsoever like bruit beasts, they know they are corrupted
in. They are indeed so swollen in their imaginations, that breaking they corrupt
themselves and others

CHAP. 6. A digression against Mr. Hales, the supposed Author of the Treatise
of Schism: And a farther proof of Schism in England.
Mr. HALES, who is said, and supposed to be Author of the Treatise of Schism;
objects that Schirm may be spread over all the parts of the Church, and so the
whole be infected; in which case Schism cannot be imputed to one place more
then to another: and this may peradventure be affirmed of the sepuration of
England from other Churches, as it was touching the ancient celebrating of
Easter; wherein also, a how Schism is rison, for aching not necessary; yea,
(says he) in a matter ridiculous. If I should bring the general Council of
Nice condemning and separating from these Quarta-decimans, he would deride it;
he accuses all the ancients of foolishness in this matter: Thus he sporteth
and trifleth in mysteries of faith, to root out all faith out of the minds of
the faithful.

I deny first what he averreth; that the West and East were at variance: that
is to say, that that Schism did invade, the whole Church, and cleave her into
two parts for the matter of Easter, but that some considerable part did raise
stirs in the East, yea, in the West also, is manifest amongst historians; this
cause of division in a late work de consilijs made in latin by a Country man
of ours, is laid open to the very root.

But to peruse a little more the grounds of his mistakes in this important
point of Schism, we must always remember what before we noted; that Schism is
not properly a separation for Heresy or Error in point of doctrine, or Faith;
but in point of disobedience, which is not a trivial matter, as all
commonwealths will easily conceive, being that nerve, upon which all order de
pends; and therefore the Quarta-decimans being rebellious to the mandatory
decree of Nice, all Catholics had reason to decline their communion.

I know Theodoret, in l. 1. c. 13. of his Ecclesiastical History, and other
learned men with St. Athanasius in his tract of Synods, do esteem that the
question of Easter was not defined, as a point of faith, but commanded to be
observed as a custom derived from the Apostles; and in confirmation of this,
they observe that the Council varieth the form of speech in a migitatory way,
from the accustomary style in declaring points of faith, saying: Visum est ut
omnes obtemper arent; in question of faith, they did not write visum est. But
credit Ecclesia Catholica: Thus the Catholic Church believed etc. And
therefore, if his undervaluing the cause of this Schism, grew from this gross
misprison of the state of the controversy, he should do well to resume his
better diligence in examining it.

He might with greater appearance, have brought that folemn word combat
touching person and hypostasis, betwixt the eastern and western Churches: which
great Athaenasius more clearly opened and closed up again. Many contested
ignorantly after the manner of those who fight with their eyes shut, and beat
the air. Some held three hypostasis, other but one in the diety: from whence
great contentions arose: But as Athanasius relates: When we asked out of what
reason they speak these things, or why all do use three kind of words? They
made answer, that they believed in the Trinity, etc. Approving therefore this
interpretation and excuse, we examined those who asserted that there was but
one hypostasis, etc. Who affirmed that they understood Hypostasis, that is
person, to be all one with (...), that is essence, etc. To conclude all by the
grace of God, after this interpretation of the words did approve of the best
and exactest rules of faith, which the Fathers of Nice had instituted.

Some indeed for their material errors, did deny communion; but as yet there
was no formal Schism betwixt the Churches, but particular persons, perhaps it
might have grown to a greater head, had not great Athanasius interposed or
rather had not Christ Jesus hindered it.

But among us, the altar of division, is erected against the altar of union
with Christ: out of which it is impious to celebrate Christ's mysteries: the
difference is not of words, but substance, not against the letter, but the life
and sense of the holy Soripture. If these things be trifles; why do you
separate your selves? Why do you punish Priests with death, who are followers
and ministers of our communion? Against all meekness and clemency of the
ancients. To conclude; Why have you built a new altar, framed the stones of
scandal and division? At leastwise, ye have broken down and demolished all the
old ones? insomuch, that ye abhor the very name of tar, as these later times in
your d^in^ stick, yet fiery contention in pulpits and pamphlets about 12. years
past, sussiciently testify: to what end is all this, if the difference betwixt
you and us be nothing else, but about a Cock and Bull?

And that the same Author, affirms it to be lawful to communicate with the
Arians, and Eutychians, Nestorians, Photians, Sabessians; because it is not
certain, that these invented their heresies out of malice: but it is otherwise
concerning the Manichees, Valentineans, Macedonians, and Mahometans; because it
is manifest to all, that they taught these blasphemies against their own
judgments.

I wonder at this assertion, from a person of his eminency: for abstracting
from the intention of the former, against whom notwithstanding there was
sufficient presumption, as among the ancients is clearer then the Sun, no less
then against the other; but to grant, I say, what is not to be granted, what is
that to me, whether they have vomitted out their heresy to the eternal
destruction of souls, with a formal or only interpretive intention to deceive?
As long as I communicate with them, and leave the truth taught from the
beginning, and delivered by the hands of the Fathers unto posterity. We must
look here upon the heresy, not the mind or intention of the heretic: that
not this, damneth the souls of those that communicate or pertinatiously adhere
unto it: as St. August. often argues in the the errors of St. Cyprian, and the
Donatists, whom this Author also derideth. But to come home to him: Who knows
not but that Luther against his own judgment began this Schism? Who knows
not that Henry the eighth framed it out of a fained and adulterate conscience?
Who of us does not know, that Queen Elizabeth out of no Religion but politic
ends, perverted the Schism into Heresy? If therefore for this reason, Communon
with such are not lawful, (as he affirmed of the last Apostates) neither
certainly is it lawful here.

Neither will it help them what the others are wont to object; that England did
enjoy a privilege, which they call Cyprium; indeed Tomakas, C^drenas, and many
were that the Bishop of Cyyprus, was declared exempt from the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Antioch: The consequenc^ most not be drawn to England, in respect
of the Sea of Rome, except an express privilege can be shows, which hither
to was never dreamed of; yea, besides other common titles of obedience; the
case of the Bulgars, may, and ought to be drawn unto us, to wit, for the title
of conversion, as the decision of the cause is in the law.

Indeed there is extant a decree in Con. Consta. c. 2. That Bishops must not
confound and intermingle their Churches, but stand to the appointed rules and
their certain limits are affigned to the Patriarchs. In the first Council of
Ephesus also, it is decreed, that no Bishop invade the province of another,
which was not first and from the beginning under his, or his ancestors
jurisdiction: Hence it was, that the cause of the Church of Cyprus was heard,
which the Bishop of Antioch would have subject unto him: but it was judged that
that yoke should be shaken off upon another title.

The Country was converted unto Christ by St. Barnabe, whose relics being
found there with St. Mathew's Gospel upon his breast, written by St. Barnabe;
this gave occasion to commence a suit of exemption, that they might enjoy the
privilege of a Metropolitan: which was granted; so that afterward they were
only subject to Constantinople. The general Council it self in the eighth
Canon speaks home of it, and checks the Bishop of Antioch, for having
transgressed Ecclesiastical and Apostolical rules in this pretense: namely,
because he did ordain in Cyprus, which was always an act of jurisdiction, to
which he had no just title, because these Churches were never put under him, as
appears in the Council. What similitude has this case with the known
subjection of England to Rome; known I say, and acknowledged; even by our laws
ever from the conversion of the Country under St. Gregory. All lawful mutations
of Provinces, which were ever made, as long as the Church was in her full
power, had to this effect the especial authority of some general Council. So in
the Council of Constantinople many dioceses, and some whole Provinces were made
subject to that Patriarch, which before were subject to Ephesus, and the
Primate of Trace. So in the Council: of Calcedon, exchange of Provinces was
decreed between the Patriarch of Antioch, and Jerusalem: and in the first
general Council, the sea of Jerusalem was created a Patriarchate; and the
refore the Fathers took some Provinces from the Patriarchate of Antioch, others
from Alexandria: And in the foresaid example; the Cyprians could not shake off
the authority of Antioch, till the decree was produced of the Council of
Ephesus. Much loss this Island ought to separate from the Sea of Rome, by reason
of the titile of conversion, and only under Gregory the first, but long before
the entrance of St. Austin, under Pope Elutherius, by Elvanus, and Meduinus,
Priests, being requested thereunto by King Lucius, Anno Dom. 179. Whilst it
was possessed by the Brittans, in which primitive faith, it remained immaculate
and uncorrupted (except the question of Pascha, in which it was corrupted by
Picts, and Scots) indeed they resisted St. Austin, because they thought he
sided with the Saxons, who had expelled them by force out of the kingdom, and
because they had an Archbishop of their own of Legancestriae.

Those other things, which the Author so often cited of the Treatise of Schism,
mentioned (for he proves nothing:) concerning the nullity of power, or of all
superiority of Christians as they are such; so that no obedience but simple
reverence, is due to our betters, except that which may arise, by certain
convention amongst men, not by right.

This Tenet indeed, if made good would make all Schism impossible; all
superiority ridiculous, and arbitrary but it is far from Christian verity,
being against Scripture it self, and all common sense of Christians. And truly,
whatsoever the same Author says, in, and for the cause of the Donatists; if it
has any favor, he does not only accuse St. Augustine, but the whole Church
of foolishness, and malice; and all the Prophecies of the fignes of the Church,
upon which St. Augustine, and before him Optatus, Hierom, and all Bishops and
Doctors rely, out of the old and new law, the Prophets and the Acts of the
Apostles; all which in them this man derideth: what he speaks of the use of
Images, he simply affirms, as the rest; but is so far from proving any thing,
that he does not so much as attempt it, neither is it a thing worthy my
insisting upon, since every Abodary Controvertist, makes it obvious to
children. Yet Mr. Hobbs will force me afterward to join issue with him in it.

In fine: The Treatise of Schism speaks many things which seem distructive to
Christian faith, which he barely proposes, or rather supposes, out of which
false supposition he does falsely conclude, that there is no Schism in the
Church; but as Aristotle Pol. l. 2. c. 4 rightly admonishes: Suppositions
indeed may be made, as every one pleases, but not impossible ones.

Neither is it of more moment, what Antonius de Dominis l. 4. and others
contend; that it was not lawful for the Africans to appeal to Rome, according
to the 22. Canon. Council. Melevit. And in like manner England was not bound to
recur thither, or elsewhere; but justly provided for its own right, whilst it
withdrew it self from the Roman yoke; as the African Church living in the
district of the Patriarchate, procured to it self the same ease.

First I say; that Africa did in no wise withdraw it self from the obedience of
the Sea of Rome. I add moreover, neither did it deny the right of appeals, but
in certain cases and certain persons; to wit, simple Clearks, which did appeal
thither without observing any order of law, which the Bishop of Rome did and
does at this day condemn; otherwise read St. Augustine, ep: 162. Omitting
others, who expressly affirms the right of appeals to the Sea of Rome. So the
pretended Canon, made by the consent of the Bishop of Rome, shows no other
thing; but in no wise, as I said, did it withdraw it self from the obedience of
the Sea of Rome. Neither is there the least show of it, but of the clean
contrary in the reciprocal letters of that Council to the Pope, and of him to
them; as may be seen in the body of the Epistle of St. Augustine, it would be
tedious to learned Readers if I should write them out, they will more easily
recur to the place cited.

I add further, worthy to be noted: If the right of appeals had been there
abrogated, yet it concludes not, that the jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome over
them, was anulled: except any should be so senceless, as to imagine that the
prefects of the Pretorian Court, were not subject to the Roman Emperors,
because their authority deserved to be advanced to such a height, that it was
not lawful to appeal from them, l. 1. F. de offic. Pref. Praet

I am not ignorant, that some Grecians as Nilus contend, that the right of
appeals which the Seat of Rome has (for he acknowledges that) in respect of
the other Patriarchs, does not convince that Seat to have jurisdiction over
them.

Because by the same reason the constant Inopolitan having by the Council of
Calcedon, Can. 9. the same power over their Metropolitans, does not exexcise
jurisdiction over them.

I answer; That be denies only the Bishop of Rome to have the same power over
the general Patriarchs, which he has over other Bishops who are ordained by
authority derived from him, and therefore concludes, that the Pope cannot
trouble their ordinary government, which is true.

This therefore confirms what hitherto has been said; and makes good, that
England by all law remains subject to the Sea of Rome, under pain of Rebellion.

CHAP. 7. Protestants have made this Schism.
IT is clearer then noon day, that not Catholics, but Protestants have made
this Schism, and divided the Church: because, when in any Commonwealth
governed under the same Prince, or Sovereignty, and by the same laws a few men
withdraw themselves from the obedience of authority, and increasing in number,
they begin to set up their conventicles, make laws; and the rest of the body
remaining in the ancient manner of government, under their own Sovereign power,
proclaim a war: It is manifest, not the Body of the Common wealth which still
persevereth in the same state; but these few men receding from the Body with
their adherents, have made the division, and blown up the rebellion: In the
same manner have Protestants behaved themselves toward Catholics, before the
scandal of Henry the 8th. or rather of Luther, the whole Catholic Church
consisting of diverse Kingdoms, in which England is comprised, did obey diverse
Princes; were governed by diverse civil Laws and Statutes, yet they worshipped
God but in one faith, and in one sacrifice, were sanctified with the same
Sacraments, did acknowledge the same spiritual Rector, the Bishop of Rome. Then
arose Luther, Henry the eighth, Queen Elizabeth, etc. Who brake Communion with
the whole world, to take away the sacrifice of the whole Church, and the
greater part of the Sacraments, and the holy rites, to revolt from the Bishop
of Rome, all the Church besides persevering in the same unity, worship and
obedience, which before it did profess.

Who therefore does not see, that they have revolted from the Church, and
erected altar against altar (if they have any) and have been the sole Authors
of the divided unity of the Church: I add, that Schism is always a dividing of
an united body, or a separation of a part from the whole preexistent, or fore
being: now the Catholic Church was an united body, existent before Luther,
from which the Protestants might go out, and divide themselves; but the
Protesants seeing they were no where, could make no body from whence the
Catholics could recede; therefore the Protestants could only first make the
division, and blow up the Rebellion.

The other often heard fantastic refuge, wherewith when these are branded
with novelty, like men in a desperate naufrage, they catch at any broken reed;
namely, that they always were of us, and amongst us, and so continued till they
were cast out of us.

To the first part I answer; That till Henry the eighth they were indeed
amongst us; that is, all their progenitors were Catholics; this every man in
the testaments and records of each family can witness, for the world till then
knew no other: all public profession of Religion was that.

To fly to interiours, that is to say, that they were in their hearts,
Protestants, were to recur to divination: which were more then childish in
things of this nature, when all exterior acts contradict any such dreams; and
yet to this clear nonsense they are put, being compelled to assert their
Church for above a Thousand years, to have been invisible, as it is understood
under the notion of a body separated from the Roman; you will see it in
Whittaker in his 2. and 3. Controversy p. 479. Field seeing how destructive
this Tenent would be, in his 10. C. Accounts it foolish, to say that a Church
should not have always known professors; and White in his defense of the way c.
4. p. 790. Says positively, that Religion is false, if it cannot show a
continual descent; yet, p. 520. he is not ashamed to say, that their Church
has had indeed always succession, but not visible; so that being pressed to
show the real svccession, he is constrained to recur to this ridiculous
divination of men's interior Protestancie, though they professed otherwise.

Which contradictory shist of their's, were enough to destroy their pretended
Church. Prideaux in his ninth Lesson of the invisibility of the Church, after
many braggs comes to this poor refuge, and beats about like a man desperate, to
save his case upon a broken reed, or distracted sentence in any obsolute or
forlorn Author.

But sa I noted: They will say that they divided not the Church, neither did
they recede from it, but were cast out of it by excommunication of the Pope;
and therefore not they, but the Pope was the Author of this division: but this
helps them nothing. For to omit; that excommunication is a punishment which
is inflicted upon such, as go out of the Church, not so much casting them out
of the Church, as depriving them of the participation of common benefits
thereof: to omit this it is notoriously known to all that Henry the eighth,
Luther, and Queen Elizabeth went out of the Church before they were
excommunicated, as being condemned by their own proper judgments: and so they
separated themselves, and before any excommunication, made the Schism, in
punishment whereof they were excommunicated: touching Henry the eighth, it is
manifest, that he was excommunicated for his disobedience and contumacy in
grievous crimes: and Queen Elizabeth, by and by when she had gotten the Crown
upon her, she seeing the Pope difficult in declaring her lawful title unto it,
not for her religion (for then she had not changed it) but for illegitemacy,
even according to Acts of our Parliaments under her Father, broke off all
Communion with the Church of God: So Camden in Elizabeth. The English also
compiled a book of Canons wherein they also confess, they went out of the
Church of Rome; therefore it is a frivolous thing, that they pretend they went
not out, but were driven out of the Church.

They may perchance reply, that they were as amongst us, so of us before this
division, and so are yet; because it is sufficient to incorporate any body into
the true Church of Christ, if he believes the Creed of the Apostles as here
Protestants do.

To this I answer: First, that in some cases this may be enough, yes even to
believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of God is sufficient, as in the case of the
Eunuch and such like, that is an implicit faith, may suffice till other
necessary truths are sufficiently propounded: For the Gospel had and has a
time of growth in every new Christian. In these and such like cases it is
sufficient, not to mis believe formerly other truths, to constitute a man a
member of Chirst's Church.

I answer: Secondly, That the same God who trusted his Church with this, has
as well entrusted her with all other necessary truths, The Holy Ghost has
taught her omnem veritatem all and every necessary truth, as our blessed
Savior promised: which she pro re nata, as heresies pullulate, declares to her
children, that they may be able to avoid the danger of swallowing stones
instead of bread.

These truths, thus by supreme power propounded to the faithful, they are
obliged to receive by obeying their Prelates, who have a charge over their
souls, according to that of the Apostle obedite praepesitis vestris, etc. Hence
the Nicene Fathers declared as a most fundamental truth, Christ Jesus to be
Deum de Deo et consubstantialem Patri, etc. to be God of God consubstantial to
the Father, etc. which is not in the Apostles Creed: neither is it there that
the Holy Ghost is God, nor the Fathers of Nice did declare that great truth,
because yet heresies touched not that point: as St. Basile, and St. Gregory
Nariane teach; yet I believe, that every true Christian will esteem it
necessary to believe these truths; it is easy to descend to many more
particulars, which all Christians admit to be necessary, though not expressed
in the Apostles Creed, as concerning the Sacraments of Baptism, and the
Eucharist, etc. The Church has therefore always from the beginning to this day
believed, and practiced this supreme obliging power in matters of faith and
manners: and upon the same ground has always esteemed such heretics, in a
damnable condition, who have not as well believed or adhered to her proposals
in faith in one subject as in another, and as well to the end of the world as
in the primitive times

But they say that the burden of Christian religion will be greater, then of
the Jews, and intolerable, if all are obliged to every declared truth in the
Church, which is contrary to Christ, who says, Mat. 11. that his yoke is
sweet, and his burden is light.

This is easily answered, in order to the Community of Christians, whose
implicit faith in the superstructures is sufficient, according to the
generally taught and received doctrine of Doctors. Pastors indeed and Doctors
have higher obligations to be able to give an account of their faith, which
obligation is much alleviated by the Synopses of Faith, which the Church
clearly and yet very contractedly propounds to keep them principally from
misunderstanding the holy mysteries of our faith. This is the weightiest
objection which I find in Mr. Hobb's, besides those which I shall presently
touch.

St. Chrysostom in his 10. homily upon St. Matthew in the person of Christ,
complains of Mr. Hobbs, Nolite de difficultate conqueri, quesi qui doctrinam
meam molestam esse dicatis: we must not say Christ's doctrine is troublesome,
least with the Capharnaits, we be committed abire retro, to be put in the back
side of Christ's book.

Surely St. August. found Christian religion in another posture, then Mr. Hobbs
would have it in his 5. Chapter to Volusian. Where he says that Tanta est
Christianarum profunditas literarum, ut in eis quotidie proficerem, si eas
solas ab ineunte pueritia usque ad de erepitam senectutem, maximo otio, summa
studio, meliori ingenio, conarer addiscere, etc. He experienced the mysteries
of Christianity, far to transcend the synagogue: he esteemed his whole life
though it were employed in nothing else, not to suffice for a perfect
understanding of Christian profundities; surely they were not so vulgar as Mr.
Hebbs would have them.

There was among the Jews a difference in points of faith, some were ut
adirces as the foundation of the rest, the denying whereof would have destroyed
the whole law: others as rami branches where the danger was not so
considerable. These R. Menassieth in the beginning of his Treatise of the
creation of the world declares.

So in Christian Religion some things are simply necessary, without which
heaven is not to be gotten; as the faith of Christ, etc. which our schoolmen
place sub necessitate medij, that is as absolutely necessary: of which sort
there are not so many.

Other things are necessary only ex suppositione, that is upon supposition
that they are made known to us, or sufficiently declared: then there is
necessitas praecepti, a command to embrace them, and surely this is no great
burden.

I will also touch that impertinent objection of the Socinians; that the Church
of Christ is a congregation of all Christians, or of all who believe in Christ,
and not of any select body of them, and consequently there are no heretics to
be declared so by any sentence of the Church; but only those are heretics who
by their own judgment are such as the Apostle speaks. That is, such who
against their own judgment do resist known truths, not such who by a council or
body of men are declared such. This to believers is easily made evident to be
impious.

First, That Christ has a Church, he has said it, that he also has
instructed her with a regitive power he has also said it, and said both
together in these words, Dic Ecclesiae; and therefore adds to such as obey
not her decrees, si eam non audierit sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus et publicanus,
we must complain to the Church for emergencies, and she has power to
excommunicate if we obey not.

If this be true as it is in other crimes and causes, it will easily conclude
in the chiefest crime of heresy, else we must blasphemously say that Christ
has made provision for the lesser difficulties, and not for greater, which is
to condemn his omniscience or providence.

Again, this regitive power is confirmed in the acts and attributes to the Holy
Ghost, Spiritus Sanctus vos constituit Episcopes regere Ecclesiam Dei. Of this
the new Testament in doctrine and practice is abundant.

Further, that the Church has power to declare heretics, is evident, besides
the immediate consequence of it out of Christ's words related, out of the
doctrine and practice of the Apostles.

They did teach how, or did institute the manner, post secundam monitionem to
declare and excommunicate for heresy, they also did declare de facto
heretics, as is evident in almost all their Epistles and the Apocalipss, and
did forbid all commerce with them, which is to excommunicate, which they did
for their false and seditious tenants or innovations in faith, as is clear in
the texts; whence it follows first, that the Church has this power, as first
Simon Magus, for teaching it lawful to buy the Holy Ghost. Secondly, the Jewish
Christians, who taught it lawful to use Sacramental circumcision under Christ,
were excommunicated by St. John, etc.

Whence it follows secondly; that the Church is not a body of all Christians,
but of all who do join in the unity and integrity of faith; else if declared by
the Church to be heretics, they are no longer of her, because by authority
derived by Christ, they are cast out of her. Their own interior guilt will
serve to accuse them in the Court of God in Heaven; but it is the judicatory
act of the Church upon their pertinacy which condemns them in Earth; and this
sentence is confirmed in Heaven, Quaecunque alligaveritis etc.

Mr. Hobbs in his 18. Chapter n. 2. requires two virtues necessary to
Salvation; Faith, and Obedience. Faith has no other latitude in her acts then
to believe Jesus to be Christ, n. 5, 6. and so forward.

Besides internal faith, he says that there is necessarily required a
profession of many other articles, which summarily are contracted and compacted
into that we call the Creed. As he had touched before, Chap. 17. n. 21. and
afterward more fully in his Annotations to the number 6. Yet he esteemed not
Christians bound to believe, but to profess these if required. This seems a
bull in Christianity to be bound to profess in matter of belief, what I am not
bound to believe: yet this he asserts Chap. 18. n. 6. necessary to salvation
out of title of obedience. That is, I am bound to profess, that I do believe,
what I am not bound to believe; I propound this to Mr. Hobb's second thoughts,
he boggles much upon it in his Annotations, utters evident contradictions, and
yet he comes not off. Nay he says chapter 18. n. 14. that it is enough if one
endeavor to believe them, though he does not, but he must profess them when he
is required.

Is not this to put a lie upon himself, for a man to profess to believe what he
does not believe? Nay, is not this to put a lie upon Christianity? He adds,
that he cannot exclude such from heaven, who internally do not assent to
articles declared by the Church, if they do not contradict, but being
commanded, will grant them, (this last particle of external acknowledgement is
more modest, then I have yet found in any of our Countrymen) though it cannot
be digested by a reasonable man, that I may profess what I do not believe.

The texts of Scripture whereby he proves the internal belief of Jesus to be
Christ, sufficient to salvation, are very weak in principles of Christianity.
For besides, whom I have named already, who were condemned by the Apostles for
believing false doctrine: There were also the Nicolaitans in the Apocalips,
Chap. 2. Who following Nicolas one of the first seven Deacons, who believing in
Christ, yet taught it lawful to commit fornication, and to eat meat offered to
Idols, were heavily threatened from God by St. John; so also those heretics,
whom St. John signifies by Jesabel, who taught it lawful to do the same.
Neither will it help Mr. Hobbs his Tenet. That Jesabel is said to teach, that
is, not only believe eternally those errors; for those of the Church of
Thyatira were threatened because they did believe those false doctrins, and the
Apostle St. Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy v. 3. uses this word (...),
where he gives to Timothy power to denounce to heretics not to teach
otherwise then they had been taught, neither is his discourse of faith in
Christ, but of superstructures, as the course of the text shows, and in it he
forbids any to believe them. In fine, it is clear in all Ecclesiastical
monuments, as well Historical as Doctrinal; that from the Apostles to this day,
not only such who denied Jesus to be Christ, who were properly Infidels or
Apostates, but who believed not any other article propounded by the Church
universal as necessary, were esteemed heretics, and in state of damnation.

All the texts for the sufficiency to believe in Christ in order to salvation,
except in cases before mentioned, are understood of all things which belong to
faith in him, in which is comprehended his Church instructing in all
necessaries, or else the faith in Christ nakedly understood by Mr. Hobbs, would
exclude all those benefits, which we believe to be obtained by him. It is true,
that in particular cases (as I noted) an implicit faith of many of them might
suffice, as in the Thief, where he had not time for other instruction or
profession; yet, it is evident he believed in the whole, when he cried Memento
Mei, etc. But these extraordinary cases are nothing to the ordinary course of
Gods providence, which we only touch: And thus the Church of God from, and
with the Apostles always understood this matter, and accordingly in her
Councels squared her practice. But as I said before of the Thief, so of the
Eunuch, and the two thousand converted by St. Peter; it is evident, that they
believed in the substance of the whole Creed, for the very children of
Jerusalem knew the main doctrins which Christ taught, as appeared in the
public process against him cried up and down the streets; and therefore these
believing in him, believed in all which he had taught; which will come home to
the Creed at least.

Mr. Hobbs will tell you in the upshot, that the points now in controversy, for
the most part concern only contention for a worldly Kingdom, gain, or victory
in point of wit, where he expounds them after his own gust and names, only
such, which may more plausibly be thought to have such appearance, omitting the
chiefest in agitation about the Sacraments, etc. Others which concern the
principal end and effect of our redemption; as freewill, and justification, he
rejects as Philosophical. Thus the high mysteries of Christian Faith, by a
Christian are made subjects of division, or rather of delusion, or collusion.
Herod was afraid of Christ, because he was jealous that his aim would be to get
his Kingdom, this jealousy was the cause of much innocent bloodshed. I hope
Mr. Hobbs has no such design, in stirring up this old false plea against
Christianity: for Christ has assured all men that his Kingdom is not of this
world.

That there has been always subordination in Church judicatures is evident by
St. Paul to Timothy, and every where in holy Writ, which has hitherto been
continued, even in external government, as all Histories show, and yet not
prejudicial but auxilliary to temporal power. But for any controversies is
point of temporal power, challenged by the Church I know none forasmuch as
touches faith. Yet Mr. Hobbs seems to desire, though with much violence, to
draw even hearing confessions and interpreting scriptures to his new Eutopia as
belonging to civil Magistracy.

There is yet another shift, wherein as the Holy Ghost says, mentitur
iniquitas sibi, they frame an imaginary pillar of security; saying, that though
the first openers of this breach were Schismatics, yet they having been born
in this Church, are not guilty of it. As when a Kingdom is unjustly obtained,
yet it may be justly possessed by future heirs. This I have weighed and
answered before: yet to the similitude I particularly answer; that there is no
parity at all to plead prescription against God, because in some cases there
may be among men; else all Heretics, and Turks, may more forcibly plead this
right then they, if naked countenance of possession can give title. I might
here question the supposition it self, for even in temporals, the civil and
Canon law require more time for prescription in order to some persons, then to
others: as for ordinary persons, ten years; in some forty, in some an hundred.

Again, there is a difference, not only in persons, but the things possessed
as Ecclesiastical, require more time then civil: and there is always required a
quiet possession to begin the count of years, that there may be titulus
probabilis. The reason is, because then the true lords are thought virtually,
or implicitly to yield their right: And thence begins the title in the unjust
possessors; namely, when the ancient lord, being able, cease to challenge any
right. But as I say, to let all this pass; the disparity from man to God is
manifestly clear, and therefore admits of no consequence.

CHAP. 8. Protestants have made the Schism without any cause or ground.
THE often cited Protestant Doctor, in the Treatise of Schism writes; that
Schism does not always make the lesser part culpable which recedeth, or is
driven out from the rest of the commonweal, or body of the Church, but the
compulsive cause is here chiefly to be looked upon, and not always the small
number of the receding persons: therefore the Protestants say; it is true, that
they made the division from the Catholic Church, but did it rightly and
worthily, for the intolerable errors and damnable doctrins which then infected
the whole Church: and therefore they followed the command of the voice of God,
Apoc. 18. Go out of her my people, that ye be not made partakers of her sins.

The damnable doctrins are by themselves reduced chiefly to Idolatry, the other
differences they conceive may be more easily swallowed: and indeed this were a
capital one, if true, and it were no less strange; that the Church of Rome
which reduced this Island and most part of the two worlds from Idolatry, should
it self knowingly teach or practice it, and no less strange, that these few men
after so many years should see these gross abominations, which such an infinity
of learned men in so long time, nor yet can find or judge to be so. Idolatry
according to Divines is taken for a religions worship due to God, and given to
any creature. In this all Christians agree.

The Church of Rome in the holy Sacrament of Eucharist, gives indeed Divine
worship out of infallible supposition, that under those Elements, is the body
and blood of Christ, accompanied with his Divinity: they do not give it to the
accidents, no not to the body and blood of Christ properly, and precisely, but
to the Divinity; so precise they are in the Divine worship; whence it is clear,
that they do not direct their worship to a creature, but to God; and though
they cannot but involve in their adoration his presence under the Accidents of
bread and wine, yet do not formally terminate their act to this presentiallity
of Christ in the Sacrament, which is but a relative, a very extrinsecal
accident, and consequently not capable to terminate a divine worship; whence we
see the proper object is Christ, who certainly is existent; and therefore in
this they are not mistaken, even in all sectaries opinions; and therefore there
can be no Idolatry, even though Christ had not that new ubication under the
Elements of bread and wine, that being the accessory, not the principal which
they aim at, for they adaequately direct their action to Christ present, not to
the presence it self abstracting from Christ, so that their mistake would be in
a circumstance, not in a substance; and therefore even admitting that
impossible supposition, yet there would be no Idolatry.

The other particle is their worship of Images; which in no ways can be called
Idolatry. First, because they do not at all teach Divine worship to be due to
them, as is clear in the Council of Trent, and as all knowing Protestants will
confess: Secondly, many great Schoolmen do not hold any worship at all to be
precisely directed to them, it is suffient, reverently to retain them, and by
them to be raised up in devotion to the thing represented by them; as by a
picture of Christ to be called upon to remember Christ, etc. As they think it
is deducible out of the Council of Trent: Out of which it is evident that the
Church of Rome is injuriously defamed of Idoltary.

And here I wonder much at Mr. Hobbs in his book De Cive, who otherwise
singularly deserving in moral and socratical Philosophy, would so easily
preoipitate his judgment in points of this nature.

He says in his Chapter 15. n. 18. That if the Commonwealth should command to
worship God under a picture, that the people were-bound to do it: In his
Annotations upon the same place, he calls himself in question for antilogies in
this particular, for in n. 14. He had taught that to worship God by a picture,
or any Image, were to limit God to a certain term, which were against the law
of nature touching Gods worship, which surely destroys the first position.

To the answer of this, he says, the offense would be in the commanders, not
in the obeyers, by reason they worship him thus upon compulsion. He adds, that
if God should specially forbid to be worshipped by the use of an image, that
then such a command could not be obeyed, as it is in the decalogue, were
expressly Idolatry is prohibited. Afterward in the 16. Chapter n. 10. treating
of the ten Commandments; he says, that to worship God by an Image is against
the law of nature, as he said in the 15. c. n. 14.

These seem to be strangely inconsistent propositions. First, the power which
he says, n. 17. in the 5. Chap. To be transferred to Magistracy from the
people in determining Gods worship, he confesses that it ought to be according
to reason.

He confesses also in his Annotation cited; that to worship God under an Image
were against reason, because Idolatry; not only because now God has forbidden
it (as he says) but in it self, namely, because as he said before, it were to
prescribe a term to his infinity, and consequently to make God to be finite.

Whence it follows; first, that though Idolatry is against the light of
reason, and therefore intrinsecally wicked, yet knowingly I might do it, if
commanded by a Magistrate, so that an inferior power, namely, a power derived
from my self, can command me that which is absolutely prohibited by the highest
power, as is that of nature, and I am bound to obey it with neglect of the
other though supreme, yet the Magistrate cannot command it, but against reason;
and therefore such a command cannot be obligatory, because in his 5. Chapter
and n. 17. reason is the limit of that power. Are not these inconsistences?

Again he says, that moral compulsion (for a command is no more) would render
an act of Idolatry lawful, because it would exempt it from Idolatry. This is
destructive of all religion, and truly of reason, in all Schools of Philosophy.
where Aristotle in his Ethics, and all others teach; that we must lose our
lives for virtue it self.

Again he says, that if God make a positive law to the contrary, as he
supposes he has, that then I may not obey the former command of a Magistrate,
how this is reconcilable to his former tenet, that worshipping God by Images is
against the law of nature, and yet only unlawful if commanded by Magistracy,
because in the Decalogue or positive law it is again forbidden; I know not, for
surely this law is inferior to that of nature, according to all men, and reason
it self being the law of nature, is drawn from the very nature of the thing it
self.

That God has forbidden Idolatry I doubt not in his first Commandment: but
whether to worship God by the use of Images is there forbidden? Or whether it
be Idolatry, would deserve Mr. Hobbs his greater diligence to prove it

For surely to say that it were a confinement of his Infinity, would be as far
from a proof as it is from truth, clear in the light of reason and evidently
against Scripture: where we are taught to glorify God in and by his creatures,
according to the 18. Psalm. Caeli enarrant gloriam Dei, etc. The heavens speak
Gods glory. How they do speak it? they can declare no more then they are,
according to Mr. Hobbs; and therefore only things finite, which is to confine
God against the drift of the Psalms: Philosophy, and Scriptures teach us to
find God by his creatures, as St. Paul 1 Romans 20. remits us to the creatures.
Invisibilia a constitutione mundi per ea quae facta sunt intellecta
conspiciuntur, our understanding of God is from these visible things: nay, it
is the only natural way we have, from the effect to find the first cause; and
not from the first cause the effect, and all things without his confinement. So
by pictures we ascend to what is represented, not tying our selves to the
manner in our worship of God under that representation: In the pursuit we
relinquish the manner, and going forward with our discourse we find, and with
our devotions follow the Infinity of Gods goodness. All representatives are
essentially inferior to the Prototypes by many degrees, yet safely conduct us
to the knowledge of them without abasing their natures to the Images. So here
and all acts of acknowledgment of God, in, and by his creatures; for we know
the effect cannot equalize the first cause especially, neither in nature, nor
in manner of existence; and therefore we conclude, Gods supreme essence and
goodness to transcend all we see; and in the like manner we easily ascend by
the use of pictures, neither can we do otherwise if we use our reason; so that
there is no danger of Gods confinement, and therefore no Idolatry.

I remember that Cassian in his Collations tells us of a poor ignorant Monk;
who out of error, had framed to himself in his narrow imagination a conceit of
Gods being corporal, and could very hardly be brought to entertain higher
thoughts of Gods spiritual essence, being unwillng to relinquish his
Phantastically ill framed Image of God.

We are much beholding to Mr. Hobbs, who is so tender of Christians dullness,
that least by their Images, they should conceive God to be finite or corporal;
with this poor Monk, he would remove all picturs, though God himself; not so
careful as Mr. Hobbs, has been pleased to talk and walk with Adam, which are
acts of a corporal and finite creature, and othertimes to make resemblance, as
if he had appeared in corporal shape, as to Moses, perchance to Jacob and
others; nay, even the Son of God appearing in our poor nature, all which would
draw us into errors, if God had not by his Prophets, Apostles, and daily by his
Church, and even by reason taught us the right use of such passages, and to
know, that those sensible representatives were only conductives to God
himself, as we teach Students by emblems to conceive things more remote from
their present capacity. All which will warrant our use of Images, yet without
Gods confinement and consequently without Idolatry.

Neither would this, if true, any way excuse them from sacrilegious Schism,
except all were compelled to Idolatry. St. Augustine says, there can be no
just necessity to cut off unity l. 2. Cont Ep. Parm. c. 2. and as he elsewhere
Ep. 166. Our Heavenly Master has so much admonished us to take heed of this;
That he would make the common people secure even of evil superiors, that not
for them the chair of saving doctrine should be destroyed. Therefore the chair
ought not to be forsaken, much less destroyed for the errors of the Presidents.
O how St. Cyprian does purge that poison of theirs to the quick! Epist. l. 3.
Ep 2. If there be seen darnel to be in the Church, our faith and charity ought
not to be hindered thereby, that because we see darnel to be in the Church, we
therefore leave the Church, etc. The Apostle in the second Epist. to Timothy 2.
says: In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but
also of wood and of earth; and certain indeed unto honor; but certain also
unto contumely: but it is only lawful for God, who has a rod of iron, to
break the earthen vessels, etc. Let not any one assume to himself what the
Father alone has given to his Son, etc. It is (says he) a proud obstinacy and
sacrilegious presumption, which wicked fury assumeth to it self. Let our
Country men think sadly of this.

It is objected to me, that the Church of Rome does force her Proselites to
believe falsehoods, perniciously under Anathema in the Council of Trent.

I answer; That if we should make an impossible supposition against all the
promises of Christ, that the Church should in necessary points teach errors:
yet even in that case, every child of the Church must exteriorly carry himself
quiet, and not make commotions; for that were to seek a cure, worse then the
disease, as in the like impossible supposition our Countryman Waldensis l. 2.
c. 27. teaches. Non perperam insilire debet. He must not leap against the
Churches face in rebellion: Neither is he bound to believe an untruth; nor yet
is one in danger to incur the censure: For the Church cannot reach the mind;
only God in a just sentence confirming her act reaches home, which cannot be
in this case, for he should confirm an injustice. Whence it follows, that no
man is or can be compelled to believe untruths; but only not to make Schism:
which by divine law is forbidden. And therefore St. Augustines rule is still
true: There cannot be no necessity of cutting off the Church unity, no not in
supposition that she should command great errors.

But you will not object, that if the articles commanded by the Church are in
themselves true; yet if I cannot perceive their truth, after all diligence used
to that end, it were hypocrisy in me; and therefore unlawful to adhere to that
Church, I conceive though falsely, teaches and commands false doctrins, and
extraordinary practices upon those grounds.

This truly is most seriously objected by some, but without all Solidity.

For surely Christians are obliged by the law of God and reason to depose their
own false judgments, in obedience to God and his Church, else this will open a
gap to all itching ears (of whom we are premonished) to introduce each man his
fancy, and prefer it before the wholesome doctrins of Christ delivered by his
Church.

Neither is it difficult for man, though learned to depose his own judgment,
especially in order to external actions, for it is daily done by all sorts of
timorate consciences, who do mangre their own reason, direct themselves by the
authority of such, whom they know to be more learned then themselves.

Mr. Hobbbs Chap. 15. and n. 13. says, unusquisque rationem privatam, rationi
totius civitatis submittere potest. Here he labors to lay the grounds of the
derivation of power in the Commonwealth to determine what belongs to matters of
religion, which he faith that the people have transferred to the Magistrate. He
proves it as he faith evidently (I examine it not being pertinent to my
design) His proof is, because every man in his private worship, before the
City was made, was to be guided by his private reason, which therefore he might
submit to the public reason of the Commonwealth. If this be true in point of
reason, as Mr. Hobbs much contendeth in order to the civil Magistrate; how much
more will this be concluded in respect of spiritual Magistracy, to whom this
power is conveyed, not from the people, but from God, as Christianity teaches.
Mr. Hobbs goes far beyond this, for he will have each one to be obedient to
his Civil Church even in things clearly unlawful; as he tells us in his 15.
Chap. number. 18. and elsewhere frequently. Thus they condemn Christian obedience
in things most congtuous to Christian reason, and yet authorize their own
tribunals contrary to faith and reason.

Mr. Hobbs says, n. 17. That except the power of determining Gods worship,
were in the law of nature translated to the City or Magistracy, that there
would be infinite sects, divisions, and consequently confusions in it; and
therefore he says consequently enough, that every man must submit to it.

The antecedent I understand not: for the law of nature is a law declared
according even to him, n. 3. Pertacita rectae rationis dictamina, by the secret
suggestions of right reason, in which he differs not from Cicero, Lex naturae
est ipsa ratio summa, insita in natura quae jubet ea quae faeienda sunt
prohibetque contraria, etc. It is not so much declared by reason, as it is
reason it self in the highest acception seated in nature, and it is therefore
called Lex naturae, because nature, signifies a certain common virtue, which
impels all men to a general prosecution of good, and avoydance of evil: whence
they cannot will any thing under the pure notion of evil: In brief, the Law or
light of nature radically is a power in the soul universally commanding the
pursuit of good and declination of evil answerable to the first principles of
reason: And therefore speaking rigidly, the soul in her creation is not so
purely tabula rasa, a bare table; according to Aristotle and his followers,
Plato and his whole school, she is enriched with universal principles, which
are called primae Conceptiones unresistable principles, which have no other
proofs then the true apprehension of the terms or extremes united: and
therefore are primo verae, as Aristotle declares, these are the first truths in
which men cannot differ in use of reason; for otherwise if they should fail in
these, it were in vain to expect any subsequent discourses in superstructures,
but as their discourses would enlarge, so would their errors: out of these,
nature frames her commands universally, which is the Law of nature taken
formally.

Whence it follows, that in this matter of greatest concernment to humane
nature: Namely, the worship of God; there needs no translation of power from
each particular person to the City, or whole body of men, because it is as
intimately connatural to each, as to all, to know what the law of nature
dictates by the constant and secret suggestions of reason, what is to be done,
and what is to be avoided, as Cicero tells us; whence principally comes, that
we call Synderesis, or check of Conscience, else it is not a law of nature, but
some superstructure, improperly called natures law, which inseperably is
infused into the soul to all, who have a soul not hindered in her opperations.
But herein many err, who confound the hypotheses with the principles whence
they are deducted; that is, remoter conclusions with the first, which are
immediate, and serve as principles to all others.

The Law, or light of natures therefore immediately dictates, that God is to be
worshipped, and none can be ignorant of it, that know the signification of the
terms: neither can they be ignorant, that Gods worship must be performed in the
best manner. Thus far Cicero his Summa ratio, pure reason convinces, men
cannot disagree in this; for as Cicoro notes, non opinione sed natura
constitutum est jus. This depends not on opinion which is always ambiguous, but
is a law as constant and evident as the law of nature.

But because our natural knowledge of God is deducted only from his creatures,
(for the objects of our understanding in this present condition of conjunction
of the soul with the body, are only material or sensible natures deduced from
our senses) hence our reason cannot reach to know the manner of Gods worship,
because that only is best which is pleasing to him, note converse, that is
pleasing to him, which we judge to be the best; though out of this mistake each
nation proceeding, or rather standing (as we say) in their own light, differed
from each other, and every one from truth, in determining Gods worship.

To say therefore as Mr. Hobbs often inculcateth, that every particular man
must submit to the whole body for determination of this, seems to be as
impertinent a doctrine, as to oblige every blind man to have an inquest of blind
men to determine what color any things were of, to whose blind judgment every
man should submit; though as Aristotle tells us, Caeaus non judicat de
coloribus. The thing were wholly out of their Sphere.

The determination therefore of the manner of divine worship, can only be had
from God, because none can know his will but himself. For as Mr. Hobbs rightly
teaches, n. 14. c. 15. Gods will is not to be thought similis nostrae, like to
ours, but it is to be supposed to have only some Analogy with ours quod
condipere non possumus, which our understand can not reach to. Which is also
Aristotle's, Averroes, and the best Philosophers doctrine.

Whence it follows, that none can know what man nor of worship inmost
agreeable, and conse quently what is best. These wholly transcend our sphere,
and therefore Christian Divivines most reasonably hold it necessary to have
supernaturally revealed truths communicated to mankind to direct them in
Gods worship; and surely, it were as high and pecoaminous presumption in any,
to offer to determinate this, as the building of Babels Tower, of which nothing
could be expected but eternal confusion. Whence it follows, that never any
worship pleased God, which was not inspired by himself, no not in the state of
nature.

Mr. Hobbs must therefore retract his injuriously traslated power to his
Commonwealth, and teach his Disciples to seek this knowledge from God, even
under the law of nature. As now Catholics observe in all worship exhibited to
the Divinity, especially directed in all these supernaturals by the Church,
from which they receive Gods orders.

Aristotle indeed acknowledges the force of an argument drawn from authority
to be very estimable, even in schools; and therefore we may adhere to so great
authority, as the Church even in reason.

But those, who cannot overcome their own tenuous reasons by overpoising them
with so great authority, as the Church, certainly must either be mad, that is,
hurt in their fancies, as I have observed some, though otherwise able to make
unbroken discourses, in other matters of less concernment, which is easily
possible, according to Philosophy, or else God for other sins blinds their
understandings, as he did Pharoah's; which obstacle they must labor to remove,
that they may learn to obey God in his Church, else their condition will be
every way most miserable, if they obey not for want of Christian humility they
are in evident danger of hell, if they do obey they are in danger, because they
do against Conscience; but the remedy of this is at hand, if they relinquish
their own judgments, not by satisfying, which they pretend they cannot do, but
by captivating to a sure Authority.

Certainly, wicked fury has made and increased this Schism: for granting,
which is my second answer to the former objection; that when unity cannot be
kept without detriment of eternal Salvation, it may, and ought to be broken
without sin; but when by the conservation of unity no detriment of salvation is
incurred, and that if this also may be obtained by persevering in unity, then
at least there shall be no lawful cause to break unity, and those who break it,
do incur certain damnation for sacrilegious Schism: But now Protestants
remaining in union with the Church of Rome, should have suffered no detriment
of their eternal Salvation, but had been in a certain way to arrive unto it. As
we have showed before, by their own confession, that Catholics persevering in
the same unity may attain unto salvation: wherefore it manifestly follows
that they without any cause went out of the Church (wherein they might have
been saved) and cast themselves and their followers into the state of
damnation: according to that of St. Augustine, De unit. Eccl. c. 19. None come
unto Salvation and life everlasting except he has Christ for his head; and
none can have Christ for his head, except he he in his body, which is the
Church.

Again, which is chiefly to be pondered, and always to be repeated, those
damnable doctrins (as they call them) taught in the Church of Rome, ought to
have been declared by a general Council, and not by themselves, who are the
least, if any part of the Church. Otherwise, if it should be lawful for every
one to accuse the Church his mother of Heresy, and to leave her without any
other discussing of the cause, a gate should be open to all Heresies; and the
Church of God would be trodden under foot, yea all Christianity fall to ruin;
this has been the plea of all separatists, which they thought sufficiently
proved, if only accusing of error be proving: as in the cause of England, D.
Bilson and Covell, teach the necessities of Synods in these things, the first
part p. 374. the other p. 110.

And that which another replied, first that England might sufficiently judge of
heresies, newly brought in, seeing it is matter of fact, to wit, whether this,
or the other doctrine came down from our Fathers Grandfathers, etc. or whether
it were heard of but yesterday, or the day before? for this even children may
perceive.

The second point also, which he not only by mouth, but by pen (now frequent
in other hands) so much urged, saying, that it is not needful to call a general
Council, since by your confessions, as Cressy, fol. 443. seems to insinuate,
that there is no infallable power in them: A doctrine which I was glad to find
amongst you, yet I wondered at it, being already repugnant to what I had read in
your former authors, as D. Stapleton, and D. Stratford of the Church, and of
late in a book made by a Countryman of ours in Latin, called Systema Fidei:
Cressie's words are these: No man will endeavor to oblige them further then
etc. to believe an obliging authority in the Catholic Church, let is be
limited and confined as straightly, and with as many provises as any Catholic,
or indeed any reasonable man shall think good. I say according to this power of
defining, and establishing faith, it is to no purpose to call a general Council
to declare heresies, when every ignorant fellow can do as much in order to the
verity of declaring, though perhaps not in order to the coercive manner of
declaring; yea, in the very power it self, for as much as according to this
position of Cressy, the power of the Church in this particular may be
restrained by any silly fellow, etc. Thus far this Author.

To these I answer; For as much as concerns matter of fact every nation may
witness, what they have recived, but they cannot make infallable discernment of
matters of Faith without the supreme judgment of the whole Church, in whose
only mouth there can be no errors: which is our principal question. Many
things are conveyed to posterity, which are not matters of Faith, sometimes not
of truth: this the Church only suerly determines.

To the second objection out of Gressy, I answer, that his words, though very
harsh, yet in my judgment they may receive a more favorable gloss, upon
connection with the other parts of his discourse. He does indeed to much even
suspiciously savor of his old friendship, with that vertiginous and flashy
Apostata Chillingworth, a man whom few examples have paralel'd in often turning
religion. But Cressy wrote this book in Neophitism, not being yet fully
instructed in the mysteries of our holy faith, as St. Hierome notes of
Arnobius. which therefore is more excusable in him, though he should express
his not thoroughly digested conceits, hardly endugh consistent with the verities
of the Catholic faith. I do not believe that his intention was, so soon to
play the master in teaching what he had not perfectly learned, which had been
too preposterous, (...) this whole books (...) to give the History or gradation
of his conversion, how he did reach from one degree to another and how he
gathers the sense of our doctrine, and Doctors, in his passage: wherein (as I
said) it is no wonder, if being a Neophite, he should boggle in his manner of
explication, as his expression seems to do in this; but where he now is, he
will better and more fully inform himself; and I doubt not but will rectify
those passages which savor of mistakes.

Neither does it avail much, though many here stumble at these, and other of
his passages; for St. Hier: says, ep. 76. I think Origin to be read, So
sometimes for application, as Tertullian, Novatus, Apollinaris, Cressy, and
many more Ecclesiastical writers, both Greek and Latin, that we may choose what
is good in them and avoid the contrary: There are some very good things in that
book, though intermixed with other passages more harsh as he seems to express
them, which a prudent reader may pick out and discern to his profit.

It remains therefore firm and certain, that our Country men are bound under
the pain of Schism and rebellion to reunite themselves unto the Church of Rome,
their mother (as King James of famous Memory calls her, in his first speech to
the Parliament) at least wise until a general Council he convocated, where
their cause may be heard and decided, which indeed is virtually already done to
their hands in the case of Germany: Wherein the proverb is true that one egg is
not more like to another then these in the main point of Schism, though
differing from themselves and others in points of Doctrine.

From what is said we may conclude thus. Whosoever divide the unity of the
Church without cause are in a damnable state, seeing (out of the third Chapter)
Schism is an enormous crime; but Protestants do divide the unity of the Church
(out of the 4 and 5 Chapters) and that without cause; (Chap. 6.) therefore
Protestants are in a damnable state. Wherefore (as I said in the beginning)
considering the danger of their souls they are bound to discuss the causes of
their revolt; to weigh and ponder the reasons of the Catholics, that they may
free themselves from such a miserable and dreadful state, return to the Church
their mother, and so have God for their Father, love and maintain her unity,
and so be made partakers of her charity.

An Exhortation of the Author.
I know that these sensible objects obvolved and ensnared in the delights of
the flesh, strongly proposed either by actual possession or clear hopes of
attaining, do so efficatiously move the powers of souls, drowned in sordid
bodies; that poor man by the weak command of his will is hardly drawn from
embracing them; therefore we must seek help otherwise, we must fly unto holy
prayer, that we be not swallowed up in this gulf of mudd; let more noble
objects be proposed, it is not in our power not to be moved with those things
we see; let us therefore look with the eyes of Faith upon the objects of
eternal felicity promised to those who confess and follow Christ Jesus,
certainly they will concern us, and by Gods mercies through the trials of
patience we shall at the length attain unto them.

Let not therefore that be applied to us, which in times past Seneca. ep. 116.
spoke of the adversaries of Stoic Philosophy: You promise too high-things, you
command too hard things: we are poor creatures and we cannot deny all things to
our selves, least we hear also his answer on the Stoics part: Our vices
because we love them, we defend them, and we had rather excuse them then leave
them: To be unwilling is the cause, not to be able is pretended. This
consideration may easily imprint a serious reflection in the hearts of
Schismatics

To conclude all, let us hear the great Zealot of Peace thundering out to the
Churches of Ephesus.

Ephesians. 4. I therefore prisoner in our Lord beseech you, that you walk worthy
of the vocation in which you are called, with all humility and mildness; with
patience supporting one another in charity, careful to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace: One body and one spirit, as you are called in one
hope of your vocation: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, One God and Father of
all, which is over all, and by all, and in us all. Amen.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 27. Line 11. Read Lions. P. 83. l. 17. read dissected. P. 87. l. 17. read
prefects. P. 96. l. 14. read impostume. P. 127. l. 10. read add faith. P. 136.
l. ult. dele to. P. 138. l. 11. read these. P. 144. l. 12. read add not. P.
174. l. 7. read Epistles. P. 195. l. 15. read radices. P. 214. l. 13. read
continuance. P. 239. l. 18. dele not. P. 242. l. 10. read not pertinent.


