A Reviler Rebuked: OR, Abraham Bonifield's ENVY, FALSENESS and FOLLY, In his
Late Book, Called, The CRY of the OPPRESSED, etc. LAID OPEN In this ANSWER
thereunto.

Written by OLIVER SANSOM.

Behold he Travelleth with Iniquity, and has Conceived Mischief, and brought
forth Falsehood. He made a Pit and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch which
he has made. His Mischief shall return upon his own Head, and his violent
Dealing shall come down upon his own Pate,

Psalm. 7.14. 15, 16. LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Soul, near the Meeting
House in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, 1696.

A REVILER REBUKED; OR, Abraham Bonifield's ENVY, FALSNESS and FOLLY in his
late Book, called the Cry of the Oppressed, etc. laid open in this Answer
thereunto.
OF the many ways which Satan has used to cast reproach upon the Way of Truth,
and them that truly walk therein, thereby to hinder those that are enquiring
after it, from entering thereinto: One (and that not the least mischievous)
has been to stir up Discontent, Emulation, or Envy in some or other, who make,
or have made Profession of the same Way of Truth, against either some
particular Member, or the whole Society; and having drawn them by degrees into
Prejudice and Enmity, then to thrust them forward, to make open War by Word or
Writing, and to load the Faithful Professors of Truth with Calumny, Reproach
and false Accusations. How much the Apostle Paul suffered by such, either False
Pretenders to, or Backsliders and Apostates from the Way of Truth, may be
gathered from diverse occasional hints, in many of his Epistles. There were some
High Talkers amongst the Corinthians, that were puffed up against the Apostle,
1 Cor. 4.18, 19. Some that were ready to Censure him as if he walked according
to the Flesh, 2 Cor. 10.2. Some who despised his Bodily presence, as weak, and
counted his Speech contemptible, ver. 10. Such he called False Apostles and
Deceitful Workers, cap. 11: ver. 13. And recounting the many Sufferings,
Hardships and Perils he had undergone for the sake of the Gospel, mentions his
Perils among false Brethren, ver. 26. He complains to the Galatians of false
Brethren at Jerusalem, who sought to bring him into Bondage, Gal. 2.4. He tells
the Philippians, That some at Rome Preached Christ even of Envy, Strife and
Contention, not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to his Bonds, Phil.
1.15, 16. He warns Timothy of Alexander the Copper-smith, who, (he says) did
him much evil, and greatly withstood his Preaching, 2. Tim. 4.14, 15. Nor was
the Apostle John free from the like Exercise and Suffering from Diotrephes, who
prated against him with malicious words, 3 John 9, 10. So that it need not seem
strange to any now, neither should any be startled at it, to see some rise up
amongst us, or pretending to be of us, and fall upon us with bitter Revilings
and false Accusations; since it appears to have been the work of the wicked
One, in former Ages, to stir up such perverse and unruly Spirits, to Rail at,
Revile, Reproach and Defame even the Apostles themselves. Which evil work he
has continued ever since; and in this Age especially, wherein the Light of the
Glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ has broken forth more brightly and
clearly, than in many Ages before; he has drawn some that professed to walk
therein, into Discontent, Division, Prejudice, Enmity, and so at length into
open Opposition, even to Write, Print and publish Books stuffed with Falsehoods
and Defamations against the Faithful Followers and Ministers of Christ Jesus.

Among the too many whom Satan has beguiled, corrupted and hardened to that
degree, Abraham Bonifield of Reading is one, who having long since discovered
himself to be a Man of a restless and unquiet Mind, and of an unruly and
contentious Spirit, seeking occasions to make Disturbances, and break the Peace
of the Church, was diverse years ago reproved therefore, and testified against,
by the Quarterly Meeting of the County where he lives. And having since left
the Meeting of Friends (to which he used before to resort) and joined himself
to them in Reading, who, some years ago, Separated themselves from Friends; he
has very lately Published a Book in Print, containing many Foul Reflections,
Slanderous Reports, and False Accusations against diverse Friends by Name, among
whom he has made me a principal Butt, to shoot his Envious Arrows at, and has
labored much to defame me in my Reputation, both as a Man and a Christian; I
find a concern upon my Spirit, to Vindicate Truth, and other Friends concerned,
as well as my self, from his False and Foul Aspersions, and to lay open his
Deceit and Wickedness therein.

He calls his Book, The Cry of the Oppressed in Sion: But by the Confusion that
is in it, he manifests himself to be in Babylon; He should have told what he
means by Sion. For as Sion outwardly was a Mountain in Jerusalem, upon, or near
which the Temple was said to be builded: So Sion Spiritually, or in a Mystical
Sense, is used for that Holy Mountain, which the Prophet spoke of, when
describing the Peace of Christ's Kingdom in the Gospel-Days, he said, They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, Isa. 11.9. And to such as
come to dwell in this Holy Mountain, the same Prophet said elsewhere, In
Righteousness shall thou be established; Thou shall be far from Oppression, for
thou shall not fear; and from terror, for it shall not come near thee, Chap.
54.14. Whence then has he fetched his Cry of the Oppressed in Sion? He says, it
is Sounded forth aloud in the Camp: But he does not say what Camp. Surely it
must be in the Camp of the Vncircumcifed.

Besides his Cry, he has given another Title to his Book, he calls it also, An
Appeal from the Wicked and Unjust Judgment of Men, to the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that Just and Upright Judge and Lord of Heaven and Earth; And to his
Holy Witness in the Hearts and inward parts of all the Real Professors and
Possessors of the Holy Truth. Here he makes a twofold Appeal, one to the
Judgment Seat of Christ, another to his Holy Witness in the Hearts, etc. by
distinguishing of which, it seems as if he referred in the former, to the
general Judgment at the end of the World. For that world [Judgment-Seat] is
used in that Sense by the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, chap. 14.
ver. 10. For we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and 2 Cor.
5.10. For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one
may receive the things done in his Body, according to that he has done,
whether good or bad. And I do not remember it is used in any other Sense in
Scripture, unless it be with Relation to Civil Judicatures. Besides these, he
has yet a Third and more particular Appeal in his Book, page 30. where he
Appeals to all that have Eyes of their own, and dare use them. I am well
content to join Issue with him upon all his Three Appeals, and to abide the
Judgment, both of God's Witness in the Hearts of his People at present, and of
Christ himself hereafter at the great day; nor do I fear the Censure of any,
who have Eyes of their own, and dare and will use them aright. And had not
Abraham Bonifield called his Book, A True and Impartial Account of Unchristian
Forcing, Severe Ways, Arbitrary and Indirect Methods, etc. I should not perhaps
have so much regarded his Personal Reflections upon my self (though they are
very Foul and False) as to have bestowed an Answer on him. But for the Honor
of Truth, and clearing of other Friends concerned therein, as well as my self,
and to prevent his Deceiving and Misleading any who do not so well know him, I
think fit to lay open and unravel his Spiders Web (which is his own Phrase p.
26) not doubting to manifest to the indifferent Reader, that his Account (which
he calls True and Impartial) is Untrue and Partial; that his Cry of Oppression
by Unchristian Forcing, Severe Ways, etc. is as Causeless, as he is Clamorous,
and that he has knowingly wronged me in those Wicked Reports he has Published
concerning me. Yet before I enter upon his Book it self, his Epistle to the
Reader lying in my way, and being so bulky as to take up ten pages, it may be
thought much, if I should wholly pass over it, without taking any notice of it.
Some few Observations therefore I think fit to make, on some few Passages in it.

He begins with as much Smoothness as he can, to insinuate himself into his
Reader, pretending much to Truth and Plainness; but he cannot hold to that
long. He quickly falls into Heat, Anger, Railing and bitter Language, and in
that heat runs into a sort of Prophetic Strain, denouncing Judgments against
others; and undertaking, after his manner, to foretell what shall befall them,
whom he calls Proud and Haughty Minded. But galloping on too fast without true
Sense, or due Cosinderation, he Stumbles, Falls and Foyls himself most
shamefully; for speaking of those whom he calls Proud and Haughty Minded, he
says, They have digressed from the Truth, and too far played the Harlot thereby
with the Lord, the ancient Rock of their Salvation. Did ever any Man of sober
Sense drop such an Expression as this? The Prophets of God did often reprove
backsliding Israel of old, for going a Whoring from God, Hosea, 4.12. and chap.
9.1. And playing the Harlot with others. Ezekiel. 16.28. Jer. 3.1. But whoever
heard before of playing the Harlot with the Lord? By this the Reader may taste
and see how far A. Bonifield is Digressed, or gone aside from Truth, and what
Spirit guided him in Writing his Book, which has led him to use such a gross
and unsound Expression. This is in the 5th page of his Epistle: And in the same
he gives his Reader to understand (whereby the Reader may see and observe what
a Quarrelsome Man he has been) that this is not the first Difference, no, not
by several, that he has been concerned in with Friends in that Town of Reading.
And as if he Gloried in this (which he might rather be ashamed of) he divides
them into Small or Pettyones, and more General, or most Capital ones. It seems
Small or Petty matters will serve for a ground or occasion of difference with
such a Pettish Spirit as he is of. But he need not boast of that: For it is not
for his Honor. And indeed, if he had had any real regard for the Honor of
Truth, and the Reputation of that Christian Society, which he once professed
himself a Member of, and is now without just cause become an Enemy to, it would
have restrained him from Publishing Differences long since past and gone,
especially wherein he himself was so deeply concerned, and thereby to expose
both the one and the other to the Scorn and Contempt of such profane Readers
as his Book may go amongst. But he must gratify his Envy, though he wound
himself in endeavoring to wound others. Three Differences therefore he here
sets forth, which he calls more General, or most Capital ones. The first he
says, was referred to be heard and ended by Jo. Osgood and John Kilborne,
wherein several others, he says, were likewise concerned, as well as himself.
Those words [several others] are a common Shelter for him to hide himself
under, when he would make his Reader believe that other Friends took part with
him in his Quarrels, but how false he is in that I shall show anon, when I come
to Examine his Book it self. What that Difference was about, he has not told
his Reader. Generals serve Slanderers best to lurk under. In general therefore
he says, Several Charges were drawn up, stated and given against W. L. and were
most of them such too, says he, as I think, searce ever the like in the Nature
and Degree of them, as with respect to W. L. his Arrogance and Pride, has at
any time come before Friends since they were a People. Is not this set out at
an high rate? From this general Account, what could the Reader conceive; but
that W. L. was the height of Pride and Arrogance? Whereas they that know him,
know him to be no such Man; and it is more applicable unto A. Bonifield himself.
It Is true, he had drawn up many Charges, and written many Scandalous Papers
against W. L. tending to defame him: But when the matters came to be looked
into and examined, the Friends to whom it was referred, did not judge W. L. to
be guilty of that which A. B. had charged him with. But A. B. thereupon burned
his own Papers himself that same Evening at John Buys Kiln-fire; and whether
this was not a Testimony against what he had written, let the Reader judge: And
was it not then agreed, that whoever revived the said Difference again, should
be deemed the offending Person? He goes on saying, And the Remarks of the
aforesaid made upon both his Charges, Person, Qualifications, W. L. may happily
still remember. Whom does he mean by [the aforesaid?] He must mean either J. O.
and J. K. (to whom, he says, the Difference was referred) or himself, and his
[several others] who he says were concerned in it as well as himself. If he
means those two Friends ( J. O. and J. K.) W. L. does not at all remember that
they made any Remarks upon his Charges, Person, or Qualifications. And he
believes they were Honester and Wiser Men, than to make Remarks upon his Person
or Qualifications. But if by [the aforesaid] he means himself and his pretended
(several others) concerned with him, it shows what Cavilling Spirits he and
they were of, and what Quarrelsome Qualifications they had, that would go to
make Remarks upon W. L's Person and Qualifications. What Persons or
Qualifications A. B's (several others) were of, I know not; but A. B. I think,
might very well have let W. L's Person and Qualifications alone. And
notwithstanding the big Words and empty Flourishes, which A. B. has used to
set forth the greatness of the Capital Difference, as he calls it; it seems the
Difference was but slenderly grounded against W. L. if it wanted to be made out
by Remarks upon his Person and Qualifications. But be that Difference what it
would, since A. B. acknowledges it was not only referred to be heard and ended
by J. O. and J. K. but also that it was so: (for he adds; as accordingly they
were, viz. heard and ended) who but one of a restless and unquiet Mind, an Evil
Contentious Spirit, would have renewed the remembrance of an old ended
Difference? By this the Reader may see some of A. Bonifield's Qualifications,
and by these guess at the rest, which are so Remarkably Evil, that they need no
farther Remark to be made upon them.

In the 8th page of his Epistle, he reflects not only on W. L. and J. B. but on
the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings too. For having set forth (but very falsely)
the great Endeavors and Entreaties he used to obtain Justice and a fair
Hearing (as he pretended) he adds, Though all in vain and to no purpose, because
of their so over-swaying of Meetings for Affection and Interest; because still
and always (says he) There was a Ruling Party both in Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings; so that what they were minded or resolved should be, was to be; and
what not, neither could, should, nor was to be admitted. That this is a great
Falsehood and Slander upon the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings of our County of
Berks, is notoriously known to all our Friends that frequent those Meetings,
and therefore need no other Refutation, there being so many that can Witness
against it: But it is usual with him to charge his own Faults upon others; and
Pre-eminence being the thing he has long aimed at, and sought after, that he
might Sway, Rule, and Overruled Meetings at his pleasure; his being
disappointed thereof (by them he mentions, and other Friends also, who saw his
Ambitious, Aspiring Humor, and Contentious Temper, and opposed him therein)
has stirred up in him a Spirit of Revenge, to upbraid them with that which
himself was guilty of. But as herein he has done wickedly, so has he also
done it foolishly, and the Reward of Fools, Confusion and Self-contradiction,
falls upon him. For when he has charged W. L. and J. B. with over-swaying
Meetings for Affection and Interest; so that what they were minded or resolved
should be, was to be; and what they were minded should not be, neither could,
should, nor was to be admitted: He immediately adds, And it may be also
observed, how doubtful and timorous W. L. and J. B. etc. all along from first
to last, have been of themselves, and concerning the Effect and Event of
things. Was this a sign of their having, or being of a Ruling Party in Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings? If they had so over swayed Meetings, as he says, that
what they were minded should be, was to be; and what they were minded should
not be, neither could, should, nor was to be admitted, surely they needed not
to have been doubtful and timorous (as he represents them) concerning the
Effect and Event of Things. Here A. Bonifield's Passion has run him on ground.
He designed to defame those Friends at a venture; and the first thing he
charges them with, is Superiority, Rule, Sway in and over Meetings, both
Monthly and Quarterly, so that they could do what they pleased; what they had a
mind to have done, must be done; and what they would not have done, must not be
done, says he. This, if it were true, were bad enough, one would think, and he
needed not have heaped up more. But his Envy extended further. Therefore
running on without Consideration, he represents them at the same time, doubtful
and timorous, not considering how disagreeable those terms are, to that great
strength and power of Sway and Rule, which he had but just before represented
them to have in and over Meetings, by which they could do, or keep undone,
whatsoever they pleased. The truth is, both the one and the other is a
Falsehood, and a Slander of his own devising; and this discovery of his Folly is
very just upon him.

Now that himself was guilty of seeking and endeavoring to carry on his
Contentious Design by Interest, he himself has (unadvisedly) acknowledged in
this place. For speaking of an Appeal, which he falsely says was pretendedly
sought, endeavored and allowed by O. S. he adds, And earnestly and truly
endeavored by me, and that by all the thought-of ways, means and interest that
possibly I could find, obtain, or make use of, on my part, in order thereunto.
So that though there was no cause for the Appeal he mentions, nor ground for
him to charge me (as he does here, and frequently in his Book) with seeking,
endeavoring, and allowing it (to which I may answer in its place) yet he
plainly discovers that that which he wrongfully blames those Friends for, to
wit, overswaying of Meetings for Affection and Interest, was the course he took
for carrying on his Appeal, namely, by all the thought-of ways, means, and
Interest, that possibly he could find, obtain, or make use of on his part, as
his own words are.

Besides the former, he contradicts himself again in this place. For speaking
of his Entreaties, used still, and all along from time to time, and one time to
another, for but Justice and a fair Hearing in his Case, he adds, in both this
and the former Differences: And he confessed but a little before, p. 5. that one
of the two former Differences was heard and ended by J. O. and J. K. and in
this place acknowledges the two former were heard and ended: So that there is
no end of Contention with him, but rather than be quiet, he will call for
Justice, and a fair Hearing, even of such Differences as himself acknowledges
have been referred, heard and ended before.

More Observations might be made on his Epistle; but these foregoing may
somewhat discover what Spirit and Temper he is of, which the Book it self will
afford occasions of manifesting more fully. I shall therefore here only note,
that he flatters with his Reader at the end of his Epistle, as he did at the
beginning of it, and after he has vented a great deal of Bitterness, Envy, and
Falsehood in it, subscribes himself in the close thereof, Thine in the Truth
that is plain, innocent, and void of the beguiling Crafts of Men. It Is true
indeed, that Truth is plain and innocent, and void of the beguiling Crafts of
Men; But it is also true, That he is not in that Truth, but out of it, and
contending against them that dwell in it: And his pretending to be in the Truth
that is void of the Beguiling Crafts of Men, is but a Crafty Artifice of his,
to beguile his Reader by.

To his Epistle he tacks on something, by way of Introduction to his Book, in
which he opens (perhaps unawares) the Ground of the present Difference, viz.
That after the former Difference had been ended, he and some others recollected
some omission or shortness (says he) in our not so stating it in the former,
relating to that part of the Difference, we thought very material and necessary
to have been inserted, as the Ground or Hinge upon which most of our
Discontents did hang and depend, upon which occasion (says he) the old matter
not brought before to light, and more new ones daily appearing, did occasion me
to draw up first my own particular Dissatisfactions, in order to present, and
to have them heard and redressed either by the Monthly or Quarterly Meetings.
And therefore (says he) in order thereunto, I presented the Monthly Meeting
with a Paper of Complaint of my Aggrievances. See now Reader, the restless
Temper of this Contentious Man, that no sooner was one Difference with him
ended, but he began to study how to raise another. He feigns some fresh
occasion, and thereupon pretends to recollect some omission or shortness in
stating the for mer Difference, that he might take fresh occasion to differ
again. But is it not strange, that this pretended omission should be of
something relating to that part of the Difference, which he and his thought
very material and necessary to have been inserted, as the Ground or Hinge upon
which most of their Discontents (he says) did hang and depend? This was a
shortness indeed, sufficient to unhinge all their Discontents, and render the
Difference, at least on their side, gronndless. But rather than his Discontents
should want an Hinge still to turn and return upon, he would bring forth old
matter not brought to light before, for he says, upon which occasion, the old
matter not brought before to light, and more new ones daily appearing, did
occasion me to draw up first my own particular Dissatisfactions. Was this like
the Truth that is plain and innocent, and void of the beguiling Crafts of Men?
Does not this either discover the beguiling Craft or Folly of a Man out of
Truth, and neither plain nor innocent, thus to keep back some old matter, (and
that too no less, it seems, than the Ground or Hinge upon which, he says, most
of their Discontents did hang and depend) and not insert it, not bring it to
light, when his old Difference was to be put an end to?

Now having drawn up his own particular Dissatisfactions, I presented the
Monthly Meeting, says he, with a Paper of Complaint of my Aggrievances. This
Paper of Complaint one might reasonably expect should have been the first in
his Book; but it is not brought forth till in his 7th page. But his Book begins
with another Paper, pretended to be a Complaint of several Friends belonging to
the Monthly Meeting of Reading, to the Quarterly Meeting at Ore, against W.
Lambell, for not Recording in the Monthly Meeting-Book A. Bonifield's
particular Complaint against him and Jo. Buy. Now though his Charges against W.
L. and J. B.r were in order of time before his Complaint to the Quarterly
Meeting at Ore, against W. L. yet since he has placed the latter first, I will
give some account of that first. It is a Complaint against W. L. consisting of
two parts, one for refusing to Record in the Monthly Meeting-Book the Complaint
he had made to that Meeting against W. L. and John Buy; and that Meeting's
referring it to the Quarterly Meeting; the other, for not bringing the
Meeting's Book to the Meeting, and refusing to let him have it to look into.
The better to set off his Complaint, and to give the more Countenance and
Authority to it, he pretends that several other Friends, belonging to the
Meeting, were troubled and sore grieved at W. L's refusing to Record his
Complaint, etc. and did from thence take occasion to draw up that Paper of
Complaint to the Quarterly Meeting against him, and that those Friends did
appoint him (A. B.) to deliver it on their behalf, as also on his own; and
accordingly he has signed the Paper thus, [ By Abraham Bonifield, on the
behalf of the rest concerned]. Now in all this he has not acted in the Truth
that is plain and innocent, but has used beguiling Craft to deceive his
Reader. For when the Friends, appointed by the Quarterly Meeting to hear his
Complaint, and end the Difference, came to examine the Matter, and inquire into
the Particulars, I well remember, (for I was one of them) that when we asked
him who, and what Friends of Reading Meeting were one with him in that
Complaint, which he had signed on the behalf of the rest concerned, he could
not, or would not, name one, but R. Sandilands being present, did acknowledge
that he was one with A. B. therein. And whereas he Charges W. L. (and it is the
main part of his Charge) that he refused to Record the Complaint in the Monthly
Meeting-Book (after the Meeting had referred it to the Quarterly Meeting)
notwithstanding that it was the Order, Conclusion and Agreement of the Monthly
Meeting. I do not remember that it was made appear to us that the Monthly
Meeting did order W. L. to Record it in their Book, though they did refer it to
the Quarterly Meeting to end it. And it does appear by the Coomplaint it self,
as A. B. has published it, that W. L. did not refuse to stand to the Agreement
of the Monthly Meeting, for referring it to the Quarterly Meeting to be ended.
For the Complaint says, The Meeting came to this Unanimous Conclusion, viz. to
refer it to the Quarterly Meeting to end, to which both Parties did agree. So
that the substance of the Matter was answered by W. L. in agreeing with the
Monthly Meeting to refer it to the Quarterly Meeting. And it is no sign that
the Monthly Meeting was offended with W. L. for not Recording it; that most of
the Friends belonging to that Meeting, when they understood A. B's Intention to
Complain of W. L. at the Quarterly Meeting, did sign a Certificate on behalf of
W. L. and J. B. of which this following is a Copy, directed thus.

To the Quarterly Meeting at Ore, the 15th of the 7th Month, 1690.
Dear Friends,
WHereas our Friend Abraham Bonifield has taken Offense in his Mind against our
Dear Friends John Buy and William Lambole, more especially against W. L. and in
this offensive Mind has been raking dislikes against W. L. and J. B. both to
the Disquieting of himself, and also to the Grief and Sorrow of Friends. Now
these may let you know, that we whose Names are here underwritten, being Eye
and Ear-witnesses of the Conversations of W. L. and J. B. and their Deportment
amongst us, do give you to understand our Sense concerning them, which is, They
are Men fearing God, and of a Clean Conversation, and make Conscience in the
sight of God of what their Practice is. And whereas our Friend A. B. has let
into his Mind that W. L. does exercise Lordship over his Brethren, and set
himself in Judgment over Honest Friends; and many things of this kind and
nature: As for our parts, we see no such Practice or Spirit appear in either J.
B. or W. L. This we thought fit to signify to you, in the behalf of the
Blessed Truth, and our Ancient Friends; with the Salutation of our Dear Love in
the Unchangeable Truth, remain your Friends.

This was Signed by William Speakman, and 20 Friends more.


This was not Read at that said Meeting, because A. B's Complaint was not
openly Read, but at another Quarterly Meeting afterward it was Read.

But now it is worth the Reader's noting (in order to have a better
understanding of A. B.) how falsely he (who pretends to be in the Truth that is
plain and innocent, and void of the beguiling Crafts of Men) dealt with the
Monthly Meeting in this Case. He had Exhibited to the Monthly Meeting a Paper
of Charges, by way of Complaint, against W. L. and J. B. and he acknowledges he
had the liberty granted him to Read the same in the Meeting. The Meeting also,
he says, Unanimously concluded to refer it to the Quarterly Meeting to end it.
And to this Reference both Parties, viz. A. B. himself, as well as W. L. and J.
B. did agree. Observe now how well he prosecuted his Charge against W. L. and
J. B. before the Quarterly Meeting, for he never carried it thither at all,
(which was his part to have done) he confesses so himself in his 3d page thus,
It is to be observed (says he) that it was only the foregoing Paper of
Complaint, containing the Grievances of several Friends belonging to the
Monthly Meeting at Reading, that was delivered by me to the Quarterly. Meeting
at Ore, the 7th Month, 1690. but not one jot or tittle in particular as from my
self, or concerning, or relating to the sever as Articles I had in Charge
against W. L. and J. B. But he letting that drop, frames a new Complaint only
against W. L. pretending as if several other Friends were concerned in it, and
that he signed it on their Behalf, (though we could find none to own it but R.
S. and himself.)

But to proceed; On the 15th of the 7th Month, 1690. A. Bonifield delivered his
new Complaint to the Quarterly Meeting at Ore; which the Meeting took, but
understanding it to be but a private Paper, not coming from the Monthly
Meeting, nor the same that was by the Monthly Meeting's Consent referred
thither, did not think fit to trouble the whole Quarterly Meeting with private
Quarrels, or particular Jangles; but committed it to Eight Friends of the
Meeting, whom the Meeting nominated, and chose to hear, and determine that, and
all other Differences between A. B. (or any others that joined with him) and W.
L. and J. B. And when the Meeting had concluded on this way, A. B. was called
in, and the Agreement of the Meeting Read to him, with the Names of the Eight
Friends to whom it was referred. He excepted against one of them, who was
therepon left out, and the Matter left to the other Seven, with which A. B.
seemed satisfied and contented, asking the Meeting, whether it was intended
that those Seven Friends should hear and end only the Matter contained in that
Complaint, or all other Differences depending between W. L. J. B. and him? To
which the Meeting answered, that those Seven Friends were appointed to hear and
end all Differences whatsoever between him, W. L. and J. B. and others
concerned therein. He was very desirous to have had his Complaint Read in the
open Meeting. But the Meeting for diverse Reasons did not think it proper.

Of the Seven Friends, to whom this Service was by the Quarterly Meeting
committed, I was one. And though A. Bonifield is so violently set, and inveighs
so bitterly against me now, I suppose I stood fairer in his Opinion then;
otherwise he having the liberty of Exception allowed him, and making use of it
(as he did) to exclude one, he might have also excepted against me, and thereby
have faved me a great deal of trouble, and himself the pains of railing at me
as he has since done: However we undertook this Service (I can truly say for
my self, and believe I may safely say it for the rest of my Friends concerned)
with a Conscientious regard to the Honor of God, the Prosperity of Truth, and
the Peace of the Church in that Place. And accordingly, on the 23d day of the
same 7th Month, 1690. we met at Reading, and being gathered together, waiting
on the Lord, in a weighty Sense of his Living Power and Presence with us, after
some time we desired A. B. (who was present among us) to bring forth what he
had to offer to our Consideration; whereupon he stood up, and made a Speech,
telling us he was dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Quarterly Meeting,
because they refused to let him read his Paper openly in the Meeting. And
instead of giving us his Charges against W. L. and J. B. he Read to us a
Writing, containing something which he called Reasons why he refused to bring
his Cause before us; in which he reflected foully on the Quarterly Meeting's
Proceedings, as Unjust, Uncharitable, and Immoral; and said, he would Appeal to
the next Yearly Meeting, where he hoped to have more Just and Impartial
Proceedings to Redress his Grievances. We earnestly desired, and labored to
persuade him to bring forth his Grievances before us (that if there were any
Cause, we might Redress them) according to the Order of the Quarterly Meeting,
to which himself had agreed; but all that we could say to him, did not at all
prevail with him, to give up the Matter in question, or Difference, to be heard
by us. Yet at length he did bring forth that Paper of Complaint against W. L.
which he had before offered to the Quarterly Meeting, and Read it to us; but
when he had done, he would neither refer the Matters therein complained of to
us, nor let us have the Paper of Complaint. See now, Reader, the crooked steps
he made in this Business thus far. First, he brought a Paper of Charges to the
Monthly Meeting against W. L. and J. B. and got that referred to the Quarterly
Meeting. When the Quarterly Meeting came, where it behoved him to have made
good those Charges, he let them quite drop, never prosecuted them at all there,
(though referred thither by his own consent) but instead of them, exhibits a
new Complaint at the Quarterly Meeting against W. L. This, together with the
former, the Quarterly Meeting referred to Seven Friends to hear and end, and to
this he consented, at least (as himself confesses) condescended; when these
Seven met, as above, about it, he had found a new starting-hole to slip out at,
and instead of prosecuting his Charges against W. L. and J. B. referred from
the Monthly Meeting, or his Complaint against W. L. only, exhibited by himself
at the Quarterly Meeting, he lets them both fall, picks a new quarrel with the
Quarterly Meeting, for not letting him Read his Complaint in the open Meeting,
and thereupon refuses trial, and nothing will serve him but to Appeal to the
Yearly Meeting. Judge now, Reader, whether this Man seeks Peace or no, and
studies to be quiet; or whether he does not rather bend all his Wits and Force
to create and continue Contention and Strife, that no end may be put to
Differences.

When we saw he was obstinately bent to answer his own Will, and would not be
persuaded to yield to Truth and Reason, we told him to this effect, That we
held our selves obliged for Truth sake, and in discharge of that Trust
committed to us by the Quarterly Meeting, to do what we could to stop the
further spreading of those Contentions among them, and should endeavor to find
out, by enquiry amongst the Friends of the Town, the true state of the
Difference, that we might make a more certain Report thereof to the Quarterly
Meeting which had employed us. And this being in the Forenoon, we desired
another Meeting in the Afternoon of the same Day, with the Friends of the Town.
This was not only proposed openly, but A. B. was desired to bring with him what
Friends he pleased: What could be fairer than this? Would any but a guilty Man
have found fault with it? Yet against this A. B. exclaims grievously, and
against us for it, as if never had the like Injury been done: Thus he sets it
forth, It Is to be noted, that when O. S. with the (...) of the Seven, saw that
I was not satisfied to leave the Matter to them, though ha^ing, as I thought,
given them sufficient Reason for it, that he, with the rest, did immediately,
the same Day, of their own accord, without either the Knowledge, Approbation,
Consent or Agreement of the Quarterly Meeting, appoint another Meeting, the
latter part of the same Day, both contrary to all Methods, Order, Practice or
President in the Case, ever heard of, or used, that I know of, amongst us
before, etc. Is not this a Ridiculous Exception for any one to make, especially
for one that fain would pass for a Wise Man? Would he have had us to have staid
near Three Months to have asked the Quarterly Meeting (which had left the whole
Matter to us) whether if one Meeting about it would not suffice, we might
appoint two? And whether, if we were not satisfied in the Forenoon, we might
not meet again in the Afternoon? He carries on his Cavil further, blaming us
for inviting both Men and Women, and they too only such as we best liked and
approved of. To the first I say, both Men and Women were proper to be present,
for he had complained on behalf of others, as well as himself, who might be
Women as well as Men, for ought we knew, and he would not tell us who, or what
they were. To the latter I say, we shut out no Friends, but desired the Company
of such especially, as were most sensible of Truth's Concerns. Accordingly the
greater part of the Friends (those especially that were most sensible of the
hurt and mischief of these Dissentions) met with us, and when we had sat
together some time, waiting on the Lord in his Holy Fear, we desired the
Parties who were the Accusers, and them also who were Accused, to withdraw,
that we might enquire of the Friends concerning the state of the Differences
that were among them, and they might inform us the more freely. Accordingly W.
L. and J. B. (who were the Accused) did withdraw: But the Accusers ( viz. A. B.
and R. S.) refused to withdraw, but continuing among us, did strive with much
vehemence to hinder the Friends from giving us an account of the Differences,
and by whom the Offenses had entered, and were continued amongst them, (for
that we desired to know) according to the Knowledge and Sense they had thereof.
And this one would think, he (had he been in the Truth that is plain and
innocent) would have been desirous we should know. But being guilty, this
pinched him, and angered him; and in p. 4. of his Book, he complains, that we
did then and there propose unto them this following intricate, improper, and
impertinent Question, viz. Whether W. L. and J. B. or A. B. himself, were the
Cause of the Disturbance that had happened in their Meetings? Was this an
intricate Question? Was it improper, or impertinent, to be known or asked? What
Question could have been more plain? What more proper and pertinent to be asked
than this? But I perceive now he would have had us have asked another sort of
Question, viz. Whether those Articles and Charges that he had drawn up against
W. L. and J. B. were in the Thoughts of those Friends, true or false? Had that
been a proper or pertinent Question, I pray, when the Monthly Meeting, before
which he had laid those Articles and Charges, had not examined or enquired into
them, but to free themselves from the trouble and difficulty thereof, had
referred them to the Quarterly Meeting? Nay, had it not been both improper and
absurd, for us to have put that Question to the Friends, much more to have
concluded any thing upon their Thoughts, concerning the truth or falsehood of
those particular Articles and Charges, when as A. B. who was the Author of
them, refused to submit them to us, or let us have the examining of them? Yet
the Friends did severally, according to the Experience they had, the
Observations they had made, and the Sense God had given unto them, declare,
That A. Bonifield himself was the man, that had frequently broken the Peace of
the Public Meetings, by smiting at honest Friends, which had brought great
Grief and Burden upon many tender Hearted ones. And that they did believe, that
W. L. and J. B. were not such men as he had represented them to be, viz. to
seek to Exercise Lordship over their Brethren: But that by long Experience they
had found them to be faithful, Conscientious, Serviceable Friends.

After we had received this Account from the Friends of the place; A. B. having
utterly refused to bring the particular matters to an hearing before us, in
order to be ended by us, we who were appointed by the Quarterly Meeting,
withdrew among our selves, to confer together about the matter, and to draw up
a Report thereof, to be made to the next Quarterly Meeting. And before we went
away, it arose in our Hearts in the Love of God, to write a few Lines tenderly
to A. B. to persuade him to be quiet, which we did as follows:

Abraham Bonifield,
IN the tender Love of God, desiring the Peace and Welfare of thy Soul, and of
all the Called of God, do we send these Lines to thee, to entreat and beseech
thee to study to be quiet, and keep low to the measure of God's Spirit given to
thee to profit withal; and to forbear any more smiting at thy Fellow Servants,
and disturbing the Peace of the Meetings of God's People, to the grief of many
tender hearted Friends, as has evidently been manifested to us this day before
thy Face. Wherefore, we earnestly desire thee to be advised, and labor to
amend what has been amiss, that thou may be reconciled to thy Brethren,
before it be too late. We are thy Friends, heartily wishing thy Welfare.

William Austel, John Gidding, Edmond Orpwood, Rich. Vokins, Jun. Oliver
Sansom, James Potter, William Cooper.

Reading the 24th of the 7th Month, 1690.

Besides this, the Friends of Reading also, having a great weight and burden
upon their Spirits, with respect to A. Bonifield's deportment amongst them, did
between this time and till next Quarterly Meeting, send their Sense in Writing
to A. B. as follows.

Reading the 25th of the 10th Month, 1690. Friend Abraham Bonifield,
WE whose Names are underwritten, being sorely grieved, and having long born
the burden of that wrong Mind and Spirit, in which thou have been smiting thy
Fellow Servants, in our Public Meetings, to the great grief of our Souls, and
likewise to the dishonor of the Blessed Truth, and the Profession of it. We
say, we have long born in Patience that which is very hard for us to bear,
hoping that the Labors, Advice and Endeavors of many Faithful Friends, might
have had some place in thee. But to our Sorrow, we see thou lightly regardest
it, still persisting in that wrong Mind of disturbing our Peaceable Meetings.
Oh, Friend, we are troubled for thy sake; and for the Honor of Truths sake, we
do entreat thee to observe that Doctrine thou so often repeatest, that is, to
be reconciled to thy Brethren before thou offer thy Gift; and so come to be
reconciled in the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace. And this is
earnestly desired by thy Friends who desires thy Welfare.

This was Signed by William Speakman and 21 Friends more of Reading Meeting.


The next Quarterly Meeting was holden at Newberry on the 5th of the 11th
Month, 1690. At which an Account being called for, of the matter committed by
the last Quarterly Meeting to us, even relating to A. B. etc. Report was made
thereof according as we had found it, which the Meeting taking notice of, and
being concerned both for the Honor of Truth, the Peace of the Church, and the
recovery (if possible) of the Man, did agree to send two Friends of the Meeting
to visit him, and endeavor to make him sensible of his Miscarriage, and the
hurt he had done thereby. Accordingly a Minute of the Meeting's Agreement
thereupon, was entered in the Meeting Book as follows.

Newberry the 5th of the 11th Month, 1690.
WHereas there was something offered to the last Meeting by Abraham Bonifield,
of his dissatisfaction with some Proceedings of some Friends of their Monthly
Meeting at Reading; and the Meeting judging it most convenient, did agree and
make choice of some Friends, to hear and determine the matter, who accordingly
did meet at Reading, at the time appointed about it; accordingly an Account is
now given by the Friends concerned, that when they were so met on the account
of that Service, Abraham Bonifield, instead of bringing forth his Charge or
Complaint, did read a Paper of Excuses, to show cause why he would not commit
his Case, or give it up to the Friends as appointed by the Quarterly Meeting,
and agreed to by himself. And judged the Quarterly Meeting to be Unjust,
Uncharitable and Immoral in their Proceedings herein, and so refused to give up
his Case to be ended by them. Wherefore it is now the Judgment of this Meeting,
That his Carriage herein, in slighting the Quarterly Meeting's Judgment, and
breaking his own Agreement, is contrary to the Truth. And John May and James
Matthew are desired to speak with him, in order to admonish him to acknowledge
his Miscarriage herein, and to give satisfaction to the Quarterly Meeting, and
come into Unity with Friends.


At the next Quarterly Meeting which was holden at Reading on the 4th of the 3d
Month, 1691. John May and James Matthew gave an Account, that according to the
desire of the last Meeting, they had spoken with A. Bonifield, and that he did
fignifie to them, That he was troubled that it had so come to pass, that the
Friends appointed before, had made a Journey in vain through his occasion. And
A. B. himself, being then present, did signify the same to the Meeting;
adding, That if Friends would accept of it, he would be content to bear the
Charge of their Journey, or to that effect. And after some Discourse about the
Differences, A. Bonifield did offer it up again to the Meeting, to be ended by
the same Friends before appointed, who being all present, except one, and
Benjamin Antrobus of London happening to be there, A. Bonifield desired that he
might be put in the room or stead of that other Friend that was absent: To
which the Meeting, with A. B's consent, did agree. And thereupon, after the
Quarterly Meeting was ended, we seven who were appointed for that Service, did
meet the same day about it, and had a full hearing of the matters in
difference, A. B. reading several large Writings containing Charges against W.
L. and J. B. all which being attentively heard, duly weighed, and well
considered of, in the Fear and Counsel of the Lord, we gave our Sense and
Judgment upon the whole matter, according to the Understanding we had received
from God therein. Which Judgment being drawn up in Writing, and Subscribed with
all our Names, we sent a Copy thereof to A. Bonifield, which is as follows.

Whereas we whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, at the request of Abraham
Bonifield, and by the consent of the Quarterly Meeting, held at Reading, the
4th of the 3d Month, 1691. were to hear the Complaints and Grievances of the
said Abraham Bonifield and others, against W. L. and J. B. and to put an end to
all differences between them; and accordingly, after a deliberate Hearing and
Examining the many Articles, Complaints and Charges, fully and impartially of
the said A. B. against the others, which being measured by the Line of Truth,
and weighed in the right Balance, there appeared little of Substance in them;
and after a serious consideration thereof, and waiting in the Light of Christ
our Lord, the Sense and Judgment we have received, is on this wise, That A. B.
has not herein been Exercised in the pure peaceable Wisdom that is from above,
but in the Earthly, Sensual Wisdom, has been watching over his Brethren with
an Evil Eye, and seeking occasions against them, and hereby has much darkened
and hurt himself, for which our Souls are grieved: Therefore our tender Advice
is again renewed, to beseech him in Bowels of Love, to wait in Humility and
Quietness upon the Lord, that in his meek and lowly Spirit he may come to be
reconciled to his Brethren: For our farther Sense is, That until this be
witnessed, he ought not to offer his Gift upon God's Altar. Also our Sense and
Judgment is, That he ought to deliver up to be destroyed, all his Papers and
Writings that do relate to, or contain matter of Charges, Complaints, or
Reflections against his Brethren W. L. and J. B. and that he cease and forbear
Writing any more of the like evil and hurtful tendency, which we are sensible
can produce nothing but ill consequences; and have been gathered together and
treasured up, not by that Spirit wherein the Fellowship of the Gospel stands,
and Bond of Peace is kept, but in a wrong Spirit out of the Counsel of God. And
moreover, our Sense and tender Advice to all Friends concerned, is, That in all
things they walk circumspectly, in the tenderness and gentleness of the Love
and Life of our Lord Jesus Christ, and be careful what in them lies to cut off
all occasions of offenses from any that may seek it, and endeavor to remove
the Blocks as much as they can, out of the way of them who are in danger of
stumbling.

And as touching Business, Meetings, and Recording matters there concluded, our
Sense and Judgment is, That if any omission or shortness have been, it ought to
be acknowledged and amended for the future. And as touching open Feuds, Heats
and Contentions in Public Meetings, our Sense and Judgment is, That such
things are against the Interest of Truth, and tend to stumble and hurt the
Weak, and ought by all Friends wholly to be avoided, and that all Reflections
against each other in Public, ought to be forborne as much as may be.

James Potter, Oliver Sansom, William Austell, William Cooper, Benjamin
Antrobus, John Gidden, Richard Vokins. Jun.



Against this Judgment A.B. and R.S. exclaimed extremely, calling it an
Unrighteous Judgment. And when at the next Quarterly Meeting (which was at
Newberry the 6th of the 10th Month, 1691.) it was read, A.B. being present, was
so Clamorous and Troublesome, that the Meeting could not well proceed in their
business. For which reason partly, and partly because some Friends were willing
to try what might be done, to bring him to a sense of his evil doing, and to
repent thereof; that so the Recording of it might have been spared, it was not
Recorded in the Book at that Meeting. (Which tenderness toward him, he has
since made an evil use of, falsely suggesting, as if the Meeting was not
satisfied therewith, and could not agree about Recording of it;) but at the
next Quarterly Meeting following, it was Recorded by Order of the Meeting in
the Meeting-Book: A.B. (who was present) behaving himself more like a Man
bereaved of his Senses, than like a Sober Man, threatening a sad Judgment that
should fall on Friends, if they did Record that Unrighteous Judgment (as he
called it) for he by his great swelling words, would have frighted Friends (if
he could) from doing it. But Friends saw his Spirit to be wrong, and Recorded
the Judgment, which has stood, and will stand over him, and let him twist or
twine which way he can, he will never get from under it, unless he Repent.

Thus Reader, I have given thee, as briefly as I could, a plain and true
Account of this Matter, so far as the Quarterly Meeting was concerned in it; by
which thou may see a pretty deal of A. Bonifield's Shifting Tricks, the
uncertainty of his Temper, and the unruliness of his Spirit, which cannot rest
nor be quiet. He has represented things in his Book far otherwise than in
truth they were. But he is so hobled in the doing it, that from his own Book
his Falsehood appears. He makes the ground of his refusing to stand Trial before
those Friends whom the Quarterly Meeting, upon his Complaint had (with his own
consent) referred it to; because his Complaint was not openly read in the
Quarterly Meeting. In this he discovers a great want both of Judgment and
Sincerity. Had he not wanted Judgment, he might have seen, that as it was
properly in the Power, and at the Dispose of the Quarterly Meeting, whether a
Complaint, not coming from a Monthly Meeting, but in a private manner, should
be read openly in the Meeting or no: So it was not reasonable, that a Complaint
against any Member or Members of the Meeting, should be read openly in the
Meeting, unless that Meeting had intended to have had the whole matter
contained in such Complaint Examined, Heard, Tried and Determined in the open
Meeting; which that Meeting did not think fit. Had he not wanted Sincerity, he
would not have started back, and refused to stand to what the Meeting had
Ordered, and himself had agreed to; much less would he have alleged this as a
Pretense or Excuse for his so doing, when as he had consented to submit his
Cause to be Heard and Determined by those Seven Friends whom the Meeting had
appointed thereunto, and the time was set for the hearing thereof, after he
knew the Meeting had refused to have his Complaint openly read. And he himself
afterward, at the Quarterly Meeting at Reading, in the 3d Month, 1691. without
having his Complaint openly read, did offer to leave his Cause to the same
Seven Friends, that had been before appointed by the Meeting, for them to hear
and end it, which shows his Exception against them both before and since, was
but a Shifting Cavil, and that he was void of Integrity in urging it.

Besides, the Reasons (as he calls them) which he gives why he would have had
his Complaint read openly; and why upon the not reading thereof, he refused to
stand to the Meetings Order, and his own Agreement, does sufficiently manifest
his own unreasonableness; they are in p. 4, 5, 6. of his Book, where also he
changes the Title of his Paper from a Complaint to a Petition, which word he
repeats over and over, near half a score times (I guess) and in his Confusion,
calls it sometimes (and most often) a Petition simply; sometimes a Petition, or
Complaint; and anon a Petition and Complaint; not knowing himself what he would
be at: Or as if he knew not the difference between a Petition and a Complaint,
Charge or Impeachment. The fore part of that Paper which he calls, Something
offered as the Reasons of desiring the public Hearing or Reading of a
Petition, etc. (which begins in his 4th page) has nothing in it of Reason, or
that looks like Reason; let him assign any Sentence out of it if he can. After
that in p. 5. he sets a new Title thus; Here follows something upon a Second
and more Deliberate Consideration, what I now find my self concerned and best
satisfied to do; and so far is he from offering Reasons in this, that it rather
shows his resolute Will, than Reason: To this, in his 6. p. he adds a
Postscript, in which he says are Two weighty Reasons for a Public Hearing of
the Petition; first, because the Grievances therein contained, relate to the
Monthly Meeting, so not a Private nor a Personal Concern. If this be true, it
makes against him: For it is evident, the Monthly Meeting did not Employ, nor
Empower him to make Complaint, of any Grievances relating to them. He cannot,
dares not, say they did; what then had he to do to exhibit a Complaint of
Grievances relating to the Monthly Meeting, without the Order, Direction, or
Appointment of the Monthly Meeting? Nay, without the Consent or Privity of the
Monthly Meeting? If he had not been a very Busy Body, he might (one would
think) have given the Monthly Meeting leave to have made their own Complaint of
Grievances relating to them, if they had any. So that this is so far from being
a Reason for him, that it is a Reason against him, weighty enough of it self,
to have justified the Quarterly Meeting, for not reading his Complaint openly
in the Meeting. A.B's second Reason is, Because every Member is equally
concerned to exercise the Sense and Understanding that God has given them. This
I grant, but when a Controversy is brought to a Meeting, and that Meeting
agree to commit the Hearing and Determining thereof to a Select Number, surely
then, no Member of that said Meeting ought further to concern himself in that
matter, without the Concurrence of the whole Meeting.

To manifest yet farther the Vnfairness of this Man, observe that in p. 3. he
says, I never left my Case wholly unto them, viz. the Seven, etc. or satisfied
at all, nor any further nor otherwise neither, than as constrained and forced
to what I did. When as all the Friends then present, know that he agreed with
the Meeting in it. And his excepting against one (for the Meeting named eight
at first) is an ARgument that he consented to the Meetings Choice in the other
Seven. But that which puts it out of all doubt is, that about half a year
after, at the Quarterly Meteting at Reading, he offered to the Meeting to refer
and leave his Cause to the Hearing and Determination of these same Seven
Friends, whom the Meeting had chosen before, and that no delay might be
occasioned, by the absence of one of them, he himself named another Friend, and
desired he might be added to the Six, in the room of him that was absent; which
plainly shows, he approwed the Choice, and accordingly he went on to exhibit,
and make out his Charges before them.

Yet he has another setch, which looks with rather a worse face than the
former; for when he said, I never left my Case wholly unto them, viz. the
Seven, etc. he adds, To subject or stand to their Award, any otherwise than
only conditional, and with this proviso, if managed impartially and to
satisfaction, p. 3. and p. 5. He says, Seeing a Public Hearing of it could not
be obtained, I condescended to the aso esaid; provided it was done impartially
and to satifaction. And in p. 6. speaking of his having condescended to refer
the matter unto the aforesaid for an Hearing, Ending, etc. he adds, yet not
without a conditional Reserve. Now does not this manifest great want of
Sinoerity in him, to pretend and make a show of giving up his Cause, and
leaving it to Friends to hear and end; and yet at the same time have a
conditional reserve in his Mind, a secret Proviso, to let himself loose by?
Does this agree with his writing himself Thine in the Truth that is plain,
Innocent, and void of the beguiling Crafts of men? Surely one would think he
writ that Craftily, that he might the more easily beguile those that are indeed
Plain and Innocent. Now pray mark what this private Condition, this Mental
Reservation, this secret Proviso was; he gives it in these words, viz. If
managed impartially and to satisfaction, p. 3. Provided it was done impartially
and to satisfaction, p. 5. Who was to judge whether it was done impartially,
but himself? And for whose satisfaction did he provide, but his own? Was not
this an abominable Juggle and Abuse, for him to pretend to give up his Case to
Friends, and leave it to them to Hear and Determine, and yet keep a secret
Reserve in his Mind, that if he was not satisfied with the end they made, he
would not stand to their Determination? This among Men of the lowest Pretenses,
either to Religion or Common Honesty, is not counted Honest. He had better have
told the Meeting at first, he would leave it to them, or such as they should
choose, to end it, if they ended it to his satisfaction; otherwise he would
Appeal from them, for so it seems he did intend from the first, as he intimates
p. 5. I condesended to the aforesaid, provided it was done impartially and to
satisfaction, else did intend (says he) to refer it, by Appeal, to the Yearly
Meeting. And as he intended not to stand to our Determination, unless it were
to (his) satisfaction, so it seems as if he had intended also, before we meddled
with it, not to be satisfied with what we should do in it. For in the Paper he
had drawn up before we came to enquire into it, (and which, when we came, he
read to us as his Reasons for refusing to let us meddle with it) he says,
Seeing there was such an irregular step made in the very beginning (by which he
means the Meeting's not letting him read his Complaint in the open Meeting) we
cannot reasonably expect these few can either go on well, or end it, so as it
ought to be to satisfaction. And so much had he possessed his Mind with that
(or at least pretended so) that when we came first to Reading about it, he
would not open the matter to us, nor yield that we should at all meddle with
it. Now I desire the Reader to observe and consider the Nature, Temper and
Spirit of this Man; how prone he is to Contention and Quarreling, and what
contrivances he has, and what Provision he makes, to continue and perpetuate
Discord and Strife; by excepting against the proper ways and means for ending
it. For Experience shows it too seldom happens, when Differences fall out
between Person and Person, that such an end can be made thereof, by the most
Judicious and Indifferent Persons that can be chosen, as will prove to the
satisfaction of both sides. Now if the Persons differing (after they have left,
or referred their Difference to others to end) shall be at liberty on either
side to fly off, and refuse the Determination made, because they don't like it,
or it is not to their satisfaction, what end can be made of Differences? Surely
this contrivance of his does not proceed from the Peaceable Spirit of Christ:
but from that Spirit which loves Dissension and Discord, and would not
willingly ever be without it, and therefore seeks, by all the ways it can, to
increase it and keep it up.

A. Bonifield has another Exception against us, and that I think snews his
Folly, as much as the former does his Falseness: He is angry that we gave any
Judgment at all, alleging, that we were appointed for Reconcilers (not Judges)
but to hear and end all Differences betwixt them, so he has it in his Title
Page. And p. 6. he says, It was not for a Sentence or Judgment, but for Justice
and Equity, Hearing and Ending of all Differences, that it was committed unto
them. And p. 3. he says, Neither yet would any Rational. Man think, the
aforesaid at their Meeting Reading (unless I were besides my self, or wholly
infatuated) a Meeting inter^^^d for Judgment, Sentence, etc. but
Reconciliation, Hearing and Ending all Differences betwixt us; would any
Rational Man, that reads these Passages, think otherwise of him, but he was
besides himself, and wholly infatuated when he writ this? Did ever any Man
before this, blame Referrees, or those to whom the Hearing and Ending of
Differences was committed, for giving Judgment or Sentence between the Parties
differing? Would he have had the Difference heard and ended without Judgment?
It Is a sign he is a Man of small Judgment himself. If any have a mind to have
business done without Judgment, they may send for him. We were (he confesses)
to hear and end all Differences betwixt them; but he thinks we were not
appointed to judge between them. To what purpose do Persons hear Differences,
but to end them? How is it likely they should end them, if they may not declare
where the ground of the Difference lies? Which Party is in the right, which is
in the wrong? Who is to be blamed, and for what? If they declare this, that
Declaration is Judgment or Sentence. When Persons differ, each commonly thinks
himself in the right, and his Adversary in the wrong; if neither can convince
the other, then (because none is fit to be Judge in his own Cause) recourse is
had to others, who are Authorized to Hear and Determine. That Determination is
commonly made, by declaring which of the differing Parties is in the wrong, or
does the wrong, and wherein. And that is called giving of Judgment. But it is a
folly next to madness, to say, as he does, they were appointed to hear and end
all Differences, but not for Judges, or to give Judgment. I have heard say,
that the Commission by which the Judges sit to try Causes at the Assizes, is
called a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and that those words signify to Hear
and Determine. Now would it not be a wise business for such an one as Abraham
Bonifield (if there be any such one) to tell the Judge, when he is to try a
cause, That he is appointed not to Judge, but to hear and end the Cause in
difference? But what makes A. B. so averse to Judgment? Surely it is no Credit
to his Cause, nor sign of Innocence in him. He might have remembered David's
saying, The Mouth of the Righteous speaks Wisdom, and his Tongue talks of
Judgment, Psalm. 36.30.

Now it is to be observed, that after we had heard A.B's Complaints and Charges
against W. L. and J. B. and had given our Sense thereupon, and the Quarterly
Meeting approving the same, had caused it to be Recorded in the Meeting's Book,
A. B. raged extremely, and troubled Friends, both in City and Country with his
Letters and Papers, as his Book shows, where he has Published the Copies of
diverse of them, to his own shame. In his 11th p. he has Printed a Letter
directed to the Friends of the Second Days Morning Meeting at London, filled
with Complaints against particular Persons, because they would not own and join
with him, when he took upon him to Preach and Pray in Public Meetings, after
he was gone into Enmity and Prejudice, and had rejected the Quarterly Meeting's
Order, and broken his own Agreement. In his 12. and 13. pages he sets a Copy of
a Letter which he sent to me, in which he very much abuses me, as he does often
in his Book, endeavoring to fasten upon me, that at the Quarterly Meeting at
Newberry, in the 5th Month, 1691. after we had heard his Complaints, and given
our Judgment on them, when he Appealed to the Yearly Meeting, I should propose
a Medium, that the Business should be referred anew to some Ancient Friends at
London. This he repeats many times over in his Book, with as much confidence as
if it were true; whereas I never made any such Proposal, nor was it likely I
should, seeing I was one of the Seven, who had heard and given Judgment on the
Difference before. But seeing, after his many Repetitions of this Story, and
Cavils about it, he refers to the Quarterly Meeting's Book for proof, saying,
p. 49. But yet if any may be doubtful of the Truth of what is here alleged,
and so often cited by me concerning him and it, etc. pray let such have
recourse to their Quarterly Book, and the minute made upon it at the aforesaid
Meeting. Now though I was not doubtful, but certain that no such Proposition
was made by me, I have searched the Quarterly Meeting's Book, that I might be
the better able to satisfy others, and do find and declare, that there is no
minute nor mention in the Meeting's Book, of any Proposition made by me, or by
any other Member of the Meeting, for A. B. to Appeal or Refer his Cause to
either the Yearly Meeting, or any particular Friends. And all that is entered
in the Meeting's Book, at the Quarterly Meeting, with respect to the Business
of A. B. is this, viz. That the Friends appointed by the Quarterly Meeting, to
hear the Complaints and Charges of A. B. against W. L. and J. B. and to put an
end to all Differences between them, did give account that accordingly the same
same day, they had a full Hearing of the whole matter, both of A. B's Papers
and Charges, and W. L. and J. B's Answers. And when they had considered of the
matters in the Counsel of the Lord (according to that measure of his Spirit and
Wisdom given to them) they drew up a Paper containing their Judgment upon the
whole matter as beforementioned, which Paper was now read. Now judge, Reader,
whether this be not a very wicked Man, to forge such a false thing, and to
endeavor to fasten it upon me, and to revile and abuse me thereupon, so
shamefully as he has done through his Book, when he had no ground for it: And
to refer to the Quarterly Meeting's Book for proof of it, when there is no
mention of it there. And indeed, all that I can remember that was said at the
Quarterly Meeting about it, was but this, when he threatened the Meeting that he
would carry it by Appeal to the Yearly Meeting, or would lay it before some
Ancient Friends, and named G. W. and S. C. I made answer to this effect, That
whithersoever he carried it, I did not doubt but all honest Friends that should
have the hearing of it, would have Unity with us in what we had done in the
mateer. And this evil minded man, has the confidence to affirm over and over,
that at the Meeting I proposed his laying of it before some Ancient Friends at
London, and that I named G. W. and S. C. on his part. But his own Confusion,
and self-contradiction, sufficiently shows the falseness of his Story. For
whereas at that Quarterly Meeting at Newberry in the 5th month, 1691. he
threatened to Appeal to the Yearly Meeting, and says, p. 14. That I thereupon
proposed, as a medium, a Referrence to some Ancient Friends at London; he says
in his 12. p. that the Letter he sent to me, at the time of the Yearly Meeting
at London, was in order for me be assistant with him in the Prosecution of the
Appeal, proposed by my self at the Quarterly Meeting at Newberry: Here he makes
as if I had proposed his Appealing to the Yearly Meeting. But in his Letter to
the Monthly Meeting at Reading, (dated near nine months before this, though
placed after in his Book) he makes as if I had proposed a Referrence to some
ancient Friends, as a medium to prevent his threatened Appeal to the Yearly
Meeting. And yet in his said Letter afterward to me at London, having
mentioned his being (as he said) necessitated to Appeal, he proposes this
Referrence as a new thing, thus, But to prevent nevertheless, the more Public
notice and knowledge thereof, if thou please, we may the rather endeavor to
have it referred to a certain number of ancient Friends, etc. Thus he is in and
out, staggering and inconsistent with himself. Yet upon this false suggestion,
that I proposed this Referrence; he abuses me at his pleasure. In his 13th p.
he says, when he spoke with me after the same manner (at Gracious-street) as he
had written, I seemed as a man surprised, and one amazed, as not knowing what
to answer or say for my self, but speedily sought for some House or Place to
get away and hide my self from him. I did not know before, that he counted
himself such a terrible Body, that the sight of him should fright me; nor do I
yet know any thing I have done, for which I need to hide my self from him, or
any one else, (though the company of such a quarrelsome man is not desirable to
any one that loves Peace.) But this which he has said of me here, is modest in
comparison with what he says in p. 42. where he repeats this matter (for he
loves to repeat things often over, that he may make the more noise) there he
says thus, No sooner had I spoken to him of it, but he immediately hasted and
rushed away from me as a man affrighted and surprised, looking one way and
another for his flight and speediest getting away, and much like (says he) to
the Thief (if I may use so pertinent a Simile) that desires the dark and shadow
of the Evening to cover and hide himself from the light and discovery of the
day. How well this Language and Simile becomes him, I leave to the Reader to
judge. But for all his representing me so surprised and amazed at his Presence,
one might think he was in some great maze himself when he writ that Letter to
me. For besides it is nonsensical throughout, he gives this for his Reason, why
he would have the Difference then heard at London, viz. To prevent those sad
and evil effects it has already brought forth. I thought those effects that
are already brought forth, had been past preventing, But this is like him.

Besides this Letter to me, he has Printed another which he writ to the Friends
of the Monthly Meeting at Reading, and would read it to them, though it was
after the Judgment given against him. After that, he Printed another which he
brought to the Quarterly Meeting in the 8th month, 1692. and had the confidence
to press to have liberty to read it in the Meeting, though he had abused and
vilified the Quarterly Meeting before, and Appealed (as he says) from them to
the Yearly meeting. These serve to discover his own Folly and froward
Disposition. But that which is most strange, is, that after he had so often
declared how much he was in Conscience concerned to stand up against W. L. and
J. B. for Usurping Authority, Rule and Lordship over Friends and Meetings, and
had set forth his Charges in the most aggravating terms; He now tells us of an
Offer he made to W. L. and J. B. of a free and voluntary forgiving and passing
by of all Offenses, etc. without either mentioning or bringing up of any of the
Causes or Grounds of the Difference. Nay, he does not so much as mention any
show of Sorrow, or token of Repentance, as a condition for this free forgiving
and passing by of all Offenses. By this it may be guessed what a sort of
Concern it was that he had, and how little there was of Conscience in it. Yet
he says, he was hearty and in good earnest, and says, A. H. R. and M. S. can
witness that he was so, who were Eye and Ear-witnesses of it. But though they
might be Eye and Earwitnesses of his Proposals, methinks they should hardly
undertake to be Witnesses of his being hearty and in good earnest. However he
seems to impute the unsuccessfulness of this, to W. L's asking him impertinent
Questions, (as he calls them) about the frame and temper of his Spirit, and
whether he was in a fit condition so to propose. One would think a Man that
were in a good frame, and of a right Temper of Spirit, would not have counted
that an impertinent question.

Upon this I perceive he began to bend his Mind toward Printing. For the next
thing in his Book, p. 16, 17. is, The Copy, (he says) of a Letter he sent to G.
W. and S. C. in order for their help and assistance, and to stop and prevent
Printing. A long scribble he troubled them with, and to make them amends for
it, suggests, (p. 18.) as if they had lost, or pretended to have lost, his
Papers of Charges, Complaints, Grievances, etc.

It would be tedious, as well as needless, to take notice of all the
impertinent Letters and Papers he has Printed in his Book. Therefore passing by
some, I take notice that in a Paper without date, called, Some offers of Peace
once more proposed to W.L. J.B. etc. p. 19, 20. he returns to his pretense of
Conscience; and nothing less will serve his turn then, in order to
Reconciliation with W. L. and J. B. than their confessing themselves guilty of
those high Charges he had before exhibited against them, which he elsewhere
tells us, are Crimes of an High and Criminal Nature. Yet in p. 22. he says, at
a Meeting which he had with some Friends at London, he did sign a Paper,
containing a free and voluntary forgiving of W. L. and J. B. But immediately
adds, In which I was neither clear, nor at all satisfied, because neither
Repentance manifested, nor any Satisfaction given to me, the Person aggrieved
and offended. How ill does this agree, with his forecited offer to freely and
voluntarily pass by all Offenses, etc. without either mentioning or bringing up
any of the Causes or Grounds of the Differences, which he brought A. H. R. and
M. S. to witness, that he was hearty, and in good earnest for? No mention in
that Paper of their Repenting, Confessing, or giving him Satisfaction. But in
this other which he signed at London, he was neither clear, nor at all
satisfied, because neither Repentance manifested, nor any Satisfaction given to
him.

But in this, as in most things, he is not without a reserve: For though he did
sign that Paper at London, yet he intended not in the least to hurt or give
away his Cause, wound or boggle his Conscience thereby; and why? Forasmuch as
the Crimes wherewith they are charged are of an High and Criminal Nature; viz.
Spiritual Pride, over ruling of Meetings, and Lording it over Friends. Yet as
High and Criminal as he calls these, he could but a little before, without
wounding or boggling his Conscience, make an offer of freely forgiving them,
without any Terms of Repentance or Satisfaction. One would think when he was so
ready and easy at proposing Forgiveness, if he was hearty and in earnest in
it, he did not in earnest believe, they were guilty of such high and criminal
Matters as he now represents them His next words open him a little further; It
is to be noted (says he) that this my so large (if not too large) condescension
to such their desire, was only complied unto by me, upon the apprehension or
(as I thought) assurance of Friends being engaged to see that W.L. and J.B.
should do the like: And a little lower he says, I do declare, and that in the
presence of God, that I had never signed that Paper of theirs, had I not
thought that they looked upon themselves as engaged, and would not have been
concerned to have written down to W.L. and J.B. for them to do and perform
their part (as I had done mine) etc. This is indeed to be noted, but not for
his Credit. This shows how void of sincerity he was in what he did, and that he
did not act Conscienciously, but politickly (with the beguiling Crafts of Men)
thinking that by his signing that Paper, he should have engaged the Friends
that met with him to have brought W.L. and J.B. (who were innocent) under the
same Circumstances with him who was guilty. But here, it seems, his Policy
failed him, and that has made him Rage the more.

About Three Months after this, I observe (from p. 23.) that G. W. coming to
Reading, A. B. gave him some now trouble about his old Business, and through
importunity got him to hear some of his Complaints; whereupon G. W. wrote a few
Lines, as tenderly and favorably for him as could be: Yet that did not please
him. He rejects that, as not being impartial, nor yet such as with which his
Conscience could be satisfied. However he drew up a Paper the next Day, and
delivered it to G. W. instead of his, of which he seems so highly conceited,
that he not only says, it might, if truly made use of, and put in due practice
among Friends, really tend to a true, just and lasting Peace and Amity between
both them and him; but proposes it likewise as a true and Christian Method to
be made use of, by and among all Friends every where, etc. This one would think
should be some notable thing; or else that he is notably conceited of his own
doings. It consists of several Heads, of which the first is this; viz. The best
way to lay a Foundation of true and lasting Peace among us, is to fix Judgment
upon that which is wrong, wherever it is. What a Childish Man is this, that
breaks his own Head by contradicting himself, in almost every thing he
undertakes! When we by appointment of the Quarterly Meeting (and with his own
consent) had heard his Complaints and Charges against W. L. and J. B. and their
Defense, and thereupon gave Judgment for putting an end to their Differences;
he, because we fixed Judgment upon him, who was wrong, not only exclaimed
against that Judgment, (unjustly calling it wicked and unjust) but cried out
most vehemently against us also, for giving any Judgment at all; saying, We
were appointed for Reconcilers, not Judges; and that it was not for a Judgment
or Sentence, but for Justice and Equity, Hearing and Ending of all Differences,
that it was committed unto us. Now, all on a sudden, he is for fixing Judgment,
as the best way to lay a Foundation for a true and lasting Peace. But then this
Judgment must be of his fixing, and that not upon what is wrong, but upon what
he will call wrong. For in the following Heads of his Paper, he makes himself
Judge, between himself and those he differs with, peremptorily determining,
that they have been the unpeaceable and unquiet Men; and directs, that they
should he as far disowned as he has been. And as for the Judgment of the Seven,
(which is indeed the Judgment of the Quarterly Meeting, both as the Seven were
appointed by that Meeting, and as that Meeting has Ratified that Judgment, by
Recording it in their Book among the Acts of the Meeting) he declares it to be
Unjust, Unrighteous, Partial, and Arbitrary in it self, and would have it to be
reversed, and utterly exterminated; see his Paper in p. 24. So that for ought I
see, that which he calls the best way to lay a Foundation of true and lasting
Peace among us, is, to let one of the differing Parties be Judge over the rest,
and let him determine what is wrong, and fix Judgment upon that. But how far
this would be from being a Foundation of true and lasting Peace, there is none,
I hope, (besides himself) of so little Judgment, as not to see.

That which follows next in A. B's Book, is, Observations both General and
Particular upon that Paper, which we Seven, who were appointed by the Quarterly
Meeting drew up, as our Sense or Judgment upon the Differences; which
Observations take up some eight Pages, or more, of his Book, and are filled
with Railing, Reviling, Bitter Expressions, Unchristian Language, and such
Envious Reflections, without any solid Matter, or fair Reasoning, but a
continual Justifying himself by merely saying so, without Proof or
Demonstration, that I do not think any Sober Man can Read them without great
dislike; therefore I do not hold it worth my while, to refute each particular
which he has written in those Observations of his; his own Work therein
sufficiently refuting it self. Yet that the Reader may see, that I have cause
to speak of them as I do, I will give him one Instance, by which he may judge
of the rest. It is in p. 28. and in his second Observation, where having set
down these words in our Paper, relating to himself; viz. Therefore our tender
Advice is again renewed, to beseech him in Bowels of Love to wait in humility
and quietness upon the Lord, that in his me^k and lowly Spirit he may come to
be Reconciled to his Brethren, etc. On this soft and gentle Advice, he makes
this harsh and rugged Observation. The greatest piece of Folly, (says he)
Weakness, and ridiculous Nonsense, I think, that ever any Man was injoined.
Would one not think this Man Mad, not only to call beseeching, injoining; but
to call it the greatest piece of Folly, Weakness, and ridiculous Nonsense, to
beseech a Man in Bowels of Love to wait in humility and quietness ^^on the
Lord, that in his meek and lowly Spirit he may come to be reconciled this
Brethren? Yet he sticks not at this, nor stops here, but adds, and (it is) so
diculous, the Case considered, that it rather bespeaks the scorn and
detestation of all than any notice to be taken of it, by all that cannot be
thus beseeched and bowelled out their Wits and right Senses, the Matter in
charge considered, which is True, and no (...) What a passionate Spirit is
this? What, to say it bespeaks the scorn and ^^^estation of all, to but beseech
one in Bowels of Love to wait in humility and q^^^^ness upon the Lord, that in
his meek and lowly Spirit he may come to be rec^^iled to his Brethren; and to
reckon them out of their Wits, and right Senses, (...) will take any notice of
it? Then he goes on; Was ever the like false, corrupt, (...) injurious
Judgment, Injunctions, etc. given forth against, or injoined any Man (...)?
Here he stops, and says, And this I think sufficient at present, because I sh^^
^^ve occasion to infer further upon the same under the several other Heads; yet
according to his usual instability and uncertainty, he runs on again, adding to
the same Observation, thus, And would not the Papists themselves as much
tender, bowel, and beseech, to make a Man turn Hypocrite, Lie, and Betray the
Truth, etc. And may it not as truly be said of you as formerly, viz. That your
tender Mercies, Bovels, and Beseechings, is Hardheartedness, Severity, and
Cruelty? Judge now, Reader, whether the words he cited out of our Paper, as our
tender Advice to him, deserved such an Observation, as this he has made upon
them. And by this thou may also guess at the rest, for they are much-what
after the same strain.

In his 7th Observation, p. 29. he Cavils at our delivering our Sense, that
until he be reconciled to his Brethren, he ought not to offer his Gift upon
God's Altar. Here he carps at the words [God's Altar] and says, If I must not
offer it upon God's Altar, and Christ Jesus be that Altar, then I pray you upon
what other Altar ought I to offer it? Answer, Upon none; while in such an
unreconciled state, but seek Reconciliation first. I hope, says he, you cannot
bar up Heaven, etc. Answer, It Is his own Quarrelsome Spirit, that has barred
up Heaven to him and his Offerings, while he remains in that unreconciled
State. He adds, I am ready to believe, it is the first time, that ever any Man
was forbidden the Offering his Gift upon God's Altar. Has he never read, or
had he forgot, what Christ said on that subject, in his Sermon on the Mount?
Mat. 5.23, 24. Therefore if thou bring thy Gift to the Altar, and there
rememberest that thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy Gift
before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then
come and offer thy Gift. Was not this God's Altar, that they were then to offer
upon? And were they not here positively forbidden to offer their Gifts upon
God's Altar, unless they were first reconciled to their Brother? How came he
then so readily to believe, that it is the first time that ever any Man was
forbidden the offering his Gift upon God's Altar? Surely what Christ said to
some other Cavillers, might not unjustly be applied to him. Ye err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the Power of God, Mat. 22.29. Had he known and considered
this aright, he would not have taunted us, as he does, saying, I pray you from
whence derived you, or any Man on Earth any such Authority, except from Rome,
to so limit and enjoin me to silence, whose Mouth the Lord-hath opened,
especially under these, or such Circumstances; or to thus endeavor to limit or
quench the Spirit of God in me? etc. For he might have seen that this Authority
(if he will needs have it so, though we exercised no Authority over him, but
besought him in Love) was derived higher than from Rome, or any Earthly Man,
even from the Heavenly Man Christ Jesus. Nor is it the Mouth which the Lord
has opened, that we would have shut or silenced; but that Mouth of his which
the Enemy has opened to reproach, revile, and speak evil of the Faithful
Servants of the Lord; neither did we endeavor to limit or quench the Spirit of
God in him: But we desired he would endeavor to limit and quench that Spirit
which lusted in him to Envy, Jam. 4.5. by joining with which he had before
grieved, and in a great measure quenched, the Spirit of God in himself. But to
set this more home upon him, since he says, he is ready to believe it is the
first time, that ever any Man was forbidden the offering his Gift upon God's
Altar, I will remind him, that in a Letter of his own to W. L. and J. B. dated
the 23d of the 6th Month, 1690. he puts the same thing upon them thus, viz. I
desire of you in the mean time, that according to the good Advice of our Lord
Jesus, and Order of the Holy Truth professed by us, that ye forbear the further
offering of your Gifts, until you have made Satisfaction to your Brother; Was
he for barring up Heaven then?

The greatest part of the remainder of his Book, (after these Observations of
his) is levelled more particularly against me, though he has not been sparing
to cast his Envious Darts at me throughout the whole; yet because in many
places of his Book, and particularly in these Observations, he speaks so much,
and so often of his Charges against W. L. and J. B. aggravating them with high
Terms, and laying much weight upon them, I think fit (before I enter upon my
own particular Defense) to speak briefly to them, that the Reader may see how
causless his so great Complaints and Clamours are.

He has divided them into Ten Articles; of which the first is, Their
Arbitrary-like Overruling of Monthly Meetings. His Proof for this, is, That
they positively affirmed, that a Matter under Debate (at a Monthly Meeting in
the first Month, 1690.) should not be the act of the Meeting. And although when
so made, and recorded, that afterward they still as apparently denied it to be
the act of the Meeting. This was, it seems, about treating with I. C. about
opening the Meeting House Doors (which T. C. and the rest of the Separates, had
wrongfully shut up) and A. B. in a forward busy mind (having got a few others
to join with him therein) would needs be tampering (as I understand) with T. C.
about opening them, and would have done it in the Name of the Monthly Meeting,
which W. L. (not Jo. Buy, for Jo. Buy was not present at that Meeting, as
appears by the Monthly Meeting's Book) objected against, desiring, that if they
would needs be meddling in that Matter, it might not be done as the Act of the
Meeting, but as their own Act, many of the Meeting being dissatisfied with it,
and objecting against it. And surely in a Case of that Importance (for it was,
A. B. says, to desire them to open the Doors freely, or upon refusal, to offer
them all their Money) wherein the whole Meeting must have been concerned, it
had been but reasonable to have had the Consent and Agreement of the Meeting
before it had been undertaken, at least before it had been made or declared to
be the Act of the Meeting. I observe he says here, that when it was so made (
viz. in his Sense the Act of the Meeting) and so Recorded (though no such
Record appears) in the said Book, they still denied it to be the Act of the
Meeting. And well they might, for there is no such Record thereof in the Book.

The Second Article of his Charge against W. L. and J. B. is, Their passing a
rash and unchristian Sentence (so he calls it) upon him, as being a Man of a
wrong Spirit, and that they saw and discerned him to be so: As also their
comparing him to those they counted open Apostates, one run out from Truth,
Brother to Bugg, and like to Rogers and Story, etc. If they judged him a Man of
a wrong Spirit he has saved them the labor of proving it, having too
evidently proved it himself since, by the wring Work he has employed himself
in, and the wrong Fruits he has brought forth, of Envy, Strife, Hatred,
Contention, Railing, Backbiting, Slandering, Lying, and the like, which shows
their Judgment in the Case was neither rash, nor unchristian, but sound and
christian; and their sight and discerning therein was true and right. And if
they compared him to open Apostates, such as Bugg or Rogers, he has made the
Comparison good, (by appearing as he has now done) an open Enemy in Print, as
those before-named had done before, whom he once counted and called open
Apostates, as well as W. L. and A. B. And what they accounted him then, may
well be guessed, by what one of them ( viz. T. Curtis) called him, who meeting
him on the way, did (as A. B. himself related it) thus accost him, viz. Canker,
go thy way Canker. But now he has altered his Tone, and does not call them
open Apostates, but those that others counted as open Apostates. And it was
time for him indeed to change his Note, now that he is not only fallen in with
that Party who have owned those Apostates, and spread their Books, but is also
fallen into the same sort of Work, which those open Apostates were in long ago.
But by comparing the time when he says W. L. and J. B. called him a Man of a
wrong Spirit, (which he says was on the 22d and 24th of the 4th Month, 1690.)
with the time of his Exnibiting these Charges against them (which was on the
26th of the 6th Month, 1690.) it seems as if he drew up those Charges against
them merely to be Revenged on them, for calling him a Man of a wrong Spirit.

His third Article is against W. L. only, and that for refusing him the sight
of the Monthly Meeting Book. This may easily be Answered, because W. L. had no
Order from the Meeting so to do. Nor is it proper for any Member of a Meeting,
to whose keeping the Book is entrusted, to let any other Member, especially one
known to be Contentious, to have it without the Meeting's Consent; neither can
any other Member say, as A.B. does, that he has as much Right and Property to
have it, as the Person to whom by the Meeting it is committed. And whereas he
says the said Book was at no time denied him by the Meeting, he might as well
have said at no time granted him by the Meeting: But when he adds, Or through
any Dissatisfaction of other Friends belonging to it, he stretches too far, as
it is well known to most of the Meeting.

His fourth Article is against W. L. and J. B. jointly, falsely Charging them
with Endeavoring to Dismember him, Tying up his Tongue, etc. This is an
Ambiguous way of speaking, which he wickedly uses to beguile his Reader into a
belief, as if some act of Violence had been offered or threatened to him. But
this I shall have occasion to speak to hereafter, where he insists more largely
on it, therefore pass it by here.

His fifth Article is, Their disorderly breaking up and leaving of Monthly
Meetings before the Business had been near done, and when Matters have been
just under Debate among us. For which he gives several instances, one of the
26th of the 6th Month, 1690. when he laid these Charges against them before the
Monthly Meeting, for which he refers to his Paper of Complaint. But that Paper
of Complaint gives no account of any such disorderly or indirect breaking up of
that Meeting (that I observe) but it says, some Hours were spent in Conference
about that Matter. Yet I think if Friends should hold and continue their
Meetings, as long as such a Make-bait would hold them in Debate, they would
find that much more disorderly, than to break up their Meetings in seasonable
time, whether such Cavillers are satisfied or no. He gives another instance
also of a pretended disorderly breaking up of a Meeting in the 5th Month, 1691.
which appears no more than the former. But it appears by this that he has
varied, altered or added to his Charges, since he gave them to the Monthly
Meeting, and these which he has now published, are not directly the same which
he brought to the Monthly Meeting; for how could he instance the 5th Month,
1691. in a Charge exhibited in the 6th Month, 1690. Eleven Months before?

His sixth Article is, Their encouraging and promoting at least, if net first
projecting, as he conceives, several Papers drawn up and signed against him.
This is very idle and silly. He grounds their projecting (as he calls it) of
those Papers but upon his own Conception, but for their encouraging and
promoting them, he offers not so much as that, as little worth as that is. But
if they had encouraged the signing of those Papers, yet so long as those Papers
contain nothing but what is true, what Evil had they done in that?

His seventh Article is, Their causing of great Disorders and Distractions in
our public Meetings for Worship, by breaking up and dissolving them in the
time of his Testimony and Prayer. If any Disorder was occasioned thereby, he
was the Cause thereof, by imposing upon the Meeting his Testimony (as he calls
it) and Prayer, which Friends had no Unity with, but desired him to forbear,
seeing him to be of a wrong Spirit, and of a contentious, quarrelsom Mind;
reflecting on, and smiting at Faithful Friends in that which he calls his
Testimony, which was his Testimony indeed, not Truth's Testimony, and therefore
was by Friends in Truth Testified against. The time he sets for the thus
breaking up of Meetings (when he would have held them beyond the usual time)
being the 16th of the 1st Month, 1690. The 26th of the same Month, 1691. The
13th of the 7th Month, 1691. shows, both that this was after he had run out
against Friends of the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, and Judgment had been
given against him; and also (as before) that these Charges are not the same,
which he brought to the Monthly Meeting against W. L. and J. B. in the 6th
Month, 1690. In the close of this Article he Names Three other Friends, viz.
William Speakman, and two Women, for no other Cause (so far as I see) but that
he might thence take occasion to throw some of his Dirt upon them; which he
does thus,

Though observe (says he) the first of them ( viz. W. S.) charged, and that by
one of his own Children with Barbarous Severity and Cruelty toward his Wise
and them. The second, of being with Child before she was Ma^ried. The last,
permitted as a Preacher among them, and a professed Friend too for nigh Twenty
Years, and yet not come so far as to speak the plain Language. How true this
Charge upon the last is, I do not know, nor shall go about to excuse. For if
any one after so long Profession of Truth, is not come so far as to speak the
plain Language, such an one is greatly to be blamed. But yet A. B. is more to
be blamed, who after a longer time of Profession, is so far gone from (if ever
he was come to) Plain-dealing, as to deal abusively, and falsely by others, as
his late Book makes appear, In his Charge against the second, of being with
Child before she was Married, he has manifested an unchristian, bad Mind, thus
to rake up a Miscarriage done above Twenty Years ago, and for which the Woman
has long since given evident Tokens of hearty Sorrow, and unseigned
Repentance, not seeking to excuse her self, or lessen her fault, but plainly
and honestly confessing her Offense, condemning her self, and readily offering
to do whatsoever she could for taking off the Reproach from Truth. And has
ever since, (so far as I have understood) walked honestly and blamelesly in her
Conversation, being much bowed down in Spirit under the Sense of that
Transgression. And had not A. Bonifield been an Enemy to Truth, and not only
void of Christianity, but of common Humanity and Civility, he would never have
revived the remembrance of such a gross thing (after it had been so long
forgotten, as well as forgiven) thereby to bring the Reproach thereof afresh
upon the Truth, and to renew the Grief thereof to an already afflicted Woman.

In the other part of this Charge of his, relating to W. Speakman, he is both
Envious and Unjust; for the Matter he here charges him with, was brought before
the Monthly Meeting above Three Years and a half ago, and W. S. upon
Examination thereof, was found to be Innocent. The Matter (as I find by the
Monthly Meeting Book) was thus, on the 26th of the 5th Month, 1692. one John
Veale brought to the Monthly Meeting a Paper, containing a Charge against W.
Speakman, for giving undue Correction to his Child, and for irregular Carriage
in his Family. Whereupon the Meeting ordered Daniel Bulluck, Andrew Hall, John
Buy, and John Thorn, to hear and examine the Matter, and make Report thereof
to the next Monthly Meeting. Accordingly they did meet about it at Daniel
Bulluck's House, and having heard and examined the Matter on both sides, as
fully as they could, they made Report thereof to the next Monthly Meeting, on
the 30th of the 6th Month, 1692. as follows.

WHereas John Veale at the last Monthly Meeting gave in a Paper, wherein
William Speakman is charged with giving undue Correction to his Child, and
irregular Carriage in his Family. And we whose Names are underwritten, being
appointed to Examine into the said Charge; and accordingly being met at Daniel
Bullucks House, and upon the best Enquiry we can make, we do not find that
William Speakman is guilty of the said Complaint, neither can we find, that his
Carriage in his Family has been either undecent, or unbecoming the Profession
he makes. And whereas John Veale has made his Report to others, before he spoke
of it to him, to the Scandal of the said William Speakman, therefore in so
doing, it is our Sense, that John Veale herein has done unfriendly by William
Speakman, and not according to Gospel Order. And further we do understand, that
John Veale brought out this Charge by the instigation of others.

John Thorn, Andrew Hall, John Buy, Daniel Bulluek,



Judge now Reader, whether A. Bonifield be not a bad Man, in thus Publicly
accusing a Friend of barbarous Severity and Cruelty toward his Wife and
Children, when the matter had been brought before a Monthly Meeting above three
weeks before, and upon full enquiry therein, the Friend was found and declared
Innocent.

To manifest yet farther the falseness of the Charge, William Speakman's Wife
desires that these few lines following may be added.
WHereas Abraham Bonifield has charged my Husband William Speakman in his Book
Printed in 1695. with barbarous Severity and Cruelty toward his Wife and
Children. These are to certify all to whom his Book may come, That his Charge
is false and wicked, and therein he has abused my dear Husband, who has been
and is tender and loving to me and his Children. To which I subscribe, the 28th
day of the Month called February, 1695.

Elizabeth Speakman.


A. B. his Eighth Article against W. L. and J. B. is, Their setting up an open
Standard of Opposition and Division in our Public Meetings, by their sitting
and keeping on their Hats in time of Prayer, which in p. 19. he calls an evil
and irreverent Practice. But does but herein condemn himself, and strikes at
them through his own Sides: For as evil and irreverent as he thinks it is, it
was his own Practice formerly toward those Separates (with whom he now joins)
as a Testimony of his not owning their Preaching or Praying then. Therefore he
should have Published his Recantation, for that, before he had fallen so foully
upon others for the like. But he has not stated his Charges right nor fairly,
in taxing them with sitting and keeping on their Hats in time of Prayer. That
is too general; and being so, is not true, as himself knows; and All, that know
their Practice, know, that they do not use to sit or keep their Hats on, when
any one is in Prayer, whom they have Unity with. And whenever they do keep on
their Hats in time of Prayer, it is because they do not own the Person Praying,
or pretending to Pray. Which is the same Reason he himself used formerly to
give, why he kept on his Hat, at the Prayer of those others, which now it is
like he puts it off to. Now, if Persons whose common Practice is to put off
their Hats in Prayer, do keep on their Hats at such times only, when a Person
thrusts himself upon them, taking upon himself to be the Mouth of the Meeting
to God in Prayer, as well as the Mouth of God to the Meeting in Preaching, and
so will impose his Preaching or Praying upon a Meeting, as if he were in Unity
with, and owned by that Meeting, when indeed he is not, the keeping on the Hat
at such times, and in such Cases, is no Evil nor irreverent Practice; but it
would look more like an Hypocritical Practice to put it off.

His Ninth Article is, Their refusing to take his Money, which (he says) he
laid down at a Monthly Meeting toward a Collection. What reason had he to
expect they should take his Money, when (as in his Second Article he says) they
had told him, they saw him to be a Man of a wrong Spirit?

The Tenth and Last Article of his Charge, is against J. B. in particular, and
is thus worded, For his wicked and most Blasphemously affirming, That he did
see my Inside; as likewise that he discerned my Heart and Inward Parts; which
Wicked, Proud and Presumptuous words of his, I do not look upon (says he) or
can conceive to be at all less, or other than plain and absolute Blasphemy, and
taking to himself the Power and Attributes only and alone proper and due to the
Immortal God. This he harps upon in other parts of his Book, and makes a great
noise about. Now, though I understand he has stretched the words beyond what J.
B. spoke, yet taking them as he has laid them down, I think he will be hard
put to it to find Blasphemy in them. It is true, that it is the Lord that
searches the Heart; but it is also true, (and methinks he should not deny it)
that God who searches the Heart, both can discover, and sometimes has
discovered the secret Thoughts and Purposes of one Man's Heart to another. When
Samuel told Saul, I will tell thee all that is in thine Heart, 1 Samuel 9.19. Was
that Blasphemy? Or did did he speak Wicked, Proud, Presumptuous Words? When
David said of his Enemies, There is no faithfulness in their mouths, their
inward part is very wickednefs, Psalm. 5.9. Did he speak at randon, or at a
venture? Or had the Lord discovered their inward part to him, and let him see
their inside? When Peter said to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine heart to
lie to the the Holy Ghost? Acts 5.3. And, why have thou conceived this thing in
thine heart? Ver. 4. Did he not discern the heart of Ananias? And see what he
had conceived in his Heart? When the same Apostle told Simon, Thy heart is not
right in the sight of God, Acts 8.21. Did he not discern Simon's heart, and see
his very inside? Did the Apostle take to himself the Power and Attributes only
and alone proper and due to the Immortal God? Did he speak plain and absolute
Blasphemy? Or Wicked, Proud and Prefumptuous words? If God has in former Ages
discovered to his Servants, the Hearts and secret Purposes of evil minded men;
will A. B. deny that he can and may do so still? His Hand is not shortened. And
A. B. says, p. 6. We know for certain, that God is not limited to Parts nor
Persons. So that what he has done of old, he may do again, and that by the
meanest, as well as by the highest Member in his Church. Has A. B. forgotten,
that amongst the excellent Manifestations which the Apostle Paul reckons up, as
wrought in man by the Spirit of God, one is Discerning of Spirits, 1 Cor.
12.10. Was that to give sight of the outside only, or of the inside, Heart and
inward parts? But there is besides this, an understanding of the inside, partly
by the outside (or Fruits brought forth) a knowledge of the Tree by its Fruits.
And so apparently uvil are the Fruits A. B. has brought forth, that one may
safely say; (and J. B. did not say so before) he sees his inside, and discerns
his Heart to be corrupt and naught, without danger of uttering Blasphemy, or
speaking Wicked, Proud, or Presumptuous words.

Thus I have briefly touched the several Articles of his Charge against W. L.
and J. B. which he laid so much stress upon, calling them, Crimes of an high
and criminal nature. But how light and trivial they are, in respect of the
noise and bustle he has made about them, I doubt not but every intelligent
Reader will soon and easily see. He adds, that he had also several other
Articles in Charge against W. L. and which were also as material as these, and
very little varying from the same Subject. If they varied but little from the
same Subject, they might soon be as material as these, and yet be immaterial
enough, or sufficiently void of solid matter or substance. And therefore he had
no cause to quarrel with us for declaring in our Judgment, that his many
Articles, Complaints and Charges being measured by the Line of Truth, and
weighed in the right Balance, there appeared little of Substance in them;
especially considering that (as has been noted in several particulars before)
he has added many things to them since: Yet he has so little Wit, as
thereupon to say, p. 26. If so (viz. that there appears but little Substance in
them) then the less to be blamed. But I think every Judicious man will think
him the more to be blamed, for drawing up a Charge in so many Articles, and
making so great a clutter about them, that had so little Substance in them.

I come now to that part of his Book which is levelled more directly, and
particularly at me, beginning at p, 33. where he says, Seeing that O. S. one of
the aforesaid unjust Judges, has taken a fresh occasion to thus run out
against me, through some offense he has taken at my late Book of Queries, it
has come into my thoughts to further discover and manifest him, and that in
his plain and naked shape. And though in p. 45. he reproacheth Friends with being
like them of old, who said, Report, and we will Report it: Yet now to his
shame, he does professedly undertake to make this discovery of me, saying thus,
viz. Not only from the Evidence and Proof from his own Mouth and Pen, but also
from the Allegations, Reports and Accounts of others concerning him, etc. And
accordingly he has dealt by me, exposing what he has picked up by Report (as
in p. 37. line last) or Hearsay (p. 39.40.) against me, and where even that
has been wanting, or not full enough to answer his Envious Intention, he has
endeavored to make it out with his own Surmises and Suppositions, no less than
three times in one page, p. 40. And this he pretends to do saying thus, viz. To
the end that all may know that he is not changed from what he was, but is still
and remains in the like Spirit of Malice and Bitterness, as is common, frequent
and inherent (he says) to my nature. Now I observe how he overshoots himself
through his ill will to me, and runs himself upon a Rock before he is aware.
For if (as he says) I am not changed from what I was, but the Spirit of Malice
and Bitterness is inherent to my nature; then I was always so heretofore, and
he must know it heretofore, and yet who more forward in pretense and show of
Love, Friendship and Unity with me than he, till of late years, since for my
gently reproving him for his contentious quarrelling, he has turned against
me, and set himself to abuse and defame me? Many lines of this nature are in
his Book, which containing nothing but mere Clamor, I pass it over as unworthy
of any notice.

The occasion he here takes for his particular Cavils at me, is from my
returning him a former Book of his (which he had sent me) and which I had
written something on. It was a Book of Queries, and one part of the Title of it
was, Plain and Honest Dealing. When I had read the Book, I found it to be so
far from Plain and Honest, that I struck out those two words, and in their
places wrote two others, more agreeable to the Matter and Substance of the Book,
viz. False and Treacherous. I writ also something on the Book, and something on
a Paper fixed to it, as my Sense both of him and it; and having so done, sent
the Book back to him again. In all which I conceive I did him no wrong, with
respect either to the matter I writ, or manner of doing it. As for the matter,
he does but nibble and carp at some words and passages in it (and that how
idly, shall be shown anon) but does not undertake to Answer it. As to the
manner of my doing it (which he seems to wrangle about) I think I did him no
wrong. For he having (not lent but) given the Book to me, it was my own, and at
my own dispose, to use as I pleased; to add, or blot out what I would, and make
what Alterations I saw meet. And when I had so done, it was in my choice either
to keep or give it away, and I chose to give it him again, and accordingly did
send it him. I intended to have Published what I had Written and sent to him
with his Book, but considering the Subject treated of there does vary from
this, I think fit to forbear at this time, and if occasion offers, and way be
made, there possibly may be a full Answer to it hereafter; so for the present I
shall proceed to go through with my Answer to this Book.

Now to manifest the Folly, as well as Malice, of this Cavilling Man, he has
picked two passages out of those two Papers of mine (he mentioned p. 33.
neither of which he was willing to undertake to Answer) and having most
dishonestly wrested them, to a ridiculous as well as a wrong Sense, he fills
two pages (34. and 35.) with empty noise and clamor, in a confused manner, and
nonsensical heap of words, one of the passages he takes out of the latter part
of my beforementioned Paper fixed to his former Book, wherein I justly blamed
him for his abusive wresting those words, which he says J. B. spoke to Friends
concerning him, viz. That if they could not bind or tie his Tongue, they would
their own, which I told him could import no more in any tolerable Sense or
Construction, than to this effect, that if they could not prevail with him to
be quiet, and cease contending with and disturbing them, yet they would let him
alone, and not strive with him. The other passage he takes out of that which I
wrote upon the Book it self, where having showed him the dangerous state he was
in, by entertaining hatred against W. L. and J. B. which he had evidently
manifested by his endeavoring to slay their Christian-Reputation, and so was
by the Apostle judged to be a Murderer ( He that hates his Brother is a
Murderer, 1 John 3.15.) I asked him thus, For how could thou devise to do
them so much mischief (and not hazard corporal Punishment) as to expose them
as thou have done? Here because I quoted this Scripture, he insinuates as if I
intended Murdering of the Body, when my meaning was no other than as in the
very line before, slaying their Christian Reputation. Yet by a strange sort of
perverse, abusing and wresting of words, he has inferred from this, that I
would have Bodily punishment inflicted upon him for writing his Books: And from
this and the former Expression (used he says by J. B.) of tying his Tongue
(which had in it no more either of danger or hardship to him than to
themselves) for the words it seems were, If we cannot tie his Tongue, let us
tie our own; that is, if we cannot persuade him to hold his Tongue and not
interrupt us: Let us hold our Tongues, and not answer him. I say from these two
Expressions he has run himself into such a fright, as if he began to feel
either the Whip, or the Fire already; so true of him is that which the Psalmist
says of the workers of Iniquity, They were in great fear where no (cause of)
fear was, Psalm. 53.5. Hereupon he cries out, p. 34. of me, for scaring or
affrighting him with Corporal or Bodily Punishment. And in p. 49. he very
gravely (if there can be gravity in so great folly) says thus, And it might not
I believe; be amiss (if but or the Truths sake) that some ancient and grave
Friends would be and were so concerned, as to examine and know of O.S. what
manner and degree of Punishment it is to be or must be, that my Body is to
suffer or to be punished withal for the great mischiefs, etc. And toward the
bottom of the same page, he mentions again my using such scaring threats of
Corporal Punishment, or Punishments upon his Body. It Is well he is so
apprehensive of Bodily Punishment, that the fear of that may deter him from
attempting that which might subject him to it: But it is strange to see how
upon these mere and willful Perversions, he runs out in a noise of Words
against Persecution, setting forth not only the heinousness thereof, but the
hideousness thereof, and representing to himself and his Reader, no less than
most cruel Sufferings, and exquisite Tortures; yea, and in the end death it
self. And before that, binding of Head, Tongue, Hands, Feet, the use and
cruelty of the Gag, and whatever else he could think of, to heighten his
affrighted fancy, the Coat and Hat of fearful and affrighting painted Devils,
Hell and Hellfire, put upon them, etc. And all this noise and outcry he makes
for nothing, or without any cause or ground given him; but merely from an evil
mind and desire in himself, to brand me and other Friends with being of a
Persecuting Spirit, than which there is nothing we are more against. But in
this I doubt not but both his Wickedness and Folly does sufficiently appear,
and the Reader may from hence take notice what a Captious, Cavilling nature
this Man is of, and how little he is to be regarded.

From my altering with my Pen the Title of his former Book from Plain and
Honest Dealing (which he did not use) to False and Treacherous Dealing (which
it plainly appears he both then did, and still does use) he takes occasion to
arraign my Conversation saying, in p. 37. Because O. S. has so injuriously
abused my true and honest Title, etc. I shall make a little farther enquiry, as
an Addition to the former, of his manner of Life, Actions, Conversation, etc.
How well this becomes him, and with what mind he undertakes it, I shall leave
the Reader to judge.

He begins his Enquiry in a high and haughty Style, thus, First I shall demand
of him (meaning me) to answer for himself in the Case of Dorothy and Nicholas
Hall of Ludcum in the Vale of White-Horse. From them or one of them he has
received he says, near a dozen Letters, and all of them chiefly and principally
relating to his (meaning my) Falseness and Unjust and Treacherous Dealings
toward the aforesaid; for of Oppression (he says) with cries for Justice, is
the Tenor of the whole, and as Reported, the same in effect throughout the
whole County within the reach of my Power and Jurisdiction. By this it appears,
that as in natural Bodies, that are distempered, the evil humors flow
together: so in Bodies Civil or Religious, the evil humoured Members flock
together, and Communicate their discontents one to another. A. B. understood
that N. H. and his Wife had taken offense against me, how busy thereupon was
he, to flsh out of them, whatever he could think might make against me. On the
other hand, they understood he had taken offense at me: How ready and forward
were they thereupon, to furnish him with their Complaints, and false
Accusations against me; see what an intercourse has passed between them. Near a
dozen Letters he has received from them, and all against me. How many he had
sent them, he does not tell us, but he don't use to be behind hand at
Scribbling. The Tenor of their Letters, it seems, was of Oppression; with Cries
for Justice, (against me) no wonder therefore that Abraham spoke so big, and
took so confidently upon him to demand of me to answer for my self, if he had
been so often complained to, with Cries for Justice. This was enough to elevate
one of his temper, and make him think himself some Body. But he has marred all,
while to gratify his Envy, he has extended this Cry for Justice throughout the
whole County, and that upon no better ground than Report, saying, and as
reported, the same in effect throughout the whole County, etc.

Besides the several Letters which he received from Nicholas and Dorothy Hall
to himself, he had also, it seems (enclosed therein) the Copies of Letters sent
by them to me, as he intimates, p. 39. out of which he Prints several
fragments, in p. 38, 39, 40, and 41. intermingling other matters between; which
both makes confusion, and manifests he was in confusion when he did it.
However, I intend to speak to this business (or Case as he calls it) of N. Hall
and his Wife first, and afterward to other things in their order. He begins in
p. 38. with a Branch (as he calls it) in a Letter from Dor. Hall to me, which
he says was to this effect, That she was deeply concerned for two of her old
Acquaintance, viz. for Spiritual Sion, that her Husbandry is managed no better,
that her Harvest was so small, etc. Secondly, for Old England, that so much of
her fair Building was moultring years ago, and now I have leaned (says she)
upon one of her props, and received an incurable wound: If her props be so
feeble, it signifies her downfall is not long. By this the Reader may guess what
a Whimsical Woman this is, and then he need not wonder that A.B. is so taken
with her. He calls this her Innocent Simile, and takes upon him to apply it to
me saying, This her Innocent Simile relates unto thee O. S. whose ill Husbandry
in the Lord's Vineyard has so hindered the Harvest or increase; and the Prop
too, that they leaning upon, have given them such an incurable wound, even
thee, O. S. As to my Husbandry in the Lord's Vineyard, I have nothing to boast
of: nor yet (I bless God) am I conscious to my self of any wilful default or
negligence therein. However, it is my comfort, that I am not to give my Account
thereof to A. B. whom it would better have become to have looked at home, and
see how well he had discharged his own part in that for which he blames me: As
to the former part of the Simile, if ever D. Hall, or A. B. either, was truly
acquainted with Spiritual Sion, I doubt it is so long ago, and they have showed
so much unkindness to her since, that the acquaintance is worn out and lost,
but for the latter part of it; what can be more ridiculous, than to call me one
of Old England's Props! For so Abraham expounds and applies it. One would think
the incurable wound they speak of, is in their Heads, and that it has
distempered both their Brains.

The fragments or pieces of Sentences which A. B. has published out of N. Hall
and his Wives Letters both to himself and me, being many and of diverse kinds
and matters, I shall not repeat them all, nor his Comments upon them. But the
Substance of such of them as relate to Hall's own business, is to represent me
as having wronged him and his Wife. In one of them (as A. B. has published it)
he says thus, O. S. my cry is again for Justice, that the wrong that thou have
done me and my Wife, may be put into the hands, of good and understanding
Friends for a hearing, concerning thy unjust, unmerciful, and unchristian
Actions, p. 39. In another thus, O. S, I not having Justice done me last second
day at Charloe (which was at the Quarterly Meeting) I do send these lines unto
thee, to have the Money, that thy hard heart has wronged me of. In another
thus, I do greatly want what thee have wronged me of, to labor with my own
hands, p. 40. In another thus, That O.S. through his Envy, and Cruelty had put
him to almost five Pounds loss, for less than Forty Pounds upon Land Security.
upon which A. B. adds this, as his Comment, I suppose (says he) by his
vexatiousness at Law upon them, for I have heard he was very extreme, etc.

From these foregoing, and other Passages of like tendency in A. B's Book, a
Stranger might think that I had greatly injured and wronged Nicholas Hall, that
I had dealt extreme severely, and cruelly with him, that I had taken advantage
upon him, had Circumvented, Cheated, or Oppressed him, to enrich or advantage
my self. That the Reader therefore may have a right understanding of the
matter, I will give a true and plain account thereof, and then leave it to his
Judgment.

In the 4th Month, 1690. Nicholas Hall being Arrested for Debt, and likely to
be carried to Goal, his Wife (through much importunity, and by persuasion of
some Friends) prevailed with me and William Austel (a Friend of Ore) who were
both of us Trustees for certain Orphans, and had some Money of theirs in our
hands, to lend some of the said Orphans's Money to Nicholas Hall to keep him
out of Prison, and he and his Wife did agree to Mortgage some Land (which was
her Jointure) for the Security of the Money. Accordingly a Mortgage thereof was
made to W. A. and me for one year, for 43 l. to the use of the said Orphans:
When this Money had laid about two years, the Children to whom it did belong,
came to be of age to receive the said Money, and we knew not how to come by it
again: For by that time, Hall was in Prison for Debt, and we had no way to
raise the Money, unless we should have seized on the Land that was Mortgaged
for it; which we were unwilling to do, because we would not use any Rigor
toward Hall. So that we were necessitated to assign the faid Mortgage to one
of the Children (and she being a Woman and Married to one Francis Clarke) the
Money due thereon, being part of her Portion: And to show what favor we could
to N. Hall, although there was near two years Interest due upon the Mortgage
when we assigned it, yet we did not charge that to Francis Clarke, to the
intent that he might be the more kind to N. Hall, in respect of his Poverty.

This is in short, the true State of the Case, by which it does appear, that I
helped N. Hall to Money at a pinch of need, and when he was in a great
straight, to save him from going to Goal. I never Sued him for the Money again,
I never Seized the Land that was Mortgaged for it, (though the Mortage was
forfeited by non-payment of the Money:) And he knows in his Conscience, that I
never received any Money at all on this account, first nor last from him, but
one half years Interest for the Childrens use. Yet he charges me with having
wronged him, and taxes me with Unjust, Unmerciful and Unchristian Actions, and
demands of me the Money which my hard Heart (as he falsely says) has wronged
him of. But whether he in thus belying and abusing me, and A. B. in abetting
him, and publishing his Lies for him in Print, has not grossly abused me, let
the indifferent Reader judge.

But A. B. is more to blame than ordinary, in this case. For before he
Published these false Charges against me, he knew they had been heard three
times over, and I each time declared Innocent, and Hall was blamed for his
causeless Clamours against me, viz. First, at a Monthly Meeting, and afterward
at a Quarterly Meeting, as the Records belonging to the said Meetings does
fully demonstrate.

But sometime before the said Quarterly Meeting, I having heard, that N. Hall
had been with Abraham Bonifield with his Complaints and Papers, and A. B. made
a noise and pudder about it; I writ a Letter to him, and therein plainly and
briefly signified the true State of the Case between N. Hall and my self, and
that I never did him any wrong, nor gave him the least Cause or occasion to
complain against me: To this effect, very tenderly I wrote, to prevent his
being abused by N. Hall's false Stories. But alas, A. B. was so glad that he
had caught hold of something, which he hoped would make against me, that so far
as I can understand, he encouraged Hall in his Clamours against me, as much as
in him lay: For I being at Reading in the 10th Month, 1694. about other
business, N. Hall being brought in by A. B. his Advocate, intruded his
impertinent matter against me, and A. B. urged me much to make Hall
satisfaction for the wrong which he said I had done him. I told them both to
this effect, That I never did Hall wrong, and that the matter had been already
twice heard by Friends, and determined. But they were so eager upon me to have
it referred, that (to leave them the more without excuse,) I said to N. Hall
before several others, There is thy Neighbor Michael Malet, I am content that
he shall hear the Matter, and to stand to his award. This Michael Malet is a
Counselor at Law, who lives in the same Town where N. Hall lives, a Man of
note in the Country, and one that is well affected to Friends. With this offer
of mine, N. Hall seemed greatly pleased, and so I left them. After I was gone,
they (unknown to me) drew up a short Paper, signifying that N. Hall and I had
agreed to refer his Matter to M. Malet aforesaid, and some that were present
set their Hands to it, and sent it to the said Counselor by N. Hall. And to
back the bufiness, A. B. sent a Letter to him at the same time by the same
Bearer, of which, having obtained a Copy I insert it here, that the Reader may
observe, how much this Envious Man busied himself in that which did not concern
him.

The Letter was thus. Loving Friend, Counselor Mallett,
AFter my true and engaged Love unto thee, and thy Wife, with thy Son, if at
home. The occasion of this is to inform thee, That thy Neighbor Nicholas Hall
being here at Reading, and the Case of the Difference between him and Oliver
Sansom, accidentally laid before several of us here, in order for a hearing,
and to have Justice done him; whereupon it was agreed, that the Matter in
Difference betwixt them should be referred unto thee, to both determine and end
it betwixt them. I therefore only entreat thee to do the poor Man Justice; for
it is to be feared, that it has been hard for him to obtain it hitherto. But
if Ol. S. do refuse it, or take any indirect way either to evade or prevent his
having it, happily it will be seen that Nicholas can find some that will stand
by him in his Case, so far as to do him Justice, though a Poor Man, and O. S. a
Rich one.

Reading, the 28th of the 10th Month, 1694. Thy Loving Friend, Abraham
Bonifield.




By this Letter the Reader may observe how forward A. B. was, not only to busy
himself in other Folks Matters, but to reflect upon the Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings, insinuating as if Nicholas Hall could not obtain Justice there.
Shortly after I being at a Meeting at Chawlow, where Counselor Mallett also
was, after the Meeting was ended, and before Friends parted, he acquainted them
that he had received the aforesaid Letter and Paper; and that inasmuch as the
Matter was referred to him, he was willing all should know, that what he did
therein should not be Clandestinely, but openly, and above-board, or to that
effect. And he desired me to give him the true state of the Case in Writing,
because I lived remote from him, and N. Hall, being his Neighbor, should have
liberty to make his Objections, and to represent his Case also; I therefore
drew up the state of the Case, in substance the same as I have given it here
before, but more large, with the Circumstances of it. And some time after the
said Counselor gave forth his Award or Judgment under his Hand, as follows,

HAving perused, well weighed and considered of this state of the Case, between
O. S. and N. H. (whereto as a Neighbor I have been no Stranger) I should be
short to Truth and Justice, should I not truly declarto whomsoever may please
to take notice hereof, That it is my Judgment, that the said O. S. has in all
the Transactions thereof fully acquitted himself as a prudent and upright
Person, and ought not to be persecuted so causlesty by the said N. H. by
various Rumors to the contrary, as of late he has done in diverse places,
after this Matter had been fully and freely discussed in an open and free
Meeting at West Chawlow, etc.

Michael Mallett.


About the same time, the Counselor Judging it needful to inform A. Bonifield
how he had found the right of the Matter to stand, wrote him a Letter in answer
to that he received from him; a Copy of which here follows:

Loving Friend, Abraham Bonifield,
HAving not long since received from thee a Letter (without Seal) of the 28th
of the Month last past. I take my self to be under some Obligation to disabuse
thy (hitherto misinformed by N. H.) understanding, in relation to that Matter
transacted between him and O. S. which I have not failed very carefully to
examine, being invited thereto by the Subscription of some Friends of Reading,
whom I have some, though not much, knowledge of, but think worthy of such
satisfaction as well as thy self, being to refer the Examination thereof to me;
though I did think it needless, the same before having been publicly and
fairly discussed, in a free and open Meeting at West Chawlow, where were
present diverse very sensible, and I hope, very real Friends of thy
Neighborhood, and then ordered that the said N. H. should acquiesce: Though
since he ceases not very cauflesly, to fill thine, and the Ears of others, with
very unjust Complaints of O. S. who has delivered to me the true state of the
Case in Writing, whereof I have Transcribed a Copy for his better Vindication,
which may be at any time ready for thy view, when thou may think fit to make
my Wife (who has formerly given thee so much light as to this Affair, as might
perhaps prevent any prejudice therein) and me happy with thy good Company here
-- where thou wilt not fail of an hearty Welcome from him, who is

Thy truly Loving Friend, Michael Mallett.
Ledencombe Regis, 9. Mensis 11. 169^.

Now if Abraham Bonifield had not been extremly darkened with Envy, how could
he have dared to abuse and slander me as he has done in this Business of N.
Hall, and his Wife, when at the same time, and before, he knew, that the Matter
had been heard and examined by a Monthly Meeting of Friends, and I cleared
therein; that the Matter had been examined by a Quarterly Meeting of Friends,
and I again cleared therein; that the Matter had a third time been heard and
examined by Counselor Mallett, (to whom it was partly through A. B's means
referred) and I cleared therein, and the blame laid upon N. Hall for accusing
me without Cause.

It is sad to consider that A. B. should act thus against so clear evidence,
and his own knowledge; but so far has his Envy carried him, that he sticks not
to pervert the Judgment given by Counselor Mallett; for thus he says of him,
p. 38. And as to Counselor Mallett, though he says that thee have dealt fairly
by them, as in respect to Law, but did not, nor could not, as in respect to
Tenderness and Christianity. Now the Reader may observe that these terms, viz.
in respect to Law, to Tenderness and Christianity, are not Counselor Mallett's
words, but words thrust in as his by Abraham Bonifield. Counselor Mallett in
the Judgment he gave, (and which I have before recited) did not say that I had
dealt fairly by them as in respect to Law, (though A. B. has the Impudence to
Charge him with saying so) much less did he say, That he did not, nor could
not, say I had dealt fairly with them, as in respect to Tenderness and
Christianity, (which A. B. falsely adds) but he used full and comprehensive
Terms, to express his Judgment by, namely, That the said O. S. has in all the
Transactions thereof, fully acquitted himself as a prudent and upright Person.
In all the Transactions thereof. Does that respect only Law? Or does it not
include Tenderness and Christianity too? If I did (in Counselor Mallett's
Judgment) fully acquit my self as an upright Person in all the Transactions of
that Business, with what Face, or Conscience, could A. B. affirm as he does,
That Counselor Mallett did not, nor could not, say I had dealt fairly by them,
as in respect of Tenderness and Christianity? I do look upon Counselor Mallett
to have more Tenderness and Christianity, than to think I could fully acquit my
self as a prudent and upright Person in all the Transactions of that Business,
without Tenderness and Christianity. And others may from hence know A. B.
better than heretofore they have, and beware how they trust themselves to his
Prudence and Uprightness, if it be void of Tenderness and Christianity.

I might further enlarge on this Subject from some passages in that Judgment
given by Counselor Mallett, and in his Letter to A. B. and therefrom show A.
B. that he has rendered himself (in the Counsellor's Judgment) Unjust, and a
Persecutor. For in that Letter he expressly calls those Complaints, wherewith N.
H. filled A. B's Ears against me, very unjust Complaints; what then but very
unjust can A. B. be, in charging those Complaints on me? And in his Judgment,
the Counselor says, I ought not be persecuted so causlesly by the said N. H.
by various Rumors to the contrary, (that is, as if I had not acted as an
upright Person.) Now if this was Persecution in N. H. how much a greater
Persecutor is A. Bonifield, who has published these unjust Complaints against
me in print, and that with his aggravating Observations on them, after he knew
they had been judged unjust both by the Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, and
afterward by him to whom they were referred to be heard and ended? But I
forbear enlarging, and most willingly leave it to the Judgment of that Holy
Witness and Judgment Seat which A. B. has too presumptuously appealed to, as
he will find to his Sorrow one Day.

He insinuates another Charge against me by way of Question thus, And was it
not also plainly proved against thee at a Meeting held at William Lambol 's the
26th of the 10th Month, 1694. and that before several of thy own Friends, and
others also, that thee had been both Remiss in, and False, and Treacherous
also to thy Trust, in the Case of Richard Daniell, late of Reading, in the
which thee wast concerned as an Executor with L. K. to the Will of the
aforesaid Daniell. To this I Answer, No, I believe that not one of my own
Friends (as thou calls them) had any such Thoughts in the least, but were
satisfied that I had acted uprightly both as a Man and a Christian in that
Affair; but I think I need say no more in this to A. B. but to put him in
Remembrance (if he has willingly forgot it) how that above 14 Years ago, at a
Monthly Meeting at Newberry I was charged with the same Matter, by some of
those Separatists to whom he is now gone (who labored then to hinder my
Service in the Truth, and among Friends, and to have fastened some Reproach or
Defamation upon me by it; but they labored in vain (as he now does) for it was
made appear to that Assembly, that I had been really Conscientious and Sincere
in all that I had acted and done in that Business. And that which is most
Remarkable in it, with respect to A. B. is, that he was one that appeared on my
Behalf, and for my Vindication in that Matter against him that Accused me.

The next thing I intend to take notice of is in p. 40. where he says thus,
Concerning the Widow Bunce of Goosie ( I mentioned, says A. B. in the general
before, (but I do not find her so much as named before) in turning Justice and
Equity backwards, and not allowing them to put it into Neighbors Hands to
Judge the Truth. These seems to be N. Hall's words, that which follows is A.
B's Observations upon them, thus, Observe, says he, in a Matter of some Claim,
Title, or Property, etc. yet O. S. as you see must needs have a Finger in it
too, as he used to do, as well as engage others with him, etc. And therefore,
as hinted, it appears they do, and will make themselves Judges over Friends,
etc. both in Civil as well as Spiritual Things, and determine it; whereas her
Honest Neighbors, as knew better of the Nature of the Case, was wholly shut
out from her Relief, to her great Injury, etc. And which her Son resenting so
very ill and unkindly, has gone since to the Priest for a Wife, etc. These
Et-cetera's are A. B's own, no less than five in seven Lines; and I set them
down as he has done, to show what an idle infignificant Writer he is.

But to proceed to answer to what he has charged me with concerning this
matter, That a difference happening between the said Widow Bunce and another
Friend, and it being laid before the Monthly Meeting, the Meeting appointed
some Friends to hear the Matter and endeavor to put an end to the said
Difference; of them that were so appointed by the Meeting, I was one, and no
otherwise was I concerned or had (to use A. B's Phrase) a Finger in it, but to
help with others to make it up. And through the Blessing of God, our endeavors
therein proved Successful. The Breach was made up, and Friends were satisfied
concerning it. But what (if one may be so bold as to ask) had A. B. to do to
put his Finger into it, now so long after it has been made up? Or what other
End or Design can he be supposed to have therein, but either to rip up, and
tear open the Difference again, and make a new Breach upon it, if he could,
(which is the Work of the Wicked One) by suggesting, as if Justice and Equity
had been turned backwards, and the Woman greatly Injured, because (both the
Parties being Friends) the Matter was undertaken by Friends, and not left to
her Honest Neighbors (the Worlds People, as it seems A. B. in such Cases would
have) or else, that he designs by thus Misrepresenting the Matter, to throw
some more of his Dirt at me, as if I had thrust my Finger into this Business,
as he has done his, without being duly called to it, and had thereby occasioned
the Widow to sust in great Injury. But that the Widow Bunce her self had no
such apprehension concerning me, nor the least distrust of my just and fair
dealing with her in that business, may well, I think, be gathered from this.
That after that matter was ended, and over, when she was to go into Ireland, to
live with her Daughter there, she has entrusted me (as much or more) than any
Friend or Relation she has in England, to Receive her Rents here, and to
transmit them over to her in Ireland.

In p. 41. he taxes me with Serving him a base unworthy false deceitful trick,
nigh or full half a score years ago, about the things that he was to buy for
the Friends that were Prisoners in Newgate, and which for the better
accomodating of them, he did (he says) in reality, and without reserve, desire
my assistance to him in it, in order to do them the greater kindness; yet
nevertheless I (he says) for my own Ends and Interest, acted quite contrary to
the said end proposed by him, as well as to the Friends disadvantage, that were
not in a condition to so well help themselves, etc. This is an high Charge set
forth in foul and aggravating terms. He calls it a base, unworthy, false,
deceitful trick; His words are not as smooth as Oil, which he says mine are, p.
33. neither is it his manner to relate things plainly and fairly; why did he
not open what this (which he calls a trick) was, that the Reader might
understand, and be able to judge whether it was (as he calls it) base,
unworthy, false, and deceitful. He says I acted quite contrary to the end
proposed by him, and that I did this for my owns Ends and Interest, as well as
to the Friends disadvantage. The End he says he proposed, was to buy things for
the Friends that were Prisoners, for the better accommodating of them. Now from
his saying that I acted quite contrary to the said end proposed by him; one
that knows nothing either of the business, or of me, might suspect, either that
I had bought nothing at all for them, but bad run away with their Money: Or
else, that if I did buy things for them, I cheated them in the buying of it,
and made an advantage to my self thereby. And it is likely that A. B. delivered
this matter so darkly, on purpose to mislead his Reader into some such ill
apprehension of me. But if that was his design, I do hope to defeat it, by
giving the Reader a true and plain account of the matter, so far as I can
remember, to the best of my knowledge, which is thus; A. B. it seems was
employed to buy certain Goods for some Friends that were Prisoners in Newgate,
for them to sell again by retail; and he thinking (I suppose) that I had more
Knowledge therein than himself, desired me to buy them (I being at that time a
Prisoner my self in Reading, but having some liberty to walk in the Town)
accordingly I did buy the Goods as carefully and faithfully as I could; but
herein it seems was my oversight, and that which gave so great an offense,
namely, that I did not buy those Goods of that Person whom A. B. has since
said he intended I should, but had them of another; but whether this was my
mistake in receiving my Errand or A. B's in giving it me, I know not. However I
know of no wrong or disadvantage that came to the Prisoners thereby, nor of any
gain or advantage that did accrue to me by it. Therefore in his saying I did it
for my own Ends and Interest, as well as to the disadvantage of the Friends the
Prisoners, he has therein spoken a double untruth, and as for his railing and
bitter language expressed toward the close of that Paragraph, let the Lord
rebuke him.

He shoots another of his Bolts at me in p. 42. about my Brother's Widow, which
he brings in thus, And again as to his Treachery, Hard-heartedness, etc. what
need I so trouble my self, or have fetched such a circuit round to prove this
Man, O. S: Treacherous, Hard-hearted, and without Natural affection to others,
when seen, found, and known to be so at home, as I may say even to his own
Relations, as witness his hardy, sower, and moross carriage toward his own
Brother's Wife. In this as well as in the rest, he runs himself aground, and
bewrays his own Folly. He charges me with Treachery and Hard-heartedness toward
my Brother's Widow, and for Proof thereof alleges that my carriage toward her
was hardy, sower and moross; now if this were as true as it is false, yet does
hardy, sower, moross carriage prove a Man to be Treacherous? O then most
Treacherous A. Bonifield, for who more sower and moross than he, as this his
Book shows? But if that be not a proof of Treachery (which none but such a Wise
Man as himself, will say it is) his bringing it here for a proof thereof, is a
sufficient proof his own Envy and Folly.

But as to my Brother's Widow, and my carriage toward her, I can truly say, I
had a compassionate love to her, and did from my Heart wish her well every way.
And I do not know that my carriage toward her, was either hardy, sower, or
moross, or other than became the Profession of Truth, and the Relation that was
between us. Yet I had cause sometimes to speak plain, and that which it is
possible might not be pleasing to her, but she well knew that my end therein,
was only and alone, on behalf of my said Brother's Children, which he had by a
former Wife, the Care of whom lay somewhat upon me, not only as a near
Relation, but by my Father's Will appointed an Overseer, to see and endeavor
that they might not be deprived of certain Legacies which in and by the said
Will was bequeathed to them, which if I had not endeavored, A. B. might then
have charged me, and that truly, with (what he now does falsely) Treachery.

I have now gone through his Book, so as to answer whatsoever seemed to have
any appearance of weight in it, and I hope to the Reader's satisfaction. But
for his confused Clamours with which his Book abounds, especially the latter
part of it, vented in a Style of Billingsgate Rhetoric, I do not think it
worth my while to trouble my self or my Reader any further about it; but I
shall subjoyn a Testimony from the Friends of the Monthly Men's Meeting of
Farringdonside, and there-a-ways, which of it self might, I suppose, have been
sufficient to have cleared my Reputation in the Judgment of the Impartial, from
the Muck and Dirt which in his Book he has endeavored to cast upon it, and
then come to a Conclusion.

The said Testimony is as follows.
WHereas there is a Book lately Published by Abraham Bonifield, Entitled. The
Cry of the Oppressed, etc. tending to the dishonor of the Name of the Lord,
and to the defaming of many Ancient Friends, who have long been known and
approved by their faithful Testimony and Sufferings for the Truth; and also by
their diligent Exercise in serving the Church of Christ. And more particularly
our dear Friend Oliver Sansom, (who is a Member of this Meeting) is greatly
wronged and abused by the said A. B. in his foresaid Book, which in two
remarkable Matters, that have been fully and fairly heard and determined in our
Monthly Meetings ( viz. the business of N. Hall and his Wife, and that of the
Widow Bunce) we do hereby declare, that within our own Knowledge, the
Accusations which A. B. from thence would fasten upon O. S. are utterly false.
And we being Witnesses of his Christian Conversation on all accounts among us
all along, are also fully satisfied, that all his other Allegations against the
aforesaid, are also false, which by the Spirit of Envy in A. B. are forged and
brought forth for no other end, but to bring him, the said O. S. undeservedly
into contempt. Wherefore we do look upon our selves concerned for the Honor of
the Holy Truth, and for the Reputation of him and other our dear Friends and
Brethren (who have been from the beginning both diligent, faithful and constant
in the Work and Service of the Lord) to give forth this our Testimony against
the injurious attempts of this Envious Apostate Adversary.

Given forth at a Monthly Men's Meeting held at West Chawlow in the Vale of
White-Horse, in the County of Berks, the 27th of the 12th Month, 1695. And by
Appointment and on Behalf of the said Meeting: Signed by Richard Vokins, Sen.
Daniel Bunce, Sen. Edw. Lockey. Adam Lawrence,



After he had brought his Book to an end, and had set to it The End, he has
added four pages more (showing himself to be confused and whimsical in the
manner, as well as in the matter of it) and that he calls a short Addition
(having a Postscript before) and in that which he calls a short Addition p. 45.
He says thus, Neither this, nor any other Difference of any Nature or Kind
whatsoever, is or can in Truth be said to be ended, until the Reconciliation be
wrought, and Peace made between the Parties that differed; and this he says,
one would think is so plain and clear, that no Capacity, though never so weak or
small, but must needs discern, believe and see it. If his Capacity had not been
of the smallest size, he might have discerned, what a foundation he has here
laid, should it be allowed, to perpetuate Differences, and render them
impossible ever to be ended, for it is too frequently seen in such cases, that
one or both of the differing Parties do obstinately refuse to be reconciled:
But toward the lower end of the same page, he grants at length, thus, That if
the Parties or Referrees to whom the matter in difference is referred, be in
good earnest, and do use their utmost endeavors for Peace and Reconciliation,
etc. yet if any one of the Persons or Parties concerned, do stand out and be
refractory, and refuse to yield compliance to the Judgment of the aforesaid,
all the rest are clear and to be excused, and the blame wholly and alone to be
placed upon the obstinate, or refusing Person or Party, etc. in case that
Partiality and Injustice be not the cause of his overseness. This I like well,
and am so fully assured, that we (whom he unjustly calls the seven unjust
Judges) to whom the matters in Difference between W. L. and J. B. and himself
were referred, were in very good earnest, and did use our utmost endeavors for
Peace and Reconciliation (in Truth) and that though A. B. do stand out, was
refractory, and did refuse to yield compliance to the Judgment given by us, yet
there was no Partiality or Injustice on our parts, which might be the cause of
his averseness. That with great Satisfaction and Content of Mind, I can, and do
leave and submit it to the Judgment of God's Holy Witness in the Hearts of his
People here, and to the Judgment Seat of Christ hereafter.

But seeing it is so plainly proved, by positive Evidence, and most clear
Demonstration, (which cannot be denied) that A. B. is deeply guilty of doing
great wrong to me and others, therefore God's Holy Witnest in the Hearts of his
People (which is just and true) must needs judge and condemn him for it: Now
this is what I (in true love to his Soul) do sincerely desire, that he may
consider of his sad Estate, and wait in Humility upon the Lord, to know such a
Godly sorrow that may work in him a true Repentance unto Life Eternal: For if
this be not witnessed by him while he have time, with what confidence can he
think to appear before that Dreadful Tribunal or Judgment Seat, which he (in an
haughty mind to make a vain flourish) has presumed to Appeal unto, where he
must certainly be Rewarded according to his doings.

Abingdon the 29th of the 1st Month, 1696. O. S.

POSTSCRIPT.
THere is one thing more which may not be improper to be taken notice of,
though I had once thought to have passed it over with a slight hint in p. 42.
but upon a second consideration, concluded it might be of some Service (though it
be but a small matter, and there are so many greater matters to be found fault
with in his Book) to show that A. B is as foolish as conceited. I did intend to
have inserted this in p. 42. where it is something touched upon before; but I
being in the Country, it came too late to the Printer's Hand, and therefore it
is added by way of Postscript. It Is his Etcetera's which (having leisure) I did
for curiosity cast up, where I found such an unusual plenty of them in his
Book, that there are fifteen of them in some single pages, and near three
hundred of them in the whole Book, though it be not eight, sheets of Print;
some whereof are very insignificant and impertinently added: As for Example, p.
40. speaking concerning the Widow Bunce 's Son, he says, He went to the Priest
for a Wise, etc. What would he have his Reader think he went for besides a
Wife? For his Etcetera implies something more than a Wife. Again, in p. 3. l.
45. he says, he with the rest, etc. did: Which is as proper as if he had said
he with the rest and the rest did. So p. 42. l. 4. Meeting with him at
Gracious-street Meeting at the time of the Yearly Meeting, etc. So p. 18. There
ended the matter as the full and result of all and the whole, etc. (viz. the
rest besides the whole) see also Epist. p. 9. again in p 44. l. 14.15. Any
Nation, Country, Kingdom or Place whatsoever throughout the whole World, etc.
Nay so filly is he as to put in, or cause to put in with a Pen these useless
Etceteras in diverse places where the Printer had the Discretion to leave them
out, as in the page last cited and some others.

ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 19. for the Capital read that Capital, p. 13. l. 31. for ti^^ r.
the, p. 16. l. 24. for 10th. r. 5th, p. 18. l. 23. for Meteting r. Meeting, l.
24. for these r. those, p. 20. l. 2. r. but that he, l. 29. for 36. r. 37. p.
21. l. 15. for the Quarterly r. that Quarterly, l. 16. r. last Quarterly, l.
19. dele same, l. 21. for matters r. matter, l. 34. for mateer r. matter, l.
35. for the r. that, p. 22. l. 2. for away, and, r. away, etc. p. 28. l. 8. for
A. B. r. J. B. l. 39. for had r. has, p. 31. l. 8. for weeks r. years, Ibid.
r. enquiry made, l. 10. for the charge r. this charge, p. 35. l. 12. for or r.
for. p. 44. l. 23. r. of his.


