MONTROSSE Totally Routed at Tividale IN SCOTLAND On Saturday last,

By Lieutenant General LESLY,

Where were taken and killed, Two thousand Foot, Eight hundred Horse, and Nine
Knights;

And all the Kings Papers and Writings sent to MONTROSSE are taken.

SEnt to a Member of the Honorable House of Commons, and appointed to be
forthwith printed.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 18. 1645.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Edmund Prideaux Esquire, One of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
I Think it my duty to give you notice at present, of the good News come hither
this Night out of the North by Sir James Hachet, of a Battle fought in
Tividale, on Saturday last in the morning, betwixt Montrosse, and Lieutenant
General David Lesly, where Montrosse, after a short dispute, was totally
Routed, his Army consisting of One thousand Horse, and Two thousand of his
prime Foot, of which not twenty escaped, about Two hundred of his Horse with
himself, saved themselves by flight: There are 9. Knights taken Prisoners,
amongst which, Sir David Murrey, Sir Alexander Lesly, Sir William Rog, Sir
William Tewes slain, with whom is found all the Writings from the King to
Montrosse.

We had this News about nine this night, and to second it, we Received yours
about eleven at Night, of the taking of Bristoll, which was welcome News here;
for which I express my thankfulness, and rest

Your humble Servant, William Thompson.
Hull 15. Sept. 1645. 11. at night.
FOR YOUR SELF.
SIR,
IN few words, Montrosse had this day One thousand four hundred Foot, and One
thousand horse, or thereabouts in the Field; the Foot are most of them killed,
many of the Horse are escaped; Lanerick took Spotwood prisoner, with the Seal
of Secretary in his pocket: One thousand four hundred Foot and Horse were sent
by Monroe into the Highlands, and six hundred another way, being confident that
Lieutenant General Lesly was South of Newcastle, when in truth he was in
Scotland. All Montrosse his Papers are taken: Two thousand two hundred Scottish
sent for into Ireland, are landed in the North of Scotland: We hear no further
news of a meeting about our business; my service to your Master*

From your Servant.
The good service of some English in Commissary General Middletons Regiment is
much spoken of.

Barwicke 13. Sept. 1645.


FINIS.

