ENGLANDS Standard Advanced IN OXFORDSHIRE, OR, A DECLARATION FROM Mr. VVil.
Thompson, And the oppressed People of this Nation, now under his Conduct in the
said County. Dated at their Randezvouz, May 6. 1649.

Whereunto is added an AGREEMENT OF THE Free People of ENGLAND, as the Grounds
of their Resolutions.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

Englands Standard Advanced in Oxfordshire, Or a Declaration from Mr. Will.
Thompson, and the oppressed people of this Nation, now under his conduct in the
said County.
Dated at their Randezvouz, May 6. 1649.
WHereas it is notorious to the whole world, that neither the Faith of the
Parliament, nor yet the Faith of the Army (formerly made to the people of this
Nation, in behalf of their Common Right Freedom, and Safety) has been at all
observed, or made good* but both absolutely declined and broken, and the people
only served with bare words, and fair promising Papers, and left utterly
destitu^^ of all help or delivery: And that this has principally been by the
prevalency and treachery of some eminent persons (now domineering over the
people) is most evident The solemn Engagement of the Army at New-Mark* and
Trip^-Heaths, by them destroyed, the Council of Agitators dissolved, the blood
of War, shed in time of P^ace, Petitioners for Common Freedom suppressed by
force of Arms, and Petitioners abused and terrified, the lawful Trial by twelve
sworn men of the Neighbor-hood, subverted and denied, bloody and tyrannical
Courts (called An high Court of Justice, and the Council of State) erected, the
power of the Sword advanced and* set in the Seat of the Magistrates, the Civil
Laws stopped and subverted, and the Military introduced, even to the hostile
seizure, imprisonment, trial, sentence and execution of death, upon diverse of
the Free-People of this Nation, leaving no visible Authority, devolving all
into a factious Junc^^ and Council of State, usurping and assuming the name
stamp, and Authority of Parliament, to oppress torment, and vex the people,
whereby all the lives, liberties, and estates, are all subdued to the wills of
those men, no Law, no Justice, no Right or Freedom, no ease of Grievances, no
removal of unjust barbarous taxes, no regard to the cries and groans of the
poor to be had, while utter beggary and famine (like a mighty torrent) has
broke in upon us, and already seized upon several parts of the Nation.

Wherefore, though an inavoydable necessity, no other means left under
heaven,(...) enforced to betake our selves to the Law of Nature, to defend and
preserve our selves and native Rights; and therefore are resolved as one man
(even to the hazard and expense of our lives and fortunes) to endevor the
redemption of the Magistracy of England, from under the force of the Sword, to
vindicate the Petition of Rights to set the unjustly imprisoned free, to
relieve the poor, and settle this Commonwealth upon the grounds of Common
Right, Freedom* and Safety.

Be it therefore known to all the free people of England, and to the whole
world, That (choosing rather to die for Freedom, then to live as slaves) we are
gathered and associated together upon the bare account of Englishmen, with our
Swords in our hands, to redeem our selves, and the Land of our (...), from
slavery and oppression, to avenge the blood of War, shed in the time of Peace,
to have justice for the blood of Mr. Arnold, shot to death at Ware, and for the
blood of Mr. (...), and diverse others, who of late, by Martial Law, were
murdered at London.

And upon this our engagements, in behalf of the Commonwealth, we do solemnly
agree and protest, That we will faithfully (laying all self respects aside)
endevor the actual relief, and settlement of this distressed Nation.

And that all the world may know particularly, what we intend, and wherein we
will particularly center and acquiesce for ever, not to recede of exceed the
least punctilio; we declare from the integrity of our hearts, That by the help
and might of God, we will endevor the absolute settlement of this distracted
Nation, upon that form and method, by way of an Agreement of the people,
tendered as a Peace offering by L. C. Joh. ^^burn, Mr Will. Walwyn, Mr. Tho.
Prince, and Mr. Rich. Overton, bearing date May 1 1649. The which we have
annexed to this our Declaration, as the Standard of our Engagement, thereby
owning every part and particular of the Premises of the said Agreement,
Promising and resolving, to the utmost hazard of our Lives and Abilities, to
pursue the speedy and full accomplishment thereof, and to our power, to protect
and defend all such as shall assent or adhere thereunto; and particularly, for
the preservation and deliverance of Lieut. Col. John Li^burn Mr. William
walwyn, Mr. Thomas Prince, Mr. Richard Overton, Cap. Bray, and Mr. William
Sawyer, from their barbarous and illegal Imprisonments. And we declare, That if
a hair of their heads perish in the hands of those Tyrants that restrain them,
that if God shall enable us, we will avenge it seventy times seven fold, upon
the heads of the Tyrants themselves, and their Creatures. And that till such
time, as by Gods assistance, we have procured to this Nation, the declared
purpose of this our Engagement, we will not divide nor disband, nor suffer our
selves to be divided, nor disbanded, resolving with soberness and civility to
behave our selves to the Country, to wrong nor abuse any man, to protect all to
our power, from violence and oppression, in all places where we come; resolving
to stop the payment of all taxes or ses^ments whatsoever, as of Excise, Tithes,
and the Tax of Ninety thousand pounds per mensem, etc. And having once obtained
a new Representative, according to the said Agreement, upon such terms and
limitations therein expressed, We shall then freely lay down our Arms and
return to our several Habitations and Callings And concerning the Equity,
Necessity, and Justice of our undertaking, We appeal to the Judgment of the
oppressed, betwixt their destroyers and us; whether by the Law of God, of
Nature, and Nations, it be not equally justifiable in us, to engage for the
Safety and Deliverance of this Nation, as it was with the Netherlanders, and
other people for theirs; and that upon the same principles that the Army
engaged at New Market, and Triple Heaths; both Parliament and Army declaring,
That it is no resistance of Magistracy, to side with just principles and ^aw of
Nature and Nations; and that the Soldiery may lawfully hold the hands of that
General, who will turn his Canon against his Army, on purpose to destroy them;
the Sea men the hands of that Pilot, who wilfully runs his Ship upon a Rock:
And therefore, (the condition of this Common wealth considered) we cannot see
how it can be otherwise esteemed in us. And upon that account we declare. That
we do own, and are resolved to own all such persons, either of the Army or
Countries, that have already, or shall hereafter, rise up and stand for the
Liberties of England, according to the said Agreement of the People: And in
particular, We do own and avow the late proceedings in Colonel Scroops, Colonel
Harrisons, and Mayor General Skippons Regiments, declared in their Resolutions
published in Print; as one man resolving to live and die with them in their and
our lust and mutual defense. And we do implore, and invite all such as have any
sense of the Bonds and Miseries upon the people; any Bowels of Compassion in
them; any Piety, Justice, Honor, or Courage in their Breasts; any Affections to
the Freedoms of England; any love to his Neighbor or Native Country to rise up,
and come in to help a distressed, miserable Nation, to break the Bands of
Cruelty, Tyranny, and Oppression, and set the people free.

In which service, Trusting to the undoubted goodness of a just and righteous
Cause, We shall faithfully discharge the utmost of our endevors; not sparing
the venture of all hardships and hazards whatsoever, and leave the success to
God.

Signed by me William Thompson at our Randezvouz in Oxfordshire(...); in behalf
of my self, and the rest engaged with me, May 6. 1649.

The Agreement before mentioned here follows, viz.
I. THat the Supreme Authority of England, and the Territories therewith
incorporated shall be and recide henceforward in a Representative of the
People; consisting of (...) persons, but no more: In the choice of whom
(according to natural right) all men of the age of one and twenty years and
upwards (not being servants or receiving (...) having served the late King in
Arms or voluntary Contributions) shall have their voices and be capable of
being elected to that supreme Trust those who served the King being disabled
for ten years only. All things concerning the distribution of the said four
hundred Members, proportionable to the respective parts of the Nation, the
several places for Election, the manner of giving and taking of voices, with
all Circumstances of like nature, tending to the completing and equal
proceedings in Elections, as also their Salary, is referred to be settled by
this present Parliament, in such sort, as the next Representative may be in a
certain capacity to meet with safety at the time herein expressed and such
circumstances to be made more perfect by future Representatives.

II. That two hundred of the four hundred Members, and not less, shall be
taken and esteemed for a competent Representative; and the major Voices
present, shall be concluding to this Nation. The place of Session, and choice
of a Speaker, with other circumstances, of that nature, are referred to the
care of this and future Representatives.

III. And to the end all public Officers may be certainly accountable, and no
Factions made to maintain corrupt Interests, no Officer of any salary Forces,
in Army or Ga^rison, nor any Treasurer or Receiver of public moneys, shall
(while such) be elected a Member for any Representative; and if any Lawyer
shall at any time be chosen he shall be incapable of practice as a Lawyer,
during the whole time of that Trust And for the same reason, and that all
persons may be capable of subjection as well as rule.

IIII. That no Member of the present Parliament shall be capable of being
elected of the next Representative, nor any Member of any future Representative
shall be capable of being chosen for the Representative, immediately
succeeding: but are free to be chosen, one Representative having intervened:
Nor shall any Member of any Representative be made either Receiver. Treasurer,
or other Officer during that employment.

V. That for avoiding the many dangers and inconveniences apparently arising
from the long continuance of the same persons in Authority; We Agree, that this
present Parliament shall end the first Wednesday in August next, 1649 and
thence forth be of no power or Authority: and in the mean time shall order and
direct the Election of a new and equal Representative according in the true
intent of this our Agreement: and so as the next Representative may me^e and
sit in power and Authority, as an effectual Representative upon the day
following; namely the first Thursday of the same August, 1649.

VI. We agree, if the present Parliament shall omit to order such Election or
^eeting of a new Representative; or shall by any means be hindered from
performance of that Trust:

That in such case, we shall for the next Representative proceed in electing
thereof in those places, and according to that manner and number formerly
accustomed in the choice of nights and Burgesses; observing only the exceptions
of such persons, from being electors or elected, as are mentioned before in the
first third and fourth Heads, of this Agreement: It being most unreasonable,
that we should either be kept from new, frequent, and successive
Representatives, or that the supreme Authority should fall into the hands of
such as have manifested disaffection to our common freedom, and endeavored the
bondage of the Nation.

VII. And for preserving the supreme Authority, from falling into the (...) of
any whom the people have not, or shall not choose.

We are resolved and agreed (God willing) that a new Representative shall be
upon the first Thursday in August next aforesaid: The ordering and disposing of
themselves, as to the choice of a Speaker and the like Circumstances in hereby
le^^ to their (...): But are in the extent and exercise of Power, to follow the
direction and rules of this Agreement; and are hereby authorized and required
according to their best Judgments, to set rules for future equal distribution,
and election of Members, as is herein intended and on oyned to be done, by the
present Parliament.

VIII And for the preservation of the supreme Authority (in all times) entirely
in the hands of such persons only as shall be chosen thereunto: We agree and
declare, That the next, and all future Representatives, shall continue in full
power for the space of one whole year; and that the people shall of course,
choose a Parliament once every year, so as all the Members thereof may be in a
capacity to meet, and take place of the foregoing Representative, the first
Thursday in every August for ever, if God so please; also (for the same reason)
that the next or any future Representative being (...), shall continue their
Session, day by day, without intermission for four months, (...); and after
that, shall be at liberty to adjourn, from two months to two months, as they
shall (...) cause, until their year be expi^ed, but shall sit no longer then a
year, upon point of (...) to every Member that shall exceed that time; and in
times of adjournment shall not erect a Council of State, but refer the managing
of Affairs in the intervals, to a Committee of their own Members, giving such
instructions, and publish them, as shall in (...) contradict this Agreement.

IX. And that none henceforth may be ignorant or doubtful concerning the power
of the supreme Authority, and of the Affairs, about which the same is to be
conversant and exercised: We agree and declare, That the power of
Representatives shall extend with out the consent or concurrence of any other
person or persons.

1. To the conservation of Peace, and commerce (...) Nations. 2. To the
preservation of those safe guards, and (...) of our lines, limbs, liberties,
(...), and estates, contained in the Petition of (...) the late King. 3. To the
raising of moneys, and generally to all things, as (...) evidently conducing to
those ends, or to the enlargement of our freedom, redress of grievances, and
prosperity of the Common wealth.
For security whereof, having by woeful experience found the (...) of corrupt
(...) incl^^ing most (...) with Authority, to pervert the same to their (...),
and to the prejudice of our Peace and Liberties; we therefore further agree and
declare:

X. That we do not empower or entrust our said Representatives to continue in
force, or (...) make any Laws, Oaths, or Covenants, whereby to compel by
penalties or otherwise, any person to any thing, in or above matters of Faith,
Religion, on Gods worship, or to constrain any person from the profession of
his Faith or exercise of Religion according to (...) Conscience, nothing having
caused more distractions and heart burnings in all ages, (...) persecution and
molestation, for matters of Conscience in and above Religion

XI. We do not empower them to impress or constraint any person to serve in
(...) or Land, every man's Conscience being to be satisfied in the justness of
th^^ Cause, herein he hazards his own life or may destroy another.

And for the quiering of all differences, and abolishing of all (...) and
rancor at ^uch as is now possible for us to effect.

XII. We agree, That after the end of this present Parliament, no person (...)
questioned for any thing said or done in reference to the late wars, or
public (...) senses, otherwise then in pursuance of the determinations of the
present Parliament against such as have adhered to the King, against the
Liberties of the people: And (...) that Accomptants for public moneys
received, shall remain accomptable for the (...).

XIII. That all privileges or exemptions of any persons from the Laws, of
(...) the ordinary course of Legal proceedings, by virtue of any Tenure,
Grant, Charter (...), Degree, or Birth, or of any place of residence, or
refuge, or privilege of Parliament shall be henceforth void and null; and the
like not to be made nor revived again.

XIIII. We do not empower them to give judgment upon any ones person (...)
estate, where no Law has been before provided, nor to give power to any other
(...) Jurisdiction so to do, Because where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, for (...) Magistrates to take Cognizance of; neither do we
empower them to intermedle with (...) execution of any Law whatsoever.

XV. And that we may remove all long settled Grievances, and thereby as far
(...) are able, take away all cause of complaints, and no longer depend upon
the (...) inclination of Parliaments; to remove them, nor trouble our selves or
them with (...) after Petitions, as has been accustomed, without fruit or
benefit; and knowing (...) cause why any should repine at our removal of them,
except such as make advant^^^ their continuance, or are related to some corrupt
Interests, which we are not to regard.

We agree and Declare

XVI. That it shall not be in the power of any Representative, to punish, or
(...) be punished, any person or persons for refusing to answer to questions
against (...) in Criminal cases.

XVII. That it shall not be in their power after the end of the next
Representative, (...) continue or constitute any proceedings in Law that shall
be longer then Six months (...) final determination of any cause past all
Appeal nor to continue the Laws or proceed^^ therein in any other Language then
English, nor to hinder any person or persons (...) pleading their own Causes,
or of making use of whom they please to plead for them.

The reducing of these and other the like provisions of this nature in this
(...) provided, and which could not now in all particulars be perfected by us,
is (...) us to be the proper works of faithful Representatives.

XVIII. That it shall not be in their power to continue to make any Laws to
(...) or hinder any person or persons, from trading or merchandising into any
place (...) the Seas, where any of this Nation are free to Trade.

XIX. That it shall not be in their power to continue Excise or Customs upon
(...) sort of food, or any other goods, Wares, or Commodities, longer then four
(...) the beginning of the next Representative, being both of them extreme
burthenso^^ oppressive to Trade, and so expensive in the Receipt, as the monyes
expended (...) collected, as Subsidies have been) would extend very far toward
defraying the (...) Charges; and forasmuch as all moneys to be raised, are
drawn from the People, (...) then some and chargeable ways, shall never more
be revived, nor shall they raise (...) by any other ways after the aforesaid
time) but only by an equal rate in the pound (...) every real and personal
estate in the Nation.

XX. That it shall not be in their power to make or continue any Law, whereby
(...) real or personal estates, or any part thereof, shall be exempted from
payment of (...) debts; or to imprison any person for debt of any nature, it
being both unchristian (...) self and no advantage to the Creditors, and both a
reproach and prejudice to the commonwealth.

XXI. That it shall not be in their power to make or continue any Law, for
taking away (...) man's life, except for murder, or other the like heinous
offenses, destructive to humane ^^ciety, or for endeavoring by force to destroy
this our Agreement, but shall use their ^^termost endeavor to appoint
punishments equal to offenses, that so men's Lives, Limbs, (...)iberties and
estates, may not be liable to be taken away upon trivial or slight occasions,
(...) they have been; and shall have special care to preserve all sorts of
people from wicked^ess, misery and beggary; nor shall the estate of any capital
offender be confiscate, but in ^ses of Treason only; and in all other capital
offenses, recompense shall be made to the ^arties damnified, as well out of the
estate of the Malefactor, as by loss of life, according (...) the conscience
of his jury.

XXII. That it shall not be in their power to continue or make any Law, to
deprive any ^erson, in case of trials for Life, Limb, Liberty or Estate, from
the benefit of witnesses, on his or their behalf; nor deprive any person of
those privileges and liberties contained ^n the Petition of Right, made in the
third year of the late King Charles.

XXIII. That it shall not be in their power to continue the Grievance of
Tithes, longer ^hen to the end of the next Representative, in which time, they
shall provide to give reasonable satisfaction to all Impropriators: neither
shall they force by penalties or otherwise any person to pay toward the
maintenance of any Ministers, who out of conscience cannot submit thereunto.

XXIV. That it shall not be in their power to impose Ministers upon any the
respective Parishes, but shall give free liberty to the parishioners of every
particular parish, to choose such as themselves shall approve; and upon such
terms, and for such a reward, as themselves shall be willing to contribute, or
shall contract for Provided none be chusers but such as are capable of electing
Representatives.

XXV. That it shall not be in their power to continue or make a law, for any
other way of Judgments, or Conviction of Life Limb Liberty or Estate, but only
by twelve sworn men of the Neighborhood; to be chosen in some free way by the
people; to be directed before the end of the next Representative, and not
picked and imposed, as hitherto in many places they have been.

XXVI. They shall not disable any person from bearing any office in the
Commonwealth, for any opinion or practice in Religion, except such as maintain
the Popes (or other foreign) Supremacy.

XXVII. That it shall not be in their power to impose any public Officer upon
any Counties, Hundreds, Cities, Towns or Boroughs; but the people capable by
this Agreement to choose Representatives, shall choose all their public Officers
that are in any kind to administer the Law for their respective places, for one
whole year and no longer, and so from year to year, and this is an especial
means to avoid Factions and Parties.

And that no person may have just cause to complain by reason of taking away
the Excise and Customs, we agree,

XXVIII. That the next, and all future Representatives shall exactly keep the
public Faith, and give full satisfaction, for all securities, debts, arrears
or damages, (justly chargeable) out of the public Treasury; and shall confirm
and make good all just public Purchases and contracts that have been, or shall
be made; save that the next Representative may confirm, or make null in part or
in whole, all gifts of Lands, Moneys, Offices, or otherwise made by the present
Parliament, to any Member of the House of Commons, or to any of the Lords, or
to any of the attendants of either of them.

And for as much as nothing threatens greater danger to the Commonwealth,
then that the military power should by any means come to be superior to the
Civil Authority.

XXIX. We declare and agree, That no forces shall be raised, but by the
Representatives for the time being, and in raising thereof, that they exactly
observe these Rules, namely, That they allot to each particular County, City,
Town and Borough, the raising, furnishing, agreeing, and paring of a due
proportion, according to the whole (...) be ^e^ved* and shall to the Electors
of Representatives in each respective place, (...) liberty to nominate and
appoint all Officers appertaining to Regiments. (...) Companies, and to remove
them as they shall see cause, reserving to the Represent^^^^^ the nominating
and appointing only of the General, and all General Officers; and (...)
ordering, regulating and commanding of them all, upon what service shall seem
to (...) necessary for the Safety, Peace and Freedom of the Commonwealth.

And in as much as we have found by sad experience, that generally men make
little (...) nothing to innovate in Government, to exceed their time and power
in places of (...) to introduce an Arbitrary and Tyrannical power, and to
overturn all things into (...) and Confusion, where there are no penalties
imposed for such destructive crimes (...) offenses.

XXX. We therefore agree and declare, That it shall not be in the power of any
Representative in any wis^ to render up, or give or take away any part of this
Agreement* (...) level men's estates, destroy propriety, or make all things
Common: And if any R^^^^sentative shall endevor, as a Representative, to
destroy this Agreement, every (...) present in the House, not entering, or
immediately publishing his dissent, shall incur (...) pain due for High
Treason, and be proceeded against accordingly; and if any person (...) persons,
shall by force endevor or contrive the destruction thereof, each person so
doing shall likewise be dealt withal as in cases of Treason.

And if any person shall by force of Arms disturb Elections of Representatives,
he shall incur the penalty of a Riot; and if any person not capable of being an
Elector, or (...), shall intrude themselves amongst those that are, or any
persons shall behave themselves rudely and disorderly, such persons shall be
liable to a presentment by a grand (...) and to an indictment upon misdemeanor;
and be fined and otherwise punished according to the discretion and verdict of
a Jury. And all Laws made, or that shall be made con^^^ry to any part of this
Agreement, are hereby made null and void.

Thus, as becomes a free people, thankful unto God for this blessed
opportunity, and desirous to make use thereof to his glory, in taking off every
yoke, and removing every (...), in delivering the Captive, and setting the
Oppressed free, we have in all the particular Heads forementioned, done as we
would be done unto, and as we trust in God will ^^bolish all occasion of
offense and discord, and produce the lasting Peace and Prosperity of this
Commonwealth.

FINIS.

