THE TRUE Fortune Tellers OR, GUIDE to KNOWLEDGE. Discovering the whole Art of
Chiromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy, and Astrology. CONTAINING 1. A
Description of the Planets, their Power and Influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angles, and Sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are Governed as to
good or bad Fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Nose, Ears, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard, and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the
signification of the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles, and their signification.
7. Of Dreams and their Interpretations. 8. Of Nativities, and their
Calculation. 9. Of the Rod by which hidden Treasure is found. 10. Of Marriages,
and at what time any Person shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the danger of
Death. 12. The manner of Resolving doubtful Questions, as to Friends,
Marriages, places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or Business.
13. Of Pythagoras his Wheel of Fortune. 14. Of the good and bad Days of each
Month relating to Health.

The Fourth Edition Corrected and Amended.

LONDON, Printed for E. Tracy, at the Three-Bibles on London Bridge, School.



THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I. A Discourse of the Planets and Signs of the Zodiac, with
Observations upon their power and influence on the Bodies of Men, Women, and
Children 2 Chap. II. A Description of the Lines in the Hand, and mounts their
situate. How they communicate with the other parts of the Body, and by what
Planets they are chiefly governed 5 Chap. III. An Explanation of marks, or
sacred characters on the Hands of Men and Women, as they signify either good
or bad Fortune 9 Chap. IV. Of the Hand most proper to be inspected, and what is
most material to be observed therein, etc. 16 Chap. V. Of the wrist Lines, and
the good and bad Fortune they predict to men and women, etc. 18 Chap. VI. Of
the Line of Life, and what is thereby of good or bad Fortune to be observed 23
Chap. VII. A Discourse of the Table-line, and its signification upon sundry
occasions, etc. 26 Chap. VIII. Predictions on the characters or marks appearing
on the middle Line, relating to the good or bad Fortune in men or women 29
Chap. IX. Prognostications as to good or bad Fortune in men or women, from the
Line called the Girdle of Venus 33 Chap. X. Judgments on the Hepatick Line, as
to good or bad Fortune in men or women 35 Chap. XI. Judgments, or Chiromantial
observations on the milky-way 73 Chap. XII. Of the Suns Line, and Line of
Saturn, and what Predictions are to be observed fi^^ them ^^ Chap. XIII. Of the
Cephalic Line, and what is to ^^ observed thereby ^^ Chap. XIV. Of the plain
of Mars, place of the Moo^^ commonly called the mount, and judgment on what ^^
materially signified therein ^^ Chap. XV. Of the Angles, observed in
Chiromancy, ^^lating to good or bad Fortune in man or woman. ^^ Chap. XVI. Of
the mounts or fleshy parts at the Ro^^ of the Fingers, attributed to Jupit^^,
Saturn, S^^ and Mercury, as also the Fingers to them attrib^ted ^^ Chap. XVII.
Of the Thumb and Nails, and what ^^ good or bad Fortune is to be observed
thereby ^^ Chap. XVIII. Of Physiognomy ^^ Chap. XIX. Observations taken from
the Hair, Bea^^ Chin, Eyebrows, and Neck, with the Explanation ^^ their diverse
significations ^^ Chap. XX. Physiognomical Judgments upon the Ey^^ Nose, Ears,
Mouth and Face ^^ Chap. XXI. Metoposcopy, or the Lines in the Fa^^ and their
significations, relating to good or bad Fortu^^ in man or woman ^^ Chap. XXII.
A Treatise of Moles, and their significations, etc. ^^ Chap. XXIII. Of Dreams,
and their Description 10^ Chap. XXIV. Exemplary Dreams, and their
Interpretations which have exactly come to pass, taken out ^^ History, and
other remarkable Stories 10^ Chap. XXV. Dreams, and their Observations, or
Interpretations according to the good or bad Accidents, th^^ frequently befall
Mankind 10^ Chap. XXVI. A Discourse relating to Nativities, a^^ their
Calculation, so far as is warrantable from t^^ Rules of Astrology 12^ Chap.
XXVII. A short Discourse of Corilimancy, and of the Rod by which hidden
Treasure is found 131 Chap. XXVIII. A second Observation of Nativities here
known, or give wonderful guesses by the marks or lines of the Hand, Eyes,
Forehead, and the like 132 Chap. XXIX. A Discovery of the time of Marriages, or
in what year of their Age the party will be Married, by certain Marks and Rules
appearing in the Hand 139 Chap. XXX. Rules to be observed to know the eminent
danger any Person is in as to his or her Health 141 Chap. XXXI. ^ivers Rules to
know by the Art of Physiognomy the danger of Diseases relating to Death 143
Chap. XXXII. How to find out the Genius of a Country, and be sensible of its
wonderful effects 147 Chap. XXXIII. Observations taken from the days of the
Moon, with relation to the Birth of mankind, as to the undertaking of business,
by that means rendered fortunate or unfortunate 150 Chap. XXXIV. The manner of
Resolving doubtful Questions, in relation to Friends, Marriages, Place of
Abode, Health, Prosperity, or Adversity, Love, or Business, with many more of
the like nature within the Rules of Astrology 153 Chap. XXXV. A further
Observation of the Planets, and their Operation on Mankind 157 Chap. XXXVI. Of
the Pythagorian-Wheel, commonly called the Wheel of Fortune, and what is to be
observed thereby, as to good or bad Fortune relating to man or woman 160 Chap.
XXXVII. An account of the good and bad days in each month relating to Sickness
and Health 162 Chap. XXXVIII. The fixed Stars, and their Situation, profitable
for Mariners, by which they may be directed how to Steer, etc. 165 Chap. XXXIX.
An Essay by way of Discourse of (...) substance and nature of Heaven, and of
Celestial (...) dies, etc. Or a Scheme of Divine and Natural ^^^losophy. ^^^
Chap. XL. A Treatise of fiery Meteors, and their ^^neration ^^^ Chap. XLI. A
Treatise of Airy Impressions, their Na^^^ and Generation, etc. ^^^ Chap. XLII.
Of the perfect Composition which are in^^^ nature of things, by which the four
Elements are (...) considered ^^^
THE INTRODUCTION.
ALthough some People are so vain, as to have all Arts and Sciences in
contempt, yet certain it is, that the Great Creator of the Glorious Universe,
has so ordered it, that he has Engraven, as it were, Mysterious Characters upon
every Creature; whereby those, whose Understandings are assisted by Divine
Knowledge, may unfold future things; and on Men and Women, more especially, his
Peculiar Signet, or Sacred Mark, is imprinted, to stir them up to seek Wisdom
and Knowledge, that so they may pry into the obscure or hidden Mysteries of
Fate, the which being known, they may avoid eminent Dangers, or observe the
better to use those Blessings and Advantages to God's Gl^ry. These things
considered, I hope no^^ will judge too rashly of this Work, before they have
seriously, with judgment and much deliberation, perused it; till when, and ^^.
Times beyond, Heaven permitting, I remain, Reader,

Yours to serve you, J. S.

The True Fortune Tellers.
CHAP. I.
A Discourse of the Planets and Signs of the Zodiac, with Observations upon
their power and influence on the Bodies of Men, Women, and Children.



GOverning the body of man, as second Causes, substituted as it were by the
wise Creator and Governor of all things, are 7 Planets, called wandering Stars,
whose influence greatly operates in all Sea^ons, and disposes the mind to act
and do, as well as urging or pushing on their good o^ bad Fortune, and the
highest of these is Saturn, a Planet disposing men to slowness in business,
melancholy, danger, and such ways as expose them to many Misfortunes. The next
in order is Jupiter; whose influence is more mild and benign, giving a cheerful
heart and prosperous progress in affairs, whose kind ^spect many times
qualifies and allays the malignity of his superior Planet. Mars is ^beneath
him, who predominates over fiery ^pirits, stirs up to rashness, war,
wranglings, ^roils, and the like; but he again is temperaed by the Sun's
influence, who moves beneath ^im, and in men creates cheerfulness, dispo^ing
them to be healthful and vigorous, and ^ose that are born under the Domination
of ^is glorious Planet, for the most part attain honor and high preferment.
Venus moving ^ext beneath the Sun, disposes those over whom she has a peculiar
influence to a gentle, ^ild, and loving temper, dispelling wrath ^d hatred.
Mercury is next, creating levi^ and fickleness of mind, where he has domi^on.
Beneath him, and moving nearest the errestial Globe, is the Moon, which
imme^^ately governs all watery bodies and flegma^k humors, her powers the
Ocean feels in ^^ Ebbs and Flows, as does the blood of man. ^any other things
are attributed to these anets as secundary causes, disposing the bo^^es and
minds of men, rendering them for^ate, or unfortunate, of which I shall have
^asion to discourse hereafter. Their chief ^ts in man's body are these, and are
known by these Characters, viz. Saturn in the left Foot, Jupiter in the
Stomach, M^^ in the Genitals, the Sun in the Head Venus in the left Arm,
Mercury in t^^ right Arm, the Moon in the Head; a^^ from these Parts their
influence moves ^^^ turns, as they are predominant througho^ the whole Body,
and have more or l^^ force according to the sign they are in, (...) respect to
the time of the Party's Nativity which Signs of the Zodiac, or Imagina^
Circle, are known by these Characters, vi^ Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer ^ Leo,
Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricorn, Aquarius Pisces. Through the
twelve Signs, t^^ Suns progress makes our Year, and rende^ the Seasons to
Mankind, distributing He^ or Cold as it ascends or retrogrades. A^ thus much at
present for the Planets and Celestial Signs.

CHAP. II.
A Description of the Lines in the Hand, and Mounts their Situate. How they
communicate with the other parts of the Body, and by what Planets they are
chiefly governed.



HAving given you, Reader, some insight into this great and mysterious Science,
shall now come nearer to the material matter, and let you understand by what
mea^ the Fates of Mortals may be foreseen, and many eminent dangers prevented
by a time^ imploration of that God, in whose hand^ is all the breath of Life,
and on whom alon^ our safety depends. And first you must understand, that of
all the members of the b^dy, none so plainly exposes our Fortunes ^^ Fates as
the Hand; for in that the God of Nature has engraven legible Characters, to b^
read by the studious and industrious, ^^ whom it is his pleasure to reveal such
Secre^ And those are the Lines and Joints, and^ apparent in the Palm, Thumb and
Finger^ which have an immediate intercourse, though by devious ways, with the
chief seats of lif^ having diverse Names, derived partly from the place of
intercourse. But for the mo^ easy understanding, I shall give you only the^
usual and proper Names. As, 1. The Line ^^ Life, or Line of the Heart, governed
by the Sun. 2. The Cephalique or middle Natural Line, governed by Jupiter and
the Moon. ^ The Line of the Brain, governed by Mercury 4. The Table Line, or
the Line of Fortune governed by Jupiter. 5. Venus's Girdle, governed by that
Planet. 6. The Line of Death^ or Sister to the Line of Life, governed by
Saturn. 7. The Percussion, governed by Mars and the Moon. 8. The Circle of the
Wrist is left to Mars in Aries. Besides these are diverse other Lines, not
common to all Hands: As the way of the Sun, and milky way, and way of Saturn,
and therefore are called uncertain Lines, not greatly taken notice of in
Chiromancy.

The situation or place of the Lines abovenamed, I thus discover, viz. The
Line of Life incloses the Thumb, separating it from the plain of Mars. The
middle Natural Line, takes its beginning at the rising of the forefinger, near
the Line of Life, and ends at the mount of the Moon. The Line of the Brain,
commonly called the Liver-line, reaches to the Table-line, making a Triangle
thus:

The Table-line, or Line of Fortune, begins under the mount of Mercury, and
ends near the Index and the middle finger. The Girdle of Venus begins near the
Joint of the little finger, and ends between the forefinger and middle finger.
The Line of Death, etc. when it plainly appears, is a counter-line to that of
Life, and therefore is called it is Sister, ending as it ends. The Percussion is
between the mounts of Venus and the Moon. The Wrist-Lines, commonly called
Rescetta, are no other than those Joints that part the Hand.

As for the mounts beforementioned, they are no other than the fleshy parts,
or little risings at the Roots of the fingers, etc. And are called by the Names
of sundry Planet^ that rule them; nor are they insignificant in this Science.
As for the Fingers and Thumb there are diverse marks on them worthy of
consideration, and are governed, viz. the Thumb by Venus, the Forefinger by
Jupiter the middle by Saturn, the third by the Sun the last by Mercury, and of
all others tha^ has the nearest communication with the Heart. As for the hollow
of the Hand it i^ attributed to Mars, according to the following Verse:

To Venus rule the Thumb we do commit,
The Finger first to rule mild Jove thinks fit,
The next old Saturn does dispose and guide,
To Sol's bright rule the third is ever tied,
The Brawn the Moon with watery Beams directs,
The Hollow Mars with pointed Rays affects,
The least Finger has Mercury's Aspects.
And thus much at present for the Line etc. of the Hand; from discoursing of
which I shall proceed to other Marks worthy (...) Observation.

CHAP. III.
An Explanation of Marks, or Sacred Characters, on the Hands of Men and Women,
as they signify either good or bad Fortune.



IN the Hands of many persons, as well men as women, are observed oftentimes
Letters or Sacred Characters, imprinted by Nature to demonstrate their good or
evil Fortune; and these ought greatly to be observed for their significations
will have their events And into the Mystery of Explanation in the cause, for
the sake such as bear them, shall dare to wave.

In this case the Hand must be imagine East, West, North, and South: The litt^
finger side being accounted the East, the fingers ends the South, the Thumb the
Wes^ and the Wrist-joynt the North. Now if happen that an A be found between
the mount of the Moon and hollow of the Hand it denotes a sickly body, subject
to losses, cro^ses, imprisonment, banishment, and dive^ other misfortunes; but
on the contrary, ^ the Letter appear fair in North part of the Hand toward the
Mount of Venus, it sign^fies happy Marriages, Prosperity, Joy, deligh^ in
beauteous Women, and rich Matches. B^ again on the contrary, if A be found on
the mount of Saturn, it fignifies delay in Business loss of Lawsuits, and
Estate, Imprisonment Sickness, and the like, and over and above threatens the
Party with a short Life. If ^ be in lower part of the plain of Mars, ^ denotes
Death by Arms, or in some Broil but if there be a Triangle above the Wrist it
denotes the Party shall be Murdered: A^^ if it stand near the mount of Venus
in a man Hand, it denotes he shall fall a Sacrifice to the revenge of a Woman,
or in her quarrel. If a touch upon the mount of the Moon, it threatens the
party with great imbecility and defect of Judgment, naturally, or occasioned
by sickness, as likewise a sickly constitution.

If T happen to be on the mount of Venus, it denotes success in Love and happy
Marriages, if it be not so low as to cut the Line of Life; for if it do, let
the parity certainly expect great crosses in Love and Business, and if he
marry, to live an unquiet and unhappy life. If it appear between the Thumb and
the Finger, it denotes Joy and Content, a Wife with Beauty and Riches, etc. If
it be in the midst of the mount, it signifies much good Fortune, and that he
shall raise himself by rich Marriages, If it be in the extremity of the mount
toward the Wrist, it denotes the party much inclinable to Lust and lawless
Love, if it appear on the backside the Thumb, it denotes the party more
desirous of Male than Female Copulation. If the T be on the little Finger, or
the mount of the Moon, it signifies the person will suffer much by the occasion
of a Woman, and that he is likely to fall by Poison or Assassination, his
Children shall die untimely, and his Goods be imbezell d^by such as he shall
entrust. If it be on the plain of Mars, it signifies Fortitude, and a Warlike
spirit, the party so marked shall be subject to quarrel, and in the end in
fighting for a woman, shall obtain her, and be thereby enriched: but if it
happen on the little finger it signifies bad success in all undertakings. I^ in
the Girdle of Venus, it is a certain sign of the parties being extreme debaucht
and la^scivious, be it a man or woman; or if there b^ an L in the same place,
the product will b^ equal.

As for G, it so happens that it produce good or evil effects, according as it
is posi^ red: As when it is found upon the mount o^ Venus, it prefages good
success, love, an^ many friends: but if it be found in the plai^ of Mars, it
signifies strife and trouble, created through rashness or an unruly tempe^lf in
a place under the domination of Satur^ it is a sign of morose dullness, and evil
conditions. But happening in any part under the domination of the Sun, it
betokens ^ sudden access to riches, by the retrieving (...) hidden treasure.

If any person having the Letter C on the middle finger, in the enclosure of
Venus Gi^dle, it betokens him or her greatly abound^ing with lustful desires,
and much given to profligate and vicious life. If the C be (...) the branch of
the line of life, it denotes (...) men great wickedness, and an evil end; ^n^
in women lasciviousness, and an insatiate desire of satisfying their lust: Nor
according to our Art can we think her chaste, though at times she appear
demure, and much pretend to Religion.

If the Letter L appear on the mount of the little finger, it betokens
prosperity, store of riches and honor; but being near the Wrist, it predicts
the contrary, threatening the party with disgrace and misfortune. If L appear at
the top of the line of life, it signifies crosses in marriage, poverty,
jealousies, and that the person shall commit Adultery, and beget many natural
children imperfect in their limbs, etc. If in a woman, she shall prostitute
herself to vile persons, break her marriage vows, dishonor and disgrace her
Husband, etc. And if it be in the Wrist advancing to the Thumb; it denotes the
like; as also in the middle of the Thumb, because in it Venus governs and
disposes to lasciviousness; but being in the little finger, it betokens wisdom
and valor; if it be under the little finger, it denotes a mediocrity of
fortune; good near Jupiter, bad near Saturn, and near the plain of Mars, or
mount of the Moon, threatens sickness and death.

If S, called the S of Scorpio, be near the Triangle of the Line of Life, and
the Table-Line, and if under it there appear two small Triangles, it denotes
Victory in all Attempt but if it be in the other Triangle toward t^ Wrist, it
denotes Cowardice though a qua^relsome Person.

If the S of Sagitarius happen in the Line Life, and Jupiter Predominant, it
deno^ much happiness and health, with length days, and an obedient Off-fpring.
But if be on the mount of Jupiter (for those Plan^ that rule the Fingers and
Thumb, rule (...) mounts or fleshy part under them; as likew^ the twelve Joints
of the Fingers, are attrib^ted to the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, a^ the
Fingers to the four Seasons of the ye^ by Chiromancers) a milder Fortune; but
on Saturn's mount it appear, it denotes e^ luck; nor if it be with the Moon or
Merc^ is it much better; but on the Sun's mo^ riches and honor are promised,
by it len^ of days, and much felicity. It appear^ in the plain of Mars, is the
occasion of g^ Success in Arms, and that the Party shall (...) to high
promotion by Feats of Chivalry.

If the Letter P attributed to Pisces, be for in the plain of Mars, it
signifies as that (...) beforementioned. And so likewise in ot^ places, it is
good and evil, according as i^ posited near the Regency of benign or ^^lignant
Planets.

F and M stand for Fortuna Major, and w^ ever they are posited, pretend no harm
to the Party, unless upon the mount of Saturn, or within the Girdle of Venus.
Now to Illustrate these Particulars, I might again discant on them, according
as they are more or less influenced by the Planets, as they progress and
reprogress, the twelve Celestial Signs described in the first Chapter. But
intending to lay down nothing but plain and easy Methods, I shall wave it as a
flourish used by Chiromancers, to illustrate their Science; and from hence
proceed to the Lines of the Hand, and their Predictions of good or evil
Fortune, from whence I have a little digressed, to give the Reader a plainer
insight into his Mystery.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Hand most proper to be inspected, (...) what is most material to be
observed the^ in, etc.



IN this case it is altogether convenient ^ known, which Hand is the most mat^
in this Science to be observed, for unless be known, a right judgment cannot be
m^ wherefore those that are skilled in Chiro^^^y or Palmistry, are of opinion,
that the left Hand is most significant, and ought to be observed with much
curiosity, because on this Hand both the Heart and the Brain, being he
principal Seats of Life, have the greatest influence, and to the former of them
go from his Hand all the Lines and Veins; wherefore Physicians by it may know
the state of the Body, as well as Chiromancers the disposition ^f the Mind, and
impendent fate or good for^une incident to mankind. It Is in this Hand hat
Jupiter and the Sun have the superior ^omination; but take notice that you
observe when you make your Inspection, the ^arty be in good temper, not
overcome with wine, fear, anger, excess of joy or sorrow, ^ver-heated by
travel, or debauehed by excess ^f venereal exploits, or the body distempered ^y
gluttony, for in these cases no true judgment can be made, by reason the blood
re^ring or dispersing disorderly, an extenuation of the natural heat is
exhausted, and the ^onstitution of the body alterable, so that ^he Lines will
neither appear in their proper order or color. Nor can a true judgment ^e made
on a hand brawny and unfashionable with hard labor, by reason the Lines are
^louded and distorted, and therefore the best ^udgment may be made upon
children of four or six years of age, whose tempers the Moon makes flexible and
fluid; but to come nea^ to our purpose; as for the Lines of the Ha^ I have
already described them, and now I she proceed to give their true signification,
^ Rules abovementioned being taken notice^ at the time of Inspection, and of
these^ their order.

CHAP. V.
Of the Wrist Lines, and the good and bad ^^^tune they predict to Men and
Women, etc.



1. IF it happen the party inspected have four Lines on the Wrist, perfect and
well-co^oured, then do the Fates show themselves propitious, in allowing him
length of days; for he or she so having them, shall live to extreme old Age,
and if there happens two small bows above, making a sharp Angle, they promise a
Heritage, or other Riches, by the Death of Relations or others, and that in
their old Age they shall arrive to honor and preferment.

2. When there appears three plain Lines, if they be broad, they porte^^l the
party shall live to sixty years of age, gathering much riches in his youthful
days, but by misfortune be reduced to poverty in his riper years, but that he
shall again be prosperous.

3. Two Lines in the Wrist, signifies the par^y shall linger out many days in
sickness and ^exation, and may arrive, if no fatal accident ^appen, at sixty
years.

4. To have but one Line, signifies many Casualties and a short duration of
Life.

5. If the Lines be wide and scattered, the ^arty has no great understanding,
nor will ^e gain any promotion; he may live to 39 ^^ moderate health and
prosperity, but let ^im look to the succeeding year, for there^^ is he
threatened with death.

6. If the lines cross each other, let the party be circumspect in his ways,
lest he fa^ by the hand of an Executioner.

7. If the lines spread abroad, and wave i^ and out, passing crookedly, they
denote ^ man of great Wisdom, but that his Ambit^ on shall be his Ruin.

8. When a line crosses the wrist, an^ meandering extends it self toward the
lin^ of life, it denotes sickness, if it appear exceeding pale, death will be
the issue of tha^ sickness, if black, the party is endangered b^ some bruise,
and retains within him mu^^ corrupted blood.

9. If a crooked line bent-wise traverse the lines of the wrist, it betokens
slavery or e^ tream hardship; if two do the like, his Fa^ will be a Gibber.

10. If so it happen that the line of the hand-wrist be double toward the
mount (...) the Moon, and if one ascend toward the lin^ of life uneven, it
signifies an uneasy and u^^ quiet continuation upon Earth, and that th^^ party
shall be in continual danger of sec^^ Enemies.

11. If in the wrist the upper line be twi^^ed or linked in manner of a chain,
it denot^^ the party born to a servile and laborious lif^ yet fortunate in
gaining riches.

12. When many lines spread themselves toward the mount of the Moon, it denotes
the party bent to travel by Sea and Land, a person of a rambling constitution,
or a Vagabond.

13. If it happen that a line passes the lines of the Wrist, as sometimes it
happens, and reaches to the mount of the Sun, then the party may look for
Honor, Favor and Riches, which will flow upon him by unsuspected ways.

14. If there happen on the hand of a Woman a Triangle, beginning at the Wrist,
and reaching near the Moons mount, then will she prove a common Prostitute.

15. If there fall out to be crosses upon the shand of a Woman, it denotes
shamefacedness, chastity and virtue, and if one be found in the plain of Mars,
it denotes she will be married young, and become a widow before the thirtieth
year of her age.

16. When the lines of the wrist bear up to the flat of the hand, it signifies
Fickleness, Inconstancy and Falsehood.

17. To conclude as to the wrist. The long wrist without intersection, denotes
strength and constancy, the short wrist dissected, weakness of body and mind.
If the lines be turned toward the mount of Saturn, vain imaginations, vanity
and vexation. But branching toward Jupiter, it denotes honor and dignity,
with great riches. When it cast its branches between the forefinger and
Saturn, in a Man it denotes he shall be in danger of Death by wounds in his
Head; and the like happening to a woman, presages he dying in Childbed. If
there happens Crosse^ and Stars upon or between the Lines, honor and peace
shall conclude the parties old age but if Stars appear alone, to the Female Se^
it denotes Infamy and Disgrace. If the Wri^^ Lines tend to the mount of Venus,
the part^ is lascivious, and subject to many Vices: (...) to the Heptick they
bend, then the party i^ just in his dealings, and has a prospect o^ long and
prosperous days: And thus much for these most remarkable Lines.

CHAP. VI.
^ the Line of Life, and what is thereby, of ^good or bad Fortune, to be
observed.



THis Line is Note-worthy, for by it Actions past and to come are to be
observed, ^d this reaches from the Wrist almost to ^e mount of Jupiter, and
denotes a quiet life ^en it is well-proportioned, colored and di^^sed. But if a
Star happen that reaches the ^unts of Venus, Mars, or Jupiter, many mis^tunes
shall befall the Party.

1. If a double line of Life appears, it p^^mises long life, advancement to
honor, ^^ favor of Kings and Nobles, success in W^^ and business of what sort
soever. If it happen to a Woman, she shall enjoy what ^^licity her Sex is
capable of, and live ma^^ happy days.

2. When 3 Stars appear within this li^^ it threatens the party with calumny
and ^^ grace, oppression and trouble from great on But on the contrary, if
instead of Stars the appear Crosses, he shall be the Object of ^^ male Love,
and giving up his strength Women, thereby shorten his days.

3. If the line appear clear, ruddy, and entire, it denotes health, length of
days, a^^ prosperous Fortune.

4. If there happen two OO's, or a Y, ^^ sight is in danger to be lost
entirely; but upon the line there be but one O, then b^^ one Eye is in danger
to be lost.

5. If this line close or twine with the m^^sual or table line, then shall
honor and rich be heaped upon the party, together with ^^ love and favor of
great men, obtained ^^ his prudence and industry.

6. If the line be sected or cut where it en^^ between the mount of Jupiter and
Venus, ^^ party shall be grieved often with sickness, oc^^sioned by trouble and
vexation. But i^^ Triangle, happen in the plain of Mars, he shall be miserably
killed, if two be found there, he dies by the hand of the Executioner, or if
the line be extremely awry, it denotes the same.

7. When lines come from the mount of Venus, and cut the line of life, it
denotes the party unfortunate in love and business, and threatens him with some
sudden death.

8. If the line be crookedly forked, it denotes the party to be of little
understanding, and easy to be imposed on, a spend-thrift, and in the end, a
fugitive.

9. If near the Ligament of the Thumb, a woman have two crosses, they crossing
the ^pper part of the line, she is shameless, and in ^st insatiable, banishing
chastity and mode^y.

10. If there are three Stars on the three ^oints of this line, they denote a
man wrong^lly to be abused, and brought into disgrace ^rough the occasion of
women; but, if they ^^pear without the line, his reputation shall ^e unspotted.

11. If a division be in the middle of the ^^e, it betokens sickness in old
age, and conquently death. If it appear gross and red, ^^ denotes the party to
be proud, high-mind^^, a lover of revenge, and of an evil nature, ^^ploying his
wits to the rain of his Neig^^ur.

12. If at the end, there be a Triangle, the party is a great babbler,
impertinent in discourse, and troublesome in his actions.

13. When there is a cross between th^^ middle natural line, and the line of
life, ^^ betokens nobleness of spirit and temper, wi^^dom and liberality. And
thus much sha^^ suffice to have observed upon this line, from whence I shall
proceed to the next, shich i^^ the Mensual, or Table line.

CHAP. VII.
A Discourse of the Table Line, and its signification upon sundry occasions,
etc.

THis line has its Name from the Table ^^ the Hand, and is greatly significant
i^^ Chiromancy, by reason it answers to th^^ Head and Brain, the chief Seat of
Wisdom and Understanding, and runs in some Hand along the four mounts,
participating of the influence of the respective Planets governing them, and
for its power and efficacy i^^ portending good or evil. Therefore, observ^^
these following Rules.

1. He who in his Hand has the Table lin^ broad, and of a lively color, enjoys
health and a contented mind, is courageous and successful.

If there be crosses in this line toward the little Finger, it denotes that the
party shall be afflicted with sickness.

Who so has lines thwarting this line, is subject to many afflictions, as
sickness, trouble, loss of estate, and the like; or, if it ^appen in the
youthful days, it denotes cros^es in love; if the lines or dents happen on he
middle of the Finger, it denotes the man flatterer and inconstant; yet in the
end by ^^ch his Folly, shall ruin himself.

If it so happen, that the line be double, or ^vided into three parts into any
of the exemities, it signifies, the party shall be for^nate, and of a generous
temper, liberal in ^^nation, and of a courteous and modest ^^haviour.

The line being forked at that end that ex^^ds toward the line of Jupiter, it
denotes ^squiet of mind upon frivolous occasions, ^^ubts, fears, jealousies,
and the like distur^ce, riches got by deceit and violence, ^ich will not be
long kept, especially, if ^t line begins toward the mount of the ^on.

If this line toward the mount of Jupiter ^^ear plain, and any Star appear
therein, ^^enotes a contented poverty.

If the line be crooked, it denotes danger ^^fe, by some mad or furious Beast,
or a ^len mischief by some distracted or disor^ed Person.

If upon the line, there be two crosses promises promotion by Learning, etc.

If near the mount of Luna in the extre^^ty, there be the Letter O, and the
Line d^^ble, it signifies mortal wounds or bruise^ be given in Quarrels or
Combats; no^ War shall such a one be fortunate.

If in the hand of any Person, three ^^ stops, as thus... be found, they do
note p^^dence and good conduct in affairs, and ^^ that attains to the
perfection of Learni^^ and, if this line end between the middle ^^ fore
fingers, it threatens death in Child^^ to women, and to men, weakness of
Co^^^tution, and much Sickness.

Two branches in the form of the sig^^ Quarius, going out of the Table line,
d^^ning toward the little finger, denotes c^^tousness, and a sciences, as
Necromancy, whereby he will be endangered; if vi^^points appear, the party is
lustful and l^^vious.

If the line branch toward the fore middle finger, and the ends be blunt, it
notes riches and preferment.

If the letter B be found in the hand woman, it denotes her chaste; and inclin^^
virtue in her Youth; but being once deba^^ed, which will happen, the turns
lascivi^^ wanton and insatiable, till age put a stop to ^^r lustful flames. If
there happen a cutting (...) separation between the two last fingers, portends
ruin by commencements of Suits, Law for an Estate moregaged or imbezled. If a
branch happen to issue from the line, ^^d extend to the middle-line through the
^^dst of a cross, he shall become rich by ^^easure found in the Earth, or some
secret ^^ce, or else, by purchasing extraordinary ^^rgains of such as
understand not their Va^^e.

If there be no Table-line in the hand of a ^^rty, he is born to losses and
misfortune in ^^e former part of his life, but in the end ^^ill live
prosperously.

The Table-line causing an Angle with the ^^e Natural under the Thumb, denotes
ex^^ding covetousness in the party: And thus ^^ch for our Chiromantick
Predictions on ^^s line.

CHAP. VIII.
^^edictions on the Characters or Marks appearing on the middle Line, relating
to the good or bad Fortune in Men or Women.

IN the middle or natural line, which has (...) above the rest, a communication
with the ^^in; if any crosses be found, they denote (...) party to be rich and
fortunate, but much given to lying and foolish discourse, flatte^^ and much
dissimulation. As many lines (...) happen to be between the Table line an^ this
line, signifies as many sicknesses in the first age, but the party shall escape
death when those lines end toward the middle f^^ger, they denote those
sicknesses to happ^^ in the middle age; if they extend to the middle finger,
then in the old age; and ^^ they reach the forefinger, they threaten the party
with a non-recovery of his sickness, ^^ that it will end in death. If in any
one ^^ them, there happen a half cross, and it ^^ branchy, or a branch
crossing, it issue out ^^ the Table line, and reach the fore finger, ^^ tend
much toward it, and the other bran^^ toward the middle finger, the party
shall^^ prosperous and fortunate, if they happen ^^ be blunted at the ends. The
line of li^^ and Table line joined, and by their co^^ junction causing an
Angle, and the midd^^ line not appearing, the party shall be cou^^gious and
bold, but cruel, and given to many vices; an abuser of his wife, and scorn^^ of
his parents, and in the thirtieth ye^^ death shall threaten him; the which (if
n^^ prevented by amendment of life, and speed repentance) will finish his
course in this lif^ and if instead of a middle line, a Star appea^ let him
beware of an untimely end. The middle line cutting in two, and soon
discontinuing, being of a pale color, signifies, the displeasure of Princes,
and by offending them, Death or long Imprisonment. The line being broad and
fair, promises old age and poverty; but, if it be thick and clouded, it
denotes, the party to be of a weak memory, subject to folly, and many idle
loquacities. The line extraordinary red with branches, making an Angle, in a
Man, signifies a War^ike and cruel Temper, a person delighting in Blood and
Ruin; if in a Woman it so appear, she is Blood-thirsty and desirous of Re^enge,
and after long variance with her Husband, will find opportunity to kill him, or
cause him to be killed. The line being double, it denotes succession and
heritages to ^efal the party in his middle age, by unex^ected ways. The line
twice forked toward the Hypothenar, signifies Hypocrisy, and seeming
devoutness in the party. If the ^ne be very pale, the body is subject to
sick^ess and many disorders. This line double ^n a Woman, denotes she will have
five Hus^ands, and live to eighty years, yet die without Child. Crosses between
this line and the line of life, in a Man, denotes a mild and gentle temper, but
in a Woman, malice and contention, especially with her Husband, which in the
end, will cause a separation. Many crosses happening upon this line, d^^ notes,
he shall be raised to promotion by the Clergy. If points or studs appear in the
line, let the Party beware of secret En^^ mies, and be temperate, lest he fall
into d^^ verse diseases, and especially the Pleurisy. (...) Triangle or half
Triangle between this lin^ the plain of Mars and line of life, signi^^ combats
and contentions, which often e^^ in death or banishment. A cross in this lin^
appearing near the middle finger, foreshe^ the party to fall by Treachery or
Assassi^^ tion; but many crosses between it and t^^ mount of the Moon, imply
favor from gre^^ men, yet not to be continued without dange^ by reason of
envious persons. If any kno^ appear in this line, it betokens the party (...)
be a murderer, or of a murtherous incli^^ tion; and dangerous are they to be
seen (...) a woman's hand, by reason of the bad infl^^ence that governs them;
for ten to one, b^ by some means or other, she will be incit^ to take away her
Husband: And thus mu^^ for the prognostication of this line, a li^^ much
observed by Chiromancers.

CHAP. IX.
Prognostications as to good or bad Fortune in Man or Woman, from the Line
called the Girdle of Venus.



THis line is mostly attributed to the influence of the Planet, from whence it
derives its Name, and what is to be observed thereby, chiefly tends to
marriages and copulation, distinguishing the Chaste from the Libidenous, etc. As
first, If in this line there happen dissections or divisions near the fore
finger, it betokens, the party shall ruin his fortunes, by associating himself
with Lascivious Women. If the Cuttings be under the middle finger, he shall be
assassinated by the Husband of some woman he attempted to debauch, or in a
Females quarrel, fall in a Duel. If this line appear on both hands, either in
Man or Woman, it denotes them extremely Lascivious, and that they will decline
no Beastiality, even that that is against Nature, etc. Two crosses upon that
line, one being on the side of (...) fore finger, and the other bending toward
the little finger, denote virtue, meekness, and a modest behavior, one often
tempted to unlawful Actions, but with detestation declining them; and by this
mark, ought wise men to choose their wives, for in women it is more significant
than in man. In brief, this line signifies those that have it, for the most
part to be desirous of carnal Copulation and of a hot Constitution, which is
the Original of such desires, both in men and women, for thereby the blood
being soon rarefied, receives more Spiritual Influence, and is thereby quickly
dismissed from the brain, heart and liver, to the seminal Vessels, and presses
for evacuation; nor farther think I convenient to give judgment on this line,
because it portends for the most part uncleanness and beastiality; but leaving
it, I shall proceed to the line of the Liver, or the Hepatick, which is the
next principal line observed by the professors of this Art.

CHAP. X.
Judgment on the Hepatick Line, as to good or bad Fortune in Men or Women.



THis line is often blotted out by labor, and therefore rarely appears in the
laborious hand, it is beginning is at the root of the line of life, extending it
self through the middle of the Palm to the mount of the Moon or Brawn of the
Hand; and if it so happen, that this line is strait, and crossed by other
lines, it signifies a sound judgment, large memory, and a man capacitated for
undertaking great things, were he not fickle and unresolved. If the line be
winding or crooked, bending in and out, it denotes deceit in promise, cheating
in employment, and an oppressor of the poor; but if strait, the contrary. If
this line and the Cephalic line make a Triangle or a Quadrangle, it signifies
the Person of a Noble Descent, and one covetous of Promotion to honorable
Employments, rarely any vulgar person having them: so that by these, when
matters were doubtful, the Ancients were wont to distinguish the Noble from the
Ignoble, by these Angles. If it happen, that this line as well as the middle
line, begin near each other, at the hand-wrist, it denotes a feeble judgment,
defect of reason, etc. in a man, and in a woman hard labor, sickness; and by
that sickness, many times loss of judgment, insomuch, that many become Idiots.
If this line happen to be forked, or there happen above it a figure in this
form, it signifies great riches and honor, by learning and good parts, a
vivacity and continuation of health: And thus much for the Hepatick line, the
next is the Milky-way, a line so called.

CHAP. XI.
Judgments, or Chiromantial Observations on the Milky-way.

THE Milky-way is composed of many lines, reaching from the Wrist to the mount
of the Moon, and takes its Name from that in the Heavens; and if it happen,
these Lines are entire and run parallel, then shall the Party be fortunate, and
much desirous of Travel and Voyages by Sea, and shall raise himself by
Navigation and Commerce. If the lines of this way bend toward the mount of
Venus, they presage the party fortunate in the love of women, and that he is of
a gen^le complacent temper, mild and affable, eloquent and wise, not easy to
be ensnared by their Wives. If so it happen, that in these ^ines Stars appear,
and mostly spread themselves toward the mount of Mercury, riches ^re promised
with many honors, which he shall attain by his Prudence and conduct in
^ffairs. If this line in men appear not, or very little, it threatens sickness,
and many grievances; when they are cut and unequal, they denote a melancholy
person, and one ^nfirm in his Intellectual Faculties, a Person subject to
strange Dreams, and a pretend to Revelation. In fine, if this line be we
proportioned, it denotes riches, ingenuity and the love of women; but if
crooked, win^ing, or cut, sickness, folly, falsehood and pover^^

CHAP. XII.
Of the Suns line, and line of Saturn, and wh^^ Predictions are to be obferved
from them.



THese lines take their Original divers^^ and first the line of the Sun being
b^^ small, begins at the line of fortune, and as^ending, divides the Suns mount
directly (...) the Ring Finger, dedicated to that glori^us Planet, and
sometimes visibly ascends to ^^e third Ligament, branching out for the ^^ost
part, or containing lines of equal great^ess.

This line wanting in a hand not inured to ^^bour, whereby it may not be
obliterated, (...) denotes, the Party slothful and careless, one ^^at is not
greatly desirous of Preferment, ^or will arrive at any, but must content
himself with a poor and mean Estate; but if it ^^e large and high ascending, it
denotes Ho^^our and Dignity, and favor of Princes, and the love of all Men,
especially if it be ^ouble, as sometimes it happens. When it is ^ear, and of a
shining ruddy color, even ^^ the Table line, it promises preferment by
^^ffices and Places of Judicature, but being ^^ale, it denotes Folly and much
Tribulation. ^ines crossing this, betokens the Person to ^ave many Enemies that
envy his prosperity, ^ut by his mild and gentle temper, he shall ^^rn their
hatred into love, etc. If the Girdle of Venus happen to cut this line, the
party must beware of Marriage, least he live in continual contention.

If this line happen to be crooked, meandering in and out, it betokens a short
Life, accompanied with sickness and crosses. If ^ Virgins it appear much
branching toward the Girdle of Venus, it betokens early Ma^^ riage, and many
Children, with indiffere^^ prosperity, but that they will be apt to (...)
astray, and promote their Husbands to t^^ dignity of the Forked Order.

Saturn's line takes its beginning from t^^ bottom of the Palm, and crosses the
Tabl^^ line, being in some forked upon the mou^^ and has its end at the middle
finger, a^^ sometimes it passes to third Ligament, a^^ is double. This line
seperating the Hep^^ tick line, signifies the party honest and ca^^ full in his
affairs, but shall not attain to a^^ considerable Preferment. If it so happen^^
be winding, or crooked very much, or ha^^ a Star at one of the Angles toward
the mi^^ dle finger, it threatens the party with all t^^ calamities attributed
to Saturn's malign (...) fluence, as imprisonment, banishment, lo^^ of goods,
friends or estate, etc. as h^^ been often observed in those who have wa^^ed the
former, and unfortunately had t^^ latter of what is proposed. If the line of
S^turn descends from the middle of the fing^^ which Joint, the Sign of
Aquarius claims the brawn of the hand, it denotes melanchly and flegmatic
Diseases, imprisonment, a^^ the like, which will be long delayed; a^^ the like
will happen, if the Hypothenar divide it. If toward the line of life, it go
through the middle of the middle finger, cutting the mount of Saturn, it
denotes slavery, imprisonment, and sudden death. The line being full and
entire, denotes prosperity and continued healthfulness: And thus much may
suffice, as to the prognostication of these lines; the next, any ways
remarkable, is the Cephalic line, being the last that is worthy of note in
this Art.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Cephalic Line, and what is to be observed thereby.

THis line begins at the Wrist, near the line of Life, and ascends to the
middle Natural line, and by so doing, makes a Triangle: This line broken,
divided, and disordered, betokens misery and misfortune to men, and death or
great pains in Childbirth to women; but, it appearing fair, and of a good
complexion, denotes the contrary, especially, if fully it reach the middle
Natural line. If Stars appear in this line, in the plain of Mars, that denotes
the party to be bold and furious, subject to quarrels and much disorder: and,
if in this line, there happen a Star, on that part inclining toward the brawn
of the hand, it signifies the par^^ subject to Theft and Fraud, with many oth^^
ill actions. If this line without any breakin^ begin at the hand-wrist, peace
and quiet, o^^ age insures, prudence, honor, and riches, (...) free and
liberal disposition, etc. If it ha^^ pen to be forked near the Table line,
wisdo^^ and much activity is thereby signified. T^^ conclude, if there be a
Triangle betwee^ this line, the line of Life, and of the Live happy fortune, a
prosperous life, much i^^ genuity, and riches are promised: If the Angle be
blunt, it denotes Diseases, a sickl^^ Constitution, and weakness of Body: If
(...) happen to be exceeding short, it denote^ Boasting, Prodigality, Beggary,
Folly, and (...) breviation of Life. And thus have I taken (...) full
observation of the lines of the hand, usu^ally regarded in Chiromancy, and made
a tru^ judgment upon every particular, worthy o^ Observation; from whence I
shall proceed to say something of the Plain of Mars, and the Moons Mount, and
so regularly proceed for the better and more easy understanding of the Reader.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Plain of Mars, place of the Moon, commonly called the Mount, and
Judgment on what is Materially signified therein.



THe Plain of Mars is in that we commonly call the Plain of the Hand, the
Triangle between the lines being assigned his station; and if in this Plain the
counterline of life, commonly called the Sister-line it denotes the party
fortunate in War, and advance himself by feats of Arms. The Plai^ being hollow,
and the lines crooked an^ distorted, signifies, the party shall fall by the
Sword of his Enemies. If the line attribute^ to Saturn, enter this Plain, it
signifies, the party will suffer much hardship in Camp^^ Prisons, and Slavery
abroad, etc. When the lines beginning at the hand-wrist, a^^ long within this
Plain, reaching toward the brawn of the hand, they declare a Wa^^ like spirit,
a Person subject to travel, labor and of a wrestless Nature. The Sister-lin^
being short in this Plain, denotes boldnes^ coverousness, the Party given to
violen^ theft and rapine; as likewise misfortune i^ War, infidelity, boasting,
sedition, treason murder and many the like wickednesses. (...) in the middle
of the Triangle, there appea^ other small Triangles toward the Wrist Duels and
Combats are thereby denoted which often end in death, or disgrace; but, i^
they appear full toward the Table line, fame and a prosperous life will happen
to the party. If the Party have a cross deep and large in the middle of the
Plain, it signifies him zealous in Arms for the defense of his Religion, and
that he will gain renown thereby. If Stars appear in the Plain, poverty and
misfortune are threatened, as also many secret Enemies that will endanger his
life.

The Moons place is between the hollow of Mars and the Wrist, called the
Hypothenar, or Brawn of the Hand, and on these two, the Cannons and Aphorisms
affixed, and what is hence to be observed, take according to the Opinions of
the skilful in Chiromancy, as follows.

If the lines appear pale or black, and gross in the Lunar Regions, the Party
is threatened with many misfortunes, and improsperous success in all his
undertakings; but, if they are fair, of a lively color, suitable in
proportion, the party shall have good success, especially in distant Land, as
well in Commerce as Negotiation on the behalf of his Prince; and women wherein
they so appear, shall be fortunate in marriage, and be exceeding fruitful,
easy in delivery, and free from death on that occasion. A round Circumference
upon the Moons mount or place, threatens the party with blindness on one Eye,
or extraordinary sickness; or, if two happen, both Eyes are in danger, either
by blasting, or some fatal accident. Stars appearing on this mount, denotes a
treacherous and malicious Person, big with envy, and a troubler of his
Neighbors; but, if crosses manifest themselves, then promotion to honor for
high deserts; as likewise riches an^ promised, and that the party is much give^
to Religious Exercise, but of a sickly tempe^ yet again, if five crosses
appear, the part^ is short lived; many Learned in this A^^ assirm, that 28
years are the Limits of h^^ temporal Being; and that near the time, th^^ he or
she so having them, must leave th^^ World, the largest of them will disappea^
And now as to the Palm, the next thing to b^ considered, is the Angles, viz.
The Quadrangle and Triangle, on which I shall gi^^ Judgment, as follows.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Angles observed in Chiromancy, relating to good or bad Fortune in Man
or Woman.



AS for the Triangle, it is caused in the hollow of the Hand, the line of Life,
^e middle Natural line, and the line called ^e Cephalic line, or line of the
Head; as or the Quadrangle, a line so called, it is ^aused by the Table line
middle Natural line, ^^nes of the Sun and Saturn, and from these are to be
observed in order the following Prognostications.

If the lines and veins of the Triangle (...) well proportioned, well colored,
and t^^ Angles be equal, health, prosperity, and^^ moderate fortune are
signified, as also the the party is of mild disposition, and coun^^ ous
behavior; but the lines and veins (...) scure, distorted, and the Angles
disprop^^ tioned, denote a churlish and sullen pers^^ given to labor, covetous
and desirous (...) gains, fraudulent, though of little unde^^ standing. A
spacious and large Triang^^ denotes liberality and munificence, coura^^ and
constancy, but narrow the contrary. (...) it be altogether wanting, or
defective by the disappearing of some line, it signifies the party unfortunate,
and of an evil nature subject to many Vices and erroneous Practices. The right
Angle, between the Ceph^ lick and the Line of Life, bordering on the Brawn of
the Hand, be comely and decen^ it signifies the party, one of a large under
standing, great memory, and a lover of justice; the right Angle being little
and shar^^ denotes a provident and industrious man, on desirous of riches; but,
if it be obscure and blunt, folly and poverty attend the Possess^^ The left
Angle pointed, denotes a loquacito^^ Person, and a man studious to overreach
(...) deceive his Neighbor. A brawniness in the midst of the Triangle, denotes
the party quarrelsome, vexatious, implacable, and of an evil nature; and the
like is signified if a sanguine redness appear in the extreamities of this
Angle. If a Star happen in the Triangle of a woman's hand, she is prone to
unlawful love and lust, and will thereby be rendered miserable in the end; but
if it stream with a tail like a Comment, it denotes a woman to outlive four
Husbands, and yet not arrive at any considerable age, especially ^f that mark
happen before the 20th year. Four lines cross-wise in the Triangle. denotes one
evil and malicious, subject to these and fraud. A Star near the right Angles,
denotes ^ man perfidious, and much the same as the former. When in a man's left
hand, looking toward the mount of Mercury, the Angle contains three small
parallels, they signify ^iveliness, health, and the like.

The Quadrangle fair and well colored, ^enotes riches and health, a sound
judgment, and large memory, with much liberality and compassion, but little and
distorted the contrary: and most whose hands are subject to rembling, have the
latter sort of Quadrangles. If a Star happen in the middle, it de^otes the
party a lover of justice, and one ^at rejoices at the prosperity of his
Neighhours, a patriot of his Country, and a prop to Religion; the like
signification has a cross if it be large and fair in the place aforesaid If
upon the Table line, making the upper side of the Quadrangle, there happen a
Star courage and prudence is thereby denoted, (...) Person liberal, and
favored by great ones yet is threatened with an Eclipse for a time but
afterward will prosper more than ever. (...) the Star appear upon the line of
Saturn, (...) denotes a person to run into much oblique and disgrace by
insatiable lust, and unlawful love, and that in the end he shall be afflicted
with poverty and disgrace, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Mounts or Fleshy parts at the Roots (...) the Fingers, attributed to
Jupiter, Saturn Sol, and Mercury, as also the Fingers (...) them attributed.

AS for these mounts or little risings, (...) have already showed diverse
predictions signified by them, and therefore shall b^ brieser in Treating of
them in their order as also of the Fingers.

Jupiter's mount is under the forefinger, i^ there happen a cross or two,
honor is there by denoted, fortunate marriage, much loyalty and applause. If
crosses happen on the first joint of the finger toward the outward side, it
signifies riches and honor by Learning and Science. When four or five lines
between the first and second joint, in the nature of a Gridiron happen, it
betokens the parties life endangered by women, or in their cause. Upon
Jupiter's mount a Star denotes disgrace, infamy, and loss of honor; but if ^wo
Stars appear, the contrary will happen. A line arising out of the Table line,
and di^iding this line, denotes a sudden and vioent death. If there happen a
square, and he line divide it, signifies honor and reveence, health, and
prosperous fortune. If in he finger of a woman, there happen three ^nes between
the second and third joint, fair and red, it betokens her of a merry temper,
and that she will have a Husband, loving and and, yet ten to one she dies in
Childbed.

Star appearing on the first joint of the ^re-finger, it denotes in women
bashfulness, ^astity, and a virtuous life. If so it happen at a Star appear on
her second joint, much ^^vancement is promised her by marr^uge, (...) the
favor of great persons. When near the ^vnt of this finger two equal lines
appear, ^ey signify the party to be ingenious, a ver of learning and virtue,
noble and liberal; the like lines in a woman presage fruitfulness. If this
character happen (...) the first or second joint of the fore finger, (...)
promises to the party abundance of wealth and possession to fall by the death
of friend but if it happen in the extremity of the sa^^ finger, it denotes
vexatious suits and conte^ tion with the nearest Relation; if on the mount of
Jupiter it appear, great honor are promised the party, and much inhe^^ farce.

The mount of Saturn is under the midd^^ sir ger, to which we join the finger,
when sore observe that when this mount is full a^^ plain, the party is weak in
judgment, o^^ without fraud, yet laborious and industrio^^ in his business and
occupation. If there ha^^ pen a line, taking its beginning at the f^^ joint of
the finger, to cut or divide this mou^^ with two cross lines, then captivity
and i^^ prisonments are threatened, with many loss^ crosses and vexations. The
Table line reading the mount of Saturn and dividing it, s^^ nities the party,
as the Proverb is, to str^^ (...) st the stream in all his affairs; and (...)
though he be industrious, yet shall he be e^^ poor, yet have a contented mind.
If i^^ woman five or more lines, not exceedi^^ eight, ascend toward the second
joint, (...) placed in the first, it denotes her to have (...) many Male
Children, but being grown up, they shall prove unfortunate. A Star in the first
joint of a man's, signifies he shall be assassinated or murdered. Many lines on
the mount signify loss and poverty, crosses and imprisonment. If after the Age
of thirty two lines plainly appear on the mount, they threaten the party to
fall by the hand of Justice, or with a long imprisonment. When from the second
to the third joint there are three lines, two of them being across, it
signifies in a woman much calumny and reproach, occasioned by her lewdness and
un^awful actions, especially as to what relates to venery. If so it happen,
that in the plain of Mars, or somewhat lower, there ascend ^ line, passing
through this mount, reaching ^he first joint, it denotes the mischief to fall
in February, if it reach the second joint, then in January, and touching the
third joint it will be apparent in December: These three ^^oynts denoting the
three Winter Months, as ^he other nine do the nine Months of Spring, Summer and
Autumn. When on the side of ^he finger of Saturn, there appear a cross or ^tar,
death or imprisonment for defense of Religion, or the Liberty of their Country
is ^hreatned. The next in order is these following Predictions.

If on the Sun's mount, which is at the root of the Ring-finger there happen
certain line beginning at the first joint of the Ring-fi^ ger, and extend
themselves toward the tab^^ line, and no intersections, the party will b^ high
in the favor of great men, attained b^ wisdom and knowledge of many sciences,
an^ thereby shall attain to riches and honor but if they be cut or crooked,
disgrace an^ penury will be the sequel. A cross upon the mount, denotes the
party to be exceeding covetous and worldly-minded, one that wh^^ ly sets his
heart upon his riches; the like cross in a woman, shows her inclination is
(...) whoredom, whereby she shall raise her fortune. When some small lines,
beginning (...) the line of fortune, or middle natural line and ascend toward
the joint of the Ring finger, running parallel, and not joining, the slgnifie
riches, honor, and a lasting fame (...) the party. A Virgin having certain
lines b^ tween the first and second joints of this finger, they being strait
and parallel, deno^^ great advantage by marriage; but if the appear not till
twenty, the party shall be (...) danger of dying a Maid, or at least continu^
long against her will unmarried. If the like lines happen from the second and
third joyn^ they signify a good Name, and an indifferent fortune to man or
woman. The la^^ joint manifesting a Star or Cross, denote^ one born to inherit
an Estate, but extremely unfortunate. If in the extremity of the finger, near
the Nail, lines appear, it denotes a man laborious and industrious, but never
destined to riches and places of honor. When from the Table line, toward the
joint on the Ring-singer, there issues a single line, riches and great
possessions are promised.

If a Triangle happen in the first joint of this finger, it denotes her chaste
and virtuous, of a mild and modest behavior, etc. The next mount of Mercury,
who governs it and the little finger; and from thence we predict as follows.

The Mercurial mount well proportioned, full and lively colored, signifies the
party to be just, honest, a lover of wisdom, and one that delights to do good.
This mount half filled with lines, denotes the party ingenious, docible, and of
a ready wit, yet shall he not attain his advancement by Learning, but by the
favor of Friends and Relations, a man hating superstition, etc. If on this
mount certain lines happen, coming from without the hand, they denote the party
a liar, flatterer, deceiver, and vainglorious Person. The character of Jupiter
happening here, portends a great understanding of mysteries, and much wisdom,
but that it shall be applied to the wrong end, and the party shall thereby in
seeking to hurt others, indamag^ himself. A cross on this mount, denotes the
party an Athiest, or one that has no inclinat^^ on to Religious Worship. When
in the thi^ joint a Star or ctoss happens, it denotes poverty, though the party
be learned and industrious, his proverty proceeding from h^ good nature, over
kindness, or lavishness i^ expense. Now the remaining part of Chiromancy, of at
least so much of it as ma^serve upon any occasion, consists in the Thumb and
the Nails, in which I shall (...) brief, by reason their signification is mu^^
the same with what has been already relate^ on the Mounts and Fingers.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Thumb and Nails, and what of good or bad Fortune is to be observed
thereby.



THe Thumb is properly called the Finger, because it is ruled by that Planet as
well as the Mount, and when it is strait, smooth, and of a lively color, it
denotes a good nature, a person affable, gay and witty. If a short line pass
the Root of the Thumb, near the line of Life, called the Sister of the line of
Life, it denotes riches and pleasure to beenjoyed without interruption; but if
it stand higher, or near to the middle joint, it denotes poverty in the first
age, but afterward abundance of riches. Four lines appearing equally distant
from each other, toward the Wrift, or the back part of the Thumb, riches and
honor are promised thereby. In the last joint of the Thumb, if near the Nail^
the lines appear straight, clear, bright, and well proportioned, they foretell
unexpected riches and honor; cross lines broken and disordered, signify the
party proud, lustful and vainglorious. A Star in the lower joyn^ denotes a
pleasing and sedate temper, a Pe^ son worthy the friendship of great ones.
(...) the letter L happen on the first joint of the Thumb, it denotes sudden
marriage, though some misfortune depend thereon. If the ch^ racter of the Sun
happen on the mount (...) Venus in the hand of a woman, it deno^^ her given to
Whoredoms and Adulteries. (...) on the first joint of the Thumb of a wom^
happen three or four lines, cutting and cr^^ ling each other, it denotes her
Husband she conspire her death, or she shall other way be in danger of a
violent death. Two line beneath the second joint, denotes the Per^^ subject to
all manner of vices. And the much for the Thumb, as for the Nails, the
^gnifications are diverse, and their mate^^ significations are thus known. If
the Nails be broad, they signify a mild, gentle and easy temper. The Nails
white and long, denotes the party to be of a weak and sickly temper. If upon
the extremities appeal a strange paleness, short life is thereby signified.
Narrow Nails denotes a covetous, luxurious, and adulterous Person.
Extraordinary long Nails denotes the party of a good natural disposition, but
subject to jealousy and mistrust. Oblique or winding Nails signifies a
cunning Person, and one given to fraud and deceit, to much vexation and
trouble, by prosecuting his Neighbors on frivolous occasions. Little whites at
the extreamities of the Nail, denotes the Party avaricious, foolish, and
pusilanimous. Little Nails, being round, denotes the party given to much anger,
one envious, and a hater of good men, yet not capable of hurting them; and if
they be crooked, Pride is denoted, and much arrogance. Round Nails denote an
honest meaning, a lover of wisdom, and a great student in sciences. Fleshy
Nails signify a Person lazy, and desirous of ease, of small judgment, and
less will to improve it Pale and black Nails, denote a Person of melancholy
disposition, subject to many diseases, occasioned by that humor, yet trea
cherous, crafty and malicious. Red Nails marked with yellowish spots, signify
the party of a fiery Nature, much given to broil^ and disturbances.

Thus Reader have I given you the most plain and easy Rules of Chiromancy or
Palmistry, by which you may know at any time the things that shall befall any,
according to the disposition of the Planets, if a superio^ power prevent not:
And further to give you an insight into secret Sciences. I shall proceed to
open a greater Cabinet of Mysteries, vi^ The famous Science, or useful Arcana
(...) Phisiognomy.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of PHISIOGNOMY.



PHisiognomy is a Science that has been of high esteem by Emperors, Kings and
Princes, who studied it with care and diligence, as desirous of nothing more
than by this Art, to read men, and by the External parts, know and discover the
inmost secrets of their hearts, according to their natural inclinations; as
likewise the constitution of their bodies, in relation to the humors,
diseases, or death, signified or foretold by sundry marks and symptoms; nor can
any man justly pretend to skill in Physic, if he be deficient herein; and in
this case the Signs and Planets are greatly significant, and have domination
and influence chiefly in the succeeding parts of the body, as thus, the
Forehead is governed by Mars, the right Eye by Sol, the left Eye by the Moon,
the right Ear by Jupiter, the left by Saturn, the Nose by Venus, and the Mouth
by Mercury. Again, as for the twelve signs of the Zodiac, Cancer in
Phisiognomy is posited on the Foreheads hight, Leo on the right Eye-brow, Virgo
on the right Cheek, Libra on the right Ear, Scorpio on the Nose, Sagitarius on
the right Eye, Capricorn on the Chin, or lowermost part of the Head, Aquarius
on the left Eyebrow, Pisces on the left Cheek, Arie^ on the left Ear, Taurus on
the middle of the Forehead, and Gemini on the left Eye. And now to make a right
judgment of these; observe the following Rules. A blackness or swa^^ thiness in
the face, if it be shining, denote^ the party of a heavy temper, slow to action
fearful, cautious, and not subject to quarre^ A greenish complexion, with
black specks denotes a Person choleric, and full of anger subject to broyls,
lawsuits, and intestin^^ contentions. A ruddy complexion, not b^^ ing over
fat, denotes the party to be of (...) prompt wit, overreaching in cunning, and
little regardful of their trust. Those th^^ have their Faces of a pale leady
color, their Forehead red, and Eyes sinking inward, a^^ extremely bashful,
restless in their mind full of angry thoughts, and fearful, trouble^
continually with affrighting dreams. A high white complexion, bespeaks a man
to b^ good natured, seldom angry, soon pacified and ever faithsull to his
friend, but fearf^ and effeminate; and therefore is best suited with women, to
render them more admi^ rabble in the Eyes of their Admirers. The brown color,
ming^^ with pale, denotes any person unstable, inconstant, luxurious, and given
to many extravagant vices. Those that have a flushing color, rising and
falling at times, have a defect in the Brain, by reason of the extraordinary
heat, which threatens them with violent Feavors, Lunacy, or the like unhappy
disorders that proceed from heat. And thus much for the complexion of the Face
in general, from whence I shall proceed to particulars more immediately
denoting the Phisiogminical predictions.

CHAP. XIX.
Observations taken from the Hair, Beard, Chin, Eyebrows and Neck, with the
Explanation of their diverse significations.



IF the Hair of the Head be thick and soft, it denotes a man of a mild and
affable temper, not subject to treachery or fraud. If the hair grow exceeding
fast, it denotes the bod^ inclining to dryness and decay, its grow^ being
suddenly forced by heat, which (...) destructive to the brain. Abundance of
ha^ in young children, denotes their complexion to increase and augment by bad
humor Curled hair, hard and black, denotes the party to be of a hot
constitution, subject (...) commit many outrages and violences. Smoo^^ hair and
lank, denotes the party to be pla^ sibly mild, ingenious and tractable, but p^^
silanimous, and one not over inclinable (...) struggle overmuch for temporal
riches. Ha^^ rising and standing upright like bristles, d^^ notes the party of
a hot constitution, har^ and timorous. White hair signifies the p^^ ty to be of
a cold and weak constitution. (...) fine, black hair proceeds from the effect
(...) choler, and hot blood. Red hair from a m^^ derate temper. Hair of a gold
color, d^^ notes a treacherous person. Red hair indR^ ning to black, denotes a
subtle, crafty, and overreaching person. A Chestnut coloure^ hair, signifies
the party of a fair condition mild and well-dispos^^, etc. And thus much for
the hair of the Head, and its significa^^ ons, from whence I shall proceed to
that (...) the ^eard.

(...) soft beard, signifies a lustful per^^^ un^^^^^^ant, effeminate, tender,
and gre^^ regarders of their person. A red beard, denotes the party wise,
courteous, complacent, a great rhetorician, smooth tongued, and somewhat
subject to flattery. A flaxen or whey beard, denotes a phlegmatic person, yet
wise and industrious. If the beard be repleat with hair, it denotes the party
of a good nature, free temper, reasonable and devout; but when it grows
straggling, the contrary. As for Women, if a beard or long hair appear upon
their Chins, they denote them mascuine, and of a hot temper; but if there
appears no hair, then they are soft, shamefaced, weak, mild, and of a courteous
behavior.

As for the Chin, if in women it be long, it denotes her a turbulent and
vexatious person. subject to scolding and brawls; and in a man ^t denotes him
loquacious and indiscreet. A little Chin, denotes malice, fraud, despite, etc.
A round thin Chin, denotes a man effeminate, yet full of pride and haughtiness.
A square Chin is full of masculine, and denotes great courage and strength of
body, much desirous of wars and clandestine commotions. The person that has a
round Chin, dimpled, is of a good nature, amiable, just, loving, and much given
to women, and the like it holds to the other Sex. A lean and wrinkled Chin,
denotes a Person unfit for the act of Generation, bewraying some more than
ordinary defects in the secret parts. A crooked Chin, with a gutter or valley
at the joynin^ of the Jaws, denote a perfidious and treach^^ rous Person, much
given to contentions, (...) it in either man or woman. And now th^^ next in
order, are the Eyebrows and Ey^^ lids.

He or She that have their Eyebrows d^^ clin'd down from on high, when they
speak and move, and rise at pleasure, are accoun^^ ed deceitful, malicious
Persons, much give to lying and romancing, and ought to (...) careful, least
their Tongue bring them (...) to an untimely end. If the Eyebrows (...) long,
and there be no divisions in the middle but they reach one another; they denote
the Person to be of no great uuderstanding, y^ a lover of mischief in secret.
If the Eye brows are naturally folded, as if they we^ curled, they denote the
party immodest, bol^ rapacious, and an envier of other men's pro^^ perity. When
the Eyebrows being of (...) flaxen color, are short and narrow, the^ denote
the party of a soft and pliable temper reasonable and fearful, yet soon
provoked (...) anger. If the Eyebrows in a Female sta^^ staring, or the hair
turn upward, and seem to curl, it is a sign she has lost her Virginity. The
party with short and small Eyebrows (...) covetous, crafty, and overreaching,
full (...) vexation and disturbance. If the Eyelids are long, with long hair,
they denote the party to be morose, clownish, yet a great boaster of his
abilities.

If any party have a long Neck, it denotes him or her to be timorous, unwise,
gluttonous, a great drinker, and an illiterate Person. A short and small Neck,
denotes a wise, tho treacherous Person, much given to anger, yet soon pacified.
The party that has a sinewy brawny Neck, is subject to quarrel, and thereby
imbroyls himself often to the prejudice of his Person and Estate. A fleshy Neck
denotes a proud Person, and a disdainer of others, better than himself. A small
Neck denotes a weak and feminate capacity, inclining to softness and inglorious
ease. A Neck inclined or bowed, denotes malice and folly. A straight Neck
demonstrates rashness. ^ Neck declining to the right side, signifies ^rudence,
desire of study, and attaining of sciences; and if toward the left, the
contrary. And thus much for the first part of Phisiognomy, leaving which to the
consideration of the sagacious Reader, I proceed to the second.

CHAP. XX.
Phisiognomical Judgments upon the Eyes, Nose, Ears, Mouth and Face.

LArge Eyes denotes a person bold, sloathful, subject to falsities, and of a
rud^ behaiour. Eyes partly colored, denote a man or woman subject to sundry
passions hasty, and of little stability. Eyes deep and naturally sinking into
the head, especially if they be of a greenish color, denote the party wise,
industrious, great in council, and happy in his undertakings, but not
altogether free from vice. An extraordinary whitish or wally colloured Eye,
denotes an imbecile person, not capable of any great acquirement. A sharp and
piercing Eye, with the Eye-brow declining, denotes a deceiver an^ fraudulent
person. Small Eyes, deep set declare the party to have a large understanding, a
clear sight, far commanding in light or darkness. A squint Eye, denotes a
fraudulent deceitful Person, and one given to many absurd actions. A yellowish
or citte^^ colored Eye, denotes the party false hearted, a dissembler, and one
that is regardless of vows and protestations. The Eye of a mean bigness, clear
and shining, denotes an honest and ingenious person.

As for what concerns the Nose, take as follows: A high Nose denotes the
party given much to violence and false severations. A big Nose, every way long
and hanging down, denotes covetousness, desirous of honor, ambitious, yet wise
in the management of his affairs. A Nose rising in the middle, and again
declining toward the extremities, denotes the party to be unconstant, harsh,
cruel, and greatly mistrustful, even of his nearest Relations. A Nose crooked
and awry, somewhat long, denotes pride, envy, luxury, vain glory, and
injustice. A round Nose, at the extreamities with small nostrils, denotes in a
man pride and incredulity, and in a woman uncleanness and meditation of
revenge. A red Nose, that is naturally so, denotes a contentious, turbulent,
quarrelsome person. A Nose proportionable in all parts, streaked with veins and
well colored, denotes the party to be of merry, affable temper. If the Nose be
hairy at the point or above, the party is of a weak understanding, yet honest
and industrious. A Nose round and long, of a pleasant feature, denotes in the
Female Sex, especially if they have blue Eyes, prudence, chastity, and good
conduct in affairs. If in a Female the Gristle of the Nose seem to part from
the Bone, or be cleft at the end, she has undoubtedly lost her Virginity.

A great Mouth, standing unseemly wide, denotes the person very loquacitous,
bold, courageous, yet inconstant and a reporter o^ false stories. A little
Mouth, well proportioned, denotes the party peaceable, cautious eloquent,
desirous of Learning, and one of small stomach. Thick Lips denotes the party
foolish, easy of belief, and one given to excess. Thin Lips denotes eloquence,
much talk, and a good understanding. Lips well proportioned, and well colored,
denotes the party faithful, given to virtue, and eschewing vice. Lips
disproportioned, as one thicker than another, denote the party of little
understanding, slow to comprehend, and much inclinable to folly.

If the Ears be big and broad, they denote weakness of memory, sloathfulness,
and little success in Affairs; and little Ears well proportioned the contrary.
Long Ears denote boldness, arrog^^ce, folly, contention, gluttony, and many
disorders. The Ears that are in a Se^^circular form, and in a figure of an
ordinary bigness, and the Crests and Lines covered in the middle, indifferent
flat toward the Center, descently standing on the Head, they denote the wearer
wise, constant, courageous, and friendly.

A Fleshy Face denotes a cheerful person, merry and discreet, faithful and
just, yet luxurious. and importunate. A lean Face signifies, the party wise, of
good understanding, but implacable, and irreconciled ^f provoked. A broad and
thick Face denotes the party rustical and boisterous. And thus much of
Phisiognomy.

CHAP. XXI.
Metoposcopy, or the Lines in the Face, and their Significations, relating to
good or bad Fortune in Man or Woman.



THree strait lines, commonly called wrinkles in the Forehead, without any
sec^ions or divisions, denote the party fortunate and prosperous in his
undertakings.

A circle in a line that passes crooked through the Forehead, with a circle on
an^ part of it, signifies loss and disgrace.

A cross directly in the middle of the Fon^ head, with scattering lines about
it, threate^^ the party with some violent death.

A crooked line between two strait lines signifies the party to be fortunate,
and on^ that shall gain much treasure.

A crooked line, with a strait line about it signifies the party to gain much
riches, with fraud and overreaching.

Four half lines, or lines that meet not i^ the middle of the Forehead, with a
full line over them crossed by two sections, denotes loss and affliction.

Diverse lines scattered and unequal in proportion, threatens the party with
hurts bruises, and many casualries indangering life.

Two lines crossing the Forehead, waving in and out in the form of the sign
Aquarin^^ threatens the party with drowning, shipwreck, or other perils by
water.

One line beginning at the left Eye-brow and obliquely passing to the
extremity of the Forehead on the right side, signifies a base and sordid
temper, one given to covetousness, yet not capable of obtaining riches.

Two lines bending Arch-wise over the Eyebrows, the one of them being crossed
with a cross, over that with three short lines in a length, on the extremity of
the Forehead, denotes the party to be of a good ingenuity, undaunted courage,
graceful, eloquent and wise, provident and politic, doing all things with
forethought, indefatigable in his endeavors, and slow to anger.

A short straight line over each Eye-brow, three short crooked lines over that,
that and two lines like a brace covering them, denotes a wrestless mind,
covering and craving after many things unattainable, industrious and laborious,
but unfortunate. These and such like, may suffice for the lines of the
Forehead, which amongst the Ancients were wonderfully noted; wherefore leaving
them, I shall proceed to prognosticate good or evil fortune from the Moles on
the Face, Neck, or any part of the Body of man or woman according to their
position.

CHAP. XXII.
A Treatise of Moles, and their signis^ cations, etc.



MOles are held by the Learned, to be ce^tain Marks imprinted as it were b^^
Providence, Characters whereby mankind (...) enabled to read himself, and know
in ma^^ cases what shall befall him; a brief acco^^^ of which, and their
significations, take a^^ follows.

A man or woman having a mole on the le^^ side the Forehead, under the line of
Satur^ Breast, answerable in color and proport^ on, denoting good success in
affairs, and riches by Building, Tilling, Planting, etc.

A man or woman having a mole on the right side the Forehead, under the line of
Jupiter, not touching that of the line of Mars he or she has another in
equality, promising to men good fortune in marriage, long life, and success in
their undertakings; to a woman it signifies a happy contentment of life, many
children, and a healthful constitution.

A mole on the right side the Forehead, beneath the line of Mars, denotes the
like on the right Arm, promising the party riches, good fortune, and many
prosperous days.

A mole on the right side the Forehead, under the line of the Sun, signifies
another on the Back, fore-shewing the parties sudden rising and promotion, the
favor he shall receive from great Persons.

A mole on the right part of the Forehead, under the line of Venus, has another
answerable on the right side or the Belly, which promises to man a kind and
loving wife, through whose means he shall grow rich, and be in great esteem;
and the like to a woman, in case such marks shall be found.

A mole on the right side the Forehead, under the line of Mercury, signifies
another on the righ Breast, declaring the party to be of a prompt wit,
industrious, and one that will attain to riches and preferment, by his labor
and diligence.

A mole appearing on the right side of the Forehead, under the line of the
Moon, not cutting nor hindering it, shows another on the right side of the
Belly prognosticating the party to be prosperous and fortunate in marine
affairs, if on a man; but on a woman it denotes she will be much sought to for
love, and in the end be advanced by a happy match.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, beneath the line of Saturn, is a sure
token of another on the left side the Back, denoting to man imprisonment and
crosses; to women difficult labors, melancholy thoughts, jealousies, and the
like anxieties.

A mole appearing on the left side the Forehead, under the line of Mars,
promises another on the left Arm, betokening in man rashness and fury, which
shall occasion him much trouble and vexation, and to women it signifies
mischief and contention.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, under the sign of Jupiter, denoting
another on the left side the Stomach, declares the party to be riotous and
wasteful, prodigal of his fortunes, and one whose extravagance will bring him
to beggary; in a woman it denotes boldness, impudence, and much lavishness.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, under the Sun's line, signifies another
on the left side the Breast, threatening hard fortune to a man, by falling under
the displeasure of great ones; and to a woman it promises poverty and
discontent.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, under the line of Venus, intimates
another on the left Sholder, signifying labor, crosses, and captivity.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, under the line of Mercury, promises the
like on the left side, denoting the party quarrelsome, subject to brawls and
contention, by which much strife arises; if so it happen in a woman, it
declares her lustful and insatiate.

A mole on the left side the Forehead, cutting the line of the Moon, signifies
another on the left side the Belly, near the Navel; threatening men and women
with sickness and adversity.

A mole in the middle of the Forehead, under the line of Venus, denotes another
between the Breasts, which denotes the Party subject to sickness and many other
insirmities, by which the party, either man or woman, shall be much afflicted.

A mole appearing on the middle of the Forehead, under the line of Mercury,
signifies another under the Breast, denoting calamity to the party, with many
afflictions occasioned by such as prosess themselves friends.

A mole in the middle of the Forehead, under the line Luna, signifies another
in the Privy-parts, denoting the party to be vicious, intemperate, and one
given to many extravagancies.

A mole appearing in the middle of the Forehead, by the line of Saturn,
signifies another on the right Thigh near the Hucklebone, denoting the party to
be rich and fortunate, attaining it by the help and assistance of strangers.

A mole appearing in the right end of the line of Jupiter, denotes another on
the right Huckle-bone, which to a man promises unexpected riches, and to a
woman it promises a good dowry and happy marriage.

A mole appearing on the left side the Forehead, at the end of the line of
Mars, denotes another under the Muscle of the right Arm, which denotes a man to
be fortunate in Gaming and War, whereby he shall much profit himself.

A mole on the right side of the Forehead, on the end of the line of the Sun,
denotes another on the right side the Reins, signifying a man to rise by the
favor of great men, and to a woman that she shall be fortunate in all her
undertakings.

A mole on the right side the Forehead, at the end of the line of Venus,
denotes another on the middle of the Breast, signifying good fortune to men,
occasioned by women, as by marriage, and the like; and to women in the same
kind is predicted advancements.

A mole on the end of the line of Mercury, promises another under the right
Breast, toward the right side, denoting a man to be successful in remote
Regions, and greatly to advantage himself by Travel; to a woman it promises a
pregnant wit, good forelight in domestic affairs, and a comfortable residence.

A mole appearing on the upper side the Temple, in either Sex, demonstrates
another on the extremity of the Belly, signifying to a man a steady fortune,
and continuation of riches; to a woman happy marriages, and a peaceable life,
etc.

A man or woman having a mole near the Eye-brow, on the right Temple, it
denotes another on the right Loyn, signifying the party, either man or woman,
to gain much esteem, favor, love, and advantage, and considerable riches, by
Legacies, Dowries, and Reversions.

A mole on the right side behind the Eye, a it were against the middle of the
Eye, sign ifies another on the right side the Buttock or Haunch, declaring much
honor and preferment to befall a man, and to a woman much praise for her
virtue, and a continuation of prosperity.

A mole appearing on the right side the Temple, in the lower part, inclining
somewhat toward the Neck, signifies another on the right Ribs, betokening a
man to be of a natural promptness, industrious, and thereby obtaining riches;
to a woman it promises the goods of Fortune, and a long life, modesty,
chastity, and a comely behavior.

A mole on the right side the Temple, near the Eye, below, denotes another
under the right Thigh, signifying to either Sex riches to be obtained by wisdom
and industry.

A mole on the left side, toward the upper part of the corner of the Eye,
signifies another under the left Loyn or Thigh, denoting to either Sex, perils
in travel, and dangerous diseases, trouble, discontent, and sometimes a violent
death.

A mole on the left side the Temple, near the Eyelid, in a man or woman,
signifies another on the left side the Buttock, betokening a rustic, harsh,
and sordid temper, and that the party shall be much in contempt and hatred of
men.

A mole appearing on the left side the Face, near the corner of the Eye,
denotes another on the left Buttock, signifying much sickness and trouble, many
thwartings and unexpected crosses.

A mole on the left side, near the corner of the Eye, and toward the Hair,
inclining to the Ear, signifies another on the left side the Huckle-bone,
behind, denoting the party, either man or woman, to be of a sullen, morose
temper, viciously inclined, insomuch, that punishment is threatened; and ten to
one a woman having this mark, if she does not defile her Mariage-bed.

A mole on the left Cheek, inclining toward the lower part of the Ear,
signifies another on the left Thigh, denoting to a man sorrow and anguish,
crosses by children, and losses in goods or estate; threatening a woman with
death in childbed.

A mole on the upper part of the right Ear, denotes another on the right side
the Belly, signifying the party to commit such crimes as will cause him to fall
into the hands of Justice, and endanger his life; denoting a woman false and
inconstant.

A mole on the outward lower part, near the middle of the right Ear, signifies
another on the right side, to a man denoting he will fall under the power of
his Enemies, and that they gaining advantage over him, will for some time
oppress him, though in the end it redound to their shame; to a woman it
betokens loss and imbezzelment.

A mole on the lower part or tip of the ear, signifies another under the right
side, predicting a man or woman subject to hurts and bruises, by falls or
blows, with many other casualries indangering life.

A mole happening on the outside the upper part of the left Ear of a man or
woman, signifies another on the left side the Belly, threatening the former with
great misfortune, and to the latter infamy and disgrace, though undeserved.

A mole appearing upon the middle of the left Ear, the like is to be found on
the lower part of the left side, denoting a man to be of an evil nature, cruel
and inhumane; and to a woman it portends a short life.

A mole on the lower part of the left Far signifies the like on the lower part
of the left side, denoting a man to fall into great trouble through occasion of
women, as by quarrelling and fighting on their behalf, betokening a woman to be
of a mischievous disposition, threatening her with the commission of some
Murder, either by Poison or otherwise.

A mole on the lower part of the Eyelid between the hollow of the Eye and the
beginning of the Nose, in either Sex, signifies another on the right side the
Privy part, denoting a man to be much beloved by women, fortunate in marriages;
and a woman to be ingenious, chaste and faithful.

A mole under the hollow of the right Eye, by the inward part of the Nose, will
have another on the middle of the Body above the Members, signifying a man to
be hasty, proud and furious; denoting a woman to be self-conceited,
vainglorious, and of a weak understanding, though pretending to much knowledge.

A mole on the upper part of the right side the Nose of either Sex, signifies
another on the Privy-member, threatening the party with weakness and diseases,
occasioned by too much venery, though it denotes him or her to be generally
beloved.

A mole on the left side, in the hollow between the Eye lid and the Nose,
signifies another on the left side the Privy-member, betokening the Person to
be envious and lustful, given to rapes and adulteries, etc.

A mole in the middle part of the hollow of the left Eyelid, denotes another
on the left part of a man's Privities, near the root, which threatens him with
causless infamy and disgrace; a woman having this mark, being on the upper part
of her Privities, denotes her to lose her honor, and be much subject to
obloquy and disgrace, not without cause.

A mole under the left Eye, somewhat near the Nose of a man, signifies another
on the left side the Yard, denoting him to be an obscene Person, potent in
venery, luxurious, and very lascivious; in a woman this mark, the latter being
on the left side the Privities, threwdly suspect her to be unchaste.

A mole between the beginning and middle of the upper right Eyelid, toward
the Temple, denotes another on the right side the Belly, in a man signifying
good fortune, the love of women, many children; and in a woman health, easy
childbirth, peace, and a calmness of life.

A mole appearing in the white of the Eye, signifies another near the left Dug,
denoting to a man pains of the head, and to a woman danger of death in
childbed.

A mole on the Face, near the right Nostril, in a man or woman, signifies
another on the right Shoulder, predicting to man good fortune in all his
undertakings, and to woman riches, love, and chastity.

A mole on the extremity of the Nose, between the Face and the Nose-end, on
the right side, denotes another on the right side the Hip, signifying a man to
be lustful and much given to venery, whereby he shall weaken himself, and
greatly impair his health; it declares a woman to be fortunate, much beloved,
yet somewhat loose and wanton.

A mole appearing on the right Nostril, between the end of the Nose and the
Face, near the middle, describes another on the right side the Privy-member,
which betokens a man to be a deceiver, and an intemperate Person; and to the
same effect is its signification in women.

A mole on the left side the Nostril, just over it, near the end of the Nose,
denotes another on the breast, inclining to the left side, denoting the party
to be vicious, and one-inclining to many debaucheries,

A man or woman having a mole on the left side, on the lower part of the
Nostril, in a manner between the Nostril and the Face, it signifies another at
the bottom of the Belly, signifying the parties will suffer by hapless
marriages.

If a mole happen on the left side, between the top of the Nose and the Face,
about the middle of the Nose, another is signified on the left side the Privy
member, fore-shewing the man or woman to be given to much debauchery, and
desirous of copulation, through which occasion they shall sufter much pain and
trouble.

A mole appearing in a man or woman, under the very fore-point of the Nose,
toward the middle, describes another on the fore part the Privy-member,
denoting the party to suffer much in old Age, by pains and disorders,
occasioned by excess and extravagancies in their youthful days.

A mole appearing on the left side, or in the very hollow of the Nostril,
signifies another on the left side the Genitals, threatening to a man an
untimely or sudden death, an^ to a woman hard labor and crosses.

A mole appearing on the top of the bridge of the Nose, either in Man or woman,
denote another in the extremity of the Privy-parts promising Children and
happiness in Wedlock, though but a short enjoyment.

A mole on the right side, on the corner o^ the Mouth, toward the Jaw, denotes
another on the right side the lower part of the Privy-member, promising good
fortune and many happy days to either Sex.

A mole on the left side the Mouth, near^^ touching it, signifies another on
the left Arm, between the Elbow and the Wrist, fignifies the party averse to
wedlock state, but rathes desirous to lawless copulation, which will endanger
Body and Estate.

A mole on the middle of the upper Lip (...) a man or a woman, signifies
another on th^^ Privy member before, signifying the party to suffer much by
crosses and afflictions, much desirous of preferment, but unable to obtain his
or her wish.

A mole happening on the middle of the Chin, in the hollow between the Lip and
the Mouth, denotes another on the right Foot for the most part, though
sometimes in such a case it happens on the left, according as it more or less
inclines to the right or left, denoting the party to be of a rambling
inclination, much given to love and excess, especially to lawless love, whereby
shame and disgrace will accrue.

A mole appearing in the middle of the Chin, on the forepart, seeming as much
below as above, signifies another on the shinbone, right or left, according as
it inclines, denoting a man to be of a great strength, given to quarrel, and
run himself into danger by presuming thereon; to a woman it denotes labor and
pain, and eminent danger by water.

A mole appearing on the left edge of the Chin, signifies another on the left
Hucklebone, denoting a man difficult to please, light and inconstant, yet
fortunate and successful in his undertakings.

A mole appearing on the right side the edge of the Chin, touching its under
edge, signifies another on the right Hip, denoting a man capable of Learning,
and studious in Arts and Sciences; and to a woman Wisdom, though attended with
care and infelicity.

A mole found naturally on the Gullet ^^ the Throat, signifies another between
the Navel and Privy-members, denoting the party will die a violent death, or
suffer much affliction.

A man or woman having a mole on the right side the Throat or Gullet, it
signifies another on the right side the Thigh, denoting a man to be of a
pregnant wit, one that shall procure much riches to himself, and be in good
esteem with most men.

A mole on the Throat, on the left side the Windpipe, signifies another on the
left side the Hip, denoting the party to suffer much by falls and bruises, if
on a man it happen but if on a woman, it denotes to her danger by water, or
blasting by lightning, etc. A^^ thus much for Sympathy.

A mole on the upper part of the Ball of the left Cheek of man or woman,
signifies danger by wounds, and that the party shall be exposed to much hazard
and hardship.

A mole appearing on the middle of the left Cheek, denotes diseases, uncertain
abiding and shortness of days.

A mole on the lower part of the left Cheek, signifies the same with the former.

A mole on the right Cheek, either in the upper part or middle, denotes good
fortune to man or woman, to be obtained by prudence or industry.

A mole on the lower part of the right Cheek, signifies the party shall
overcome many misfortunes, and in the end live happy.

A man or woman having a mole on the hinder part of the Neck, inclining to the
right side, gives a reasonable happy life, yet accompanied with some danger,
which the party may overcome.

A mole on the upper part of the middle of the Neck of a man or woman,
threatens the former with strangling, and the latter with danger in childbirth.

A mole on the left side the Neck, somewhat near the middle, signifies the same
with the foregoing.

Moles on both sides the Neck of one Person, either man or woman, being
opposire to each other, threatens the party with loss of life.

A mole appearing toward the right Arm, on the lower part of the Neck, denotes
servitude, fruitless love to a man, but to a woman honor and advancement.

A mole on the lower part of the Neck, toward the left Shoulder, lenotes a man
evilly-affected, coveting things not lawful; and a woman inclining to lewdness,
regardless of her honor, and one that is not studious of her fame and
reputation.

A mole above a fingers breadth about the Mouth, on the right side the upper
Lip, signifies to a man or woman good fortune, happy marriages, obedient
children, and an increase of love and virtue.

And thus I shall take leave of moles appearing in the Facc, etc. and proceed
to say something of those on the Body, that all parties having them any where,
may be satisfied for likely it is that some People may have none on the
Face-yet they may appear on the Body. As thus,

A mole on the right Arm denotes riches and good fortune to the party; if on
(...) man, to be a Proficient in Arms, and gain Honor in Military Affairs; to
a woman (...) signifies a happy marriage, health and lo^^ substance.

A mole on the left Arm of a man, signifies him rash, malicious, and one apt to
do violence to others, whereby he shall endanger himself to the Law; the like
to a woman, signifies her of an untractable, harsh disposition, much given to
study malice and revenge.

A mole under the right Arm, signifies (...) man prosperous by his ingenuity,
much glven to activity, a gamester or player at Interludes; to a woman it
promises inheritance from Parents, or other Relations, whereby ^he shall be
advanced in the world, and gain (...) good repute and esteem.

A mole on the left Arm, between the El^ow and Wrist, denotes the party to be
^^ossed in his Issue, but that he shall attain ^^ches, etc.

A mole on the right Arm, between the ^lbow and Shoulder, signifies good
fortune ^o the party, that he or she is kind, and of (...) good nature, not
inclinable to wrong or ^^jury and person.

A mole on the Arm-pit signifies sickness, ^iseases, and many disorders of
body, hard^^ips in travel, and the like.

A mole under the left Arm-pit threatens the party with an untimely death,
especially ^^ they be not wary in tampering with them^^ves by extraordinary
course of Physic.

A mole on the right side and upper part of the Breast, denotes the party to
increase in wealth by Tillage and other Rural Employments.

A mole on the Breast, or near the Region of the Liver, on the right side,
declares good fortune in marriages, happy undertakings, and great possessions.

A mole on the Back, inclining to the right side, denotes riches and honor to
accrue by the favor of great men.

A mole on the upper part the right side the Belly, denotes to a man good
fortune in marriage, riches and preferments ensuing by means of his Wives
Relations, and to a woman a love and regard from her Husband and a comfortable
continuance in this life.

A mole appearing on the right side the Belly, near the middle part, denotes a
man to be fortunate in Merchandise, Traffic, a^^ bartering of Wares, as also a
happy manage; to a woman in denotes her chiefe^^ Blessing on Earth will consist
in her happy Nuptials.

A mole on the upper part the left side the Back, signifies to a man long
Journey, losses crosses, and imprisonments, upon light and frivolous occasions;
to a woman it signifies that she shall travel into distant Lands.

A mole on the left side the Breast threate^ bad fortune to a man, occasioned
by fallin^ into the dislike of his Superiors; and to^ woman poverty, by neglect
and disregard (...) her affairs.

A mole on the midst of the Breast, signifies a man to be of a phlegmatic
constitution an uneven temper, incapable of business ^^ quiring great ingenuity.

A mole on the left side the Belly denot^^ indifferent good fortune to man or
woman, though signifying the latter to be weak in capacity, and not
over-studious in affairs to her advantage.

A mole in the midst of the Belly, declares ^ man to have a good utterance, and
eloquent in speech, fit to manage affairs, wherein the ^se of the Tongue is
mostly required; but (...) a woman it is not good.

A mole near the middle of the Breast, toward the lower part, threatens a man
with indisposition of Body, and many other grievances, crosses and afflictions;
and to a woman weakness in childbearing, and many other natural infirmities.

A mole under the Breast threatens the par^y with calamity, vexation and
trouble, yet ^entoes him industrious, and promises he shall overcome his
afflictions.

A mole on the midst of the Breast inclining to the right side, promises the
man good ^^rtune to accrue to him by means of his ^iends and relations, or by
advantageous wedlock, and the same to a woman.

A mole under the right Breast on the right side, denotes a man to be fortunate
in distant Lands, advanced thereto by his own ingenuity, which shall be taking
with great Persons; and to a woman it promises a pregnant wit, and such conduct
in her affairs, as shall render her much loved and esteemed.

A mole on the left side the Back, signifies to a man poverty and crosses
through his own neglect and unadvisedness; and to a wom^^ the like.

A mole on the lower part of the left Bre^^^ denotes a man shall be reduced to
poverty, (...) his extravagancy in drinking and gluttony (...) and renders a
woman vain and conceited, (...) ver loquacitous to no purpose.

A mole on the left side the Back decla^^ a man to be contentious, given to
qua^^^ and brangling, inclinable to Martial Ente^ prizes and Feats of Arms;
denoting a (...) man to be regardless of her Fame, bold a^^ resolute in
attempting things above h^^ sphere.

A mole on the lest side the Belly signifies to a man strife and affliction by
sickness and to woman bad success in marriage.

A mole under the left Breast on the R^^^ denotes a man of a sordid temper,
full (...) malice and hatred; and to a woman it d^^ notes she shall be
calumniated, but find those that shall vindicate her, and take off the^^
spersion.

A mole on the left side the Belly, betwe^^ the Navel and the Side, it denotes
to a m^^ slight, and ahsconding through trouble, occasioned by some great
misdemeanour; and (...) a woman crosses and afflictions by reason (...) a bad
Husband.

A mole on the upper part of the left side the Buttocks, signifies the party is
subject to cold infirmities, contracted by extravagancies and debaucheries; and
to a woman denotes lasciviousness.

A mole on the left Buttock threatens a nan with sickness and poverty; and a
woman with dishonor and disgrace.

A mole on the Shin-bone right or left, denotes a man to be rash, sturdy, hold,
and one much given to quarrel by presuming upon his strength, whereby he shall
fall into ^^ibulation; and the like signifies it to a woman.

A mole near the right Dug, denotes a man to be exceeding amorous of the Female
Sex, proceeding therein so far that he shall impoverish and disgrace himself;
to a woman it signifies ill fortune, extravagant enterprises, and a great
desire of copulation.

A mole on or near the left Dug in a man, fignifies he shall endanger himself
by rash actions, and may happen to die an untimely death; and much to the same
purpose is its signification in a woman.

A mole on the Foot, either right or left, denotes to the party an unhappy
offspring, yet he shall obtain riches, though not without vexation and trouble.

One observation of the Feet which seldom falls, is worthy here to be noted,
viz. If on either Foot the Toe next the great Toe, extend it self beyond the
great Toe, or be longer than it, let him or her whom it belongs know that
riches one time or other will fall to his or her lot, if not by inheritance,
ye^ unpectedly.

A mole on the Groin, inclining to the right side the Loyn, signifies
prosperity and good fortune to man or woman by marriage, o^ otherwise.

A mole on the Groin on the left side, denotes the party to be laseivious, much
given to debauchery, and diverse other vices.

A mole appearing upon the right or left Knee, denotes a person desirous of
travel, and by visiting strange Countries, advantage himself both in learning
and fortune.

A mole on the right Loyn, promises a man the goods of Fortune, and that he
shall continue happy and prosperous; to a woman (...) signifies the like, and
that she is chaste an^ virtuous.

A mole under a man's right Loyn denote^ him thrifty and industrious, that he
sha^^ attain to some dignity; and to a woman (...) likewise signifies good
fortune.

A mole on the Calf of a man's Leg denote^ him exceeding lustful, and desirous
of other men's Wives, indangering himself thereby and to a woman it betokens
loss of honor not undeservedly.

A mole on the Calf of the right Leg, denotes a man to be provident and
industrious, whereby he shall not only procure to himself wealth, but a good
name; to a woman it denotes advancement in happy marriage, which shall fall to
her share under the age of twenty, if not hindered by the obstinacy of her
curious Parents.

A mole in the midst of the body, denotes a man to be choleric, rough, and
untractable, one that for his disquietude procures himself hatred and contempt;
to a woman it denotes a conceit of her own perfections, a levity of mind, yet
that she shall be fortunate.

A mole on the middle of the Privy-member, often denotes great infirmity, a
continu^ion of troubles to a man; but to a woman it denotes, that although she
be of a weak constitution, yet shall she be much beloved.

A mole on the left side the Privy-member, near the extremity or end, signifies
a man unfortunate in love, and the like; at the bottom of the Privy-member of a
woman, betokens loss of good name, etc.

A mole on the right side, somewhat above ^he lower part of the member,
concludes a man fortunate, especially in Marriage; and a woman in her Friends
and Relations.

A mole on the left side the Belly, near the Navel, denotes diverse infirmities
to man, attended with outward crosses, and perhap^ shortness of life;
threatening a woman with danger in childbirth, and diseases of the wom^^

On the right side, near the Navel in the upper part a mole happening, denotes
good fortune to a man, occasioned by women; and to a woman the like, through
the occasion of a man.

A man or woman having a mole on the hinder part the Neck, inclining to the
right side, it promises a reasonable felicity, ye^ threatens him or her with
danger of drowning, or the like casualty.

A mole on the lower part the Neck, ne^^ the Shoulder on the right side,
denotes a m^^ to be an extraordinary lover, but that (...) shall find crosses
and delays therein; but (...) a woman it signifies success.

A mole on the lower part of the Ne^^ near the Shoulder on the left side,
signifies man much trouble and anxiety, as also public punishment; and to a
woman much the same.

A mole appearing in the midst of the Pr^^ vy-member, denotes a man honest and
virt^^ ous, yet subject to reproach undeserved, an^ to a woman an unspotted
honor, though nevertheless subject to the malice and calumny of evil Tongues.

A mole on the right Ribs, denotes a man to be very industrious, a great
admirer of Arts and Sciences, by which he shall at^ain to ^^ches and honor; to
a woman it denotes advancement to be obtained by her virtuous and modest
behavior.

A mole on the left Ribs, declares a man to be rough, of an untractable
disposition, one that is much addicted to quarrels and disor^ers; and a woman
to be proud, vainglorious, unquiet, etc.

A mole on the left side the Stomach, denotes the party to suffer much through
the means of women, by giving way to their al^^rements.

A mole on the lower part the Shoulder-^^ade, denotes a man, if on the right
side, sta^e, firm in his resolves, and of a healthful constitution; to a woman
it signifies a contimed success of fortune.

A mole on the right Thigh, near the Huc^le-bone, denotes the party to grow
rich by ^ural affairs; and a woman to get wealth and esteem by good houswifry.

A mole under the right Thigh, betokens a ^an descended of a noble and generous
stook, ^^e of an admirable wit, whereby he shall attain to riches and
promotion; and much to the same effect does it signify to a woman.

A mole under the left Thigh, threatens the party with perils, sickness, and
very many diseases.

Two moles answering equally on either side the Guller or Neck, threatens the
party with untimely death.

And thus much for moles and their signification, as far as Art and Experience
has gathered, in relation on either Sex, though in these and the like cases,
notwithstanding second causes, we must altogether submit to overruling
Providence, by which the ways and actions of men are guided and disposed, as
the all-wise Creator bids; when leaving these, I shall proceed to other
Observations greatly to be noted in the affairs of men, namely Dreams, and
their Signification o^ Interpretation, as they relate to good or bad fortune in
man or woman.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Dreams, and their Description.

AS for Dreams, they are usually divided nito a fourfold order, which vary both
in their manner and signification, and these are noted according to the four
Humors of the Body, participating of the qualities of Fire, Earth, Air and
Water, as Choler, Melancholy, Sanguine and Phlegmatic, of which difference the
Learned Mr. May gives this Poetical Account.

Fair Sanguine Dreams that seem to cheer the night,
With beauteous Shapes, and Rosy Wings as bright
As in the Morning are those Flowers that grace
In The miast of Spring, the pains of Flora's Face;
They round about our nightly slumber sport,
To whom the little Cupids often resort;
The little Cupids from fair Venus's Grove,
Stealing by night, do thither come and love,
With those fair Sanguine Dreams to pass away
The hours of dark in sport and amarous play:
Whilst Dreams of Choler in a flame-like dye,
Through the Air like little fiery Meteors fly,
With swift and angry motions too and fro,
As if with eagerness they sought a Foe:
Sometimes mounting to the Roof on high,
They soar as if they meant to scale the Sky,
Or some impossible achievement sought,
TO allay the Thirst of an aspiring Thought.
But down below with sad and heavy cheer,
On dead men's Tombs, and every Sepulcher,
The dusky Dreams of melancholy light,
With sable Wings like Bats or Birds of night,
Fluttering in darkest corners here and there,
But all alone and still each other fear;
Courting dead Sculs, and seeking to invite
The dismal Ghosts for company by night.
Whilst all along upon the whited wall
Ph'egmatick lazy Dreams no Wings at all.
But slow like slimy snails about do crawl,
And evermore are thence afraid to fall,
And fo be drowned, for on the floor below,
They still suppose deep springs of water flow.
And thus much for the general description, from which submitting the events to
the Almighty, I shall proceed to particulars.

CHAP. XXIV.
Exemplary Dreams and their Interpretations which have exactly come to pass,
taken out of History and other remarkable Stories.

SUetonius affirms, that Nero's Mother being with child, dreamt that she
brought forth a Dragon, which rising up against her, drew out her Bowels, at
which being affright, she in the morning consulted the Oneiromantist, who told
her she should bring forth a Son that should cause her to be ripped up, which
accordingly fell out, Suet. in Nero, etc. Moses in Genesis gives us an account
of Joseph's dream of the Sheaves, Sun, Moon and Stars, with other dreams that
came exactly to pass according to their Interpretations.

Arnoldus Villa Nova relates, that he dreaming that he was assaulted by four
Wolves who came to devour him, and he killing the greatest, soon after overcame
four of his most Capital Enemies in a suit of Law.

Adrian the Roman Emperor the day before he was proclaimed at Antioch, dreamed
that a flame from heaven fell upon his head, and spread into Rays, doing him no
harm, which was Interpreted that he should be Emperor, when the next day,
contrary to his expectation, as some affirm, he was saluted.

A certain man dreaming he was Fishing in a River, and caught with his Net
abundance of great Fish; and it was Interpreted, that by his industry he should
attain great ^iches, which accordingly fell out.

A person one night dreaming he drew forth his own blood, and going into a far
Country gave it to a stranger; which being Interpreted he should go into a
strange Land, and dying there, leave his riches to one that was no relation to
him, it so fell out.

A certain man dreamt that he beheld his Son taken by his Playfellows into a
Hall, and there by them Crowned with Laurel and Clad in a rich Garment; which
being Interpreted, that for his virtuous actions, and hero^^ck achievements,
he should be Crowned King. It so fell out.

Calphurnia, Wife to Julius Caesar, the night qbefore he was murdered in the
Senat-house, dreamt that the Roofs of the House fell, that her Lord was thrust
into the Belly, and that the Chamber Door of it self flew open. And whilst she
was relating of this dream, a Bird with a branch of Laurel came from Pompey's
Court pursued by diverse other Birds, who killed it, and tore it in pieces,
which foreshewed his death.

Caesar that night before his death, dreamed that he flew above the Clouds, and
there shook hands with Jove; which was Interpreted that the soul should by
death be set free from the body.

A man dreaming he beheld one cutting off his own Arm; it was Interpreted he
should fall by the hands of his Relations: which accordingly happened, for he
was killed by his own Brother.

And thus much for the more immediate exemplary-dreams, and their
interpretation.

CHAP. XXV.
Dreams, and their Observations or Interpretations, according to the good or
bad accidents that frequently befall Mankind.

IF a person dream he is bitten by a Serpent, it signifies he will sustain some
great hurt by a private Enemy.

If a person dreams he is washing his hands, it signifies the performance of
some great matter, but if the dirt will not come off, he shall not effect it,
or at least find much difficulty therein.

To dream one flies in the air, signifies a sudden journey or hasty news.

To dream one fights and remains victor, denotes the overcoming or avoiding a
danger.

To dream you meet a Lion who fawns upon you, denotes the favor of some noble
Person.

To dream of a black Coffin and Mourners, denotes the death of some Friend or
familiar Acquaintance.

To dream you see a Friend lie dead, denotes that he or she is at ease and in
good health.

To dream one is in a Field of standing Corn, betokens prosperity and content.

To dream ones Shoes fall from off ones Feet, or are old and torn, denetes
poverty and distress.

To dream of small pieces of money, and that you are gathering them off the
ground, denotes want and hard labor; but to dream a good sum is put into your
hand, denotes either you shall receive unexpectedly some sum of money, or that
you shall be relieved by a Friend.

To dream a Horse runs away with (...) denotes unexpected business against your
liking to call you to some distant place.

A woman dreaming that a woman salutes her, she shall be crossed in love. If
she dream she have a crying child in her Arms, it denotes much affliction
through the loss of Parents or Relations.

To dream one is Sailing on the Sea in a calm, denotes a peaceable life, and a
happy end of business, but if in a storm the contrary.

To dream of flashes of Fire, denotes sudden anger, whereby much hurt will
ensue.

To dream a House or any heavy Load falls upon one, denotes the party shall be
oppressed by some Superior hand, to his or her ruin; but if the overwhelming
weight seem to be removed, or that he get from under it, he shall in time
recover his former station.

If a person seem to be upon a high Hill, from whence he may take a pleasant
prospect, and be compelled to descend into a Valley, he shall fall from
promotion, and continue in a mean estate.

To dream one climbs a Hill, and attains the top of it, denotes the party shall
attain his desires, but if he return e^re he reach the top of the Hill, or
tumble down, he shall not attain his end.

To see in a dream a dead F^^nd, and seem to talk with him, denotes prosperity.

To dream one hears the sound of Bells denotes sickness.

To dream one is amongst Tombs and Bones of dead men, denotes riches to fall to
the party by the death of some Friend.

To dream one weeps, denotes the party to be restored to the favor from whence
he is fallen.

To dream a Gold-ring breaks and falls from off ones Finger, denotes the loss
of a Lover or dear Relation.

To dream of a Sow, denotes fruitfulness, and the like of any Creature that
produces many young ones.

To dream of the hunting of a Hare and that she escapes, betokens loss of
something ^he party earnestly desires.

To dream of a sudden and surprising fit of by at the sight of any thing,
betokens the ^^rival of Friends, or the celebration of Marriage.

To dream you have Gold and Silver in ^our hands, and know not how you came by
(...), betokens the finding of some precious ^ing.

To dream of courting beautiful women, ^etokens crosses and vexation.

To dream you put on gay clothing, de^^tes preferment.

To dream one is about to be killed, yet that it is prevented, signifies some
great deliverance from danger.

To dream of fearful Monsters that pursue you, denotes the assault of dangerous
and open Enemies.

If you dream you endeavor to fly and cannot, it betokens imprisonment or
restraint.

To dream you are in a Fight, betokens strife and contention.

To dream of a great Fire, betokens anger or sickness.

To dream you hear intelligible voices, denotes a continuance in your native
Land, and unintelligible voices the contrary.

To dream you are in a green shady place, adorned with flowers, and hear the
melody of Birds, denotes ease, plenty, and content.

To dream you are let blood, denotes loss of riches.

To dream you contend with a Wolf, denotes a furious but sordid adversary.

To dream one is gathering Posies, denotes sndden Nuptials.

For a barren woman to dream she prostitutes her self with one of her sex,
denotes that that barrenness will be in time removed, and she enjoy a Child;
but to a Childbearing woman it denotes much pains in travail, and bringing up
her Children.

To dream one wears a Garland, denotes the party shall be in great repute, and
acquire such esteem as shall be of long continuance.

To dream of lighted Tapors, denotes the party happy in his Friends, whose
sincerity is approved.

To dream of Serpents in the Water, denotes Enemies without power to hurt you.

To dream you embrace without power to speak, denotes the party shall fall in
love, but not possess the party loved.

To dream you hear sighs and groans, denotes trouble and anguish.

To dream of falling into the Water, betokens affliction, occasioned by some
phlegmatic disease.

A Virgin dreaming she is putting on new Garments, denotes an alteration of her
condirion by way of marriage.

For two Lovers to dream they fall out and quari^^^, ^enotes constancy in
affection.

To dream ones Teeth drop out, denotes loss, etc. and to dream of losing an
Eye, threatens a dear Relation with death.

To dream of swimming in Water, denotes much labor in business, especially if
it be up a River, or in troubled Waters.

To dream that one hides himself, denotes slight and obscurity.

To dream of Banquets, denotes poverty and penury, if they imagine they see
them only, and taste them not; but if they suppose they taste them, the
contrary.

To dream you see any person murdered, denotes poverty and sadness.

If you imagine in your dream that you fall into the hands of Thieves and
Robbers that dispoil you, it denotes much loss and tribulation.

To dream you see flights of Birds, denotes a sudden journey, or that the party
shall wander.

To dream one puts on new Gloves, denotes the party shall be suddenly married,
or hear of the marriage of a Friend.

To dream one receives a Letter, denotes a sudden contract of love and
friendship, or the meeting of friends.

For a woman to dream she is with child, denotes sorrow and heaviness, but to
dream she is delivered, the contrary.

To dream of a great company of People in close debate, denotes some private
design against you, and that strife will arise from near Relations.

To dream you see an old Tree wither and decay, and that notwithstanding young
branches spring at the root of it, betokens Children in old age.

If you dream you see your House on fire, and that you immediately quench it,
it signisies sickness to your self or Relations, but promises a speedy
recovery. This has been wonderfully experienced.

To dream you are in a Shipwreck, denotes loss of Goods or Estate.

To dream you are let Blood by a stranger, denotes a stranger shall obtain by
Law or ^iolence part of your Goods, Estate or Money.

To dream of a Hurricane or mighty Tem^est, denotes much anger and contention,
which will probably end in loss and disgrace.

To hear in a dream Swallows chattering about ones House, denotes much hurt to
^ccrue by flatterers.

To dream you hear a voice and see no body, denotes a delusion by false
pretenses.

If you dream you remove into an old ruin^us House, and are at the same time in
a good settlement, either of House, Service, or Employment, beware how you
leave either, for ^t will undoubtedly prove to your disadvan^age.

To dream of deep pits, and that you fall therein, denotes a danger at hand,
but if ^ou dream you escape them, you shall overcome it.

To dream you are walking in a Garden, of Flowers, denotes much pleasure and
delight.

To dream you are in a place amongst many delicious fruits, and that you pluck
them, denotes riches and prosperity.

To dream of Waters falling from a steep Hill, and overflowing the Neighboring
Plain or Fields, denotes sudden riches evilly gotten.

To see you see a small Spring become a large Lake, or produce a great River,
denotes an increase of fortune and much wealth.

To dream you fight and overcome, promifes fuccess in Lawsuits, or the like
contests.

To dream you are pursued by a furious Bull, and that in vain you endeavor to
avoid him, denotes you soon after to lie at the mercy of an implacable Enemy.

To dream of Swans in a River, denotes great advantage by Navigation, or Wat^^
Commerce.

To dream you see many Moons contending in the Firmament, denotes a division
amongst Friends and Relations.

To dream of Thunder and Lightning in a dark and troubled Sky, denotes the
party to fall under some extraordinary displeasure, whereby he shall suffer
many afflictions.

To imagine in a dream that you hide your self amongst Flags or Osiers, by the
brink o^ so^e great Water, signifies flight.

To dream of Ghosts or Spectrums, and that they represent parties dead that you
have formerly known, denotes happy news from foreign parts.

To dream you fight with Serpents and Toads, and that you overcome them,
denotes Victory over Enemies.

To dream one sees white hair, it denotes Friends, if red envious Persons, and
black denotes Enemies.

To imagine in a dream you are at Church it your devotion, denotes joy and
comfort.

To dream your Beard is shaven, is to alter ^our condition, as to place,
office, or business, is to man; but if a woman dream she has a Beard, and it is
shaven, marriage is promised her, or increase of riches.

For a man to dream he kisses a woman or ^irgin with pleasure, denotes
discontent, ^islike, or anger.

To dream ones Teeth are drawn, denotes sickness or loss.

For a party to dream of drinking unmea^^rable when exceeding dry, it denotes a
hot ^isease, or some great disorder in the Body, ^ccasioned by heat to ensue.

If a party imagine in a dream an exceeding high flight, especially over the
Water, ^eeming beautiful and gay, it denotes promo^ion and honor, but if low,
and he conceit himself deformed, it denotes disgrace and contempt.

To dream one has much Vermin about one, and to be much troubled in killing
them, signifies riches.

To dream one has a great Beard, and ugly, and that some Boys plucks it off,
signifies anger, carefulness and danger.

To dream one is stark naked in a Church is a very bad dream.

To dream one hears Serpents hiss but not to see nor feel them, signifies your
Enemies have not power to hurt you.

To dream one sees the Sun and Moon greater and brighter than ordinary, denotes
increase of riches and honors; but to see them dim or obscure, decay of
prosperity.

To dream you are at a Feast and eat Roast-meat greedily, denotes sickness.

If you dream you draw a Bell-rope and the Bell will not sound, it signifies
health, but if it sound, the contrary; if you go about to Ring, and a Spirit
hinder you, it denotes a frustration and loss in your undertakings.

To dream you see Crows and other Birds of prey flying in dark and cloudy
weather, betokens anger, loss, and misery.

To dream one puts a Ring on the finger of a Maid, betokens sudden Marriage;
and for a Maid to dream a Man ties her Garter, is the like.

To dream you behold some fearful Precipice, and are urged to clim it,
threatens the party with punishment by the hand of Justice.

To dream you have Provision set before you, and that one snatches it from you
before you can eat, denotes circumvention and loss.

To dream of Ribbons and gay Plumes of Feathers, denotes amendment of Fortune.

To dream one hears Crows make a noise, and see Monkies, denotes sadness and
diforder of mind.

To dream one hears the barking of Dogs who pursue him, is to be in danger of
an enemy, but to pursue them is to overcome the danger.

To dream one finds great difficulty in pas^ing a Bridge or River denotes the
party shall ^ave much delay in his undertakings.

For one to dream he has great veneration ^or beautiful women, yet keep at a
distance, ^^enotes the party to be virtuous, chaste, and that thereby hshall
gain the love and esteem of the Female Sex.

He that dreams of Dung or Ordure, may expect to be invited to some great Feast
soon after.

To dream one discourses with Spirits, signifies the discovery of secret things.

To dream one sees Knives or Swords, de^otes quarrel and contention.

To see in a dream Lean Oxen, signifies misfortune and loss, but to see
Fat-Oxen, riches and prosperity.

To dream one kisses ones Father, or some near Relation, signifies an entire
friendship,

To dream one is in company with ones Mother or Sister, betokens ill news and
sadness.

To dream one sees men or women about to be Executed, signifies he or she
suddenly to be importuned by some Friend in great distress.

To dream one sees a Mule, or any Beast of Carriage laden with Books, and that
some scoff and deride him, signifies that the party shall find some let in his
pious intentions.

To dream an old woman is Courting you, denotes riches by marriage, yet not
without discontent.

To dream one is in a spacious Chamber richly garnished, and there to behold
the King, or some Noble Person, denotes honor and advancement.

To dream one sees a Serpent of a large size creeping out of the Earth,
threatening with his sting, and yet not have the power to hurt you, signifies
you shall escape the snare laid for you, by the malice of some woman you have
offended.

And now I shall close this Discourse of Dreams, with an enlargement upon
exemplary dreams, and their events.

Darius before he fought the mortal Battle with Alexander the Great, dreamed
that he beheld a burning Army marching through Asia, and Alexander in a Persian
Robe at Babylon entering the Temple and immediately vanished; laying hold of
which his Flatterers persuaded him it presaged the destruction of the
Macedonians, and that Alexander being Clad in a Persian Robe, signified his
subjection; but it proved otherwise, for by the flames was denoted the swift
and victorious progress of the Grecians, and the Persian Habit denoted to
Alexander, the Persian Empire should become subject, but his sudden vanishing
signified he should not long possess it.

Cambyses dreamed that he sat in his Brother Smirdis Royal-Seat, and that his
Crown touched the Sky; it was interpreted that he should shortly die, and his
Soul being free from the incumberance of his Body, should mount aloft.

Xerxes upon his entering Greece with a numerous Army, dreamt that he was
Crowned with Olive Branches which shadowed all the Earth, it was intepreted
that he should be overcome by the Greeks, and end his days in sorrow.

A Runner in the Olimpick Games dreamed he was carried in a Chariot with four
Horses, and imparting it to Antiphon, a wise man of that Age, he told him that
he must expect to lose the Race, seeing four run before him, the Horses by
their strength, signifying the celerity and ability of those that run before
him.

A certain Person dreaming he saw an Egg hang by a string at his Bedside, told
it to an Interpreter, who bid him search the ground directly under that place,
and he would find great riches, which he accordingly did, and found as he had
been told.

Ptolomy, Alexander the Great's Favorite, being wounded with a poisonous Arrow
in a Battle against an Indian King, Alexander one night dreamt, that the Dragon
that his Mother Olimpia kept, brought him a Root in his Mouth, and having
delivered it, lead him to the place where many of those Roots grew, and
informed him, that by their virtue Ptolomy's wound should be cured; which made
such an impression in his mind waking, that he caused the place he dream they
grew in to be searched, and finding the Roots, experiment was made, and it not
only cured Ptolomy's wound, but diverse others made by the like invenomed
Weapons.

The Lord Stanly, in the time that Richard the Third was Pretector, dreamt that
a Boar set upon him and the Lord Hastings, and so gored them with his Tusk,
that the blood ran about their ears, whereupon considering that the said
Richard had a white Boar for his Cognizance, he conjectured that the mischief
might proceed from him, and was so far possessed therewith, that he sent a
Servant immediately (it being then about midnight) to acquaint the Lord
Hastings with his Dream, and the fears he had of the Event; as likewise
further, to desire him to withdraw himself e're Morning; which Message being
delivered, the Lord Hastings thus replied, Good Lord, does your Master lean so
much upon Trifles, to put such Faith in Dreams, which either his own fear
fancieth, or else do rise in the night by reason of the days thoughts; go back
therefore and recommend me to thy Master, and pray him to be merry, and have no
fear, for I assure him, I am as sure of the man he thinks of as of my own
hand. Notwithstanding the next day he lost his Head by the commandment of the
Protector, and the Lord was dangerously wounded, by one amongst diverse armed
men that came into the Council Chamger to slay him.

Dr. Moor in his Treatise of the Immortality of the Soul, tells us a very
strange passage, (...) that two Gentlemen (...) Magara, one of them took up
(...) Lodging (...) a Friend's house, but there being no more room, the other
who had a considerable sum of money about him, he went to an Inn, when about
Midnight the former being asleep, dreamt that he saw his Friend stand by his
Bedside beseeching him to come to his assistance, for he was set upon by his
Host, and in danger to be slain. At which starting, he leaps from his Bed and
made toward the Chamber Door to have gone to the Inn, but finding it locked,
and considering it was but a dream, he went to Bed again; when sometime after
falling asleep, he dreamt he saw his Friend a second time all bloody, who
earnestly requested him, that seeing he had neglected to come and rescue him
whilst alive, yet that he would not be wanting to revenge-his death, saying he
was murdered by his Host, who was carrying him out of the City in a Cart,
covered with dung. Which made such an impression in his mind waking, that he
immediately put on his Clothes, the day by this time dawning, and running
toward the City-gate, found a Cartladen with dung accordingly, which he
causing to be searched, the dead Body of his Friend was found therein, and the
Host confessing the fact was deservedly executed.

The Night (...) King Henry the second was (...) Eye by Montgomery in a Just,
of which wound he died; Queen Margaret his Wife dreamt she saw his Eye so put
out, and warned him of it, but neither her warning, nor Montgomery's using many
endeavors to avoid the Combat, could avert his destiny.

Morison in his Book of Travels, relates, that whilst he was at Prague, he
being asleep in a Sun-shining morning, fancied he saw an Image pass by him,
which told him his Father was dead; whereat being somewhat troubled, he awoke,
and wrote down the hour and day, which he put into a Box, and looked not on it
till he came into England, and had strictly inquired the time of his Fathers
death, which as near as could be computed, agreed with his Paper.

And thus much may suffice for dreams, etc. so much observed in former times,
that their Interpretations were looked upon as Prophetic, they imagining that
some Angelical or Divine Power more immediately conversed with the Soul, and
dictated things strange and wonderful, when it was in a manner freed from the
Body, which lay dissolved in drowsy repose. Though all dreams are not to be
considered alike for their verity in significrtion, for some proceed merely
from the action or observation of the day past, others ill digestion, and
ascending vapors, but those more especially that proceed from neither of
these, and make a perfect Impress upon the memory, and whereat you are more
immediately concerned, are chiefly to be noted, especially such as are
confirmed by dreaming the same over and over, as it often happens, the Soul
being therewith more than ordinarily affected, as it happened to Pharaoh, and
diverse others that I might instance, but for brevities sake think convenient to
omit, and pass on to relate something relating to Nativities, the most curious
and nice part of Astrology; and indeed, of that, this or any other Science
whatsoever, the perfection of which few or none have been hitherto able to
attain.

CHAP. XXVI.
A Discourse relating to Nativities and their Calculation, so far as is
warrantable from the Rules of Astrology.

IN this particular many things are to be considered but chiefly the coherence
or incoherence of the Celestial Bodies, agreeing with the frame and temper of
Terrestial Bodies, moving or disposing them according to the greater or lesser
Influence, or Prodomination; for although to the operation of the Planers, we
can attribute no more than the effects of second causes bounded and limited by
the infinite wise Creator, yet are they so placed, that in their working they
have great power over earthly things, which is most of all visible by the Sun
and Moon in general, the one causing by kindly heat the Increase, and glads
with his Beams all Creatures; the other draws up the cold damps and dews,
manages the Ocean in its Ebbs and Flows, causing the Blood of Man and Beast to
do the like. All Creatures appearing more naturally sad at her Wain than in her
Increase; so that if so much be apparent in these, the like, according to what
is assigned them, may be expected from the other five, as that Saturn disposes
to Melancholy, Envy, deep Counsel, deadly Hatred, and the like. Jupiter ^o a
temperate Mildness, Beneficence, Ju^ice, etc. Mars to Wars, Bloodshed,
Wranging, Rashness, etc. Mercury to Deceit, Craft, Overreaching, much
Loquacity, and the like. Venus to Gentleness, Love, Calm^ess of Temper, etc.

Now to be considered in this case there are ^ivers things, and more
immediately the sign under which the Country or place of Birth (...) posited
or subject, the Planet that was Lord of the Ascendant, and the particular ^ime
the constitution of the party, if come to maturity, if not, the Sex is to be
had regard to, and by an exact time taken even to a minute, according as the
Planet disposes, that is the Ascendant, and the Influence of the Sign, it is
posited in the good and bad fortune of the party, must be conjectured and drawn
from inferences; as a party that is born under Saturn happens to be wise, one
of profound Policy, yet not often fortunate, but subject to many casualties,
being of melancholy heavy temper, serious in thoughts, and by counsel able to
stand others in great stead, but not apt to apply them to his own advantage;
and if at any time the exact minute or hour not being brought, yet by
Physiognomy may it be known under what Planet the party was born; for the
Saturnist, or party born under Saturn, being choleric, is pale of countenance,
having his or her eyes deep in the head, little, and inclinable to redness. If
Saturn be in the Radix of the Radix of the Phlegmatic, the party is naturally
inclining to fatness, having dull eyes of a leady color, being slow in action,
of a haughty carriage; still aiming at high things, though seldom succeeding,
notwithstanding many great endeavors are used when Saturn rules in the
Nativity of the Melancholy, the countenance of the party seems to be askue, or
inclinable to wriness and deformity, appearing of diverse colors, the party in
that case is sad, fearful, slovenly, and regardless of himself, unconstant and
unfortunate: Saturn being in the Nativity of the Sanguine, makes there a
Temperament by reason of the Sun's influence, and is distinguished or known by
the sharpness of the Voice, a merry countenance, shining eyes, though somewhat
standing inward, yet in this case few Sanguinists have Saturn their ascendant.

Jupiter Lord of the Ascent in the Nativity of the choleric person, causes a
whiteness of complexion, a reddish or yellowish Hair, a hasty temper, yet soon
pleased. In the phlegmatic person he causes a large growth, a well proportioned
body, fair hair, a high nose, black eyebrows, and greenish colored eyes. As
for the Melancholy he seldom is in their Nativity. The Sanguine he governs
most, causing the party to have a fine white skin, a cheerful countenance, eyes
a dark brown, a high forehead, and four lines apparent therein, disposing the
party to freeness of discourse, liberality, and a good temperature of mind,
endows him or her with wisdom, and large fortune, and renders the party a happy
course of life.

Mars Lord of the Ascendant in the Nativity of the choleric, causes a dusky
redness, a round face, bluish or yellowish eyes, a threatening countenance, a
middle stature, the forepart of the head big, the nostrils standing out, going
lightly, and taking short paces, of a fiery temper, given to quarrels and
disorders. Mars in the Radix of the Phlegmatic, causes a yellowish, or rather
somewhat inclining to a reddish countenance, a middlesized visage, sharp eyes,
a broad forehead, and a big nose, inclining to flatness, much given to
discourse, and inclinable to disorders. Mars ruling in the Nativity of the
Melancholy, causes a threatening countenance, with sundry marks on the face, or
on some other part of the body, the hair chesnut-colour, the eyes large and
yellow, rather inclinable to rashness then wisdom. If Mars be in the Sanguine
Nativity, a thing that rarely happens, it appears by flaxen hair, greenish
eyes, the features well composed, the face round, a bold resolution, large
words, and much desirous of great achievements, and covetous of fame.

Mercury is never seen but in three Nativities, as thus, if he be eminent in
the choleric person, it is known by the great stature, leanness, and
leaden-colour, thinness of the hair, swift moving, eyes deeply set in the head,
narrow hips, and short teeth. When he is Ruler in the Nativity of the
Melancholic, and there being retrograde, it is known by the parties having
some deformity in his or her Physiognomy, as the Nose standing awry, the Mouth
not even, the Eyes asquint and the like; as also by the manners of the Party,
rendering unruly, inconstant, a great talker, and one given to many disorders.
When Mercury is in the Sanguinists Nativity, a good disposition, a prompt wit,
promising great riches to be obtained by subtility.

As for the Sun, that being Alfridary, or Lord of the Nativity of the
Choleric, it is known by a cheerful countenance, a little inclining to
brownness, a comely blush, great eyes, much fleshiness and hair, a large front,
a middle stature, and much eloquent discourse.

The Moon is generally seen in the Phlegmatic Nativities, for which reason such
are called humors, known by extraordinary whiteness and softness of the skin,
intermingled with a little redness, large and thick heads, the eyebrows
joining together, fair eyes, but many times unequal as to the size, and the
party subject to many watery diseases.

Venus is never but in the Phlegmatic Nativities, known by the fairness of the
face, the whiteness of the skin, the crisping of much hair, gentle speech,
black eyes, whereof the balls are somewhat inclining to yellowish, which burn
or shine as it were. A Female born under this Constellation, if she be not
married young, will ignobly part with her honor, especially if she be high
Nosed.

And now these Physiognomies well and duly considered, one may make the
Horoscope without difficulty, taking one or more questions concerning a friend
that we wish well, and would know his present and future fortune or misfortune.

First, By these Linaments, finding what Planet was Lord of the Nativity, then
see if the nature of that Planet operate more or less in the party. If so it
fall out that they are conformable without any difference, then past doubt, is
he or she born in the first House of the Sign of the Zodiac, to which that
Planet relates. As for example, if the party be white, have a long Nose, fair
Hair, and thick Eyebrows, a brown and shining Eye, he or she so having, is
born under Venus, being ad Instar, in the first part of Taurus, which is found
to be the first House of that Planet, and that known in the manner aforesaid,
proceed by way of question, having well considered the month, day, hour and
minute, you will past doubt find this Sign Taurus, whether it be in the House
of Life, which is the First or Tenth, called Helligiack, the House of Dignities
and Honor, Riches and Prosperity, and from the figure you shall thereupon
erect, you may draw the certain significations, as the learned Belat did of a
great man in France, of which he gives us this description.

My procceding (says he) were thus, without desiring to know the day or hour of
his Nativity or his Age, having well considered his Physiognomy, I plainly
perceived he was Phlegmatic, having black Hair, red Eyes, great Eyebrows, and
a Mouth sufficiently rising up, great Teeth, a fat Neck, and corpulent Body; my
question being made the eighteenth day of March, at seven of the Clock in the
Morning, in the Year 1623, I sound that the Ascendant of his Physiognomical
question was Libra in the tenth Degree, which is the last of the first part: My
question was to know how long he should live, what should be his fortunes or
misfortunes, briefly what should happen in his days? I erected the Figure, and
thereupon made certain quadrains and resolutions, the better to have the
signification understood. As thus:

The FIGURE.
The Tenth House, 12 of Cancer. The Eleventh House; 19 of Leo. The
Twelfth-House, 17 of Capricorn. The Ascendant, 10 of Libra. The Second House, 3
of Scorpio. The Third House, 3 of Sagitary.
The opposite Signs and Degrees making the Figure complete thus. The position
of the Planets.

Saturn in the 5 of Capricorn the North-Angle. Jupiter in the 3 of Virgo. Mars
in the 2 of Aries. Sol in the 2 of Sagitary. Venus in the 13 of Capricorn the
North-Angle. Mercury in the 22 of Sagitary. The Moon in the 3 of Gemini, the
Angle of the Ninth House.
So that computing these, he found he would be very prosperous in his affairs,
but be of an unhealthful constitution, that he should live long, be happy in
his relations, that he was born in 1601, on a Tuesday, 2 Min. past 3 in the
Morning, Mars being Radix in his Nativity, which all appeared to be true, and
gave the party infinite satisfaction.

And thus much may suffice as to Nativities, and their Calculation, a thing not
to be pried too far into, seeing we are Gods Creatures, and therefore ought to
submi wholly to his will and disposal.

CHAP. XXVII.
A short Discourse of Corilimancy; and of the Rod by which hidden Treasure is
sound.

THis, though it may seem strange to some, has been proved to the advantage of
diverse. If you seek for a Mine of any Metal, or suspect Treasure to be hid in
any place, you may take a Hazel-rod forked in the manner of, and it being
according to the Rules of Astrology, gathered when the Sun enters. Aries or
Leo, Mercury being combust, strip off the Bark, and fasten to the forked ends a
string with a piece of Metal at the end of it, equally poized, and then stick
it lightly in the ground, the Metal hanging above ground, and notwithstanding
your endeavor to poize it never so equal, it will by degrees bend or incline
toward the place where the Mine or Treasure is, doing so by sympathy, or a
secret instinct, for which no man could ever give an exact reason, no more than
for the Needle touched with a Load stone's turning to it beloved North, and by
this means some Persons have enriched themselves in discovering Mines and
hidden Treasure. But ever observe the Metal on your Wound must be the same with
that you search after, that is of the same sort, whether Gold, Silver, Brass,
Lead, or the like, and this fortune mostly happens to such as have a V or Y in
their hands, a sacred character of which I have before spoken.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A second Observation of Nativities here known, or give wonderful guesses by
the marks or lines of the Hand, Eyes, Forehead, and the like.



CErtain is it, that man, according to the opinion of Ancient Philosophers, and
Learned Men of all Ages, being a little world, that is the Epitome of the great
one, many rare and wonderful things are to be observed, if seriously
considered, but more especially in these particulars, for from the Nativities
of either Sex, many future events derive their power and efficacy, and fall not
out, as some will have it, by chance, but, in a manner, by course, and are
liable, in a great nature, to be foreseen, though hardly to be prevented; for
when man, intending so to do, uses diverse means, and moves with great
circumspection, yet by ways he perhaps dreams not of, many accidents and
contingencies fall out between the Cradle and the Grave, some happy, and some
unhappy; and the best way to prevent any danger threatened by the malignant
influence of the Planet, or other causes, is with humiliation, and low
prostration, to beseech the Supreme Maker, Governor and Disposer of all
things, to avert it, who is only able, and whose sole will is fate, in whose
power all things are, and with the same readiness obey his voice (Mankind
excepted) as at his word they were made; still we see the Sun keeps his course,
distributing to the World light, and suffering darkness to take its turn, the
Moon and Stars move orderly, and know their appointed times and seasons, heat
and cold dispossesses each other by turns. The Clouds give rain, and the Earth
fails not to give her Increase; the Fowls of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea,
and the Beast of the Field serve to the end for which they were ordained, with
many more too tedious to recite, when men for the most refuse to live up to
that more immediate knowledge that they are endowed withal, and improve that to
their Maker's Glory, which in the end will redound to their immortal felicity.
But not to paraphrase too long upon the general, I shall proceed to the
proposed particulars. As thus,

Taking the hand of the party, the day of whose Nativity, and what future
Observations you are desirous to make, it being that Hand on which the lines
are fairest, for in some Hands by labor they are worn out, and well marking
the middle natural line where it ends (the beginning of it being at the root of
the line of Life) take notice whether there be a cross there or not, or that
some other line cut it not, as also to what part of the Hand they bend, for if
so it happen that it bend and end near the Moons mount, it signifies the party
to be born on a Monday, being the tenth of June, if there be two crosses, it
denotes the Birth to be on a Monday, the twentieth of June. If a line in the
like nature end in the plain of Mars, with one cross, denotes a man born on the
tenth of March, two crosses on the twentieth. If so it happen to a woman, or
womankind, she is born on the same days in October. If it end toward Mercury's
mount in the like nature, then Wednesday, for man in May, the woman in August.
If so it end under the mount of Jupiter, Thursday is the day, and November and
February the months assigned. The middle line failing toward the mount of
Venus, denotes Friday, the day in April or September. If the same line fail
toward the mount of Saturn, then is Saturday the day, and the month December
and January. If it fail toward the mount of the Sun, it falls out on a Sunday,
July being assigned for the month. And so according to the crosses and figures,
which frequently happen at the end of that line, according to their
signification may be found any day of the months already assigned. Now the next
thing which remains, is to know the hour, which is generally observed by the
color of the Eyes, if they retain their native color, and are not perished by
bruises, or defective by other accidents, and must be taken thus.

If the Birth be directly about midnight, then will the eyes appear extreme
black. If at one of the clock they will be somewhat shining. At two of the
clock the party being born, the eyes will have somewhat of a dark green in
them, with dusky balls. Those that are born at four will be greenish, but the
green a little lighter, inclining to an Olive-colour. After four or at five the
party being born, the Apples ^f the eyes will incline to a whitish, though
somewhat related to a bluish. The party born at or between six and seven, will
have the apples of his eyes half blue, and the remainder a kind of a wall
color. The party born at or between eight and nine has the circuit of the
center of the apple blue, and the center of a party-colour. At or between ten
and eleven the party born has the eyes all blue, with a few marks. At twelve
they begin to be somewhat greenish, though much shining. At or between one and
two in the afternoon the party being born, has eyes between blue and green. At
or between three or four they are of a pale green. At or between seven or eight
they are colored yellowish, with some small matter of green. At or between
nine and ten they have red spots in them, though being of the same color with
those immediately foregoing. The party born at or between eleven and twelve,
are as for the eleventh hour, somewhat inclinable to redness, but from that
time blacken to the twelfth.

And thus much for the hours of Night and Day, in every one of which throughout
the year, either Male or Female, if not both, are born; and although it cannot
be positively affirmed to be an infallible sign, yet, it is wonderfully to be
observed, seldom failing the party in his Judgment, who makes due inquiry.

As for the year, if we have regard to Chiromancy, in that case it is known
diverse ways, as by the lines of the Wrist, Forehead; as for the Wrist, the
lines signifies thirties of years, but as age increases those lines are
extinct, decreasing by little and little, as if the first line be half extinct,
then shows it, that the party is fifteen years of age, and to be quite extinct
thirty; four lines in the Wrist being generally the most, though some have
five, and by an equal measure in this case, any year may be known, by dividing
a whole line into thirty parts, a half line into fifteen, and so to the
quarter, or almost extinction or end.



As for Age it is likewise seen in the Forehead, and this by the Rule of
Metaposcopy, and on the first year appear but to the seventh year, when upon
the left side extending to or toward the Temple from the Ear, there is a
little line which denotes that age, and if it descend to the Forehead, it
denotes the party to be between ten and twelve years of age; if it so fall out,
that it is apparent in cutting through the Forehead, it signifies the party to
be in the twenty fifth year, and according to its length, the years under
twenty five are to be guessed or imagined, according to the Rule of this Art
and Science. If there appear considerably divided, thirty years are signified,
and from five and twenty to thirty, according to the length of the third. If
there happen a fourth, it signifies by its length, forty, fifty, sixty,
seventy, and eighty years, especially if there happen another half line on the
right side the Forehead, but beyond this, or especially exceeding five; they
are referred to the Alfridaries, and cannot, or at least but with great
uncertainty, in this case be known, but is better understood by wrinkles or
lines in the extremities of the Eyes, reckoning twenty years to every line, and
equally for the rest, though in young people, especially of the Female Sex,
these rarely, unless they laugh or frown much, and then you must take heed lest
you are deceived, by taking those for lines that are none, but rather appear so
by the parties distorting his or her Face.

CHAP. XXIX.
A Discovery of the time of Marriages, or in what year of their Age the party
will be Married, by certain marks and rules appearing in the Hand.

IN this case several things are to be considered, as first, Consider the space
between the root of the little finger, and the end of the Table-line, upon the
mount of Mercury, measuring from the root of the little finger to the middle of
the mount, not on the edge or side, for in that a great mistake often happens,
and in so measuring, account from the root of the finger to the middle of the
mount thirty years, and from thence to the Mensual or Table-line the like
quantity of years, and so begin at the root of the finger according to
proportion, counting half of the first half, which amounts to fifteen, and
proportion it by degrees to seventeen, eighteen, twenty, or more, till you
bring it to thirty, observing what year according to this proportion touches
the first line, and at that number of years, according to the division of the
proportion the party, whether Male or Female, shall alter his or her condition
by Marriage, if more lines appear, measure them by proportion from thirty,
thirty-five, forty, fifty, and all the years between, according to a due
proportion, a second Marriage is to be noted, or a third, if any such thing is
designed, or more, and may thus fully be known by a due proportion and
mensuration, answering to Marriage or Marriages according to the division and
course of time.

To know your fortune or misfortune on this occasion, note that where the lines
are fair, as also the usual Characters, as Parallels, Crosses, Stars, Scales,
Branches and Quadrates, they depend upon Jupiter, a happy Planet, and promises
good success.

The usual Characters that point at misfortune in Marriage, are to have the
lines broken and abrupt like Grates, or Chequered, the Character of Saturn the
resemblance of Hair, the mounts turbid, crooked and wrinkled.

CHAP. XXX.
Rules to be observed to know the eminent danger any person is in, as to his or
her health.

IF the body and face be yellowish, the veins distended, the sight weary, heavy
and irksome, an unwilling heaviness to motion or action hang about the party,
it denotes the vessels full of humors, which ought to be purged out, or, by a
gentle means, dispersed and brought away, to prevent diseases that may, by
their continuance, be contracted.

If the Senses appear dull and melancholy, without affliction or disorder of
the mind, the face look dull and of a leadish color, puffed and swollen, if
wringing pains happen after Meals, it denotes obstructions.

If tears, without a sensible cause, fall from the eyes, the lips quiver at
times, as likewise the Legs seem feeble, if the memory grows bad, and the
senses stupefied as it were, the body hot and cold by turns, the breath short,
and fetched with pain, and pain in the head; if these Symptoms in any critical
time happen, they denote a conflict of Nature, a Sickness approaching through
Ejection.

If the Eyes are dull, and Rheum much afflict them, if the Nostrils are red, if
the Midriff and short Ribs stretch without pain, if the Breath be difficult, a
pain of the Head, Nose, and Face, itching pain of the Temples, they denote some
sharp disease at hand, with Efflux of Blood, especially these Symptoms
happening or continuing on a critical day.

If the Face be sad, dark and cloudy, the Breath drawn with difficulty, the
lower Lip tremble, the Spittle thin, and the Navel extended, they denote a
foulness of the Stomach, which must be removed in time, to prevent violent
diseases, that through that occasion may befall the party.

These and many Symptoms I might urge, but seeing the brevity of this Treatise
will not permit, I shall wave them, and proceed to some Physiognomical signs of
approaching Death, as they are laid down in Rules and Canons by the Learned.

CHAP. XXXI.
Diverse Rules to know by the Art of Physiognomy, the danger of Diseases
relating to Death.

1. THE Philosophers and Sages of the World always conclude, that if the Sight
or Image in the Ball of the sick Parties appeared dull, or after a manner not
usual, that it argued Death was at hand.

2. If the Eyes withdraw themselves, or sink extraordinary deep in the
concavity or hollow, it presages Death; for a penetrating ^^me from the
Cerebelle, or hinder part of ^he Head, entering the Optic branches, ^ender a
Chritaline contracted hardness, from whence it comes to pass, that the Eyes in
a Convulsive manner are drawn inward, so that if it happen Death does not
immedi^iately ensue, yet the sight is in extreme ^anger of being lost, if not
irrecoverable.

3. If in sickness the Eyes change to an ^zure or reddish color, being before
of some ^ther color, they foretell great danger, if ^ot Death it self.

4. If the Nose grows sharp and pale, du^ing the time the party is under any
fit or agony, Death is threatened. If the Nose be writhed or depressed it is the
like. If a pale yellowish water distill from the Nose, the danger is the same.

5. If the Mouth, as if the Membranes of the Jaws were loosed, appear to open
for Air, drawing quick and short in any Disease, Death is eminent.

6. If the Teeth appear smaller and longer than usual, as if they were shooting
out, Death is thereby eminently threatened.

7. If the skin of the Face and other parts be converted into yellowish or pale
ashy color, it prognosticates danger to the sick party.

8. If any person being sick, suddenly languish, and growing worse become pale
and megre, yet, being still sick, his or her Face become ruddy, it denotes
danger and affliction.

9. If in the extremity of sickness the Breath of the party change to an ill
Scent, and the Eyes appear as if they were fixed, Death is threatened.

10. If the party that is afflicted in the height of his sickness stammer
abruptly, his voice become hoarse and sharp, changing from what it was before,
being as it were inward, it is a sign of Death.

11. If the Breath be drawn with heaviness and pain, so that the Lungs seem to
rise and obstruct the passage, the Breath being gross and fumy, it denotes the
party will hardly recover.

12. If in extremity of sickness the Teeth, the Nails, the bottoms of the Feet
change color and become dusky, it is a bad sign.

13. If the Intestive issue at the Fundament, by reason of sharp humors, Death
is threatened.

14. If the Face and Lips suddenly change into Earthly pale-colour in time of
extraordinary sickness, it denotes Death, especially if the Body be weakened and
decayed by the force of the Disease.

15. If a darkness appear and seem to cloud the whiteness of the eye, the sight
dazzle, the eyebrows writh and shrink up as it were in puckers, or the eye cast
a squint, not usual to do so, the sickness will prove very tedious, if not
mortal.

16. If one eye on a sudden contract it self ^ess then the other, if water
flow fast from the left eye, and the other be bleared, and if the eyes are
fixed, a hard struggling to open them, or white Pussels appear under the eye,
they are all dangerous signs.

17. If in a sharp disease the Face be smooth and shining, a Flux of the Belly,
happening, no desire, but an extraordinary inclination to sleep, are ill signs.

18. Sleeping with the Lids of the Eyes open, and no moisture issuing forth,
are signs of danger.

19. To lose ones hearing in the time of a dangerous Disease, with a
contraction of the Ears, is the forerunner of much pain, if not Death it self.

20. To observe the Teeth blacky, rough, and disordered in an extreme Disease,
and that the party is wonderful incliable to rub them, denotes great danger,
and almost a despair of recovery.

21. After a Sweat, if a cold quaking or shivering seize the party, the Hair
stare, and a cold Sweat follow, chiefly about the Neck and Head, it is an ill
sign, threatening the party with Death.

22. If the Tongue be black, the Mouth noisome and contagious, the Lips writhing
and distorted, the Mouth opening without yauning, a pimple upon the Tongue, as
it were a Pea, and the desire of hot things, are arguments of Death.

23. To contract the Yard and the Testicles in an extraordinary manner, denotes
Death, especially if it be in a contagious sickness.

24. A hot vapor arising from the skin, the Breath being cold, and the
coldness of the extreme parts, are arguments of Death.

25. A yaxing or straining to vomit after having much vomited, the Flux of the
Belly, the Jaundice, before the seventh day of sickness, the debility of the
parts, with extreme leanness, are tokens of Death.

And thus much I have thought worthy to be noted as to these Observations
useful in many kinds, whereby the sudden or latter approach of Death is
signified or threatened to languishing Mortals and is one main pare and one main
end of Physiognomy.

CHAP. XXXII.
How to find out the Genius of a Country and be sensible of its wonderful
effects.

THough this may seem strange to the in credulous, even to such as will not be
lieve any thing beyond the ocular demonstration, yet certain it is there is a
secret influence proper to peculiar places more immediately affecting and
protecting one place than another, that is participating of the nature of the
Planet, has greater Influence and as a secundary cause much, augments to the
felicity or infelicity of Mankind, and therefore is called the good or evil
Genius and by the Ancients was much observed in all their undertakings, nay,
was styled their Guardian, or the Goddess Fortune.

To know the Genius, consider the humor that predominates in the Body, whether
Phlegm, choleric blood, or Melancholy, which may be known by the lines in the
hand. A^ for instance, if they be red, he or she is of a choleric humor,
which sympathizeth with the nature of fire, and consequently the Genius is of
the fiery Region of the Hierarchy of Gargatel, or depends upon Tariel Tubel
Gaviel his Substitutes; which may be discovered by the color of the lines,
according to their agreeableness with Fire, Air, and Water, or consistent with
Earth. The first being red, the second pale or whitish, the third of an azr re
or bluish, and the fourth of a dusky or dar kish color, and the Genius's
participating of these Elements, have their stations assigned in the four
Quarters of the Universe. If i^ happen to be one of the fiery Figures of
Geomancy, which are in number four, viz. Fortuna-Minor, Amisso, Rubeus and
Cauda Draconis; or if it happen in one of those of Mars, which are Acquisitio,
Puer, Tristitia, past doubt the Angle or Genius is of the Region of Fire,
having its Regency in the South, and coucludes Tuesdays to be the fortunate
days of those who are born under their influence.

If in the Hand the lines and veins be narrow and long, appearing of whitish
complexion, somewhat inclining to redness, they denote an airy or sanguine
Constitution, the Genius in that case being of the Hierarchy of the Air
attributed to Raphael, and under him to Miel and Seraphiel, and those born
under them are generally wise, virtuous, great studiers of Arts and Sciences,
having their happy days on Wednesdays.

If in the Hand Lines and Veins appear long and bluish, mixed with white
strokes, that denotes the party to be of a phlegmatic Constitution, the Genius
in that case referring to water, and have their Regency in the North, the
principal is Gabriel, having under him, Samuel, Mediel, Mael, and the person
born under their protection shall be wonderful fortunate in Sea-affairs.

If the Lines and lesser Veins in the Hand are found broad, short and thick, of
a dark dusky color, the Constitution is Melancholic, in which cause the
Genius is found in the West, Uriel being Superior, and under him Cassiel,
Salchiel, and Assasiel, inducing to learning the study of profound Sciences,
and their happy days are Thursdays. As for these Geniuses they do not always
dispense their immediate influence or assistance to mankind, but predominate
more at one time than another, communicating strange things.

As for the Genius of the fiery Hierarchy ruling in choleric persons, it is to
be observed powerful in its operation, when the Sun is in Aries and Leo, in the
Months of March and July. As for the Genius of the Air it is most powerful in
March and April, the Sun being in Aries and Taurus. The Genius of the Water
when the Sun is in Capricorn and Aquarius, in the Months of December and
January. The Genius of the Earth when the Sun is in Libra and Sagittarius in
the Months of September and November, and at these times in Critical hours the
Ancients affirm, that they appear to the sight of such as they protect or
infiuence in sundry shapes, representing their power and grandeur according to
their Hierarchical degrees, but it being a mystery too deep for the capacity of
the unlearned, full of ambiguities, I shall the brieflier pass it over, and
proceed to other useful matters.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Observations taken from the days of the Moon, with Relation to the Birth of
Mankind, as to the undertaking of Business, by that means rendered fortunate or
unfortunate.

IN this case the Observation according to the learned Ancients, is to be taken
from New Moon to New Moon. As thus if the party be born in the first day of the
Moon, shall be vigorous, lively, fair, and increase in riches. If born the
second day, his or her undertakings shall prosper, but sickness is threatened.
if the third day, expect crosses and vexation in Love, by reason of
inconstancy. If the fourth day, the party will be fortunate in affairs, but be
much subject to pains and disorders of the head, occasioned by watery
contractions. If on the fifth day, mischief is threatened by Thieves or Robbers.
If on the sixth day, good fortune is promised by marriage unexpectedly brought
to pass. If the seventh day, riches are promised by the death of Friends. If
the eight day, losses by Sea are eminent. If the ninth day, the person is
promised long life, though attended with several crosses and vexations. If the
tenth day, he or she shall be fortunate in finding things precious, which shall
turn to their great advantage. If born on the eleventh day, the party shall be
fortunate in Children of the Female Sex. If born on the twelfth day, the party
shall be subject to travel, and be often in danger of drowning. If born on the
thirteenth day, he or she shall be light and inconstant. If on the fourteenth a
calm estate is promised, accompanied with many blessings. If on the fifteenth,
the party is promised success in Tillage. If on the sixteenth day, the party be
born, he or she is subject to Rheums, Catarrhs, extraordinary Colds, and the
like. If on the seventeenth day, it denotes the party of a peevish disposition,
one given to quartel and contention, by which many mischiefs shall ensue, if on
the eighteenth day the party being born, much happiness is promised. If on the
nineteenth day, it denotes the party slothful, much given to sleep and
drowsiness, not desirous of labor, nor thoughtful of business. If on the
twentieth day, it denotes the party from a low station to rise to a high
degree. If one the twenty-first day the party is promised riches by Navigation.
If on the twenty-second day he or she shall be unfortunate in Children or
Relations. If on the twenty-third day, then shall the party be feeble,
unhealthy, and fall into many disorders. If on the twenty-fourth day, the
Dropsy and Gout are threatened. If on the twenty fifth day, bad success is
predicted, in especially Rural Affairs. And so for the twenty-sixth, and
twenty-seventh; for so many days, besides hour and minutes, is the Sun making
her progress through the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, as being the nearest
Planet to the Earth, so that to her are more immediately attributed the rule of
all watery Bodies, she drawing after her in her Rises and Fall, not only the
Ocean and the Blood in the Body of Mankind, and other Creatures of substance,
causing them to ebb and flow, but by her increase and Wain, causes a liveliness
or decay in the parts of life; both Man and Beast naturally appearing more
heavy and lumpish in her Wain than in her Increase. And thus much for the
signification of the Moon's course relating to good or bad fortune.

CHAP. XXXIV.
The manner of Resolving doubtsul Questions in relation to Friends, Marriages,
places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, love or business, with many
more of the like nature within the rules of Astrology, etc.

REsolving of Questions in this kind has by many been held a curious Art, and
by the Ignorant wonderfully esteemed, who generally conceit it can be brought
to pass by no less than Conjuration, though therein much mistaken; but however,
though like other Arts and Sciences, it is not altogether infallible, yet it is
lawful, and of much efficacy, rendering in many particulars such satisfaction,
as the Inquisitive have thought impossible to meet with in their inquiry,
though in this the Rules are not difficult, if seriously weighed and
considered. As thus,

Observe the question and the time wherein it is demanded, consider the Planet
that is Lord of the Ascendant, and the Sign that is posited, take the
dimentions, and erect the Scheme, in which by comparing and making exact
parallels, division of the Figures, by which means the Nativity being brought
within view you may by understanding how the Planet that ruled in that,
disposes, orders, or influences as a secundary cause, and from thence drawing
your conjecture, make your solution; as suppose the question be, whether the
party shall marry the party desired, if Venus a Planet properly influencing
affairs of Love and Conjugal felicity be in the seventh House, which by
Astrologers is termed the House of Marriages, or the third Angular House, the
affair will be prosperous if begun at that time, and the party have success. If
any person make a Voyage when the Moon is in the fifth House it will be
prosperous, but if Mars be there, let him expect to suffer much by storms, and
may be in danger of casting away. And so if any one sicken, Saturn or the Moon
being in the eighth house, termed the House of Death, the recovery is to be
doubted, if you contract Friendship, the Moon being in the third, which is the
House attributed to Friends and Relations, it will be to your great advantage,
prove happy and lasting; but if Mercury be there, the contrary. The first House
is termed the Ascendant of the Horoscope, whence is gathered the condition of
man's life, wherefore to undertake any business when Jupiter or the Moon is
there will prove very fortunate. If Jupiter be Lord of the Nativity in that
House, honors and great preferments are promised. The Moon being in the fourth
House at the Nativity, called the house of Inheritance and Treasure, the party
shall have an estate fall unexpectedly. If a Woman conceive when Venus is in
the fifth House, the Child will be Male. If in the sixth, a weak female Child.
If Mercury, and Venus be at the time of the conception in conjunction in the
5th house, there happen twins, or if but one, it proves for the most part to be
a Hermophrodite, participating of either Sex. Business begun, the Moon being in
the 12th. House, shall meet with many crosses and disappointments, going for
the most part preposterously. If a party be born when the Sun is in the ninth
House, and Mercury be Lord of his Nativity, he shall travel into many strange
Lands, advance himself thereby, and increase in wisdom and piety, dying in his
Native-Countrey in a good Old Age. If a party is born, the Moon being in the
tenth House, and the Sun the seventh, Mars being Lord of that Nativity, good
success is promised in Rural Affairs, but in other employments the party will
be unfortunate. The party born when the Moon is in the twelfth House, and Mars
Lord of the Nativity, is born to discontent, disorder, strife and reproach. In
fine, the Houses have these properties attributed to them, in case the Planet,
that is, Lord of the Nativity, be in one or other of them, as that it must
consequently. The first house so termed, is the Horoscope or Ascendant from
whence the condition and manner of life is resolved. The second is the House of
Riches, Servants, Substance, as also the expiration of youth. The third is that
of Brothers, Sisters, and Kindred farther of. The fourth is that of Inheritance
and Possessions. The fifth is that of Children, Pleasure, Delights, Substance,
etc. The sixth is that of Sickness and Health. The seventh is that of Wedlock,
Contractions, Marriages, happy and unhappy breaches of Love, mistrust, and the
like. The eight denotes of what kind of death the party shall die, and what
befalls him in his latter days. The ninth is that of Piety, Wisdom, Learning,
Philosophy and Travel, as well in Voyages at Seas, as by Journeys by Land. The
renth is that of Government, Advancement, Learning Eminency, Lordships, Laws,
and has great Influence on the middle part of the life. The eleventh is that of
Benefactors, Friends, Servants, and the like, much influencing old Age. The
twelfth and last is that of Enemies sighting, Labor, Envy, Treachery, and
falls upon the latter end of man's days. Now from these the Question rightly
stated, the hour and minute of the Nativity, the constitution and complexion
of the party rightly considered, may be drawn strong conjectures as to health,
sickness long or short life, marriages, happy or unhappy voyages, travel,
children, friends, riches, prosperity in one place more than in another, and
the like. And indeed this is the foundation on which all the pretenders to such
Solutions build and draw their Inferences, from which many times come exactly
to pass, though sometimes the expectations of the Inquisitive are left in the
mist of Ambiguity.

CHAP. XXXV.
A further Observation of the Planets, and their Operation on Mankind.

IF it so fall out that the Moon be in Gemini or Cancer, when the child is
born, she has not the power of the birth, but it must be attributed to the Lord
of the next House. If the Sun be in Leo, which is his proper house, at the time
a child is born, yet his power, by reason he is in his own house, is of no
force, but it must in that case be attributed to Mercury, being Lord of the
next house being Virgo. If the Moon be in Virgo, Venus is Lady of the birth, by
reason Libra follows, which is her proper House. As for Mars and Saturn, it is
held on all hands that their Influence is not so pernicious in their own
Houses, as in Houses proper to other Planets, by reason their proper Houses
being more natural to them, they pour not out their malign influence to that
degree as is other cases. As for the rule of the Planets, by turns, they are
these: On Saturday the first hour of midnight reigns Saturn. The second hour
Jupiter. The third Mars. The fourth Sol. The fifth Venus. The sixth Mercury.
The seventh the Moon. And so beginning again in the like order, hold on their
course throughout all time, making their changes, each Planet ruling the first
hour of that day attributed to it, as Sol Sunday. Luna Monday. Mars Tuesday.
Mercury Wednesday. Jupiter Thurday. Venus Friday. Saturn Saturday. And their
dispositions are these: Saturn causes a firm and stable prudence. Jupiter a
righteous justice. Mars a constant force and puissence. Sol an ardent charity,
and good nature. Venus mildness and affability. Mercury fluentness of speech
and a wary cunning. Luna a moderate temper, softness and effeminancy, Therefore
the hour of Saturn is good to undertake deep Councils and Affairs that require
great prudence to conduct, and bring them to perfection. The hour of Mars ^o
undertake warlike enterprises, or any ^iolent or dangerous attempts. Jupiter's
hour ^s good to enter upon Places, Offices, and Preferment. The hour of Sol is
good to require and seek for the favor of Potentates and great men. The hour
of Venus to solicit Love, and seek a reconciliation with those who are at
enmity with you. The hour of Mercury to undertake the out-witting or
circumventing your adversary. The hour of the Moon to enterprise business of
Navigation, or any thing relating to Water. Again, Saturn causes death, dearth
and peace. Jupiter a cessation of quarrels and strife, a quiet and temperate
life. Mars Winds, Thunder, Lightnings, Quarrels, Contentions, Strife, and
Bloodshed. Sol Long-life, Health and Prosperity. Venus causes Vigor-Love,
Friendship and Fruitfulness. Mercury causes Controversies, Lawsuits, Contests
and Contentions. The Moon causes great Floods and Inundations, Dropsies, and
all watery Diseases incident to either Sex. And thus much as to these
particulars.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Of the Pythagorean Wheel, commonly called the Wheel of Fortune, and what is to
be observed thereby as to good or bad Fortune relating to man or woman.



ALthough this by some may be esteemed needless in a treatise so amply
furnished with variety, yet that nothing that may contribute to the advantage
of the Reader in this nature may be omitted, I have thought fit to insert these
following Instructions.

Would you know the result of any Question? choose a number not exceeding
thirty, that you best fancy, to that add the number or the day, and the first
Letters of your Name, which probably may stand Figures, divide the number by
three, and if the result be even, then will what you demand come to pass, but
if odd, not, or at least not without vexation and delay.

Would you know whether you shall enjoy the party you love, in this case take
the first Letters of your Christian and Sirnames, add thereto the number of the
Planet, and day of the Week, all which in one conjunct number divide by thirty,
and if it fall out in the upper part of the Wheel, you will have your wish, but
if it happen in the lower part you will find many crosses, if not altogether
miscarry therein.

Another understanding of this Wheel, is thus, Choose a number according to your
pleasure, add to it the day of the Month, then the Letters of your Name, which
united in one sum divide by thirty, which number if it happen to be 154 so
divided, the overplus will be 14, which number being found in the upper part of
the Wheel, promises success, but if in the lower part, renders it doubtful, if
not altogether impossible to bring to pass: Another way there is by Alphasier
in case of Victory, or who shall overcome, which is by comparing the Names of
the parties, and substracting the numbers of signification, adding to each the
number three, and in such cases the day of the Month, and the Planet, being the
additional, if the three or thirteen remain the Supernumerary to one of the
parties, he may expect success, and so in other cases relating to love,
business, friendship, fidelity, riches, truth, falsehood, prosperity and
adversity, honesty, dishonesty, malice, evil intention, fraud, or the like, too
tedious herein to be inserted.

CHAP. XXXVII.
An account of the good and bad days in each Month, relating to Sickness and
Health.

IF any party fall sick on the first day of the Month, the third day is to be
feared, the which if he pass he will in all probability recover. If on the
second day he or she fall sick, though the sickness may be tedious, yet is
there great hopes of recovery. He rhat falls sick on the third day, if he
pass the next change of the Moon, there is great likelihood of his recovery. He
or she that falls sick on the fourth day, is in danger of continuing sick to
the twenty-eighth day. To fall sick on the fifth day, denotes much pain and
trouble, yet promises a recovery. To fall Eck on the sixth day, threatens the
party with danger of death after a long sickness. To ^ll sick of any dangerous
disease on the se^enth day, may notwithstanding hope for recovery. To fall sick
on the ninth day, pro^ises a speedy recovery. To fall sick on the ^enth day, is
dangerous. To fall sick on the ^leventh day, promises a speedy recovery. To sll
sick on the twelfth day, is in danger of ^eath within fifteen days following.
To fall Eck on the thirteenth day, denotes the recovery will not be besore the
eighteenth day. To fall sick on the fourteenth day, promises ^ quick recovery.
To fall sick on the fifteenth day, denotes danger of life, unless the party
recover within eighteen days after following. To fall sick on the sixteenth
day, promises a recovery after much affliction. To ^ll sick on the seventeenth
day, denotes the party to be in danger of death. To fall sick on the eighteenth
day, denotes the party soon to recover. To fall sick the nineteenth day,
^enotes the party shall recover. To fall sick the twentieth day, signifies that
sickness to be ^hort, and that it will end in health. To fall sick the
twenty-first day, promises a recovery, if the party escape the ten days
following. To fall sick on the twenty-second day, promises the same with the
twenty-first. He that falls sick the twenty-third day, though he shall endure
much pain, shall recover. To fall sick the twenty-fourth day, signifies the
sickness to be very short; and the like is signified to the party falling sick
on the twenty-fifth day. he that falls sick on the twenty-sixth day, shall
before the sixth day of the ensuing Month recover. He that falls sick on the
twenty-seventh day, is threatened with a tedious sickness, if not death. He that
falls sick on the twenty-eight day, is in the like like danger with the party
foregoing.

As for the overplus days, by reason February has but twenty eight days, and
that the other two or three which are in some Months, being properly allowed to
complete the Sun's Revolution, and not the course of the Moon, it is the
opinion of the Learned, that no direct Inferences can be drawn from thence, but
rather in that case to begin again as if they appertained to another Month,
reckoning one, two, or three, as the Month falls out, and count in this case,
the success as in the beginning of this Chapter of favorable and unfortunate
days.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
The fixed Stars, and their Situation profitable for Mariners, by which they
may be directed how to Steer, etc.

FOr a more full continuation of this work, I have not thought it amiss to
nominate the Celestial Signs, with the Stars that appertain to, or are
compacted in them; and those that are so spangled, are divided into three
parts, some of which are placed in the Circle of the Zodiac, some of them
called Northern, and others Southern Stars: and those that are placed in the
Zodiac have sundry Names attributed to them, according to the fancy of the
Ancients, not that they resemble the Creatures or such, but it is supposed on
all hands, that those Names was given them by Artists to distinguish them; or
at least as ^he Sun entering those Signs, sympathizes more or less with the
nature of such Creatures, as the Ram, the Bull, and the like: In the Back of
Taurus or the Bull, are placed the Stars called Pleiades: In the head of Taurus
six Stars called the Hijades: The Stars standing before the Feet of Gemini are
called Propus, and that as it were cloudy part of Heaven, which is Cancer, is
known by the Name of Persephe: the two Stars dimly shining that are near it,
are called Alini: and the bright Star in the middle of Leo is named the Lyon's-
Heart; the bright Star at the Fingers end of the left hand of Virgo, is called
SpikaVirginis: the little Star at the right hand of Virgo, is called
Protigettes: the four Stars that are at the right hand of Aquarius are called
Urnathe: Stars that go from the Tail of Pisces are called Lines, and in the
South Line nine Stars are contained, and only five in the North: the brighter
Star in the Lines end is called Nodus, and these are accounted useful Stars.
Those between the Zodiac and the Northern Pole, are accounted Northern: As
thus, Ursa, Major, and Ursa, Minor, Draco, that lies between the Bears
Artophylax, Corona, Engon, Asin, the Harp, the Vulter, the Eagle, the Serpent
and Serpentine, the Arrow and the Dolphin, Prottomo, Hyppy, the Horse that is
near Hyppacas, Caepheus, Cassiopia, and Romeda, Perseus, Auriga, Deltoton,
Bernices, here likewise there are other Stars, who for their plain appearance
had their names from the notable Stars, about the middle shank of Arctophilax,
and are called Arcturus: and the shining Star placed by the Harp, borrows its
name from the Sign: the Stars at the top of Perseus left hand are named
Gorgons: the clear Star in the Shoulder of Auriga is called the Goat: the two
lesser Stars at the extremity of the hand are called the Kidds: and all that
lie on the South side of the Zodiac, are Southern signs, their Names as
follow, Orion the Centaur, and the Beast that he holds in his hand,
Thyrsylocus, the Rehale, the Southern-Fish, the Skinker of Aquarius, the Flood
of Orion, the Southern Crown, the Road that lies by Hyparcus, and in these
there are Stars that have taken proper names, the bright Star in Prokyou is
called by that name, the bright Star in the South, Dogs mouth is called the Dog
or Dog Star: The Star that shines in the top of Argo, is called Canopius. And
thus much touching these Stars, which well considered, may in a great measure
be a help to Sailers in directing their Course, especially in those Seas where
the Stars are the most material Guide. As for the two Tropicks, they are Cancer
and Capricorn, the first the Summer Tropic or Oblstice, being the boundards of
the Sun, and the two extremes of the twelve Signs: The Poles are Artick and
Antartick, North and South, the former by reason of its Elevation is visible in
our Horizon, but the latter is depressed, and not visible in the Northern parts
of the World: These Poles are no other than a certain number of Stars, that
making in a manner a Circle, turn only round, never rising and seeing as the
other Stars; from whence they derive their names of Poles, or as it were,
Centres of the Spheres on which they turn and move about.

CHAP. XXXIX.
An Essay by way of Discourse of the substance and nature of Heaven, and
Celestial Bodies, etc. or a Scheme of Divine and Natural Philosophy.

THough this to some may seem strange, yet may it not altogether prove
unprofitable, being drawn from Reason, general and particular Observations, as
likewise from the Opinions of the Learned. First, Then I shall thus proceed,
that amongst all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, some are spiritual, and others
corporal, by the spiritual is meant those that have no body or visible
substance, as Angels and the Souls of Men; now in this case some have life, and
others not, some are lasting and immutable, others perishable and corruptible,
some motion, and there is without motion; and amongst those which are without
life. there is difference in two points, some have natural motion, the rest
want it; and amongst those which have this motion, some are mutable,
corruptible, and subject to change, the rest not persisting always in their
Estate, during the course of this World, stones and metals, etc. are of the
number of those that have neither life, nor any natural moving whatsoever, but
participate with the Stable Earth. The Water, Air, and Fire, are Creatures, the
which, though wanting life, yet have the motion, and are subject to all
corruption, as are all other Creatures composed of Elements, whether they
retain life or not; for by reason they are compounded of matter, and contrary
qualities, they do at length corrupt, and are changed; not in regard of the
first nature and substance, which perishes not, tho it changes Forms, but
returns always into the same Element, whereof every compound consists, and
notwithstanding, stones and metals are exceeding hard, yet are they not Exempt
from corruption, but are consumed by Usage; but the Celestial Bodies consists
of such matter, nature and substance, that being in perpetual motion, they ever
persevere, and are entire in their first form, not being subject to change in
Bodies, or any way consuming like other Creatures that are under them.

As for the matter and substance of the Celestial Bodies, it has occasioned
diverse disputes amongst the Learned, for some, even Philosophers, have
affirmed, that the Heavens and Stars are compounded of the same Elements with
other Creatures, though somewhat refined and purged from its grosness; rendering
this reason, viz. that they could not be visible, were they not made of visible
matter, and that it is unlikely that visible things should be made of things
invisible; from whence they conclude, that there is in the composition of
Celestial Bodies, some portion of Earth and Water, and that they are more lucid
and bright, they attribute to the nature of the Air and Fire; others are of
Opinion, that the Heavens are composed of another nature of substance, which
they term the fifth Essence, of most rare and different substance, from the
Elementary, and much more excellent and noble; but whatsoever may be subtly
invented in this matter, it may be very well conjectured, that heat is the
substance of subsistence of Celestial Bodies, which is inseparable from
brightness, the similitude and semblance of light having the substance of it,
and of heat, so annexed with it self, that it is almost nothing else, so that
the light brightness;, and heat, may be taken for one and the same thing the
substance and matter of Heaven and of all the Spheres, neither are they more
wearied, worn, and corrupted for all the labor they have performed by the
space of so many thousand years, than they were the first day of their
Creation; for we must not hold it for a change and alteration of their natures
and qualities in that, according to their diverse courses, the Stars and Planets
are sometimes far from, and sometimes nearer to each other, and that they have
conjunctions, oppositions, and diverse aspects, according to the variety of
their motions; not yet for the Eclipse of the Sun, occasioned by the
interposition of the Moon's dark Body, between us and that glorious light, or
of the Moon by the interposition of the shadow of the Earth, between the Sun
and her lightness, or be, for such changes are not in their proper Bodies
substance and quality, but only in regard of us and our sight, though in the
end they shall wax old like a Garment, and pass away; but till that appointed
time, sealed up from the knowledge of all Men or Angels, in the Bosom of
infinite Wisdom, they shall keep their course without alteration.

CHAP. XL.
A Treatise of Fiery Meteors, and their Generation.



THE Generation of the fiery Impression often seen in the Air, called burning
Stubble, or sparkles of Fire, is on this kind, viz. When the matter of the
Exhalation being an Unctious or Oily Vapor extracted from the Earth, by the
influence of the Stars, or Beams of the Sun into the highest Region, and there
being in all parts alike thin, one part takes fire before the other can arrive,
so kindled by degrees, it flies abroad like sparkles, or falling Stars.

The flying Dragon, or fiery Drake, another sort of fiery Meteors, is a Body of
a vaporous matter, ascending to the Region of cold, but by reason of its
grosness, not capable to pass it; so that being driven down by the vehementness
of its agitation, takes fire, forming it self into the shape of a Dragon, very
fearful to behold, and in the like nature are generated and kindled fires in
the Air, resembling Shields, Globes, Bowels, Lamps, Pyramids, and the like,
according as they fall into fashion, by reason of the opposition they meet, or
their sooner or later kindling.

There is a Light seen upon the Earth, called, Will with the Wish, which in
Moorish or Marshy ground, is seen to go before men in a dark Night, called by
the Latins, Ignis Fatuus, or foolish fire, which is indeed no other but a
Vapor kindled by vehement agitation, moving and skipping up and down by the
motion or direction of the Air, when through the darkness of the Night, men
many times fixing their eyes upon it; they are so dazzled as they loose their
way, which they foolishly attribute to the power of this Vapor, which indeed
has no such operation.

There are other flames which appear upon men's beards and hair, as likewise
upon Beast's, these are caused by clammy Vapors scattered in the Air, and
taking fire by their swift and vehement motion which ingenders such heat, that
in motion many times Arrows have taken fire, and Bullets have melted.

Comets or Blazing-Stars are no other than a huge Mass of vaporous Unctions,
which by reason of its subtilty reaches the Region of Fire, and there blazes
till the matter that feeds it is consumed: the Train or Tail being the blaze,
and the round Head the Body of Fire that continues it, and cannot be seen,
where the Sun beams make any impression, but is very discernable when the
shadow of the Earth passes about it; but for the most part these Exhalations
threaten mankind with diverse Calamities, appearing as the Beacons of Heaven, to
warn the sinful World to repent.

CHAP. XLI
A Treatise of Airy Impressions, their Nature and Generation, etc.



THE cause of many Suns and Moons appearing at once, that is the representation
of many, though indeed not real, is, as to the first, when the Sun casts a full
reflex upon smooth and watery Clouds, and in them impresses its likeness, so
that sometimes there appear two, three, or five Suns in this nature so are
produced the Images of many small Suns like little Stars, and in like manner
are produced the Images of the Moon, seen oftener than the former, by reason of
her nearness to the Earth.

Lightning is caused by a hot Vapor, ascending from the Earth and Water, which
in its Ascension taking fire, yet not being able to break through the cold
Region, it forces its passages downward, when meeting with watery cold, it
plunges into them, and rend them in pieces with horrible Bellowing, which is
called Thunder, but when no Clouds interpose, or at least very thin ones, then
are flashes of Lightning only seen, but no Thunder heard; the reason why the
Lightning is so long seen before the Thunder is heard is, for that the sense of
seeing, is more quick and instant than that of hearing.

Earthquakes are caused by Winds in the Bowels or hollow Caverns of the Earth,
fighting with the heat and opposition they meet with, so that struggling for
vent, they often in forcing their way, rend and force the Earth in sunder, and
fly forth in prodigious Whirlwind, doing great mischief. Whirlwinds, properly
termed so, is caused by a strong Vapor, or Airy Contraction that forces its
way through a flock of Clouds, without any noise of Thunder, of flash of
Lightning. Another sort there are, called fiery Whirlwinds, which is when a
Vapor in such a case takes fire, which sort overthrows and destroys all dry
things that oppose it.

Circles about the Sun and Moon are caused by the thick and grosness of the
Air, for the Beams being shot direct, reverberate, or are beaten back, making a
round Circle or Halen, according to the roundness of the body of Light which
occasions it, and sometimes it so falls out through the Interposition of thin
Clouds.

The Rain bow is caused by the Suns. Beams, darting ascance, or in opposition
to a thick and watery Cloud, making the Colors lighter or darker, according to
the deepness of their penetration.

The natural Winds are caused by the sudden and violent motion of the Air, and
that directed from the turning of the Spheres more or less according, and the
reason why it so often varies and changes, is to purge off, and carry away the
gross Vapors, which would otherways infect the Earth, by corrupting, and
render it uninhabitable.

Rain is caused by Misty Vapors exhaled by the heat of the Sun, which being
drawn up, thicken, and are carried about by the Winds, till they are too heavy,
and then fall down in showers; for the Clouds are of no solid matter, but only
composed of moist and dry Vapors, and where it so falls out that the Wind is
exceeding scant before the moist Vapor can ascend to its height or thicken,
then does it fall again in Mist.

Hail and Snow are moist Vapors, conduced by too near approaching the Region
of cold. If the Vapor be thick, then it is Hail or Drisle, if thin and
expanded, then it is Snow; if thin and close Rhyme or hoar Frost. And thus much
for these particulars.

CHAP. XLII.
Of the perfect Composition which are in the Nature of things, by which the
four Elements are to be considered.

AS for the four Elements, they may be fitly termed to resemble living
Creatures, Plants, Stones and Metals, as for Stones they have their Original
and Foundation from the Earth, and agreeing with its nature, ever descend.
Metal may be said to be placed upon the second Watery Angle of the World, as
agreeing in their Liquid Matter with Water, all Metals have their Original from
Quicksilver and Sulphur, stewed or boiled in the Bowels of the Earth, and are
finer or courser, according to the firmness or grosness of those Originals,
upon the third or Airy Angle of the World. We may find Plants, for they neither
grow nor fructufie, but in the open-day, and do properly retain the nature of
Air, which they always require, as being fittest and aptest for them. Upon the
fourth Angle, namely Fire, may be centered or put all living Creatures, whose
lives as the Learned hold, subsist by fire, obtained from the Empireal Heaven
and Spirit of Life, which is a quickening fire, and distributeth Life to all the
Wheels of the World.

True it is, that under every Universal kind of these, there are diverse
particular species distinct the one from the other; for although stones may
properly enough be termed Earthy, yet are they sometimes nominated of some
other Element, which most prevails in their composition for doubtless all the
Elements do meet together in the Procreation of them, but chiefly Earth and
Water, and may by their grosness or pureness be observed, which most
predominates or contributed to the composition, for the dark stones are called
earthly; and the clear ones watery. As for Metals, they participate mostly of a
watery substance, though they have in them the composition of all the Elements,
and may be resembled to the seven Planets, as Gold to the Sun, Silver to the
Moon, Iron to Mars, Quicksilver to Mercury, Brass to Jupiter, Lead to Saturn,
and Tin to Venus, being each of them imagined to have the fire or influence of
the said Planets. As for Plants, although they may be by Nature Airy; yet there
are some whose Roots, Leaves and Blossoms are hot in the first degree, others
are cold and dry, some are moist, which diversity happens according as the
Plant participateth, more or less of the sundry Elements. The like is to be
observed of living Creatures for although they are said to participate of the
Region or Element of Fire, yet the composition of all the Elements are found in
them, and without them no Creature can subsist; nay, diverse are of Opinion,
that all the glittering Frame of Nature, as well Celestial as Terrestrial, has
a participation, though more ratified and refined. And thus Reader, I hope to
your satisfaction, I have performed my promised Task, though but small to the
eye, yet a work large to the mind, and not without much serious deliberation,
easily comprehended. As for the pains I have taken here I exact no applause,
but if advantage accrue hereby, give the glory to God, who is the only
Omnipotent Wise Creator, and disposes of all things, and in whom all Created
Beings are centered.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is lately brought from Chily, a Province in America, a most excellent
Natural Balsam, found by several eminent Persons, to excel that of Peru and
Tolu, in curing of diverse diseases has given demonstration: It Is a Remedy that
no man under the Sun can compose, being a most Odoriferous and Natural Balsam:
It cures most Diseases in humane Bodies; particularly helps all pains coming
from Cold; chiefly pains in the Stomach, want of Appetite: Corroberating and
strengthening the whole body: it is a wonderful Remedy for all inward sores,
bruises, or ulcers of the Lungs, reins, bladper, or womb, etc. it helps
shortness of breath, cough, consumption, or wheesings: it is good in most
diseases of the head, as falling sickness, apoplexy, palsy, trembling,
convulsions, headache, and giddiness of the head; and strengthens the brain and
nerves: It kills the worms, and helps the stone, and is a good provoker of
urine; and brings away the sand and gravel, which oftentimes obstructs the
urine: It helps all Fluxes of the belly; and it is a wonderful thing for most
Diseases of the Ears, especially Deafness. And outwardly applied, cures all
manner of green Wounds, Ulcers, and Fistulas; and cures most diseases in women,
etc. It is only to be had of Eben. Tracy, at the three Bibles on London Bridge,
at 1 s. 6 d. the ounce, The bottles are sealed with the Balsam-Tree.

Books Sold by Eben. Tracy, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge.
LLoyds Dictionary. Heylin's Cosmography. Reynolds of Murder. Heartmans
Chemistry. Greenwoods Astronomy. Cockers Arithmetic, 12mo. Christian Warefare,
4to. Wits Academy. Salmons Dispensatory. -- his Dispensatory. -- his Doron. --
his Polygraphice. -- his System. -- his Synopsis. -- his Observations. -- his
Practical Physic. -- his Anatomy. Present State of England, in 4 Parts. The
Whole Art of Navigation, by Captain Newhouse. Marrow of the Mathematics.
Mariners Magazine, Fol. Markhams Masterpiece. David's Repentance. -- his
Blessed Man. Lithgowes Travel. Dialogue between Life and Death. Seamens
Kallender. Seamens Practice. Mariners Kallender. Seamans Companion. Norwoods
Triangles. -- his Epitomy. Seamans Glass. Geometrical Seaman. Gellibrands
Epitomy. Mariners Compass Rectified. Pilots Sea-Mirrour. Practical Navigation.
Boatswains Art. Dr. Newtons Cosmography: A Treatise of Geometry, and Astronomy,
and Surveying; With an exact Description of the Globes. The Famous History of
the Destruction of Troy, in 3 Books in 4to. Valentine and Orson. Chemical
Essays, by John Beguinus. Spiritual Antidote against sinful Contagion, by Tho.
Doolittle. Pools Dialogue between a Papist and a Protestant. Monasticon
Fevershamiense: A Description of the Abbey of Feversham. The Christian Crown of
Glory: Or Holiness the way to Happiness. Pathway to Health. Book of Knowledge.
The Pilgrims Port: Or the weary Man's Rest in the Grave. The Famous History of
the 8 Wise Philosophers: Containing the Life of Jehosaphat the Son of Aveneron,
Emperor of Corwa, and his wonderful Conversion to the Christian Faith. The
Great Assize. The Christians best Exercise in the worst of Times. Scarborough
Spaw: Being a Description of the Nature and Virtues of the Spaw of Scarborough
in Yorkshire. The French Schoolmaster. Farnaby's Epigrams. Newton's Art of
Logic. Newton's Art of Rhetoric. Hodder's Arithmetic. Bishop Hall's
Soliloquies. Dod on the Commandments.
All Sold by Eben. Tracy, at the Three-Bibles on London Bridge.


