The Pathway To ^ERFECTION: Showing the Duty of Children to their Parents;
(...) the promised Blessings, which attend ^^ose that truly perform it.

The Variety of Worldly Pleasures, in respect of ^^^ptations, with proper
Methods to refrain their ^^^^ements, and suitable Remedies against them.

The great necesity of Repentance, with awake^^^^ Motives and Exhortations
thereunto: As also the ^^^nal Danger, and miserable Consequences which ^^^^ds
the delay and neglect thereof; the comforta^^^ Enjoyments which accompanies
that great and ^^^essary work, with directions and Encouragements, ^^^reunto.

By J. S. D. D.

(...) not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what (...) Day may bring
forth,

Prove. 27.1. London Printed, School.

depiction of a man kneeling in prayer

Courteous Reader,
If these Christian Arguments should not be reckoned worth laying out one
Penny, be pleased to read it Gratis, keep it clean, and return it in an hour.

I Shall first begin with the Duties of Children to Paren^^ considering the
many inconveniences which generally ^^^tend the neglect thereof, for it is in
vain to undertake (...) work of repentance without the performance of this
Dut^* it being Expressly Commanded by God himself.
I.
EXODUS XX.XII. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may (...) long
in the Land which the Lord thy God gives thee.


BUT how little this Duty is regarded is too manife^^ly known in all parts of
this Nation, for Pare^^^ have for the most part, their Children no longer
un^^^^ their Obedience, than they are under the Rod, for be^^^ grown up they
think themselves free from all manne^ (...) Command, and though (perhaps) some do
observe it, y^^ the case be thoroughly Examined it is for their own Int^^^^^
sake, by gaping for what they have, but very few o^ (...) purely upon the Duty
of Conscience. This unnat^^^^ Sin of Disobedience to Parents, was by the Law of
M^^^^ Punishable with Death, Deuteronomy. 21.19. but if Fathers (...) Mothers now a
days should be so severe with their Children; Oh what great numbers would make
themselves Childless thereby. Hear what the wise Man adv^^^^ Prove. the 23.22.
Hearken to thy Father that began (...) and despise not thy Mother when she is
old. But the Y^^^^ of our Age are so far from hearkening to their Pa^^^^^
Council, that they esteem it as Wisdom to despise it and proceed so far as to
mock and deride their Person ^^^eir Extreme Age, when Infirmities has both
rendered ^^^em useless and helpless, but let such vile wretches read ^^^rov.
30.17. The Eye that mocketh his Father and despi^^^sh to Obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick ^^^ut, and the Young Eagles shall eat it; There
is ordinari^^^ such a Pride and headiness in Youth, that they cannot ^^^ide to
submit to the Councels and wholesome Instructions (...) their Parents; many
times accounting them the Effect (...) Dotage when indeed they are the fruits
of Sobriety and (...) experience, designed for the good and welfare of their
Souls and Bodies.

The Debt that a Child owes to his Parents is so great (...) can never hope to
discharge, unless he calls God to his ^^^l, in begging of him that be would be
pleased to reward ^^^^n for the many troubles and sorrows that they have
^^^dergon for him, by multiplying his blessings upon them; ^^^t instead of this
some are so unnaturally Wicked, as to ^^^sack (as I may say) Hell it self for
Curses by pouring (...) black and dismal Expressions against them? which is
^^^ing so horrid, odious and abominable that one would ^^^k there needed no
persuasion against it. But we see ^^^^nly, God himself, (who best knows Men's
hearts) (...) it possible: otherwise he had not pronounced such ^^^eavy
Sentence upon it, Exodus 21.17. He that Curses Father or Mother let him Die the
Death. And our own experience tells us that many Children there are, who ^^^ugh
greediness of the Possessions of their Parents have ^^^hed their Deaths, but
let such know that how sliely (...) fairly soever they carry it before Men,
there is one (...) sees and knows the secret wishes and desires of their ^^^ts.
And further take Notice that they who watch (...) Long for the Death of their
Parents, may be the ^^^ice of God, (before they are aware) untimely meet (...)
their own, for as the Fifth Commandment pro^^^h Long Life as the reward of
honoring the Pa^^^; so by Consequence short life is threatened, upon breach of
that Duty, to prove which I could repeat sev^^^ remarkable Instances in order
thereunto.

And again we are to render them all due obedie^^^ Ephesians. 6.1. Children obey
your Parents in the Lord for (...) is right; again Colos. 3.20. Children Obey
your Par^^^ in all things for this is well pleasing to the Lord.

You see here St. Paul asures us it is not only righ^^^ obey our Parents in
point of natural subjection to th^^^ but there is a higher degree of perfection
enexed t^^^ (viz.) it is well pleasing to the Lord, so that you see (...) is so
necessary a Duty that Consequently without it cannot please God.

And Lastly we cannot Honor our Parents as we ou^^^ unless we assist them in
their wants, of what kind soe^^^ whither in weakness of Body, Poverty, or
whatsoe^^^ earthly unhappiness befalls them, for Christ himself te^^^eth us,
that this is Contained within the Precept of (...) nouring our Parents, as you
may read Mark. 7.10, 11, 13. How then shall those answer it who deny relief
their poor Parents, and cannot find in their hearts to p^^^ with with that
which they vainly throw away (upon th^^^ Pride and Excess,) to satisfy the
pressing necessities (...) those to whom they owe their very being. Nay some
(...) yet worse, who out of great Pride scorn to own their ^^^rents in their
Poverty, when themselves are advanced Wealth, they hold it a disparagment to
look on their po^^^ Parents: so that the Child's prosperity (many times) pro^^^
the Father and Mothers unhappiness; but this is so unnatural and inhuman
ingratitude, as will surely find a shall Vengeance from God, unless timely
repented of; therefore for the Lord sake, and as you tender the welfare (...)
your Precious Souls, not only read, but put in practice this great and
necessary (tho much decayed and neglected) Duty, in performing which you will,
not only me^^ the Gracious promised reward of Long life and prospe^^ty in this
world, but 'twill be a means to obtain (through (...) ^^merits of Christ our
redeemer,) a happy Crown of ^^ory in the Kingdom of bliss Eternally which God
of (...) infinite Mercy grant to us all. Amen.

And so I descend to speak something relating to the uncer^^^^ty, vanity and
deceit, as well as mutability of Earthly ^^^ceited Pleasures, which are the
only Obstructions of Re^^^tance.

II. ^he Vanity and Uncertainty of Earthly Pleasures.
^^^le. I.VIII. The Eye is not satisfied with Seeing, nor ^he Ear filled with
Hearing.


(...) this latter Age, the Pleasures of this World are the (...) Idols of
Mankind, for it is impossible to Love our selves (...) not to Love our
Pleasures, the World has truly no^^^ng in it which may be accounted great, or
at least satis^^^tory, for it is entertainments are strangely Empty and ^^^ting.

For how taking soever a Pleasure may appear or seem in ^^^ncy, yet it is
Evidently known that Men soon disrellish ^^at they most Covet to Enjoy, nay
sometimes they ^^^dain what they Possess.

What is Greatness? it is but a slippery height, it is a ^^^orious Slavery, and
a fantastic formality. What is ^ealth? it is not to be reckoned an Enjoyment,
but the way ^^one. What is Lust? but a sudden violent and unruly ^^tiny of
Spirits, a sudden Blaze, that flashes and then ^^es. What is Gaity of Attire?
but an Imaginary Pret ^^^ess to please Children and Fools.

Besides it is the Silliness of the Fancy only, which creates (...) supposed
Pleasure, Coveting that most which we ne^^r tried, like a Man who comes into a
new World the ^^^angeness of it only begets the wonder, success many times
makes a man loath what before he vehemen^^ Loved, for when he has tried all
objects he will (...) the Vanity, for as soon as Experience has Defeare^^
Person of Imagination, it robbs him of the Pleasure (...) For a sinner derives
his temptation from Custom, and (...) not so much because it is pleasent, but
because he is use^^^ do so. This is the case of those who pretend to (...)
greatest Gallentry, and Wit in the choice and contriva^^^ of their Sins.
Therefore what shall we think of th^^^ who basely stoop to the mean and sensual
Conceited p^^sures of Love, Lust, Gluttony, Pride, Covetousness, (...) For
though great Fortunes are necessary to support g^^^ Sins, yet our Sins ruin our
Fortunes. Our health is ^^cessary to our Sensual Pleasure, but yet our
Pleasures dermine our health: And thus the change of th^^^ and humors, makes a
Sinners life a strange mixture desire and disapointment.

Good God? that ever rational Men should for (...) Heaven for such a mixed
uncertain State of Empty p^^sures as this? Oh that we could but open our Eyes
(...) see through all that Paint and Varnish that mocks and (...) ludes the
fancy, we need but be wise and we shall be ^^ly too; for if we once truly
understand the world, cannot but despise it.

Vain Pleasures are Conceited Sun shines in the pur^^^ but black and dismal
clouds in the Enjoyment, and ^^ther Pleasure as is a Beautiful Harlot, sitting
in a Cha^^ whose four wheles are Pride, Gluttony, Lust and Idle^^ the two
Horses are Prosperity and Plenty, the two ^^vers are Covetousness and Ambition,
her attendants ^^ followers are horror Guilt and late repentance (if a ^^
Death and ruin; therefore for the Lords sake avoid (...) Strumpit, and come not
near the Door of her House. E^^ 2.2: I said of Laughter it is Mad and of Mirth,
^^ do thou?

And as for Lawful pleasures (as you call them) it is ^^^r best wisdom only to
touch them, and if you will (...) them, let it be as Poison in an Antidote, to
fortify ^^r selves against Casual Extremities.

St. Augustine before his Conversion, could not Live ^^^hout the Carnal
pleasures of this World, but when (...) Nature was changed, and his heart fixed
upon God, (...) how sweet (quoth he) is it to be without that which (...)
^^fore Idolized and admired.

What a silly thing therefore is Impiety, and how wise (...) well contrived a
thing is Religion, for what can we ^^re more of God; if he gives us a pleasant
Fortune, he ^^scribes us rules how to Enjoy it prudently; if he ^^^olves us in
a cross one, he supplies us with Comforts to ^^^eten and support it.

Therefore assure your selves that no pleasure on this (...) the Grave, is so
truly delighting, so satisfying ^^engaging and so lasting as those which spring
(...) ^m Union and Communion, from God and Christ, ha^^g a Conscience void of
offense toward God and to^^rds Man.

And further take notice, that no Man yet, (though never (...) Notorious) ever
sinned with a design or persuasion to (...) Eternally Damned for it. No, no,
but thought they (...) provided a reserve safe enough for after Repentance,
(...)' god knows, most have miserably miscarryed therein, (...) God's cutting
them off suddenly, or Sin at last grew ^^rong, and they too weak to withstand
it. Jonah. 2.^^ They that wait upon Vanities forsake their own mercy.

For it is much easier to Conquer a Lust than to satisfy (...) the Ambitious
may grow Content sooner than great; (...) Covetous may sooner moderate their
desires than sa^^ie them; the Adulterer may sooner gain a chaste Spirit, ^^n
satisfy the ravings of a beastly and wandering Lust. (...) a Man's Frame grows
more tractable and goverriable, (...) wholesome Reasonings, and sound advice;
and Heavenly by Prayers and Meditations. But if you once give way^ nay but so
much as listen to a wanton Suggestion, it wi^^ immediately kindle into Lust and
that Lust if Encouraged ^^ will flame into inordinate Passion; and Consequently
Passion will grow savage and unruly; And they if fe^^ and pampered very rarely
(if ever) ceases till it centure^^ in the ruin of thy Body and Estate; and
without Extr^ordinary Mercies, thy precious and Immortal Soul also.

III.
Luke XIII.V. I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye sh^^^ all likewise perish.


THE occasion of these Words was because (...) Jews seemed so rashly and
uncharitably to ^^^sure upon the Galileans, whose hard fate was such, a^^^ be
Murtherd by Pilate's Cruelty, and at the very time t^^ when they were offering
Sacrifices, thereby Conclud^^ because their Sufferings Exceeded others, their
Sins m^^ Consequently be proportionable thereunto. And th^^ 18 also upon whom
the Tower of Siloam fell, were Ju^^ed by those Carnal Jews to be greater, most
notori^^ and Capital Sinners, than all others that dwelt at Jer^^lem; and from
hence vainly flattered themselves, beca^^^ the like Judgments did not fall upon
them they fanc^^^ that they were not only safe, but very firm and sure^^^ the
favor of God^ Therefore our Savior in order^^^ Correct and Convince them of
this their false, rash (...) hasty Censure, Answers them thus, Nay but Except
^^ repent you shall all likewise perish. As if he should h^^ said, do you think
because you have hitherto Escaped (...) Judgments, that you shall steal away in
the Dark, (...) flee from God's just displeasure. No, no you are (...) much
mistaken, for I say unto you, even you, who a^^ ready to Condemn others and
Justify your Selves, (...) except you very speedily fall to an earnest
agreement ^^d reconciliation with God, by leaving of your Sins, you ^^all not
only be subject to the like disasters in this life, ^^t shall also perish
Eternally, in the world to ^^me, so that our blessed Savior in this very
answer, ^oth (as it were) thunder down a most dreadful Sen^nce, upon the heads
of those vain and high Conceited ^hristians, who set such a great value upon
their ^^n Merits, and such Contemptable and undervaluing ^oughts of their poor
suffering Brethren; when at ^e same time (perhaps) they are guilty of as great,
if ^t far greater Sins, than those whom God is pleased to ^ake Examples of his
Divine Judgments, and so conse^^ently unless they repent must likewise
miserably perish, ^^erefore oh Christians! let us strive to atain to this one
^^ng needful, for it necessary follows, that repentance (...) go before
forgiveness, for unless it leads the way, the ^^tes of God's Mercies will be
shut against us. And by (...) way take notice that repentance is not a
careless, but ^areful thing, therefore let none that that a few Sighs (...)
saying Lord have mercy upon them now and then, (...) from time to time make
fresh Engagements with their ^^ul and odious Impieties, I say let none think
this to be ^entance. No, no these are direct and downright Con^^^ies and cannot
stand together, to repent for Sin, and to ^^ight in Sin; to hate Sin, and at
the same time to Love (...) entertain it; to fly from Sin, and to follow Sin;
is ^^way to agravate and Increase it. For some Men make ^^igion, only a Sundays
Religion, putting it on and off (...) their Sundays clothes, and then conclude
God is ^^ly served for all the week, vainly supposing that if (...) keep up
Religious duties on Sundays, they may do ^^^t they please at other times, and
think that on the ^^th they can make even with God again. Like the ^ore in the
Proverbs, that having made her Offerings, ^^ presently ready to Commit fresh
Wickedness. Prove. ^^4. as if she had paid off the old score and might now
boldly run on again upon a new. But oh my Brethren God will not Look Mercifully
upon any that loo^ pleasantly upon his Sins, the Jealous God wll n^^^ endure to
see thee bankering and longing after (...) Harlots lips, that is by Embracing
any Sin with (...) light. Oh! Therefore look into thine hands, look (...) thine
heart, look into thy house, look into thy shop, (...) Trade, thy calling, see
that thy heart and mind be (...) Corrupted, by being fixed too nigh to
something the (...) For true peace with God, cannot be made till those (...)
are removed; therefore be not almost but altogeth^^ Christians, perhaps, some
of you have been half of (...) mind to repent thoroughly of your great heinous
and ^^cret Crimes and have wis^^^^ many times, that necess^^^ word had been
performed. But how long will you (...) barely in these fruitless purposes? When
will you (...) to a full fixed and firm resolve, don't you plainly see (...)
Satan gulls you by tempting you to delays, what if (...) should cut you off
before you come to a happy resolu^^^ Oh how terrible would it be to look back
upon the (...) gracious opportunities of mercies, which you have (...) fully
and presumptiously neglected; therefore O ^^stians I beseech you all in
general, Consider (...) great and weighty necessity there is of Repentance (...)

It was a notable passage of a Noble Roman, (...) was Loading, a Vessel with
Corn, to carry to a (...) time of Famine, the Mariners being unwilling (...)
Sail in a Storm, (says he) Our Voyage is of more (...) than our Lives.
Therefore as food is Necessary (...) port natural strength, so is repentance
only (...) to secure the Soul, and preserve it in safty, for (...) the Disease
thereof breeding distempers, as well as (...) bances therein. For what a
Continual tempest and (...) motion is there in a discontented mind? What (...)
evil is inordinate care? What is Passion but (...) feavour in the mind? What is
Lust but a fire in the (...) What is Pride but a deadly Tinpany? or Cove^^^
(...) an unsatiable desire? or Malice and Envy, but ve^^^n in the very heart?
Spiritual Sloth is but a Scurvy (...) ^he mind, and Carnal security a mortal
Lethergy; and (...) can that Soul, have any true Comfort, that Labors ^^^er so
many distempers? Therefore the Conscience ^^^not be truly pacified, till
soundly cleansed and purified. (...) Peace with sin, and Peace in sin, is more
to be ^^aded, then all the troubles in the World.

Arise then, O Sluggard and shake off thine Excuses, (...) long will thou
slumber, and fold thy hands to sleep? (...) ^ou be human Creatures, and not
senseless Stocks, stand (...) and consider where you are going, and do not fall
(...) Hell with your Eyes open, but bethink your selves, (...) set to this
Necessary work of repentance, what, (...), and run into the Pit when the very
Beasts will not (...) ^orced in? What endowed with Reason, and yet dally (...)
Death and Hell, and the Vengeance of the Almigh^^* Oh! show your selves like
Men and let reason pre^^^^ with you, Esaias. 1.2. Hear O Heavens, and give Ear
(...), for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and (...) up Children and
they have Rebelled against me.

^^ere is never a Creature but if it had reason to know (...) it is abused, it
would groan against sinful mankind. (...) Land would groan to bear them, the
Air would (...) to give them breath, their Houses to lodge them, (...) their
Beds would refuse to ease them, as would their (...) to nourish them, and their
Clothes to cover them. And (...) could but speak, their Food would say Lord,
must (...) such a wretch as this, as yield forth my strength ^^urish him to
dishonor thee withal? No, I will choke (...) ^ather, if thou will but give me
Commission. The (...) Air would say Lord must I give this man breath, to (...)
Tongue against Heaven; scorn thy People, and vent ^^^ride, Wrath and filthy
Communication, and belch (...) Oaths and Blasphemy against thee, No, if thou
(...) ^ut say the word he shall be breathless for me. His (...) would say Lord
must I carry this sinful wretch, upon his wicked and Odious designs, No, I will
break his bone^ I will end his Days, if I may have but leave from thee, a^^
creatures being (as it were) up in arms against thee t^^^ thy peace is made
with God, Job. 22, 23, 24.

At destruction and famine thou shall Laugh, neither sha^^ thou be afraid of
the Beasts of the Earth, for thou shall be (...) League with the stones of the
field, and the Beasts of t^^ field shall be at peace with thee, And thou shall
know that (...) tabernacle shall be in Peace; and thou shall visit thy
hab^tation and shall not Sin.

Oh Sinners make your peace therefore, with the Go^ of peace, and give up your
Souls and Lives, to be ruled b^ him? But that this Exhortation may take the
better E^fect I will back it with some pressing Considerations.

First either, you must taste of Gods's goodness or h^^ fury; for there is not
a Man nor Woman in the World but must partake of the one or the other, your
portion will be either joy or sorrow, either disolation or consolation, if you
be not Trees for bearing, you must (...) Trees for burning, if you are not for
fruit, you must b^ for flames, if you do not swim in the waterworks o^
repentance, you must and shall burn in the fire works o^ vengeance, if you will
not make your peace with God to obtain Heaven, you must go to Hell for not
making you (...) peace; for one of them you must do; for as our Savior says
Mark. 16.16. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be Damned.

Oh Christians if godliness be evil why do you so much profess it? If it be
good why do you so little practice it either take Christ into your Lives, or
cast him out of your Lips, either get oil into your Lamps or cast them away.

It would be Just with God to fall out with a carna^ Man in the Course of his
providence, who falls off from him in the Course of his obedience, for wicked
Men mak^ the World their treasure, and God makes the World their torment; when
they want Estates they are trouble^ for them, and when they have Estates they
are troubled ^^ith them. Murmuring Persons, think every thing too ^^uch that is
done by them, but think every thing too lit^^e that is done for them; God is as
far from pleasing ^^em with his Mercy, as they are from pleasing God with ^^eir
Duty. It Is farther observable, that Carnal Men ^^ar no wrath because they feel
none, Imagining, because ^^ey sin unpunished, there is no punishment for their
sins. ^^^d because Christ goes on to spare them, they go on to ^rovoke him;
and as he adds to their Lives, so they add (...) their Lusts, because he is
very Merciful, they will be ^ery Sinful; because he is very good they will be
very ^^ad: And lastly because Justice winks. Men think he is ^^lind: But alas!
Enraged Justice will strick home at last, ^^nd aveng the quarrel of abused
Mercies; for the long^r God forbears, the sharper is the stroke when he comes
^^o Judgment. And the longer God is lifting up his hand, ^^he heavier will the
blow be when it falls Rev. 2.21, 22. (...) gave her space to renent of her
Fornication but she, repen^ed not. Behold I will cast her into a Bed, and then
that Commit Adultry with her into great tribulation, except they ^epent of
their deeds.

Again Consider o man! that so long as you let sin Continue in you, it is and
will be like a Serpent in the bosom that is stinging, or like a Thief in the
closset that is stealing, or like Poison in the Stomach that is Poisoning, or
^ike a sharp two edged Sword in the Bowels that is killing. Therefore for the
Lords sake leave off your Sins, for think of them how you will, some are in
Hell already for smaller Sins (perhaps) than you now daily puts in practice.
For is it not better her to forgo the pleasures of Sin, then hereafter to
undergo the pain for Sin. You that sin now for your profit, will then find your
Sins unprofitable, for he that likes the works of Sin, to do them will never
like the wages of Sin, to have them.

Sin is both Shameful and Damnable, it shameth Me^^ this World and Damneth them
in the World to come (...) is like Judas, it at first falutes, but at last
betrays us, o^^^ Dalila, smile in our faces, and at the fame time betra^^^ us
into our mortal Enemies hand. Oh that Men w^^^ deal truly with their own Souls,
for though many tall^^^ grace yet few taste of it. Every one that talks (...)
Christian does not walk like one, many wear Christ (...) very, who do the
Devils Drudgery, many have (...) Therefore remember that the sheeps coat, will
be (...) from off the Wolves back. If here be nothing done (...) your selves on
Earth, their will be nothing done (...) your souls in Heaven.

And for a further Motive to Repentance suppose, (...) presumptous Sinner! that
thou saw a Condemned Per^^^ hanging over a burning fiery furnace, by nothing
bu^^^ small thread, which was ready to break every mome^^^ would not thine heart
and bowels tremble and yearn (...) such a one? Why (as Nathan said to David)
thou art (...) Man. This is thy very Case, that read this, if th^^^ do
not speedily repent, for what if the thread of (...) life should break, (as thou
know not but it may (...) very next moment) where would thou be then?
w^^ther would thou drop? but into the lake that burne^^ with fire and
Brimstone, where thou must lie welter^^^ Eternally in that fiery Ocean if thou
die in an unconv^^ted state. And can thou read this and not tremble, do^^
not thy heart throb in thy bosom, does not thy tears I^dew the Paper, do
thou not yet smite upon thy brea^^ and bethink thy self of what need thou have
of a chang^^ O what is thy heart made of. If the dismal cries of Cor^^^ Dathen
and Abiram were so terrible, (when the Ear^^ opened her Mouth and swallowed
them up) that all Isra^^ fled at the cry of them, Numb. 16.33.34. Oh h^^^
fearful and amazing would be the Dreadful cry, if G^^ should take (but) off the
Covering from the Mouth of ^^^ll and let the cry of the Damned (in all it is
terrors) ^^^end among the Children of Men, cortainly 'twould (...) very
piercing. Why as God lives that made thy Soul, ^^^nless thou repents and be
converted) thou art but a (...) hours distance from thus. Therefore Oh my
beloved ^^^ristians, if you have any pity for your perishing Souls, ^^^se with
the present offers of mercy, and do not stick ^^ the birth, if the God that
made you have any Aut^o^^^ with you obey his Commands, repent, come in and ^^
Converted, and let not Heaven stand open for you ^^^ain, therefore look to it,
for I will say with Mos^s, ^^^ut. 30.10. That I have set before you, life and
Death, ^^^ssings and Curssings, therefore choose life, that you may (...).

Therefore with good King Hezekiah let us be afraid of ^^^^l's threatenings, and
be truly sorry for our Sins, and ^^^^rtily and unfeignedly repent, for the
same, that when the ^^^cked who have willowed in Lust and Pleasures here ^^^ow,
shall be condemned and plunged into their ever^^^ing pains; we may then I say,
receive Crowns of Glo^^^, and reign with God and Christ in the fullness of all
^^^e Joy and Comfort, in the highest Heavens world ^^^^hout end. To whom with
the Father, Son and Holy ^^^^rit, be all honor, glory, power and dominion now
and (...) evermore. Amen.

Licensed according to Order.

FINIS.

