God Glorified, AND THE Wicked Snared.

IN A THANKSGIVING SERMON For the most happy Preservation of His Majesty, King
WILLIAM III. from a most horrid and barbarous Assassination, in order to an
Invasion from France.

By A. S.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin at the Oxford-Arms in
Warwick Lane. 1696.

God Glorified, AND THE Wicked Snared.
PSALM. IX. 16. The Lord is known by the Judgments that he executes. ALthough
there be nothing in the World so much removed from the Eye of Sense as the
Substance of the Essence of God is; yet there is nothing more known by its Acts
and Operations. The direst Beams of the Divine Majesty that flow from his Being
and Essence, these are too illustrious for our dim and bleared Eyes to gaze
upon. But then the Rays of his Wisdom and Power, Goodness, Justice, and
Holiness reflected upon us from the Creature, these discover God unto us, and
make him known, who in his Essence is a great Deep, an eternal Abyss unto our
Eyes; so that although there be nothing in the World less known than the very
Being or Essence of God; yet there is nothing more clear, more visible in its
Acts, Effects, and Operations, than God's Attributes are, his Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, etc. his Essence (as I may say) it is all covered with thick
Darkness, veyl'd with Clouds from our Eye, but the Rays of those Attributes
shine through those Clouds: So that as we see the Light of the Sun many times
when we cannot see the Sun it self, the Body thereof being hidden under a
Cloud. So may we see the Luster and Glory of the Wisdom, Power, and Greatness
of God, while we cannot see his Essence, nor pry into the Deep of God himself.
Which I conceive will instruct us as a Preparation to understand the Words, The
Lord is known, etc. Which words are an absolute and plain Proposition of
themselves, therefore I shall not any way divide or lessen them, lest also I
should at the same time cut the Nerves of the Truth, and make it weak by being
minute and obscure, which in it self is as it were a strong and an entire Body;
but I shall speak unto them by making these Questions upon them:

I. What is the Judgment of God here said to be executed?

II. When may God be said to be known in the Sense spoken of in the Words?

III. How may we understand more remarkably the Judgments of God? Or thus, How
or by what means do the Judgments that God executes in the World, make the same
God known unto us?

First, What is meant by the Judgments here spoken of? I answer, by Judgment
expressed by the Hebrew Mishpat, we are to understand the righteous Sentences,
and holy Decrees of God past upon Man, or Mankind, in order to Reward or
Punishment; and also the Execution that is made upon the passing of these
Sentences. So the Jewish Masters tell us, It is to judge according to Truth,
and execute also according to that Judgment whether it be in Matter of
Punishment or Reward. And then if you would know the particular Sense, wherein
the Word is taken here, there is no Question but it refers to the worst Sense
(that is to say) an Act of Judgment, the Execution of it, as the latter part of
the words show, The Wicked is snared in the Work of their own Hands. Look in
what Sense the Judgment of God is said to be executed in the latter part of the
Text, in that Sense it is taken in the former part: but the Judgment executed
is spoken in respect of Punishment of Offenders; therefore so is it to be taken
in the former part also.

Secondly, When may God be said to be known in the Sense spoken of in the Words?

I answer, When so much of his Wisdom, Power, Justice, Righteousness, Holiness,
or any other of the Divine Attributes, is discovered and made known unto the
Sons of Men, as that every Man that will consider may indeed observe and take
Notice of; that he that has an ear, may hear; and he that has an Eye, may
see, if he please. We are not here to think that God speaks of the
Metaphysical, or Phylosophical Knowledge of his Essence; No, that is too high
for us; but he speaks of Moral Knowledge of his Attributes, or indeed rather of
a sober and pious, and humble Acknowledgment of them. So that then God may be
said to be known when his Wisdom, Power, Goodness are acknowledged in these
Providence and Dispensations that he exercises and acts among the Sons of
Men. The Holy Scriptures they were not (generally at least, and in the largest
Extents of them) designed to instruct Philosophers, and to discipline and teach
Men of great and raised parts and understandings only, but they were as well
aimed to enlighten, to inform, to teach, and instruct Men of lower and weaker
Capacity. As the Sun does not only shine upon the Cedars of Lebanon, upon the
tallest and bravest Plants of the Wood, the Trees of the Forest; but also upon
the lower Brambles and Bushes; in like manner, God (who would have all to be
saved) does not so cause the Holy Scriptures to be drawn, penned, or Written,
that they should only be understood by Men of greatest Parts (I mean in the
general, or things necessary) and of highest Seize; but also, that what
is necessary should be drawn out of them, even by Men of lower and meaner
Understandings. And hence it comes to pass when we find the Knowledge of God
spoken of in Scripture, it is not to be understood Philosophical, Notional,
Metaphysical Knowledge of his Being and Essence (for this is above all
Capacities) but we are to understand common and ordinary acknowledgment of
those wonderful and glorious Attributes of God shining in his Providence, made
known in his Works, appearing in all those Exercises of that Providence in the
World, and amongst Mankind.

Thirdly, How, and by what means does the Judgments which God executes in the
World make him known unto the Sons of Men.

I answer first in the General, That God's Judgments they are generally suited
and strangely accomodated unto the Time, Opportunity, and also unto the Nature
of those things that are at such times upon the Wheel, or upon the Anvil, when
those Judgments are discovered and are executed in the World. The Wisdom of
Divine Providence it makes it self known every where unto a seeing and
considering Eye; and if we will but take notice of things, we may see the Lines
of Divine Wisdom and Knowledge drawn upon every thing, we may discover the
Footsteps of Righteousness and Justice generally in God's Judgments, of his
Intendments, and of his Designs in the World.

But to fall into particulars: All God's Judgments are seasonable, and the most
remarkable in these Particulars.

1. They often surprise the Sinner in the very act of Sin; they arest the Hand
that is lifted up to strike; they cut off the Head that is plotting and
contriving to destroy; they fall in upon the Sinner just in such a nick of time
either as he was ready to do the Evil, or while he was just doing of it; and
this is a great and a singular Discovery of the Providence of God in these
Affairs. Men, they do indeed follow and set as it were the Contrivances and
Plottings of Evil Men at a great Distance; they do trace the Works of Darkness
in the Dark, and so they often miss that which they follow; the Sinner escapes
in a Crowd, or a Mist of his own making, and so gets off without any Punishment
to them here in this World. But now God he has an Eye in every Attom of the
Sun, and his Eye-Beams they point into every Corner of Man's Heart. He stands
by when all the Contrivances and Machinations of wicked men are upon the Wheel;
stands by though he do not partake or communicate with them. He listens unto
all the Plots that are made; nay, he hears without listening; for he is in the
very Heart that thinks, in the very Head that contrives; and with the Voiee,
the Tongue that speaks, though it whisper never so gently, never so softly, yet
then he only can give Strength to it to move. And now when Plots are laid, and
Designs contrived, and Instruments of Death are forged, and are big, and ready
upon the Anvil; when the Innocent is designed for slaughter, and when the
Righteous is swallowed up in hope; and when the Prey is already devoured in the
Expectation of the Devourer, then does God often times strike in, and fall upon
the Necks of those evil Persons.

You may observe God takes Pleasure (at least in many signal Evils) to choose
the very time of Sin for the time of Punishment: Vzziah stretches out his Hand
to support the Ark, which was not to be touched by any such Person, and he is
in the same Moment smitten dead, touched himself by the Hand of the Lord, and
taken away in the twinkling of an Eye, 1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10. again Vzziah the
King, he arrogates to himself to execute the Priests Office, he invades the
Work that was put into the Hands of other Persons, and in the same Moment he
was smitten with Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. Thus also was it with Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, they were surprised in the very Act of their Rebellion. God thus
deprehends, seizes, and arests a Sinner, even in the very Act and Exercise of
Sin; when he stops him in the full Carear, and lays hold upon him while he was
just falling upon the Evil designed, this shows that it is God that strikes,
and that it is his Wisdom, and his Justice that interposeth in such a case as
this is.

2. If God does fall upon the Sinner by some remarkable, visible, and
extraordinary Judgment; this is an other Demonstration of God's Providence, and
such as may well be said to be in Judgment amongst the Sons of Men. If God
shall fill the World with Darkness at Noonday; if God should draw an Eclipse
over the Eye of the World, that is to say upon the Face of the Sun, at an
extraordinary time, in an extraordinary manner, as he did at our Savior's
Death, would we not all say, and must we not needs acknowledge, that the Hand
of God is here?

So when the Veil of the Temple was rent (the Temple it self being in good
Repair) and divided asunder, as it was at our Savior's Death; was not this a
visible Demonstration of the Interposition of God's Power and of his Providence
here in the World? The Fate also of the Rebels in Israel (before instanced in)
was the more remarkable, in that by a Prophesy, Moses had foretold that some
strange Death should fall upon them, Then the earth opened its mouth and
swallowed them up, Numb. 16. 31, 32. So again we find those Two Hundred and
Fifty Persons that offered strange Fire unto God, these are taken away by a
strange Fire; this is a Demonstration of God's Justice, and of their Iniquity.

3. God's Judgments again are often Executed when the Wicked have brought
things to such a pass as that the Righeous are almost ruined, and are in the
greatest danger, then God appears at such a time, and this Appearance
demonstrates him to be God, and makes him known amongst Mankind; In the mount
will the Lord be seen, Genesis 22. 14. God often lets Wickedness arrive and swell
into great Tides, unto great Excesses and Inundations; he often suffers the
Winds to blow, and the Sea to arise, and the Waves to swell until the Sides of
the Vessel crack, the Cordage be broken; until the Church as it were be ready
to sink, and the mighty Waters ready to pass over it; and then in a Moment he
stills the Winds, he allays the Fury of these Tempests that overflow; he makes
the Face of the Waters smooth like Glass, and he heals the Breaches of the
Vessel, and knits the joints thereof together again.

And when God deals thus with his Church, this is a Demonstration that there is
a Providence awake and alive in the World, that takes Notice of things, even
when they are brought to the greatest Hazards, and in the greatest Dangers and
Extremities. God loves sometimes for the clearer demonstration of his
Providence, to let things go to dangerous Points, unto very dreadful hazardous
Cases; he sometimes places his People upon the Brink of the Pit; and sets his
Church as it were upon the Brow of a Rock, upon a great Precipice; but then he
so orders things again, that he interposes in times of greatest Danger; he
rescues the Prey out of the Mouth of the Lion; he plucks the Firebrand out of
the Fire, and he smites out those Teeth that were ready to devour; this shows
the Wisdom, and Power, and demonstrates the Providence of God.

4. God interposes sometimes also in the midst of great Affairs; when great
Designs are upon the Whell, and great things are driving on toward an Issue,
then God delights to intervene and show himself.

God sits in the Center of the great Wheel of Providence, that rules and
governs all the World; he turns the Primum Mobile, he moves the first moveable,
he turns the highest Sphere; and though he move the lesser Wheel, or the lower
Affairs also, yet we are sure the great and mighty Affairs are governed by none
but God; if a Hair of a Man's Head do not fall without the Providence of God,
how much less the Man himself? If every Man, every single Person be the
Concernment of Divine Providence, how much more those Persons that are God's
Vicegerents, Princes, Magistrates, and Men in place; for they have a double
Relation to God, as Men, and as Men in Power. And therefore you shall find that
God makes mention of the very Name of Cyrus many Years before he was born, and
calls him his Servant, nay his Anointed Servant, and that though Cyrus was a
Heathen Prince, but then he was a Prince, and a Prince that God designed to
make use of in the Restoration of his Church, and return of his People out of
the Captivity of Babylon, Isa. 45. 1. Again, Dan. 2. 22. It Is said he changes
times and seasons, and therefore these changes are in a peculiar manner
attributed unto the providence, and unto the Dispensations of God's Wisdom, and
to his Power; for who can remove Mountains, but he that lifted them up? and who
can exalt the Valleys but he that laid them low? and who can change Times, but
the Author of Time it self, and the Father of Eternity? And therefore, although
thou would not observe the Providence of God in lesser Affairs; though thou
would not hear the Voice thereof whispering in small things; yet when Divine
Wisdom and Power thunder from Heaven, when they appear in several great and
wonderful Revolutions and Transactions in the World, surely he that is not
verily blind, he must see at such a time as this is, when the Hand of the Lord
has been so long and so dreadfully lifted up, who can be so blind as not to
see God's Hand here? or who so hard, and so obdurate as not take notice of the
Judgments and of the Righteousness of God in such a case as this is?

5. If God interpose and execute Judgment upon the Enemies of the Church, when
they are in their greatest Confidence, greatest security, this doing appears to
be such as that it owns no other Author but God himself, Isa. 36. 18, 19, 20,
etc.

Observe here what wonderful, proud, signal Confidence appears in Rabsheka, and
then see the Issue that falls upon this Confidence, Chap. 37. 36. How many
Thousands one Angel slew in one Night. Observe, God delights sometimes to check
the Insolence, and astonish the pride of vain Persons, and of those that lift
up themselves in Iniquity against him. And that he may do this more
effectually, he astonishes them in their greatest confidence, he destroys them
in their highest Security, and weakens them in the very Flower of their
Strength: signal Disappointments are generally attributed unto God, and so are
signal Deliverances also: When we see such Effects wrought as cannot well own
any second Cause, upon whom can we Father these Effects but upon the first
Cause only, that is to say, upon God himself?

If God shall by weak means produce great ends: If he shall cut off the Head of
a Giant by the Hand of a Son of Jesse: If he shall scatter a Conspiracy by the
Light of a Candle: If he shall remove a Mountain by a weak Arm, this must needs
make God known by the Judgments which he executes.

6. If God find out and execute Judgment upon wicked Persons in their greatest
Secrecies, when they thought no Eye had seen, when they were persuaded so thick
a Darkness had been drawn over the Face of their Designs, that none could
pierce nor make a Discovery of it; then for God himself to unfold and unveil
the Monster! this shows that God is Judge indeed: He reveals deep and secret
things, says Daniel, He knows what is in darkness, and the light dwells
with him, Dan. 2. 22.

In these Six Particulars may God be said to be known by the Judgments which he
executes.

And thus indeed, and in all these Respects was God known by the great
Deliverance he vouchsafed to us in the Discovery of this late horrid
Conspiracy, against the Life of our present gracious Sovereign, King WILLIAM,
and in him against our Religion, Lives, Laws and Liberties: and in the great
Judgment that he has exercised upon some of the wicked Contrivers of our
Destruction. In all these Particulars now mentioned, did God make himself known.

1. He surprised them in the very midst of their Sins; he seized upon them in
the very Bowels of the Plot; he broke the Vessels while it was upon the Wheel;
and he dashed the Instruments of Death in Pieces, even while they were
preparing, while they were forging, or rather just forged upon the Anvil.

2. God did also remarkably confound and scatter those wicked Contrivers away;
no sooner did the Day break upon their Designs, and the Light peep upon them;
no sooner was the least Discovery made, but like Men amazed, even at their own
Evil; like Men afraid of the Monster that they themselves had formed, hatched,
and contrived, they run away, they divide, they scatter, they loose themselves
they know not where; so strangely did God confound and amaze them so soon as
ever they were discovered.

3. God discovered them also in the very nick of Time, when the Monster was at
the very Gates of the Womb, when it was just striving for Birth, when it was
just ready to devour the Prey, when the Day and Hour fixed for the Execution of
their black Treachery, and unparalled baseness was already arrived, and
welcomed by the hellish Content and rejoicing of the Assassinators, then did
God point at the Evil by a Beam from Heaven, then did he discover the Plot that
was laid, and so prevented it by the same Discovery.

4. Great Affairs were now upon the Wheel, and great Persons were at work: the
Safety of Christendom, the Peace of Europe, the Establishment of our reformed
Religion were depending. The Person of his sacred Majesty, the chief Patron of
this Cause of God, and the main Obstacle to the Designs of the Tyranny that
makes Head against Europe was therefore struck at.

They well guessed that the Cedar of our Lebanon once fallen, they might hew
down the Shrubs with less difficulty; or that the Sprigs which before were
defended by his Shade, would be crushed by his Fall: That the Peers and Commons
assembled in Parliament, though in themselves strong Props and Pillars of our
State, yet could not long stand, the Foundation and Center of their Strength
being once rased: Yea, that the United Forces, the Confederate Princes would
reel at least, before so mighty a Shock.

Providence therefore appeared signally, in preventing so common a Ruin;
wherein not a single Nation only, though mighty and numerous; but the whole
Interest of diverse States were concerned; and from which, had it taken effect,
many Kingdoms might have dated their Misery.

5. How secure and confident were these wicked Contrivers at this time! the
Traitors being cherished by the Goodness they ingratefully conspired against:
Goodness free from jealousy, as it was from Injustice and Oppression; and the
Vipers seeing themselves nourished in the Royal Bosom, thought they might
unsuspected sting the Princely Breast.

Thus secure they had already swallowed the Prey in hopes, they had shared and
divided the Nations, assigned the Keys of England to be the Holds of a Foreign
Tyrant; they had cantoned us into several Tribes for themselves to seize on,
and each had marked his intended Vassals.

They had resolved, (and that with great Confidence) to have blown up all our
Securities in a Moment, and to have amazed the World with an Act of Villainy,
surpassing the most accursed Treasons of all Ages past.

In Assurance of Success they insulted and divided the Spoil in their Thoughts;
all things (but especially his Majesty's being above little Distrusts, and full
of Love which thinks and suspecteth no Evil) conspired to favor their
Treachery; which so hightned their Expectations, that they imagined the
Thunderbolt now might be against the Thunderer himself, and that Lightning
might be taught or constrained to ravish Heaven, and their designs move against
the Will of Providence, and God's Designs in the World.

6. These wicked men thought that no Eye had seen them; like cunning Workmen
they laid the Works of Darkness in the dark; and contrived those secret and
evil Designs with very great and signal Secresy: But God rent the Veyl of the
Pit that they dug; and he broke the Day upon them, and so the snare it self
was broken also.

God would not that our Religion, and Laws, and Liberties, and Prince and
People should be surpised in a Moment into Death, Confusion and Slavery.

He would not (so great was his gracious Providence) that the Reformation which
had been first produced with so much Labor and Toil; which had been the Fruit
of so great Councils, so many Martyrs, so many Prayers and Tears, so many
signal and great Endeavors and Examples; he would not, I say, that all this
should be blasted in a Moment, by the Contrivances of wicked and desperate
Persons.

He had lately restored to England her Privileges and Liberties, which were
well nigh enslaved by Arbitrary Power; had anointed a David to bless and govern
his Israel, a Prince whose Virtue equals his Greatness, and whose Dignity
receives a Luster from his Piety, and he would not deprive us of a Mercy which
we have as yet but tasted enough of to increase our Desires after its
continuance; he would not subject us to the same Yoke of Tyranny he had but
lately rescued us from: He would not that the Crown so lately fixed, should so
soon fall from the Head of him, who had found Mercy not to stain its Glory with
any unjust, or unprincely Action. Therefore for this Deliverance we have great
Cause to bless him this Day, and for ever. And since God has preserved a King
dear to us as our Lives and Religion; let us make a return of Thankfulness
proved in Zeal to the Honor of God and Religion, and in all Loyalty to the
Power preserved over us. Our Zeal to Religion should discover it self in aiming
at those Ends for which it was given, scil. The Peace of the Church, and the
Peace of the State, and the Safety of our own Souls. Let every Man that
pretends to hate the Superstition of the Church of Rome, hate the Treachery and
the Rebellion of their Principles also: What Advantage will it be to curse the
Pope at Rome, and to nourish Popish Principles under our own Roof, nay, in our
own Hearts?

To conclude, That Religion that makes us good Men, will make us good Subjects
also; and if it do not make us good Subjects, without doubt it has not made us
good Christians: For it is one indispensible Law of Christian Religion, that we
obey Magistrates, that we submit unto those Authorities that God has placed
over us; and if we do not submit to them, neither do we submit to God's Laws.
Let us therefore take care that none of us be deficient in the same Duty, but
let us obey God, and let us obey Laws, and live in Peace, in mutual Love one of
another, and this is the way to be happy here, and happy hereafter also.

FINIS.

