Corrupted COIN Made Good by CAESAR: Corrupted MAN Made Good by CHRIST the
Power of GOD.
ON the 15th and 16th of the Eleventh Month, 1695/6. The Lamentable Confusion
and Distraction of the People of this Land, about the badness of the Coin, was
before the view of my Mind; and how earnest they are to have it Remedied, some
Projecting this way, others that, generally concluding the best way is, to call
in the Old (which is abused) and melt it down by Fire, and separate the Base
from the Fine, and so make the Fine into New, putting thereon the true Value,
Figure and Fineness by Caesar's Authority; so the Cause of Confusion and
Distraction being removed, the Effects thereof would cease.

Whereupon, It ran through my Mind to this Effect; Even after this manner will
the Lord deal with the People (not only of this Land, but with all People) of
all Lands and Nations, who are in the sight of the Lord grown Corrupted, are
out of, or have lost his Image of Purity and Holiness; some retaining only the
likeness thereof, and that very dimly too, hardly to be discerned, being much
Clipped and Deformed, that there is an exceeding want of Weight and Value (being
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary) because of which the Lord is
displeased, and remains so to be, until the Cause be removed.

Others are so grossly Corrupted, even to that degree, as that they cannot be in
the sight of God allowed Current and Passable; but Reprobate Silver (God does,
and) Men shall call them, because the Lord has rejected them, Jer, 6. 30. And
the chief Cause and Reason thereof is Peoples Sins, which they love, and
wherein they live, many not yet being willing to live out of them while they
live on this side the Grave, though Christ Jesus, the Lord from Heaven, the
quickening Spirit, is come to put an end to Sin, and bring in everlasting
Righteousness, according to Daniel's Prophecy, Dan. 9. 24. and 1 John 3. 8.

For that day which the Prophets saw, and through the Holy Ghost Prophesied
should come (Zech. 13. 1, 2, 9. and Mal. 3. 2. 3.) is certainly come, because
the light thereof does shine into the dark Hearts of People, without respect of
Persons, showing unto every one, at one time or other, their present States and
Conditions; insomuch that a Child which is capable to use its Tongue to tell a
Lie, by virtue of the in-shining thereof, is measurably able to Judge, that a
Lie is not Good, but Bad, as also the Liar; and that telling Truth is not Bad,
but Good. The same shows the Drunkard, that Drunkenness is Bad, and not Good,
and that God is not the mover thereunto, but the Devil, etc.

Now if all People would believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, wherewith he
has Enlightened every Man that comes into the World, John 1. 9. and obey it,
and walk therein, 1 John 1. 7. as the Nations of them that are Saved shall,
Rev. 21. 24. They would find that Virtue and Power therein, which is able to
Consume, Burn up and Separate, the Dross and Tin, which is their Sins, and
purify them throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, from all Corruptions and
Defilements, and stamp upon them the Image and Likeness of the Living God, to
wit, Purity and Holiness, without which none shall ever see the Lord, Heb. 12.
14. and in which all ever have, do, and for ever shall see, and find acceptance
with God; which that all may do, who yet do not, is the true desire of my Soul.

Richard Scoryer.
POSTSCRIPT.
AS Silver mixed with Dross, is unacceptable unto Man; so is Man, being mixed
with Sin, unacceptable unto God. And as such Silver must be Refined by Fire to
make it acceptable with Man; so must Man be Refined by the Spirit of Judgment
and Burning, Isa. 4. 4. before he can find acceptance with God.

The Fining-Pot is for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold, but the Lord tries
the Heart, Prove. 17. 3.



London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-street,
1696.


