A Scandalous, Libellous, and Seditious PAMPHLET Entitled, The Valley of Baca:
OR, The Armies Interest pleaded, the Purchasors seconded, the danger of the
Nation demonstrated in 34 QUAERIES, ANSWERED. And the present state of Affairs
briefly vindicated.

By a True Lover to the Peace and Welfare of his Country.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.

THE Valley of BACA Answered.
1. VVHe^her seeing it was the Parli^ments Army that brought in his Majesty
when his own Party and Armies could not do it, They deserve not all due respect
and tenderness? And whether proportionable encouragement ought not to be given
t^ such, who shall be found to merit it, according to his Ma^esties late
Declarations?

Answ His Ma esty has given assurance to confer a Character of Favor upon
those Person* of the Army who were Instrumental in his Restoration; and in
order thereunto, there is Care taken, that those Lands purchased by them, or
Received for Service, in their possession, to be secured to them and their
Posterity.

2. Whether it can be called tenderness, or encouragement, to turn out so many
of the old Officers and Soldiers of the Army, and Garrisons, contrary to the
known Laws Martial, and contrary to his Ma esties Royal Promise and Engagement,
not paying their Arrears before disbanding nor letting them know any cause for
which they are Outed, only to make way for such who have been known Enemies to
Parliament and Army, not having left above one Comm^ssioned-Officer in many
Regiments? And whether the rest of the Army, who engaged for the Parliament,
are not like speedily to follow, if not prevented? And whether the Nations are
not insensibly brought hereby to ruin and slavery, before they see it.

Answ. To the Second, Let the Querist inform himself aright, and he shall find
those only of the old Army divested of their Imploymen^s, that have been
Instrumen^s actively or passively under all Changes, and are person, tempered
fit for the swallowing down of any Change whatsoever: And those Continued, are
either Persons that have given Testimony of their dislike of those Grand
Inconveniences that were daily practiced upon these Nations, by a Giddy,
Unconstant, Proud, Insolent, Ignorant, and unprincipled Generation: Or else
such who were wearied out with the often Changes, abhorred to be Instruments
longer in using their Arms to defend Faction, and therefore they did readily
adhere to that Noble Northern Conductor. The Querist in these words, viz.
Turning out many of the Officers of the Army, to make way for known Enemies,
discovers his spirit to be turbulent and factious, to keep up distinctions of
Parties: A thing Dangerous and Unprofitable, and not permitted by any Wise
Princes or States. But as the Case now stands, it is the most wise and
advisable course that can be taken, to put Arms in the Hands of such Persons
of both Parties, as really desire Settlement. If the Arms of the Nation were
not so disposed of, there would be new Matter for Jealousy: which is
endeavored to be fomented by the Author of these Queries.

3. Whether the Justice of the Long Parliaments Cause, has not been
sufficiently owned by the late King, his concessions at the Isle of Wight; And
by the Solemn Covenant and Declaration of this King, made and taken at his
Coronation in Scotland?

Answ. No doubt, but that Public or Sacred Act or Thing was done either by his
late Majesty, or his now Majesty, due respect will be had thereunto: However,
the Scene of Affairs are altered, his late Majesty was under Restraint, and a
powerful Army in being; his Majesty present had a Crown offered him upon Terms,
it is not to be believed or supposed (otherwise then Enviously) that what His
Father did, or what He did Himself, will be by Him disowned; although
peradventure not in the sense of the Author of these Queries. His Majesty now
was called in out of a perfect necessity to bring the Nation to some kind of
Settlement; and the security the Nation has, is his own Interest; that is, it
is his Interest to do all or more than what justly or legally could have been
expected by the Undertakers of the late War: It is evident, for that by any
thing his Majesty has already done; and will be led by his Principles of just
preserving Policy, his deep Judgment and Skill in Government, that he will be a
King of Virtue, a Rectifier of Abuses, a Balance to Justice, a Prevention of
Exorbitancies in Ministers of State and Justice, an Expeller of bad and
grievous Laws, a Discountenancer of Debauchery and Vice, an Encourager of
those that do well; by which he will find Favor of God and Man.

4. Whether this Convention now sitting, are not like to endanger the Cause of
the Long Parliament, our Religion and Liberties, by bringing the guilt of the
blood shed in the late War, upon their heads, and all who adhered to them, if
the bold and saucy encroachments of Prelatical and other intruders, be not
timely prevented?

Answ. I shall answer this Quaere with another, whether that the Long
Parliament did not suffer their Cause to be overthrown by Cromwell the Usurper
and his Acomplices, in the secluding of Members, putting to Death of the King,
and other Actions that made the Nation to loath them, and weeded them out of an
Interest to back them in carrying on of what they undert^ok.

5. Whether the Old Parliament may not yet have another Resurrection, seeing
they could not be d^ssolved without the joint consent of both Houses, which
hitherto has not been done according to the Legal intent of the Act for that
purpose?

Answ. To the first part I answer yes, 19000 years hence, if the Doctrine of
that Philosopher be true, that once in 19000 years all Beeings shall Act the
same part over again, they have already Acted hereupon Earth: In this Age it is
not likely they shall have a Resurrection, in regard they preserved not their
Authority, free from those Violations and Alterations that passed upon them. To
the other or last part of this Quaere, I answer, As the Saylor cannot Sail by
the Compass in a Storm; and that it is convenient to restrain the Sick from
Food, and to give him Physic, Laws that are made to respect such and such
Reasons of State are in force as long as the occasion lasts. Affairs have
changed themselves into many forms and shapes, since insomuch that that Act
will not at all fit or sort with Affairs now; it is become Null and Void of it
self. If they had con^inued without those Vicissitudes and Changes, and the
same Reasons of State on foot, and the same Interest able to support it self,
in that Case the Act had been pleadable. Bracton, Fleta, Horn, and Littleton
agree, That if the Lord shall fail to protect his Vassal, the Vassal's Oath's
dissolved, for that the Law intends a Condition, and the Law freeth him from
his Obedience: Even so is it, that Parliament seized to be a Parliament, by
being not able to protect the People from those frequent Violations and
Outrages, Irregularities and Disorders that were daily committed upon the
Subject; and as the Vassals service in the aforementioned Case, and the like
Cases might be atturned and assigned to another Lord; So doubtless the Subject
may be atturned and assigned to sit under the Council and determination of
another Parliament.

6. Whether seeing there is like to be so great a difference in the Complexion
of Parliaments, one being ready to give away that, which the other has
obtained by Conquest: and the next succeeding ready to condemn the former for
so doing, it be not most safe for his Majesty and this Convention, to grant and
confirm his Fathers Concessions in the Isle of Wight?

Answ. To this let the Author look back, and he shall find that Parliaments
speak the language of the Interest of State that is most Predominate at the
time of their Sitting; If the Factions of the People be Predominate, it
speaks lowdest in their behalf; and so of the Prince, the like of the
Nobility or Clergy. So that if it were necessary for the beginning of the Long
Parliament to adhere to the People, it is now more necessary for this
Parliament to adhere to his Majesty, to balance the extremity of the Humor of
State that did swell it self up to Inconsistency on the behalf of the People,
insomuch that nothing but Ruin and Confusion could have been expected. Who is
it that does not see that if this Parliament should out of their Affections to
his Ma esty, give away all the People Righ^s? Tha^ hi^ Majesty himself out of
his Wisdom, and Justness, and Noblenes of mind will be a good allay, he knowing
like a good Physician of State, that it is necessary in the constitution of a
Body to keep the Hun ors equal by proportion, that one do not predominate over
the other, wh ch produces a healthy Constitution; the contrary, Diseases: as
for hi granting of the Concessions of the Isle of Wight, as the Case now
stands, it would not be safe to Posterity to insist upon that, but rather as
is said before, to account it sufficient to receive no other security than what
his Majesty's Interest will produce, the which by the operations of time, will
reduce all other Interests to a condition of Security.

7. Whether any thing done by this Convention, can be obleiging to the Nation,
seeing they have not the right Constitution of a Parliament; according to the
Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: And whether any Parliament can be so called
for the future, till the Long Parliament, consisting of Lords and Commons, be
actually dissolved by ^oint consent?

Answ. That which they do, is obliging to the Nation. If the Nation submit to
it, a part discontented in the Nation, i^ not to be taken for the Nation; but
the Interest that is uppermost is to be taken for the Nation: So it i^ where
there is Factions in States, as in Italy, the Gulses, and Gibeleons. If one
State should have two Factions in it, another State sends Embassage, they
send to the uppermost, who are able to give Laws; and not to that which must
receive Laws. Beside, what this Parliament does, must needs oblige, because
what they do, suiteth and agrees with the Minds of most of the Nation. And as
Sir Edward Cook says, Part 4. Instit. Chap. of High Co^r^s of Parliament, That
in some Cases the Members may answer, That they must go and consult with their
Counties for which they serve. The Original of all Law; and Power rise from the
People Actively or Passively; let them be just, or Unjust. A good Prince that
is absolute, respects what will best Suit, Secure, and Content the People: A
Tyrant Consults what he may (having opportunity) enforce upon them. If these
three Nations should be Consulted, there would, no doubt, be three to one to
give their Approbation of what is done; therefore it must be oldging to the
Nation. In such Times, Rule by Mode and Figure cannot be observed. You cannot
sail by the Compass in a storm, as is laid before. For Dissolution of the Long
Parliament by Joint Consent, that need not to be, unless that the Long
Parliament had kept their Interest and themselves in the same form without
alteration, and power to be able to give Lawe^ together with the King, as they
did at the time of passing that Act. If that Parliament at the time of sitting
down of this, had undertaken to deal in the Government as formerly, I pray what
obedience would the Nation have given to them? So that the Act in that case
became void of it self. There be many Acts of Parliament that become void by
time, and need no other repealing, then that which they provide against,
growing up to use. As for Example, There is an Act yet unrepealed, that no Ho s
shall be Brewed in Beer; and another, That no Sea-Coal shall be burned in
London. Is there any need of Repealing these Acts? None surely. The Case is the
same in the Matter in hand: for there is now no Interest that is able to
strengthen is, to be observed: nor is there need to repeal it; for that it is
Repealed by several Concurring accidents and affairs of State that are
Considerable in opposition of that, able to render it useless and void, as it
is.

8. Whether if the King by his power, can make this a Legal Parliament, before
such a Dissolution of the other, his Father could not do the like? And whether
the Mungril Parliament which he chose at Oxford, was not as ust and Legal as
this?

Answ. This Parliament had a Legal Being and Power from the People, as is
before expressed: Their Election demonstrated the Peoples Consent and
Approbation; which is a sufficient stamp of Authority. His Majesty's Consent
being added thereunto, makes it unquestionable. If the King by his Arms, and
if that Parliament at Oxford by their Counsel had prevailed, their Success had
given it a sufficient Sanction for its Legality.

9 Whether by the late Vo^e past by his Convention, to dispossess all
Sould'ers and Purchasers, of their Interests in Crown-La^d, when they m ght by
long Leases, have secured his Ma estly sitle, incre sell his Revenue beyond his
Predecessors; and have also satisfied thousands of Families tha^ are now
undone, it does not evidently appear, that they have designed and resolved to
ruin and destroy all those that ever served, and adhered to the Interest of
the Long-Parliament?

Answ. If the Counsel, Arms, o^ Interest of the Possessors of these Lands had
been able to have held them, their Title had been made good by the same means
they held it by, so long it lasted: but that sailing, their Title is void; and
now it must be in his Majesty's Royal Breast what he will do in that case: No
doubt but he will be moderate, because he will not leave too great an
Impression of Discontent upon so Considerable a part of the Nation. Other then
this, the Purchasers of those Lands cannot in Justice expect, as the case
stands.

10. Whether it be not therefore the best way for his Majesty speedily to
dissolve this Convention, and not confirm any thing they shall enact; But
rather, forthwith to recall the old Members to settle the Nations?

Answ. Whether that be not as much as to say, Let there be a foundation laid
for a New War. Whether is it convenient to do any thing that should give cause
of Jealousy to his Majesty of his State and Dignity, if he should meet with
opposition, it would but put a necessity upon him to fortify himself by such
Reasons of State, as would be remote from the good of the Public: Whereas
otherwise, he meeting with no opposition, will be led by Natural Consequences,
to do all that may be obliging: His Majesty by his long deprivation, has
learned the temper of the English Nation, well observed by Sir John Suckling,
in his Letter to the Lord Jermyn, 1640. says, The King may preserve his power,
by giving it away: for the people of England have ever been like wantons, which
pull and tugg as long as the Kings have pulled with them, as you may see in
Edw. 3. King John, and Edw. 2. and indeed by all the Troublesome and
Unfortunate Reigns: but those Kings as have let it go to oblige the People, the
People have put it into their hands again with addition, as you may see by
Queen Elizabeth, and others, Kings of this Realm. Those have been most powerful
abroad and at home in their own Dominions, who obliged their People most: That
this is the Disposition of His present Majesty, is certain; and Envy it self
cannot truly say otherwise.

11. Whether it be not as dangerous for his Majesty to cast aside his old
Parliament, to follow the Council of these young Conventioners, who can neither
secure, him, themselves, nor the People; As it was for Rehoboam, in a parallel
case, seeing the Spirit of the Nation is ragingly discontented?

Answ. Whether that if his Majesty should do such a thing, it would not
discontent the Nation much more than it is at present, as the Author
supposes, or then can be imagined by the Author: It is to be admired, that the
Parliament, whom he maliciously calls a Convention, are not more severe; it
is an argument that they are deliberate and grave. If it were so, as he
wickedly suggesteth, His Majesty's unexpressible Temper and Inclination to
Moderation, will be a good allay, as is said before. Indeed, it has been usual
in such Vicissitudes, that when one part of a Nation has made War upon
another, That the predominate party have been Tainted with Revenge: But this
present Parliament make no other use of their Power then becomes them, and
demonstrateth their Undertaking to be the Effect of Council, and not of Arms.
Besides, His Majesty is endowed with a spirit of discerning, not to Incline to
such Councels as shall tend to the Detriment of the Public. Which is our
greatest happiness and security.

12. Whether if our Religion and Liberties, contended for by the
Long-Parliament, with the expense of so much Blood and Treasure, should be now
lost, we are not like to be brought to the French mode of Government: and all
Persons deterred ever to appear for a Parliament in futuro?

Answ. This need not be feared at all: Philip de Comenius observes well of the
English Nation, that they cannot endure too much slavery, or too much liberty;
This hi^ Majesty well knows, and that if it were at his Majesty's Choice to
be King of England as the King of France is King of France, he would rather
choose to be King of England upon the terms his Predecessors were Kings of
England, for that it is more honorable for to be King of Princes or Freemen,
than to be King of Slaves and Pesan^s: He who rules a Free People is much more
powerful, for that his Arm and Treasure he can employ against a Common Enemy,
and be able to give Laws to Foreign Princes, either by Council or Arms, whereas
if he Rules Slaves, his Council and Arm are always Employed in his own
defense against his own People whom he should defend and pro^ect.

13. Whether, seeing the Design is now visible to debauch the Army, by casting
out the Parliament's Friends, thereby to intrude their Enemies, by which means
contentions and discords may arise, seeing the greatest part of the Army and
others who are engaged for the Parliament are still in being, who cannot but
retain affections to their old Principles and Ma^^ers, It be not therefore most
safe speedily to disband the Army, seeing also it was the Expectation of the
Nation upon the Return of his Majesty to his Government; The Militia being
sufficient to secure the peace of the Kingdom.

Answ. For the Answer to this, you are referred to the Answer to the second
Quaere, only to the last part of this Quaere, viz. The disbanding of the Army,
and trusting to the Militia: If that were effected, immediately the Author
would arrive to his Arm and End, which would be dangerous; for if the Militia
should be settled in the hand of one party, it would be cause of jealously in
the other, if you should settle the Militra in the Hands of all Parties, it
would be useless: So that it is better to wave trusting to the Militia, until
that the mind* of all are more quiet and settled, and to keep up a considerable
part of the Army, which being Conducted, as is expressed in the Answer to the
second Quaere, will be in his Majesty's Hands an equal Arbitrator of
Differences, and of much more use and less Charge to the Nation than the
Militia will be, for that he who pays 5. s. per annum to the Assessements for
the Army, will be at 20 s. per annum Charges at the lest in finding Arms and
other Expenses and loss of time, by attending at Muster, and infinitely much
more in case of Se vice, the like of his I state proportionably, that shall by
the Act for the Militia find Horse and Arm, and pay to a Rider: The Militia
will be of use when the minds of People are united into One, which (no doubt)
will be by the Endeavors of his Majesty and with the blessing of God in a
short time, if not anticipated by the wicked practices of the Jesuits, and the
ungratefulness of unquiet Spirit.

14. Whether it be s^fe for his Majesty to enforce a superstitious form of
Worship when covenanted against, and whether, if according to the Covenan^, the
Nation should appear against it, it may not be of dangerous consequence to his
Majesty's Government?

Answ. For the Answer to this, you are referred to the Answer to the 19th. and
27th. Quaeries.

15. Whether National sins will bring down National Judgments, and whether the
sins of Blood and Idolatry, no only at present seemingly commitred, but
promoted by this Convention, are not like to become National sins if his
Majesty prevent not?

Answ. To this I shall say little, in regard the Author has referred the
prevention of his fears to his Majesty, who is a merci^ull and wise Prince, who
will do that which shall not be ^ustly sensurable by hi^ worst of Enemies; that
he may be so, we must pray to the Almighty to lead him by the hand of
Providence, and still watch over him for good to these Nations.

16. Whether those who opposed his Majesty's c ming in upon conditions, have
not showed themselves unfrienaly both to their King and Country; and when her
they who should have been the People's refuge have not proved their ruin, by
not asserting the old Parliament's Cause to be just and lawful, as their
Brethren did in Sco^land?

Answ. It is very certain, as before alleged, That it is better that his
Majesty came in without Terms, than with Tearns; for if that he had come in
upon Terms, those Terms must have been made with one Party or Interest, or
with all the Parties and Interests; if with one of the Party, that had been to
the prejudice of the rest: if it had been with all the Parties, that could
hardly have been effected: The Differences were so irreconcilable, that without
an Umpire, it would have produced another War, and unto which of the Parties
Success might have happened is uncertain, so that all had run an equal danger;
therefore it is much better that his Majesty came in as an equal Arbitrator of
all our Differences. Moreover, at that time when his Majesty was invited into
the Nation, Lambert was forming a new War, which would have been safe for no
Party, whose Principles were nothing but Ambition, who, as he has said
himself, did Interrupt the then sitting Parliament the 13 of October, 1659.
upon no more than half an hours consideration, being led thereto by a violent
Impulse of the Spirit; such a person as shall attempt such a thing upon the
face of Authority without more deliberation, Let it be Legal or Illegal, is not
at all to be trusted. So that it is evident, that there was a necessity of his
Majesty's coming in at that time, and that it will be for the better to the
Nation that he came in without Terms: For as he is King of all, so he now must
equally respect all, and Frame all his Reasons of State to that End: by which,
he will lay a sure Foundation to his Sovereignty.

17. Whether, seeing there is above four hundred Thousand Families engaged to
that old Parliament's Cause, by way of purchase in this Nation, who are like to
lose their Purchases, It be not only dangerous at present to inflame the
Spirits of these mea; But whether it be not a ground to espouse a quarrel to
their posterities, if their Estates should not be confirmed?

Answ. See the Answer to the 9th Quaery. Moreover, the Interest of the
Purchasors was not able to buy it self up to make Terms, nor support that
Interest that sold the Lands unto them: Therefore His Majesty is not bound to
make good those Sales, farther then his Royal Word shall oblige him, or his
Interest lead him unto: Which no doubt will be Honorable.

18. Whether any confidence can be put in a giddy multitude, who crying Hosanna
to day, are ready to cry Crucify to Morrow, especially of the English Nation,
who are ever fluctuating?

Answ. His Majesty knows full well, That no Confidence is to be put in the
Multitude: but that he must put Confidence in Actions of Justice and Honor,
which will Establish His Throne, Adorn his Crown, and strengthen him to display
his Scepter to the satisfaction of all Interests.

19. Whether, seeing Prelacy was a main Ingredient into the late Wars, (they
having intruded so many English Popish Ceremonies into the Church,) and his Ma
esty is bound by Covenant and Declaration to root it up in his Dominions, it
can therefore be safe to re-establish it; And whether Mr. Duglas his Sermon was
not a spiritual Prediction of some speedy Judgment to follow, if such a horrid
violation of the Covenant be tolerated?

Answ. His Majesty's proceedings in that particular are just and honorable; He
intends a Synod to reconcile those differences in the Church: It is as
reasonable for the Presbyterians to abate of what they would have, as for the
Episcopal to abate of what they desire; for that as to Government or Ceremonies
in the Church, neither of their Forms are absolutely necessary to Salvation: So
that his Majesty, by the advice of a learned and wise Synod to moderate things
between them that they may unite and agree, will, as He is Head of these
Nations, do a Good Office, and answer the Ends of the Covenant, which seems
to drive principally at a Government according to the Word of God: and not ab
olutely this, or that, Government, farther then in opposition to that of
Popery, etc.

20. Whether it be not the duty of the Ministry to prevent the Apostasy of
their People from the Covenant, by their Preaching and Doctrines, now we are
running unto another extreme, as well as they did lately when in a former
extreme, especially, when the Wolf is already amongst their flocks; And whether
it be not the duty of all Cities and Counties, to follow the Examples given
from Wiltshire and Dorsetshire, by petitioning to settle Religion according to
the Covenant?

Answ. The Author sounds the Trumpet of Sedition in this Quaery but he will
be prevented by his Majesty's care in that particular in his Reconciling the
two grand and considerable Interests of these Nations.

21. Whether the turning out near three thousand learned and godly Ministers,
to intrude such who neither know how to pray or preach, will not increase
discontent in all their Congregations, when they shall see how their Souls are
like to be starved and cheated?

Answ. That there has not been any as yet turned out because Presbyte^rians,
but because in others Rights; if they cannot pray and preach, doubtless upon
due proof thereof Remedy may be had against them in that case; for his Majesty
has declared that he will maintain a godly Ministry; And no Prince yet that
ever lived upon the Earth has ever accounted his Word more sacred than he does.

22. Whether it will not renown his Majesty in the hearts of his People, to
hasten a full Indempaity to all his Subjects in his Dominions, as an Act of
Council, till the old Parliament sits, and to expunge all Provisoes which may
any way invalidate the operation of the Act, and to do the like by an Act for
Sales?

Answ. How often has his Majesty out of his own grace urged the passing of the
Act of Indemnity, with as much earnestness as the party themselves that are
concerned can in modesty desire.

23. Whether the making of Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Calamy, and Mr. Baxter, Chaplains
at Court, be not a Prelatical design, either to draw them by preferme to that
party, or to lull the Presbyterians asleep, till they are all turned out o
their places, as many are served already?

Ans. The 3 Persons here mentioned are not such to be warpt to any thing that
is evil, in hope of Preferment: Nor is it his Majesty's design, other than to
be truly informed by them of the best and moderate ways to Reconciliation,
which will be much better than for his Majesty to adhere to one party or to the
other party; for that his adhering to one party would not be safe, also the
keeping them in equal hopes and favor is not safe, for that the keeping up of
Factions in Church will produce Factions in State: therefore the way his
Majesty is now taking, is the best to please God, secure himself, and for
handing forth peace to his People.

24. Whether two National constitutions can stand together, and therefore
whether the settling of the Prelatical Hierarchy does not naturally predict the
fall an^ extirpation of Presbytery?

Answ. That it is true as before, the countenancing and encouragement of the one
is a detriment to the other; therefore, the extremes of both patries being lopt
off, they may be united and become one, which will much renown the Church of
England, and render it more formidable against the Church of Rome, whose
practice it is to foment differences; therefore it is the duty of every one to
study and practice Reconciliation.

25. Whether such Prelates who have been viewing the Altars of Damascus are
like to have a peaceable entertainment here, in their superstitious Popish
fopperies, when a new Generation of Youths are started up since their
extirpation, who never yet bowed the knee to Baal.

Answ. That although the Presbyterian Interest be considerable, yet the
Episcopal are not inconsiderable, if not as considerable; and since that their
difference, in respect of Church Government, is not irreconcilable, Union is to
be endeavored: It is not my work here to prescribe a way, I leave it to those
whose work it is to do that, my Task is to detect the Sophistry of the Author.

26. Whether seeing his Ma esty has Declared, He will countenance godly
Ministers, it could be therefore intended when he made Dr. (...) Dean of
Westminster, That the said Doctor should turn out all the Orthodox Ministers
within the liberties of the said ^eana^y, as he is endeavoring to do? And
whether the Prelaticall party do not abase his Majesty's cars, by telling him
they displace none but Phamticks?

Answ. I know not whether it be true or false, that the Dean of Westminster
has done any such thing; peradventu^e all the Incu^bents of those Livings are
alive, or that some of them were not ordained by Bishops or Pre^byters, in that
case the Dean's Actions are legal.

27. Whether there be not of the Presbyterian way, a hundred good Preachers for
one of the Prelaticall; and whether that Government be not best for the Nation,
that has most and best Preachers?

Answ. There are godly and painful Preacher; of both so^ts; that Government
assuredly is best for the Nation that may reconcile these two grand
Persuasions, much better than that which shall keep up the Distinctions and
consequently the Factions.

28. Whether the re-instating of the Prelatical Hierarchy, with the
Appurtenances, does not in the consequence of it make null and void, all
Ordinations, Sacraments, and Marriages, practiced since their extirpation; and
whether the Nation hereby will not be brought into a strange and horrid
Confusion?

Answ. Those Persons that were ordained by Presbyters, and are not upon those
Livings w^ereof the Incumbents are living, do still remain, and are not, nor
are likely to be turned out, but their Ordination is deemed good: As for
Marriages, it is a public Act, and it receives its Being and Essence from the
consent of the parties, it cannot be made void by ^ing administered by an
improper Agent, if it were, all Judgments and Determinations in Law since these
times would be made void: It was the Opinion of the Judges in Henry the VII.
his time, that the Judgments and proceedings in Law in Richard the III. his
time were good, although they were passed in the Usurper's time, by whose
Authority none could administer Justice; but the necessity of doing Justice was
such, that the illegal Administration of it was dispensed with. So, the
necessity of Marriage was such, that the unusual performing of it does not make
it void, because that the consent of the Parties makes the Marriage, the other
is but the Solemnity of it; and since there is a public Record thereof, it is
therefore legal.

29. Whether the best way therefore to set^le the Church, and consequently the
Nations, and to prevent clamours to his Ma esty, were not speedily to summon a
Synod, consisting of two Ministers out of each County, to be chosen by the
Presbytery of Ministers, calling in the help of the best and most sober of the
Episcopal but not Prelatical party which deligate from Scotland, and other
Protestant Churches, giving due liberty to the soberly conscientious?

Answ. These, or much better Rules, are intended by his Majesty to be pursued.

30. Whether the pressing of the Oath of Supremacy be not of dangerous
consequence, to ensnare many thousands of Protestants, who do conscienciously
scruple it, and generally all the Pre byterians of the three Nations. And
seeing the true intention of that Oath was to renounce the Pope's Supremacy,
whether it be not more consonant to a Protestant conscience, to press an Oath
upon all par^ies, directly tending hereunto instead thereof?

31. Whether pressing the Oath of Supremacy, as it now stands, does not make
null and void ^he solemn League and Covenant; and whether it be not dangerous
to enforce the Nations to forswear themselves, seeing in the one they have
directly covenanted and sworn against Prelates; and in the other they swear to
maintain all the Privileges and Customs, that either now do or heretofore have
appertained to the Crown; Of which, creating Bishops is one. And whether the
Convention taking such an Oath, were not preobliged, not only to establish
Prelacy; but also to turn out all Soldiers and Purchasers, in any such Lands
belonging to the Crown; yea, most unnaturally forcing men to swear so to do;
and consequently to starve their own Children?

Answ. The Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy is not at all against the Solemn
League and Covenant, although it does oblige those that take the Oath of
Supremacy and Allegiance to defend and maintain his Ma^esty's Righ^s and
Prerogative; as in the creating of Bishops. Suppose that his Ma esty should
settle the Government of the Church without Bishops, by some other
Super-intendence, ^o the content of the Episcop^l and Presbyterian p^rties,
because that is one of the Privileges of the Crown, it does not oblige the
party to contend for that which his Ma esty discharges him of by a public ^ct
of State: As for example, if a Lord shall, upon condition from his Tenant or
Vassal, take his Oath for performance of several Services in Homage and Feal^y,
if the Lord shall discharge the Tenant of part or all, the Tenant is so much,
or wholly discharged of his Oaths as the Lord shall dischage, notwithstanding
the Oath was peremptory: In thi^ case, as also in that of Lands, he that shall
suggest, to beget ^ealousies and fears of any thing, but that his Majesty will
de^l honorably justly, and well with all his Sub^ects, i^ an Enemy to the
peace and welfare of the People.

32. Whether it be for the safety of the Nations, to permit the Popish Lords to
sit in the House before they have taken such an Oath?

33. Whether his Ma esty, this City and Kingdoms be not in danger of bloody
Massacre by the confluence of those bloody Irish Papists, to the number of many
thousands about City and Court, who withstanding his Ma^estie late Proclamation
to the contrary, who had a hand in the horrid massacre in Ireland and Savoy?
And whether countenance and respect from the Courtiers, be not not a great
Inducement to draw over many thousands more if not timely prevented?

34. Whether his Majesty; person at Court, can be safe from danger when all
places about are bought and sold?

Whether the Querist be not a Friend and Servant to his God, his King and
Country.

Answ. I shall say nothing to these Quaeries, I suppose they are malitiou,
scandalous, and false. Only thus much to the last Clause, That the Querist is
no Friend to God, his King, or Country, in regard that he in a clandestine way,
has published such a wicked Paper tending to beget and foment Fears and
Jealousies in His Majesty's Subjects, by Reflecting upon Public, Actions, to
put all in a flame and disturbance, out of which the Nations, through the
goodness of God, lately have been delivered. It had been his duty, as well as
it is all others duty, to study healing and moderation, uniting and composing
of Differences: He that does otherwise, Either by Action, Word, or Writing, let
him be of what Party soever he will, is no other than an Enemy to God, the
King, and his Country.

FINIS.

