A LETTER sent from the Commissioners of SCOTLAND, To his Excellency the Lord
General MONCK, In the Behalf of themselves and the whole NATION.

From Edinburgh the third Day of March, 1660.

London, Printed for Daniel White, at the Seven Stars in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1660.

Right Honorable,
WE look upon it as no small mercy from the Lord our God, that while the late
dreadful confusions, speaking forth his sad displeasure against us, did
threaten to dash these Nations in pieces; it has pleased him so speedily to
cheer up our hearts and drooping spirits by your Lordships so seasonably
appearing as our healer and repairer of these Breaches; As we do with all
thankfulness remember your Lordships constant and continued kindness to this
scrieking Nation, and do particularly acknowledge the goodness of the Lord in
employing you as an Instrument in his hand for dispersing of that black cloud
which of late was gathering in these Nations, and threatened to swallow all that
was dear and precious to us; So it does singularly indear your Lordship to our
hearts, that since your being at London, you have so actively and eminently
appeared for the satisfying the general languishes and desires of all the
lovers of truth and righteousness, who thirst after a settlement of these
distracted Nations, upon a sure foundation of Religion and Righteousness, and
to all some comfortable Issue of those many Revolutions which have exposed
these Nations to be matter of Rejoicing to their Enemies, and of grief and
sorrow to their Friends. We do heartily bless the Lord on your and the Nations
behalf, who has put such a Resolution in your heart for their good, and has
led you first in acting thereof in so prudential and (through Gods blessing) so
promising away, and do earnestly beseech that your hands may be more and more
strengthened in God to prosecute that good work, which you have begun, by
endeavoring effectually in your Nation, that the grievances and complaints of
these Nations, may be redeemed by such lawful means and ways as may be
satisfactory to all sober minded, the true Protestant Religion, and the
Ordinances of Christ may be countenanced and flourish; and the Government of
these Nations may be settled on righteous and sure foundations as it shall not
be in the power of particular Persons and Parties (as of late) to intrude
thereupon, to advance themselves and serve their own ambitious designs and
lusts, whilst the Nations lie bleeding under their feet. Hereby you shall not
only do service eminently acceptable to God, but shall purchase to your
Lordship a name and praise, whereof the like opportunity will not readily occur
in any age, the present Generation (whose bleeding and gasping condition does,
we must say very much lie at your mercy, shall arise and call you blessed:
Nations abroad shall honor you, as one amongst a thousand who has put forth
the power in your hands for promoting and settling of the public interest and
safety, whilst others having the like opportunity did inslave all public
concernments, to carry on their own selfish Designs, and following generations
shall record your memory as precious, And for our selves and the rest of this
nation (whose sense we sufficiently know by our last meeting) as it has been
our endeavor so to demean ourselves as might give your Lordship satisfaction,
so in your prosecution of this just and honorable enterprise (whereof we are
confident of your continued tenderness, courage and zeal) we have not only
resolved to live peaceably and quietly, But are ready to put forth our selves
to our utmost to serve you; And albeit, we were nominated by the late meeting
of the Commissioners of this Nation to come and wait upon your Lordship; yet
being for the present doubtful of the expediency of our going at this time, we
could not in the mean time forbear to cast in this our mite, and to testify our
sense and acknowledgement of the late great mercy showed unto these Nations by
your means, and how great an addition is hereby made to our many Obligations to
approve our selves

Your Excellencies most humble Servant.
Signed by the Commissioners at Edinburgh the 3. day of March, 1660.
FINIS.

