To all and every the Constables of St. Clements Danes of the Duchy Liberty,
of Covent Garden, and St. Martins in the Fields.
WHereas I have received a Warrant from the Right Honorable the Earl of Linsey
Lord Great Chamberlain of England, to make Proclamation in His Majesty's Name,
as follows, Namely, That no persons but the Nobility, and Officers appointed,
come within the Rayles wherein His Majesty shall proceed unto His Royal
Coronation, nor after on that day, until His Majesty be returned into
Westminster Hall from the Church. Nor that any persons but such as are to go in
the said proceeding, presume on that day to come into any Rooms of the Lords
House of Parliament, the Painted Chamber, Courts of Requests and Wards, in
Westminster Hall, until such time as His Majesty be gone thence to the Church,
and then only such as are to do duty in the said Hall at His Majesty's return
to Dinner. As also that the said Constables be careful that no persons whatever
presume to stand within the Rayles that shall be set up from Whitehall to
Temple Bar, to hinder His Majesty's proceeding on that day when His Majesty
shall ride from the Tower unto His Palace at Whitehall, until he shall be
arrived there; but that the said Rayles shall be kept clear and void all that
day for the free passage of His Majesty and of His Officers that are to attend
the Ceremony: These are therefore in His Majesty's Name to require you and
every one of you, to cause this Proclamation to be read in your respective
Churches, the Sunday before the Solemnization of the Coronation, and to affix
the same in places convenient to be seen; and to be careful in your several
stations that the contents hereof be duly observed.

Given at Whitehall, by the Authority above named, the Eight day of April, One
thousand six hundred sixty one, and signed by me His Majesty's Knight Marshall,
William Throckmorton.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Printer to the KING'S most Excellent MAJESTY,
1661.


