BANNERS of LOVE Displaied over the Church of Christ, walking in the Order of
the Gospel at HEXHAM: By the outstretched Arm of the King of Saints, against
the Jesuitical Design lately attempted by the false JEW. OR, An Answer to a
Narrative stuffed with Untruths, by four Newcastle GENTLEMEN.

ISAIAH 4.5. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion,
and upon her assemblies, a Cloud by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

ISAIAH 54.17. No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.

REV. 2.2. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them liars.

LONDON, Printed by Hen. Hills, and are to be sold at his house at the sign of
Sir John Old Castle in Py-Corner, 1654.

To the Church of Christ walking in the Order of the Gospel at HEXHAM.
MY DEARLY BELOVED,
THe Crown of my rejoicing in Christ, through whom he is pleased to convey
divine consolations, for the sweet refreshing of my weather-beaten soul,
surrounded with storms on every hand; from Rome, from the World, and (which is
most sad) from my late familiar friends, the professed servants of the same God
whom we adore. O my Beloved, what measure have you and I met with, from
unreasonable and wicked men, since, by a separation from the world, we made a
visible profession of the faith of the Gospel? You know the many plotted lies
that have been invented, and vented by Satan and his children, That there were
12 persons to be baptized at Naward Castle, whom I called my Apostles, and said
that I was their God; That I have taken 12.14.20. a person for baptizing them;
That some have seen me drunk on the Rod^; That I robbed a man near unto
Corbridge; That I was sent for to Newcastle, and so to London, to suffer; That
some whom I baptized, presently run mad, had the Palsy, were blind, have been
drowned, have hanged themselves, and many such like untruths: But, Deuteronomy. 33.16.
Isa. 43.1, 2.
through the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, you have been preserved
in the midst of these flames, so that from the first day until now, you have
been living Monuments of his unspeakable mercy, not a hair of any of your heads
perished; being more than conquerours through him that loves us; his banners
of l ve have been continually over us; he has drawn out the hearts and
affections of his Churches to own you; their gracious spiritual Epistles (from
London, Lempster, Leith, Stokesley, Lancashire, and Cheshire) have raised and
exceedingly refreshed your spirits; and the Lord return seven fold into the
bosoms of those precious ones. O what a rich stock of prayers have you going? a
mighty interest in the Churches of Christ, who are terrible as an Army with
Banners. The late Jesuitical attempt to ruin you, Christ discovered seasonably,
and blasted the Adversary, yea, and turned it to your singular advantage, and
wonderful increase in number and grace; who could imagine that so many precious
souls should be added to the Church of Hexham upon this detection of the
Impostor? most men thought it would have been your ruin: but as (upon the
discovery of those grand Hypocrites) in the first pure Church; Acts 5.14.
so has the Almighty blessed and prospered you. But now alas your flourishing
condition has (I fear) stirred up a spirit of emulation, in those
congregations that differ from your judgment; who under a pretense of
publishing the false Jew, have mightily labored in his design, to supplant
you, who being but a young Vine, and of tender Grapes, had more need of careful
dressing, and constant dews of consolation, and instruction, than such
discouragements and defamations; as that you readily embrace any (whether Sheep
or Goats) if they be but of your opinion in Baptism, that you (even the whole
Congregation) are given up of God to believe lies. These, and such like
aspersions are sad and grievous, especially from those who have pretended to
build with you, giving a secret stab (as it were) in the midst of a brotherly
salute; but it is your mercy that Christ deals better, cherishing your souls with
his most sweet and chaste embraces, as his most loving faithful Spouse,
carrying you in his blessed Arms, and folding you in his bosom of love (that
Nest and Hive of sweetness) taking all your reproaches, affronts, and
indignities, as done unto himself, while he leads you through the green
Pastures, and feeds you with marrow full of fatness, by the still waters,
hiding you in his Pavilion, and in the secret of his Tabernacle from the strife
of tongues: thus the Eternal God is your refuge, and underneath are the
Everlasting Arms. Wherefore be encouraged in the Lord, ye children of the most
High, and remember what I have sometimes taught you, That the Saints trials
shall end in triumph, your Night of Misery will have a most glorious Morning of
Victory: And though it be sad to suffer by Professors, yet consider, that
Christ suffered by his own professed people, so did Paul, Acts 21.20 with 28.
and other precious Saints. Did you ever hear of a Church increasing, as God
increases you, without great afflictions and persecutions? Do not consult with
flesh and blood, but behold the works and wonders of the Lord, how he baffles
the carnal conceits of men. Remember what a signal token of divine approbation
was showed but a month since at Muggleswick, in the cheerful submission of
many precious souls to your despised Ordinance of Baptism (the very same day
that it was cried down by a Boanargis, who soon fell sick, and so dyed) the
whole night following being spent in Prayer, and declaring the work of grace
upon their souls (a Vigil to be observed) and in the morning buried with Christ
in Baptism. Some of you have been secretly instructed, and marvellously
convinced of Disciple-baptism only, while you have been under the preaching of
Infant-springling. Live up to these mercies, you precious Saints; let your
holy, humble walking crown Christ, 1 Peter 2.12.
and more and more confute the adversary. So stand fast in the Lord, my dearly
beloved: And the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. You,
Phil. 4.1. Romans 16.20.
whose prayers prevailed for my life, from a late extreme sickness, would
surely have me live; Why now I live, 1 These. 3.8. 2 Cor. 11.2.
if you stand fast in the Lord, I have espoused you to one Husband. O my
dearest, let your shining conversation so adorn your profession, that I may
give up my account with joy, and present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ, when
transported on Angels wings to the Kings Palace, we shall be lovingly received
into our Masters joy, with Well done, and Well come. This is the life, the joy,
the hope of him, who entirely and unfeignedly loves you,

Hexham 6mon. 20day. 1653. Your servant for Jesus sake, to live and die with
you, THO. TILLAM.
Hear the Word of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your Brethren that
hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed. Isa.
66.5.





THe late Act for ejecting Popish Priests, causing a retreat to Rome, has so
enraged those Locusts, that they have invented new and unheard of stratagems,
to destroy our Vines, by instruments cut out and fitted for any kind of
mischief, with Unction and Benediction from the Pope, to undermine, poison, and
bring to ruin the Churches of Christ. Amongst these Miscreants (whereof many are
said to be sent into England) one subtle instrument of Satan is designed for
Hexham in Northumberland (a place swarming with Papists) there to carry on his
Plot for the destruction of the Baptized Church; such Churches being the great
adversaries of the man of sin, overturning his great Idol, wherewith he in
churches the world in their infancy, to prevent the rejecting of his
abominations when they shall be able to discover him. This wretched Emissary
(with plenary indulgence) lands at Newcastle, and as a poor Scholar craves
relief of a Minister there; but finding Charity cold, he hastens to Lieutenant
Colonel Paul Hobson, where he finds courtesy as large as report. A while
after he gives it out that he is a Jew (having been circumcised at Rome on
purpose to deceive) by the name of Josephus Ben Israel (rather Judas Ben
Belial) having obtained the love and letter of the Lieut. Colonel, he came to
Hexham, where he acted his part so neatly, and counterfeited the convert so
Saint-like, that after a solemn public Confession, he was Baptized: but within
a week after his lies came to our ear (a seasonable mercy to prevent his
communion with the Church) which drew him to Newcastle to vindicate himself,
which with much confidence he boasted: but God, the great preserver of his
Saints, discovered his hypocrisy at length, to whom be everlasting praise.
Hereupon four Newcastle Gent. publish this false Jew to the world, but drive on
secretly his design to break the Church of Hexham, by reproaches, scandals, and
very great untruths, to which I shall, in the strength of Christ, return a
sober, Christian answer, as becomes my profession, not rendering reviling for
reviling. The Gent. who have three or four times subscribed it are, Tho. Weld,
Cuth. Sidenham, Sam. Hammond, Will. Durant.

IN their Title Page they present the world with a Scot, baptized at London,
and rebaptized at Hexham; but we deny his rebaptization at Hexham, and do
conceive he was only sprinkled at London (as the manner is) and not baptized;
for though much time and strength was spent by a Gent. in Hexham Pulpit
(omitting the great point, who were fit subjects for Baptism) to show that the
word (...) might as well be taken for sprinkling, as dipping; yet (since these
Gent. declare, my acquaintance is not great with the Rabbis) let a worthy man
of their own judgment inform them, That the word (...) from (...), Leigh Crit.
Sacr.
signifies primarily, such a kind of washing as is used in Bucks, where Linen
is plunged, or dipped, and that the native and proper signification of it, is to
dip into or plunge under water; for which he quotes these Scriptures: and in
his Annotations upon Romans 6 4 he says, Joh. 3.22, 23 Mat. 3 11, 16. Acts 8
38. Baxt. Bapt. p. 136.
That the manner of Baptism then, was to strip them naked, and plunge them in
the water (but this Mr. Baxter will say is a breach of the seventh
Commandment.) And upon Mat. 3.11. I baptize, that is (says he) drown you all
over. Now why should not we rather practice according to the way of the
Apostles baptizing, and the genuine signification of the word, than the Popes
way of sprinkling? but of this more at a fitter opportunity: this may suffice
to show the Gents. mistake in the front of their false Jew, who was not
rebaptized at Hexham; as also themselves acknowledge a little after in the same
Title Page (but that he was baptized there) but it was (say they) soon (and
page 3.) very soon after his Landing; how soon it was themselves declare, April
the 21. he landed, and June the 5. he was baptized, which I am persuaded was
more time than was taken to baptize Ananias and Saphyra, Simon Magus, and other
Hypocrites, by men of more discerning spirits, than any of us. But surely these
Gent. begin to show an ungospel-like spirit soon, yea very soon, even in the
Front of their false Jew; it were the easier born, if it did not breath wholly
throughout their Narrative. But to their first Epistle, where I shall observe
little, the stroke of death having removed the Gent. to whom it was dedicated.
Secondly, they mention Everard in the same Epistle (reflecting as I conceive
upon us) whose Errors we disown; although, through mercy, we had neither hand
nor heart in that Persecuting Petition, which these very Gent. presented
against him to his Excellency; but ever blessed be our gracious God for raising
such an eminent instrumental Savior, as our Victorious and most renowned
General, whose car was, is, and I hope ever will be deaf to such desires, and
long may this Christ-like Gospel Spirit sit in Mount Sion, to judge the Mount
of Esau, while all such Persecutors speed like these Gent. in that Petition.
Will not the Word, without the Sword, confute Errors? Must this Prelatical
spirit still be up? I perceive Everard's Antidote wanted strength. But I go on
to their second Epistle, where they show Satan's chief ways of delusions; As
first, The opening of a wide door to let in Sheep and Goats -- and does not
Satan drive on such an interest in the Administrators Society, to get a number
to glory in? Answ. It Is too apparent that Satan drives on a notable design of
bitterness, wrath, strife, and scandal in these Gents. writings. 2. A number to
glory in, 1 Cor. 4.1^, with 1 These. 2.19, 20.
if they be gracious ones, is truly Apostolical; and my hope is, that the
number which our gracious God is pleased to add daily to the Church of Hexham,
will so adorn their holy Profession, that it shall be known the Gent. have
reproached the Servants of the living God, Satan driving on no such design in
the Administrators Society. 3. The door was wider at Weremouth but a few months
since, than it is, or ever will be in the Administrators society; that Parish
way of sprinkling is now drawn into a narrower compass; for since an addition
of Tyths was not feasible, one of these Gent. changes his habitation (to a
warmer Quarter) and withal changes his judgment, and as I hear, keeps the
door closer at Newcastle, admitting no more upon a Parish account. But I desire
these Gent. to resolve me in their next, whether only Children of
Church Members have right to baptism? if so, how were the members themselves
baptized, whose Parents never were in such Church Fellowship? or if all
Children have right to baptism, how will these Gent. answer the wrong in
rejecting them from that holy ordinance, exposing them to the greediness of
such ravenous hirelings, who have been cast out of the Ministry, as wolves,
dumb dogs, and abominably profane wretches? If God drives on the present
interest at Newcastle, who did drive on the former interest at Weremouth? But
the next passage in the Gents. Epistle will evidently point out, where Satan
(the father of lies, and the accuser of the Brethren) drives on his interest;
for these Gent. confidently declare that before the letting in of the false
Jew, the Administrator knew of his many plotted lies. Jer. 9.3, 4, 5. and
spread this false accusation before the just and righteous God, as also I have
d^^ another gross untruth, affirmed by one of these Gent. in a th^^^g of
people, viz. Hexham. (...) notorious falsehood was then detected, and soo^
(...) ^onfuted under the hand of a Parliament man, who had (...) of about
threescore Sermons, (and not one of Baptism) the heads whereof, at our next
dispute, I produced with this attestation; I have compared this Paper with my
own Notes, and they are both one; this I thought good to certify under my
hand, very well knowing that many aspersions have been raised against Mr.
Tillam, and false informations given in against him, which he is no way guilty
of, W.F. But although full evidence declared manifestly the Gents. guilt in
this gross untruth, and great scandal, yet I never saw, nor heard of any
repentance, but rather a smothering of the wickedness by those with whom he
has fellowship, who have also brought upon themselves further guilt, by
joining together in this palpable untruth, that I knew before of the Jews
plotted lies, which I am ready to disprove by scores of witnesses. Isaiah 29.10.
But since such gross scales of prejudice and falsehood have so manifestly
covered their eyes with darkness that may be felt, I do the less wonder at
their following scornful question, Whether I would baptize a man with the
French Pox on his Nose, that had committed Adultery the night before, if he did
but profess the faith of the Gospel, and desire admission? Answ. I look at
covetousness with as hateful an eye, as either of these; and if some of these
Gent. 1 Timothy 6.10.
were not generally known and talked of for this kind of Idolatry, which is the
root of all evil, I should not have published it; but this may work their
repentance. 2. I must freely declare, and let all the Saints know it, and well
weigh it, That if a Jailer should presently come from tormenting the tender
Lambs of Christ, or a Simon from his Sorceries (which are worse than the French
Pox or Adultery) after I had showed them the Pattern, Forms, and Ordinances of
the Gospel-Temple, and put them upon consideration what it would cost them to
be Christians, if they should profess the Faith of the Gospel, with Evangelical
repentance, and an earnest desire of the Ordinance; I would in the strength of
Christ speedily baptize them, though it were the same hour of the Night; Acts
16.35.
and thus wide will I endeavor to keep the door, not an inch narrower, after
the New England way, nor a foot wider to let in children, in ^^om no Faith,
Repentance, or desire at all appears: and as I (...) ^pen a door of admission,
so shall I as readily set open the (...) ejection, as need shall require, and
hereby enjoy peace (...) ^^lgrimage, and a plain rule to make my account by in
the (...) of Christ.

Having thus spoken to their first way of Satan's delusions, I shall only say
this to their second (of undermining Churches by closing with Errors) That if
baptizing of professed Disciples be indeed an Error, then Popish sprinkling of
Infants may the better pass for a Gospel truth; and so pass to their third way
of Satan, that is, To lay the main weight upon some particular Ordinance, which
let me tell my brethren, they may not venture their souls upon; I have
sometimes told them, that it is not enough to have a Levite in our house, a
poor prop to be only baptized, and in Church Communion, Friend how came thou
hither, not having on a wedding Garment, will startle all; therefore leaving
the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let all sincere souls go on to
perfection; and as he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation; be sure your communion flow from a clear union with Christ:
what a mercy is it that the Gent. can thus far accord with us? Really Reader
(thou that art the child of peace, and can not endure any kind of harshness)
it is the grief of my soul that I am constrained to dip my Pen in Vinegar at
any time; but known sins must have sharp and public reproof: I am troubled to
use such terms, as ly, untruth, falshcod, etc. but I have professed (though it
procure a jeer from the Gent.) not to daub with untempered Mortar. Lev. 19.17.
Jer. 1.17, 18. 1 Timothy 5.20, 21. Tit. 1.12, 13.
And if thou well weigh these Scriptures, thou will find it a duty both to me
and thy self, wherefore I desire thee peruse them.

But though we can heartily close with these Gent. in their third particular;
yet in that wherewith they close their Epistle we cannot; for it is a gross
untruth, to close the Jews Declararation about Church Communion at the end of
seven lines, with Caetera desider (...) ( id est, pages more in their hand of
that they call the Jews argument for Baptism: And to this gross untruth they
add another (a most unworthy act) in printing my Animadversions upon the whole,
when the one half of the Jew was not printed; and then tell the Reader, That
they were my own conceptions, which I must tell the Gent. is another untruth,
as the Reader shall see upon perusual of the whole. No wonder therefore, that
they should be strongly deluded to believe his lies, whom they knew to be a
Liar. He told them (and it seems they believe it) that he forged Authors for
the strengthening us in our opinion. Reader, have thou one Beam of light? I will
appeal to thy Conscience, Can thou imagine that the Popes design is to
strengthen us in our opinion of baptizing Disciples only, and preaching down
his Infant sprinkling, which shakes his seat, and makes his Tripple Crown to
totter, unchurching all whom his sprinkling Idol has churched? No, no, his
very soul abhors it, and therefore he it seems anointed and appointed this
accursed Impostor to undermine and ruin us; but the mighty Arm of Christ our
King, has wonderfully detected, and defeated the stratagem, and secured his
poor professed despised servants, from the malice and subtilty of Satan,
Antichrist, the World, and all false Brethren. O that we may walk worthy of
this mercy to his praise! Thus much to the Gents. Epistle; They have also an
introduction mentioning Tobiah and Sanballat. And many such we have met with
while this Gospel Church has been building, who have endeavored to weaken our
hands from the work; but these Gent. outstrip all. They close the introduction,
with telling the world, That the Administrator and his Society gloried much in
this new Convert. Answ. He seemed to us a real Convert, and therefore we did
but our duty in rejoicing, as Angels, Luke 15.10. Acts 8.8.
do; and as Mr. Sidenham, with his Society would (and ought to do) have done,
yea, and as one of his Society did, who was deluded also by him, more than my
self; I being deceived before his lies came to my ear; but so neatly and
subtly did he dissemble that he deceived this Gent. after he had heard of his
lies: for so Saint-like were all his answers, that they well deserved all that
the Gent. has reported to the world in his Counterfeit Jew, that is, Orthodox,
Spiritual, Learned, Practical. I shall now take a view of the Gents. Narrative,
where the forementioned Member, in Fellowship with Mr. Sidenham, is honored
with the Title of their Dear Friend, although they confess he was deluded by
the false Jew; but when afterward he appears on the Administrators part,
against their ungospel-like carriage, then the Gentlemen are pleased to term
him a Stickler, and his plea, A perilous Argument. I might upon handsomer
grounds deride the conceit in Mr. Shadforths examination, as a frothy and idle
fancy; namely, That it is the Popes project to bring People in^o a
Congregation, or Church, and after to Anabaptism -- which was as much as they
sought after, and all they desired. Is it possible that these Gent. should be
so over-credulous, as to conceive there is any truth at all in this whimsey?
they have been at it before, Page 5.
and I have answered it. But howsoever these Gent. deal with me, yet I hope
prejudice shall never so far cover the eyes of my understanding as to think
that the Pope desires to draw people into Congregational Churches: but I must
confess this is as likely as that which some with much confidence affirm, viz.
That the design of the Anabaptists is to draw people to Popery; yet possibly
the Pope may have entertained Mr. Baxters conceit, That our way of baptizing
will shorten the Peoples lives, and that it is good for nothing but to dispatch
men out of the world, Bax. Bap. page 135.
and to ranken Churchyards; and upon this occount indeed he may desire to draw
people to Anabaptism. But if M. Baxters judgment be right herein, what need he
and others be so hot in dispute and persecution, let them have but a little
patience and our practice will destroy our selves: but doubtless such will
prove false Prophets, Isaiah 44.25.
and the gracious promise of the King of Saints, will frustrate the expectation
of Mr. Baxter, and his Accomplices, who consult only with flesh and blood, and
are more in love with their ease, than Christ's Ordinance, not daring to expose
themselves to the danger and reproach of the Water (in Philips way Acts 8.38.)
especially in cold Regions and seasons; there is danger of many mortal
diseases, Catarrhs, etc. says Mr. Baxter; in the eye of reason I grant, but a
promise of divine assistance in this Ordinance, Mat. 28.19, 20.
Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world, carries the obedient
soul upon the wings of an active faith, through all dangers, difficulties, and
disgraces. Blessed instances of heavenly aid in this undertaking, might be
produced to confute the Adversary; many tender, sickly persons, some very great
with Child (let Mr. Baxter make himself sport with it if he will) some of great
eminency, As in his Bap. page 136.
in cold seasons have valiantly followed Christ through this part of
righteousness; neither did I ever know any that suffered by it. And though it
be censured for an impertinent digression, yet since the Administrator is the
But, and Baptism is Mark the Gent. chiefly aim at, I shall fully answer to Mr.
Shadforths conceit, in declaring. That if this be the Popes design in drawing
People to Anabaptism, he will be as much mistaken as Mr. Baxter is. Catarrhs
are not generated, but through a secret blessing rather profligated by this
practice of Baptism. The Administrator upon his first undertaking, had a sharp
Catarrh, and was greatly distempered, the season cold, the Persons baptized
many, but through mercy his Catarrh vanished. My Reverend Brother Mr. Will.
Kaye (who by his Ministry gathered a people at Stokesly in Yorkshire) after
long communion in the way called Independent, was convinced of Baptism: after
which he was instrumental to convince many, and in the midst of a sharp
distillation of Rheum, did very much honor Christ by a late cheerful
submission (and many precious souls with him) to the holy Ordinance of Baptism,
and was presently raised, strengthened, elevated, to our great admiration,
having since baptized many without danger. Therefore let not his Holiness, nor
any of his Adherents, dream of drawing people this way to destruction. But
enough has been said to Mr. Shadforths examination, and I must now answer the
Gents. charge against the Administrator. Who was not afraid to compare the Jews
lies to Abraham and David's sins, but owned him as an Angel of God, and his Dear
Brother in Christ. Answ. I must confess that the harsh and High Commission like
dealing of these Gent. (which tended not, neither did God own, as to a
discovery) constrained me the more to appear for him, while I thought him
innocent, and could see nothing at all proved against him, which was neither
vainglorious, nor affronting, as they please to term it. And for comparing him
to Abraham and David, I suppose I might warrantably do it, when with David, I
heard him cry out lamentably, I have sinned, with tears and trembling,
professing a loathing and detestation of his former abominations. But to
proceed, the next charge is. That the Administrator affirmed that many of the
Jews could speak perfect English. Answ. They cannot charge me with speaking
untruth: I suppose none will deny, but a Jew trained from his in fancy among
the English (as many of them are) may speak as perfect English, as a Scot may
do Hebrew, which they confess this Scot could do, page 12. line 18. and the
Counterfeit Jew, page 1. line 9. but this charge is only as lightning to the
ensuing thunder; for if my life, liberty, credit, or whatsoever is dear, lay at
stake, the Gent. have proclaimed it to the world, that some years since the
Administrator was a Papist; I leave the Saints to corsider from what kind of
Spirit this proceeds. It was with much Prelatical, High Commission-like
Lordliness lately demanded in a throng of People, by one (and I think the
youngest) of these Gent. if I had not been a Papist? I durst not then deny what
now I declare to the world, That about twenty years since my poor soul was
deluded by Antichrist; and through infinite riches of grace, the everlasting
bonds of distinguishing love drew me out of that horrible Pit 17. years since,
which the Gent. would not declare, but mention some years since, as though it
were but lately that I was a Papist: thus all the dirt they can possibly
procure, raking Romes filthy ditch and all, they freely cast in my face: But if
I should declare what I have heard, and can prove of some of these Gent. 17.
years since, it would much displease. And now that they have thus labored to
cover me with shame and disgrace, they leave me a little for the world to gaze
on, and having endeavored to make me many foes, they are troubled that I
should have any friends, wherefore he who but lately was their dear friend,
they must now contend with (for appearing on my part, against their fierce and
bitter actings) he confidently affirmed (as they say) That because the Jews
could pronounce Shibboleth, therefore they could speak perfect English, which
creates this scoff (which their friend must wear as a favor from them) A
porilous argument. No wonder I should be thus laden with reproaches, scorns and
slanders, when their dear friend cannot escape them: but the truth was this,
the Gent. judging improbable (or impossible) that a Jew should speak so good
English, presented a Dutch Schoolmaster, who could not speak plain English, as
an Argument to prove that no Jews could speak our Language perfectly; so that
here lay their strength, This German cannot speak perfect English, therefore no
Jew can speak perfect English: so that justly is their jeer retorted in their
own Dialect -- A perilous Argument. See page 13.
It was his Argument that occasioned the Speech of their dear friend, That some
Jews had more command of their Organs, with volubility of expression, than
Germans, and gave this instance of Shibboleth. Judges 12.6.
From deriding their dear Friend, the Gent. fall upon Lieutenant Colonel
Hobson, for no other fault that I know of, but that he is also against the
sprinkling of infants, and gave more Bishop-like entertainment than any of
themselves; and yet they say, 1 Timothy 3.2.
That he was courteously entertained, and particularly by one of them; but what
this entertainment was, you may perceive by the Jews plea for leaving Newcastle
so soon; namely, because he could get no lodging, so that here is the latitude
of these Gents, courtesy, which is thus published in print: Had an
Antipaedobaptist boasted of so small a piece of Charity, as would not amount to
a Nights Lodging, it would have been censured for the sounding of a Pharisaical
Trumpet; a little of these Gents. Charity goes far. But now the Gent. declare
another grievous crime of the Lieutenant Colonel, For the Jew (say they)
acknowledged that he had heard much of the Lieutenant Colonel at Rome. Believe
it, A perilous Argument. The Lieutenant Colonel has been talked of at Rome.
Ergo -- It Is like that by this time some of these Gent. are also spoken of at
Rome, since they have appeared in Print pleading for sprinkling (the Popes
Diana, and the best market of the hireling exploded Priest) and doubtless the
preaching and printing of the Lieutenant Colonel, with his late Public
employment in the Government of Newcastle, has been heard of in other places
besides Rome. What strange suspicious insinuations are these? The Administrator
has been a Papist some years since, and the Lieutenant Colonel has been
heard of at Rome: The Gent. are loath it seems to speak all out, we may both
possibly have a months mind to Rome yet. O enmity, prejudice, emulation,
falsehood, whither do you mean to transport these Gent.? This possesses the
rude multitude, that we are certainly Papists, contriving by baptizing
Disciples to turn all to Popery; whereupon they invent lies, and since these
Gent. put forth their false Jew) make Libels, and violently assault me in my
own house. Thus the Gent. having represented us suspicious to the world,
Declare, That after the Jew had lived about a month with the Lieurenant
Colonel, he commended him to the Administrator at (...), which as these Gent.
would insinuate, is the commendation of one Popishly affected to another. Ans.
The Jew indeed brought me a Letter from the Li. Col. wherein the most concernd
the Jew was, That the Ministers of Newcastle are discontented at him, and some
of them say he is no Scholar, which I do not believe: I am sure his condition
calls for love and pity: but let the Reader take notice, That the Gent. of
Newcastle are now in another mind, and do confess he is a great Scholar, in
their false Jew, page 12. line 18. So that you see these Gent. are not
infallible in their judgments, and can no more know the secrets of a heart
than the depths of a Scholar, till full fruits appear. Having let fly two or
three Arrows at Rovers against their dear Friend, and the Lieutenant Colonel,
they return with a full Quiver to their constant But. Ans. page 2.
The Administrator baptized him within a few days after he came to Hexham. The
Administrator still with much confidence affimed him to be a Jew. The
Administrator presently replied for him. The Administrator told us very
angerly, that he saw bitterness of soul and brokenness of heart in him for
those lies, which we did not christianly to press. The Administrator called him
an Angel of God. What is all this, but now have at the Administrator, have at
the Administrator? lets smite him, wound, break, blast him to purpose. Ans. The
Administrator had as much ground to conclude he was a Jew, as Philip or Peter
to judge Simon Magus or Ananias Believers: Luke 6.44.
and having this confidence (by a sure rule) the Administrator looked upon it
as his duty to baptize him, and to plead for him against that high Commission
course that was taken, but not blessed of God to detect him. I called him an
Angel of God: I wished them to mitigate that rigorous, fierce carriage, and be
more civil, courteous and christian to Strangers, since some had entertained
Angels thereby unawares, which he might possibly prove, Heb. 13.2.
since all their fierceness could find nothing at all of proof against him:
indeed, when I heard him say, That such hard usage was enough to cause him to
go back to his Country, and write against Christianity, I did roundly and
sharply reprove him, and from that time sided not with him, as suspecting the
frame of his spirit, being far from his former temper: but in this the Gent.
are silent. Let the Reader (if he can) espy one good word for the Administrator
throughout all the Gents. false Jew, but all the Gall and Wormwood they can
procure. When nothing could be proved against the Jew, being ready to depart
without a discovery, Alderman George Dawson offered, that if I would see him
forthcoming, he should go with me; but seriously I found my spirit averse since
his late expression, when of a sudden, after the Gents fierceness had done no
good, the Almighty searcher of hearts ordered the steps of a man at that
instant into the Room with two Lecters, the one directed to Thomas Horseley,
but so worn, spelled and written, that there was much difficulty in reading of
it; yet so much appeared, that his guilt appeared more, than by all the former
rugged, unchristian dealing; yet still he faced it out, and subtly evaded
all; at length I desired that I might take him into the Garden, which was
readily granted, Mr. Hammond also whispering in mine ear, to sift him
thoroughly; but this the Gent. smother, declaring, the Jew desired to go aside
with the Administrator: whereas God knows, and some of themselves know, that
the motion and desire was mine. What a naughty spirit is it that sets these
Gent. a work, concealing all that might render the Administrator any way
acceptable, and proclaiming all that may any way tend to his disps ragement?
amongst the rest, declaring, that they knew not what passed betwixt us; which
is untrue; for I declared to them, That I pressed him with all my might, by
persuasions, allurements, threatenings, to discover the particulars of that
guilt I manifestly discerned in him: but before I could obtain this, some
others came to us, which made him more reserved, so that I set to it singly the
second time; but all the Gent. coming into the Garden much a mused him. Then
Mr. Hammond and some others labored with him; but when they could not prevail,
I was desired the third time to try what God would do; who now so mightily
appeared, in a corner of the Garden near the River, that the wretch confessed
his imposture, telling me, that if his life might be secured he would make
known strange things; but not daring to promise more than I could perform, I
called to Mr. Hammond, who upon some promises and encouragements, had all
discovered, As that he was no Jew, but, to act the Jews part, was circumcised
at Rome. That he was Mr. Alexander Ramsey 's Son. That he would discover many
Popish Plots against England, etc. After this, Mr. Hammond, and Mr. Durant
desired me, as being best acquainted with him, to give him some Christian
Counsel, which I willingly performed, laboring to touch, or if possibly, to
awaken his seared conscience, and hardened impenitent heart, showing him the
just hand of a sin-searching God, etc. Amongst other things, I demanded of him,
How I should know that he took up Baptism at Hexbam upon any other terms than
he took up Circumcision at Rome, id est, on purpose to deceive? He answered,
That all he could say was his conversation while he was amongst us: And thus
much for the discovery of the Impostor, with which the Gent. draw to an end of
their Narrative, only some passages it seems they had almost forgot; They had
almost forgot to term their dear friend a Stickler, whom they say urged this
Agument for the Counterfeit triumphingly, Did ye ever hear or read of an
Emissary from Rome that submitted to the Ordinance of Baptism? Ans. I suppose
that as these Gent. could not name one, so they never heard of such an Impostor
as this; the Pope, with his scarlet Conclave, and subtle Jesuits, and bloody
Inquisition, are now hatching new projects to undermine and ruin the true
Churches of Christ.

had almost forgot, is a most notorious untruth, viz. That the Administrator
called the Counterfeit to partake of the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and
that he dissembled to avoid it. Reader, there is not one syllable of truth in
this almost forgotten passage; here are many living witnesses in the Church of
Hexham to testify, That the false Jew most earnestly desired the Ordinance,
and the Administrator (by desire of the Church) wished him to forbear until he
had cleared himself at Newcastle; whereupon he most exquisitly acted the part of
a dejected, forlorn, perplexed soul, smiting his breast, and with tears and
trembling (for no doubt he can quake) professed that his soul did weep, even
tears of blood for those lies, which he thought no sin when they were spoken.
Thus the Gent-instead of ours, have published their own shame in this great
falsehood; and not only this, for the false Jew tells them, which being to our
reproach they publish, That he looked upon our Baptism as no more than the
washing of his hands, but for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that he
dissembled to avoid. But can these Gent. believe, that the Papists have any
more esteem of our Ordinance of the Lords Supper, than of our Baptism?
Certainly, our Communion is no less contrary to their Mass, in all
particulars, than our Baptism to their Sprinkling. Is not the same judgment,
which the Gent. say is seized upon us, justly fallen upon themselves? being given
up of God to believe lies; 2 These. 2.11.
and that from he mouth of a known Liar. Truly, although these Gent. judge
nothing of God in us, yet for the honor of truth, they should have enquired of
us, being but sixteen miles from them, before they had Published these gross
and slanderous untruths. But I proceed to their third passage, which was almost
forget, The Administrator thought to terrify us, in saying, This Jew was sent
for into the Army. Ans. I fear, that in^^^ad of this passage, the Gent. have
almost forgot themselves, in usurping the Throne of God, boldly intrenching
upon his Prerogative Royal; Do they know my thoughts? God alone knows the
thoughts of men; How then can they say, The Administrator thought to terrify
us? I wish the Gent. who boast so much of the knowledge of the heart and
thought, to read 2 These. 2.4, 10, 11. But why should these Gent. be terrifyed
with the Army? I know not any Professors that fear the Army, but such as are
principled for persecution; indeed it is thought these Gent. have not much
affected the Army, since Captain Everard, and his Brother, stirred up their
spirits to persecution by a Petition, which our Noble Lord General, like an
excellent Christian, slighted. But the Gent. do every way abuse me in declaring
that I said, The Jew was sent for into the Army. I said indeed, That the Jew
was invited into Scotland by a godly tenderhearted Christian, commiserating
his mean condition. Being almost tired with these Passages which had been as
good altogether, as almost forgotten, I hasten, having already answeted to all
that concerns us, in the false Jews Examinations; it is our great mercy that
God restrained him from inventing lies of us, for out it had come, we must have
shared with Lieutenant Colonel Hobson, whom here the Gent. present to the
world, from the Jows mouth, a person of credit, As a slighter of Ordinances, a
neglecter of Family Duties; For, say they, the Jew was much pressed by one, how
he could stand under the power of Lioutenant Collone! Hobosons pravers, being
so long in his Family: To which he plainly answered, That they used no Family
Duties while he was there. How Gospel-like had it been if these Gent. had
enquired the truth, before they had thus published, defamed the
Lieutenant Colonel, living but ten miles distance; I hope he will vindicate
himself, and show that he dare not expose himself and Family to that direful
curse, Ier 10.25.
Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families
that call not on thy Name. Having thus wounded the reputation of the
Lieutenaut-Colonel, they are pleased again to let fly at the Administrator, and
his Allies, for crying up the false Jews Confession. To which I answer, That if
it be well weighed by the judicious Reader, as the Confession of a Jew, it will
appear a very full Confession, of a Messiah come in the Flesh. For the
Gentlemen have dealt most unworthily, in concealing that part of his
Declaration, wherein much of the excellency of a work of grace (exquisitely
counterfeited by him) is contained, most in juriously breaking off, with a
Caetera desiderantur. When I demanded of M. Hammond, whether he would have
denied the Jew Baptism upon this Confession? He answered, Yes; because of his
many lies; But when I replied, That his lies were unknown to me at that time;
Nay then (said he) I should have not denied him. And now I suppose the
Gentlemen have not forgot any one passage: they have let fly every way, at the
Church of Hexham, at the Administrator, at their dear Friend, at the
Lieutenant Colonel, at Captain Everard, at the Army, and before they have done,
My dearly beloved, and most cordial Fellow Laborer, will be brought upon the
Stage by them. Really, the Administrator has as good company as he could wish;
in this alone the Gentlemen have been courteous. It Is no small mercy, my dear
Brethren and Friends, that you and I are counted worthy to suffer shame for his
Name, who has suffered the Fathers wrath for us; Heb. 10 32 33.
it is one Gospel-mark of illumination, Partly whilst ye are made a gazing
stock both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilst ye became
companions of them that were so used.

And here I present you with the false Jew, truly and faithfully, as it was
written with his own Hand.

The substance of the Declaration and Confession which was made at the public
Meeting House at HEXHAM, the fourth Month, the fifth Day, 1653. By JOSEPH BEN
ISRAEL.
ROMANS 11.1. I say then, has God cast away his People? God forbid. For I also
am an Israelite, of the Seed of Abraham, of the Tribe of [Judah] Benjamin.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers,
MY purpose is to declare unto this Congregation, first my Descent and
Education; and secondly, the great work of my Conversion.

I verily am a man which am a Jew, of the Tribe of Judah, Act. 23.
born in Mantua, a City in Lombardy, a Province of Italy, trained up in the
Religion of my Fathers, and brought up in the choicest learning of my Country,
and having attained unto eight Languages, I betook me setiously to the Study of
Philosophy; where meeting with Plato (surnamed Divine) Trinum per unum,
Socrates, and Hermes Trismegistus, I found such light in the glorious Mystery
of the Triunity, that I was wonderfully surprised and amazed; and the more,
that Heathens should come to the knowledge of this most excellent Doctrine.

O Lord, said I, how shall those Philosophers rise in judgment against us, who
have more light, even sepher hattorah, the Book of the Law? the former book
rendered them inexcusable, but what will become of us, who have the revealed
Will of God?

I had not gone three footsteps in this way, but I found Elohim in the plural
number, compounded with a singular word Bara, created, upon which my meditation
was much raised to admire this mystery; when passing on a little further, I
met with Nangas haadam betrolmenu, Let us perfect man with our Image. Why us?
but that we should understand the plurality holden forth in the Creator: this
drew my Meditations first toward the Christians Messiah. But now Satan (the
professed enemy of Christ, of all that set their faces toward heaven) told me,
that these were but fancies, and delusions of my own brain; shall the
Heathenish Philosophers be a rule for my Religion? no, I will follow the Law,
under which I was born and educated. Behold the power of Satan's snares, and
behold the vileness of mine own heart, forsaking this blessed light, and
rejecting all these holy motions, returning to my former old ways again. But
here, through the goodness of God, I found no rest, but very much trouble, and
anquish of spirit: But O the loving kindness of God! whose design graticusly
appeared to bring me to the knowledge of himself, even from our own way of
worship. Our Doctors choose out a place to say every Morning and Evening,
Shemang Israel Adonay Eloheinu Adona echad. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God,
the Lord is one. Immediately upon this I find thrice, Elohenu, Jehovah,
Jehovah, the Lord, etc. O Brethren, I cannot express the heart-searchings and
movings that were upon me at that instant, which with my former Meditations,
engaged my soul in a firm belief of the blessed Three in One, which most sacred
Trinity I do invocate as a witness of the sincerity of my heart, holding
concurrence with my words. O Holy of Holies, Father, Son and Spirit, Searcher
of the heart, and Tryer of the reins, be pleased to give strength and courage
to avow thee; grant that my lips may enunciate truth, and deal with thy servant
according to the integrity of his heart.

After diligent enquiry of the Lord Jesus Christ, I did in heart confess him as
the most high God, taking upon him our nature; but then Satan sets upon me with
fresh and violent temptations, which caused me to break forth, O my soul, its
for thee I care; go I back to the Law, I lose thee, and thy case my body; go I
forward to those that profess this Messiah, and behold gross and abominable
Idolatry; look upward, and behold a just and jealous God, the punisher of it;
look about thee, and behold all thy friends ashamed of thee, and thy nearest
relations our sing thee and the Messiah whom thou believe. But can this be
the true Messiah, whose disciples are so notoriously wicked, wallowing in all
kind of sin, and woeful Idolatry?

In the midst of these perplexities and distractions of spirit, I was almost
swallowed up of despair.

And while I thought of returning to the way of my Fathers reading in the holy
Scriptures, I discovered many gross untruths and corruptions of the Doctors; as
concerning the in carnation of Christ, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear
a Son, Isaiah 7.14.
they render Gnalmah, a corrupted woman (which is no sign or wonder at all)
namely, for a corrupted woman to conceive and bear a Son. So for the sufferings
of Christ, instead of caru, they dug, or pierced, Psalm. 22.16.
they read caari, as a Lion, that so they may cast a mist upon the true Messiah.

And now the good hand of Providence brought to my view the Syriack and Greek
Copies of Guido Fabricius Boderianus, and by comparing these with the Law and
the Prophets, I found all Prophecies fulfilled in Jesus Christ, without
contradiction, which, through the goodness of God, raised me to a full
resolution, Avoid Satan, the enemy of my soul, I will delay no longer, but fly
to Christ; come Lord, the desire of my soul, lead me in the way of life. Now I
resolved to leave my Country, and Friends, and to go over the Alps to find a
people professing the true Messiah, not in Legal ways, but in spirit and
truth; for the Papists go on the same way that my own people do, altogether
Legally, ex opere operato, rest on the work done, and by their horrible
idolatry to Pictures and Images, are a grievous stumbling block unto the Jews,
and were a great obstruction to my conversion.

Coming into Germany, instead of finding comfort to my poor soul by Communion
with Christians in a spiritual way of worship, without human Traditions, I find
their great Idol Consubstantiation, and many other Idols of their own
inventions; this is not Christ's way, I will not enter this way, no more of
this. Lord what shall I do? I will not go without my business.

Away I go to Hessen, where all are Calvinists; here Organs, Forms, and wicked
lives turned away my heart from them.

So that from Hamburg I came into England, and while I was thus seeking Christ
without, in the way and order of his holy Gospel, I found him also within, to
the exceeding joy of my soul. Blessed be thou King Jesus, who lives in thy
Saints by Faith, communicating thy self through thine Ordinances: thou show
me my lost estate in Adam, and the only way of recovery in thy self.

When we come to a sight of our own undone condition, then we see the necessity
of a Savior, and the danger of our souls without Christ, and then Christ
lovingly clothes the poor sinner with the precious Robes of his own
Righteousness. Fleshly Privileges intitles none to any thing of Christ, Though
I might, etc. See Phil. 3.4.


Lord Jesus present me at the day of judgment before the Father in these long
white Robes, I disclaim all other coverings; whatsoever I counted gain before,
I now count loss for Christ, yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, Phil 3.7.
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ.

And since my Lord Jesus has appointed Ordinances for his people that have him
within them enthroned in their hearts, and that I am called upon to arise and
be baptized,

I do here avow thee Lord Jesus my true Savior, and I rejoice in thy Church
and People, thy precious Saints, who do here walk through thy grace, according
to thy Rule and holy Commands.

I do here solemnly vow thee my Lord and King, thy Saints and Ordinances; and
now I heartily desire all the people of God to pray for me, that the residue of
my days may be spent according to this beginning.

O Lord Jesus, who has appointed Ordinances, and sufferings for those who
shall reign with thee in glory, show the desire of my soul is to thee; do thou
therefore convey the grace of Ordinances into my heart, that I may live to the
honor of thy name, as becomes thy professed servant, waiting for thy second
coming. So come Lord Jesus, and tarry not. Baruch Adonay lengolam vanged Amen
ve Amen.

Scripsit propria manu. R. Josephus B. Israel, Heb. Mant.


I having thus, with much brevity, discovered the glorious work of God in my
souls union with the Lord Jesus Christ, I shall add somewhat more in reference
to that communion with his people under which I now walk, and wherein I greatly
rejoice, That it may appear to all the world that my present actings are not
bottomed upon selfish carnal principles, but upon real and clear convictions
of spirit.

My answer therefore to them that shall demand of me a reason why I entered into
communion with a people who are injuriously termed Anabaptists, is this,

When first it pleased the Father of lights to shine into my soul with the
lights of the glorious Gospel of a Christ, he set my soul a longing to find out
a people whose lives were suitable to the profession of Christ, and both
conformable to the Rule of his Word.

Whiles I was thus longing, coming to Hamburg, I heard great things of
Christians in England. It was welcome news to me, but alas, how to attain to
such a people I knew not. Many difficulties appeared; a dangerous voyage by
Sea, uncertainty of ever coming thither, by reason of the present troubles
upon the Seas; and in case I should arrive there, I knew of no liberty or
protection granted to our People in that Nation; so that although I might
escape the danger of the Sea, yet I feared the Laws of this Commonwealth would
not suffer me to live, when I was come on Shore. And here my Faith fainted, so
that unbelief prevailing upon me (being resolved to run all hazzards, rather
than fall short of what I sought for) I made a lie my refuge, and sought
self-preservation under falsehood, by denying my Nation and Descent, and giving
out my self to those in the ship with me, to be an Englishman. Which failing
of mine, I now bewail, and craving pardon through Christ, do believe I shall
receive it at the hand of the Father, for I did it ignorantly through slavish
fear and unbelief, such things among the Jews being counted no sin.

Yet the Lord, who is rich in mercy, notwithstanding this mis-carriage, was
pleased to bring me safely to Newcastle, where I heard of Lieutenant-Collonel
Paul Hobson, who upon my address to him, courteously entertained me, and showed
me many favors, De cujus in me humanitate mallem tacere quam pauca dicere.

After three weeks abode with him, I desired to see the order and fellowship of
the Saints at Hexham: In answer to my desires he recommended me by his Letter
to the Minister of the Baptized Church, who, together with the whole Church,
received me gladly, and in a way becoming their profession.

After such a people I especially enquired, 1.
the Lord having convinced me, that there was no way of becoming a visible
Disciple of the Lord Jesus but by Baptism, and that Faith was necessarily to
precede the administration of it. The Scripture through which the Lord was
pleased to break in with a conviction in this particular upon my spirit, was
that of Mark. 16.16. confirmed by the constant practice of the Disciples in the
History of the New Testament; neither did I ever meet with any plain Scripture
thwarting this light; but many concurring to confirm me in the truth I had
received. So that Hic sisto pedem, till they who walk by a rule preposterous to
this, can show me a clear and plain Scripture for such their walkings. To
bottom Ordinances upon men's inferences, how rationally soever deduced, is not
to me consistent with the faithfulness of the Messiah, who was the great
Apostle and Prophet of his Church, and left not his household without plain
directions how he would have them to go in and out before him in all
wel-pleasing, and not to depend upon the extracts of the wisest of Men's
Reasonings.

For Moses, who was but a Servant (in whose House from my youth up I have been
educated) was so faithful, as in plain terms to lay down every Ordinance which
God would have us to make the Rule of our obedience. And shall we suspect his
Master would be less faithful or deficient? No, in no wise.

But secondly, I did the rather enquire after such a People, because their
manner of Administering of Baptism is very clear to me to be most consentaneous
to the mind of the Lord Christ's institution, which is by a total immersion of
the Party baptized under water.

When I consulted with the best Phylologists in the Greek tongue, whether
Sacred, or Profane, I found all Vno Ore profess, That (...) was (...), to dip,
or put over head, as the Dyar does his Cloth into his Liquors, which is
confessed to be the genuine meaning of the word, even by those who are
professed Adversaries to the carrying on of Baptism by immersion. Let me give
you one instead of many, and that an eminent one; it is learned Spanhemius in
his Dubia Evangelica, Dub. 24. Partis tertiae, Thus much the Gent. had in
print, which they willingly concealed.
ad calcem; where having discussed ex professo, quid (...) signify, concludes
that this exposition is, to use his very terms, Syncera and conformis
significationi verbi, and communi Christianorum, immo omnium Graece doctorum
calculo comprobata. And this sense of the word is received and retained by the
learned Translators in the most eminent Languages of West Christendom.

The Italian and the Spanish retain the Greek word Baptesimo.

The High and Low Dutch render it Doop and Tauff, which signify a total
immersion, and Eu tauffen, to baptize, as is well known to those that are
knowing and acquainted in these Languages.

Add hereunto the conformity between the Greek Word (...), and tebilah in our
Language, which is a total Immersion, as appears by that expression our Nation
gives concerning a Woman going to purify her self in Water, after the days of
her separation, because of her uncleanness, she is said to go lattevillah, to
be hid over Head and Ears.

I shall only add this one Testimony of our Rabbines, which when I found
comformable to the practice of the Disciples of the Messiah in the carrying on
of this Ordinance of Baptism as it is held forth in the Scriptures by immersion
of the Parties to be baptized, it was of great weight and authority with me,
and it is this, In sepher Jalkut O nitzachon, set out by R. Mulhusino, argel
letalmidei talui lalechet litvilah, it is a custom of the Disciples of the
hanged man (for my Nation in mentioning of Christ Periphrase him by contempt,
talui, the hanged man) to go to the place of Immersion to be hid over head and
ears in Water. And thus the Lord having made plain my way before me, and
bringing me to a people walking according to the light, which through the
Scriptures confirmed, by the Testimony both of the learned in my own and other
Nations, who was I that I should resist God, and turn away from those, whom God
had discovered, to my poor wandering soul, to be a people walking in the way of
his own appointment, and according to those convictions that were upon my
spirit? For whose Communion I do exceedingly bless God, and wherein I greatly
rejoice. The Lord Christ having given into my spirit abundance of joy and
refreshing, as a signal token of his good liking, and gracious approbation of
this my undertaking, warming my heart under the full discovery of that Promise
made good to me both in the union of my soul to himself, and giving me into the
embraces of, and communion with his People.

Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37.

Now to God only wise, who has showed me these grear things, the God of my
Fathers, keeping Covenant for ever, who has not taken his mercy from me, nor
suffered his Truth to fail, but has taken one of the outcasts of his ancient
Israel, and brought it home to himself, To him be glory and Dominion throughout
all Ages, Amen, Amen.

Tamvenishlam tehillah leel barach. Josephus Ben Israel, ex Judaeo Christianus.


The Administrators Animadversions upon this Declaration and Confession,
wherein the glorious Order and Method of the Highest shines forth.
1. IT is observable, that the Lord Jesus Christ was pleased to manifest
himself to this poor soul that asked not after him, to advance him as a living
Monument of free grace and mercy; like as the Woman of Sychar, coming to
Jacobs well to draw water for her bodies comfort, met unexpectedly with a
living Fountain of distinguishing grace, freely streaming out to her soul. So
was the Lord pleased, while this Jew was pumping the water of Philosophy, for
the accomplishment of the outward man, to open the glorious Fountain of the
Divine Nature, for the blessed information, and to the great admiration of his
Spirit, until that happy season blinded with the Traditions of his Fathers. O
the distinguishing love of God! Romans 11.7.

2. The Gospel-like order of this great work deserves our most serious
thoughts; that high and wonderful doctrine which the Almighty lays for a sure
Foundation in his heart, is it whereon eternal blessedness depends.

And this is life eternal, That they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

He is first awakened (as it were) by Esays Vision, the discovery of that
glorious, infinite blessed Three in One; Holy Father, Esa. The Lords ancient
people the Jews have ever accounted it great blasphemy to call God a Person.
6.3. Holy Son, John 12.41. Holy Spirit, Acts 28.26. and other Foundation can
no man lay. Wherefore let holy hearts labor for a right understanding of this
excellent mystery, 1 John 5.7, 13, 20, 21. Little Children, keep your selves
from the Idols of men's vain inventions; let the holy expression of men divinely
inspired be your rule, without adding or dimishing, Rev. 22.18, 19.

3. No sooner has he conceived with this blessed truth, but the grand enemy of
the Saints stands before him with fearful temptations, Revelat. 22.4.
either to strangle it before, or devour it so soon as it was born.

And this occasioned those sharp conflicts in this distressed Jew, who was now
put very hard to it; so that either he must extinguish this Candle of the Lord,
lighted in his soul, and utterly relinquish this glorious doctrine of
salvation; or else he must forsake all relations, and enjoyments, and be an
exile for ever, from that excellent place of his Nativity, which is accounted a
second Eden, even the choice Garden of the world. Alas poor seeming Christians,
how many of you are entangled in these snares of relations, and enjoyments,
which you dare not, will not relinquish for Christ, so as to make a bold
Profession of the despised Truths of a Crucified Redeemer? O how will you stand
in judgment with this happy Convert, who has forsaken all to follow the Lord
Jesus.

4. But now behold a stumbling block, surpassing all Satan's temptations, or
snares of relations, or whatsoever else could be as a Mountain obstructing his
passage toward Sion. This is the scarlet colored Whore, sitting upon seven
Hills, that monstrous strumpet, Romish Babylon, whose dreadful abominations,
stops the advance of this seeking soul; he concludes these cannot be the
Disciples of the true Messiah, that thus wallow in all manner of impiety,
whoredom, murder, sodomy, theft, covetousness, pride, Pontificial Pride, but
especially that filthy and detestable idolatry of Image and Picture Worship,
which the just God so severely punished by a 70 years Captivity of his nation
in literal Babylon, Ez. 23.27.38. Neh. 13.28.
with that other sin of horrible profanation of the solemn time of Gods
worship.

Let every sincere soul that can either pray, Jer. 51.3.
preach, or bend a Bow, lay out it self to the utmost, purse, person, all, for
the destruction of this Man of sin (with his bloody, hellish Inquisition) that
so mightily hinders the great work of Isreal's conversion. O Daughter of
Babylon who art to be (wasted) destroyed, happy shall he be that rewards thee
as thou have served us; happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little
ones against the stones. Psa. 137.8, 9.

5. While Romish abominations cause his retreat toward his former legal
profession, his perplexed Soul, (acted by the Spirit of the living God, to pant
and breath after him, who has perfectly fulfilled the Law, by contrary motions
and struglings) like Jacob and Esau in the womb of Rebecca, is nigh unto
despair, even ready to split upon that dreadful Rock.

In this mount of straights, the holy one of Israel appears, who having laid so
sure a foundation in his precious soul, carries it on gloriously to perfection,
Phil. 1.6.
making out unto him the next great mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the
Flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16.
While he discovers the gross corruptions of the Jewish Doctors, laboring to
obscure that serene Prophecy wherein the glory of this Gospel Mystery shines
forth; the like impiety he discovers in their senceless and gross abuse of the
Kingly Prophet, Isay 7.14.
concerning the sufferings of Christ, which serve more to establish him in the
faith of the Gospel: So having gotten the New Testament of some Popist Priest
(the chief benefit he ever received from Papists) he finds all prophecies
concerning the Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension, exactly
fulfilled in him, in whom all promises are yea and Amen.

6. Being thus informed of these great mysteries of God, he next by reflection
upon himself, discerns first, What he was by Creation, Innocent and happy.
Secondly, What he is (without a Savior) by sin, Wretched and miserable.
Thirdly, What he would be, Gracious and glorious: and seeing Christ the only
way to this blessedness, he is so graciously strengthened from on high, as to
abandon all enjoyments and earthly comforrs, and to cast himself upon a naked
Christ.

7. Hereupon he sets upon a diligent search of a Christ, enthroned in the
beautiful conversation of a People professing the Faith of the Gospel; not
after the Traditions and Inventions of men, but according to the exact
prescription of the King of Saints:

8. Taking his life in his hand, through dangers and difficulties, he visits
Germany, where finding his hopes frustrate by Hesseu, he comes to Hamburg; and
there the gracious hand of Providence brings the Fame of English Professors to
his ear. Oh that the increasing glory of our Land, may more and more allure the
outcasts of Israel, to come to the knowledge and profession of the Son of God;
yea let all that profess the name of Christ, labor to adorn the glorious
Doctrine of Salvation in this happy Isle, that they may never crucify the Son
of God afresh, nor put him to an open shame by their miscarriages.

Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of the way; Deuteronomy. 27.18. Mat.
18.7. Esaias 57.14. and 62.10.
then woe to Rome, the great Mother of Harlots and abominations; woe to
Germany; woe to Hessen; yea, woe and alas to English Professors, (all who call
themselves Christians) that by any corruption in Life or Doctrine shall prove a
stumbling block to such inquiring, seeking souls.

9. Englands Renown adds wings to the heightened desires of this distressed
Rabby, who upon holy resolutions of this high design, is vehemently assaulted
by Satan (who had not forgot his old language in Peter) saying, Master pity thy
self; the English permit not any of thy Nation to abide amongst them, they have
slain thousands, and can thou think to escape? But getting victory over this
temptation, Genesis 12.11, 12, 13.
and imbarking for England, he is suddenly surprised by another, (like the
Father of the faithful, for the preservation of his life) even slavish fear,
not knowing of the liberty in England to his people, he answered to the
Mariners, That he was an Englishman.

I shall not, I hope, either daub with untempered Mortar, to sow Pillowes under
any arm-holes; far be it from me to extenuate any sin; yet something methinks
may and ought to be spoken in this matter.

1. That it is a received and avowed Principle amongst the Jews, that nothing
is sin, when life is concerned, except Murder and Idolatry.

2. That this Jew was not yet thoroughly instructed in Christianity; not any
Christians he had met with making Conscience of such kind of untruths.

3. It was through the same fear that surprised Jacob, David, Peter, and other
dear servants of Christ, both of old and in our late wars, many a precious soul
changing his Name, etc. when life was in danger; but this was their infirmity,
as it was also his, who professes his sorrow, and does hope he has obtained
mercy, upon Paul's account, because he did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy
1.13.

Lastly, I would give a word of caution to all the dear servants of Christ, to
abstain from all appearance of evil, and not to commit the least sin, to avoid
the greatest danger, but walk in Gods path, and leave the success to him.

10. This has occasioned many false reports, as that he is no Jew, but a
Jesuit, an Impostor, a Counterfeit, and what not? whereas it will evidently
appear a Noonday verity to any ingenuous person that shall converse with him,
that he is indeed a Jew; especially when they shall behold that manifest token
in his Flesh, the distinguishing Character of Circumcision, which I also saw
before I baptized him. Genesis 17.


11. But the mighty power of Faith grounded upon many precious promises,
especially this, All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out, John. 6.37. bearing him through all
these great undertakings, for his Names sake, who made this gracious promise
his, the lively demonstration of Evangelical Repentance, and a thoroughly
changed Nature.

The clear knowledge of the great Mystery of Godliness, the gracious flowings
of love from life, and life from light; the sweet experimental breathings of a
Christ within (in a more excellent manner than I am able to recite) did even
constrain me to profess, that I have not found a more blessed work of Grace, no
not in England.

12. And therefore looking upon him as a subject fitly qualified (through
Grace) for Christ's Kingdom, (my very soul cleaving to him, and the same in tire
affections abundantly flowing from my faithful Fellow Laborer, with full
approbation of all my Brethren that heard him) I called upon him in the words
of that holy man, And now why tarriest thou? arise and be baptized, Acts 22.16.
and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.

13. Which Initiating Ordinance he being well informed in, as to the subject
matter, Believers, and the exact manner, Dipping, or Plunging, both from the
holy Scriptures, and from the full testimony of the most learned Jewish
Doctors, averring, that the manner of the Disciples of Jesus of Nazareth (the
Hanged Man) was to baptize their Converts in Rivers, by Immersion, or Dipping
the whole body under water, according to the ancient custom of cleansing
Lepers, and of menstruous Women, even to this day.

Whereupon, after a public solemn Profession of the Lord Jesus, and humble
addresses to his Throne for his gracious presence, some hundreds accompanying
him to the River Tyne, he was baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, who
returned him in a rejoyceing frame of spirit, Acts 8.49.
and has filled his soul since with much spiritual sweetness.

Now let all that are the Lords Remembrancers, give him no rest until he bring
in all his Ancients gloriously, and make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, Isai
24.23. and 62.7 and 60.1.
by causing that joyful found to ring in their ears, Arise, shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. Romans 11.25, 26.

Tho. Tillam.

THus I have truly presented the False Jew, the greatest part whereof was
omitted by these Gentlemen, and yet they were pleased to print my
Animadversions upon the whole: And when they had so done, they offer to the
world their Considerations upon them, telling the judicions Reader, That he
will see without their Advertisement, say they, he Animadverts upon, are not
visible to us in the Declaration, but sure he had a mind to make something of
it.

Reply. The former part which the Gentlemen have printed, was more properly the
Jews confession, and the later part, which they have omitted, was his
Declaration. Now they having about fourscore lines of the later part before
their eyes in print, have willingly broken it off at the end of seven lines,
Caetera desiderantur.
telling the world, that the rest is wanting, and then insult over my
Animadversions, as lame and defective, Animadversions and my self equally
monstrous: They conclude with a Scoff, But sure he had a mind to make
something of it.

I think it is evident that these Gent had a mind to make something of it, when
they printed not the one half, and yet gave forth my Animadversions upon all.
But to their considerations upon them.

Their first Consideration.
This glorious change which the Administrator was so confident of, was in a
month, by reading some books in Lieutenant-Collonel Hobsons house, as himself
pretended: How soon shall a man be called by these men, a living Monument of
free Grace, though a mere stranger only, upon closing with their opinion?

Reply. Me thinks it is harsh that these Gentlemen should limit the holy one of
Israel, and judge it no true work of grace, unless it be above a month in
doing: That New England way of keeping persons upon trial many Months, my soul
could never close with. The way of Christ, is to receive poor, wounded,
thirsty, penitent souls, upon their earnest desires. If these Gentlemen would
give me one Scripture for rejecting such, (as such this Jew seemed) really I
shall give them thanks, and soon change my judgment; but till then, I shall
endeavor to follow the practice of Peter, Acts 2.41.and 8.12, 13. and 16.33.
and 18.8.
Paul, and Philip, in looking upon those that profess the faith of Christ, and
Repentance, from dead works, as living Monuments of free Grace, and fit for the
Ordinances of the Gospel. If they shall prove hypocrites, as Ananias, and
Simon Magus, 2 Cor. 10.6.
and the false Jew did, we have in a readiness to revenge all such disobedience.

But whereas the Gentlemen present us to the world, as owning such for living
Monuments of free grace, that do but only close with our opinion, it is a great
Untruth: we do well know, Mat. 7.16. Gal. 5.22.
to have passed through the pangs of the New Birth, and subjects fit for
Baptism; and hereupon we show them all the Forms and Ordinances of the Temple,
the outgoings, and in-commings, and so open the arms of our dearest
affections to embrace them. But it is well known, that diverse Persons under
full convictions, as to our opinion, as these Gent. term it, have been denied
communion with us, and desired to wait in the use of means, until the fruits
fore mentioned shall appear, whereas these Gent. do own and receive such in
whom neither Faith, Repentance, Self-denial, Knowledge, or desire at all
appears.

Their second Consideration.
That the Administrator calls the distinction of Persons, Idols; as at a
meeting in Newcastle the last year, he called them appearances, and
manifestations.

Reply. These Gent. have no less abused me in this, than in their High
Commission-like dealing in that Conference at Newcastle, where Mr. Hammond
would rigidly impose the term Person upon me, and when I put him to produce one
rule for it, which by Scripture he could not, he demanded what I would call the
Three Persons? My answer was, that I durst not give any Appellation at all, but
Father, Son, and Spirit, God being graciously pleased so to appear or manifest
himself to us, when suddenly he stopped my speech, and spoke very loud to the
people, that I called God an appearance, or a manifestation, which went for
current amongst that party. And the like height of spirit was seen in the same
Gent. when I was speaking of God as a Father, a Son, a Spirit; he presently
rises up, crying, A Son, a Son, is that Scripture Language? Then casting his
arms abroad to the people, Look ye friends (said he) this is the Gent. that
stands so much for Scripture, and now he says, A Son, a Son; then turning to
me he said, I must call him the Son, I answered, A Son; and he hotly replied
often, the Son, not a Son, it is no Scripture phrase; till at last he sat down
silent, upon my rehearsal of this Scripture, To us a Child is born, to us a
Son is given. Such has been the carriage of some of these Gent. toward me,
more like the Lordly Prelates, than humble Gospel Ministers. But concerning the
great charge, of calling the distinctions of Persons Idols, I have indeed
warned Christians, to keep themselves from the Idols of men's vains inventions;
Mat. 15.9. Psalm 99.8.
because Christ has declared it to be vain worship; and it is that which
procures the vengeance of God upon it. Now if the Appellation, Person, be not
Scripture, it is a mere invention of Man, and so an Idol. Yes (say they) we have
the Author to the Hebrews, and is not he of more Authority than all the Rabbis
in the World? Reply, Undoubtedly he is; for however some do question the
Authority of this Epistle, yet I do firmly embrace it, as the very word of
Christ. But the Author of this Epistle does not call God a Person; the words
quoted by the Genesis are these, Heb. 1.3.
(...) the express character of his substance, or subsistence. These Gent. tell
the world of the Administrators non-acquaintance with the Rabbis: and that I
do not disprove them, I shall only at present make use of our own Writers,
Crit. Sac. page 272.
who possibly may help to inform some of them, that (...), (though it be
translated) Person, for a Person, and that some render it Essence, others
Substance, others Subsistence; yet all these are improper, and that the proper
signification of this word, is a Foundation, or Basis, which subsisting of it
self bears up other things: In 2 Cor. 9.4. it is Confidence. In Heb. 11.1. it
is Existence. In the Scripture it does signify, A firm and settled persuasion
of the mind upon any thing; mark it well, this is the Scripture signification
of the word; but, says he, It is also used (observe, it is also used) for the
Divine essence with a Personal propriety, Heb. 13.

Thus you see this worthy Author lays no such weight upon the word person, as
these Gent do; to charge a man with denying the Trinity, that cannot own the
term. Let us a little consider another learned Writer, Gheynell Div. Trinun. p.
22.
who was commended to me with seeming affection by Mr. Hammond, who
indifferently accepts the word Person or Subsistence, and plainly says, that
the word, which they translate Person, is Subsistence, Heb. 1, 3. Page 81.
and in page 84. the word (...), which we render. Subsistence, and by way of
Analogy, Person, observe, it is by way of Analogy, he further holds forth, Page
89
that the Fathers did use the phrase of three Hypostases, not daring it seems,
in the purest Primitive times, to translate it Person, but at last, Page 91.
they took the boldness to use the word Person.

I desire to be informed why this word Hypostasis, which the Primitive Fathers
so long used, may not still be kept without translation, as well as other As
Thylacceries Mat. 23 5. Anathema Meranath^
words, whose proper signification cannot easily be rendered in English. But to
proceed with Master Cheynell, page 89, 90. you have this sober Christian
conclusion, We are prompted by the Spirit to explain this Mystery thus, the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost, are three in subsistence, but one in nature; no
Mystery can be explained with less violence, and more sobriety; for we are
precise in keeping to the very words of Scripture, in explaining this Grand
Mystery to the plainest of men; and therefore they were sentenced of old, that
did not believe this plain truth.

But I am sentenced now for professing the truth; for when I declared my
judgment in this glorious Three in One, nothing would serve their turn but the
very word Person; what the height of spirit was God knows.

One observation more I shall add from Mr. Cheynell upon Calvin; Non minori
Religione, etc. Whatever we think or speak of our own heads concerning God,
will be like our selves, unsavory, foolish and vain (and yet these Gent. are
troubled that their invented word Person should be termed an Idol) no Language
is rich enough, no words are significant enough to declare this profound
Mystery, which the understanding of Men and Angels cannot comprehend, nor the
tongue of Men and Angels express.

And therefore I hope, that until these Gentlemen can show me the word Person
in the Scripture, I shall enjoy my Christan liberty to adore the eternal
Father, Son, and Spirit, according to Christ's Word, and not after the
inventions and rigid injunctions of men.

There are three that bear record in Heaven, 1 John 5.7.
the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one.

Little Children (I warn you again) keep your selves from Idols, Amen. Verse 21.


The Gent. have prevented me, in answering themselves, how I came to know that
the Jews count it great blasphemy to call God a Person; for they presently
conclude, That I had it from this Counterfeit Jew: and truly in this they are
right. I should hope for some Christian accommodation, if I could find these
Genesis as ingenuous, in acknowledging they have done me wrong in taking this Note
out of the Margin (where I wrote it) and putting it into the Text, or body of
my Animadversions; possibly God may give them Eyes to see the many unbrotherly,
light, unsavory expressions, and carriage in their false Jew: Amongst the rest,
me thinks their third consideration is no solid one, viz. You see by this time
how the Candle smells; Is not this to call darkness light?

I am persuaded, if I had written of seeing the Candle smell, these Gent. would
have made themselses as merry with it, as they have done with their dear Friend
in their Narrative. But to proceed, they demand, If my Animadversions upon the
Jews Affliction, be not to call darkness light? To which I must return, That
his affliction, according to his Declaration, was as truly light to me, as
Simon Magus believing was to Philip, Acts 8.13. And I shall leave to the Saints
to judge, whether my charitable conclusion of the Jews trembling, melting
confession, have not more Gospel-like light, than these Gentlemen's following
Consideration, which by way of Quaere, they send out into the world thus;
Whether by this railing at Rome there may not be hopes of the Administrators
real turning from Popery, which we much suspected by his speedy and cordial
closing with the counterfeit Jew.

Reply, That which these Gentlemen term railing at Rome, is the express
Language of Gods Spirit; there are very few words in my fourth Section, but
what the Scripture breaths against Babylon; and as for the Quaery, I must
acknowledge (it is so full of envy) that it puts my spirit out of frame,
something (but I fear it is a temptation) moves me to answer in another manner,
but let the Prophet answer for me.

Then, said they, come, Jer. 18.18, 19. and 20.10.
and let us devise devices against Jeremiah; Come, and let us smite him with
the tongue. Give heed to me, O Lord, for I heard the defaming of many, fear on
every side; Report, say they, and we will report it: all my familiars watched
for my halting, etc. Father forgive (these poor prejudiced Gent.) for they know
not what they do.

To their fifth Consideration, I have already replied in my return to my third,
concerning the light I judged the Jews estate by. And whereas they tell the
Reader, that he cannot but see my ignorance in heart work; let me also tell the
Reader, that if all be true which these Gent. affirm of me, they have as little
skill in heart work as I; for some of them (if not all) reported of me, as a
godly, able, and approved Preacher of the Gospel; and thereupon importuned me
to Preach the Lecture at Hexham, as knowing me utterly averse to any engagement
in a Parish way: Yea one of these Gent. (not long since) professed, that he
believed I had grace; and yet now they have subscribed it, that they suspect my
being a Papist still; they bewail the sadness of my condition, as one given up
of God to believe lies, They proclaim me ignorant of the great my steries of
the Gospel, and heart work; really if these things be so, these Gent. are as
ignorant in heart work as my self; but if they be not so, what manifest wrong
have they done in publishing these to the world?

And whereas in their sixth Consideration, they mind me, That the false Jew
often professed that he had no work of Grace before his arrival in England: and
then desire to know, how I discovered, that his perplexed soul was acted by the
Spirit of the living God, to pant and breath after Jesus Christ, and to abandon
all enjoyments for him.

Reply, He had no work of Grace indeed, neither before, nor after his arrival;
but he seemed to me to have: and these Gent. themselves have no other way to
know a work of grace, but by the fruits; both they and we must be contented
with the knowledge of Samuel, 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 Cor. 13 9.12.
Peter, Philip, Paul, and other Saints, who can know but in part, see through a
glass darkly; it is Gods Prerogative Royal, to know and search the heart: so
that the question must be, nor whether this, or any other Hypocrite do pant
after, or forsake all for Christ; but whether an Elect Vessel may do so, before
he see his interest in Christ. I hope I have so much acquaintance with heart
work in my self, and many others, as to know that a precious soul may pant and
breath many a day, month, and year, seeking fot a Christ without (to use the
Jews language) before they find or feel on dragm of comfort of the least
knowledge of a Christ within. How many drooping, disconfolate, broken,
trembling hearts are there, wrestling with many violent assaults, terrified
under many dreadful temptations, struggling through the pangs and bitter throws
of the New Birth, before Christ be formed in them? What would such poor souls
give, nay, what would they not give for one glimpse of his reconciled face, one
beam of light from his glorious countenance, one soulravishing embrace from
their Beloved, before they feel him (like his first Gospel Messenger) springing
in the Womb for joy? who all this while keeps behind a thick and dark cloud, on
purpose to make sincere souls more earnestly and affectionately seek and cry
after him; for he loves to see their Face, and hear their Voice, even while
they are in the secret places of the stairs; yea, possibly, whilst they lie
prostrate at his feet, begging his favor; Caut. 2.14.
they meet only with frowns, denying, rejecting, it may be spurning his poor
Petitioners, as dogs from his presence, who are willing to be so accounted, if
they may obtain some of his crumbs from under his Table, Mat. 15.22 Psalm. 48.10.
the meanest Ordinances of his House (slighted by wantons) which yet their
dejected souls esteem too precious for them; yea, so base, so vile, so
abominable and filthy in their own eyes are they, that crying out undone,
unclean, polluted, dust and ashes, wretched creatures, death, flashings of Hell
Fire, walking upon the brink of that dreadful Praecipice which descends unto
the soul-swallowing Gulf of despair; till at length a still and soft Voice,
some sweet heavenly whispers, He show thee the kindness of God, thou poor dead
dog, 2 Samuel 9.3.8.11. Psalm. 11. ^ult.
thou miserable, polluted, dunghill-wretch; O thou afflicted soul, thou tossed
troubled soul, what will thou? be it unto thee even as thou will: and then
(sometimes) Or ever I was aware, Cant. 6.11.
my soul made me like the Chariots of Aminadib (says the poor distressed
Saint.) And truly such like was the Jews condition to me, and many more
discerning Spirits who heard him speak (far beyond all that has been Printed
by him, or of him) as one who was brought out of Egyptian darkness, and had
traveled hard, through the howling and terrible Wilderness of great
afflictions, before he found that he had got one step into the Promised
possession, any interest at all in Christ, only seeking a Christ without; so
exquisitely could he act the Hypocrite, in all the motions and methods of a
work of grace. And whereas the Gentlemen desire to know by what Principle he
did it? I must tell them, from a Principle infused by the Prince of darkness,
transforming himself into an Angel of light, the way of all Hypocrites. I hope
these Gentlemen know, that Hypocrites may, and do abandon all enjoyments, and
expose themselves to all dangers, and miseries, as they think, for Christ, or
else, what shall we think of many of those called Quakers, and their Fathers
the Franciscan Friars, who have undoubtedly begun the work, by some such
Impostors as our Jew, who forsake all, and macerate their bodies, though as
yet, I think, they are not come to whipping, and other Penance; I may not
question, but Judas had forsaken all, as well as Peter; neither could these
Gent. have been able to discern whether would prove the Traitor, any more than
their dear friend or I could discern the Jew would prove an Hypocrite.

And now if the enlightened Saint (considering what has been offered) shall
observe the Gents. conclusion of this their sixth Consideration, viz. By this
time you know both the Administrator and his Disciple; he may easily conclude
by what Principle they speak it; but I shall leave them to God, beseeching him
to pity and pardon them.

The Genr. passing by my seventh and eight Section to avoid prolixity (as they
say) being desirous only to point out my grosser mistakes; They declare in
their ninth Consideration, their trouble, That I should compare the Jew to the
Father of the Faithful, and so harden him in his sins: To which I reply, That
it was upon his professed sorrow for his lies, that I pleaded for him; but
after I discovered his imposture, I was as far from justifying him, or
mincing his sins, as from daubing with untempered Mortar, That I abuse many
gracious Saints which the Jew met with, before he came to Lieutenant Colonel
Hobson, charging them with making no conscience of lies.

Far be it from me to charge any one gracious Saint with such abominations. I
shall desire the Reader to review my second Reason,

That this Jew was not yet thoroughly instructed in Christianity, not any
Christians he had met with making Conscience of such kind of untrnths. Now what
charge is this?

I enquired diligently of the Jew, what Christians he had met with, before he
came to the Lieutenant Colonel: he told me He had only been with Mr. Durant
at New Castle, but stayed not, And for this Gent. when I shall see him humbled
for that gross untruth mentioned page 3 I may look upon him as a gracious
Saint. Now I desire these Gent. to name one gracious Saint that I have
perfectly abused, by charging him to make no conscience of lies; if they
cannot, then surely they have perfectly abused me, whom they have sometimes
owned as a gracious Saint.

But I proceed to their tenth Consideration, wherein they declare, That the
reports, I called false, are now evident truths; and wonder that my confidence
should swell so big, upon no better grounds, than by the Narrative. To which
I reply, my grounds were good, I walked by an exact rule which will bear me
out. 1 Cor. 13.4.7.
I might better enquire what should swell the confidence of these Gent, to
publish such things as they have done for Truths against me, from the alone
testimony of a known liar, which are notoriously false?

And whereas they lament my condition, 2 Thessalonians 2.1.
and the whole Society with me in Communion, as given up of God to believe lies.

1. Let them consider well, that whatsoever dirt and filth they cast in our
faces, lights in the Face of the Apostles, and primitive Christians, who were
frequently deceived by Hypocrites, yet never blamed for admitting them (upon
their profession) let these Gent. produce one example for such kind of dealing
as theirs is with me.

But secondly, I shall desire the Reader (if he have any light) to consider
seriously, whether strong delusions to believe lies, be a just judgment from
God upon these Gent. or upon us.

1. The Jew came to us with most exquisite hypocrisy, in a melting, trembling,
weeping frame of spirit: all his carriage holy and humble before his Baptism;
his lies were unknown to us, till afterward, and then we denied him communion
with us.

2. But after he is known to be a notorious liar, these Gent. have so far
believed all his relations, that might any way defame us, that without further
enquiry, though we are but sixteen miles from them, they have published them
all to the world: Is this like the ministers of Christ? Is this to speak and
write as the Oracles of God? The Oracle of God says, Thou shall not receive,
or raise a false report, Exodus 23.1. but these Gent. have done both. The Oracle
of God says, Receive not an accusation against an Elder, but before, or under,
two or three Witnesses. 1 Timothy 5.19. but one single Testimony, and that of a
known liar too, has set these Gents. Pens a work, to reproach and defame both
an Elder, and a whole Church. This Scripture was urged some months since, by
one of these gent. who having done me manifest injury, in a Public way of
persecution, I wrote to Mr. Hammond, whom I judged more moderate, to deal with
him about it: Whereupon the Gent. wrote to me, flatly denying the injury,
within these fair expressions, I expect a Brotherly satisfaction from you,
which is first, a sense of your over credulity, and unloving readiness, in
believing ill of your Brother, contrary to 1 Timothy 5.19. Secondly, your
irregular declaring this offense to another. To which I answered, That I am
able to make good the charge by sufficient witnesses (no Jews) whenever he
pleases. Secondly, It was a very public persecution, and therefore I dealt
not irregularly. But what brotherly satisfaction can these Gent. make for their
over credulity, and unloving readiness, in believing ill of him they term a
Brother, from the hand of one Witness, whom they know to be an Impostor full of
Falsehood, and irregularly declaring all to the World? which they can never make
good. They can never make good, That I knew of the many plotted lies of the
false Jew, before I baptized him. They can never make it good, That I called
the Jew to the Lords Supper, and he refused.

If the Gent. shall reply, That the false Jew told them so, and thereupon they
publish it; Has not God sent them strong delusions to believe lies?

They can never make it good, That I neglected to preach the fundamental truths
of the everlasting Gospel; and made it my business to preach up Baptism ever
since I came to Hexham.

They cannot make it good, That we own Persons, as living monuments of free
grace, only upon closing with our opinion.

They cannot make it good, That I have charged many gracious Saints, with
making no conscience of lies.

These, and other gross Untruths of these Gent. being considered, I suppose I
have more cause to bewail their sad condition, as being given up of God to
believe, to make, and to publish lies; so that their own Pen drops their own
doom, 2 These. 2.11.
both in their Title Page, and the closure of their tenth Consideration. But
time and occasions call to a Conclusion: And therefore to their eleventh
Consideration, enquiring, Whether the work upon my heart, be any better than
the Jews.

I have already answered That if it be not, their skill in heart work is as
little as they say mine is, seeing they have judged me truly gracious. Their 12
Consideration, I shall leave to my beloved Brother, and faithful
Fellow Laborer, to which he answers, That the twelfth Consideration has as
much of the Serpent in it, as any of the former. For whereas they mention his
present station, he apprehends it to be inserted by them.

1. Either to his disparagement (which is the grand design carried on through
the false Jewish Pamphlet) and if so, he must tell the Gent. it is their
weakness so to judge, they not knowing whereof they affirm. For as the Office
relates to a person of no mean quality, but one eminent and honorable in his
Country, so also it is a place of considerable credit, and no mean trust,
though they would present it to the world as despicable.

2. Or secondly, If they insist upon his Office as an impediment, so that he
cannot labor in the Lords work; this mistake is equal with the former. For his
Office does not like their fat Lots at Newcastle (for which they take occasion
in their first Epistle to give God thanks, page 2. l. 23.) make him so
corpulent or unwieldy, but he can once or twice a fortnight lanch out to preach
the Gospel in the dark parts near adjacent, where are diverse Parish
meeting houses, which stand as so many dark Lanthorns, and which these Gents.
present pomp and greatness will not vouchsafe them to visit, no not once in a
Summer, to hold forth their light to some thousands of poor souls which sit in
darkness, and may, for all them, perish without understanding.

But to proceed. As for his great change which these Gent. charge him lately to
have professed; He doubts not, but in the day of the Lord Jesus his appearing,
it shall appear that he possesses what he has professed. And that it is of a
former date, than since their Bugbear Articles of Scandals, which they say were
shown him, though he never got a sight of them to peruse them, wherein what was
of truth, he neither then did, nor will deny. But what he then granted, had it
amounted to a Charge, he makes no question but he should have heard of them
long ere now; he having appeared in two Public Disputes with the
Administrator, against them at Newcastle, even before the expiring of their
Commission. So that concerning these Articles, he has ground to conclude, That
either there was self-conviction upon these Gent. that they were false, or
their proof shrunk in and sailed them, being ashamed to justify such untruths;
or there has been corruptness on some hands, since that a business, which the
world must be made believe was so wicked, has been near upon 3 years pocketed
up in silence; and if a truth, has bin withholden in unrighteousnes. Any of
these being granted, which the impartial Reader in reason cannot deny, there was
doubtless no such necessity, as these Gent. pretend, for him to strike in with
the Administrator and his way, (who came not into these parts for many months
after) to secure him from the stroke of these Gent. Mock-Articles of Scandals,
they having had time, will and power sufficient, had they but had sufficiency
of truth and integrity, to have drawn up a charge against him. But by the way,
let the Reader take notice, that the Administrator, and his way, holds a rod
over these Gent. and teaches them moderation. He was struck in with the
Administrator and his way, therefore these Gent. waved their Articles. Does not
such an inference well become Gent. that profess to be valiant for the Truth
upon the Earth?

Oh blessed be our God, who has raised up such Professors of the
Administrators way, as have chained up men of persecuting Prelatical spirits,
so that they cannot act up to the height of mischief against the truths of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the Professors of them, as they would.

But say the Gent. We desire to see further, etc. Ans. They have their desire,
but upon this condition, That he may prevail with them for the like liberty,
before he lay the weight of infallibility in a work of grace, upon any, or all
their judgments, since that experience (whereof sundry instances may be given)
has taught him that these Gentlemen are not acted by an infallible spirit, but
are men subject to the like Passions, Delusions, and Mistakes, as he is.

-- Optimus ille
Qui minimis urgetur. --
S. A. As to their last Consideration, the Administrator can, through mercy,
cheerfully bear all the affronts, derisions end abuses of it, and all the rest;
though temptations have not been wanting to answer these Gent. Romans 12.17, 18,
19.
in another way; but Christ has taught me better, 1 Peter 2.23, so that when
they say, I speak in the same Language which the spirit of Satan breathed out
of the mouth of my Dear Brother the Counterfeit, I can patiently bear it, Mat.
10.25.
and leave it to the Lord, who was termed Beelzebub before me, and told me
what I should meet with. But whereas the Gent. confidently tell their Reader,
That the Counterfeit could never dissemble so handsomely in the Ordinance of
Prayer: (and thereupon deride me thus; Yet this is the Saint that the
Administrator says, he had not found the like, no not in England.) Let me tell
the Reader, what I shall punctually prove, whenever I am called to it, That
this is another gross untruth, To be given up of God to believe lies. Really
Christian Reader this wretched Impostor, whom these Gent. say at adventure,
could not dissemble so handsomely in the Ordinance of Prayer, could speak
sweetly, soundly, affectionately, feelingly in Prayer, so as to draw forth the
heart exceedingly, of such as are richly experienced in the things of Christ.
But it is manifest how readily, yea, and greedily the Gentlemen embrace
whatsoever the false Jew speaks, that may any way wound us; whereas all other
things that seem to appear for us, they brand as Lies, Forgeries, Deceits, etc.

The Gent. close, leaving the Administrator upon the Stage, in his relation of
the false Jews joy, and spiritual sweetness after Baptism, and they affirm, its
true, He was observed to smile as he came out of the water, and being asked the
reason why he smiled, it was as easily believed, as spoken by him, to be the
joy of the Holy Ghost.

And I shall conclude also with declaring, That I am certain these Gentlemen
themselves, are no other way able to discern, or know, where the joy of the
Holy Ghost, and Heavenly incomes are, but by the expressions and actions of the
party, which were not wanting in this exquisite Hypocrite. As for his smiling
as he came out of the Water, it is as easily believed by these Gentlemen it
seems as spoken, to use their own words. But I perceive these Gentlemen little
know what it is to be buried in Baptism, that can believe a Person baptized, is
so suddenly in a smiling condition: I was as near to him, as any, and helping
him out of the Water, I heard him pray, as soon as he could take breath.

I leave all to the Lord and his Saints, it is their work to judge the World;
let them judge between us whether is guilty of believing Lies, as easily as
spoken, We in giving credit to the false Jews holy, humble Confession, when he
appeared to us to be adorned with the pure Robes of Snow-white innocence, no
guilt at all: or these Gent. in embracing whatsoever he told them against us,
after his notorious falsehood was detected, and they knew him to be an
abominable Liar?

Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge: for
wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge
do the same things. Romans 2.1.

FINIS.

