THE Pretended SAINT AND THE Profane Libertine. Well met in Prison. OR A
DIALOGUE BETWEEN Robert Titchburne, AND Henry Marten, Chamber-Fellowes in
Newgate.

LONDON, Printed for J. Stafford 1660.

A Dialogue between. Robert Titchburne AND Henry Marten.
Col. Mar. HOw now Mr. Alderman, what makes your Soul thus to Droope, your
Speech methinks fails you, your Eyes are as Hollow as your Heart has always
been, you seem to be as dejected as if the Executioner were about to do his
Office, and your Countenance is as Gashly as (...) Brethren that are turned
Sur^ of the rivers Thames whose Heads are Elevated upon London Bridge.


Titch. Ah Coll. Marten, This is no time to Jest in; can you Pray and
Expostulate the reason, why our Palaces are turned into a Prison; our Noble
Attendants, into Iaylors and his Sub-Officers; our Chains of Gold into Fetters
of Iron; our place as a Judge upon the Bench, to be a Prisoner at the Bar, This
methinks is a sad dispensation, that the Grapes of Canaan should be thus sower,
and our Glory so suddenly turned into shame.


Mart. Prithee Mr. Alderman don't disturb me with the repetition of that thing
called Prayers; the noise of it sounds in my Ear as doleful as a passing Bell.
But yet tell me what is the cause in your apprehension of these Afflictions
which follow us as naturally as one Billow follows another in the unwearied
Sea.


Titch. Ah Coll. Marten, I find your soul is not yet touched with the sense of
Blood, Innocent blood, Royal Blood; the Blood of Gods Anointed of his
Vicegerent here upon Earth; Blood that has cried aloud to Heaven, and this
Blood God is making inquisition for; and we gave consent to the shedding
thereof, we Dethroned his Royal Person from his Power and Dignity; We Usurped
an Authority over him to take away his Life. And in a word the guilt hereof
lies so heavy upon my spirit, as that I cannot scrue or wind up my Soul higher
then this sad dejection wherein you behold me.


Mar. Pish Alderman Titchburne, I Will tell you, had you still rode like a
Jackanapes on Horseback as you did when you were Lord Mayor of London; and had
a few Red-Coats to have Levelled their Muskets against all that would not obey
your commands, and had the punishing of Alehouse keepers that would not
conform to good Orders; and were you now again contriving a New market place
for the Herb Women that formerly sat in Cheapside; and were you again to be
Dubbed one of Oliver Cromwells Knights, and be Honored with the Title of one of
his Mushrome Lords. Or lastly were the Committee of Safety sitting again, and
you but entertained one of the Members thereof; you would Cut off the King's Head
again, you would call the desire of a Personal Treaty with the King, a Traiterous
Engagement; you would betray the Counsels of the City, and would be fit for any
enterprise that might Establish or uphold the same.


Titch. Well Colonel Marten, this methink is not well done of you, to add
Affliction to Affliction; the remembrance of each of these particulars Cuts a
new Wound, and every thought thereof Torments my Soul with renewed Grief.


Mar. Come then Mr. Alderman, let us Laugh away every thing that disturbs our
Content, let us make Music with the Gingling of our Chains, and let us make
our Fetters to keep a Noise in Tune; let us turn one of our Acts of Parliament
into Hopkins his Rhimes, and sing our selves into a better Temper. But what
think you Mr. Alderman methinks we want a Girl to complete the story.


Titch. Fie Fie is this Prison Discourse, what hard hap had I to meet with such
a Chamber-Mate; sure this adds to my former distempers, and Reiterates my never
to be pacifyed Grief: Oh that I had been so happy as to have been united to one
in Prison who would Alternately have past away the time in opening a Text of
Scripture, that we might have Sung a Psalm of Lamentation together; discourst
of the World to come, and brought to our Minds the remembrance of those
Torments, which some of our brethren now endure for having a Hand in the Blood
of that just man; but I Will go Pray.


Mar. A Pox take your canting, what the Devil makes you disturb me in my rest;
methings this whining and drolling is not like praying at all; pray Mr.
Alderman talk your self, let me not hear so much as the sound of one of your
words, for I told you before it goes against my Nature to hear any Prayers.


Titch. Truly Colonel Marten, you are very profane, I thought we had all been
praying Saints that Cut off the Kings Head, and you methinks do not speak the
language of one.


Mar. A way I tell you with this discourse, there was not one person like a
Saint in all that crew called the High Court of Justice, and truly if I had
thought there had; you should not have found me there, for I promise you I do
not like such company; but come let us talk of what will become of us, is there
any hopes of Escaping the Gallows;


Titch. None that ever I can hear, only they say the King is merciful.


Mar. I but they say the people are mad to have us out of the way, they are
ever and anon crying out why are not those Rogues brought to Justice, some
saying no Torment is bad enough for us, Hanging in Chains, setting our
Quarters upon the City Gates, and our heads upon London Bridge, they think it
not punishment enough, They would have us buried a Live, Starved to Death; some
say let their skinns be pulled over their Ears whilst they are living, and let
them be hanged up as Memento of everlasting shame, and as a warning piece to
succeeding Ages how they meddle with the sacred institution of Kings and
Princes.


Titch. Well so I were but out of the World, I would not much care which way I
went, for it is Torment enough for me to live; do you not think it does trouble
me to be carried to the Tower when I was once Lieutenant thereof and to be a
close Prisoner, where I commanded the whole place my self, and to have one of
my Brethren an Alderman of London now to be a Commander over me; well if I be
Reprieved it will be my punishment, I shall live like Tantalus all my days;
that is to say only mocked with pleasure and delight.


Mar: Well Mr. Alderman for the present Good night, but pray hereafter, do not
whine out your Feigned stuff, for say any thing but your prayers and I shall
be glad to discourse with you; I think it is about sleeping time, though we
shall be parted when we are carried to another Prison, yet we shall meet at the
Gallows; or else our Heads may meet with our Brother Peter's and the rest of
our Brethren upon London Bridge.


FINIS.

