KNOWLEDGE OF THE TIMES, OR, The resolution of the Question, how long it shall
be unto the end of WONDERS.

By JOHN TILLINGHAST, a Servant of Jesus Christ.

Dan. 12. Verse. 8 -- Then I said, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these
things?

Verse 9. And he said unto me, Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up,
and sealed till the time of the end.

Verse. 10. Many shall be purified and made white, and tried; but the wicked
shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand.

Chap. 7.21. I beheld, and the same Horn made war with the Saints, and
prevailed against them

Verse. 22. Until the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the
Saints of the most high, and the time came that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom.

Printed at London by R. I. for L. Chapman, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

Knowledge of the Times.

TO The faithful VVitnesses of CHRIST, Within the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
Dearly beloved in our Lord:
IT was not doubtless without a special and most wonderful design of Heaven, in
order to the making of Christ's Kingdom, and the Administrations thereof the
more welcome to the World, when the Fathers appointed time of setting the same
up should be come, That the power of the Fourth Monarchy in its second state
should be in all respects, but chiefly in its rise, worse, more odious, and
abominable than ever was power in the World before it; for as for all the three
first Monarchies, and the Fourth also (considered in its first state, before
the Antichristian Beast was Mid-wived into the World) they did receive their
power from God, upon which account the Apostles in the New Testament urge obeto
the ruling Powers of the World that then were, telling Believers to whom they
wrote, that there was no power (i. e. then standing) but what Originally, in
respect of the derivation of the power, was of God, and ordained by God, Romans
12.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

But now the power of the Roman Monarchy in its second State, as subjected to
Antichrist (which Beast was not then risen, but to ascend to the Throne
afterward, Revel. 17.8.) is (as in many other respects, so especially in this,
viz. of the first rise or derivation of the power) made to differ vastly from
all those preceding powers, which were parts of the Great Image, as well as it;
for those, though their power was abused, yet had they it originally from God;
but of the Antichristian Power the contrary is expressly declared, namely, That
when the Ten-Horned blasphemous Beast should arise, he should receive his power
from the Dragon, or Devil, Revel. 13.1, 2. And I saw a Beast rise up out of the
Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Horns ten Crowns, and upon
his Heads the name of Blasphemy. And the Beast that I saw was like unto a
Leopard, and the Dragon gave him his power, and great authority. Hence, Revel.
11.7. and again, Chap. 17.8. where his rise is spoken of, he is said, not to
have a descent from Heaven, as had the former powers, but an ascent out of the
bottomless Pit, i.e. from Hell, noting (as before) that the derivation of this
Power should not be from God, but from the Devil.

Which Position is yet more clear, if we consider, how that Jesus Christ, all
the time of the Beasts Kingdom, does set up a two fold power, viz. a power
Magisterial and Ministerial, (which he calls his two Witnesses, Revelation
11.3.) For this very end, to oppose the Beast, by bearing constant witness
against, and smiting so far as in them lies, the Beast and his Powers. This
witnesse-bearing Power set up in direct opposition to the Beast, though in
respect of their outward condition they are at and under all the time of the
Beasts Kingdom, he, till his day is out, ruling the roast, for which cause they
wear Sackcloth; yet being declaredly of Divine appointment, and ordination; I
will give power to my two Witnesses, hence it necessarily follows, that the
power of the Beast cannot be such too, unless we should suppose Divine
appointments to be manifestly contradictory within themselves, and to fight the
one with the other, which to say, would be rather a blasphemy than an
absurdity. And it is for this reason, because the Beast receives his power from
the Dragon, that the Worshippers of the Beast are said to worship the Dragon,
Revelations 13.4. And they worshipped the Dragon that gave power to the Beast,
and they worshipped the Beast. From all which it appears, That Power considered
as Antichristian is not of divine institution, but Diabolical.

This Antichristian power is that which of all the Powers of the Four
Monarchies takes last place, closing up the Worlds day, and standing next to
Christ's Kingdom in regard of time, God seeing it best in his infinite and
unsearchable Wisdom to suffer things, before he will erect his own Kingdom of
righteousness, and holiness, to grow to such a height of unparalelled impiety
in the World, as that the principal affairs thereof, which in all Ages and
Generations formerly had ever been ordered and disposed by men, as his
Substitutes, should in this last time (namely the time of Antichrists Kingdom)
be disposed of, and governed by men as Substitutes of the Dragon.

In the ruins of this Power Christ begins his own Kingdom; for as the Persian
Monarchy had its beginning in the ruins of the Babylonian, and the Grecian in
the ruins of the Persian, the Roman afterward in the ruins of the Grecian;
so the Kingdom of Christ, or the Fifth Monarchy, has its first rise in the
ruins of the Antichristian Kingdom, with which (the Antichristian Kingdom
being the Fourth Monarchy in its second and last state) the Fourth Monarchy it
self goes to ruin, and way is made for the rise of the Fifth, which succeeds
it.

This thing is most evident in the two first of Daniels Prophecies, viz. That
of the Great Image, Chap. 2. and that of the four Beasts, Chap. 7. for the one
tells us, that Christ's Kingdom arises by smiting and breaking the feet of the
Great Image; the other, that it arises by judging, casting down the Throne,
taking away the Dominion of the Little Horn, either of which are the same, both
pointing (as the future Discourse proves at large) at the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and Christ's judging thereof.

Now, that this Kingdom of Christ, which Daniel speaks of, as succeeding the
Kingdom of Antichrist, taking its beginning in the others ruins, cannot be a
mere Spiritual Kingdom (as many would have it) but must be an outward and
visible Kingdom, is manifest enough, though we had no other proof thereof, but
what is couched in these two Prophecies; though yet I might say it, and speak
truth, that this Doctrine of Christ's visible Kingdom, is that great Truth of
which all the Prophets of the Old Testament, more plentifully than of any one
besides it, have spoken, and Christ himself, with the Apostles, and
Evangelists, of the New likewise.

But (not to enter into so large a field, which requires a Book, not an
Epistle) let us (because the Rulers of this World begin at this day to be
jealous of this Notion, and to look big upon Christ's outward Kingdom) consult
with Daniel upon this Question, Whether the Kingdom he speaks of in his two
first Prophecies be merely Spiritual, or whether it be not, as Spiritual, so
outward too. And although some Arguments urged from Daniels first Prophecy, to
prove this Kingdom to be not Spiritual only, but outward also, are laid down in
our following Discourse; yet do I not here judge it amiss to enlarge some of
them, and also add something new, to vindicate thereby a most blessed, but
suffering truth, hoping my labor in so doing may not be altogether lost. Let
us therefore (I say) ask Daniels mind upon our Question.

First, As for his Prophecy of the Great Image, Chapter two, the Stone, verse
thirty fourth, which is interpreted Christ's Kingdom, verse forty fourth, cannot
be meant of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, but must necessarily point at an outward.

The Reasons are,

1 Because the rise of this Kingdom is not till after that the feet of the
great Image, i. e. the Roman Monarchy in its Antichristian state, is risen and
in being, which is clear;

1 Because Daniel, to whom things in the Vision were represented (as his
interpretation, verse thirty sixth to forty sixth, does evidently manifest) in
that order of succession that they were to come forth in afterward, beholds
the Feet before yet he sees the Stone; as verse thirty four, Thou saw till
that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet;
the seeing of the Stone cut out, and smiting, was after that the whole Image in
its several parts had been presented to him; therefore I say, as all the other
parts, so likewise the Feet of the Image were in being before the Stone.

2 Because Daniel beholds the Stone, so soon as formed, to smite the Feet,
verse thirty four, therefore must the Feet be in being before the Stone was
formed.

3 Because the Kingdom signified by the Stone is not set up till in the days of
the ten Antichristian Kings, verse forty four, And in the days of these Kings
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom. That these Kings can point at no
other but the ten Antichristian Kings John speaks of, Revelations 17.12, 13,
14. See our future discourse, page three hundred and eighteen, and three
hundred and nineteen. Now the Kingdom of the Stone being to be set up in the
days of the ten Antichristian Kings, therefore must the Antichristian State be
before the Kingdom of the Stone. If so, then cannot Christ's Spiritual Kingdom
be the thing signified by the Stone, for that was set up when Christ first gave
forth his Spirit, immediately upon his Ascension, which was within the time that
the Iron Legs of the Image, verse forty, i. e. the Roman Monarchy in its
first, and as yet Pagan state, did bear rule, being three hundred years and
upwards before the Feet, viz. the Antichristian State had existence or being in
the World. Christ's Spiritual Kingdom therefore being long before Antichrists
Kingdom was begun; but the Kingdom of the Stone having not being till
afterward, it follows that the Kingdom of the Stone cannot be Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom, but must be an outward.

Second Reason, Because it is the Stones proper and peculier work to break in
pieces the Great Image, i. e. outward Powers.

First, That it is its proper work, is clear, because it does the thing not
accidentally, but intentionally, and therefore it is said to do it by smiting,
verse thirty four, thirty five, and forty five; which Phrase notes the
intention of the Agent, it smites the Great Image, with full purpose and
resolution to break it, and therefore observe, it never leaves smiting, after
once it has begun, till it has beaten the Great Image to very chaff and dust,
verse. 35.

Secondly, That it is its principal work, is clear, because no other work is
attributed to the Stone but this only, which shows, that the Kingdom of the
Stone is a Kingdom set up by God to perform this work, which in case it does it
not, it does nothing. But now the proper and principal work of Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom is another thing, viz. The increasing and edifying it self in
love; and it does not at all intermeddle, much less undertake it as its proper
and principal work, with the routing and breaking of Worldly Powers, which if
indeed it should, then Christ's Spiritual Kingdom (the proper and principal work
hereof being once rightly apprehended by the Saints, the Children of this
Kingdom) would soon prove a thing of as dangerous consequence to the Rulers of
this World, as the Doctrine of the Fifth Monarchy either is, or can be. But this
I say is not the work of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, therefore cannot the
Kingdom of the Stone be Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, but must be an outward.

Third Reason, Because the Kingdom of the Stone is such a Kingdom, as that the
standing and continuance of the Great Image is altogether inconsistent with the
growth and prosperity thereof; which is clear, because it neither does, nor can
grow up to be a great Mountain, filling the whole Earth, till the total removal
of the Great Image, verse thirty five. But now the standing and continuance of
the Great Image is no way inconsistent with the growth and prosperity of
Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, but rather is indeed advantageous unto it, as the
Persecutions that Christ's Spiritual Kingdom has met with, and that in all
Ages, from the Great Image, which have always been the greatest and most
effectual means of its growth, and fruitfulness, do bear witness; therefore
cannot the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ be the Kingdom here meant.

Fourthly, Because the Kingdom of the Stone is a Kingdom in respect of Nature,
the same with the Kingdoms represented by the Great Image, i. e. it is outward
as they are outward; which appears,

1 From the general scope and drift of the Prophecy which runs upon outward
Kingdoms, all the first four Kingdoms, or Monarchies are outward, as none can
deny; why then the Holy Ghost in speaking of the Fifth and last should so far
vary his scope, as presently to glide from the outward Kingdom to the inward,
ought (besides the bare say so) to have some solid and substantial reason
brought for it, by those, whosoever they are, that either do or shall assert it.

2 Because it is not proper to say, that a bare Spiritual Kingdom, considered
only as Spiritual should break in pieces, beat to very chafe; grind to Powder
the Great Image, i. e. destroy the very being of worldly Kingdoms, which work
is yet notwithstanding done by the Stone, as Verse. 35.44, 45. Indeed Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom may by that light and life it gives forth, much refine, and
reform outward Kingdoms, but when once the work comes to breaking and beating
to pecoes, i.e. subverting Kingdoms, razing their very foundations, and
destroying their being, as they are the Kingdoms of this World, here (unless we
conceive God to do it by a Miracle) must we also conceive some other hand,
besides a Spiritual, to be put to the work.

3 Because the Stone, to the end there might not be a vacancy in the world,
comes straightway in the place and room of the Great Image, so soon as ever the
same is totally broken, verse thirty five; for as the Great Image, while
standing, bears rule over all the earth, verse thirty nine, so the same being
broken, the Stone becomes a Mountain, and fills the whole Earth, verse thirty
five, therefore must the Kingdom of the stone be such a Kingdom as was that of
the Great Image, viz. outward, or otherwise the coming of that in the place of
the other now taken away, could not supply the want of the other. From all
which reasons (and some others also that are laid down in the following
Discourse, page one hundred and five, one hundred and six.) It is clear, That
the Kingdom of the Stone, mentioned Daniel 2. cannot be a Spiritual Kingdom,
but must be an outward. Thus much from Daniels first Prophecy.

Secondly, As for that Kingdom Daniel speaks of in his Second Prophecy, Chapter
seven, which is there said to be given to the Saints, and to succeed (in
respect of the greatness and glory of it, though not in respect of the
beginnings) the Kingdom of the Little Horn, that it cannot be a Spiritual
Kingdom, but must also be an outward and visible, is clear, for these reasons.

First Reason, Because it is a Kingdom in which outward judgment is given to
the Saints, verse twenty two, Judgment was given to the Saints of the most
High. This Judgment must be outward, because the effect of it is such, viz. a
casting down the Thrones of the Fourth Beast, verse nine, by consequence
therefore the Kingdom it self must be such.

Second Reason, Because it is a Kingdom the Saints are said to possess, verse
twenty two, The time came that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, but it is more
proper to say of the Spiritual Kingdom that it possesses them, than they it.

Third Reason, Because it is the very same Kingdom which was before governed by
the Little Horn, that is given to the Saints; now that being an outward
Kingdom, such must the Kingdom given to the Saints be also.

That the Kingdom given to the Saints is the very same Kingdom that the Little
Horn did before possess, is clear, from the plain words and expressions used by
the Holy Ghost, verse twenty one, twenty two, I beheld, and the same Horn made
War with the Saints, and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of days
came, and Judgment was given to the Saints of the most High, and the time came
that the Saints possessed the Kingdom. Note, we do not read it, That the Saints
possessed a Kingdom upon this their judging of the Little Horn, but the
Kingdom, teaching us thus much, That that very Kingdom which the Saints by
judging the Little Horn do take from him, they themselves do afterward
possess. So verse seventeen and eighteen, These great Beasts which are four,
are four Kings which shall arise out of the earth; but the Saints of the most
High ^eall take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever,
and ever. Observe, the Kingdom, or that very Kingdom which was before governed
by the four great Beasts, and by the Little Horn, as the last Limb of the
Fourth Beast, is the Kingdom that the Saints take, i.e. from this Little Horn,
and so consequently from all the Beasts, or Powers, his Predecessors, and
having taken it, do possess it for ever and ever, i.e. it shall never be taken
from them again, as they took it from all the other. So verse twenty six,
twenty seven, But the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
Dominion, to consume, and to destroy it unto the end. And the Kingdom, and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an
everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

Observe, The Saints, in the Evening of the Little Horns Kingdom, are by the
Decree of Heaven constituted a High Court of Justice; hereupon they sit in
Judgment, by sitting in Judgment they take away his Dominion; Whose? Why, the
Little Horns, upon whom the Discourse runs; but what becomes of it when they
have taken it away, and despoiled him of it? why, it is by God given to them,
the Kingdom, and Dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High. Which yet further
(besides the general scope which shows this to be the same Kingdom with that
of the Little Horn) that this Kingdom should be an outward Kingdom, the use of
that Phrase, the greatness of the kingdom under the whole Heaven, which cannot
without forcing the words be restrained to a Spiritual Kingdom only, does
necessarily import. The Kingdom of the Saints therefore, which Daniel in his
second Prophecy makes mention of, cannot be a mere Spiritual Kingdom, but is,
and must be an outward.

But now as it was the great Master-peice of Satan's policy at the time of
Christ's first coming, when he set up his Spiritual Kingdom, to put that
Generation of men altogether upon looking after the outward kingdom, drawing
them thereby to a neglect of that Kingdom, which they in that day ought
specially to have attended to: So is it his great engine of Policy in the days
a little before Christ's second coming, when now Christ is indeed, and in truth,
entering into the World to set up his outward Kingdom, to turn the eyes of this
Generation altogether upon the Spiritual Kingdom, drawing them thereby off from
the outward, hereby cunningly holding forth one truth as a bait to allure from
another, and endeavoring to draw the hearts of men from the great truth of the
Generation, by presenting them with some other truth, every way as glorious,
considered in it self (the time and season only, which is still the thing that
adds beauty to Generation-truth, set aside) as the truth it self of the
Generation.

Upon the foregoing Principle, That Christ is to have an outward visible
Kingdom, and the scope of the following Discourse, which proves that the time
of setting up this Kingdom is now approaching, and upon us, does it not
necessarily follow, that all those who in this day, shall by their sayings or
actings be found to have any hand in keeping Christ from his Throne, are by so
doing become guilty of High Treason against this King of Kings, and though they
may and should escape the judgment of man, may they not expect (in case they
remember not from whence they are fallen, and repent) to be arraigned as such
before his Throne another day, who will then pass a Judgment of persons and
things, not as they are in men's interpretations, but according as he has left
them in his Word? yea, let it be seriously considered, and laid to heart,
whether or no the condemning this blessed Doctrine, the glorious truth of the
Age, viz. of the Fifth Monarchy, or Christ's visible Kingdom (considering that
no five Parties this day in England have so much to say from the Word for their
particular opinions, though all they have to say be put together, as may be
said for this) be a thing justifiable before Gods people, or rather in the
sight of God and out Father, especially too when as the persons condemning,
have never to this day given the truth a fair hearing, by using such endeavors
for the finding out the mind of God in this thing, as they might, and as lies
in their power to do, and which, were there nothing else but the
dis-satisfaction of Gods people, God declares from Heaven that he calls upon
them to do? yea whether or no is not this very act of theirs a dealing more
injuriously with the blessed Truth of Christ, the least iota of which is of
far greater worth than Men and Angels, than ever did the Pagan Powers of the
Roman Empire in the Apostles days, with the persons of particular men (though
Malefactors) who always refused to pass a Sentence till they had heard what the
accused could speak? Acts 25.16. yea whether or no such persons whose words and
actions are Patterns unto Multitudes, will not have much to answer for (unless
they repent) if so be Christ shall one day find it, that by their slight
speeches, or frowning carriages toward the truth of the Generation, the
generality of poor souls that know nothing, but are merely led by example,
shall be emboldned, encouraged to slight, revile, oppose, persecute that truth
in which his honor is more nearly and immediately concerned, than in any other
truth besides it? And is it not possible that a man with a faithful and upright
heart, (but considered as mistaken, or darkened in his Principles) may do all
this? Did not Paul act with an upright heart, considering he acted zealously
according to his light, whilst yet he persecuted the Church, and the true way
of the Lord? And in such Cases, is it not the better and safer way for a man to
fear his own heart, and to be jealous that it acts under some distemper, and so
makes not a judgment of it self in the light of the Lords Spirit, but in the
darkness of temptation, than to be confident of it, especially too when a
general fear of such a thing dwells upon the hearts of Gods people? David
concluded himself then for certain to be under a temptation, when he saw that
otherwise he must condemn the generation of the righteous, Psalm. 73.15. Much
more I could say, but that it is no delight to dig into a Wound.

To conclude therefore, seeing the visage of our times (both in respect of the
great opposition this day made to the truth of the age, and in many other
respects) is grown pale and black, and that blessed Cause of Christ, that of
late looked with a fresh and amiable countenance, begins now to appear wan with
Death in the face of it, is it not high time for the Saints, and all those who
wish well to Sion, to cry mightily to the Lord, and to give him no rest, to
humble themselves greatly before him, for those manifold abominations committed
in the Land, especially that Pride, Luke-warmness, Wantonness, unthankfulness
for Mercies past, love of this present World, open licentiousness, gross
Apostasy, that superabounds even among those that bear upon them the Name of
the Lord, which things have given our Father just cause, not only thus to
frown, but to depart from us for ever? Yea, is it not high time, if we have a
tongue for Christ, now to speak for him? if bowels, now to sympathize with him?
if tears in our eyes, now to pour them forth before the Lord? if groans in our
hearts, now to send them up into Heaven? if faith in the Word and promise of
God, now to act it? if exhortations in our Breasts, now to bring them forth,
and speak often one to another? and will not the Lord hearken, and hear? and
shall not a Book of remembrance be written before him, for them that now fear
the Lord, and call upon his Name? Yea, will not God say concerning them, and
they shall be mine in the day when I make up my Jewels, and though they are
Children full of failings, yet for this service sake I will spare them, as a
man spares his own Son that serves him? surely he will.

And should not this consideration added to all the rest, that the set time of
our Redemption is at hand (which dwelling every day more and more upon my
heart, has caused me to speak) work up our hearts to all these things, and
beget in us noble resolutions to hazard whatever is precious to us in the
World, for the sake of Christ, and his now despised Cause? which though
trampled upon at present, yet shall it suddenly arise with Power and great
Glory, and then shall all its enemies melt away before it, as the Snow before
the Sun; then shall the Armies of Heaven march forth with the Lord in the Head
of them, and the Princes shall be afraid of his Ensign, whose fire is in
Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform
this. So believes he, and so he prays, who is,

From my Study in Trunch, this 4th. day of the 9th. Month, 1654. A poor sinful
Creature, unworthy to make mention of the name of the Lord, John Tillinghast.

Errata.
PAge 2. line 10. for so even this also, read, so even in th^s also. p. 3. l.
26, 27. for, such knowledge also is the root of grace, r. such knowledge is the
root of grace. p. 4. l. 14. for, apace, this way, r. apace this way. p. 6. l.
last, for, be with Jew and Gentile, r. betwixt Jew and Gentile. p. 17. l. 18.
for are the same, r. both which are the same. p. 22. l. 15. for at, r. as, l.
16. blot out which. p. 37. l. 20. for current, r. concurrent. p. 43. l. 29 r.
Bishop of Rome, Purgatory, p. 45. l. 25. r. they are to be, p. 77 l. 27. for
consists, r. insists, p. 82. l. 31, 32. for terrible to the Saints, r. tetrible
to the Nations, p. 85. l. last, r. Crowns, p 87. l. 11. for in. r. into p. 89.
l. 13. for the beginning, r. our beginning, l. 21, 22. for the aforesaid ending
of the 1260. days, r. the ending of the 1260. days from the aforesaid beginning
p. 109. l. 24. for eleven, r. eleventh, p. 129. l. last, for 1230. r. 1150. p.
137. l. last. forhurt, r. hurts, p. 14 1. l. 29. for also, v. 3. r. v. 3. also
I. p. 183. l. 25. for forth came, r. came forth, p. 160 l. 9. for who are, r.
which is, p. 213. l. 3. for mollify, r. mollifies, p. 232. l. 26. for four, r.
fourth, p. 239. l. 234. for one, r. once, p. 265. l. 11. for Hester ten, r.
Hester the 10th, p. 291. l. 29. for account, r. accounts Epist. p. 2. l. 8. r.
obedience, p. 3. l. 25. r. are at an under.

Page 121. lines 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32.

Let the words which are printed greatly out of place be read thus:

Yea by consequence many hundred years should here be leaped over, which is not
in any of the other Prophecies.

2 Because the rise of this Little Horn is in the latter time of the Grecian
Monarchy, verse twenty three, and in the latter time, etc.

Directions for the Book-binder. Place the Title to the Appendix before Page
311.

Knowledge of the Times: OR, The Resolution of the Question, How long it shall
be unto the end of Wonders. Divided into three Parts.
PART I.
Handling some things of more General concernment as to our whole Discourse.

CHAP. 1. Of the Justifiablenesse of this Enquiry.
AMongst the many Questions that this Age abounds with, The Great Question that
we find in Daniel Cha. 12.6. How long shall it be to the end of Wonders? is
neither of the least of those Gods people at this day are seeking resolution
in; Nor may it be ranked among those we call Unnecessary, seeing the Age it
self we live in, has been, and is an age of Wonders.

And truly, that I, once, and now again have assayed it, does not arise I hope
from any confidence I have of my self, that there is in me above others an
ability to resolve it (the thought of which thing I desire to abandon) but
having been moved of late to wait upon the Lord for light, as in other things,
so even this also; and hoping that a door of light as to the Question
propounded, has through the Lords merciful guidance of a sinful unworthy
creature, been set open to me, I have judged it a duty, and indeed the greatest
piece of service that I find my self in a capacity to do for Christ in my
generation, to set this light on a Candlestick, that Gods people may see it.

Yet in regard the Enquiry it self is such as lies under the censures of some,
the reproaches of others, and the general neglect almost of all, it will be
necessary that something be spoken in the first place, by way of Justification
of the thing it self, which I shall do in two or three Conclusions laid down
and proved.

1. CONCLUSION.
That this Enquiry is no enemy to a man's own grace, or the grace of God in
others; but rather a special help and advantage to the increase and quickening
of grace, both in the person enquiring, and the person reading and hearing.

1 Because it is included within that general Command, John 5.39. Search the
Scriptures; now God does not command that which is prejudicial to our grace.

2 Because the word of blessing goes along with sincere and faithful endeavors
of this nature, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the
words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, Rev.
22.7. Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. The
original word in either place translated keep, comes from a verb that signifies
to reserve, or to observe; noting, That this keeping which has a blessing
twice annexed to it, first in the beginning, then in the end of the Apocalypse,
is such a keeping whereby a man lays up the things here written in his heart,
observes how they are fulfilled, and acts toward God and man accordingly; and
therefore (I take it) is this Book fenced in with Gods blessing, so as no other
besides it, to deliver us from such a conceit as this, viz. That by studying of
it, our grace would either suffer decay, or be lost.

3 Because we have a particular promise of fruit and success annexed to such
an Enquiry, Dan. 12.4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased; This knowledge here mentioned being a fruit of the Promise, is not
to be looked upon as head-knowledge only, but heart-knowledge also, and such
knowledge also, is the very root and watering of grace, and therefore can be no
enemy to it.

4 Not to multiply Reasons, which of the two, whether to be ignorant of the
times of Christ's glorious appearances, and his coming, or to know them, if this
knowledge be a thing attainable, especially for persons living in the last
days, who are near the times, and in a manner bordering upon them, be the most
likely thing to make a heart secure, lull it asleep in sin, love of this
present world, forgetfulness of God, make it negligent in the holy Christian
duties of faith, patience, watchfulness, prayer, etc. I call not Reason only,
but such Christians also, who knew their own hearts fifteen or twenty years ago
with a principle then that Christ's coming was at hand, and who know them now,
but it may be with a contrary principle, to be Judges. And truly (to say no
more) how Christians, though they may rub and chafe their hearts, will yet be
able, seeing that the Sun is coming up with the beams of his light and vigor
apace, this way to keep them alive, or warm long, if they too come not up to
truths of this nature, I do not know.

2. CONCLUSION.
That the Holy Ghost has expressly foretold that Saints at the time of the end,
shall make diligent enquiry into these things. This I take to be the thing
noted in those words, Dan. 8.13. Daniel in the foregoing Vision had had the
three last Monarchies, viz. 1 Medes and Persians, 2 Grecians, 3 Romans,
represented to him. The Roman Monarchy (which is the last) is represented in
its twofold state; 1 In its pure civil state; 2 In its mixed Antichristian
state. All which things occasion will be offered to handle more fully in the
following Discourse. Now observe, after all these things had passed before
Daniel in the Vision, then as the very last thing of all, Daniel hears a
discourse of Saints upon our Question; Then I heard one Saint speaking, and
another Saint said unto that certain Saint which spoke, How long shall be the
Vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to
give both the Sanctuary and the Host to be trodden underfoot? The particle
[then] denotes the thing to be successive in time, as well as in place; that
is, after Daniel had seen the whole Vision, first the Medes and Persians come
forth, and for a while make a great noise in the world, but in the end vanish;
Then the Grecians, who also for a time make some stir, and then vanish: After
them the Romans, who first conquer Nations as they were a civil state; then
secondly, rage against the true worship of God, the holy City, and the
inhabitants thereof, as they are an Antichristian state. Now in the conclusion
of all, after all these things had passed before Daniel, and he saw this last
Monarchy, in its last state upon the nick of vanishing away, as were already
the former, then Daniel specially observes another thing, of which he had not
seen the like all the time and way before, viz. He beholds many Saints, and
they are in very deep serious discourse, and the subject of all their discourse
is this Question, HOW LONG SHALL IT BE TO THE END OF WONDERS? or How long shall
the Vision be? To which Question of theirs, Daniel hears answer given, and
immediately thereupon the whole Vision is at an end; only the interpretation
of it comes in afterward; so that it is evident these words are properly the
last in place and time both, of the whole Vision, which clearly affords us this
Observation:

That Saints in the time of the end, shall be much upon this Enquiry, How long
it shall be unto the end of Wonders?

This is farther clear from Daniels great Prophecy, Chap. 11, and 12. in which
two Chapters Daniel has the very same thing, viz. the three last Monarchies
declared to him by way of Voice, which in the former he saw by way of Vision.
Now after the declaration of the whole, Daniel Chap. 12. verse. 5, 6. sees two
men standing, betwixt which is a River, and one is on the one side, and the
other on the other. A fit resemblance of Jew and Gentile, ready to unite, yet
not fully united; for still there is a River betwixt them, which argues that
these words relate to the time a little before the coming in of the Jews, when
Jew and Gentile shall be upon the very bank of union, yet not united. Of these
two, one propounds a Question to the man clothed in linen upon the waters of
the River, How long shall it be unto the end of these Wonders? This Querist I
conceive to be not other then the Gentile Saints; and my reason is, because
verse. 7. answer to him is made in the Gentile Dialect of a time, times, and a
half, which is a time proper to the Gentile Churches, Rev. 12.14. and not to
the Jews. And further I look upon the Enquirer here to be the very same for
time and persons both, with that Chap. 8.13. Only with this difference, the
Enquirers, though many, are here called but one, because in opposition to the
Jews we have one here put for the whole body of the Gentile Saints; there they
are spoken of as many, because in that Text is no such opposition bewith Jew
and Gentile.

Now from the whole I make up this Conclusion, That in the time of the end, a
little before the Jews coming in, and Antichrists fall, shall be great
Enquiries made among the Gentile Saints, concerning the end of Wonders. And if
so, then in case we are fallen into that time (as what I have said already in
my Key, and have farther to say, will manifest that we are) this Enquiry is not
only justifiable, but necessary, it being the great truth of this Age.

3. CONCLUSION.
That the Holy Ghost has left particular and certain ground for the faith of
Gods people in the last days to go to God upon for light and knowledge in this
thing. I say not only, that the promise made to runners to and fro, Dan. 12.4.
that knowledge shall be increased, is, yea ought to be (for why is it else left
upon Record?) a ground for our faith to build upon in making this Enquiry; nor
only, that the particular answers given to the Querists, Dan. 8. and Chap. 12.
is, yea should be another; for why is particular answer given to the Enquirers,
but to show that upon a sober humble and believing Enquiry a knowledge of the
thing sought after should be given forth? But that which I chiefly aim at, is,
the particular assurance left us in the word that the sealed Book of Prophesies
should be unsealed, the words opened, the understanding of the Vision made
manifest to the Saints at, or in time of the end; For this see Dan. 12.4. But
thou, O Daniel, shut up the words and seal the Book, even to the time of the
end. The Book is to be scaled, the words therein shut up; But how long? Why,
but till the time of the end; then Book and Words both are to be opened and
read.

So verse. 9. Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up till the time of
the end. Daniel heard the answer given by the man that was clothed in Linen,
verse. 7. to the Enquirer, verse. 6. but says he, I understood not; therefore
from a desire to know, Daniel himself puts the Question, verse. 8. to whom
answer is given, verse. 11.12. but withal observe, Daniel has first a kind of
gracious check, Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up until the time
of the end; as to say, Daniel, thou would fain have the knowledge of these
things presently, but go thy way Daniel; for the time of Revelation is the time
of the end; though I will give thee the words now, yet the unsealing of them
shall not be till the time of the end, when (and not before) my mind in these
sealed mysteries shall be made known to my children.

Suitable hereunto are the words, Dan. 8.17. which words I have showed in my
Key, Thesi 3. are not to be understood of the time of the Vision, nor the
subject matter thereof, but of the understanding of the Vision, which though
revealed in part to Daniel then, yet was not to be fully and clearly opened
until the time of the end.

The Conclusion is, That at the time of the end, the Book is to be unsealed,
the understanding of the Vision to be made known; and if so, then surely this
our practice, we being fallen into the lap of the last times, is justifiable;
for why has God so long before given assurance that then he will unseal the
Book, open the words, but only to this end, that our faith, when this time
comes on, might as in other things, so in this, wait upon him for light and
knowledge.

CHAP. II. Showing, That the Mystical Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations do
hold forth a certain definite and determined time.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter showed the justifiablenesse of our Enquiry,
and what comfortable hope the enquiring Soul may have of Gods presence and
assistance to accompany him in this work. In the next place it is requisite,
because we have no ground in Scripture to go upon for an answer to this
Question, but only the mystical Numbers of Daniel, and the Revelations, that I
proceed to show that there is a certain definite and determined time held forth
in those numbers; only in order to the thing, to the end some of the following
Arguments may not want their weight, nor we be put in our proof to insist upon
each particular number by it self, I premise, That look what is truly affirmed
of any one, or more mystical Numbers, the same may be as truly affirmed of all,
except such, where some substantial reason appears to the contrary. If
therefore it may be truly affirmed of some one or more, that a definite time is
held forth in them, then by the same rule of all, where (I say) appears not
some solid reason to the contrary. This premised, my Reasons that a definite
time is held forth in the mystical Numbers of Daniel, and the Revelations, are
these.

1 Because They are all broken Numbers; the two thousand and three hundred
days, Dan. 8.14. is a broken Number; for although the three hundred is a round
Number in respect of Hundreds, yet it is a broken Number in respect of
Thousands, which is the way of numbering here. Upon the same account, but more
evident, the one thousand two hundred and ninety, the one thousand three
hundred thirty five days, Chap. 12. John's one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, his two and forty months are all broken Numbers.

Now it is a Maxim among Interpreters, that notwithstanding round numbers do
sometimes signify an indefinite time, yet broken numbers ever a definite.

2 Because If they signify not a definite time, no account can be made up from
them; for who can define what is indefinite, or make up an account from
uncertain numbers? But now the intendment of the Holy Ghost in laying them
down, is, that from them an account might be made up, as is clear.

1 Because the scope of the Questions proposed, Dan. 8. and Dan. 12. to which
the mystical Numbers there mentioned, are given in as answers, does look at
such a determined time as known; some certain conclusion concerning the time,
How long the things revealed should be in accomplishing, might from thence be
drawn up; therefore the Questions do not run thus, Shall these things be long,
O Lord in doing? but thus, How long shall the Vision be? Dan. 8.13. How long
shall it be to the end of these Wonders? Chap. 12.6. the thing enquired after
in both, is a certain determined time.

2 Because the Holy Ghost does lay down a particular head of account, Chap.
12.11. Now this is never used but only there where some account is to be made
up. But were the time indefinite, there could (as before I have said) be no
making up of any account.

3 Reas. Because should we look upon them as holding forth only an indefinite
time, signifying no more but a long time, there would be manifest Tautologie in
laying them down. For in Daniels Vision, Chap. 8. where is recorded his two
thousand three hundred days, verse. 14. it is said over and above, verse. last.
The Vision shall be for many days: If now the two thousand three hundred days
signify only a long time, it is the same with the other. So in Daniels Vision
Chap. 10, chapter 11, and chapter 12. where the one thousand two hundred and ninety,
the one thousand three hundred thirty five days are spoken of, it is said
moreover, Chap. 10.1. The time appointed was long: The very same with the
other, if not a dertain time but a long time only be intended.

4 Because For this very reason Daniel 8. verse. last, it is said the Vision of
the evening and morning is true. The Vision of the morning and evening has a
particular and peculiar reference to the two thousand three hundred days,
verse. 14. (or as the Hebrew reads it, two thousand three hundred mornings and
evenings.) Now Daniel in the foregoing verses, from verse. 20. having had the
whole Vision in an orderly manner interpreted to him, in the conclusion of all,
lest Daniel should doubt of the time assigned of two thousand three hundred
mornings and evenings (which was the very last thing of the Vision, and is here
of the Interpretation) it is added, The Vision of the evening and morning is
true, that is, the two thousand three hundred days, which thou heardest
mention made of in the close of the Vision, are a certain and determined time,
and therefore verse. 19. the time is said to be a set time, or an appointed
time; At the time appointed the end shall be.

5 Because God in former times under the Old Testament, has ever measured out
the Bondage and Captivity of his Church by set and determined times. Four
hundred and thirty years was the time in Egypt, and this time set to a very
day, Exodus 12.41, 51. Seventy years the set time in Babylon. Now is New
Testament grace less than Old Testament? Nay consider the Egyptian and
Babylonian Captivity were both Types of the great Captivity of Gods Church in
the latter days. Now is it likely that in both the Types the time should be
determined, and yet undetermined in the Antitype? Is the Type more clear, and
the Antitype more dark? yet this will follow.

6 If any should say so, let them say the same also for Daniels Seventy weeks,
Chap. 9.24. for the reason is the same, Nay the Seventy weeks are a round
number; so is none of the other; yet who does, or will affirm an indefinite
time to be there signified? or if any should, let them when they have done,
show any ground at all (unless bare humane authority) for above four hundred
of the worlds years, and that too within such a period, in which (without
censure) less credit is to be given to the Historians, then almost in any one
period from the Flood to this day.

7 Because such a Principle would be very prejudicial to the faith, comfort,
and prayers of the Saints; for the more certain ground any of these are built
upon, the more strongly do they act. Daniels assurance that Seventy years was
the utmost term of the Babylonian Captivity, raises mightily his faith and
prayer. But now were the time held forth in these mystical Numbers an
indefinite time only, there should be no certain ground for any of these: And
hence it would follow that the people of God in the last days should instead
of having a more clear word of Prophecy, have a more doubtful ground for their
faith and prayer in this respect, then had Gods people in times of old.

The Conclusion is, That the mystical Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations, do
hold forth to us a certain definite and determined time.

CHAP. III. Clearing and confirming our general Distinction, viz. That the end
of the Beasts Tyranny, relates to one time; the end of the fourth Monarchy to
another.
IT is a truth, Nothing can be rightly defined, which is not first rightly
divided. The very reason (as to the creature) why men's conceptions have been so
dark as to the mind of the Holy Ghost in the mystical Numbers of Daniel and the
Apocalypse, has seemed to me to be this, because they who have undertaken the
work, have not applied distinct numbers to their distinct times, but either
carried them all in a heap, or handled them all severally, i. e. made all to
end at one and the same ending point, or made as many ending points as there
are diverse numbers. Now of these two, the first inevitably breeds confusion
throughout all the Prophesies of the Old and New Testament; the last leaves in
the Enquirer after the most diligent search a seed and a ground of doubting,
because the light he has attained, is a word established only by the mouth of
one witness, and that witness too (which makes the suspicion greater) must of
necessity be, where first numbers are not rightly distinguished, for a
principal part of its testimony, as namely, where I am to begin, or how to
carry on the account having begun, only humane; it being impossible for that
man who would carry up each number severally, to find divine Testimony either
for the beginning, or carrying on of any one number; for of this kind of
testimony; though there is sufficient left us in the word for each number, both
where to begin it, and how to carry it on, yet all is couched in the Harmony;
and the Harmony it self depends upon a right division; so that consequently,
this wanting, we have nothing left us but humane testimony (which is a thing
fallible, and no ground of faith) to warrant the beginning, or carrying on of
any particular number that we have either in Daniel, or the Revelations.

That therefore we might have firm ground and sure footing here, I have in my
Key, Thesi 15. laid down (as the foundation of all) this Distinction, namely to
distinguish betwixt the time of the Jews first stirring, and their complete
deliverance; betwixt the time where an end is put to the Beasts Reign and
Tyranny, and his final destruction; or (which is all one in respect of time
with the other) betwixt Christ standing up in his Witnesses, and his standing
up in his Person.

Now although the Harmony that by virtue of this distinction is brought forth
betwixt all the mystical Numbers (of which in my Key, These. 63.) be Argument
sufficient to make the distinction valid, yet that it may appear that all our
ground for it lies not here, I shall briefly show what particular ground and
warrant besides it, we have in the word for this Distinction.

For the first branch, which concerns the Jews delivery, our ground is so clear
from Daniels distinguishing of times, Chap. 12. verse. 11, 12. (where he treats
of his own Nation more especially) first one thousand two hundred and ninety
days, then one thousand three hundred thirty five, that the truth needs no
explication.

And although that Division of times made by Daniel is foundation sufficient
for our whole distinction, considering that the end of the Beasts Reign, and
the Witnesses Resurrection, are things contemporary with the Jews first
stirring, as is proved Key, Thesi 17. and also Christ's Personal appearance, and
the final destruction of the Beast or fourth Monarchy, contemporary with their
complete deliverance, as also see our Key, Thesi 34. yet because I will not lay
the weight of so material a distinction upon that single Text only, I shall
produce other Scripture grounds which warrant this distinction.

Dan. 7.26, 27. A manifest distinction is made betwixt the end ( i.e. the final
destruction) of the little Horn, ( i.e. Antichrist) and the taking away his
Dominion.

His Dominion is taken away at the end of the time, times, and a half, which is
the very day of the Witnesses Resurrection; i.e. the Beasts Reign and Tyranny
shall expire with the time of the Witnesses rise; but observe, his final
destruction is not as yet; for after his Dominion is taken away, there is
betwixt that, and his end, a time of consuming and destroying him by degrees,
till at last upon Christ's Personal appearance, a total destruction comes upon
him, and thereby a translation of the fourth Monarchy to the Saints. verse. 26.
He shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints
of the most High, and think to change Times and Laws, and they shall be given
into his hand, until a time, times, and the dividing of time, verse. 26. But
the judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his Dominion to consume and
destroy it unto the end. verse. 27. And the Kingdom and Dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people
of the Saints of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

So Rev. 11. It is evident that so soon as the Witnesses rise, the treading
underfoot the holy City by the Beast is at an end; for as the two and forty
months of the Beasts continuance, Rev. 13.5. are interpreted, Chap. 11.2. by
another phrase of treading underfoot the holy City, are the same, and therefore
both end together; no longer, according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, Ch^.
13.5. may he be said to continue, then he treads underfoot the holy City. So it
is most evident that the two and forty months of treading underfoot the holy
City, ends with the end of the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the
Witnesses wearing Sackcloth; for what causes the Witnesses to wear Sackcloth,
but this, because the holy City is trodden underfoot? therefore with the end of
the one, the other ends. But now observe upon the Witnesses rise, and putting
off their Sackcloth, where ends the Beasts Tyranny, not the whole Kingdom of
the Beast is destroyed, but a tenth part only, Rev. 11.13. And the same hour
the tenth part of the City fell. Yea farther observe, after the Witnesses rise,
we read of a third woe to come quickly; therefore not come yet, verse. 14. The
second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly. And of this woe
the Beast bears a part, as well as Christ's other enemies, and therefore not yet
finally destroyed. Yea farther, (which serves us as a clear demonstration of
the thing in hand) we read of the Beast as one of the grand Leaders in the
battle of Armageddon; Now as this battle succeeds the ruin of Rome (as
formerly I have proved) so does the ruin of Rome succeed the rise of the
Witnesses, whose punishment comes in a way of revenge of their quarrel Rev.
18.6. of necessity therefore the rise of the Witnesses, and consequently the
end of the Beasts Reign, which expires with the other, must be, yea and that
some time, before the last and final destruction of the Beast.

To say, we find the Beast raging even at the battle of Armageddon, as
appears, Rev. 19.19. therefore the two and forty months of the Beast must be
extended as far as that day; and if so, then our distinction is invalid.

I answer, True, the Beast shall then rage, and his rage at that day shall make
him stark mad; but with what rage? not with the proud insulting rage of a
Conqueror, as he did all the time of the two and forty months, but with the mad
and distracted rage of a loser; before he overcame the Saints, and in his pride
raged, and trampled the Holy City under his feet; now himself is overcome, and
for madness rages, because himself is trodden underfoot; before he was a
raging spoyler, now a rager because spoiled; and in this latter sense he may be
a rager, and yet the time of his Reign out; nay, that be who before trod
underfoot, is now trodden underfoot; who led into Captivity, is led into
Captivity; who killed with the sword, is killed with the sword, is an evident
demonstration (though his end be not presently, yet) that the time of his Reign
and treading underfoot the Holy City is over; the Woman is got out of the
Wilderness; for she seeks not now any longer holes to hide her self in from
the rage of her Enemy, but dares appear in his very face, and can drive her
Enemy before her. Add also hereunto, that although the Beast rage after the
two and forty months are expired, yet does not he then rage alone as he did all
the two and forty months. All the two and forty months he was able to tread
underfoot the Holy City, and put the Woman to flight without help; but now he
is glad to call in help, send Ambassadors to the Kings of the Earth, and the
whole world to stand by him, Rev. 16.13, 14. as being not able alone, though a
mad raging Beast, to deal with a Potent Woman, which is a manifest Argument
that the time of his Reign is over, though yet his end be not presently; and
indeed the following time is not (to speak properly) the Beasts time, so much
as the time of Gods enemies in general, in which they all hand in hand shall
endeavor to destroy the Holy City, but the end shall be their own destruction,
which they shall come to, and none shall help them.

And here methinks it does wonderously affect my heart whilst I ponder upon it,
to think how that within these few days the poor Woman will come creeping out
of the Wilderness, armed with such courage and divine power, as that she,
though but a weak Woman, shall yet with manlike resolution fly in the very
face of this monstrous Beast, though all the Kings of the earth stand by him to
help him; Un-horse the Scarlet Whore that sits upon him, drive the Whore, and
the Beast that carries her (Antichrists Civil and Ecclesiastical power) both
before her, making them cry, Come help, come help, deliver us from the fury of
the Woman.

From the whole it appears what footing we have in Scripture for this
distinction, which is a fundamental thing, as to the Enquiry in hand; Yea where
it is not made, and diligently observed, a cloud will of necessity be upon all
the Prophesies of the Old and New Testament both.

The end of the First Part.
PART. II.
Computing the Time of the Beast, and showing where the limited time of his
Tyranny ends.

CHAP. I. Discussing some things of more General Concernment as to the
particular Question.
SECT. 1.
THat distinction of Times (which we have noted before) namely to distinguish
betwixt the time of the Beasts Tyranny, and the time of the fourth Monarchy,
being the foundation of this Enquiry, and that only which can produce a
Scripture Harmony of all those mystical Numbers that bear any relation to the
Question in hand, it is necessary that we should here make it our rule to walk
by.

Now of these two, as the time of the Beasts Reign is to expire first, the time
of the fourth Monarchy some years after; So shall I in this Enquiry first,
begin with the first, viz. the time of the Beasts Tyranny?

And so the Grand Question is:

Quest. When, or with what time are we to put a period to Antichrists Tyranny.

The only ground we have to go upon to resolve this great Question, is,
Daniels one thousand two hundred and ninety days, John's two and forty months,
his one thousand two hundred and sixty days.

The first, viz. Daniels one thousand two hundred and ninety days prove not
this directly; for their aim is at another thing, viz. the beginning of the
Jews delivery, but by consequence only at the end of Antichrists Reign, and
the beginning of the Jews delivery, which fall out at a point; I shall
therefore (having also spoken sufficiently to that number. Key, Thesi 20.) wave
it here, and wholly insist upon John's numbers of two and forty months, one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, both which tend directly to prove the
thing in hand; only with this difference; the one, viz. the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, sets forth the time in reference to the Churches
suffering state within this time; the other, viz. the two and forty months in
reference to Antichrists rage and tyranny throughout this time: yet both (I
say) have a direct tendency to prove the thing, and answer our Question. And
(as Mr. Mede has excellently observed) Antichrists time is set forth by
months, which are governed by the Moon, because the worshipping of Idols, and
every sin and error is of the power of darkness and night, wherein the Moon
rules; but the Churches time by days, because true Religion is compared to
the light, and to the day, of which the Sun is the Ruler.

SECT. 2.
That both Days and Months are Prophetical, is clear, because (as Mr. Mede in
his Comment upon Rev. 11. verse. 3. well reasons) if (says he) the one thousand
two hundred and sixty days be to be understood of natural days, then are the
three days and a half, assigned afterward to the death of the Witnesses, to
be so understood also, they being part of the one thousand two hundred and
sixty; but they cannot be so taken, because the things foretold to be done
within the three days and a half, will no way agree to three days and a half
of natural days; the one therefore being Prophetical, the other must also.
Withal the very things spoken of the Beast, and the Witnesses, have already
taken up near as much time as two and forty Prophetical months, one thousand
two hundred and sixty Prophetical days, amounts to. I conclude, therefore the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days; the two and forty months, are
Prophetical Days and Months.

SECT. 3.
The Days and Months being Prophetical, the Question now would be, Where are
we to begin these numbers? Before I can take this Question in hand, there is
yet something of more general concernment to be noted by the way, as,

First, Let it be observed, that the two and forty months are twice spoken of.
1 Forty two months of the Beasts continuance, Rev. 13.5. 2 Forty two months of
treading underfoot the holy City, Chap. 11.2. Each two and forty months are one
and the same in respect of beginning and ending. The difference between them is
only this, the first chiefly mentions the time allowed to the Beast to reign
and domineer; the second the work that he shall do within this time, viz, Tread
down the Holy City. And indeed that these two must begin and end together, is
clear; for were the treading underfoot the Holy City to have its beginning
either some time before the rise of the Beast, or some time after, and that as
a distinct two and forty months from the other, then considering that the Beast
must rage, and tyrannize two and forty months, in all which time the Holy City
is trampled underfoot, the time (though ever so little) that we add either
before or after, will make the time of treading underfoot the Holy City to
amount to more then two and forty months, which is the very time, and no
longer, that the Holy City is to be trodden underfoot. The one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, we have likewise twice spoken of. First one thousand
two hundred and sixty days of the Woman's flight into the Wilderness, Chap.
12.6. Secondly, one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the Witnesses
prophesying in Sackcloth. Chap. 11.3. These two (as the other) are likewise one
and the same, both for beginning and ending, the one (making mention of the
state of the Church more in general) sets forth the place where the Church
of God all the one thousand two hundred and sixty days should abide, viz. in
some obscure corners of the world, as in a Wilderness; the other (pointing at
the state of the Witnesses in particular, which are not the whole Church, but a
part only, and this I take to be the main difference betwixt the eleven and
twelve Chapters of the Revelations) tells us, the work Christ's Witnesses should
be employed in, notwithstanding this their retirement, together with the Church
into blind and obscure holes and corners, in this time of the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, which is, they Prophecy, though in Sackcloth, i. e.
in a poor oppressed sorrowful condition, through grief, to see all this time
the Holy City trampled underfoot by the Beast. And indeed that these two also
must be one and the same both for beginning and ending, is evident for the very
same reason, as the former, because if the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days of the Woman's flight into the Wilderness, were to begin sooner or later
then the one thousand two hundred and sixty days of the Witnesses prophesying
in Sackcloth, then (as I said of the other) seeing the Witnesses wear their
sackcloth all the time the Church abides in the wilderness, the added time
whether before or after, would make the time of the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth to surmount the number of one thousand two hundred and sixty days.

Now in the next place it would be farther enquired into, First whether the two
and forty months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, are a
different time? or whether both make up but one and the same number of years?
Secondly, whether in case the same number of years be found in both, are we to
conceive of either as beginning and ending together? or whether is any one to
begin before the other?

To the first, I answer, That we are to conceive the time to be one and the
same in both; the two and forty mouths, the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days making both up but one and the same number of years. Not to insist upon
what Expositors generally say, that two and forty months, reckoning thirty
days to a month, which is the Grecian account, make up the just sum of one
thousand two hundred and sixty days; to me it appears that the thing I am
speaking of must be so, and cannot be otherwise, and that upon the former
account still; because were the two and forty months a time longer then the
other, then the Beasts reign and treading underfoot the Holy City, being to
continue two and forty months (which two things are the main cause why the
Woman betakes her self to the Wilderness, and the Witnesses continue there
with here in a mournful posture prophesying in sackcloath) the Woman's
continuance in the wilderness, and the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth
should (the cause still remaining) be above one thousand two hundred and sixty
days. Or were the two and forty months a shorter time, then should the flight
of the Woman into the wilderness, and the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth,
which continues no longer then the time of the Beasts rage, and trampling the
Holy City (that being (as I have said) the cause of the other, which taken
away, the effect cease) not be so long as one thousand two hundred and sixty
days. Seeing therefore it cannot be either a longer time, or a shorter, we
must conclude one and the same number of years to be included in both.

To the second I answer, That we are without doubt to conceive of it, that the
two and forty months, the one thousand two hundred and sixty days (making up
but one and the same number of years) are to begin and end together. My reason
is still what I have urged; because should we suppose the two and forty months
to begin either sooner or later then the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, as a time distinct, and to be considered by it self; it will then
necessarily follow, seeing all the time of the Beasts tyranny, and treading
underfoot the Holy City, the Woman is to be in the wilderness, and the
Witnesses to prophecy in sackcloth, that by reason of the time which must be
addedeither before or after, to make up the two and forty months complete, the
Woman's continuance in the wilderness, and the Witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth should be above one thousand two hundred and sixty days.

The conclusion is, That the two and forty months, and the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, are one and the same, and also begin and end together.

CHAP. II. Disproving the sundry false beginnings.
SECT. 1.
IT being cleared in the former Chapter that both Months and days are
Prophetical; and also that the two and forty months of the Beasts continuance,
the two and forty months of treading underfoot the Holy City; the one thousand
two hundred and sixty days of the Woman's abode in the wilderness, the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days of the Witnesses prophesying in sackcloth,
do all make up but one and the same number of years; and also are one and the
same both for beginning and ending; it comes next to be considered, where we
are to begin this Epock of two and forty months, one thousand two hundred and
sixty days.

Amongst the variety of opinions which are extant of Writers ancient and
modern, there are but three, save the opinion of our worthy German Author, from
whom, though I judge, by comparing mystical numbers together, that I see reason
to vary somewhat, yet is not the variance such as deserves a contest; I say
besides him, there are but three that have so much color of reason for their
opinions, as that there will be any need of bringing them to the Touchstone.
And these are,

1 Those who begin the Epock with the time of Constantine the Great.

2 A late Writer who begins with the time of Pope Leo the first.

3 Others who begin with the time when Boniface was created universal Bishop by
Phocas.

As for the first, viz. the opinion of those who begin from the time of
Constantine the Great (some of that opinion fixing upon the year 304. others
differ as to a few years, yet keep within the compass of 300. and 316.) I say
not (in answer to it) that the very foundation of this opinion is a mistake,
viz. That the two Witnesses are the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

But my reasons against it are:

1 Because by this opinion, the Harmony of the mystical numbers is destroyed;
for if the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, and the two and forty
months begin with Constantines time, then is it not possible to bring the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, the two and forty months to concur in
their end with Daniels one thousand two hundred and ninety (which must be upon
the grounds laid down in our Key, Thesi 17.) unless we shall find some action
which may be accounted a fit Head for the one thousand two hundred and ninety
days, thirty years above Constantine; and in case this should befound, yet
then will not the one thousand three hundred thirty five (which begins from the
same Head with the one thousand two hundred and ninety) concur in their end
with the two thousand three hundred (which also must be for our reasons, Key,
Thesi 34.) unless some other beginning and carrying on of that great number,
may upon approved grounds be found, which will notwithstanding bring the two
thousand three hundred days to end at the same point with the one thousand
three hundred thirty five.

2 Because (setting the Harmony wholly aside) by this computation the seventh
Government in the Roman Empire, viz. by Christian Emperors, which is that John
calls a Government yet to come (Rev. 17.10. There are seven Kings (i.e.
distinct kinds of Government) five are fallen, one is, and the other is not yet
come) is either wholly cut off, or else confounded with the Beasts: For this
Government did not begin till Constantines time; now if we thence also begin
the two and forty months of the Beast, then do we (I say) leave no room for the
seventh kind of Government; so that either it must be cut off, or confounded
with the Beasts. That it should be cut off, cannot be; for the Text says
expressly, it was to come, i.e. as really to have a being as the five fallen had
had, and the sixth then in being had. That we should confound it with the
Beasts, may not be.

First, because this Government is to continue a space before the rise of the
Beast, And when it comes, it must continue a short space. This short space
must either be meant of the time before the Beasts Kingdom, or the time of his
Reign. If the time of his Reign be meant, and so the seventh Government, and
his Reign be made one; how then is it called a short space? seeing the time
allotted to the Beast is a long time, two and forty months; one thousand two
hundred and sixty years; yea how is it called a short space comparatively with
the sixth or former Government, which continued not half, nay not one third
part of this time? this Government therefore must be distinct from the Beasts.

Secondly, because the Beasts Government as relating to this, is called the
eighth, verse. 11. And the Beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth.
Though the Beast in respect of his Seat and the Civil power he exercises,
which power did reside in all the former Governments, is said to be of the
seven; and accordingly has seven Heads, i.e. Rome the Seat of, and the Civil
power of all the former Governments, yet is he not called the Seventh, but of
the seven, because successively, and in order he follows the seventh, and his
Government comes in as the eighth, being a Government distinct from the
seventh, and all theseveral Governments before him; For which reason we may not
confound the Beasts Government with the seventh, which yet this opinion either
does, or shuts wholly out, neither of which can stand with truth.

3 Because according to this supputation, the time is expired above a hundred
years since. And being so;

1 How comes it to pass that yet of late years the Holy City has been so
trodden underfoot? Saints for Religion sake driven to flight, as it has been
with us here in England; yea so many killed, and put to death, as have been in
Germany, the Low Countries, France, and all this within much less time then
one hundred years, yea the greatest part of it not half the time? Certainly
whilst the Woman is driven from one corner of the world to the other to hide
her self, and her children are cruelly killed and massacred, we cannot look
upon her as come out of the wilderness; whilst Antichristian injunctions and
superstitions are set up, and imposed instead of the pure worship of Christ,
who will say the treading underfoot of the Holy City is at an end? and have not
these things been more or less, within less then twenty, I may say within
less then half this twenty years? I would I could not say at this present.

2 How also comes it to pass that so many years since the expiring of this
time, the Beast has escaped, and neither been killed with the sword, nor led
into captivity, seeing it is said of him that at the end of his Reign his two
and forty months expired, He that leads into Captivity shall be led into
Captivity, he that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword, Rev.
13.10. If it be said, Christ has these many years ever since Luthers time in a
spiritual manner with the sword of his mouth been killing and captivating the
Beast; I answer, true; But what has been done against him by a Civil sword, or
toward a Civil captivating of him, which is the Sword and Captivity here
spoken of? For observe such a Sword as he has killed the Saints with, and such
a Captivity as he has exposed them unto, such a Sword, and such a Captivity
(it being brought upon him by God in a way of retaliation) shall himself suffer
by, and be exposed unto; but the one has been Civil, therefore shall the other
also. If it be replied, was not this done some years since in Germany by
Gustavus Adolphus? Answ. Grant it so to be; Yet does that fall many years too
late; the one thousand two hundred and sixty (according to this opinion) being
expired long before his time; but now no sooner is the time expired, but
instantly, He that leads into Captivity is led into Captivity, He that
kills with the Sword is killed with the Sword; Neither the German War
therefore, nor any that has been since will at all help this opinion. 2. If
the Wan of the Swedish King in Germany were a killing the Beast with the Sword,
a leading him into Captivity, then most certainly, since, he is risen, and come
out of Captivity again; but let us assure our selves, that when Christ kills
the Beast with the Sword, he shall have no resurrection; when he leads him
into captivity, no return.

Obj. But it may be objected, That we must of necessity begin this Epock of one
thousand two hundred and sixty years as high as Constantine, if not higher; for
( Rovel. 12.) it is the Dragon with seven Heads, and ten Horns, and seven
Crowns on his heads; (which is the emblem of the old Roman Empire, and not the
Empire of the Beast, who has ten Crowns, and those upon his Horns, ( Revel.
13.1.) that drives the Woman into the Wilderness.

I answer; This cannot be for what has been proved already, viz. That the
forty two Months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, are one and
the same time, which begin and end together; and how could this be, in case the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days were to begin before the rise of the
Beast, whilst yet the Roman Empire was ruled by the Dragon?

2 Observe the Text it self, and it will appear, That the act of the Dragon
there mentioned, is not the driving of the Woman into the Wilderness, but
another thing, viz. a lying in wait to devour her child so soon as born, v. 4.
And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, for to
devour her child so soon as it was born. The meaning whereof is, That the
faithful, the true members and children of the Church, (which because one Body,
are here represented by one Child; and for dignity sake, or else to represent
their strength in their head, Christ, a Man-child) that in the time of
Paganism had been oppressed by the Dragon; the Devil perceiving them now
through Constantines means to be in a rising way, and ready as with a Rod of
Iron to crush in pieces his Heathenish Worship; he therefore labors by
stirring up the power of the old Pagan Empire to oppose Constantine, to stifle
this work in the beginning; but this he cannot do; Constantine prevails, and
the faithful in despite of him are caught up to God, and to his Throne, i. e.
set out of the reach of the Dragon through Constantines prevailing. The Church
now after her sharp fiery Trial under the Pagan Emperors coming to enjoy great
peace and prosperity under Constantine, it comes to pass that she abusing her
prosperity, and Jesuron-like now waxing fat, beginning to kick and grow wanton,
her good is turned into evil, and within a short time afterward she begins to
Apostatize from her first Principles, and instead of being clothed with the
Sun (as was the Primitive Church, ver. 1.) and having the Moon under her feet,
she neglects the Sun, i. e. Christ crucified for Justification, and true
Holiness through his Death and Sufferings, and arrayes her self with the Moon,
i.e. worldly ornaments, as Dignities, Preferments, outward Riches, etc. which
things a while after Constantine began to be mightily stickled for by the
Clergy generally, yea in Councels also. Now when it came to be thus, the Woman,
i. e. the true Church vanishes away, and retires her self into the Wilderness;
and as she retires, so in her room stands up the Beast, i. e. the false
Antichristian Church. But this is not done instantly, but after the Church had
had prosperity some time, and abused it, and thereby provoked Christ to
withdraw his presence and Spirit; which gone, the Church straightway
degenerates, and she that was before the Spouse of Christ, becomes an
Antichristian Harlot.

Hence the Woman's flight into the Wilderness is noted in the Text, as the very
next thing after the childs being caught up to God and his Throne, ver. 5. And
her child was caught up to God, and to his Throne, ver. 6. And the woman fled
into the Wilderness. Now observe, as the childs being caught up to God, and
his Throne, was successive to the Dragons gaping to devour the child, which
was whilst yet the child was but in the birth; So the woman's flight into the
Wilderness (whence begins the one thousand two hundred and sixty days) is to be
looked upon as a thing successive, as well in time as place to the childs
being caught up to God and to his Throne; And so the Objection is indeed a
reason for us, that we may not begin the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, either before Constantine, or with him, but must some time afterward.

The Arguments brought from History Civil, or Ecclesiastical, to prove this
fall to the ground upon the account of these two reasons.

1 Because History is only a Human testimony, and therefore to be tried by the
Divine; but the Divine testimony (or testimony of Scripture) cannot be made to
agree to this beginning, as our two first Reasons prove.

2 Because all that is said from History, as viz. the Story of Constantines
donation of Rome, Italy, etc. to Pope Silvester, the story of Queen Helens
Cross, etc. have only the authority of Popish Writers, and not any of the
Ancients to countenance them; yea, are exploded by Protestant Writers as
Fables; as see Melancthon in his review of Carions Chronicle, lib. 3. Johan.
Wolf. cent. 4. Simpsons History of the Church, lib. 2. cent. 4.

The Argument urged by some from the Indictions (which of all Arguments from
mere History is the most plausible) tends only to prove that the Papists reckon
the beginning of their Kingdom from about this time. But does it follow that
therefore we are so to do? What Scripture warrant is there for such a thing,
that there we should begin the time of the Beasts reign, where the Beasts own
followers begin their Kingdom? Certainly, were this a rule to walk by, there
would be no difficulty at all in making up our account of the forty two
Months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days; yea take it at best,
it is but an uncertain Argument; for some end the Olympiads, and begin the
Indictions sooner, some later; and what strength this Argument has in it
(which in my account is but feeble) will as well agree (according to some) to a
more likely time, as to this; for Rosse in his History of the World says, Lib.
3. Chap. 3. that about the year three hundred ninety five the Olympiads ceased,
and the Indictions were instituted.

The conclusion of all is, That that opinion which begins the forty two
Months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days with Constantine, is
not that we are to cleave unto, as truth in this thing.

SECT. 2.
THe opinion of a late Writer (who has bestowed much labor upon our Question)
is, that we are to begin this Epoch with the time of Pope Leo the first; and
the particular year pitched upon by our Author is the year four hundred forty
two.

But though I honor the Author, yet cannot I receive his opinion.

1 Because according to it the one thousand two hundred and sixty days cannot
be made current in their end with the one thousand two hundred and ninety,
unless thirty years upwards, of the year four hundred forty two, a Head be
found for that number; which could it be, yet cannot then the one thousand
three hundred thirty five be made concurrent in their end (no not according to
our Authors own Principles, and calculation) with the two thousand three
hundred.

2 Because its evident the Beast was risen above forty years before this time;
therefore not now to rise.

The account of the wonderful Numberer, Dan. 8.14. does not (as says our
Author, but without giving any substantial reason for the thing) enforce this
beginning, but indeed strongly, if rightly computed, another, as appears from
our Key.

His Human testimonies are wonderously misapplied in point of time; for indeed
not any one of those Human Rites, Superstitions, and Idolatries, which our
Author makes mention of, as crept in at this time, but had their rise, yea
approbation too even in Councels some years higher, as is proved in my Key,
These. 23.

The Authors calculation of the time when the Beast shall begin to go to wrack,
and that from the number of his Name, six hundred sixty six, carries not weight
with me, because I find the number of the Beasts name put for a part or piece
of the Beasts Idolatry, which the true worshippers of Jesus are to shun, and
get victory over, Chap. 15.2. And I saw them that had gotten the victory over
the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the number of his
Name. But now did the number of his Name hold forth the time of his
continuance, it would contrariwise be a great part of a Saints comfort and joy
to know it.

Nay further, I find the Papals severely punished by God for having to do with
this Name, Chap. 14.11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever
and ever. And they have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast, and his
image, and whosoever receives the mark of his name. The least that can be
inferred from these words, is, that the mark of the Beast and his name are
things of near kin the one to the other; therefore his mark, and the number of
his name are both included in these words, The mark of his name. But were there
any such thing intended in the number of the Beasts name, as the time of his
continuance, this could not be, but contrariwise, the Beasts mark, and the
number of his name should be things vastly different. To say the one and the
other may be intended, cannot be, unless we should suppose contraries, viz.
Sin and Comfort, a Curse and a Blessing may be reconciled.

The conclusion is, That that opinion, which makes the two and forty months,
the one thousand two hundred and sixty days to begin A. D. 442. cannot be the
mind of the Holy Ghost in this thing.

SECT. 3.
There is yet another opinion, which begins the one thousand two hundred and
sixty days with the time when Boniface was by Phocas made universal Bishop.
The Authors and Assertors of this opinion most of them begin about the year 600.

But this cannot be:

1 Because all the wit of man can never according to this opinion bring forth a
Harmony of the mystical Numbers, i. e. make the one thousand two hundred and
sixty days to end at the same point with the one thousand two hundred and
ninety, and the one thousand three hundred thirty and five with the two
thousand three hundred, both which must be.

2 Because it is said of the seventh kind of Government in the Roman Empire
that the same was to continue but a little space, Rev. 17.10. And there are
seven Kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is not yet come; and
when he comes, he must continue a short space. Now when the Angel says, It
should continue but a little space, he speaks undoubtedly with a reference to
that Government that then was in being, viz. by Pagan Emperors, comparatively
with which the continuance of the seventh or following Government should be but
a short space. But now if the Beast who by coming in as the Eighth, puts an end
to the seventh or following Government, did not rise till about this time, then
comparatively with the sixth, could not the seventh be said to continue a
little space; for its continuance should be well nigh as long as the other.

3 Because according to this account, all the Horns of the Beast should be in
being, and that above one hundred and forty years before yet there was any
Beast; For the Beast had all his Horns (as shall appear by and by) before the
year four hundred and sixty; but how monstrous and irrational a thing is it to
affirm that Horns should be before, or without a Beast?

The Conclusion is, That we are not to begin the two and forty months, or the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, with the time when Boniface was
created universal Bishop by Phocas.

CHAP. III. Stating and confirming the true beginning.
SECT. 1.
IT will now be said, seeing I disallow all the precedent accounts, What year
do I my self pitch upon for the beginning of this Epock.

I answer, The year I fix upon, I have already stated in my Key, to be A.D.
396.

The Reasons of this fixation are,

1 Reason, Because that year, and no other can make the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days concur in their end with the one thousand two hundred
and ninety; And also the one thousand three hundred thirty five with the two
thousand and three hundred.

2 Reason, Taken from the words of the Apostle, 2 These. 2.3. Let no man deceive
you by any means; for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away
first, and that man of sin be revealed, the Son of perdition.

Out of which words I draw this Conclusion;

That the Revelation of the man of Sin was then to be, when as there should
appear some eminent defection in the Church from its primitive purity: For the
Apostle makes the falling away, to be the Revelation of the man of sin; as to
say, the man of sin shall then thrust himself into the world, in, or with this
falling away.

Now let us enquire when this eminent Apostasy from Primitive purity began, and
therein undoubtedly are we to state the rise of the Antichristian Beast.

Much as to this I have written already, Key, Thesi 23. so as that it may seem
superfluous to add any thing more. All therefore that I shall do farther,
shall be only to translate some few things of many, which I find gathered
together out of the Ancients by Joan. Wolfius in his Centenaries, who applies
things to the particular year or time of their rise, i. e. when a discovery was
first made of these corruptions, and witness born against them, by good men
living in those first ages.

And first as for what is by him laid down in his Epistle Dedicatory,

Out of Jerome he has these sayings, which he applies to the year 390.

Concerning the Avarice and corruption of the Clergy, Jerome thus;

Whence is this Avarice crept into the Church? the Law now perishes from the
Priest, the Vision from the Prophet.

And again, Searching (says he) former Histories, I have not been able to find
any who have so rent the Church, and seduced those of Gods Family, as those do
who now go under the name of Priests; they are become a crooked snare, giving
occasion to scandal in all places.

Farther, He calls the then Roman Presbytery, Scribes, Pharisees, a Synod of
Pharisees; and adds, that from the Apostles days until that time the Church
grew under Persecutions, and was crowned with Martyrdom; But (says he) at
this day the same is greater in riches, and power, but less in virtue.

Concerning the Prohibition of Marriage Meats, etc. the said Jerome, thus;

IN HYPOCRYSIE they speak, who when they cannot contain, will seem so chaste as
even to condemn Marriage, so abstemious that they judge those that use the
creatures of God sparingly, when as they give up themselves to follow luxurious
Banquets.

Our aforesaid Author alleges also a saying out of Augustine, applying it to
the year 399. tending to show how greatly the Church about this time was fallen
from her first purity. The testimony speaks thus, That Religion about this time
was so corrupted with Traditions and humane Rites, that the very condition of
the Jews under the Law was more easy then that of Christians under the Gospel.

Also under the very same year (as the next thing) he brings a testimony of
Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, who by an Epistle admonishes another Bishop, that
he should not load Christians with heavy Burdens, Ceremonies and Traditions,
nor obtrude upon his Brethren single life.

After this he quotes Chrysostom declaming against the Bishop of Romes
Purgatory, etc. which things he applies to the year 410. the recital whereof I
forbear to mention.

Hitherto of what I find in our Authors Epistle.

The Book it self affords variety of the like, betwixt the years 390 and 400,
whereof I shall only glean up some things.

Cent. 4. A. D. 391.

Of the Clergies enriching themselves by Auricular Confession, he says thus,

That when any Prince or great man confessed himself guilty of any crime by him
committed, presently by threats and persuasions he was made to believe that he
could not be saved, unless he did confer on the Church a good part of his
estate; or else bidding farewell to all earthly things, devolving them upon the
Clergy, should betake himself to a private Monkish life; which done, he should
thereby not only be freed from Hell, but also obtain a sure certain and
plentiful hope of life eternal.

A.D. 393. He says thus, That in that very year was seen hanging in the
Heavens, a burning Pillar by the space of thirty days. And (says he) about
this very time began humane Traditions, Monkish life, etc.

A.D. 395. He makes mention of one Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium, reprehending
the worshipping of Images; An Argument Image worship was up so early.

A. D. 396. He collects many things out of Epiphanius third Book, Contra
Haereses, showing how great the defection was at this time.

Concerning Image worship, Epiphanius thus.

Whence is this Image worship, and design of the Devil?

And a little after, The Images of such as never lived, do men introduce to be
worshipped, having the mind adulterated from the one, and only God.

And a little after that, Be mindful my beloved children, that ye bring not
Images into the Church, but bear about God always in your hearts; for it is
not meet that a Christian should be held by his eyes, but by the occupation of
his mind.

Concerning the Virgin Mary, Epiphanius thus;

The body of Mary was truly holy, but not God. The Virgin her self was indeed a
Virgin, and to be honored, but not given us that we should worship her, she
her self worshipping him who was born of her flesh.

Much more is by the aforesaid Author quoted from Epiphanius, which speaks the
very same language with these, all which he applies to the year 396. the
recital whereof I forbear.

A.D. 399. To this year Wolfius makes application of many sayings of Augustine,
who was made (says Helvicus) Presb. Hyponensis, A.D. 391.

Concerning Purgatory, Augustine thus,

The Catholic faith believes Heaven to be the first place; the second Hell; as
for a third, we are wholly ignorant, nor is it found in the Scripture.

Concerning worshipping Saints thus,

It is not our Religion to worship dead men; they are honored for our imitation
sake, not to be worshipped for the sake of Religion, nor are we to consecrate
Temples to them, for they will not so be honored of us.

Concerning Faith and Works.

Good Works do not precede Justification, but follow the justified.

Concerning Peter, and the Power of the Keys thus,

We who are called Christians do not believe in Peter, but in whom Peter did
believe. And again, The Keys of the Church are delivered to the whole Church,
not to one Peter.

A little after, Augustine reprehending (says our Author) the arrogance of the
Popes who suffered themselves to be called Gods, says, He that would seem to
be God, when as he is man, does not imitate him, who when he was God, was for
our sakes made man.

The aforesaid Author quoteth a saying of Gregory Nazianzene concerning
Councels about this time, Cent. 4. p. 127. If truth (says he) be spoken, I
judge it best that all Councels be avoided; for I never saw good end of any
Council, nor the abrogation of any evil thereby, but only ambition,
contention, and strifes about Prerogative and Dignity.

This cloud of witnesses standing up for the truth, and that about this time is
a manifest demonstration of that great Apostasy from primitive principles and
purity, which we are speaking of, to be about this very time.

If any doubt of the Testimonies themselves, or conceive I may in translating
them have corrupted them, they may satisfy themselves by having recourse to my
Author; where likewise they shall find in most things, two for one of what I
have translated.

Add hereto as a Celestial sign of this defection, and of the rise of the
Antichristian Lucifer about this very time, what is by Alsted recorded, viz.
That a little before this time, as namely, A. D. 383. And again, A. D. 389.
were seen two Comets, one following the other like unto Lucifer, the like to
which were never seen in any other Age. In Chronologia Cometarum.

Yet as concerning the defection I am speaking of, I grant that the same was in
part more early. The reason whereof is this, because the mystery of iniquity
from the Apostles days did begin to work, and endeavor to thrust it self in,
2 These. 2.7.

Hence in the year 198. when Victor was Bishop of Rome, a great stir was made
by him about the Celebration of Easter; but the same was opposed by some
Councels at that time. Alsted in Chronologia Conciliorum.

So also in the year 326. It was endeavored in the Council of Nice, That
Bishops and Elders should refrain from their wives: But Paphnutius opposed
himself to the whole Council, urging that of the Apostle, Marriage is honorable
among all men, and so far prevailed as to bring forth a decree of liberty, that
for chastity sake such might accompany with their wives. Alsted in Chronologia
testium veritatis.

But now though Antichrist was more early thrusting himself forth, yet are we
not thence to reckon his rise, but from that time when the Apostasy grew
eminent, the Councels, and Ministry being more generally corrupted, which was
about the aforesaid year, 396.

And certainly if at this time after all these things before mentioned were
come forth, we cannot yet see the Beast in the world, but must come down lower
to find him, it argues that we either shut our eyes, or are blind whilst we
look for him.

The Argument then lies thus, If that falling away which is foretold should be
at the time of Antichrists Revelation, were A.D. 396. then are we there to
place the Beasts rise, and accordingly thence to reckon the two and forty
months, and the one thousand two hundred and sixty days; but the Antecedent is
true; therefore the consequent.

SECT. 2.
3 Reason. A third Reason of the foregoing Position may be taken from the
following words of the Apostle, verse. 6, 7, 8. And now ye know what withholdeth
that he might be revealed in his time: For the mystery of Iniquity does already
work; only he who now lets, will let until he be taken out of the way. And
then shall that wicked be revealed. Out of which words I draw this conclusion,
viz. That the man of sin, or the Antichrist, was to be revealed, when that
which then did withhold and let ( viz. the Civil power of the Roman Empire,
which would not admit of any Competitor, or the setting up of any other power
equal with it, or above it) should be taken away, i.e, removed from the
seventh Head (which is the last Head of the ancient Roman Beast, i.e. of Rome
as it was a pure Civil state) and placed some where else.

Now before we can frame any Argument that shall have in it a concluding force,
here are two things to be cleared, viz.

1 Whether this taking away be to be reckoned from the time that the Civil
power of the Roman Empire was wholly taken off the seventh Head, and fixed some
where else, or whether from the time when this began to be?

2 In case we incline to the one, or the other, what time are we to pitch upon,
in which this was done?

Concerning the first, We are (as I conceive) to account from that time when
this began to be done. My Reasons are,

1 Because it is proper and agreeable to the phrase of taking away, to say a
thing is then taken away when as such a beginning is made as irresistably
causes a total removing or taking away.

It is said, Dan. 9.2. That seventy years were to be accomplished in the
desolations of Jerusalem. These seventy years are to be reckoned from the
first Captivity, which was in the third year of Jehoiakim, Dan. 1.1, 2. 2 Chon.
36.6, 7. as is clear,

1 Because the Scriptures speaking of the seventy years Captivity point us to
Jehoiakims reign, as the time from whence we are to begin our account, Jerem.
25. verse. 1. compared with verse. 11, 12. Chap. 29. verse. 1, 2. compared with
verse. 10.

2 Because Israel was to serve the King of Babylon but seventy years, Jer.
25.11, 12. These Nations shall serve the King of Babylon seventy years. And
after seventy years are accomplished, I will punish the King of Babylon. Now
Isreal's servitude to the King of Babylon beginning in the days of Jehoiakim,
in case the seventy years were not to be begun till afterward, then should
they serve the King of Babylon above seventy years.

3 Because Israel was to be in Babylon but the term of seventy years, Jer.
29.10. For thus says the Lord, that after seventy years be accomplished, I
will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you to return
to this place. But Israel for a considerable part of them were carried into
Babylon in the days of Jehoiakim; if therefore we begin the seventy years
afterward, then seeing that until the seventy years were expired, they came
not out of Babylon, their being in Babylon should be upwards of seventy years;
therefore I say that the seventy years of Jerusalems desolations are to
reckoned from the first Captivity; yet observe, their desolations then were
only begun, not perfected till nineteen years after, in the eleventh of
Zedekiah, when City and Temple were destroyed, 2 Chronicles. 36.19. yet
notwithstanding does the Holy Ghost reckon their desolations and captivity from
the time the same was begun, though the completing of it was not till some
years after.

So Dan. 7.26. Its said concerning the little Horn, the judgment shall sit,
and they shall take away his Dominion: And when is this taking away? Ans. When
the Ancient of days begins to sit, and the Thrones of the Beast begin to be
cast down, though yet the final destruction of this little H^rn is not till
afterward, verse. 11. And observe, if the ruin of the Roman Empire in its
second state under Antichrist be to be reckoned from the time when this begins,
why not in its first likewise?

In Scripture Phrase therefore a thing is said to be taken away, when the
desolating and removing time is come, and the work begun, though yet the
completing of it be not till some time after.

2 Because the Beast did not take up and exercise all the Civil power of the
Roman Empire together, or at once, but did by little and little ingrosse the
same into his own hands, as the same by degrees fell off the seventh Head. And
if so, then of necessity must the Beast, who pills the seventh Head, and robs
him of his power, have a being before as yet the seventh Head had lost all his
power, or was totally destroyed.

3 Because if we begin not till this work was completed, then of necessity
must we extend the forty months, the one thousand two-hundred and sixty days,
beyond Daniels two thousand three hundred, and his one thousand three hundred
thirty five, both which expire A.D. 1701. but so will not the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, if we find not a beginning for them till the complete
devastation of the ancient Roman Empire.

To say some middle beginning may be found, must be grounded upon some such
substantial reason as may enervate the force of ours; and withal be so carried
on, as that the admirable Harmony betwixt Daniels numbers and John's may be
preserved.

The conclusion therefore is, That we are not to reckon this taking away from
the time that the Civil power of the Roman Empire was fully removed from the
seventh Head, but rather from the time when this began.

Our next Question is, What time are we to pitch upon when this was done?

Ans. The year before fixed 396.

1 Because at this time the Roman Empire (upon Theodosius death) became divided
betwixt Arcadius and Honorius his two sons, of which see my Key, Thesi 22. This
division was such that Carrion treating upon the fourth Monarchy, does hereupon
prefix to the reign of Arcadius and Honorius this title, The spoiling of the
fourth Monarchy.

2 Because about this very time did the Goths and Vandals invade the Roman
Empire, coming in as an overflowing deluge upon diverse parts of the Roman
Empire. A better testimony hereof I cannot produce, then by transferring hither
what by the learned Mede is gathered together out of the Ancients relating to
this time and thing, in his Comment upon the Apocalypse, Chap. 8. upon the first
Trumpet.

He begins from the time of Theodosius death, which was A.D. 395. (which
because the current year, we are in our account to let fall, and begin with the
year following 396.) and says thus, In this very year Alaricus with a huge
host of Goths, and other Barbarians, did first break in out of Thracia upon
Macedonia, sparing neither Towns, nor men. Thence marching forward through
Thessaly, and possessing himself of the Straits of Thermipolae, he enters
Greece, i.e. Achaia, the Cities whereof, besides Thebes and Athens, he razeth
to the ground. He rusheth into Peloponnesus, wastes Corinth, Argos, and
Sparta. Thence he marches into Epirus where he proceeds to make the same
devastations and destructions. In the following year quitting Epirus, he
invadeth Achaia, and it together with Epirus, and the adjacent Provinces, he
labors four full years cruelly to destroy with fire and ransackings; when
thus for five years he had afflicted the East with merciless ransackings, he
set his mind to invade the West; he passes into Dalmatia, and Pannonia, those
Regions he wastes far and near. Hear (says he) Jerome, who then lived,
bewayling the state of this deplorable time, the tempest hitherto raging. In
his third Epistle, the Roman blood is daily poured out between Constantinople;
and the Julian Alps: The Goth, the Sarmatian, Quadus, Alanus, the Huns, the
Vandals, the Marcomanny, do force and take by violence Scythia, Thracia,
Macedonia, Dardania, Dacia, Thessaly, Achaia, Epirus, Dalmatia, and all
Pannonia. How many Matrons, how many godly Virgins, and beautiful noble bodies
were mocking stocks to these Monsters? The Bishops taken, the Presbyters slain.
The Roman Empire goes to ruin. What heart think thou have the Corinthians
now, the Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Arcadians, and all Greece, whom these
Barbarians command?

But in the year following, viz. Anno Dom, four hundred and one, the same
Alaricus, followed by the Goths, Alans, and Huns, about to wage War in Italy
also, brake through Noricum, and came through the Forest of Trent into Venice,
those Cities in a short time he subdued, the Emperor Honorius he besieged at
Hasta, so as that all Italy thought upon quitting their Habitations. But here
at length, (...) the General of Honorius, having gathered (...) Army, stopped
his fury, and compelled him living once and again vanquished, and wearied with
(...) Battles, to retire into Pannonia, whence he came, out of which a while
after, a League being (...), and be honored with a Military government (...)
Honorius, be departed into Illyricum, a Pro^^^^ of the East.

^^^^icus being quiet a little while, lest hence^^^^ (...) or any time the West
should be vacant of (...) presently in the year four hundred and four, another
mentorable breaking in of the Barbarians upon Italy is attempted, Radagiso a
Scythian being Captain, who with an Army of Goths, Sarmatians, and Germans, to
the number of two hundred thousand, the Forts in the Alps being beaten down,
he passes into the Region of Venice, Aemilia, and Hetruria, he besieges
Florence, where being by Stilicho vanquished with a great slaeughter, is taken
and beheaded.

This enemy how soever terrible, in a little time, and with l^sse loss being
taken away, forth with Anno Dom. four hundred and six, the third, and that the
most grievous and deadly inrode of the Vandals and Alans, taking with them the
Marcomanni, Heruli, Swedes, Alemans, Burgundians, with a rabble of other
Barbarians, is made upon the West, whereby first France, then Spain, lastly
Africa are taken; and afflicted with all kind of calamities; Which destructions
Hierom in his eleventh Epistle has thus partly expressed, partly implied.

Innumerable (says he) and most fierce Nations have taken all France,
whatsoever is betwixt the Alps and the Pyrenaean Mountains, which is enclosed
with the Ocean and the Rhone; the Quadus, the Vandals, Sarmatians, the Alans,
Gipides, Heruli, Saxons, Burgundians, Alemans, and Pannonian enemies have
destroyed; Mentz is taken, and plundered, and many thousand slain in the
Church; the Vangions with strong siege destroyed the strong City of Rhemes, the
Ambians, Attrebates, Morini, Tornacus, Nemete, Argentoratus translated into
Germany, Aquitane, and the Provinces of Novem Populorum, Lions, and Narbone, a
few Cities excepted, all are ruined. I cannot make mention of Tolose without
tears, which that it is not yet ruined, is for the sake of that holy Bishop
Exuperius; Spain it self now ready to perish trembles, Rome buys her life with
gold. Hitherto Master Mede, p. 71, 72, 73, 74.

Now upon the whole, observe, it being a thing expressly foretold, Revel. 13.1.
that the Antichristian Beast should have his rise out of the Sea, i. e. from a
confluence of People and Nations, the rise of Antichrist cannot more aptly be
applied to any time then this, of these barbarous Nations overflowing in this
wonderful manner the Roman Empire.

3 Because suddenly after the year three hundred ninety six (as the issue of
this invasion) the Civil power of the Empire began by little and little to be
transplanted from the seventh Head, and to be seated in the Horns. Now, as it
is an evident Argument that the Empire was going to decay, when there began to
be a removal of the Civil power and authority from the Head to the Horns; so
is it also as clear an Argument that the Beast was now rising; for it is the
Beasts Horns that have Crowns upon them, the Dragons have none. But of this
more in my next.

From the whole I frame this Argument; The forty two Months, and the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days are there to begin where the Civil power of
the Roman Empire began to go to decay, or to be taken away. But this was Anno
Dom. three hundred ninety six. Ergo.

CHAP. IV. Proving and confirming yet farther our Position, laid down in the
former.
SECT. 1.
A Fourth Argument, to prove that we are to begin the time of the Beast in all
likelihood with the year before stated, may be taken from the time of the rise
of the Horns; some of the Horns did suddenly after this year appear. For this
see Alsted in Chronologia regnorum veterum. Rosse History of the world, Lib. 3.
Cap. 3. Sigonius (as I find him quoted by Mr. Mede, cl. p. 79.) of the Western
Empire, Lib. 10. and 11.

To these let me add; Our German Author in his Cla. p. 127. testifies, that
Anno Dom. four hundred and three, some Horns did appear. Mr. Archer in his
Personal Reign, p. 44. says, That about the year four hundred, or four hundred
and six, some of the ten Kingdoms in Europe began to rise. Mr. Woodcock of the
two Witnesses, p. 81. says. That Anno Dom. four hundred and ten, when Alaricus
took Rome, several of the ten Horns even in that very year began to appear.

Mr. Medes own opinion is, That all the ten Horns were in being in the year
four hundred fifty six, the Empire in that year appearing divided into ten
Kingdoms, which together with the names of the People, and of the Kings, and
Provinces over which they reigned, are by him laid down in this following
Table, Cl. p. 80.

A Type of the rending of the Empire, or Roman Dominion, in the year of Christ
four hundred fifty six, and thence forward.
The Kingdoms. The Provinces wherein they reigned. The names of the Kings
reigning in this year. 1 Of the Britains. Vortimer. 2 Of the Saxons. In
Britain. Hengist. 3 Franks. First, In Gallia Belg. suddenly after in Celtica
also. Childerick. 4 Burgundians. In Gal. Sequan. and Lions. Gunderick. 5
Wisigothes. In Aquitane and part of Spain. Theodorick. 6 Swedes and Alans. In
that Tract of Spain which is contained in Gallecia and Lusitania. Riciarius. 7
Vandals. In Africa, but a little before in Spain. Gensericus. 8 Alemanes. In
that Tract of Germany, which was called Rhetia. Sumanas. 9 Ostrogoths. In
Pannonia the Huns being subdued, neither was that age run out when they did
enlarge their Kingdom into Italy also. Theodemirus. 10 Grecians. In the
residue of the Dominion of the Empire; for the Empire of ancient Rome being
dissolved, the Kingdom of the Grecians is to be reckoned among those Kingdoms
into which the Dominion of the City reigning, sometimes far and near was
divided. Marcianus.

Some things by way of explication of the Table are added by Mr. Mede, which I
omit, referring the Reader where any doubt arises to the Author himself for
satisfaction.

Now to make our Argument the more firm, let it be observed, That we are to
place the rise of the Beast before the rise of the Horns; the Horns therefore
having being, some so early as the years four hundred, four hundred and three,
four hundred and six, etc. yea being complete, having their perfect number,
Anno Dom. four hundred fifty six, the rise of the Beast must be placed somewhat
more early; and therefore it is not amiss that I have pitched upon the year
three hundred ninety six.

Now that the rise of the Beast must be before the rise of the Horns, is
evident;

1 Because the ten Horns with Crowns upon them are the Horns of the
Antichristian Beast, and no other. This being so, the Antichristian Beast must
necessarily be before his Horns; for how improper, yea absurd would it be to
say, That Horns should grow before, or without a Beast? To say, The Horns are
the same which were grown before, only the Beast puts Crowns upon them, which
before they had not, helps not the thing, for if the Beast crown the Horns,
then is he before any of the Horns are crowned; that which is not, cannot add
to another thing.

2 Because the rise of the Beast is to be reckoned from that point of time, in
which the Civil power of the Roman Empire began to be taken away, as has been
proved already; but now none of the Crowned Horns arise till a while after, the
Horns getting Crowns, i.e. a Civil power to themselves, by the devastation of
the seventh Head, i. e. pilling the Empire of its Civil power.

3 Because the words of the Holy Ghost, Rev. 17.12. import as much; for
speaking of the Beast and his Horns, its said, These receive power as Kings one
hour, (or in one hour; so Pareus in his Comment upon the Revelation reads it)
with the Beast. Observe, not the Beast receives power with them, but they with
the Beast; intimating clearly, that notwithstanding the Beasts rise is not long
before the Horns, therefore both rise as it were in one hour, that is, within a
little time of each other, yet the Beast has being first, and is
instrumentally the cause of helping the Horns to their Diadems or Kingly power,
to whom therefore as engaged they adhere, giving their power and strength to
him again, verse. 13. i.e. laying it out for him, who was a special means of
helping them to it.

SECT. 2.
Ob! But it may be objected, That Daniel saw the rise of this little Horn
(namely Antichrist) after the rise of the other Horns, Dan. 7.8. I considered
the Horns, and behold there came up among them another little Horn, verse. 24.
And the ten Horns out of this Kingdom are ten Kings that shall arise, and
another shall arise after them.

Ans. Three opinions there are of this little Horn, which if either of them
might be admitted, would easily quit our hands of this Objection.

The first is that which interprets it of Antiochus Epiphanes; but as touching
this I shall say nothing til I come to my Third part.

Two other opinions there are embraced at this day by men of great light,
learning, and worth, whom I would not thwart, were it not but that this
Prophecy of Daniels little Horn is so material, that an error here turns the
streams of all Daniels Prophecies out of their proper channel; and because the
best men, and men of greatest Light may have their particular mistakes, I hope
it will not be grievous or offensive to any, if for truths sake I bring the
principles of those, whose light in other things I esteem above my own, as to
this particular thing, to the touchstone.

Yet ere I come to examine either opinion, I shall in order thereunto premise
these few things.

1 That all Daniels Prophecies, viz. That of the great Image, chap. 2. Of the
four Beasts and little Horn, chap. 7. Of the Ram, Hee-Goat and little Horn,
chap. 8. Of the Kings of the North, and Kings of the South, chap. 11. have but
one and the same end.

2 That the last thing in each of these is the description of the Fourth or
Roman Monarchy.

These two Principles are so clear and unquestionable upon the grounds, that
not my self only, but also those good men go, from whom yet (as to their
opinions of the little Horn) I vary, yea from the plain scope and expressions
of each Prophecy, that to insist upon particular proof, were but to multiply
words.

3 That the Fourth or Roman Monarchy consisting of two States; 1 A pure Civil
State, 2 A mixed State, partly Civil, partly Ecclesiastical; has therefore in
each of Daniels Visions and Prophecies a twofold representation suitable to
its twofold state. In that of the Great Image, the Roman Monarchy (which is
signified by the legs and feet of that Image) is first represented as a pure
Civil State, by the legs of Iron, breaking in pieces and subduing all things,
verse. 40. as a mixed State, by the feet and toes of the Image, which are part of
Iron, part of Potters clay, ver. 41.

In the second Vision of the fourth Beast, the Roman Monarchy, signified by the
fourth Beast, is represented in two States. 1 As a Civil State, and so it is a
Beast dreadful, terrible, strong exceedingly, having great Iron teeth,
devouring and breaking in pieces, verse. 7.2. As a mixed State, and so a raging
blasphemous little Horn, ver. 8.21.25.

In the third, chap 8. the Roman Monarchy (represented by the little Horn,
verse. 9.) has two States; 1 A Civil State, and so it is a little Horn waxing
great in a way of conquest, subduing Nations to it self, verse. 9. 2 A mixed
State, and so it is a little Horn, waxing great in a way of opposition to the
truths, people, and worship of God, ver. 10, 11, 12.24, 25.

In the fourth and last Prophecy, the Roman Monarchy has two States; 1 A Civil
State, and so it is that terrible potent King of the North, chap. 11. verse. 14.
to 21. 2 A mixed State, and so it is that vile Person, verse. 21. whose
description and acts are continued to ver. 40.

This I take to be (and I doubt not but he who thoroughly weighs each Prophecy
will, yea must in this be of my mind) the true state of the Roman Monarchy, as
the same is set forth in all the Prophecies of Daniel.

Hence fourthly, It follows upon the former, That the little Horn, chap 7.
signifying the mixed State of the Roman Monarchy, and the mixed State of the
Roman Monarchy being also the thing signified chap. 2. by the feet and toes of
the great Image, chap. 8. by the little Horn there mentioned in his second
waxing great, chap. 11. by the vile Person; Hence I say, it follows, That the
feet and toes of the great Image, chap. 2. the little Horn, chapter 7. the little
Horn in its second waxing great. chap. 8. and the vile person cha. 11. are all
one and the same thing. What therefore is affirmed of the little Horn, chap. 7.
must be of all the rest.

This premised, I come now to the opinions themselves.

The first opinion is that which interprets this little Horn of Mahomet, at
leastwise as to the special accommodation. The rage of this little Horn
against the Saints to be specially meant of the Turks Tyranny over, and
oppression of the Jews.

But this opinion cannot I receive, because it seems to me to be inconsistent
with all the four foregoing Prophesies.

1 for the Prophecy of the great Image, its inconsistent with that; for the
feet of the great Image (the same with the little Horn) are to be understood of
such a power, as First, is made up of a mixture, and that of things contrary,
as iron and clay. Secondly, it is such a power as consists of ten parts, which
ten parts are represented by the ten Toes, verse. 42. Now neither of these
Characters either do, or will agree to the Empire of the Great Turk, but both
are punctually fulfilled in the Kingdom of Antichrist, which first is made up
of a Civil and Ecclesiastical power molded together; secondly, consists of ten
Horns i.e. so many Kingdoms, Rev. 17.12.16.

2 For the Prophecy Chap. 8. The proud He, there spoken of (who is the same
with this little Horn) is said to cast down some of the host of heaven, and of
the stars to the ground, and to stamp upon them, verse. 10. to take away the
daily sacrifice, throw down the place of his Sanctuary, cast down the truth to
the ground, verse. 11.12. Yea, he is also said to understand dark sentences,
verse. 23. to be mighty, but not by his own power, to destroy wonderfully, to
destroy the mighty and holy people, verse. 24.

None of these Characters (which are all the Characters of the little Horn)
either will, or can agree to any act of the Turk put forth toward the Jews,
for,

1 The Jews in the state they are in, and have been in these many years, cannot
be called The Host of Heaven, i. e. The true worshippers of God, as the phrase
signifies.

Neither secondly, can the casting down and trampling the Jews be called A
casting down of stars, and trampling upon them. The Officers of the Christian
Churches are called Stars, Rev. 1.20. The seven Stars are the Angels of the
seven Churches; but where in any Prophecy relating to the Church of the New
Testament, from the day the Jews were broken off, till this day, are the Jewish
Doctors and Rabbis called Stars?

Neither thirdly, can the Turks sitting over the material Temple, viz. the
place of it at Jerusalem, be in a true sense called the taking away of the
daily sacrifice, and a throwing down the place of his Sanctuary. If it be said,
by sitting there, he hinders men from embracing the Messiah, so he does by
sitting in Constantinople, and therefore his sitting there may as properly in
that sense (though Jerusalem were not under his power) be called a taking away
of the daily sacrifice, and casting down the place of Gods Sanctuary.

Neither fourthly, can his opposing the Mosaical worship be termed a casting
down the truth to the ground, seeing God has cast down that already, and owns
it for his truth no longer.

Neither fifthly, will it agree to Mahomet to entitle him a King understanding
dark sentences, whose birth and education was poor and mean, and so far was he
from learning and high speculations (which Antichrist not only pretends to,
but is also furnished with) as that indeed he had nothing less.

Neither sixthly, does it agree to the Turk to term him mighty, but not by his
own power; seeing his might lies in no other power but his own; but it is an
excellent description of the Romish Antichrist, who whilst he would make the
world believe that he is Christ's Vicar, and a spiritual creature, does yet lift
up and exercise, and becomes mighty thereby, a Civil sword, which indeed he
has nothing to do with.

Neither seventhly, can it be said of the Turk that he has destroyed
wonderfully, i.e. more then any before him; and this wonderful destruction, to
be a destruction of the mighty and holy people; seeing it is a thing rare with
the Turk upon a mere account of Religion (what to increase his Empire he has
done, is but what others have done) to destroy men. But now what the Romish
Antichrist in this kind has done, is notoriously known. If it be said, he has
destroyed by the poison of his Religion more then ever any before him.

Its answered, but not the holy people, the holy people are kept by God, and
therefore safe from the enchantments of Satan. To understand it of the Jews,
will neither agree to them, either in the state they were in, when Daniel saw
this Vision, nor the state they are in at present. Not the former, because then
they were not the mighty people; for they were a people in Captivity; not the
latter, because now they are not the holy people, being a people as yet
rejected of God.

3 For the Prophecy Chap. 11. The vile person (the same with the little Horn)
is said to have indignation against the holy Covenant, verse. 30. to cause the
understanding people, who shall instruct many, to fall by the sword, the flame,
by captivity and spoil many days, verse. 33. The following Charactors of this
King, I shall take up, and show whose they are, in answering the other opinion
of this little Horn.

As for these two we have named, how will they, or can they agree to the Turk.

1 What holy Covenant is that which he has indignation against? If the
Levitical Covenant, God owns not that for the Holy Covenant any longer; but put
case he did, what particular indignation does the Turk express against that
Covenant, when as a great part of his Religion is founded upon it? If the
Gospel Covenant, then must this indignation of his be not against Jews, but
Christians; for they are the children of this Covenant; and if so, then are we
off of our Argument, and we must rather of the two conclude the Romish
Antichrist to be this vile person, then the Turk; for he, and not the Turk, is
the great and principal oppressor of these.

As for the second, what understanding people are they who are said to instruct
many, that through sword, flame, captivity, and spoil, fall by the hand of the
Turk? Can they be the Jews as such? None will say so. Are they Christians? then
are these things in a more especial manner to be applied to the Romish
Antichrist than the Turk; for the understanding people who have been the
instructers of many, have fallen ten to one, I might say a hundred to ^^e, more
by his hand then ever have fallen by the hand of the Turk. Nay when did ever
yet the Turk make a war upon, raise a persecution against the understanding
people merely upon this account because they were such? But this has been the
practice of the Romish Antichrist throughout all ages.

4 For the Prophecy it self, Chap. 7. This interpretation of the little Horn
agrees not to it, neither to the Characters of the little Horn mentioned in it,
nor to the time of his continuance.

1 Not to the Characters, the little Horn is said, to make war with the Saints
of the most High, verse. 21. to wear out the Saints of the most High, verse. 25.
How does he wear them out?

Answ. Partly by inward grief to hear his blasphemies, partly by outward
sufferings, persecutions, martyrdomes.

But now as to the first, The Turkish oppression of the Jews by detaining their
land from them (which he has done diverse hundred years) cannot be called a
making war with the Saints of the most High; for the Jews from the day he first
had their land to this, have been a people rejected by God, and therefore
cannot in the condition they are in, and have stood in a long time, be
considered as the Saints of the most High.

As for the second, The Turk cannot be said in either of the forementioned
respects, to wear out the Jews; For first, They grieve not, nor (as yet) are
their souls worn out to hear his blasphemies. Secondly, They have not been by
him persecuted and martyred for Religion sake merely, but are owned and
countenanced in his Dominions.

2 Not to the expressions used by the Holy Ghost to set forth the time of his
continuance; For the time of his continuance is expressed by a time, times, and
dividing of time, verse. 25. which words being spoken in the Gentile Dialect,
and signifying the very time of the black day of the Gentile Churches, Revel.
12.14. seems to me clearly to argue, that this little Horn is such a one as
should Tyrannize over the Gentile Churches, not the Jews; and this agrees not
to the Turk, but the Roman Antichrist.

So that we see that this interpretation will not agree to any one of all
Daniels Prophesies.

Yet here let me say, that thus far I go up with the Assertors of this opinion,
as to believe, that the Prophesies of the Old Testament, as touching the
glorious restitution of the Church, do more directly and immediately look
toward the Jews; yet with this Proviso, that this rule is appliable to such
Prophesies only as relate to the time of the Jews coming in: But now this
Prophecy of Daniels little Horn, and his blasphemies, his rage against the
Saints, relate to another time, namely that time in which the Jews are
rejected; for the coming in of the Jews is not till the end of the time, times,
and a half, which is the time where the little Horns dominion cease. It
therefore follows, that all the time of the little Horns blasphemy and tyranny,
the Jews are a people rejected, and are not received till the day where a
period is put to his reign; therefore although Prophesies that relate to the
time of their restitution have a look firstly to that people, yet not this
Prophecy, which relates to the time of their rejection.

But indeed our Rule in Daniels Prophesies must be this, viz. That the scope of
the Holy Ghost in Daniel is to represent the state of things in the world from
Daniels time to the end, with a special reference still to Gods Church and
people in it. This being so, it follows that so long as the Jews remained a
Church, so long did the things foretold primarily respect them; when they are
broken off, and the Gentiles, Gods chosen people, throughout that period, do
the things foretold primarily respect the Gentiles; when the Jews are grafted
in again, then shall the things, as at first, so now again, be primarily
fulfilled to them. So that (I say) although Prophesies which relate to the time
of the Jews coming in do primarily look to that people, yet is the case
otherwise as to those Prophesies which relate to the times betwixt their
breaking off, and their receiving again.

And although the name Antichrist is appliable all the time of the Jews
rejection to none but the Roman Antichrist, the only Persecutor of the Gentile
Saints; yet this I readily grant, if we speak of the time after the Jews come
in, that the name Antichrist shall be as well, and as properly appliable at
that time to the Turk, as to the Romish Antichrist (which consideration affords
answer as to all those agreements (some make) betwixt Pope and Turk) and this
seems to me to be the great and only thing intended, Dan. 11. verse. 40. to the
end, which place I shall a little open, chiefly to let light into that
Prophecy, which (in my apprehension) is generally mistaken.

The great knot of that Prophecy, is, Whom we are to understand by the King of
the North, and who by the King of the South. Now for the untying hereof, we are
to consider, that these titles the King of the North, and the King of the
South, are not appliable to two parties or people only, but to diverse parties
and people; For this Chapter carries us through the second, third, and fourth
Monarchies, and takes in the beginning of the fifth; so that here is very
frequently a change of persons, though the old names are still retained, King
of the North, and King of the South.

Now the reason of the names, in understanding which lies the chief mystery,
and the very Key of the Prophecy, is taken from the situation of parties, that
party in every change, contest, skirmish here mentioned, whose situation was
more Northerly, goes ever under the title of the King of the North; that party
whose situation was more Southerly, under the title of the King of the South.

So in the very first contest, where these names are used, which was betwixt
Alexanders two chief Captains after his death, and the division of the Grecian
Monarchy: the Race of the Lagidae, so called from Ptolomeus the son of Lagus,
the first of that Race, is called the King of the South, verse. 5. because their
situation was in Egypt and Africa, which lay more toward the South. The Race
of the Seleucidae, so called from Seleucus Nicanor, the first of them, are
called the King of the North, verse. 6, 7. because they were situated in
Assyria, Babylon, and other parts of Assa, which did border somewhat more upon
the North, then the other.

So in the next contest which begins with the beginning of the Roman Monarchy,
the parts first assaulted and invaded by the Romans when they were reaching
after the Monarchy, as Macedon, Egypt, Judea, etc. are called the King of the
South, verse. 14. because these Countries were situated Southward from Italy and
Rome, and the Romans invading are called King of the North, verse. 15. because
of their Northern situation.

And here by the way, give me leave to observe what a notable mark the Holy
Ghost has left us in this close transition from the Grecian Monarchy to the
Roman, to give us light where in this Prophecy we are to begin the Roman
Monarchy, which otherwise, considering how things all along hang as it were in
a chain, were a thing most difficult to find; verse. 14. And in those days many
shall stand up against the King of the South, which is a most proper
description of the Roman Monarchy in its first rise, and seems to point them
out from all the people in the world; for it is observable of them that at the
time they were growing into a Monarchy, they were governed by a Senate,
consisting of many persons, which many also, to show us that they are to be
understood of such a many as do yet make up but one Representative bony, are
therefore in the next Verse called the King of the North. The words in the
close of the fourteenth Verse, They shall fall, which may seem to make this
Exposition doubtful, do not relate to the many standing up against the King of
the South in the beginning of the Verse, but to the robbers of thy people in
the end, which are not the Romans, but another people opposing the Romans in
the beginning of their Monarchy, and falling before them.

So likewise in the controversy afterward betwixt the vile Person Antichrist,
and the Turks and Saracens, which began about the year one thousand ninety six,
the Turks upon whom the vile person makes War, are called the King of the
South, verse. 25. because their situation lay Southerly from Rome; and
Antichrist is King of the North, because his Seat was situated most Northerly.

This Light gained, sets open a window to that which follows, from verse forty
to the end of the Chapter. For the better understanding whereof let it be
noted, That these six last verses do set forth the very last part of that
Tragedy that now for a long time together had been acting upon the Stage of the
World; and they are not (as is most generally thought) a repetition of things
before delivered, but indeed a continuation of the Prophecy, and that from that
very point of time where Antichrists Tyranny, which is the thing described in
the foregoing verses, ends. The description of Antichrists rage in the
foregoing verses brings us down to the very end of the forty two months, the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days, now with the end of that time begins
this Prophecy, which carries things on, but with a special respect to the Jews
until Christ's coming.

Hence the time is particularly noted to be the time of the end, verse. 40. At
the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him; and in this sense,
viz. for the very concluding time, and shutting up of the things here
foretold, is this phrase used throughout this Prophecy, verse. 27. The end
shall be at the time appointed, verse. 35. even to the time of the end, because
it is yet for a time appointed, chapter 12. v. 4. Seal the Book even to the time of
the end, verse. 6. How long shall it be to the end of these Wonders? verse. 8.
What shall be the end of these things? So verse. 9, 13. all verifying our sense.

Now we are here to remember what I have proved in my Key, That the one
thousand two hundred and ninety days (the time of the Jews first stirring)
concur in their end with the forty two months, the one thousand two hundred and
sixty days. This noted, things lie thus. The foregoing verses brings us down to
the end of the forty two months, with which time ending, ends likewise the one
thousand two hundred and ninety days. Now do the Jews stir, and get their own
Land, which Land of theirs, because it lies Southward from Rome, the Seat of
the Beast, and Constantinople likewise the Seat of the Turk, the new-stirring
Jews in opposition to these take this name, King of the South. The Jews, this
new King of the South, being gotten into their Land, push at the Turk and Pope
both; at the one upon a Civil account; at the other upon a Christian, or at
leastwise as favorers of the Gentile Saints. This makes Pope and Turk (though
sometimes before they had been quarrelling with each other, not herein serving
any design of Christ so much as their own Lusts; for though they quarrelled,
yet it is said of them, verse. 27. That both their hearts were set to do
mischief) now at last gasp to join hands; and as Herod and Pilate, the one a
counterfeit Jew, the other a professed Heathen, deadly enemies to each other
before, became friends in opposing Christ; so shall Antichrist and the Turk,
the one a counterfeit Christian, the other an open Pagan, who till this day
lived by one another as enemies, be now reconciled and made friends, yea become
one in opposing Christ's Cause, in doing which they shall fall together. This
combination of these two grand Enemies as chief, goes under the name of the
King of the North, because either of them (as I have said) are Northerly
situated from Jerusalem. These combined shall come with great fury into the
Land of Judea, and the Countries adjacent, as Egypt and Aethiopia, who shall
at this day favor the Jews, Isa. 19.23, 24, 25. Here shall begin the Jews
black and terrible day of trouble; for this raging King of the North, filled
with outrage to see a new Enemy risen up against him, and the more because of
tidings he hears from the East and the North, verse. 44. which tidings in
likelihood is news brought to him of those Gentile Saints (who having been
instruments of setting the Jews at first in their own Land, and upon that,
having done their work, being returned home) now hearing this, march up again
from the Northern parts to assist the Jews, and together therewith also tidings
of other Jews coming up to their Land from the Eastern Countries. This news
sets him in a great rage, and to the end that he may dispatch one party first,
before the other can get up, he marches with wonderful fury, resolving to
destroy all, into Judea, and up to Jerusalem, pitching his Tents in the holy
Mountain, i. e. laying close siege to Jerusalem, as Joel 3.1, 2, Zach. 12.2, 3.
by which the Jews shall be brought into such straits as never was any people in
the world. Now in the day of their greatest straits, when the Enemies rage, and
their straits shall be at the highest, shall Michael stand up, i. e. Christ
appear, as Chap. 12.1. Zach. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. who instantly upon his appearing
pours out the seventh Vial upon all these his enemies, now gathering and
gathered together, by which they shall come to their end, and none shall help
them, verse last.

Thus this last verse brings us to the point of Christ's Personal appearance,
which more fully is opened in the following Chapter, ver. 1. all that follows
afterward to the end of the twelfth Chapter, is not of things succeeding, but
only, first a rehearsal of the state of the Jews in the time of their first
stirring, (the handling whereof, that no interruption might be caused in the
Story, is omitted till the discourse was come to an end) which is set forth by
a resurrection, ver. 2, 3. the same with Ezekiels resurrection of the dry
bones, Chapter 37. And afterward a revealing to Daniel the time of these
things, (viz. their first stirring, and their complete deliverance by the
appearance of Christ;) which is set forth by two mystical numbers, of which I
have discoursed at large in Generation work, Part 3. Chap. 2. Sect. 5. and in
my Key, These. 17. These. 34.

Thus much by way of answer to the first opinion concerning the little Horn, in
answering which I have been led into some things a little out of the way, but
not unprofitable.

SECT. 3.
THere is likewise another opinion of this little Horn, viz. That this little
Horn signifies the late King Charles, as some; or the whole Norman race, as
others; of these two, as touching the first, I must confess, I have wondered
with my self, how any should once imagine that the Holy Ghost being now giving
Daniel information how things should be agitated in the World from that time
until the time of the end, should at once leap over all the time from the
beginning of the Roman Monarchy, which was long before Christ, until the time
of King Charles, the whole amounting to well nigh two thousand years;
considering too, that the whole Prophecy of the Revelations in a manner
consists upon things to be fulfilled within this time; and it is wonderful
that throughout this time, a time so remarkable for observation as never any
before it, the Holy Ghost, when too (as I say) he was in a way of informing
Daniel, should shut up all in silence, as if nothing from the time the Roman
Monarchy began, were transacted or done in the world worthy to be noted, till
King Charles arose.

And as to the second, Though the leap in regard of time will be too great to
leap from the beginning of the Roman Monarchy until the time of William the
Conqueror, as if the Holy Ghost should in this Prophecy leap over the
wonderful revolutions attending Antichrists coming into the World, and all his
rage when come in (which are things particularly noted in Daniels other
Prophecies) and observe nothing till William the Conqueror arose; yet is the
mistake greater in limiting the Holy Ghost, so much as this opinion does in
regard of place; for it ties up all done within these last six hundred years to
England only; so that although it allow more time then the other, yet is it as
strait it in respect of place, both confining Daniels Prophecy of the little
Horn, to things done in England only, which no way agrees to the scope of the
Prophecy, which is to set forth the state of the whole Roman Monarchy. And why
we should not as well restrain the Apocalypticall Visions, as the Visions of
Daniel, to England only, I see no reason to the contrary. This I am sure, If
Daniels Prophecies run upon things done only in England, in case John's do not
so too, we cannot make the one Expository of the other.

But to pass these Generals, I shall here lay down some particular Reasons to
prove that this opinion, take it in either dress, will no way agree to the
mind of the Holy Ghost in Daniel.

Reas. 1. Because this little Horn after his rise is equivalent to the fourth
Beast, or Monarchy, swaying the same Scepter, having the same Seat, or Civil
Power; (which cannot agree to the late King Charles, or the Norman Race) as is
clear.

1 Because for this Reason is the Fourth Monarchy it self, called by the name
of the little Horn, Dan. 8.9.

2 Because the fatal destruction of the fourth Beast, or Monarchy, is for the
blasphemies of the little Horn, Dan. 7.11. an Argument the little Horns power
did extend it self to the whole Monarchy, having a special influence upon the
whole, both to cause it to sin, and to bring the Wrath of God upon it.

3 Because the feet and toes of the great Image, chap. 2. (the same with the
little Horn) are not a particular Nation, but the fourth Kingdom or Monarchy,
Dan. 2. the forty and forty one verses compared.

Reas. 2 Because the Prophecy of this little Horn being the same with the
Brophecy of the vile Person, chap. 11. Let it be nakedly considered, whether
the whole story of King Charles his Life, or of the whole Norman Race will, or
does afford matter fit for a Comment upon Chapter 11. ver. 24 to 32.

Reas. 3 Because this opinion does not agree to the Characters of Daniels
little Horn, in any of Daniels four Prophecies.

1 For the Prophecy of the Great Image, the feet and toes of that Image (the
same with the little Horn) denote such a power as consists principally of ten
Parts, set forth by the ten toes. This cannot be said of the Norman power, take
it either as in the last King, or any of his Predecessors.

2 For the Prophecy, Chap. 8. its said of the Tyrannical King, That his power
should be mighty, but this power none of his own; that he should destroy
wonderfully, i. e. above all that ever were before him, verse. 24. That he
should stand up also against the Prince of Princes, i. e. Christ Person: nally
appearing; That he should be broken without hand, verse. 25.

Now apply these to King Charles that was, or the Norman Race in general, and
see how unsuitable they are.

1 What power did he or they (I mean consider them as they were Kings)
exercise, and become mighty thereby, which was none of their own?

2 How did he or they, destroy wonderfully above all before them? If we take it
for a destruction of Nations, were not others before, as Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus,
Alexander the Great, the Romans after them, far greater destroyers of Nations
than ever any of the Norman Race? but take it for a destruction of Saints,
because that the following words import, He shall destroy the mighty and the
holy people; and consider, whether the Pagan Emperors of Rome in the first
three hundred years, and Antichrist since, who each of them have put Millions
of Saints to death, were not greater destroyers of Saints, then the Norman Race.

3 Did ever the Norman Race oppose Christ Personally appearing? but so shall
this little Horn in the end; for after all his opposition to the holy people,
he stands up with an also against the the Prince of Princes.

4 Can it be said of the Norman Race their breaking was without hand, who were
plucked up by the roots by a Civil power?

As for the rest of the Characters, which also belong to this little Horn,
verse. 10.11, 12. Let it be considered, whether they do in a more eminent manner
(for that must be said, or nothing) agree to King Charles, or the Norman Race
in general, then to any other person, state, or power that ever was in the
world since Daniels time.

3 For the Prophecy Chap. 11. It is said of the vile person, verse. 21. he
shall come in peaceably, so did not William the Conqueror. Obtain the Kingdom
by flatteries, so did not Charles Stuart, who had it by succession.

Verse. 33. That Saints under him shall fall by sword, by flame, captivity, and
spoil many days; but in Scripture Phrase King Charles continuance cannot be
called many days, no nor the continunance of the Norman Race; for 600. years
is but a short time, and not many days, in the account of Scripture.

Its said of him, v. 36. That he shall exalt himself and magnify himself above
every god, which is the express character of the man of sin, 2 These. 2.4. Who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God. That he shall
prosper till the indignation be accomplished, which Chap. 8.19. is called the
last end of indignation, i.e. he shall persist in his pride and blasphemies
till the pouring forth of the last Vial, for that is properly the last end of
indignation, which Antichrist shall do, but the Norman Race is plucked up by
the roots already.

Furthermore its said of the vile person, verse. 37. That he shall not regard
the desire of women, which agrees exactly to Antichrist, who professes and
voweth chastity, forbids and vilifieth Marriage. But if things recorded be
true, and in this we have little cause to be suspicious, this Character will
agree to few of the Norman Race.

Again its said of him, that he shall honor a God whom his Fathers knew not,
verse. 38. called therefore a strange God, verse. 39. which most punctually is
fulfilled in the Grand Popish Idol the Mass, an Idol never heard of in the
world till Antichrist devised it, and set it up. But let it be shown what
strange God, unknown to his or their Fathers, did King Charles or any of his
Predecessors set up, and worship?

4 For the Prophecy it self, Chap. 7. It is said of this little Horn, verse.
20. That his look was more stout then his fellows, i.e. more dreadful, amazing
to those that beheld him, then the look of any of the other Horns. But now let
it be impartially considered, whether the look of King Charles that was, or his
Predecessors in the Norman Race, were ever more dreadful and terrible to the
Saints, or in particular to the Saints under their power, then the look of any
of the other Horns! I do believe, yea know Histories will make the contrary
appear.

To all the rest I may add, as none of the least, the Argument urged in my
Key, Thesi 39.

The head of all the Arguments brought for this opinion, take it in its first
or second dress, are cut off at one blow, or with saying one word, viz. That as
what is spoken of Tyrants in general, may in most things agree to every
particular Tyrant; what is spoken of the whole body, in many things to every
part; so what is here by Daniel spoken of Antichrist, the Grand Tyrant, and the
whole body, may in many things very fitly agree to the Norman Race in general,
or King Charles that was in particular, they being Tyrants, and also a part of
this body; yet does it not therefore follow that the one or the other are here
solely intended.

The Conclusion is, That Daniels little Horn is neither the Norman Race in
general, nor King Charles in particular; But is indeed the Romish Antichrist,
to whom (had I leisure, or opportunity here to undertake the work) I doubt not
through the Lords assistance, but to make it appear, that there is not a title
in any of the Prophesies of Daniel, but will naturally, without forcing the
Text agree, which will not to any other opinion what soever.

SECT. 4.
But it will be said, how will we solve the Grand Objection we started at
first, viz. That Daniel saw the rise of this little Horn, after the rise of the
other Horns?

Ans. My answer is this, viz. That the ten Horns Daniel speaks of, among which,
or after which came up the little Horn, are not the ten Horns of the Beast
Antichrist, but of the Beast the fourth Monarchy. Now Antichrists Kingdom, and
the fourth Monarchy differ as the part, and the whole; Antichrists Kingdom
being not the fourth Monarchy, but a part or limb thereof only.

That the fourth Beast in Daniel, is not Antichrists Kingdom, but the fourth
Monarchy in general, is clear;

1 Because the fourth Beast succeeds streightway in the room of the other three
Beasts, i.e. takes the place of the three former Monarchies, so soon as the
third Monarchy was dissolved. But this did not Antichrists Kingdom, whose rise
was not till some hundreds of years after the dissolution of the third
Monarchy; yet it excellently agrees to the Roman Monarchy in general.

2 Because Daniels fourth Beast is exceeding terrible, breaks in pieces, and
stamps all the other Beasts, Dan. 7.7. which thing will not agree to
Antichrists Kingdom, but to the Roman Monarchy in general.

3 Because the fourth Beast in Daniel is diverse from all the Beasts before it,
Dan. 7.3, 7. but now the description of the Beast Antichrist, Rev. 13.2. argues
him to be in some things like them all; For first he is like a Leopard; And the
Beast which I saw was like unto a Leopard, which is the similitude of Daniels
third Beast, or the Grecian Monarchy, Dan. 7.6. Secondly, He has feet as the
feet of a Bear, And his feet were as the feet of a Bear, which is the
similitude of Daniels second Beast, or the Persian Monarchy, verse. 5. Thirdly,
His mouth is as the mouth of a Lion, which resembles Daniels first Beast, or
the Babylonian Monarchy; so that Antichrist has the similitude of all the
former Beasts; but Daniels fourth Beast is diverse from them all.

4 Because there should be no distinction betwixt the fourth Beast, and the
little Horn, in case the fourth Beast be to be understood of Antichrists
Kingdom; for that is the thing set forth by the little Horn.

5 Because the rise of Daniels fourth Beast is clearly and plainly noted to be
before the rise of Antichrists Kingdom; for the rise of Antichrists Kingdom
begun in the rise of the little Horn; but the fourth Beast with all his Horns,
was risen before that; how else is the little Horn said to rise among, and
after the other Horns? I conclude therefore that Daniels fourth Beast is the
Roman Monarchy in general, as John's Beast, Rev. 13.1, 2. is the same only as
under Antichrist.

Now this being so, it is to be noted, that the Roman Monarchy from its
beginning, take it either as it was in its pure Civil state, or as it now is in
its mixed Antichristian state, had ever ten Horns. As it was a pure Civil state,
so was it exactly divided into ten parts in the days of Augustus Caesar, as
Strabo witnesses. And for this reason, the Dragon, which represents the old
Empire, has as well ten Horns, Rev. 12.3. as the Beast, Chap. 13.1. yet with
this difference, the ten Horns of the Roman Monarchy in its first state had no
Crown i.e. the Kingdoms subjected to the Roman Empire, whilst it remained a
pure Civil state, had not Legislative power within themselves, but rather were
kept in the nature of Provinces, over whom the Roman state did set titular
Kings (as Herod in Christ's time was the titular King of Judea, and for this
reason, because so in title, they are called Kings, Dan. 7.24.) but yet did
still reserve to it self the power of making and giving laws; as in Christ's
time, besides Herod the titular King, there was Pilate the Roman Governor set
over the Land to execute Laws, which Laws executed were only the Laws of Rome;
and hence Christ is said to be crucified in Rome, because he suffered by the
Law and Power of Rome, Rev. 11.8.

And also it is for this reason, that the Dragon representing the old Empire is
said to have his Crowns, not upon his Horns as the Beast, Chap. 13.1. but upon
his seven Heads; that is, the Legislative power all the time of the old Empire
is continued at Rome, built upon seven Mountains, which are these seven Heads,
Rev. 17.9. Yea farther, it is for this reason, that John speaking of the ten
Kings, as having a being even then when he wrote, says, Chap. 17.12. that as
yet they had received no Kingdom, but were afterward to receive power as
Kings, namely with the Beast, i.e. though all the ten Horns were then in being,
yet were they then only titular Kings, who had no power of making or giving
Laws, this power as yet abiding upon the Heads, i.e. at Rome it self. But now
the Horns of the Beast Antichrist, i.e. the Roman Monarchy as under Antichrist,
have Crowns upon them, i.e. that Legislative power which was before upon the
Heads, is now translated to the Horns; every particular Kingdom, which before
were but as Provinces, governed by no other Laws but such as came from Rome,
has now a power within it self to rule, and to make Laws; therefore says
John, Rev. 17.12. the ten Horns receive power as Kings with the Beast, that is,
when the Roman Monarchy which then was in the hands of Emperors, and the whole
governed by the Laws of Rome, shall fall in the hands of the Beast, then shall
those several Kings which before were titular, only receive Kingly power, or
power as Kings to make and give Laws within their own Dominions, without
receiving their Laws from any foreign place or power.

Now consider the ten Horns in the first respect as they are the Horns of the
Roman Empire in general (which is clearly Daniels sense, the ten Horns he
speaks of being the Horns of the fourth Beast, i.e. the Empire in general; for
says he, verse. 7. It (that is the fourth Beast) had ten Horns) and it is most
clear the rise of Antichrist, the little Horn, was among and after these Horns.
And therefore observe the words narrowly, it is said, that at the time of the
little Horns rise, three of the first are plucked up by the roots, verse. 8.
what is the meaning? why this; the Roman Monarchy in either state (as I have
said) had ten Horns; now upon the little Horns rise, three of the first, i.e.
three of the Horns of the Roman Monarchy as considered in its first state were
plucked up. And hence verse. 24. The little Horn is said to be diverse from the
first, that is, from all the Horns of this Monarchy in its first state; For of
the Horns of the Monarchy in its second state, how is the little Horn diverse,
when as the ten Horns in this state are but a part of this little Horn, i.e. of
the Roman Monarchy as governed by Antichrist?

And thus to understand it, unties that great knot, verse. 8. of three Horns
being plucked up by the roots before the little Horn at the time of this rise:
for taking three to signify not strictly three, but diverse or many (three
being used because a number of perfection) and how clear is it from all
Histories that upon the invasion made by the Goths and Vandals, with which the
Beast rose, as before a considerable part of those Provinces, which were before
subjected to the Roman Empire, and ruled by its Laws, were now broken off, and
grew up into particular Kingdoms ruled by Laws of their own, and so by degrees
the whole Legislative power crept off from the seventh and last Head to the
Horns?

And thus interpreted, this place in Daniel does excellently point out the time
of the Beasts rise; and I take it, that it is left us by the holy Ghost as a
divine Character to guide us where we should end the first state of the Roman
Monarchy, and begin its second; where we should put a period to the Roman
Monarchy, as a pure Civil state, and begin it as an Antichristian; namely with
the time when a remarkable breach or rupture should be made among the first ten
horns, or the ten horns of the Monarchy, as in its first state; with this time,
and among the horns thus broken should the little Horn creep up, i.e. from
thence should the translation of the Monarchy be, or from thence should
Antichrists Kingdom begin; so that indeed these words are so far from
weakening what we have asserted, that they are a strong confirmation of our
beginning, that we have stated it aright, in stating the rise of the Beast,
Antichrist, to be with the time of the invasion of the Goths and Vandals.

Thus notwithstanding the Objection, our Argument stands firm, viz. That the
rise of the Antichristian Beast is a little before the rise of his Horns; and
therefore his Horns rising suddenly after the beginning of the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, the forty two months, the rise of the Beast himself is
stated rightly with the year three hundred ninety six.

SECT. 5.
To the Arguments already laid down, I shall add an Argument or two more.

Arg. 1. The aforesaid ending of the one thousand two hundred and sixty days
agrees most fitly to the time of killing the Witnesses; The time of the
Witnesses killing (which is to be reckoned the last three days and a half of
the one thousand two hundred and sixty, as see Generation Work, Part 3. Chap.
1. Sect. 4.) falls under the third Vial, and a little before the first stirring
of the Jews (as is also there proved, Sect. 5. in the first and third
conclusions) now as the third Vial is the Vial we at present stand under, as
my discourse upon that Vial manifests; so the first stirring of the Jews falls
to be in the year one thousand six hundred fifty six, as is proved, Key, Thesi.
20, therefore it agrees well to the one and the other, to end the one thousand
two hundred and sixty days with the year one thousand six hundred fifty six.

Arg. 2. Taken from the visibility of those very things at this day, which the
Scripture has foretold us shall occur within the last three days and a half
of the one thousand two hundred and sixty.

To give some instances.

First, The Scripture fore-tels, that within this time the Witnesses shall lie
dead; Their death shall be civil, and Spiritual; Civil in being stripped of
Religion, and Liberty; Spiritual, in subjecting themselves (through a spirit of
cowardice upon them) to this Tyranny of the Beast, rather then to run the
hazard of life in opposing him. The place of their lying dead shall be Germany;
the one to be their death, the other the place, I have proved, Generation Work,
Part 3. Chap. 1. Sect. 7, 8. whether (considering the thing, time, and place)
have we not more then a little ground to conjecture, that the present day is
the day of the Witnesses killing? and if so, then considering that this time is
the last three days and a half of the one thousand two hundred and sixty, does
it not speak that the year we have stated as the end of the one thousand two
hundred and sixty is the right, viz. Anno Dom. one thousand six hundred fifty
six.

Secondly, The Scripture fore-tels, That within the last three days and a half
of the one thousand two hundred and sixty, A war shall be attempted; First, by
the invisible Dragon, then by the visible, (of which read Generation Work, Part
3. Chap. 2. Sect. last) against a remnant of the Woman's Seed, that shall stand
up for Christ in the World, within the day that their Brethren the Witnesses
lie dead, which shall be known by these two Characters; 1. They shall walk in
Gospel institutions. 2. Have amongst them a Spirit of Prophecy. Now whether the
beginnings of the first War, and probabilities of the second, be not at this
day more visible upon a people, having the aforesaid Characters then ever
heretofore, I propound as a Quaere?

Thirdly, The Scripture fore-tels that there shall be within this time a people
in the World that shall favor the Witnesses, and withal be so potent as to
awe the Beast (of whom mention is made, Generat. Work, Part 3. Chap. 1. Sect.
9.) Who yet settling themselves upon a worldly interest as their highest aim,
shall neither openly declare for the Witnesses Cause, nor against the Beast;
These are called, They of the People, and Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues,
Revel. 11.9. which cannot be interpreted the Popish party, though Rev. 17.15.
they are so described, because in this place they are distinguished from the
Popish party, which in the following verse are set forth by another name, viz.
The dwellers on the earth. Whether or no such a people be not now to be found,
I also put the question?

Fourthly, The Scripture fore-tels, That within this time there shall be a
great League and combination of Nations (the Beast now gathering together his
Powers to defend himself, the time being come that his Dominion is to be taken
away; as the Fourth Monarchy afterward, at the end of the one thousand three
hundred thirty five days, (when it is to go to ruin) gathers together all its
power to that dreadful Battle of Armageddon to uphold it self.) Whether a Work
like this be not now on foot likewise, I propound as another Quaere?

Fifthly, The Scripture fore-tels, That within this time there shall be in the
World a wonderful triumph over the dead and suppressed Witnesses, as supposing
they and their Cause likewise to be now dead and sunk for ever, Revel. 11.10.
Chap. 18.7. Whether does the present time afford nothing that has a look like
this? If all these things be found true at this day, have they not in them the
weight of an Argument to prove, That we are upon the very ending time of the
one thousand two hundred and sixty days?

Arg. 3. The forty two months, the one thousand two hundred and sixty days may
not be begun either higher of lower; therefore they must be begun with the
aforesaid year. That they may not be begun any time higher, is clear, because
from such beginnings the time is expired; but this cannot be, because the
Witnesses to this very day (my opinion is throughout all Europe, but all must
confess in most places, as Germany, France, etc.) do yet wear their Sackcloth;
the Woman as to this day abides in the Wilderness, the Beast as to this day, (I
really think in all the ten Horns, but as to the greater part of them it is
undeniable) does yet continue to rage against the Saints, by persecuting them
under the Notion of Heretics, or Schismatics, or Enemies to Civil Government
(because they cannot but declare, That the day is come, in which God will
destroy, as well his Monarchical Power, as his Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical)
to tread under foot the holy City, by establishing Powers not of Christ, but
his own creating, to be Lords over Gods heritage; to blaspheme God, by
blaspheming (as did the wicked Pharisees) those very Works and Truths of God,
counting them Erroneous, Diabolical, which yet take him at some times, when he
is in his best mood, he is convinced in his Conscience are of God; yea and
fears (maugre all his opposition) that these things will prove his undoing, to
tyrannize over the Nations, by continuing those unrighteous Laws, Customs, etc.
which were at first imposed by the Beast, that by these he might like an
imperious Whore sit domineering upon the waters, Revel. 17.1.15. that is, be a
Tyrant over the People. Now I say, considering that all these things are in
being unto this very day (yea and that in all the ten Horns, to him that has
but half an eye to see) it cannot be that the forty two months, the one
thousand two hundred and sixty days, (which are the limited time of the
Witnesses wearing Sackcloth, the Woman's being in the Wilderness, the Beasts
rage against the Saints, treading under foot the Holy City, his blaspheming
God, and his Truth, his Tyranny over the Nations) should be begun higher, then
our aforesaid beginning, for then should we see a perfect end of those things
(in part, i.e.) in some of the ten Horns at least, which yet we see to have
being and exist, yea to be maintained in every one of them; I therefore
conclude, That the forty two months, the one thousand two hundred and sixty
days, cannot be begun higher then the year I have stated.

That they cannot be begun lower, is clear and manifest, because it is a
monstrous absurdity to say, That all the Beasts Horns should spring up, before
yet the Beast was brought forth; but (as I have proved at large in the
foregoing discourse) all the Horns were come forth, but a few years lower then
the stated year; therefore must the time of the Beasts rise (who naturally has
being before his Horns) be, as I have stated it, and cannot without that gross
absurdity of placing the Beast after his Horns, be placed lower. Again, All
that begin lower, do not begin from the time of Antichrists Infancy, or from
the time of his first rise; (which none can or do deny, but it was as early as
we have stated it; the testimonies of all the Ancients being so full, as
touching the wonderful defection that was in the Church about that time;) but
rather they begin from the time of his growth, either his full growth, his
perfect maturity, or his growth in part only; but now this beginning is
expressly against the Prophecy of the Beast, which points us to the time of the
Beasts first rise, as the time whence we are to reckon his forty two months.

This we may see, Revel. 13. in verse. 5. It is said, Power was given to him to
continue forty two months. Whence are we to reckon these forty two months? Ans.
From the day he first received his power and authority from the Dragon, verse.
2. The Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Anthority. And when
was that? Ans. At the time of his first rise, verse. 1. I saw a Beast rise up
out of the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and the Dragon gave him his
power, etc. Farther, Let it be considered, that the second Beast, or the
Ecclesiastical state of Antichrist is set forth under a threefold
representation in the Book of the Revelation, suitable to his threefold State,
viz. of Infancy, Maturity, Old Age.

1 In his Infant state, He is a poor despicable Beast, creeping out of the
earth, but not able as yet to make the Nations crouch to him, and therefore he
borrows the power of the first Beast, i.e. of the Civil Magistrate, thereby to
carry on his own designs, Rev. 13.11, 12.

2 In his Mature state the Beast sits as a rich proud imperious Whore upon the
Nations, Revel. 17.1. compared with 15. and rides upon the back of the first
Beast, or the Magistraticall power of Nations, ver. 3. ruling them, and the
Nations under them, making them do even what this Beast lists.

3 In his declining state, or Old Age, he is a false Prophet, i.e. he
counterfeits abundance of Holiness, more then indeed he has, or ever before
professed; the reason where of I take to be; the first Beast through his long
riding and galling of him, now begins to kick, and will by no means endure his
Rider any longer; the Nations begin to see, that this Beast is not indeed (as
they have been all along held in hand, and made believe) the Woman, the true
Church, but a very Strumpet, that by Whoring and Juggling has in all Ages made
her self rich, persecuted the Saints, enslaved them; this makes the Nations
begin to spurn likewise at this Beast. This Beast now fearing a downfall, and
knowing full well that if there be not some way found out to keep up his esteem
with the first Beast, and the Nations, he is undone; he Proteus-like (for
indeed he is a Monster, never heard of in the world till Antichrists Kingdom
began) changes shapes, and as at first of a poor ragged Beast became
(opportunity serving him) a proud Whore; so now the Beast when he can be a
ruling, commanding Whore no longer, transforms himself into a false Prophet,
pretending abundance of Holiness, that hereby he may keep up that esteem still
with the first Beast, and the Nations, which once he had, but has wel-nigh
lost, through his domineering pride and imperiousness. This is the true state
of the second Beast (or of Antichrist, as considered in his Ecclesiastical
state) throughout the Book of the Revelations. And of this I have more fully
treated, in my discourse upon the Vials, p. 101. to the 112. Now observe those
who begin the Kingdom of Antichrist from the time of Antichrists growth, or
maturity, leave out the first state of the second Beast, and begin their
account with his second; which certainly we must not do, but must carry our
beginning so high, as to take in all the three, as the Holy Ghost has laid
them down; I therefore conclude, that we may not begin lower then the
aforesaid year, three hundred ninety six.

Seeing therefore that we may not begin either higher or lower, it necessarily
follows that we must begin with the year we have fixed upon, viz. three
hundred ninety six; to which number adding one thousand two hundred and sixty,
the whole makes up one thousand six hundred fifty six.

The result of my whole discourse in this Second Part is, That the utmost
period of the Beasts continuance, the treading under foot the Holy City, the
Woman's being in the Wilderness, the Witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloth, all
which things are concurrent, will in greatest probability be, Anno Dom. one
thousand six hundred fifty six.

Thus John's one thousand two hundred and sixty days expire in the same year
with Daniels one thousand two hundred and ninety. Thus likewise in that very
year in which from the Creation the Flood came upon the corrupted old World, in
that very year from our Redemption, comes the flood of Gods wrath upon the
Idolatrous Antichristian world.

The end of the Second Part.
PART. III.
Computing the time of the Fourth Monarchy, and showing where the date of all
worldly Kingdoms expires; and when the Fifth Monarchy, or that glorious
Kingdom of Christ and the Saints, which is to bear rule over all the Earth,
shall be set up.

CHAP. I. Of Daniels two thousand and three hundred days.
THe times that the Prophetical and Apocalyptical Numbers are conversant about,
are either the time of the Beasts Tyranny, or the time of the fourth Monarchy.

The time of the Beasts Tyranny, we have treated of in our Second Part, and
showed where the date of his Commission ends. It now remains that we enquire
into the time of the fourth Monarchy, to the end we may know how long that is
to continue; and when, or by what time we may expect the total and final
dissolution thereof.

Two mystical Numbers ending at one and the same point, afford us light into
this Question; the one is Daniels one thousand three hundred thirty five days,
Chap. 12.12. the other his two thousand three hundred, Chap. 8.14. I shall say
no more as touching the first then what I have already written in my Key,
judging what I have there laid down; Thesi 20. and Thesi 37. to be sufficient
as to it. My present Discourse shall therefore proceed upon the latter, viz. of
the two thousand and three hundred days.

SECT. 1.
The common-road opinion, is, that the little Horn mentioned in this eight of
Daniel is to be understood of Antiochus Epiphanes; the two thousand and three
hundred days to be natural days, a day consisting of four and twenty hours: so
the whole making up six years, three months, and twenty days, which the
Authors and Favorers of this opinion apply to the time of Antiochus rage
against the Jews.

Now in order to our answer hereunto, let us premise, That the Feet and Toes of
the Great Image, Chap. 2. The little Horn, Chap. 7. The vile person, Chap. 11.
who is described from verse. 21. to verse. 40. and the little Horn in his second
state, or second waxing great, in this eighth Chapter, are one and the same,
the very same state or person (if a particular person be here meant) is
signified by all these.

And this needs no proof, because the common opinion has granted it, by making
application of all that the Holy Ghost has spoken, as touching either of
these, to that horrible Monster Antiochus Epiphanes; thereby plainly confessing
that one and the same thing is signified in the aforesaid parts of each
Prophecy.

This premised, let us examine what truth there is in this principle so much
hugged and contended for by many, as the only door of light into Daniel.

And although more can hardly be said in answer hereunto then what has been
already by some worthy men of later times, who have opposed themselves to this
opinion, as Mr. Archer in his Personal Reign, The Author of Clavis Apocalyptica
ad incudem revocata, but above all, the learned Parker in his Daniels Visions
and Prophesies expounded; yet because in principles that men are wedded too (as
ordinarily they are to all, be they right or wrong, that have but a crowd of
learned men to Patronize them) they had rather (to use the Popish Proverb)
believe as the Church believes, then look out for an Author that is contrary to
their mind. I think it worth my pains in opposition to this opinion, to present
here (though I shall but multiply whilst I so do things already published) some
of those Arguments that are and may be brought against it; not doubting but
that those who sincerely love truth, will see reason enough to be of my mind;
as for others, who following the genius of this age, which is to be sick,
sullen, and humorsome, when any truth crosses those principles they have
received by tradition from their Forefathers, have a principle or a will (I
know not which I may call it) that they will not see any thing but with the
eyes of their Forefathers, or the multitude of the learned Doctors of the
time, let Scripture or right reason speak ever so clear or punctual; I leave
such to the judgment of being yet farther blinded.

But to come to the opinion it self, the Question is, Whether does this
Prophecy, Chap. 8. run upon Antiochus Epiphanes or no? This resolved, it will
be easily determined whether the days are Natural or Prophetical.

To this I answer, That Antiochus Epiphanes, notwithstanding Commentators have
fearfully and shamefully stretched the Text, Reason, and the very sinews of the
ancient Histories to gather up something that might colourably make the whole
to agree to him, cannot be the person here meant, unless we look upon him as a
common Tyrant and Persecutor, and so I deny not but that many things spoken of
Antichrist that Grand Tyrant and Persecutor of the Saints, may very fitly be
applied to him. Yea I think withal that there might be a special design of God
in it, that many of the things here mentioned should be fairly appliable to him
and others, that so thereby doors of mistake might be left open, and by it the
Prophecy kept sealed (which otherwise in an ordinary way could not have been)
until the appointed time. And the same design seems to me to run also through
the Book of the Revelations, in opening which it is very easy to mistake, if
every thing which has a plausible look, and fair color outwardly, may
presently be taken up as an Interpretation.

But to pass this, and come to the thing, That this Prophecy (as holds the
common opinion) should terminate in Antiochus Epiphanes, and so have its
fulfilling before the first coming of Christ, cannot be.

My Reason is, Because it will not agree to the mind of the Holy Ghost in any
one of Daniels four Prophesier before mentioned.

First, To begin with that of the Great Image. Chap. 2. This opinion does no
way correspond with the truth of that Prophecy.

1 Because that Prophecy runs down into the latter days (or the end of days,
as our new Annotationists upon the Bible render it) verse. 28. But there is a
God in Heaven that reveals secrets, and makes known to the King
Nebuchadnezzar what shall be in the latter days. But this cannot be, should
the whole have its accomplishment two hundred years before Christ's birth, as
this opinion does, and must necessarily maintain; for Antiochus Epiphanes whose
Kingdom they will have to belong to the Feet and Toes (which are the extreme
and utmost parts of the Image, and therefore the close of the Prophecy)
reigned two hundred years before the birth of Christ.

2 Because the Iron legs are called the fourth Kingdom or Monarchy, verse. 40.
And the fourth Kingdom shall be strong as Iron; but this opinion which applies
the legs and feet to the Race of the Seleucidae, and Antiochus Epiphanes one of
that Race, makes the Iron legs and feet a part of the third Kingdom or
Monarchy; for the house of the Seleucidae and Antiochus Epiphanes, are by
Chronologers generally reckoned as a part of the third or Grecian Monarchy.

3 Because the fourth Kingdom is that which breaks in pieces all the foregoing
Kingdoms and Monarchies, i.e. it subdues to it self whatsoever was before
subject to any of the other Monarchies, verse. 40. for as much as Iron breaks
in pieces and subdueth all things, and as Iron that breaks all these, shall
it break in pieces and bruise.

This also appears from verse. 35. because the stone that smites, upon its
smiting, breaks the Brass, the Silver, the Gold, as well as the Iron and Clay,
though yet it smites no other but the feet of Iron and Clay, which shows that
whatsoever was in the three first parts of Gold, Silver, Brass, was now by
succession come to the Iron and Clay, which smitten, the whole is broken. But
this was never done by the Seleucidae in general, nor Antiochus Epiphanes in
special, therefore cannot relate to him or them, but had a punctual fulfilling
in the Roman Monarchy, which succeeded the Grecian, and swallowed up whatsoever
the foregoing Monarchies possessed.

4 Because in the days of these Kings the God of Heaven sets up his own
Kingdom, verse. 44. But this Kingdom (according to the principle of those who
are our Opponents, who begin it not till Christ's Birth) was not set up in the
days of the Seleucidae, nor of Antiochus Epiphanes; for the whole Kingdom of
the Seleucidae, yea the whole Greek Empire (lower then which this opinion looks
not) was utterly dissolved many years before Christ's Birth.

5 Because it is Christ's Kingdom, represented by the Stone, which by smiting
breaks in pieces that Kingdom, which by the Feet and Toes of the Great Image
is set forth, verse. 34. Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out without
hands, which smote the Image upon his feet that were of Iron and Clay, and
brake them to pieces; But it was not Christ's Kingdom, but the Pagan power of
the Roman Empire that destroyed and brake in pieces the Kingdom of the
Seleucidae, of which Antiochus Epiphanes was a limb; therefore cannot the
Seleucidae or Antiochus Epiphanes be understood by the Feet and Toes of the
Great Image.

6 Because the stone that smiting the Great Image breaks it to pieces, cannot
be Christ's spiritual Kingdom, set up upon his first coming, which this opinion
as it does say, so must it, or say nothing.

1 Because this Kingdom take its rise where the Feet and Toes are smitten; but
Christ's spiritual Kingdom did not rise till many years after the Feet and
Toes, in the sense of the Patrons of this opinion, were wholly dissolved, and
in being no longer.

2 Because this Kingdom cannot become a mountain filling the whole earth so
long as the Great Image, i.e. Worldly powers stand, which is clear, because
upon the total dissolution of the Great Image, it becomes a Mountain, and not
before, verse. 34, 35. But now Christ's spiritual Kingdom may be a Mountain
filling the earth in a spiritual sense, though the Great Image be not broken in
pieces, i.e. though worldly powers are standing.

3 Because such a Kingdom is signified by the Stone as was represented by the
Great Image; for the Kingdom of the Stone takes the place of the Great Image
upon its dissolution. But the Kingdom or Kingdoms signified by the Great
Image were not spiritual, but outward; therefore such must be the Kingdom of
the Stone.

4 Because such a Kingdom is here meant as must answer to Daniels scope in his
answer to the Kings Dream. But if this Kingdom were spiritual only, then
Daniel had missed the soope much; for Nebuchadnezzars thoughts run of his
Monarchy, according to which thoughts the Dream was directed, and Daniel
interpreting it, undertakes to resolve him fully: For in a word (as says Mr.
Huet whose Argument this is) Daniel intends two main points:

1 To comfort the Jews in the loss of their Kingdom and Liberty, showing that
after many changes it should be restored to them again.

2 To convince the King of his Tyranny over them, by which his third Heir
should be nothing the warmer; another should take it from him, a third from
him, and a fourth from him, which at length (maugre all their despite) should
be returned to the Jews in greater glory then ever they lost it. Now whether
the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ does answer this scope or no, I leave (says
he) to the judgment of the godly wise.

5 Because such a Kingdom is here intended as was to be continued to the Jews
(after once they should be possessed thereof) without alteration. So the Text,
It shall not be given to another people, i.e. from Daniels people; but when
Christ came, and brought his Spiritual Kingdom (whiles to be merely Spiritual)
he first preached the Gospel to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, from
whom notwithstanding the Gospel was taken away and given to the Gentiles.

6 Because the proper work of the Stone, to which it is appointed, is to break
in pieces earthly Kingdoms, verse. 44 but Christ's Spiritual Kingdom set up upon
his first coming was not appointed to any such end; for then would not Christ
have commanded a subjection of the Subjects thereof to worldly powers.

7 And lastly, What prerogative and advancement had it been for the Kingdom of
Christ Spiritual, to have broken down the Seleucidae, and other Horns of the
Greek Empire, so long as another Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Romans succeeded
in their place to beat down the Church by the Heathen Emperors, and
Antichrist, for longer space of time, and with greater and more terrible
persecution then ever was before?

This opinion therefore cannot agree to Daniels first Vision, of the Great
Image.

Secondly, for Daniels second Vision of the four Beasts, Chap. 7. it no way
agrees to it; for it cannot be that the fourth Beast, having ten Horns, verse.
7. should be the House of the Seleucidae, or that the little Horn, verse. 8.
should be Antiochus, Epiphanes, as this opinion holds.

I shall here oppose only the Arguments alleged by Mr. Parker from the learned
Graserus in answer to it, as judging them sufficient, though yet if need be,
there is more to be spoken.

Arg. 1 The Kingdom of the Seleucidae belongs to the Third Beast, and is one
of the four Parts into which the Grecian Kingdom was divided after Alexanders
death, expressly represented in his four wings, and four Heads, verse. 6. the
truth of which interpretation will clearly appear by comparing with chap.
8.8.22. chap. 11.4. for the King of Grecia is expressly distinguished from
Alexander, as the whole from the part, comprehending both him, and the
quadrupartite division among his Successors, chap. 8.21, 22. therefore both he
and the Seleucidae, with other his Successors, are included in the third Beast,
and cannot be extended to the fourth.

2 Because these four Beasts arose successively to subdue the world, verse. 2,
3. but the Seleucidae, and other Successors of Alexander succeeded into it
already subdued by him.

Thirdly, The Preface prefixed to the fourth Beast, After this I saw in the
night Visions, and behold a fourth Beast dreadful, verse. 7. the proposing of
him without a name, as an unknown Monster; the sollicitous and curious enquiry
of Daniel concerning him, ver. 19. the bestowing of a far larger and more
accurate description upon him then upon the former Beasts, do plainly argue,
That the fourth Kingdom here signified is far more great and wonderful then
any of the former, and therefore cannot be the Kingdom of the Seleueidae.

Fourthly, The fourth Beast is said to be dreadful, and terrible, and very
strong, in comparison with the Beasts going before; having Iron teeth, and
Brazen nails, devouring and breaking in pieces, and stamping the residue under
feet. But the Kingdom of the Seleucidae was weaker then that of Alexander, as
is expressly said, chap. 8.22. and did not devour and destroy so as the former
Kingdoms, as entering upon a world subdued already by Alexander the Great,
therefore the fourth Kingdom cannot be the Kingdom of the Seleucidae. Thou will
say, The fourth Kingdom is thus expressed, not in relation to the world, or
State general, but to the Jewish Church, unto which it was more terrible and
stronger then the former. But it is manifest that the Iron strength is the
Character of this Kingdom, distinguishing it in a general and unlimited
comparison with the Kingdoms going before. To exert in some particular place,
such as Judea, more cruelty, by reason of the weakness of the people, and not
by reason of his own absolute strength, is not a sufficient reason that he
should be Characterised, and distinguished from the others by the character of
strength and fearfulness, no more verily then the Spanish Inquisition, or
Phalaris, or some other Tyrant, may be superlatively compared in strength with
Cyrus, Alexander, Julius Caesar, because more cruel and formidable then they,
in respect of some weak and not resisting persons, over whom without exertion
of much strength they might easily exercise their tyranny. Again, their
strength was not so much terrible to the Jews as Nebuchadnezzars or Hamans was;
and the Jews against the Seleucidae would have vindicated themselves into
liberty, and had defended themselves sufficiently, had not the Romans come upon
them, and broken them down at last, and the Seleucidae together. Lastly, it is
expressly said, That the fourth Kingdom is thus strong, irony, and terrible, not
only in relation to the Jews, but also to the whole earth, verse. 23. for it
devours and treads down the whole earth.

5 Because this Beast is said to be unlike to the Beasts that were before it;
whereas the Kingdom of the Seleucidae was like other Kingdoms. Some say, it was
unlike in respect of the ten Horns; but these (as they will have it) are ten
succeeding Kings, which in kind and nature is ordinary to all Kingdoms. They
say it is extraordinary in this respect, because some of the Egyptian Kings
are mixed in the number. But what ground is there of such a mixture? because
(say they) they are described, chap. 11. Ans. But in Chapter eleven is no
mention made of ten Horns, and the number there is not adaequately ten; no
reason to extrude some, to intrude others, but rather contrary to reason, as
Graserus shows.

6 Because the fourth Beast has ten Horns, and a little Horn arising after
them, by whom three of the former were rooted out, verse. 7, 8. How will this
agree to the Kingdom of the Seleucidae? They say, they are ten succeding Kings,
whereof Antiochus Epiphanes is the tenth and last, and the same the little
Horn. Ans. But if only by succession, then really in all particular differences
of time it had but one Horn, and so the Kingdom might rather be said to have
one Horn then ten. 2. These ten Horns here described, existed at the same time,
not by succession, because the little Horn arose among them, verse. 8. and his
look was more stout then his fellows, verse. 20.3. How can Antiochus Epiphanes
be both the little Horn, and also the last of the ten, seeing the little Horn
is said to arise besides, and after them, ver. 8.20, 24. 4. Antiochus cannot be
the little Horn, because the little Horn arising, grows greater and greater,
and more stately then the other Horns, verse. 2, 20^ whereas Antiochus was not
so great as his Father Antiochus Magnus. 5. What are the three Horns, and how
did they fall before Antiochus? ver. 8. It is said, That they are Prolomeus
Philopater King of Egypt, Seleucus the Brother of Antiochus, and Demetrius.
But was Seleucus rooted out because he dyed by slow and lingering hatred? and
how can Demetrius be one of the three which was not reckoned by the Authors of
this opinion among the ten? verse. 8. Lastly, by the fall of the three the
little Horn grew greater then the rest, whereas nothing was added to Antiochus
besides the ancient Kingdom of the Seleucidae. 6. Sixthly, the little Horn
rages against the Saints until a time, times, and a half. How will this agree
unto Antiochus, because (say they) the Temple was profaned by Antiochus three
years and ten days? Ans. But here it is half a time, or half a year, as also
appears by comparing chap. 12.7. Apoc. 12.14. and ten days makes not half a
year. 7. The Beast falls in the destruction of the little Horn, verse. 11. but
the Kingdom of the Seleucidae did not fall in Antiochus Epiphanes.

7 Because it is extended until the coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven,
verse. 13, 14. which is his second coming, Apoc. 1.7. Mat. 24.30. and 26.64. for
it is not said that he ascended in the Clouds, but that he came, ver. 13.

8 It is extended to the time when all the Kingdoms of the earth shall be the
Lords, and his Christ's, ver. 14. with Apoc. 11.15. And when the Kingdom shall
be given to the Saints of the most high, all Hostile forces utterly suppressed,
ver. 14.26. chapter 2.44. Apoc. 11.17, 18. And how can this be verified in the
Kingdom of the Seleucidae?

Upon these grounds it appears, That the aforesaid opinion will no way agree to
Daniels Prophecy of the four Beasts, and the little Horn.

Thirdly, For Daniels Great Prophecy, chapter 10. chap. 11. chap. 12. this opinion
of Antiochus Epiphanes cannot agree to it.

1 Because the feet and toes of the great Image, chap. 2. The little Horn.
chap. 7. and the vile Person in this Prophecy, chap. 11.21. are (as before I
have observed) one and the same; but the two first, as has been already
proved, cannot agree to Antiochus Epiphanes, therefore not this last.

2 Because this Prophecy brings us to the time of the end, chap. 11.35. some of
them of understanding shall fall to try them, even to the time of the end,
verse. 40. At the time of the end shall the King of the South push at him, chap.
12.4. Seal the Book even to the time of the end, verse. 9. yea to the very end
of days, when Daniel was to rise and stand in his lot. But go thy way till the
end be, for thou shall rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of days. But this
cannot agree to Antiochus Epiphanes, whose Kingdom expired many years before
Christ's first coming; Nor did Daniel arise and stand in his lot at the end of
those days, viz. the days of his Persecution, which yet is promised to Daniel
at the end of the days here spoken of. Further, this Prophecy is said to be for
many days, Chap. 10. ver. 14. I am come to make thee understand what shall
befall thy people in the latter days; for yet the Vision is for many days. For
a long time, chap. 10.1. in the third year of Cyrus a thing was revealed to
Daniel, and the thing was true, but the time appointed was long. Now it is not
ordinary in Scripture Phrase (a thousand years with God being but as a day) to
call so short a time as was the time betwixt Daniel and Antiochus Epiphanes
many days, a long time.

3 Because he who appears to Daniel, Chap. 10.5, 6. Chap. 12.7. being the same
who appeared to John, Revel. 10.5, 6. and also the time, times and a half, Dan.
12.7. being a time peculiar to the Gentile Saints, Revel. 12.14. it thence
follows, that this Prophecy is to be brought down into the Apocalypticall
times, and therefore could not have its fulfilling in the days of Antiochus
Epiphanes.

To these let me add some few of the very many Arguments (all which would be
tedious here to repeat) that are laid down by Mr. Parker in his Daniels
Visions, and Prophecies expounded, p. 91. to 97. and again, p. 111. to p. 116.
in opposition to this opinion.

1 How (says he) was Antiochus Epiphanes a vile Person, to whom they gave not
the honor of the Kingdom? seeing he was the lawful Son of Antiochus Magnus,
who (to use the words of Graserus) was so great even from his Infancy, that
then in the world known unto us, there was scarce another to be compared with
him.

2 I require (says he) a sufficient reason, if this be Antiochus Epiphanes,
why as many, or rather more words should be spent upon him, then were spent
upon all the Kings of Syria, and Egypt before him, whereof some were far
more notable in exploits then he? If any say that it is so because he was more
notable in afflicting the Saints; I still demand, But why are so many words
spent upon these Warlike exploits, that concerned not the Church? Besides,
others before afflicted the Jewish Church not alittle, and yet their
afflictions are not here mentioned. If his persecution did exceed, yet why
should the description thereof exceed so much, being but short in duration, and
not to be compared with those of Nebuchadnezzar precedent, or those of the
Romans in the time following? But if it be said, The reason is because
Antiochus is described as the type of Antichrist; I answer again; That the Type
howsoever must be according to truth, and the words of description answerable
to the things contained therein; the Holy Ghost would not represent Antichrist
by a type excessively, described above the verity and proportion thereof.

3 He proves at large, that the Wars of this King, and the several
expressions the holy Ghost uses in describing them, verse. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28,
29, 30, 31, 32. cannot be applied to Antiochus Epiphanes, p. 93, 94, 95.

4 What should I speak (says he) of the great afflictions of the Church by
sword, flame, captivity, and spoil, and that for many days, ver. 33. at certain
gusts succeeding after interruptions? The Church now and then rising, and
prevailing, verse. 32, 33, 34. and then at certain fatal revolutions, set by
God, exposed again to fire and sword, verse. 35. How can these passages be
exhausted in the narrow and short persecutions of Antiochus?

5 That Phrase, ver. 36. He shall do what he lists, is usually applied to
irresistible and uncontrollable Monarchs, verse. 3.16. Chap. 8.4. and cannot be
applied to Antiochus, over whom the Romans were so imperious, that at the
threatening look and command of the Ambassador Popilius, he was forced to retire
out of Egypt, and leave his prey. Add to this, That he was inwrapped with
many difficulties at home.

Lastly, Our aforesaid Author proves largely, p. 112, 113, etc. that those
Characters, ver. 37, 38, 39. as, He shall not regard the God of his Fathers,
neither shall he regard the desire of Women; neither shall he regard any God,
but shall magnify himself above all; He shall honor a God whom his Fathers
knew not, and a strange God; he shall divide the Land for gain; are not any one
of them appliable to Antiochus Epiphanes; which things who desires to see I
refer him to the Author, as judging what I have already said enough, if it be
not of some thought more then enough.

From the whole it appears, That the aforesaid opinion of the little Horn
neither does, nor will agree to Daniels great Prophecy.

Fourthly and lastly, For the Prophecy it self, Chap. 8. This opinion of
Antiochus does no way agree to it.

Take here likewise some of Mr. Parkers Arguments in answer to it. Daniels
Visions and Prophecies expounded, p. 36, 37.

1 This little Horn rises when the transgressors are come to the full, and in
the end of the Grecian Empire, chap. 8.23. whereas Antiochus was in the midst,
and far from the time of the great and full degree of transgressors.

2 The Horn here spoken of is in respect of his beginnings called a little
Horn, whereas Antiochus was not so low at first as to be called a little Horn;
for Antiochus in respect of his Parentage, and condition of Fortune which he
had thereby, was so great, even from his infancy, that then in the world there
was scarce another to be compared with him, being the undoubted Son of
Antiochus the Great, and after Seleucus Philopater his elder Brother, right
Heir of the Kingdoms of Asia, Babylon, and Syria.

3 This Horn is said to wax very great in comparison of the former Horns, verse.
9. whereas Antiochus although he was great from his beginning, yet did not
attain unto a condition greater then his Fathers; Concerning which let the
words of Graserus be observed: He (says he) never had full possession of the
whole Kingdom of his Father Antiochus the Great, which he possessed before the
Roman War; the sinews of War also failed him not once. And as for that which
Junius alleges concerning his taking of Egypt, if that were true, yet would
it little help his cause, seeing it is manifest that his Father Antiochus did
not less exploits against Egypt. Indeed Antiochus Epiphanes did the second
time invade Egypt, but with such a success that he got more dishonor then
honor thereby. Neither in other Wars was he so happy and fortunate, that
therein he might be so far preferred above his Ancestors. In sum, Antiochus
Epiphanes had little or nothing more then the meaner sort of the Kings of Syria.

4 How did Antiochus Epiphanes so excellently magnify himself unto the South,
and to the East, and to the pleasant land? How unto the East, forasmuch as he
was ignominiously put to flight, and expelled out of Persia in the East, by the
Citizens of Elemais? How against the South, seeing in both his expeditions
against Egypt, he was at last shamefully repulsed; the first time by the
Captains of Ptolomeus, the second time by the Ambassador Popilius? And how unto
the pleasant Land, forasmuch as after his intestine cruelty on the Jews, his
Princes and Armies were in Judea over-thrown, and put to flight by the Jews,
and their Captain Judas Maccabaeus.

5 The Acts of this little Horn are extended to the time of the end, verse. 17.
and of the last wrath, verse. 19. whereas Antiochus Epiphanes dyed long before
the birth of Christ.

6 In the judgment (says he) of a learned Author, the two thousand three
hundred days are unappliable to Antiochus Epiphanes. And Pererius shows
(says my Author) out of the first Book of Maccabees, that Antiochus his
Persecutions began in the year of the Grecian Kingdom one hundred forty three,
and ended in the year one hundred forty eight, which could not be longer then
six full years; and therefore it cannot fill up exactly the measure of two
thousand three hundred days, which space contains six years, three months,
and twenty days; for the three months, and twenty days, would over-abound;
Pererius to salve this difficulty, says, That the two thousand three hundred
years may be extended to the death of Antiochus, which was in the next year
following; but according to Daniels words, and the drift of the interpretation
of the Authors of this opinion, the aforesaid two thousand three hundred years
must not end in the death of Antiochus (although if they should, yet the
difficulty of exact accommodation will still remain) but in the cessation of
persecution and calamity of the Church, and in the purgation of the Sanctuary,
verse. 13, 14. which being referred to the Jews in the time of Antiochus, came
to pass exactly in the year of the Greek Empire one hundred forty eight, as
has been said, and cannot be extended to the year following; therefore are not
the two thousand three hundred days appliable to this time; yet because I find
some of our own, who confess Daniels other Prophecies to have a look to the
end of the Fourth Monarchy, somewhat doubting of this, which therefore
according to the common opinion they would make to terminate with Antiochus
Epiphanes. Let me therefore add a reason or two farther to those already laid
down by Mr. Parker.

7 The time of the end here mentioned, verse. 17. and the Inst end of
indignation, verse. 19. are undoubtedly of the same interpretation, with the
time of the end so often spoken of, Chap. 11.35, 40. Chap. 12.4, 9, 13. and the
accomplishment of indignation, Chapter 11.36. which besides the wonderful
agreements of either King in their description, of which for a taste compare
these passages.

CHAP. 8. CHAP. 11. Verse. 12. An Host was given him against the daily
Saerifice. Verse. 31. And Armies shall stand on his part. Verse. 11. By him the
daily Sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his Sanctuary cast down. Verse.
31. And they shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength, and shall take away the
daily Sacrifice. Verse. 25. Through policy shall he cause craft to prosper in
his hand, and by peace shall destroy many. Verse. 23. After the League made with
him, he shall work deceitfully. Verse. 24. He shall enter peaceably into the
fattest places of the Province. Verse. 12, It cast down the truth to the ground,
and it practiced and prospered. Verse. 36. He shall speak mavelous things
against the God of gods, and shall prosper. Verse. 24. He shall destroy the
mighty, and the holy people. Verse. 32, 33. The people that know their God shall
be strong, and do exploits, yet they shall fall by the sword, and by flame; by
captivity, and by spoil many days. Verse. 25. He shall magnify himself in his
heart. Verse. 37. He shall magnify himself above all. Verse. 25. He shall also
stand up against the Prince of Princes, but he shall be broken without hand.
Verse. 45. compared with chap. 12.7. He shall come to his end and none shall
help him; and at that time shall Michael stand up.

I say besides all these agreements, the inculcating that Phrase in either
Prophecy, as the bounds and limits of the tyranny of either King, at the time
appointed shall the end be, chap. 8.19. So chapter 11.27. The end shall be at the
time appointed, verse. 35. The time of the end, because it is yet for a time
appointed, is to me a clear Argument, that either Prophecy terminates at one
and the same point. Now the point of time that Daniels Prophecy in the eleventh
and twelfth Chapters terminates at, being not the end of Antiochus rage, but of
the Fourth Monarchy; therefore not Antiochus rage, but the end of the Fourth
Monarchy is also the point of time with which the Prophecy, chap. 8. does
likewise terminate.

8 Daniel is commanded to shut up the Vision, because it was to be for many
days, verse. 26. But as it is not likely, that the Angel would have commanded
Daniel to shut up the Vision, but rather have given a contrary command, as to
John, Rev. 22.10. Seal not the sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for the
time is at hand; in case the fulfilling of it had been so near as the times of
Antiochus Epiphanes; so cannot two thousand three hundred Natural days, no nor
the whole of the time from the day Daniel had this Vision, to the utmost point
of Antiochus rage, be called in the Phrase of the Holy Ghost, who (as I have
said before) calls a long time short, many days.

The conclusion from the whole, is, That that opinion which makes application
of this Prophecy, chap. 8. to Antiochus Epiphanes, interpreting the two
thousand three hundred years of the time of his rage against the Jews, neither
does nor will agree to any one of Daniels four Prophecies.

SECT. 2.
ERe I proceed, I shall here by way of digression lay down my own thoughts
concerning the little Horn, chap. 8, 9. upon whom the whole stresse of the
Controversy lies.

All those that I have seen, who differ from the common opinion of Antiochus
Epiphanes, will have this little Horn to be the very same with that Chap. 7.
and accordingly some apply it to the Romish Antichrist, some to Mahomet, some
to the Norman Race, etc. The two last opinions of Mahomet, and the Norman Race,
I have disproved before, and that throughout all the Prophesies of Daniel. The
first which interprets it of the Romish Antichrist is the most colorable,
because its clear the little Horn, Chap. 7. is to be understood of him, and
also a large and full description of Antichrist comes under this little Horn.
To this therefore only I shall here oppose, and that by laying down my own
opinion, which is,

That the little Horn, Chap. 8. is not Antichrists Kingdom only, but the whole
body of the fourth, or Roman Monarchy, which is clear,

1 Because in each of Daniels other Prophesies we have the Roman Monarchy set
forth in its twofold estate. 1 In its pure Civil state. 2 In its, mixed
Antichristian state, as I have before proved, Part. 2. Chap. 4. Sect. 2. But if
the little Horn in this Chapter signify Antichrists Kingdom only, then in
this Prophecy we have the Roman Monarchy described only in its second state,
and so this Prophecy is made to differ from the other three; Yea by
consequence many hundred years.

2 Because the rise of this little Horn in the latter time of the Grecian
Monarchy should here be leaped over, which is not in any of the other
Prophesies, verse. 23. And in the latter time of their Kingdom, a King of
fierce countenance shall stand up. What Kingdom is this? Answ. The Kingdom of
the Greeks spoken of verse. 22. which after Alexanders death was broken and
divided into four Kingdoms. This no ways agrees to Antichrist, whose rise was
not till many hundred years after the dissolution of the third or Grecian
Monarchy, but it punctually agrees to the Roman Monarchy, which had its rise
(according to the very words) in the latter time of the divided Grecian
Monarchy.

3 Because the rise of this little Horn is out of one of the four Horns of the
Grecian Monarchy, verse. 9. And out of one of them ( i. e. of the four Horns,
verse. 8.) came forth a little Horn. This cannot be applied to Antichrist who
rose out of the Roman Monarchy, not the Grecian. But it agrees well to the
Roman Monarchy, which consider it as it was a Monarchy in the account of the
Holy Ghost here in Daniel; for by the way observe this Rule, That the Holy
Ghost accounts none of the Kingdoms succeeding one another to be Monarchies,
till they had swallowed up the whole, or some considerable part of the
foregoing Monarchy; therefore though Cyrus before the taking of Babylon had
obtained great Conquests, yet his Monarchy in Daniels sense begins thence.
Alexander likewise had done great exploits before he encountered Darius, yet his
Monarchy begins from his overthrow of him. In like manner, we are to reckon the
beginning of the Roman Monarchy, from that time when it first began to bring
under the Grecian Monarchy, which was when it did subdue to it self the
Kingdom of Macedon (one of the four Horns, into which the Grecian Kingdom
after Alexanders death was divided) when the Macedonian Kingdom (which
formerly had been the Seat of the third Monarchy) was turned into a Roman
Province, then began the Roman Monarchy, from which time the same did daily
increase till in the end by degrees one after another, it swallowed up the
other Horns also.

Now observe the Roman Monarchy may well be said to rise out of one of the four
Horns of the Grecian Monarchy in regard that that Kingdom, which in the
account of the Holy Ghost before was no Monarchy by swallowing up the kingdom
of Macedon (the Seat of the former Monarchy) now takes place of it, and becomes
a Monarchy; and therefore many make observation of that remarkable Eclipse of
the Moon, which was total, and happened the night before that fatal overthrow
of Persius by Aemylius the Roman Consul, through which the Macedonian kingdom
was lost, as a Prognostication of this wonderful change.

4 Because this Horn in its first rise was a little Horn, which fitly agrees to
the Roman Monarchy, consider it either, first as it became a Monarchy (as I
said even now) by subduing to it self the Kingdom of Macedon, which (though it
had been the ancient Seat of the third Monarchy, yet) comparatively with some
other of the four Horns in the Greek Empire ( viz. the Kingdoms of Egypt and
Syria, which were more potent then that of Macedon) it was but a little Horn.

Or secondly, if we consider the manner of the Romans growth as they were a
Monarchy, which was different from the growth of all the former Monarchies; For
the former Monarchies had their perfection in a manner the first day they
became Monarchies; but the Roman Monarchy is a Monarchy whilst yet it is little
and more imperfect, and afterward by a gradual growth through continuance of
time it attains perfection. Cyrus swallows up the Babylonian Monarchy,
Alexander the Medes and Persians, as it were at a mouthfull, and in so doing,
these Monarchies are at the top, arrive to their perfect stature the first day
of their birth: But the Roman Monarchy otherwise, it comes creeping on (as
'twere unseen) and by little and little encroacheth upon the Grecian Monarchy,
till in the end it has devoured all.

First, it swallows up the little Kingdom of Macedon; by this it becomes a
Monarchy; then about a hundred years after, it swallows up the Kingdom of
Syria, and makes a Province of that; then sometime after the Kingdom of Egypt,
then Palestina, and the Countries adjacent, making them Provinces, and so by
degrees it swallows up the whole Grecian Monarchy; so that indeed we may say
the Roman Monarchy comparatively, with what it grew to through continuance of
time, was in its first birth but an Infant, and therefore is well called a
little Horn.

This gradual growth of the Roman Monarchy (take it in its first, or second
state, for herein one answers to the other, the growth of both is gradual) is
livelily set forth by the term Waxing, it waxed great toward the South, etc,
and it waxed great, even to the host of Heaven, verse. 10. which word notes a
gradual increase, whereas the growth of the other Monarchies was (as I have
said) sudden.

Furthermore, whereas this waxing great of this little Horn in its first state
is said to be TOWARD the South, and TOWARD the East, and TOWARD the pleasant
Land, it excellently sets forth the exploits of the Romans after they had
subdued the Macedonian Kingdom; For hereupon they assault the Kingdoms of
Syria and Egypt, whereof one lay toward the East of Macedon, or if you will
rather of Rome or Italy, the other the South; and withal they invade
Palestina, the Land of Canaan, which is here called the pleasant Land. So that
in a word, a more accurate description of the first rise, and growth of the
Roman Monarchy (according to what Histories record hereof) cannot be given,
then is here in this Vision of Daniel laid down in but a Line or two.

5 Because this Horn though little in its first rise, yet does it in time wax
exceeding great, verse. 9. greater then any of the Kingdoms that had been
before it, exceeding them all, which agrees not to Antichrists Kingdom, but
exactly to what we have of the fourth Monarchy, Dan. 2.40. Chap. 7.7.

6 Because the twofold waxing great of this little Horn, excellently sets forth
the twofold state of the Roman Monarchy. 1 As a Civil state only, in which
state it subdues Nations to it self, and particularly the Land of Canaan; it
waxed exceeding great toward the South, and toward the East, and toward the
pleasant land. 2 As a Mixed state, or a Civil and Ecclesiastical state both, in
which period the great thing it does, is, to make war with the Saints, and
tread underfoot the Holy City, verse. 10. And it waxed great even to the host of
Heaven, and it cast down some of the host, and of the stars to the ground, and
stamped upon them. To this twofold waxing great does most excellently agree
that double title given afterward to this fourth King, verse. 23. 1 A King of
fierce countenance, such is the fourth Kingdom, Dan. 2.40. and the fourth
Beast, Dan. 7.7. 2 Understanding dark sentences, such is the Roman Monarchy, at
least pretending to abundance of wisdom, learning, and high speculations in
its second state under Antichrist.

This twofold waxing great, and this double title, will agree to no opinion
(neither to that of Antiochus, nor that of Mahomet, nor that of the Romish
Antichrist, nor that of Charles Stuart, or the Norman Race in general) as it
does to this.

I conclude, therefore that the little Horn here mentioned, is the whole body
of the fourth Monarchy, and not the same in its second state only.

Now the Roman Monarchy is here called the little Horn, the name before given
to Antichrist, Chap. 7. for one, or both these Reasons.

1 Because there is a likelihood in their rise. The Roman Monarchy (as I have
said) when it first began to creep up, was but little, and therefore Daniel,
Chap. 7.7. beholds the fourth Beast creeping up in the night visions, i.e. this
Beast was obscure, and in a manner unseen at first, none dreamed he would grow
so terrible a Beast, such was Antichrist, and for this reason called the little
Horn Chap. 7. Or

2 Because Antichrist in the last days was to weild the Scepter in this
Monarchy, and the sequel of the Prophecy was to go on chiefly upon him: And
hence observe, we have in the Vision and explication both, only a word (as it
were to bring on the other) of the Civil state of the fourth Monarchy, the main
of the Prophecy looking to its Antichristian state. Now as this is (I suppose)
the very cause and ground of their mistake who interpret all this of
Antichrists Kingdom only; so may it be the reason, why the name proper to
Antichrist, should here be given to the whole Monarchy, because his Kingdom
being a part of that Monarchy, was the thing chiefly in the following Discourse
to be insisted on.

What I have said confirms our former opinion, that this Prophecy belongs not
to Antiochus Epiphanes, but another thing; and consequently the two thousand
and three hundred days are not to be understood of Natural days, but
Prophetical.

SECT. 3.
Having already proved that the two thousand three hundred days cannot be
natural days, but must be Prophetical; In the next place, a Question will
arise, whether by the two thousand three hundred days we are to understand so
many days or years complete?

A very worthy and learned Author, reading, according to the Hebrew, two
thousand and three hundred mornings and evenings, which make but half so many
complete days, will have but half so many days (at most) viz. one thousand,
one hundred and fifty, to he here accounted upon.

But to this opinion I must give my dissent.

1 Because this way of computing by morning and evening a part, is no where
else found in all the Prophets.

2 Because its the ordinary Scripture Phrase to put morning and evening for one
day, Genesis 1.5. the evening and the morning were the first day, verse. 8. the
evening and the morning were the second day, verse. 13.19.23.31. And therefore
its more consonant to Scripture Phrase to conceive that the Holy Ghost by two
thousand and three hundred mornings and evenings, does intend so many complete
days, then that he should mean only so many mornings and evenings, which make
but half the number of days.

3 Because by this Computation the very Prophecy it self becomes useless to
us, who cannot from it make up any account; For until some Head is found out
where we are to begin, there can be no supputation of years. Now I ask, (if the
two thousand and three hundred years are to be understood of but half so many
years, viz. one thousand, one hundred and fifty) Where are we to begin them? If
we begin from the time Daniel had his Vision, how will one thousand, one
hundred and fifty years bring us thence to the time of the end, when as two
thousand and two hundred years and upwards are passed already since that time,
and yet the end is not.

If we shall begin lower (as we must by above a thousand years) let the head of
our account be showed in the Text. Daniel in all his other mystical Numbers
has still some clear head of account laid down: His seventy weeks have for
their Head the going forth of the Commandment to restore and build Jerusalem,
Dan. 9.25. His one thousand two hundred and ninety, and his one thousand three
hundred thirty and five, have for their Head the taking away of the daily
sacrifice, and setting up of the abomination that makes desolate, Dan. 12.11,
12. Now let a Head of account be showed in the Text for this. If it be said, It
is implied, though not expressed, verse. 13. to be the taking away of the daily
sacrifice, trampling the Sanctuary, and Host underfoot. Ans. If this be the
Head of account, then must the Head of this account, and the Head of the one
thousand three hundred thirty and five days, Chap. 12. be one and the same;
for that is the taking away of the daily sacrifice. And if so, then let a
sufficient reason be given to reconcile these places, why the account there
(which begins with this) should have one hundred eighty and five days or years
more in it, then this here; for who reckons shall find the one thousand three
hundred thirty five to have in it so many years more then one thousand, one
hundred and fifty, especially considering too that the one thousand two hundred
and thirty days, and the one thousand three hundred thirty five days, do both
end in the full restoration of the Church, and through-cleansing of the
Sanctuary, as is clear from the scope of either Prophecy. If it be said, some
other taking away of the daily sacrifice is here to be sought for as Head to
this Number, then that which was in Julians days. Ans. Grant it, yet must the
time when this was done, be so stated as that the one thousand one hundred and
fifty years may concur in their end with the one thousand three hundred thirty
and five years; For the Prophecy Chap. 8. and that Chap. 12. bring us both to
one and the same point, viz. the last, most full, and glorious restitution of
the Church, where either number must expire. This taken into consideration, I
say no more; Let the time be stated.

4 Because we have a special mark set upon this Number of two thousand and
three hundred days (which is not upon any other number in all Daniel, or the
Revelations) to give us to understand that the time shall be long, v. 26. And
the Vision of the evening and morning ( i.e. of the two thousand and three
hundred days, verse. 14. set forth by so many evenings and mornings) which was
told, is true; wherefore shut thou up the Vision, for it ( i.e. the Vision of
the evening and morning, which as it was the last thing in the Vision, so is it
here in the Interpretation) shall be for many days.

Now observe, the like is not said of any other mystical Number, neither of the
two and forty months, nor of the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, nor
of the one thousand two hundred and ninety, the one thousand three hundred
thirty and five, that it should be for many days. Indeed Daniels last Vision,
which contains in it his one thousand two hundred and ninety days, has this
said of it, It shall be for many days Chapt. 10.14. but let it be noted, that
these words have not reference to the one thousand two hundred and ninety, the
one thousand three hundred thirty and five days afterward spoken off, but
rather to the time of the Vision it self, which was in the third year of Cyrus
King of Persia, Chap. 10.1. and this was near a thousand years higher then the
Head of the one thousand two hundred and ninety, the one thousand three hundred
thirty and five days; and therefore well may the Vision it self, which
contains the one thousand three hundred thirty and five years, and over and
above almost a thousand more, (not full forty wanting of the number) be called
a Vision for many days or years. But now let it be showed of any other number
(besides this of the two thousand and three hundred) where we have any such
mark set upon the number it self, That it should be for many days, as we have
expressly here the mark set upon the number it self, The Vision of the evening
and and morning (or the two thousand and three hundred mornings and evenings)
is true; therefore shut it up, for it shall be for many days.

Now certainly we can from hence learn nothing less then that the two thousand
and three hundred is a larger Epock then either the one thousand two hundred
and sixty, the one thousand two hundred and ninety, or the one thousand three
hundred thirty and five (which are the largest besides it that we read of) for
neither of them does the Lord himself (with whom a thousand years is as a day)
count long, or set a mark upon, that we should account them so; but this the
Holy Ghost has noted down as a long time, and marked it out that we might so
look upon it; but now according to the foregoing account which reckons only
one thousand one hundred and fifty years, it should be a hundred and ten years
shorter then the least, and shortest of these; which how it will agree to this
note here left us by the Holy Ghost, to give us special light and direction in
things, I do not see.

Lastly, I shall say no more; The Labyrinth, the worthy Author of this opinion
seems to be in, not knowing whether he may reckon one morning and one evening
for a day, and so of two thousand three hundred mornings and evenings, make one
thousand one hundred and fifty days or years; or whether he should reckon two
evenings and two mornings for one day, so numbering the days and years (which
he also does, making two diverse reckonings) according to the fourth part of the
two thousand three hundred evenings and mornings, which makes five hundred
seventy five days or years; appears to me to be confutation sufficient of that
opinion; which should we follow it, yet concludes nothing certain.

The Conclusion then is, That by the two thousand three hundred days, we are
to understand two thousand three hundred days or years complete.

SECT. 4.
It being clear that the two thousand three hundred days are Prophetical
days, and also to be understood of so many Prophetical days complete; Our
next Question is, where we are to begin this large Epock?

A late Writer would have the beginning of this number to be fixed with the
beginning of the seventy years captivity in Babylon.

But this opinion I cannot receive.

1 Because it is contrary to all the Prophetical numbers of Daniel and the
Revelations, to go from the time of the Vision backwards for a beginning.

2 Because this beginning neither does, nor can make the two thousand three
hundred days to concur in their end with the one thousand three hundred thirty
and five, unless some other Head be found for that number; which Head must be
such too, as will bring the one thousand two hundred and ninety days, which
arises from the same Head with the one thousand three hundred thirty and five,
to concur also in their end with the one thousand two hundred and sixty, which
concurrence of numbers must be upon the grounds laid down in my Key, Thesi 17.
and Thesi 34.

3 Because this beginning exceeds the bounds of the Prophecy it self.

Quest. But where then are we to begin?

Answ. With the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, viz. in that year the
Scripture calls the first of Cyrus; and that for these two Reasons;

1 Because the Prophecy it self, which begins with the beginning of the
Persian Monarchy (as compare verse. 3.4. with verse. 20.) warrants this before
any other.

2 Because this beginning fitly agrees as to the scope of the Prophecy, so
also to the time when Daniel saw this Vision.

The time of the Vision bears date the third year of the Reign of King
Belshazzar, verse. 1.

This year was the last year of the Babylonian Monarchy; and to go strictly to
the time of the Vision, it was in the latter part of the year, after Babylon
was taken, Belshazzar slain, and the Babylonian Monarchy translated to the
Medes and Persians; as the learned and judicious Dr. Lightfoot in his Harmony
of the Old Testament upon Daniel the eighth has clearly proved; his words are
these; The first and second verses of this Chapter plainly show that Belshazzar
reigned but three years; for it tells that in the third of Belshazzar, Daniel
was in Shusan, the Royal City of Persia. It cannot be imagined, he was there in
Belshazzars life time, for his preferment and residence was in Babylon, till
Babylon fell; but his coming thither, was by the transporting of him thither by
the Persian Monarch, after he had conquered Babylon, who as it appears by
verse. 27. had preferred him there, and interessed him in the Kings employment.
This (says he) is called the third year of Belshazzar, purposely that we might
learn to give the first year of Cyrus its proper Date, i. e. reckon the first
year of Cyrus and Darius, not the year that Babylon fell, but the year after;
and partly that we may observe how that in the very year the Medes and Persians
destroy Babel, the Lord reveals to Daniel the destruction of the Medes and
Persians, and the Monarchies after them. Hitherto Dr. Lightfoot.

Give me leave to add, as a farther explication, That that Kings business,
which verse. 27. Daniel is said to do, is no way likely to be Belshazzar, who
neither knew Daniel, nor had Daniel to do with him, as the words, Chap. 5.
verse. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. seem to import; but very likely to be Darius,
who upon the taking of Babylon set Presidents over the Kingdom, or Empire, of
which Daniel was first, Chap. 6.1, 2. And by reason of the nature of his
employment, it was meet his abode should be in the Royal City of the Empire
where he might better attend it then he could elsewhere. Now this was not
Babylon, but Shushan, as appears, Esther 1.2. where therefore Daniel now was,
not Visionally (as say some) but really and personally, as is clear from verse.
2. And I saw in a Vision (and it came to pass when I saw, that I was at
Shushan in the Palace, which is in the Province of Elam) and I saw in a Vision,
and I was by the River of Ulai.

Had Daniel been in the place here mentioned Visionally only, he would never
have spoken of two places; for Visionally how could he see himself at Shushan,
in the Palace, and also by the River of Ulai at the same time, beholding the
same Vision; the meaning therefore undoubtedly is, Daniel by virtue of his
residence at the time he saw this Vision, was at Shushan in the Palace; but
locally he was either walking abroad to pray, meditate, refresh himself, etc.
by the River of Ulai; as when he saw his great Vision, Chap. 10. he was by the
River Hiddekel, verse. 4. and this not Visionally, but really, for he had
company with him, verse. 7.8. so was Daniel at this time really and personally
by a River called Ulai, near adjoining (in all probability) to Shushan the
Palace, where he saw this Vision. Now what made Daniel there, if at the time of
this Vision Babylon were not taken? It must therefore be that Babylon was now
taken, and the Monarchy translated, although the Vision bears date (for the
reasons given by Dr. Lightfoot) the third of Belshazzar.

Now it being so that Belshazzars third was the last year of the Babylon an
Monarchy, and consequently Cyrus first, the very next year, our beginning of
the two thousand and three hundred days, agrees most fitly to the time of the
Vision; for observe the third of Belshazzar being the current year, its
necessary therefore that we do not bring that into our account, but let it
fall: The very first year therefore that we either may, or can begin our
account upon, is Cyrus first, which begun with the beginning of the following
year; and therefore to begin the two thousand three hundred days, with the
first of Cyrus, agrees most excellently both to the matter, and the time of the
Vision. This therefore I conclude to be the only true beginning.

SECT. 5.
But ere I can proceed farther, one thing there is somewhat needful to be
enquired into, viz. Whether or no is the second Monarchy to take its beginning
(as I have said) from the first year of Cyrus the Persian; or whether had it
not its beginning some years before under Darius the Mede? The ground of this
Question is because Daniel makes mention of one Darius the Median taking the
Babylonian Monarchy from Belshazzer, Dan. 5.30, 31. and also speaks of him as a
person distinct from Cyrus, Dan. 6.28.

Some to salve this difficulty, will have this Darius the Mede to be King of
the Babylonians not by Conquest, but by Election: And their conjecture upon
this business runs thus. That King Belshazzar was slain the night after his
great Feast, by a conspiracy of those of his friends that he called to his
Banquet; amongst these conspirators this Darius the Mede was one, who being a
man ancient, wise, and of great authority among the Babylonians, they (though
he were a Mede and a stranger, yet) to avoid contentions for the Kingdom (
Nebuchadnezzars Line being ended in Belshazzar) confer it on him. Those of this
opinion give to this Darius the Mede, some seventeen, some eighteen years.

Now although this opinion (as laid down by the Authors of it) hurt not us
greatly, because the time they allow to this Darius the Mede, they give to the
Babylonian Monarchy, (reckoning the seventeen years of his Reign into the
seventy of the Captivity) and not to the Persian, which they with one mouth
confess began with the first of Cyrus, who (say they) took the Babylonian
Monarchy not from Belshazzar, but from this Darius the Mede; yet because if
once we grant it, that the Reign of this Darius the Mede was distinct in regard
of time from the Reign of Cyrus the Persian, there will be then force enough in
Daniel to beat us, yea and all Chronologers off their ground, while they
account the first year of Cyrus to be the first year of the Persian Monarchy; I
shall not therefore let the opinion pass by without an examination.

And although it were enough to destroy the credit of it, to say, That the
whole of the story this opinion is founded upon, is but pure conjecture, there
being not one tittle in the whole Scripture to bring us to the belief of such a
thing; yet shall I not insist upon that, but rather prove how that this opinion
does not only want Scripture warrant, but manifestly fights with the
Scripture. For it is most evident from Daniel, that Darius the Mede there
mentioned, did Reign in the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, and not (as
says this Opinion) in the end of the Babylonian.

The Reasons of this are:

1 Because Daniel (as I have proved before) was in that very year which is
called Belshazzars third, in Shushan, the Royal City of Persia: Now what made
Daniel there, if in this very year the Monarchy were not translated? if the
Monarchy were now translated, where shall we find room for the seventeen or
eighteen years of its continuance afterward?

It may be said Daniel was in Shushan by the power and authority of Darius the
Mede, who (though he were now elected King of Babylon, yet) had still great
power at home, and by virtue of that settles and prefers Daniel in Shushan.

Ans. But Shushan did not belong to the Territories of the Medes, but of the
Persians; for it was the City Royal of that Country. Now say the Authors of
this opinion, Cyrus King of Persia was a professed enemy to this Darius the
Mede, and did in the end take the Kingdom of Babylon from him. Upon their
principle therefore how can it be imagined that Daniel should reside in Shushan
in the time of Darius the Mede, if this Darius the Mede (as they say) did
belong to the Babylonian Monarchy, and were an enemy to Cyrus? for may it be
supposed that Darius's power could settle and prefer Daniel in his enemies
country, yea in the City Royal, and that of such an enemy as was more potent
then himself? it cannot be.

2 Because this Darius the Mede did rule by the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
as is clear, Dan. 6. verse. 8, 12, 15. he must therefore belong to the times of
the Persian Monarchy, and not of the Babylonian; For who can think the
Babylonians were so stupid, such Fools and Madmen, as to suffer a King, a
stranger, who came in amongst them not by any Conquest, or power that he had to
conquer them, but (as says this opinion) by their free choice, which was a
matter of courtesy toward him? I say, to suffer such a one to rule absolutely
by the Laws of his own Country, and not rather by theirs, is a thing that we
cannot easily imagine that any other, unless very Fools or Madmen (in such a
case) would consent unto.

3 Because it appears from the faith and fervency of Daniel, and his urging
present deliverance so much as he does in that prayer of his Chap. 9. (which
prayer was made in the first year of this Darius the Mede as verse. 1. tells us)
that Daniel did now look upon the seveny years as run out (which also he seems
to intimate verse. 2.) at this time of his praying; which consideration puts
life, courage, faith, boldness into him. But now according to this opinion
there should be seventeen or eighteen years of the seventy yet to expire; which
surely in case Daniel had so looked upon it, it would have been a great cooling
to his spirit, a quenching to his faith, so as he could never have urged (as he
does, verse. 16, 17.) a present turning away of Gods anger, causing his face to
shine upon them; nor would he ever have pleaded (as he does, verse. 19.) defer
not for thine own sake, O my God; For how could he with faith have uttered
those words, defer not, if he had looked upon the time of their deliverance to
be remote seventeen, or eighteen years?

4 Because the Scripture is clear and punctual that the Babylonian Monarchy
ended in Belshazzar, therefore may we not look for any Darius to succeed him in
that Monarchy. This we have, Dan. 5.26. God has numbered thy Kingdom and
finished it. These words are not to be referred to the Kingdom of Belshazzar
in particular, but to the whole Babylonian Monarchy (called Belshazzars
Kingdom, because he now swayed the Scepter in it) the continuance whereof was
numbered by God, or measured out to be seventy years, Jer. 25.11, 12. Jer.
29.10. which determined time was now expired or finished, as the Text tells us;
Therefore no room is left for a Darius to succeed in this Monarchy.

5 Because Belshazzars Kingdom is divided, when he loses it, betwixt the
Medes and the Persians, Dan. 5.28. Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the
Medes and Persians; but according to this opinion, if Darius the Mede, as a
King elected did first possess the whole, and after him Cyrus the Persian by
Conquest gain the whole, what division were there? True, either have what once
was Belshazzars Kingdom; but seeing they succeed each other in it, and either
is a possessor of the whole, here can be no division; where one has all, is no
division.

6 Because the words of the Holy Ghost, Dan. 11.1. import as much as if that
this Darius the Mede had been used by God in the doing some eminent service for
him and his people. Also v. 3. in the first year of Darius the Mede, even I
stood up to confirm and strengthen him. Gods standing up to confirm and
strengthen Darius in the first year of his Reign is an Argument of some
remarkable work that was done for God in this year: Now if we place Darius
first year with the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, its evident enough what
this work was, namely, the giving way to Isreal's return out of Babylon, the
making him willing to that work, which outwardly might seem to his loss and
disadvantage; but in case we place Darius first year (as does this opinion)
sixteen or seventeen years before the expiration of the Babylonian Monarchy,
let it be shown from Scripture, what that eminent piece of service was, that
was done for God in that year.

From the whole I conclude, That Darius the Mede spoken of by Daniel, did not
reign in the ending time of the Babylonian Monarchy, but in the beginning of
the Persian.

But it may be said, If so, then of necessity must we begin the Persian
Monarchy not with the first of Cyrus (as before) but with the first year of
Darius; and if so, then is not the beginning of the two thousand three hundred
days which (I have said) begins with the first of Cyrus, stated aright.

Answ. It does not follow, For though it is confessed that Darius did reign in
the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, yet does it not therefore follow that
Cyrus did not, unless it could be proved that these two did succeed each
other, which cannot be from Scripture, but rather the contrary is manifest,
viz. that Cyrus and Darius were contemporaries, and indeed Copartners in the
Kingdom of Babylon after the same was taken. For let it be considered, that
the taking of Babylon was not an act performed by Cyrus alone, nor by Darius
alone, but it was their joint act; they two (one being King of the Persians,
the other of the Medes; and as Histories report, allied the one to the other)
join forces, and with their united strength march up against Babylon, besiege
it, take it. And this is clearly the mind of the Scripture, and that opinion
only which with Scripture approbation will stand. For,

1 The Scripture attributes the taking of Babylon to either of them, as being
their joint act. It is attributed to Darius, Dan. 5.31. to Cyrus Isa. 45.1, 2,
3. which is a clear Prophecy of Cyrus his taking Babylon. To say (as some)
that Cyrus in the taking of Babylon did act as General of the Army under
Darius, is not only a thing without Scripture-warrant, but a thing in it self
very incredible, viz. that Cyrus who (as all Histories report) had before the
taking of Babylon reigned some years as King among the Persians, and was for
his warlike exploits and victories the most famous man then living, having also
hitherto in his way met with no check or frown of Providence, should upon the
sudden in the midst of all his Trophies and Victories, come down from being a
King, to be General only under another.

2 The Prophecy we are now upon, Dan. 8. Concerning the beginning of the
second Monarchy, does plainly hold forth this. For observe it, as the third
Monarchy of the Grecian is in the rise of it described by a He-goat having one
Horn, verse. 5. which Horn was Alexander the Great; so the rise of the second
Monarchy of the Medes and Persians is described by a Ram having two Horns,
verse. 3. which two Horns are interpreted, the Kings of Media and Persia, verse.
20. Now as these two horns were both upon the Ram together, at the time of his
pushing against the Babylonian Monarchy; for otherwise, why is he described as
pushing with two horns? so must we conceive that Cyrus King of the Persians,
and Darius the Mede with their united strength did push against the
Babylonians, and overthrowing them did accordingly (until by Darius death, the
Monarchy fell to Cyrus alone) Reign together.

3 Its foretold to Belshazzar, Dan. 5.28. that his Kingdom should be divided
betwixt the Medes and the Persians; But in case the same had fallen into the
hands of Darius the Mede only, then (as I have observed before) there had been
no division of the Kingdom; for where one has all, is no dividing. Yea
farther, if Cyrus had had nothing to do with the Monarchy till after Darius
death, how then had Belshazzars Kingdom fallen to him? it had been Darius his
Kingdom, not Belshazzars.

4 The Prophet Isaiah foretelling the ruin of Babylon, Chap. 21. makes mention
of two Nations as spoiling of her, which two Nations are the. Medes and
Persians, verse. 2. A grievous Vision is declared unto me, The treacherous
dealer deals treacherously, the spoyler spoyleth; Go up O Elam, besiege O
Media. Now observe, Elam was that Province in which Shushan the Royal City of
Persia stood, Dan. 8.2. I was at Shushan, which is in the Province of Elam; by
Elam therefore the Persians are meant, as by Medea the Medes, both which hand
in hand, march up, besiege, spoil Babylon. And therefore in the following
verses of this Chapter, the marchers up against Babylon, are described by a
double Chariot, a Chariot of Asses and a Chariot of Camels; noting the Medes
and Persians; which double Chariot by virtue of that union and near conjunction
that was now between them, go both under the name of one, and are called but
one Chariot because they march up together so unanimously against babylon, as
if they had been but one people, and not two; which one Chariot is led on by a
couple of Horsemen, excellently pointing out Cyrus and Darius the two Heads or
Leaders of this Army, as verse. 6. For thus has the Lord said unto me, Go set a
Watchman, let him declare what he sees, verse. 7. And he saw a Chariot with a
couple of Horsemen, a Chariot of Asses, and a Chariot of Camels, and he
hearkened diligently with much heed, verse. 8. And he cried, A Lion my Lord. I
stand continually upon the Watchtower in the day time, and I am set in my ward
whole nights, verse. 9. And behold here comes a Chariot of men, with a couple
of horsemen; and he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and all
the graven Images of her gods he has broken unto the ground.

5 The first year of Cyrus the Persian when the Decree went forth for building
the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 36, 22, 23. Ezra 1.1, 2. is the very same year with that
called the first of Darius the Mede, Dan. 9.1. Chap. 11.1. For observe, the
first year of Cyrus the Persian must be that very year, that immediately
succeeded the ending of the seventy years of Captivity; for otherwise Isreal's
deliverance being not till the first of Cyrus, the time of their Captivity
should be upwards of seventy years, which is expressly against the Prophecy,
Jer. 29.10. Thus says the Lord, That after seventy years be accomplished at
Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you, in causing you
to return to this place. Now the first year of Darius the Mede was the same
year, as is clear; because with the end of Belshazzars reign, from whom Darius
the Mede takes the Kingdom, the time allotted to the Babylonian Monarchy,
which was seventy years from the time that Israel was first captivated, was now
finished, Dan. 5.26. and also, because this seems to be the very thing that
sets Daniel upon prayer and fasting, Dan. 9.2, 3. the understanding by Books in
this first year of Darins the Mede, that the seventy years were accomplished.
Nay, let me say, it must needs be so, that the seventy years did expire with
the first year of Darius the Mede, when Babylon was taken, and so consequently
Darius first year, and Cyrus first, but one and the same year, because the
forequoted Prophecy, Jer. 29. is clear, that after seventy years were expired,
Israel should return from Babylon: And Jer. 25.11, 12. speaks it yet more
clearly, that Israel should serve the King of Babylon but seventy years, which
so soon as accomplished, God would punish the King of Babylon, and deliver
them: Whence I conclude, that the seventy years are not to be extended any
further then the time that Israel did serve Babylon, and the time that Babylon
was punished of God: But Israel served Babylon no longer then the first year of
Darius; for with his taking the Kingdom (as our former Reasons prove) the
Babylonian Monarchy ended, if we should therefore suppose them in servitude
afterward, it must be to the Medes, not the Babylontans; and also Babylon was
sufficiently punished of God, when the Babylonian Monarchy was translated to
another people; both which things having their plenary accomplishment in the
first year of Darius the Mede, therefore with that year must the seventy years
of necessity expire; and if so, then must the first year of Darius the Mede be
also the first year of Cyrus the Persian, in which Israel was set free; for
otherwise they had remained in Captivity above seventy years. If therefore the
first year of Darius the Mede, and the first of Cyrus the Persian, were one and
the same year, then of necessity must their Reign be together; and therefore (I
take it) that those words, Dan. 6.28. speak of Darius and Cyrus as Co-reigners,
and not as Reigning successively one after the other, unless we understand it
only of the time that Cyrus Reigned alone after Darins death; So this Daniel
prospered in the Reign of Darius, and in the Reign of Cyrus the Persian.

Now the Reasons why Daniel speaks chiefly of Darius the Mede, as if the ruling
power lay in his hands only, seems to me to have been one of these two, or both.

1 Because Darius the Mede, being aged, and of the two the greater Politician,
took up his abode ( Babylon being taken) in the Royal City of the Empire,
managing the affairs of State, whilst Cyrus (who was the younger and the braver
Soldier) was in all likelihood yet in the field, subduing, and bringing into
subjection such Countries, Cities, and Towns, as did yet stand in the way of
his absolute Monarchy. Hence Daniel whose employment lay in State affairs,
having chiefly to do with Darius, makes mention of him as though be alone had
been King.

2 Because Darius the Mede being much the elder, and (as some think) Uncle to
Cyrus, things might go mostly under his name, by reason whereof the name of
Cyrus, (whilst Darius lived) might be somewhat obscured; therefore Daniel
mentions him, who of the two was vulgarly looked upon as the leading man in
ordering affairs, and does not take so much notice of the other, though yet he
were in power equal with him. And surely there might be a glorious design of
Providence in obscuring the name of Cyrus about the time Babylon was taken,
through that of Darius; for the name of Cyrus (by reason of Isaiahs Prophecy)
was grown so famous amongst the Jews, that had they but heard the name of
Commander inchief before Babylon to be Cyrus, they had not been so surprised
with their mercy, as it is ordinary with God to deal by his people in his more
glorious appearances to be upon them before they are aware; but whilst they
little think of a Cyrus, and hear a great noise of a mighty Darius, Babylon is
taken, and instantly unlooked for, appears a Cyrus, as a first and leading man
amongst the Conquerors; which certainly could not but so soon as discovered
(which in all likelihood was presently as Babylon was taken, when now the Jews
within Babylon by converse with them, come to have a more true understanding of
the people themselves, the state and affairs of the Conquerors) wonderously
affect the hearts of Gods people. And whether or no, as the perceiving on the
one hand the seventy years to be out, so some such amazing Providence as this
concurring on the other, might not be a whet to Daniels spirit the more, to be
earnest in striving with God for his People, City, and Temple, I shall not (the
Scripture being silent therein) take upon me to determine.

And this consideration of Cyrus being manifested and known to Gods people
last, does well solve those words, Chap. 8.3. The Ram had two Horns, and the
two Horns were high, but one was higher then the other, and the higher came up
last: Which words seem to have in them matter of objection against the thing we
are speaking of, and they seem to import, as if that Cyrus (who is the higher
Horn of the two) did succeed Darius; and if so, Then how is it true that has
been said, They did both Reign together? Now from what has been said, the
Answer is easy, that Daniel speaks not of the being of the two Horns, but of
their appearance; the two Horns, were both in being upon the head of the Ram
when he pushed down the Babylonian Monarchy; but now, as to Gods people they
did not both appear at once; but Darius the lower Horn appears first, and Cyrus
the higher Horn after him; so did they not to Daniel in the Vision; first
Daniel beholds the lower Horn, then the higher. But if this suffice not
(because there seems weight in the Objection) it may be otherwise answered;
that Cyrus's coming up last, is not to be understood in respect of his being a
Horn, but in respect of his being a Horn greater and higher then the other
Horn: A Horn he was of power and authority equal with Darius, whilst Darius
lived; but a Horn of higher and greater authority then ever his fellow Horn
had; so he was not till after the death of Darius, when the whole Monarchy,
which before was shared between them, fell to him alone; and in this respect
Daniel sees him come up last.

If it be asked, how long these two, Darius and Cyrus, did reign together.

I answer, Two years, at the end of which Darius (who was sixty two years old
when Babylon was taken, Dan. 5.31.) by death (which is most probable) or else
by resignation, devolves the whole upon Cyrus. Now that they did reign together
two years, and no more, is clear, if we compare Dan. 1.21. with Dan. 10.1.
Daniel Chap. 1.21. is said to continue till the first year of King Cyrus, i.e.
so long Daniel did survive. In Chap. 10. Daniel sees a Vision in the third year
of King Cyrus: How may we reconcile these places? did Daniel behold this Vision
two years after he was dead? No, we may not think so; but that which does, and
only can reconcile the places, is this, Chap. 1. speaks of Cyrus's sole reign,
i.e. reckons from that time he began to reign alone; but Chapter 10. speaks of
the whole of the time that he reigned from the taking of Babylon; now that was
three years, until the time Daniel saw this Vision, two of which he reigned
together with Darius, and the third (which is called Cyrus's first Chap. 1.21.)
he reigned alone. Here in our close it may be observed,

1 That the first year of Cyrus, Dan. 1.21. is not the same year with that
called the first of Cyrus, 2 Chr. 36.22. Ezra 1.1. The one signifies the first
year of his reign after Babylon was taken; the other the first of his sole
reign, which was not his first year, but his third from the taking of Babylon.

2 That Daniel dyed in the self-same year, in which he saw his last and great
Vision, which was in the third year of the Persian Monarchy; for he continues
but till the first of Cyrus, viz. of Cyrus's sole reign, which (I say) is the
same year with that called the third of Cyrus, in which he saw his last Vision;
for therefore (as I conceive) does Daniel, who before had all along dated his
Visions by the reign of Darius, date that last by the reign of Cyrus, to
signify to us how that in this third year of the Empire, Cyrus did reign
alone. Daniel therefore continuing but till the first year of Cyrus his sole
Reign, and the year in which Daniel saw his last and great Vision being that
year; I therefore conclude, that Daniel dyed in that very year in which he had
his last Vision; which near approach of Daniels death seems to me to be hinted
to him twice in the end of the Vision, Chap. 12.9. Go thy way Daniel; And
again, in the very last words of all, But go thou thy way till the end be; for
thou shall rest, and stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

The sum of all our whole discourse in this Section, is, That Darius the Mede
did not belong to the Babylonian Monarchy, but the Persian; and that the first
year of Darius the Mede, and the first of Cyrus the Persian, are one and the
same year.

CHAP. II. Wherein in order to a more full clearing up of the foregoing
account, viz. of two thousand and three hundred days, Daniels seventy weeks
are discussed.
SECT. 1.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter fixed the Head of our Account, viz. with what
time we are to begin the two thousand and three hundred years; I shall now
through the Lords assistance go on, and (as that which necessarily comes next
to be handled in order to the making up our Computation) enter upon Daniels
seventy weeks, Chap. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.

This seventy weeks is a lesser Epock comprehended within the greater of two
thousand and three hundred years, consisting of four hundred and ninety days;
for seventy weeks being reduced into days, amount to the aforesaid number,
which according to the Prophetical way of speaking is so many years, viz. four
hundred and ninety years.

Two great knots we have here to untie:

1 Whether these seventy weeks relate to Old Testament, or New Testament times?

2 In case they relate to the one, or the other, where are we to begin, and
where to end them?

As touching the first, it is the opinion of a worthy man, that this Prophecy
is not to be understood of the times between the Babylonian Captivity and
Christ, but rather points out the Churches Restoration in New Testament times
from its bondage and servitude under Antichrist.

But this I cannot receive.

1 Because this opinion leaves us wholly destitute of Scripture-ground, either
for the making up the years of the world, or for a right supputation of Daniels
two thousand and three hundred years.

2 Because the determination of the seventy weeks is clearly and evidently upon
the Jewish Church, where as this should be upon the Churches of the Gentiles;
This is evident from the words, verse. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy City. Thy people, and thy holy City, clearly denotes
the Jewish Church, and the City Jerusalem, which was Daniels people, and City
to be h^re intended. Nay it cannot be otherwise; for these words coming in as
an answer to Daniels prayer, most surely that people, and that City Daniel had
been praying for, is here meant. Now this was not the Church and people of the
Gentiles, but of the Jews, with the City Jerusalem, as the very expressions of
his prayer declare.

Object. But the Prophets whilst they speak of the restoration out of Babylon
temporal, do mystically imply, and under figures describe the restoration out
of Babylon spiritual: Therefore though it is a truth that Daniels prayer was
directed for restoration out of temporal Babylon, yet notwithstanding was he
closely under it led by the Spirit to the restoration out of Babylon spiritual.

Answ. True, the Prophets whilst they speak of the restoration out of Babylon
temporal, do indeed mystically imply, and under figures describe the
restoration out of Babylon spiritual; this in the general is a truth; but
whilst there is an application made of this general Rule to this particular
Prophecy, it fails; for our Author himself confesses that Daniel in his
prayer did cast in his thoughts the restoration out of Babylon temporal; and
therefore the seventy weeks from his own principle, must have some relation to
that, at leastwise as a type of the other. But a typical relation it could not
be; for the Text having expressly said, that seventie weeks should seal up the
Vision and Prophecy, we are here by out off from looking after any Antitype,
or any other fulfilling of these words then what was betwixt the coming out of
Babylon literal, and the death of Christ; therefore the relation they have to
that time must necessarily be the whole intendment of the Prophecy.

3 Because the Phrases verse. 24. to finish transgression, to make an end of
sins, to make reconciliation for iniquity, to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, cannot without a manifest forcing be applid to any other time,
then that wherein Christ suffered.

4 The Messiah the Prince, verse. 25, 26. being called the most Holy, verse. 24.
(which is the Attribute of God alone) it is not sufferable that the same should
be applied (as does this opinion) to the Waldensian Princes, Zisca the
Bohemian, or any other creature. To interpret the anointing the most Holy to be
spoken not of any person but of things, viz. the bringing in of Christ's pure
worship into his Church (which is the sense of the Author of this opinion)
cannot be thought; seeing the only anointed One spoken of in all this Prophecy
is the Messiah the Prince, who being a person, the anointing the most Holy must
be of some person, not of things. Nay it seems strange to me, that the word
Messiah signifying the anointed One, and this whole Prophecy pointingat the
Messiah, it should once be thought that the anointing the most Holy can be
meant of any other save the Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ himself. And
therefore learned Mede upon the words well says, There is (says he) no
interpretation of any passage in this Prophecy could seem so harsh, but I
would be content to admit it, rather then yield that by Messiah, the Prince
here named, should be meant any other then Christ our Lord and Redeemer. For
(says he) I am persuaded that the Church of Israel in the Gospel, and from
them the Apostles took it, had no other place of Scripture, whence they did, or
could ascribe the Name of Christ or Messiah unto him they looked for, but only
from this of Daniel. These are Mr. Medes words, which carry a convincing
demonstration along with them, that the Messiah here spoken of must be Christ
personally; but this opinion we oppose, neither does, nor can so hold.

5 The Messiah the Prince, or the anointed Governor (to use our Authors term)
is not to be anointed until the seventieth week. verse. 24. Seventy weeks are
determined to anoint the most Holy. But according to the express and declared
mind of the opinion we oppose, the Messiah is to be anointed after seven weeks
of the seventy, i.e. nine and forty years are expired. And indeed so
considerable is this one Stone, that if removed, the very foundation, yea the
whole fabric of this opinion goes to decay; for neither will there be room
found for the Waldensian Princes, nor Zisca, at the end of the seven weeks, or
nine and forty years, in case the Messiah, the Prince, be not anointed till the
seventieth or last week; and this Stone needs not a hand to be put to it; for
the Text it self has removed it in telling us, that not seven, but seventy
weeks are determined to anoint the most Holy.

6 The Messiah, the Prince, is said to be cut off, but not for himself. verse.
26. what could more fitly have been spoken to signify Christ's dying for the
sins of his people?

7 And last, To say no more, The perplexednesse of this opinion, which knows
not certainly where to begin the seventy weeks, whether with the Waldenses,
A.D. 1160. or afterward in the time of Wickliffe, 1370. argues the same to be
no sure interpretation of this Prophecy.

Object. 1. This Prophecy seems not to relate to Old Teastment times,
because in no place of the New Testament do we find it used against the Jews,
to prove the Messiah already come.

Ans. 1. No more do we any where find throughout the New Testament that ever
Christ or his Apostles did make improvement of the departure of the Scepter
from Judah to convict thereby the obstinate Jews; Is it meet that we say
therefore, there was nothing in that fore-shewing the time of Christ's passion?
the reason is as good for the one, as the other.

2 All Daniels Prophesies were by strict command given forth to Daniel again
and again, to be sealed till the time of the end. That therefore this Prophecy
of Daniel (which had Christ or the Apostles unsealed in part, would have set
open a door of light to the whole) might remain sealed till the time of the end
should draw on; therefore neither Christ nor his Apostles do urge this
particular Prophecy to any such end, which indeed they could not have done
without unsealing it, by determining the drift of the Prophecy, and also
showing the time to which it did relate; and in determining this, a fair way
had been made for the supputation of the two thousand three hundred years,
Chap. 8. and thereby light also let into that Prophecy.

Object. 2. All Daniels other Prophesies bring us to New Testament times,
therefore this also.

Ans. The subject of all Daniels other Prophesies is the four Monarchies, but
not so this: the consequence therefore is not good.

As for all the other Arguments laid down by the Author (which are not a few)
some to prove the Negative part of the Question, some the Affirmative, the
bottom of them all is one of these two things, either,

1 False principles arising from, first, a mis-interpretation of some phrases
and passages in this Prophecy: Or secondly, From too great a restraining of
some things in Daniels other Prophesies (which our Author would have
interpretative of this) to such and such particular Events: Or thirdly, from a
leaning too much to the bare reports of History.

2 An interpretation of the phrases here, which set forth Christ his acts and
sufferings by similar phrases in Daniel elsewhere, which point at Antichrist
his acts, and the Churches sufferings under him; whence the conclusion is, That
this Prophecy must relate to the times of Antichrist, and the captivity of the
Church of the New Testament under him. But let it be considered, as Arguments
of this nature, when they are not seconded by some others more solid, do mostly
make up but a doubtful conclusion; so in the present case more especially the
conclusion is such, yea the way of demonstration very unsafe. For Antichrist
being Christ's Ape, acting over those things that Christ himself did, only with
this difference, the acts as performed by Christ were holy and good, as done by
Antichrist wicked and abominable. Hence it follows, that the acts of both are
set forth by similar phrases and expressions. Christ by his death and
sufferings caused virtually the Jewish sacrifice and oblation to cease (this
being the time of its abrogation) v. 27. and afterward by a total ruining
through Thunder, Lightning, and Earthquake, the very place of that sacrifice,
he actually destroyed it in Julians time. Antichrist likewise (but in an evil
sense) is said to take away the daily sacrifice, Dan. 8.11. Chap. 11.31.
because he labors to destroy, and by his power suppreseth Christ's true worship
to set up his own. As Christ to set up Christian worship, destroyed the Jewish;
so he to set up his Antichristian worship, would destroy the Christian;
therefore are the one and the other said to take away the daily sacrifice.
Again, Christ is said for the over-spreading of abominations to make it
desolate, i.e. make desolate the Jewish worship, their City, Sanctuary, which
thing as it was caused by rejecting him, so after his death, was performed in
part by Titus, and completely in the time of Julian. Antichrist likewise to
place the abomination making desolate, Chap. 11.31. i.e. to desolate the
Christian worship, withdrawing people from it, by setting up his own
abominable Idolatry, by which the whole world are bewitched, and led aside.
Thus other similar phrases, by considering the thing as done by Christ, and
done by Antichrist; or as relating to the Jewish Church and worship, and the
Christian, will be clear. And indeed this notion both lets a light into Daniel
to reconcile seeming contrary places, and also (if duly weighed) turns up by
the roots a great part of our Authors Arguments.

Add hereto, (which takes in those that remain) that there is in many things
an Analogy betwixt Christ's sufferings who is Head, and the Chruches who are his
body, and also betwixt the effects that follow upon either. Now one or other of
these considerations will enervate the force of all the Authors Arguments,
which (because many, and an answer to each, will take up much room, and also
anticipate some things in my following Discourse) I forbear to give particular
Answers unto, leaving the drawing them forth from these more general
considerations to the meditations of the understanding judicious Reader.

The Author of this opinion (if any should blame me, or think I may injure
truth whilst I conceal his name, and therewith his Arguments) is the godly and
learned Mr. Parker in his Daniels Visions and Prophesies expounded upon Chap. 9.

The Conclusion is, That the seventy weeks are not appliable to New Testament
times, but belong to the times of the Old Testament.

SECT. 2.
Having in the foregoing Section proved that the Seventy weeks relate to the
times of the Old Testament, The next Enquiry is, Where we are to begin this
Epock of Seventy weeks, i.e. four hundred and ninety years, and where to end
them? In both these it is most necessary that our way be very clear, or
otherwise we shall never carry a straight line downwards; and the way being
once cleared, here the difficulty will not be great to find out, where Daniels
two thousand three hundred years expire, as we have already found where they
are to begin. And indeed there is not an Epock of years in all Daniel, and the
Revelations, that there is more need of being upon sure grounds for the
beginning and ending, then this of the Seventy weeks; for a falling here makes
a general failing, because no account, whose Head is in the Old Testament, can
be brought downwards to the New, but must descend through these seventy weeks;
if therefore we mis-place them, we turn every account out of its proper Chanel,
cutting the way either shorter, or by wheeling about making it longer, then
indeed it is; so that an error here is a fundamental error in Chronology. We
shall therefore desire in this to go the more warily, taking up nothing upon
trust, but bringing even the most common received principles to the Touchstone
of Scripture, and right Reason.

Now as for the first, viz. The beginning of the seventy weeks, the Text is
clear, verse. 25. That we are to begin them from the going forth of some
Commandment, and this Commandment such too, as was not as yet gone forth when
Daniel had the Vision, but to go forth afterward.

Now we read in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah of four Commandments going
forth after this time.

1 A Decree, or Commandment of Cyrus, Ezra 1.1, 2, 3. which is more fully
repeated, Chap. 6.3, 4, 5.

2 Of Darius, Ezra 6.6 to 12.

3 Of Artaxerxes to Ezra, Ezra 7.11 to the end.

4 Of Artaxerxes to Nehemiah, Neh. 2.7, 8, 9. Upon some one of these four must
the Head of our account be fixed.

The most general opinion is, that we are to fix on the first, viz. The Edict
of Cyrus in the first year of his reign.

But with this cannot I accord. My Reasons are,

1 Because this beginining can never bring the two thousand and three hundred
days, to concur in their end with the one thousand three hundred thirty five,
unless we find a Head higher for the one, or lower for the other; and in case
either of these be found, yet must the Head be such, as shall also produce a
concurrency in their ends betwixt the one thousand two hundred and sixty, and
the one thousand two hundred and ninety days, upon the grounds we have more
then once referred to already.

2 Because the Angels pointing out to Daniel a certain Head for the beginning
of this account, viz. the going forth of the Commandment to restore, and to
build Jerusalem, verse. 25. is to me an Argument that the seventy weeks were not
to be begun from the time of the Vision, (which in case we begin from the first
of Cyrus was, Daniel having this Vision in the first year of Darius the Mede,
which year was the same (as I have made appear) with the first of Cyrus the
Persian) for the Prophetical manner is, when an account is to be begun some or
many years after the time of the Vision, to fix upon some certain Head for the
beginning of it, as Chap. 12.11. but now when the account is to take its
beginning streight-way from the time of the Vision to fix upon none, for which
reason the two thousand and three hundred years, which begin from the time of
the Vision, have no particular Head assigned in the Text.

3 Because the determination of the seventy weeks is expressly upon Daniels Holy
City, i.e. the City Jerusalem. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy Holy City.
But Jerusalem was not the Holy City, nor could it properly be so called until
many years after the first of Cyrus (as shall appear in our next Section)
therefore are we not from thence, but from another time to begin the Seventy
weeks.

4 Because the Head of account laid down in the Text will not allow this
beginning; for observe, the Text in plain words has laid down the Head of our
account to be this, the restoring and building Jerusalem, verse. 25. Know
therefore and understand that from the going forth of the Command to restore
and to build Jerusalem. But now there was not the least word in all Cyrus
Decree that did concern Jerusalem, but the whole ran upon the building of the
Temple, as is clear, Ezra 1.2, 3, 4. where we have the substance of his Decree
in these words, Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, the Lord God of Heaven has
given me all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and he has charged me to build him a
house at Jerusalem which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people?
his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judah, and
build the house of the Lord God of Israel (he is the God) which is in
Jerusalem. And whosoever remains in any place where he sojourneth, let the
men of his place help him with silver (...) and with gold, and with goods, and
with Beasts, besides the free will offering for the house of God that is in
Jerusalem. Here is not one word in the whole that does authorize the Jews to
any farther work then what concerned the Temple; but now the building of
Jerusalem (which is the Head laid down in the Text) was another, and a farther
work.

Object. But though the building Jerusalem be not expressed in Cyrus Decree,
yet it is clear such a thing was intended, and the Jews by him authorized to
such a work, as appears Isaiah 44.28. That says of Cyrus, He is my Sepherd,
and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be
built. And Chap. 45.13. I have raised him up (viz. Cyrus mentioned verse. 1.) in
righteousness, and I will direct all his ways; he shall build my City, and he
shall let go my Captives, not for price, nor reward, says the Lord of Hosts:
Yea also from the very deportment of the Jews themselves in this business, who
upon this Decree of Cyrus, before yet any other Decree was given forth, did
assay the building of the City, which surely they would not do without a
Commission, Ezra. 4.12, 13. Be it known unto the King, that the Jews which came
up from thee to us, are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the
bad City, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations. Yea
from the very news brought to Nehemiah by Hanani, Neh. 1.2, 3. that the wall of
Jerusalem was broken down, the gates burnt with fire, which therefore surely
had been built betwixt their coming out of Babylon, and Nehemiahs days; for it
could have been no news to Nehemiah to have reported to him of the breaking
down of the walls of Jerusalem, and burning the Gates by Nebuchadnezzar.

Ans. I must confess the Objection seems to have great strength in it, and
(for truths sake) I have brought it forth in its full and utmost strength. But
to come to an answer. In doing whereof, I shall, First, give some particular
Answers to the Texts themselves. Secondly, Lay down some
Scripture-considerations, which may be an answer to the whole Objection.

First, for the Texts themselves; And first, that of Isaiah Chap. 44.28. That
says of Cyrus, he is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure; even
saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built. I take it, the latter words (in which
lies the force of the Objection) even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built,
may be very fitly, according to the scope of the place, interpreted to be the
words of the Lord himself, not of Cyrus; for observe, in the foregoing verses,
we have God brought in by the Prophet, assuring his people upon his word of
many great things he will do for them, verse. 24. Thus says the Lord thy
Redeemer, and he that formed thee from the womb, I am the Lord that makes all
things, that stretches forth the Heavens alone, that spreads abroad the
Earth by my self. verse. 25. That frustrateth the tokens of the Liars, and
makes Diviners mad, that turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge
foolish. verse. 26. That confirms the word of his Servant, and performs the
counsel of his Messengers, That says to Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited,
and to the Cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will ra^se up the decayed
places thereof, verse. 27. That says to the deeps be dry, and, I will dry up
thy Rivers. verse. 28. That says of Cyrus, He is my Shepherd, and shall perform
all my pleasure. Hitherto it is most evident, that the words have relation to
God, as speaking: Now observe, God having assured his people of many great
things already, he shuts up all with this, as the crowning mercy to all the
rest, Even saying to Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, thy
foundation shall be laid. As to say, Over and above all I have promised
already, I do also give particular assurance, That Jerusalem shall be built,
and the foundations of my Temple there shall be laid. And to this our last
English Annotations agree, interpreting them to be the words of God himself, by
rendering the words, Even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, thus, and
saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built; so by the copulation and put for
even, making in effect the words to have relation, not to Cyrus, but to God
himself, who had said thus and thus before, and now over and above says,
Jerusalem shall be built, and the foundation of the Temple there shall be laid.

Now looking upon the words thus, it does not necessarily follow, because Cyrus
gave Decree for the one, the building of the Temple, that therefore he did for
the other also, viz. the building Jerusalem, but it proves that God would do
both, and as he afterward raised up Cyrus to do the one, so would he also
raise up Cyrus, or some other, to do the other, when the time for doing it
should be come.

Object. If it be said, But the building of Jerusalem cannot but be included in
that of Jerusalems being inhabited, verse. 26. therefore if these be the words
of the Lord also, there seems to be a Tautologie, he should speak the same
things twice.

Ans. Not so; for seeing to inhabit is one thing, and to build a place in order
to its being inhabited, is another, the things though spoken apart, may both
very well be spoken by the Lord himself, and that without any Tautologie; and
by how much the Jews had their eye chiefly upon this, the building their City
Jerusalem, by so much does the Lord give them greater assurance of it, by
doubling the thing in a manner, yet without Tautologie, because set forth in
several and diverse expressions.

Object. But Cyrus is said to perform all Gods pleasure, verse. 28. and this he
could not do, if he did not as well give command for the building Jerusalem, as
the Temple.

Ans. The Phrase of performing all Gods pleasure, neither can nor must be
stretched farther then this, viz. That whatsoever God has determined to be
done by Cyrus, that he should freely and cheerfully do, and accordingly so he
did; First, He destroyed the Babylonian Monarchy, which were the oppressors of
Gods people. Secondly, He freely without price or reward gave full liberty to
the Jews, who before were captives, to return to their own land. Thirdly, He
made a Decree that they, come thither, should set upon the work of building the
Temple. Fourthly, He laid a happy foundation (as I am now coming to show) for
the perfecting the whole work of God, both concerning the Temple, and Jerusalem
also. More then this (I mean in reference to Gods cause and people) cannot be
proved that ever God determined Cyrus should do, and all this he did; and
accordingly performed all Gods pleasure.

2 Granting these words, Even saying to Jerusalem, thou shall be built, to have
relation to Cyrus; yet may the meaning of them be only this, That God would
make Cyrus the principal instrument, as of laying the foundation of the Temple,
which was actually done by his decree, so also of building Jerusalem; but how?

Ans. By removing the great impediment, namely the Babylonian Monarchy (which
had ruined Jerusalem, and was a professed enemy to it) out of the way, and
setting the Jews (who whilst Captives could never do it) free from their
Captivity, which accordingly was done by Cyrus, God making him instrumental to
ruin Babylon, by which, as the Jews are thereupon by him set free to build the
Temple for present; so also the supreme power came now to be in the hands of a
Nation, who were more friendly to the Jews, and inclining to hear their
complaints, and redress their grievances for future. And in this sense it may
well be said of Cyrus that he should say to Jerusalem, thou shall be built,
i.e. set open a door, which before was shut, for the building of it afterward.
And to this well agrees that other Text, Chap. 45.13. I have raised him up in
righteousness, and will direct all his ways; he shall build my City, and
shall let go my Captives, not for price, nor reward. The building Gods City,
the Objectors themselves will never say was done actually by Cyrus Decree; The
meaning therefore can be no other then this, That Cyrus should set open a door
for the doing of it, by destroying the Babylonian Monarchy that had desolated
Gods City, setting the captived Jews at liberty, and laying a foundation for
such a work afterward, by putting forth a Decree to build the Temple, which
might be, and was an inducement (as appears from Ezra 6.1, 2, 3. compared with
verses 6, 7, 8.) to his Successors after him to follow their noble Leader in
kindness and respect to this Nation. And indeed it is a thing observable, that
(for the general) of all the four Monarchies, the Persians were ever the most
friendly to the Jews, and most ready to do them right and favor, following
doubtless herein the example of their famous Founder Cyrus, to whom therefore,
as being the leading man, whose example became a provocation to his Successors,
the whole work, in Scripture, and that not amiss, is attributed.

As for the other place in Ezra, Chap. 4.12, 13. it being only the allegation
of Judahs Adversaries, and written to Artaxerxes for this end, to put a stop to
the work of God, I rather conceive them to be words of mere accusation, then of
truth, by which those crafty enemies endeavor to make the case of the Jews as
foul as may be; and to beget in the King the greater dislike of their
proceedings, they suggest such things to him on purpose which might breed
jealousy, and cause a discountenancing of the work; and therefore they set
before him how potent a City, bearing rule over Kings, in former times
Jerusalem had been, and how that now the Jews were re-edifying of it, had set
up the walls, and joined the foundations. And some color there was for this;
for the Jews had now laid the foundation of the Temple, as appears, Chap. 3.11.
and the malicious subtle enemies seeing a work on foot, and being willing to
mistake, so they might incense the King, and hinder the work, call this the
building of the walls of Jerusalem.

Now the Reasons persuading me that this was only the enemies false
accusation, and that indeed there was no such thing in reality, are,

1 Because in Chap. 3. verse. 8. to the end, where mention is made of the Jews
building, and the progress made in the work, there is not one word spoken of
building any thing, but the Temple only.

2 Because the Adversaries of Judah, when first the report of the Jews building
was brought to them, had no report of the building Jerusalem, but of the Temple
only, Ezra 4.1.

3 Because it was in building the Temple the Adversaries at first offered to
join and build with the Jews, which Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and the rest would not
give way unto, whereupon the Adversaries openly oppose; all which is clear,
Ezra 4.2, 3, 4, 5. A clear Argument, the work the Jews were about, and that the
Adversaries knew well enough, though they will not know it, was not building
Jerusalem, but the Temple.

4 Because the work that the Adversaries upon receipt of Artaxerxes Letters (in
answer to theirs) do cause to cease, is, not the building of Jerusalem, but the
building of the Temple, Ezra 4. verse. 23, 24. Now when the copy of King
Artaxerxes Letter was read before Rehum and Shimshac the Scribe, and their
companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made them to
cease by force and power. Then ceased the work of the house of God, which is at
Jerusalem, so it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius, King of
Persia. Now observe, the work the Jews were about, was the work caused to
cease, for so ran the Kings Commission, verse. 21, 22. the work caused to cease,
was not building Jerusalem, but the Temple, the Temple-building therefore, and
not the building Jerusalem was the work the Jews were now about. Now though we
suppose Ezra to be chiefly intent to set forth the Temple-work, yet doubtless,
having so frequent occasion to mention the building, a hint would have been
given by him, as well as the Adversaries, of building Jerusalem, had such a
work been in hand.

5 (Which makes it apparent that the thing was a mere fiction) because, the
Adversaries in their Letters to Darius, after Zerubbabel and his party were
fallen anew to that very work, which before they were constrained to let fall,
have not so much as one word of this, Chap. 5. verse. 6, 7, 8, etc. But now they
can tell the King plainly what the Jews were about, viz. building the Temple,
and not go in the dark, calling a Temple a City; and all they now propose to
him is, only that search may be made whether Cyrus made a Decree for such a
thing, or no. A clear Argument their former juglings were by this time
discovered at Court; though having juggled, what by their own power, the
prevalency of friends above, and that color they had for an excuse, it was but
a mistake, they saw foundations laid, and walls built, they thought it had been
for a City, though upon better information they hear it was only a Temple; and
they could do no other, but out of that due respect they bare to their Prince,
his honor, and welfare, advise him of it; and however though a City it were
not, yet the one, if suffered to go on, would make way for the other; By such
Arguments (I say) having by juggling at first put a stop to the work, they make
a shift to keep their own all the days of Artaxerxes; but now when Darius
comes to the Crown, knowing themselves to be tardy in their last Letters, and
that they of the Court had found out their faultring, they will have no more of
it, but rather seem to make a sober Proposition that it might be looked into
whether the Jews had any Law (as they pleaded to have) to bear them out in what
at present they were about: Whereas, had there been but the least shadow of
truth in their former accusation, they would undoubtedly have pleaded that
again, as a thing more likely by far to gain the Kings ear to them, and to
alienate the King from the Jews, and altogether frustrate their design. Nay
these imbittered enemies, whose language was so high against the Jews in their
first Address (Rebels, Rebels) it is likely would never have been so sober in
their expressions, as this their second shows them to be, had they not exceeded
their bounds, and come off with disgrace, and some private check for it before.

6 Not to say much more, that which strongly persuades me yet further to be of
this mind, is this, There are evidently crafty designs and jugglings in those
very Letters which carry the charge;

For first, observe, They speak not one word of building the Temple, but only
of building Jerusalem, the Rebellious City, yet were not they ignorant in that
respect what the Jews were about, for they offer to join with them in that very
work, Chap. 4.2.

Secondly, They speak not a word neither, in these their first Letters, of
Cyrus Decree, which yet they could not be ignorant of, for the Jews had
informed them of it, Chap. 4.3. yea the very Adversaries had hired Counselors
against the Jews to frustrate their design, as Chap. 4.5. What need of hiring
Counselors against a business that has no color of Law for it?

Quest. What may be the reason they are silent in these things?

Ans. Because the discovery of either of these might have brought their
juggling to light. Had they hinted a word of buiding the Temple, they above
would have enquired, What, are they building a Temple, and building a City too?
which would either have driven them to confess the truth, It Is a Temple only,
but what it may grow to in time we know not; Or else by averring both, they had
cut themselves off their fair excuse for time to come in case of discovery,
viz. That it was but their mistake, they thought it, by the greatness of
preparations, and magnificence of foundations, to be a City, but it proved but
a Temple. Again, Had they but hinted the Decree of Cyrus, enquiry then would
have been made for the Decree, to see what that allowed the Jews to do, and
whether they exceeded the bounds of it, before passing any definitive sentence.
And this Decree brought forth, would discover what the Jews had authority to
do, more then which the Adversaries knew well enough, they could not justly, in
case strict enquiry should be made into the business charge them with, and
therefore they hold it policy to conceal altogether that Decree also. Which
Decree, yet afterward (see the wretchedness of men) when their juggling is
come to light, in their next address to Darius, Chap. 5. they make a great
noise of, as willing thereby to hide their former malice, by making those above
to think that in their former address they were not so much enemies to the
Jews, as loath to see and countenance any irregular proceedings, and that now
having had satisfaction from the Jews that they had a Decree of Cyrus for what
they did, they only think good to intimate, that the thing may be looked into,
whether such a Decree there were, or no; not without hopes undoubtedly, that
through continuance of time, and mutation of affairs, the same might be lost,
which in case it were, they not only should wipe off the aspersion of malice,
which now lying upon them made all charges ineffectual, but also find a fair
opportunity to draw up a new charge. But God who knows the rage of his enemies,
and takes care of his people, had provided otherwise, and turns this their
crafty rage against the work, even to a promoting of it, as appears from the
issue, Chap. 6.

As for the third foot of the Objection taken from Hananies report, My Answer
is, That the breaking down of the wall of Jerusalem, and burning the Gates,
relates to the ruins of Jerusalem in the days of Nebuchadnezzar.

My Reasons are,

1 Because no Scripture mentions any building of the walls of Jerusalem betwixt
the time of Cyrus and Nehemiah (the forementioned Texts, I have proved too
weak) therefore we have no ground, for faith, that ever such a thing was.

2 Because its likely, if the walls had been rebuilt by the Jews that came up
in the days of Cyrus, and afterward broken down again by enemies, and gates
burnt, they would also as well have broken down the Temple and burnt that, for
their malice was as great against the one, as the other; yea if more against
any, it was the Temple, which, being the place of the Jews worship, was most
abhorred by the Adversaries, who hated them only for Religion sake; but this
was not done, for Nehemiah coming to Jerusalem found a Temple there, Neh. 6.10.

3 Because should I grant (which yet I cannot, there being not one tittle of
Scripture for it) that City and Wall was built before, yet must we confess
withal, that this work was an obscure thing, and no way to be compared with
the after famous building of Nehemiah, memorized by a whole Book, written
particularly upon that subject, and therefore not fit in comparison of the
other, to be made head of Daniels Seventy weeks.

As for the ground of this part of the Objection, That it could have been no
news to Nehemiah to have heard of the ancient ruins by Nebuchadnezzar.

Ans. Neither indeed was it, nor is the business between Nehemiah and Hanani a
hearing and telling of news (as we commonly understand the word) they were more
spiritual, and better employed then so. Hanani was a faithful man, one that
feared God above many, Neh. 7.2. This holy man coming to Nehemiah, another
choice Spirit; two choice spirited men being now met together, having both of
them great hearts for the cause of God, they (as it is comely for Saints at all
times when they have the like opportunity, to do) presently fall into discourse
about things that concern the people of God, and Gods cause, at that day, and
all the news that passes between, is indeed matter of so spiritual a
concernment that it is too low a term to call it news. Says Nehemiah to
Hanani, brother Hanani how fares it with our brethren at Jerusalem? O says
Hanani their condition is sad, they are still in the old posture, a reproach to
the Heathen, and the wall of Jerusalem lies broken down, the gates burnt with
fire. This thing this good man reports, not so much as a matter of news (though
in part of it news there was) as indeed a thing which was the present burden,
grief and affliction of his own soul, and the souls of the remnant at
Jerusalem; how that Jerusalem (the building of which they had long expected)
continued still a heap; and withal how that now (as it is Gods ordinary way to
affect the hearts of his people, and heighten his enemies against a work, when
the time thereof is come) the thing lay more heavy upon the spirits of all the
remnant then ever, and also the enemies did more reproach them with their
unbuilt City then ever; In this last lay all the news (if we may so call it)
Nehemiah, upon hearing this, and through that heart-warming discourse that had
passed between them, goes home from this meeting, wondrously affected with the
condition of Gods people, and cause, and betakes himself to his Closet, and
there spreads the whole before the Lord; the issue whereof is favor, in the
sight of the King, and authority from him to go to Jerusalem and build it.

Thus much by way of answer to the Texts in which the force of the Objection
lies.

Secondly, I now come to add two or three Considerations from Scripture, which
may be an answer to the whole of the Objection.

1 Consideration, Whether it be not a very strange thing to suppose, that the
Jews having been charged with such a thing as building Jerusalem, and the work
they were about stopped upon it, that yet afterward the original Copy of Cyrus
Decree being found out among the Court-Rolls, in the second yer of Darius, and
transcribed by Ezra, Chap. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. not one word should be mentioned of
that about which had been so much noise and stir by the enemy; but as the
Command, Chap. 1. So here the Decree should run altogether upon building the
Temple, and not a tittle in it of Jerusalem; which, who can think otherwise?
but that had there been but the least clause in Cyrus Decree, empowring the
Jews to the building Jerusalem, upon which the Jews had undertook it, Ezra,
though it were to vindicate the actings of his Nation (and to show that what
they did, which was so ctyed out against, and they suffered so much, though
unjustly, through forged accusations, for, was not without Law and Authority)
would not doubtless, had the Jews been really guilty of the act, or the Decree
allowed them any such thing, in transcribing the Decree, have left it out.

2 Consideration, Whether the very words and manner of expression used by the
Angel, do not import an Effective command, such a command as upon the going of
it forth did cause a restoring and building Jorusalem? verse. 25. Know
therefore, and understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment to
restore and to build Jerusalem. Observe, the Command is a Command expressly to
restore and to build, which it is not proper to call that Command, which by
virtue of it self alone does never produce any such effect; considering too,
that Gods Commands (as we are to look upon this, though he use man as an
instrument) are every of them always effective. Now let it be considered,
whether the naked Decree of Cyrus ever had any such effect? nay, is not the
contrary evident, viz. That for many years after the going forth of that
Decree, even until the twentieth of Artaxerxes, Jerusalem lay waste as a
ruined heap, Neh. 1.3. and when the time of building it came, the work had for
its basis, not that Decree, but a new one of Artaxerxes, by which only Nehemiah
acts, and not at all by the Decree of Cyras, as is manifest from the whole of
his Book.

3 Consideration. Whether the Angels giving Daniel so many serious hints to pry
well into this thing, and to take heed of a too hasty concluding any thing,
lest he should mistake, verse. 25. Know therefore, and understand. verse. 23.
understand the matter, and consider the Vision. verse. 22. I am now come forth
to give thee skill and understanding: I say, whether it seem not to import,
that it would be a very hard thing to make a right conclusion here, and that
Daniel himself, and others, would be exceeding apt to mistake this
commandment, upon the going forth of which the seventy weeks were to be begun,
and therefore the Angel bids him be very cautious, and mark well every word and
tittle that he was to speak, that so he might not through affection, or
otherwise, be drawn to make a conclusion too suddenly. Now let it be seriously
considered, whether or no could there be any such difficulty in the thing it
self, or such aptness in Daniel and others to mistake about it, in case the
Decree of Cyrus were the thing here aimed at. For consider, Cyrus himself being
so expressly notified by name, by the Prophet I saiah, many years before, (which
Prophecy Daniel undoubtedly was not unacquainted with) and also this Decree
being the first, and so the most famous, and also brought forth in such a
wonderful remarkable manner by Gods stirring up the heart of Cyrus, a Heathen,
Ezra 1.1. and also coming forth immediately upon the prayer of Daniel, for
Daniel prays in the first of Darius, verse. 1. and the Decree comes forth in
the first of Cyrus, Ezra 1.1. both which (I have before showed) were one and
the same year, it cannot be thought that were this the Decree we are to look
at, that either Daniel himself, or any other would have been ready to mistake
here, but would soon say, our conclusion must be so, here must we begin, and no
where else; And therefore (I conceive) that Daniel whose thoughts now run upon
the ending of the seventy years Captivity, and had been praying for that, and
the Decree of release being just now ready to come forth, that by all these
things meeting together, neither he, nor we, might be so overset with
affection, as instantly, without any further search, to pitch down our standard
here, therefore does the Angel give so many serious hints to Daniel to look
upon this thing as a matter of great weight, a thing very hard to hit the right
nail, in making conclusions, and a hundred to one, if he did not conclude
salfe; and whith all strongly to give a check to his thoughts, which now were
all occupied about the ending of the Captivity, and therefore would be ready to
catch up any thing to begin from thence, he points him to another beginning,
viz. When a Command should go forth for restoring and building Jerusalem, that
so Daniel upon the going forth of that famous Decree of Cyrus, which was to be
presently, might not (having the foregoing hints, and this word, laid in before
as a Caveat) be deceived, and begin the account of his seventy weeks from
thence, but still look up, and wait upon God for another time.

Yea undoubtedly the Angel being so careful in this to make us know and
understand, would, had the Decree of building the Temple been that here
mentioned, have given it that name, and not another, of restoring and building
Jerusalem (betwixt which two were many years) hereby opening a wide door of
mistake to aftertimes who should live to see this Decree, as well as the
other, and yet must account from the other.

4 Consideration, Which I take from the mouth of the Prophet Zechary, who began
to Prophefie in the second year of that Darius who advanced the work of the
Temple, as Zech. 1.1.7. Ezra. 4.24. compared with Chap. 5.1. which was many
years after the first of Cyrus. Now observe, in his time Gods measuring Line
for the building of Jerusalem had not as yet passed upon it, as is clear from
Chap. 1.16. and Chap. 2.1, 2.3, 4. In Chap. 1. verse. 16. Zechary has this by
way of promise, Auline shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem. In Chap. 2.
Zechary Visionally sees the thing done, having withal a promise addud to it,
that Jerusalem again should be inhabited, verse. 1. I lifted up mine eyes again,
and looked, and behold a man with a measuring line in his hand. verse. 2. Then
said I, Whither go thou? and he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem, to see
what is the breadth thereof, and what the length thereof. verse. 3. And behold
the Angel that talked with me went forth, and another Angel went out to meet
him. verse. 4. And said unto him, Run, speak to the young man, saying, Jerusalem
shall be inhabited: us Towns without walls, for the multitude of men, and
cattle therein. Now mind it, Zechary's seeing the thing Visionally, with a
promise it should be done is a clear Argument that the real passing the
measuring line upon Jerusalem, for the building thereof, was a thing not yet
done, but to be some time after. Now consider, can we imagine that God should
cause a Decree to come forth by Cyrus for the building of Jerusalem, before yet
himself had passed his measuring line upon it? or that the Jews, having such
choice guides with them as Zerubbabel and Jeshua, should attempt to lay the
foundations, and build up the walls of Jerusalem, and that in a way of
fore-stalling Providence, laying their measuring lines before yet God had laid
his? surely it cannot be.

My Conclusion therefore from the whole is, That that famous Decree of Cyrus,
so generally harped upon, cannot be the Commandment here spoken of, from the
going forth of which we are to begin our Epock of four hundred and ninety years.

SECT. 3.
Besides the Decree of Cyrus, which Decree was the first, we read in Ezra of a
second Decree that concerned the Jews, and their welfare, which forth came from
Darius, whereof mention is made Chap. 6. verse. 6, 7, 8, etc.

But this cannot be the Commandment here spoken of, which by the Angel is made
Head of our account, for the same reason disproving the former, because this
Decree concerned the Temple only, not Jerusalem, whereof we have not one tittle
in the whole Decree; and also it concerned not so much the building of the
Temple, as the removal of that which was an impediment in the way to the going
on of the work, which work had still for its basis the old Decree of Cyrus,
only the impediment is removed by virtue of a new; but now the Decree which is
to be Head of our account is a Decree expressly to build, therefore cannot be
this Decree.

Yet the learned Mede in his Treatise upon Daniels Weeks (whom I am
necessitated here to mention by name, because I can neither state his opinion,
nor answer it, without referring oftentimes to the Author) is of the mind our
fixation must be here.

That by which he would evade the reason of the words, viz. That we are to
begin from the building of Jerusalem, is, He would distinguish the beginning of
the Holy City, from the beginning of Jerusalem; For (says he) the Holy City is
so called of the Temple the principal part, and therefore the time of the
restitution thereof is to be reckoned from the time that the Temple was
builded; but by Jerusalem is understood the external buildings and walls of the
City, which were not restored till some time after the Temple and Sanctuary was
finished, Daniels Weeks p. 3. (as the Treatise is printed by it self, as it is
printed with his whole Works, the Page is different.

To speak more plainly to the Readers capacity, Mr. Medes opinion is this; That
the seventy weeks are one Epock, and the sixty two weeks another, being a
lesser period of time comprehended within the Seventy, whose beginning (as he
says page 10.) was to be after the Seventy were begun, and the end before they
should be ended.

And as he makes the Seventy weeks to begin from the perfecting the work of the
Temple in the sixth year of Darius Nothus, as is his opinion, and to end with
the destruction of Jerusalem; so does he the sixty two weeks to begin from the
seventh year of Artaxerxes, when Ezra had Commission to cause to return, and
carry with him as many of the Jews as he would to Jerusalem, Ezra 7.7.13. and
also from the twentieth year of the same Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah obtained
leave to build Jerusalem, Nehem. 2. and to end with the death of Christ. Only
he makes a difference betwixt Solar years, and Lunar, reckoning sixty two Solar
years from the time of Ezraes going up, to the Death of Christ, but sixty two
Lunar from Nehemiah's: sixty two weeks, or four hundred thirty four Lunar
years, being (as he says) so many less, then so many Solar, as there are
years betwixt the seventh and twentieth of Artaxerxes, p. 21. and to this
latter beginning he makes the Command to build Jerusalem to refer, and not to
the former.

This is the full of Mr. Medes opinion, which with what clearness I am able, I
have set forth; and now must say, though I highly honor the Author, and his
indgement in many things, yet in this particular cannot I close with him.

My Reasons are,

1 Because the concurrence of the two thousand three hundred days in their
end, with the one thousand three hundred thirty five, the one thousand two
hundred and sixty days, with the one thousand two hundred and ninety (both
which stand upon firm Scripture-ground) is absolutely destroyed by this opinion
of the Seventy weeks.

2 Because Mr. Medes great and only Reason inducing him to this Computation, is
weak, uncertain, without Scripture-ground, yea destructive to
Scripture-principles.

His Reason is, to reconcile humane Histories, and Daniels Seventy weeks. Now
supposing it to be done, yet in matters of faith the reason is weak, and as
good as nothing, because the foundation is humane History, which is no ground
of my faith.

2 It is uncertain, because humane Computations are different, and in things
different a choice cannot be made, without some other rule to guide the choice.

3 It is without Scripture-ground, because First, Scripture has no where told
us that we should make bare humane reports the ground of our faith, but
manifestly the contrary. Secondly, No other gross sum in the whole Scripture
does enforce the beginning and ending of the Seventy weeks to be as Mr. Mede
has stated it, which could that be made out, it must then be granted that Mr.
Mede has reason sufficient to adhere to the reports of those he follows,
rather then of others, who in computing the same time differ in their accounts,
and consequently he should have, though not a particular, yet a general
Scripture-ground; but his opinion having neither the one, nor the other, has
no Scripture-ground at all.

4 It is destructive to other Scripture-principlos, viz. those principles which
are the foundation of our first Reason.

3 Because Mr. Medes Distinction (which is the foundation of his whole Opinion)
is unsound; yea, if the ground of it be thoroughly weighed, there is enough in
the thing it self, to overthrow the whole building. For whereas Mr. Mede would
put a difference betwixt the Holy City and Jerusalem, making the beginning of
the Holy City to be from the time the Temple was finished, but the beginning of
Jerusalem not to be till afterward; Let it (in answer thereunto) be
considered, That although the Temple, when spoken of alone, is called the Holy
place, yet is it never called the Holy City, but with a reference still to
Jerusalem. As the City Jerusalem is no otherwise said to be Holy, but as it
has reference to the Temple, the only place of Gods worship being there
fixed; so cannot the Temple, the place of Gods Holiness, be called a Holy
City, any otherwise then as it has reference to the City Jerusalem joined to
it; Both compacted together make up the Holy City, either claiming a share in
the name. That it is Holy, is from the Temple; that a City, from Jerusalem;
that a Holy City, from both. And therefore it is observable, as Jerusalem is
never in any other Scripture called (unless in a Prophetical way of what
should be for future) the Holy City, but still with reference to the Temple
fixed in it, so do we not find in all Ezra (which Book relates to the time we
are upon) so much as once mention made of the Holy City, till afterward in the
days of Nehemiah, Chap. 11.1.18. which was after Jerusalem was built, and
City, and Temple, now again standing together. Yea whereas the Angel says to
Daniel, Seventy weeks are determined upon thy Holy City, what City does he
mean, but that City Daniel had been praying for, which was not the Temple
only, but Jerusalem with its Temple both together? Now seeing that Seventy
weeks are determined upon the Holy City, and the Holy City cannot be so called
from the Temple only, but Temple and City together, it therefore follows that
there can be no other beginning of the Seventy weeks, but what is fetched from
the time when Temple and City were again joined together, so making up the Holy
City, Daniels Holy City; nor can the duration of the Seventy weeks be any
longer then Jerusalem stands with its Temple in it, owned by God for the place
of his worship; which as it cuts off both Mr. Medes beginning and ending of his
Seventy weeks, who begins before the City was built, and ends many years after
God had rejected the Temple as the place of his worship; So is it a strong
Argument against any beginning whatsoever that shall begin the Seventy weeks
any time before City and Temple stood together, or ending, that shall end them
any time after God had rejected the Temple as the place of his worship.

4 Because Mr. Medes beginning of the Seventy weeks (take the same nakedly in
it self, and out foregoing Arguments set aside) appears improbable; For he
begins with the sixth of Darius Nothus, the King under whom (as he supposes)
the Temple-work was advanced in his second year, and finished in his sixth. But
how improbable is this that Darius Nothus should be the Darius here meant, even
from Mr. Medes own Concession, who upon the matter grants us one hundred and
thirteen years betwixt the first of Cyrus, and the sixth of Darius Nothus; for,
says he, p. 9. the sixth year of Darius Nothus is concurrent with the three
hundred and thirtieth Nabonassarean year; but now the first year of Cyrus was
An. Nabon. two hundred and seventeen, as affirms Helvicus (Sir Walter Rauleigh
and some others go seven or eight years higher) which is one hundred and
thirteen years, walking by Mr. Medes own rule, and keeping to the lowest
reckoning. Now though the Temple-work was after Cyrus first at a stand for
diverse years, yet not for one hundred and thirteen; for consider, Zerubbabel,
who leading Israel out of Babylon in the first of Cyrus did lay the foundation
stone, has a promise made to him that he should lay the Top-stone, Zech. 4.7,
8, 9. Nay not Zerubbabel only, but also some who were so ancient at the coming
out of Babylon, that they had seen, and could remember the stateliness of the
first Temple, which was destroyed fifty years before Cyrus first, by
Nebuchadnezzar, were alive in Darius's second year, as is clear, Hag. 2.2, 3.
now allowing for the time (which we must) of their age when the first Temple
was destroyed (for were they not then of some age and judgment too, they could
not so remember as to judge betwixt the one and the other, viz. the first
Temple and Second) and adding hereto, the fifty years betwixt the destruction
of that Temple, and Cyrus first, and one hundred and nine, betwixt Cyrus first,
and Darius Nothus his second year, and the whole upon account cannot amount to
less then one hundred and seventy years, which age is very improbable.

5 Because Mr. Medes ending of the Seventy weeks not till the time of
Jerusalems destruction, is expressly against the several Characters of the Text,
verse. 24. (which point us to the time where the Seventy weeks are to end, as
the words, verse. 25. point us to the time where they are to begin) as shall be
made appear in due place. Now beginning and ending both being mis-placed, the
whole must needs be weak, yea, altogether false.

6 And lastly, Because Mr. Mede, to confirm and make good this opinion, is
constrained to lay down (and that in his very foundation) two strange
Assertions, for either of which the Text it self affords no solid bottom, nor
any other Scripture sufficient warrant; and they are,

1 Mr. Mede interprets the Angels words, verse. 25. Know therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the Command to restore and to build
Jerusalem, to have relation not to the beginning of the Seventy weeks, but of
the sixty two weeks, whereas it is most evident that the period or time the
Angel had spoken of in the foregoing verse (with a determination there of the
end) the beginning of which Daniel now seeks after, and the Angel declares to
him, was the Seventy weeks, not the Sixty two weeks, which is not spoken of
till afterward; and therefore its more agreeable to the scope of the words, to
make the going forth of the Commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem the
beginning of the Seventy weeks, then of the Sixty two weeks; to which if they
are to be referred, the Angel should point out a period for beginning, before
he had told Daniel any thing of the time. Nay, if this Command to build
Jerusalem be not the beginning of the Seventy weeks, then is there not in all
the words any express Head of account for them, for there is no other Head,
but this only, in the words, unless we say the Seventy are to be begun from
the time of the Vision, which is as wide from, and as inconsistent with Mr.
Medes whole Discourse, as any thing can be said. Yea farther observe, the Angel
lays down this Head of account with great care, that Daniel might not mistake,
Know therefore, and understand. Now it is not a thing likely that the Angel
should take so much care to make us understand aright the beginning of the
lesser Period (as Mr. Mede calls it) of the sixty two weeks, and take no care
to point us a beginning for the greater Period of the Seventy weeks, which (as
Mr. Mede also says) comprehends the other; and therefore by consequence, if we
know not where to begin and end that, the bare knowledge of the other will add
but little to us.

2 Mr. Mede is driven to assert the seven weeks and the sixty two weeks, verse.
25. to be one and the same, he reading the words thus, There shall be sevens of
weeks, and threescore and two weeks; that is (says he) many sevens of weeks,
so many as amount to sixty two weeks of years, there being in sixty two week,
nine times seven wanting one, which little want (says he) makes no matter,
there being eight whole Sevens besides in the number, p. 12. So he makes the
sixty two weeks explicatory of the seven weeks, and the fame number to be in
both, only set forth under diverse expressions. But this as it seems to be
overcurious; so Mr. Mede himself saw so many intricacies in asserting it, that
he confesses p. 14. that could the seven weeks be well bestowed the chiefest
difficulty were taken off this Prophecy. Nay let me say, this cannot be, but
only with that supposition that the seventy weeks are one period, and the sixty
two another, which has been disproved already. To all the rest I might add,
that Mr. Medes distinction betwixt Solar and Lunar years, which must come in to
help, or else all said will not do, is overcurious, yea groundless, having no
firm footing, to warrant such a way of computing either in the Text, or any
other Scripture.

The Conclusion is, That Mr. Medes opinion, which begins the seventy weeks with
the sixth year of Darius Nothus, is not that which we are to embrace and cleave
to as truth, and the mind of God in this place.

SECT. 4.
A third Decree, or Commandment, we have in Ezra Chap. 7. viz. of Artaxerxes
in the seventh year of his Reign; But this cannot be the Commandment we are to
look at; For neither did it concern the building of the Temple, which work, as
to the building, was finished before in the sixth year of Darius, Ezra. 6.15.
nor the building Jerusalem, whereof not one word is spoken. But it was only a
License given to Ezra, and some Jews with him, to go up to Jerusalem to offer
sacrifice, and if need were to repair the Temple, in case of any decay there
might be since the time the building-work was finished, or otherwise to add
something to the work by way of beauty or ornament, which seems to be
intimated, Ezra 7.27. with a Command moreover to the Treasurers beyond the
River, to furnish Ezra with moneys and other necessaries for the expediting
hereof; which looks in nothing like the Commandment we are now enquiring
after. I might add, that several of the Reasons we have before laid down to
disprove the former opinions, fall with equal force upon this, as might be
showed; but I forbear, because the reason of the Text lies so directly against
this, that there needs no more to be rehearsed.

There is but one Decree more that any can imagine, and that is of Artaxerxes,
in the twentieth year of his Reign, and given forth to Nehemiah; of which we
may read Nehem. 2.

Now this (as I conceive) is the Commandment, from the going forth of which,
we are to begin this Epock of four hundred and ninety years.

My reasons are,

1 Because this Commandment came forth in as solemn a manner as any of the
other. The first Decree of Cyrus came forth presently upon Daniels praying and
mourning, so does this upon Nehemiahs, Chap. 1.4, 5. The one has as solemn a
rise, as the other.

2 Reason, Because the work that this Decree concerned, was a work in its self
as famous every whit as the work of the Temple, as appears, First, By the large
description we have left us of the thing, by the Lord himself; a whole Book
(viz. Nehemiahs) being written in a manner upon this subject, in which we have
the work, in the parts and circumstances of it, more exactly laid down then is
the work of the Temple in the foregoing Book of Ezra. Secondly, The great
opposition it met with by enemies, declaring it to be a work wherein Gods cause
and glory was greatly concerned. Thirdly, The calling of this work, Gods work,
Neh. 3.5. and a work in which God did so eminently appear in carrying it on,
and defending the workmen, that the very enemies themselves confess the work
to be wrought of God, Nehem. 6.16. which considerations are sufficient to
silence some exceptions I have met with, undervaluing this work of Nehemiah, as
a private business, and a thing too mean to be made the Head of this famous
Epock. And indeed I have sometimes thought, that one reason why so large a
story is left us of this work, might be, because without a knowledge hereof, we
could never have found the certain time with which we are to begin Daniels
seventy weeks, which is a thing of so great concernment, as the Head of no one
number in Scripture like it.

3 Because this Decree agrees much better to the Angels words, then either the
Decree of Cyrus, or any of the other two: For observe, the Commandment spoken
of by the Angel, is a Commandment to restore and build Jerusalem, Know
therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the Decree to restore,
and to build Jerusalem. Yea such a building as should rear up again the street
and walls of Jerusalem, as the following words show. Now neither of the former
Decrees did this, for when Nehemiah first thought upon the work, the walls of
Jerusalem were broken down, the Gates burnt with fire, Nehem. 1.3, 4. after the
work of building the walls was finished, yet the houses were not builded,
Nehem. 7.1, 4. -- the City was large and great, but the people were few
therein, and the houses were not builded. The meaning surely is, That
notwithstanding there might be here and there particular houses in which the
people did reside, yet Jerusalem as a City with houses compacted making a
street, was not yet built (which is the thing the Angel mentions to Daniel, to
the end we might not look upon the building of some particular houses, to be,
in the intent of the Holy Ghost, the building of Jerusalem, but rather reckon
it from the time when walls and street began to be built.) But now in Nehemiahs
time both these were done, he built the walls of Jerusalem, and that in so
short a time as was even a miracle, Nehem. 6.15. and he built the houses also,
and Artaxerxes Decree did authorize him to do both these, Chap. 2.5, 8. And
this was a larger power then ever was given before by any of the precedent
Decrees.

4 Because this beginning stands reconciled (as our computation of the two
thousand three hundred days by virtue of it will make appear) with those
Scripture-principles, which require a concurrence in their ends betwixt the two
thousand three hundred days, and the one thousand three hundred thirty five,
and also the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, and the one thousand two
hundred and ninety; which all the other beginnings are at variance, and open
war with.

What shall I say more? to make the whole of this long Discourse clear and
undoubted, in one word, Consider, That the Jews had a twofold Restoration, and
a double building-work; First, A spiritual Restoration, or a Restoration as
they were a Church, and a building-work attending that, viz. Of the Temple;
Secondly, A Civil Restoration, or a Restoration as they were a Commonwealth,
and a building-work attending that, viz. Of the City Jerusalem. Both these
Daniel in his prayer had been pleading for, viz. The Restoration of City and
Sanctuary. Accordingly, in the answer given to him by the Angel, we have a
double Command; First, A Command which concerned the first only, viz. The
Temple-work, which was the Command of Cyrus, and is that Commandment which is
said to come forth at the beginning of Daniels supplication, verse. 23. i.e.
whilst Daniel is praying Cyrus enacts this Law, and so part of Daniels prayer
had a present answer; Secondly, A Command respecting the second, viz. The work
of the City and Commonwealth, which is the Commandment to restore, and to
build Jerusalem, verse. 25. -- The coming forth of this was to be for future;
and (I take it) this latter Commandment has therefore this particular
notation, Of building Jerusalem, that Daniel, nor we, might not mistake, and
account it the same with the other, verse. 23. Now observe, the Angel fixing the
Head of the seventy weeks upon the Command for building Jerusalem, it is a
clear Argument that we are to begin the seventy weeks with the Jews Civil
Restoration, not their Spiritual.

The Conclusion therefore is, That the Commandment from the going forth, of
which we are to begin our four hundred and ninety years, is the Commandment of
Artaxerxes to Nehemiah, in the twentieth year of his Reign.

Thus much as touching our beginning of this famous Epock of Daniels seventy
weeks, or four hunddred and ninety years.

SECT. 5.
Having found out the beginning of Daniels seventy weeks; our next Enquiry must
be where we shall end them.

Worthy Mr. Mede (with whom we have been contending already about the
beginning) is of opinion that we are to end the seventy weeks with the
destruction of Jerusalem; But having before proved his Beginning to be false,
his End must necessarily be so too. And indeed, the most of our Reasons, but
the three first especially, laid down to disprove his beginning, do lie as
strongly against this end, take the same, as it is asserted by him, or any
other.

But that which here I shall farther add, is, That this ending of the seventy
weeks is altogether repugnant to the Text, which points us to another ending
point, viz. the death of the Messiah; as the evident Characters in the Text
declare.

1 CHARACTER. The seventy weeks are determined upon Daniels Holy City. Seventy
weeks are determined upon thy Holy City; therefore to be extended no farther
then the time that Jerusalem remained the Holy City. But now Jerusalem (as I
have observed before) remained the Holy City no longer then God did own the
Temple in it as the only place of his worship; and this was only till the
Death of Christ, the Messiah; after which the veil of the Temple is rent in
twain, the Jewish Sacrifice and Oblation cease, Neither in this Mountain, nor
in Jerusalem shall men now any longer ( i. e. excluding other places, as it was
all the time of the Law) worship the Father.

2 CHARACTER. The seventy weeks are there to end where the Jews transgressions
are finished, or come to the full. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy Holy City, to finish the transgression. But this was done
in the crucifying the Lord of life, for then did the Jews fill up the measure
of their Fathers, as is evident from that Parable Matthew. 21.33. to the end;
first the servants of the Lord of the Vineyard are killed, verse. 35.36. Thus
were the Prophets one after another by their Forefathers. But last of all
(says Christ) The Lord of the Vineyard sends his Son, saying, They will
reverence my Son, verse. 37. But these wicked Husbandmen kill him likewise,
verse. 38. hereupon transgressions are come to the full, the Lord of the
Vineyard miserably destroys these wicked men, and lets out his Vineyard to
other Husbandmen, verse. 40.41. And what can better evidence transgressions
being now come to the full, then this? the chief Heads of the Jews, and the
popularity, with one mouth crying out, when the sentence of condemnation was
passing upon Christ, His blood be upon us, and our children, invoking hereby
Heaven for judgment and destruction upon themselves and their posterity; yea
it is yet more evident that transgressions at this day were come to the full,
because, though some particular persons, upon the wonderful miracles of
Christ's Resurrection, sending down the Spirit, and the preaching of the word of
the Gospel hereupon sent forth among them, did afterward come in and embrace
this Christ; yet never had the body of the Nation, nor their Rulers from that
day forwards hearts so much as to acknowledge their most wicked fact, much
less repent them of it.

A third, fourth, and fifth CHARACTERS. The seventy weeks are then to expire
when an end was made of sin, reconciliation made for iniquity, everlasting
righteousness brought in.

Seventy weeks are determined to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting Righteousness: But
all this was eminently done in the day of Christ's sufferings when he gave up
the Ghost, saying, It is finished.

The Conclusion is, That we are to end Daniels seventy weeks with the Passion
of Christ.

SECT. 6.
Unto the foregoing Opinion, which ends the seventy weeks with the Passion of
Christ, does excellently accord the seven weeks, and the sixty two weeks in the
following verse (which Mr. Mede confesses to be the greatest knot in this
Prophecy) the difficulty hereby being wholly taken off, and thereby our
opinion as touching the ending of the seventy weeks confirmed.

But ere this can be made appear, it will be necessary that the knot concerning
the seven weeks be untied.

Four opinions (besides that of Mr. Medes, whereof mention was made before)
there are of these seven weeks, neither of which can I receive.

1 The first is, that which would have the seven weeks to be weeks of days,
and the sixty two weeks, weeks of years; the meaning of the opinion is, That
the days of the seven weeks should be understood of Natural days, a day
consisting of four and twenty hours, but in the sixty two, of Prophetical
days, a day for a year, and accordingly it would have these seven weeks to be
meant of the two and fifty days, wherein the Wall of Jerusalem was finished,
Neh. 6.15. which (says the Author) though they are indeed somewhat more then
seven weeks, yet short of seven and a half, and so not to be regarded in
account of weeks.

But this cannot be,

1 Because It is against all Scripture accounts, yea reason it self, to
conceive that in one and the same Epock of seventy weeks, we should (without
any compelling reason from the Text so to do) interpret some of the weeks of
days Natural, some of days Prophetical.

2 Because The Angel assigns no proper work to the seven weeks, as distinct
from the sixty two, no reason therefore we should. Nay, in case we so do, its
more consonant to the Angels words to attribute the building of Jerusalem, with
its Wall, to the sixty two weeks, then to the seven weeks; For says the Angel,
Sixty two weeks the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in trouble
some times.

2 A second opinion (and the most common) is, That which makes the seven weeks
the Period of time the second Temple was building, and the sixty two weeks the
time thence to Christ, in which time Jerusalem was again built, and inhabited.

Ans. This cannot I subscribe,

1 Because it supposes seven weeks of the seventy to be expired before
Jerusalem began to be built, whereas I have already proved at large the seventy
weeks are to take beginning thence. The very foundation therefore of this
opinion is a mistake as to the beginning of the seventy weeks.

2 Because it is a thing that cannot be proved from the testimony of any clear
undeniable Scripture, that the second Temple was in building seven weeks, i.e.
nine and forty years. As for that, John 2.20. Forty and six years was this
Temple in building, which place some make interpretative of Daniels seven
weeks, supposing the Temple to be perfected in the seventh week, toward the
end, or about the middle of it, which will agree well to six and forty years;
Not to say, In case the thing were so, that the words can have no relation to
Daniels seventy weeks, the seventy weeks not beginning (as I have proved) till
after the Temple-work was finished;

My Answer is, That it is a thing doubted among good men, whether these words
have any relation at all to Zerubbabels Temple, or not; for some conceive they
relate to Solomon's Temple, which computing from the time David made preparation
for the building thereof, till the same by Solomon was finished, amounts to
about six and forty years; But others, with more reason, and likelihood of
truth, refer them to the Temple Herod built, who (to ingratiate himself with
the Jews) pulled down the former Temple Zerubbabel had built, building, instead
thereof, another more large, rich and sumptuous Temple (as is testified by
Josephus, Antiq. lib. 15. Cap. 14.) which Temple was the Temple then standing;
And this work (as Dr. Lightfoot in his Harmony of the four Evangelists upon the
Text, proves) had been in hand exactly six and forty years before the time
Christ and the Jews had this Discourse, the probability of which opinion
(considering the Jews spoke of a Temple that was, not that had been) weighs
down, in my opinion, all others. But if yet any do adhere to the opinion of
Zerubbabels Temple, and accordingly set this Scripture against my Argument, let
them (which they must) produce some Scripture speaking the thing that
Zerubbabels Temple is here meant; till that is done, we are in uncertainties,
and an uncertain ground is too weak to prove a thing, or disprove the contrary.

And indeed learned men generally seem not in the present case to lay much
weight upon this Text; for those, on the one hand, who conceive the second
Temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius Hystaspes, reckon not half six
and forty years, betwixt Cyrus his first, and Hystaspes sixth year: And those,
on the other, who judge the work was not finished until the sixth of Darius
Nothus, reckon between the first of Cyrus, and the sixth of Nothus, above twice
six and forty years: Yet is not this Text judged by either to have that weight
in it, as to make them alter their opinions.

Alsted (in Chronologia Monarchiae Persarum) would find out a way to uphold
this opinion, viz. That Zerubbabels Temple was six and forty years in building,
and yet will not have the complete finishing of the work to be till the sixth
year of Darius Nothus, which (according to his account) reckoning from the
second year of Cyrus, when the foundation was laid, was one hundred and eleven
years. But to do this he reckons only the time they were building, leaving out
the time the work was at a stay. But as it is a most unlikely thing, that the
Jews, being so considerable a company, as was that company that came up from
Babylon, and attending wholly to this work, should spend six and forty years
inthe mere building-work, who afterward in Nehemiahs time did in two and fifty
days build the whole walls of Jerusalem, Neh. 6.15. So is it as unlikely
(which yet Alsted to make good his opinion supposes) that those enemies of
Judah should sit still, and suffer the work quietly to go on, without
intermedling in the least to their prejudice, six and thirty years together,
viz. all the time of Darius Hystaspes, who at other times were ready and
active, whenever they saw the work on foot, to hinder it.

To say no more, the whole of the opinion is made up of mere suppositions; As
first, That the Darius, Ezra 4.5. is Hystaspes. Secondly, That the Jews did
build all the time of his Reign. Thirdly, That Ahasuerus, Ezra 4.6. and
Artaxerxes, verse. 7. were two diverse persons. Fourthly That Ahasuerus was
Xerxes the Great. Fifthly, That in the beginning of his Reign the Templework
was stopped, which yet went on again in the six last years of his Reign.
Sixthly, That the Artaxerxes, Ezra 4.7. was Longimanus, who throughout his
Reign, forty years together, hindered the work. Seventhly, That Darius, who in
his second year set the work on foot, bringing it to perfection in his sixth,
was Darius Nothus; never an one of all which can be proved by any clear
Scripture, yet not one of them but is and must be supposed, to make good this
opinion.

Let the Reader therefore judge what probability is in it; And also by the way
take notice, to learn hence never to take up things upon trust; what a do is
made, by not a sew, to prove a thing that is not, or at least that cannot be
made appear to be? to prove Zerubbabels Temple was six and forty years in
building, because it is said, Six and forty years was this Temple in building;
whereas indeed, if we follow the opinion to the heels, it cannot be proved that
Zerubbabels Temple is there spoken of. Could any demonstrative Text be brought
to prove that, it would then be worth while to look after the six and forty
years, but to spend time about it, while the main Question is begged, is but
lost labor.

3 A third opinion there is of these seven weeks, which makes them to be the
term of time Jerusalems Wall and City was building, which was nine and forty
years (says the Author of it) reckoning from the first of Cyrus to the two and
thirtieth of Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah having finished the whole work returns
again to the King, Neh. 13.6.

But this cannot be,

1 Because what I have already said in my second Reason, in answer to the first
opinion, lies with the same weight against this.

2 Because the building of Jerusalem was no part of Cyrus Decree (as formerly I
have proved) which yet this opinion supposes; yea the whole stresse of it lies
upon the neck of this supposition.

3 Because in beginning the seven so high, it does also begin the seventy weeks
as high as Cyrus, which is an error.

4 Because the Author fails greatly in point of Chronology, whilst he accounts
but nine and forty years betwixt Cyrus first, and Nehemiah's Artaxerxes two and
thirtieth year, which upon a due examination (when we shall come to it) will
appear to be many more.

4 There is yet another opinion also of these seven weeks (not much differing
from that I named last) viz. That these seven weeks are the time Jerusalem,
with the rest of the Cities of Judah were building and repairing.

But this cannot stand, because of our second Reason, laid down in answer to
the first opinion, which batters this also; and also because, the very
foundation of it is neither Scripture, nor Story, but pure and mere conjecture,
as Master Mede proves, who opposes himself to this opinion. Daniels Weeks,
page 15.

What has been hitherto said by way of Answer to each, is sufficient to show
the inconsistency of all those opinions, with the words, which make the seven
weeks one time, the sixty two another, assigning several works to the several
times.

Seeing therefore none of these can stand, nor the forementioned conjecture of
Mr. Mede, I shall now lay down what I conceive of the Text, reading the word
thus, with an alteration of the stops only, Know therefore, and understand,
that from the going forth of the Commandment to restore, and to build
Jerusalem, unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and sixty two
weeks, the street shall be built again, and the wall, even in troublous times.
The meaning is, That from the time the command to build Jerusalem should go
forth, until the appearance of the Messiah, should be sixty nine weeks; all
which time, notwithstanding the great troubles and overturnings that within it
should be in the world, through the translation of the Monarchy from the Medes
and Persians to the Grecians, and from them to the Romans (all which fell out
within this time) and the distractions of particular Kingdoms, and the great
opposition that should be made against the Jews; yet such should Gods care of,
and his providence over his people be, in this so mighty a hurly burly, and
commotion of Nations, and particular oppositions made against them, as that in
despite of all, Jerusalem throughout this troublous time should continue
building and built. And so observe, the words, as they set forth the length of
the time from the day Jerusalem should begin to be built, until the Messiahs
appearance, so do they include within them a sweet and gracious promise of the
care God would have of his people, through and amiust all these tossings,
until the Messiah should appear, they should still be preserved one way or
other, who ever went to wrack; and this notably answers to Daniels prayer,
being a blessed quieting of his spirit, and to the event also. And indeed, one
principal thing that makes this place so knotty, is in a manner but a trifle,
viz. making a half point betwixt the seven weeks, and the sixty two weeks,
where none should be made, and neglecting a Coma at the end of the sixty two
weeks, where for the more easy understanding of the words its requisite one
should be.

Now, as for the Reason why the seventy weeks, which first are mentioned whole,
verse. 24. are afterward broken into parts, I conceive it to be this only,
That hereby the mystery of this Prophecy might be the greater, and the time
the harder to compute, which otherwise (the Head of the seventy once found)
would have had no difficulty in it; therefore, that the mystery might be so
much the greater, we have the seventy weeks, which are first mentioned whole,
broken into three parts, two smaller, and one greater, which are expressed
severally; first, seven weeks, then sixty two weeks, then one week, verse. 27.
and that too in such a manner, as if the seven weeks had relation to one thing,
the sixty two to another, the one, to another; whereas it is not so, but all
put together make up but that seventy we had before, and serve to point us to
the time of our Saviors Passion, which is said, verse. 26. to be after sixty
two weeks, that is, sixty two added to the other seven, making sixty nine;
then, viz. at the end of sixty nine weeks, in the beginning of the seventieth,
is our Redeemer anointed to his work: Hence that Character of the seventy
weeks, verse. 24. Seventy weeks are determined to anoint the most Holy. This day
of his anointing, is the day of his appearance to Israel; being anointed, he
goes forth the rest of that seventieth week, till the time of his Death,
preaching the Gospel, doing good, healing those that were sick, casting out
Devils, etc. And this I conceive to be the thing meant by his confirming the
Covenant with many for one week, verse. 27. And indeed this agrees excellently
well to that of Paul, Romans 15.8. Now I say, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of
the Circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the
Fathers. Christ himself by his own preaching must confirm the Covenant made
with the Fathers, which (says the Apostle) is the reason why he was made a
Minister of the Circumcision, i.e. a Minister under the Law. Now this he did in
the beginning of the seventieth week, going about preaching the space of three
years, and but three, as is clear, Luke 13.32, 33. And this was till toward
the middle of the week ( i.e. till four years before the four hundred and
ninety were fully expired) at which time he was cut off, which I take to be the
meaning of those words, In the midst of one week shall he cause the sacrifice
and the oblation to cease, verse. 27. i.e. Christ's Death which fell out, not in
the end, but in the middle of the last and seventieth week, did put an end to
all the Jewish Sacrifices and Worship; the Great Passcover being slain, all
other Sacrifices terminate in him.

And indeed that Christ's Passion must necessarily fall out about the middle of
the seventieth week, is clear, because the Text speaks positively that it
should be but seven weeks, and sixty two weeks, i.e. sixty nine weeks, until
the Messiah shall appear; So soon therefore as ever the sixty nine weeks were
at an end, and the seventieth but begun, we must of necessity conclude the
Messiah did appear, for otherwise it should be upwards of sixty nine weeks to
his appearance. Now the thing which will make all clear is, what we are to
understand by his Appearance. We may not understand his Birth; for if so, then
he not being put to death till he was four and thirty years old, which space of
time contains almost five of Daniels weeks, it should be seventy three, or
seventy four weeks to the cutting off of the Messiah, whereas the Text tells us
he is cut off after sixty nine weeks, or after seven weeks, and sixty two
weeks, which make sixty nine.

I have in my Key, These. 57. pitched upon the time of his Baptism, but not so
considerately, for though his Appearance then was to John Baptist, and some few
Disciples whom he chose, yet did he not till afterward appear publicly.

This Appearance of his, I do therefore conceive (following herein the learned
Mede) is to be reckoned from that time in which he begun to preach publicly to
the Nation of the Jews, declaring himself to be the Messiah, which was (as Mr.
Mede has well noted) after his Harbinger John had now finished his message,
and was cast into prison, which circumstance of time is precisely noted in the
Evangelical story, and the place also where he began his preaching, Mark. 1.14.
After John was put in prison Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of
the Kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled, i.e. (says Mr. Mede)
the last week of the sixty two weeks is now come, Matthew. 4.12. compared with
17. This is the very time and place whence Peter reckoned the beginning of
Christ's Prophecy in his Sermon to Cornelius, Act. 10.37. That word which was
published throughout all Judaea, and began from Galilee, after the Baptism
which John preached. And which is an evidence that this was the time of his
anointing by his Father, Luke tells us Chap. 4.18, 19, 20, 21. That when he
first opened the Book to teach the people in Nazareth of Galilee, he opened
upon that place, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me
to preach the Gospel to the poor; Upon which Text our Savior himself Comments,
verse. 21. This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears; as if he should
say, This day is Daniels seventieth week begun, now is the Messiah anointed;
from this time (which according to Mr. Mede was a full year after Christ's
Baptism) we are to reckon those three days or years, Luke 13.32, 33. To this
opinion the several Passeovers betwixt Christ's Baptism and Death, do best
accord, which in case the Principle were as demonstrable, as it is received and
owned by good men, that of the Passeovers alone does necessarily infer that
four years must pass betwixt his Baptism and Death.

This opinion, though it differs from what I have laid down in my Key, yet is
it so far from destroying my Harmony, that it suits it better then that does;
for by the addition of this year, the two thousand three hundred days, and the
one thousand three hundred thirty five, do both fall at the end of the year one
thousand seven hundred and one; but according to the Computation there laid
down, one falls at the beginning of the aforesaid year, the other at the end.
This being so, let it be considered how long it was betwixt Christ's beginning
to preach, and his Passion, none will say it was seven years, the forequoted
Text, Luke 13. shows it to be but three. And this no way repugns to Daniels
half week; for the Scripture is not so curious in dividing as to go to the
exactness of a half week, it is sufficient that there is the half of the years
contained in the week, though some few months be wanting: And therefore well
and considerately did, our Translators render the half of the week, by the
midst of the week, which phrase mollify the rigor of Division, and helps to
remove the scruple that might otherwise arise through the want that there is,
in this division, of some few months. Now I say, Christ from the day of his
anointing, which was at the very end of the sixty ninth week, and in the
beginning of the seventieth, preaching but three years, and then being
crucified, it necessarily follows, that his Passion must be, not at the end,
but in the midst of the week, which week too can be no other then the
seventieth and last. And therefore (as I have observed in my Key) it is said,
verse. 26. after threescore and two weeks ( i.e. sixty two added to the seventy,
making sixty nine) shall the Messiah be cut off, and not after seventy weeks,
because Christ's sufferings came upon him before the seventieth week was fully
and completely expired.

And upon these reasons I have concluded in my Key, These. 57. that we are not
to account upon so many years fully as there are days in seventy weeks, but to
deduct four out of the seventieth and last week, because Christ's sufferings
(which are the point where the seventy weeks expire) fell out to be in the very
close of the third day or year of the seventieth and last week.

And indeed it is an Argument of Gods special care, that he should leave in
this Prophecy, such clear hints, to prove that we are to cut off four years of
the 70th week, without which we should have run on to the end of it, and so
computed four years more then we ought; which, besides the breach that hereby
would be made in Chronology, would have made this Prophecy irreconcilable
with the reports of the several Evangelists as touching the time that passed
betwixt Christ's Anointing and Passion.

Object. But it is said, verse. 27. He shall confirm the Covenant with many for
one Week; Which one week can be no other but the seventieth and last; for it
is spoken of as a week distinct from the seven weeks, and the sixty two weeks;
If therefore after sixty nine weeks are passed, one week is spent in confirming
the Covenant, then must we needs place the Death of Christ, which was his last
and sealing act, not in the midst, but in the end of the seventieth week.

Answ. Not so, for under the Phrase, One week, is not comprehended the whole
week, but the half only; and this is clear from the next words, in the midst
of the week shall he cause the Sacrifice, and Oblation to cease. In the midst
of what week? Ans. Of the one week, therefore Christ's Death must fall in the
midst or half (though not the exact half) of the one week; and if so, must not
be brought down to the end of that week. If it be said, The half week is to be
understood of the latter half, and that it is the error of the Translators,
which renders the half of the week, by the midst of the week, for it may as
well be taken for the latter half, as the former. To that I answer; If so,
then doubtless the Angel would have said in the end of the week, and not in
the half of the week; for the one is a proper phrase, the other improper; the
one leaves the thing without scruple, the other leaves a knot where none would
look for any; for who would ever imagine, that the Angel, whilst he speaks of
a half of the week, should mean the end. Nay, it cannot be otherwise, but that
that which is here called one week, must be the former half only, and no more,
for this reason, because the work to be done in the one week, is confirming
the Covenant.

Now this confirming the Covenant, being the highest act of Christ, as he was
a Minister of the Circumcision, it necessarily follows, that Christ could do
this no longer then within that time that he was laying out himself in his
Ministerial Function.

This confirming the Covenant cannot therefore be a work of seven years durance
(which must be, if we take the one week for a full week) but of three only,
which agrees well to half of a week, and (for what I have said before) the
former half.

If any be curious to know the reason why it should be called, One week, and
yet but half a week only meant thereby?

Answ. It is with respect to the seventy weeks, sixty nine of which he had
already reckoned in two parts, first seven weeks, then sixty two; now because
the seventieth week, which in the gross sum was reckoned, had not yet in the
parts been mentioned, he therefore now brings that in, calling it one week,
yet with laying down such Cautions and Considerations, as that we may well
perceive, this one week, though called a week (with a respect to the other
weeks of the seventy, that it is in the gross sum conjoined with) is not
indeed to be understood of a whole week, but the first half only.

Object. But if the cutting off of the Messiah be in the middle of the week,
how then are there seventy weeks determined on the Holy City?

For answer. Mr. Mede has a Notion concerning this, worthy to be written in
Letters of gold; Only he applies it to his opinion, viz. That the seventy
weeks are to end with the destruction of Jerusalem. So much as concerns that I
shall alter in reciting it. The Notion speaks thus; It should be observed
(though it uses not so to be) that the Angel reckons not by single years, but
by weeks; If he had said there should be four hundred and ninety years to the
Passion of Christ, then indeed to make good the prediction, Christ must have
suffered in the last year: But when he says it shall be seventy weeks, it is
enough if so be Christ suffer in the seventieth week. For if those who reckon
by years, if the year designed answers the event, will not stand upon the
compleatnesse of months and days; nor those who reckon by days, upon the
compleatnesse of hours and minutes; no more in the Angels reckoning here by
weeks, if so be the number of the weeks be complete, are the parts of a week to
be exacted. Seeing therefore the Text is clear, that the Messiah is to be cut
off in the seventieth week, it matters not as to the making up of seventy
weeks, though the thing were done in the middle of the week; for sufficient it
is, that the same is done in the seventieth week.

Thus the sundry great knots, as touching the seven weeks, the sixty two weeks,
the one week, and the half week, are all untied by this opinion, which ends the
seventy weeks with the Passion of Christ, which no other opinion in a way
agreeable to the Text, other Scriptures, yea reason it self, either has done,
or can do.

By this therefore we are yet farther confirmed in our foregoing Position, viz.
That we are, with the Passion of our dear Lord and Savior, to end Daniels
Seventy Weeks.

SECT. 7.
Object. But against this our ending of the seventy weeks, it may be objected,
viz. That the seventy weeks cannot end with the Passion of Christ, because it
is manifest from sundry expressions in the Text, that the very Prophecy looks
farther, and treats of things that relate to another time; For verse. 26.
mention is made of the destruction of Jerusalem, both City and Sanctuary, which
was performed many years after Christ's death by Titus Vespasian, The people of
the Prince that shall come shall destroy the City and Sanctuary, and the end
thereof shall be with a Flood. Yea the following words in the very same verse,
Unto the end of the War desolations are determined, relate to a time much
lower, according to the Exposition I my self have given of them, Key, These. 17.
Yea likewise those words verse 27. For the overspreading of abominations be
shall make it desolate, even until the consummation, and that determined shall
be powered upon the desolate, must needs relate to the very last times, in
which the Jews, who for crucifying and rejecting the Lord of Glory, were given
up of God to remain a desolate, forsaken people, until the Consummation, or
the time of the end, shall be again received into favor, and restored under
Christ to greater Liberty and Glory then ever. Therefore must not the seventy
weeks end as before, but be extended to some farther time.

Answ. The foregoing Expressions, though they come within the compass of the
Vision, yet not within the compass of the seventy weeks; or thus, Though they
are a part of the words of the Prophecy, yet are they no part of the seventy
weeks; that is, They do not relate to things done within this time, but things
to be done afterward, when the seventy weeks should be expired. For observe,
The Angel having informed Daniel, that after seven weeks, and sixty two weeks (
i. e. sixty nine) to be reckoned from the going forth of the Command to
restore and to build Jerusalem, the Messiah should appear, who having confirmed
the Covenant part of the seventieth week, should in the midst of that week
be cut off, by which Death of his, he should put an end to the Mosaical
worship, etc. He now goes on relating farther, what should befall the Jews
hereupon, even until their last Restoration, not any longer speaking of things
as referring to the seventy weeks (to the end of which he was come already)
but as suiting the former Discourse, and also answering Daniels desire, which
was, to know the final issue of things concerning his own people; and therefore
the Angel tells him, that the Messiah being cut off, the Jews City and
Sanctuary should thereupon be destroyed, the body of their Nation be made
desolate, in which desolate, forlorn, unchurched condition, they should remain
even unto the time of the end, when Christ notwithstanding all their
unkindnesse to him, would yet make himself known unto them, taking that poor
desolate people into his arms and favor again; and this last of their
Restoration seems to me to be the thing hinted in the very last words of the
Prophecy, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate, i.e. (as I
conceive, otherwise nothing at all is here spoken of their Restoration) That
determined One, viz. the Christ, the Mesiah, the determined time of whose first
coming was seventy weeks, and who accordingly at the end of that time did come,
was cut off by the Jews, Jerusalem for this destroyed, they made desolate,
unchurched, until the consummation, shall in the consummation, or in the time
of the end, be poured upon the desolate, that is, reveal himself unto, pour
out his Spirit upon, this desolate Nation, who now shall see and confess, that
that act of their Forefathers in crucifying Christ, was indeed the cutting off
of their Messiah, or that determined One promised to them at the end of seventy
weeks.

Thus though the Prophecy it self brings us as low as Christ's second coming,
yet are not the seventy weeks to be brought down thither; but we are to end
them, as before, with the Passion of Christ; and whatsoever expressions have a
farther look, we are to interpret them not as having a respect to the seventy
weeks (which are complete without them) but as spoken to this end, to give
Daniel information how the case should stand with his people, between the time
of their rejection for the cutting off of the Messiah (where ends the seventy
weeks) and their Restoration.

Thus much as touching Daniels Seventy Weeks.
CHAP. III. Wherein Inquiry is made into the number of the Years that passed
betwixt the first of Cyrus, and the twentieth of Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah
received his Commission to build Jerusalem.
SECT. 1.
HAving in the foregoing Chapter found out the true beginning and ending of
Daniels seventy weeks, it now remains, That we enquire into the number of the
years that passed from Cyrus first, unto the twentieth of that Artaxerxes when
Nehemiah went up to Jerusalem with Commission to build it.

And the more is this piece of our way to be heeded, because Chronologers
themselves differ no less then above a hundred years, some from others, in
computing this time; and a hundred years lost or gained is no little matter.

I shall therefore, as hitherto I have done, so in this also, make
Scripture-Text compared and laid together my chief rule; showing what
probabilities I have from the Scripture it self for the thing which I assert;
and by those examining others opinions, choosing or refusing upon no other
account.

To come therefore to the Question.

Quest. What number of years are we to account upon betwixt the first of Cyrus,
and the twentieth of Artaxerxes?

Ans. It is the opinion of Dr. Lightfoot in his Harmony of the Old Testament
(whom I am necessitated for truths sake here to mention by name (as Mr. Mede
before) because I can neither bring forth his strength, nor my own, without
references to the Author) that we are to reckon upon seven and thirty years
only, which by him are laid down thus, viz. Cyrus three, Artaxerxes Ahasuerus
fourteen, Artaxerxes Darius twenty, the whole is seven and thirty.

But though I much value the learning and judgment of the Author; yet cannot I
conclude with him in this.

1 Because the allowance of so few years to this Period, can never (unless new
Heads, agreeable to Scripture and Reason, be found out for each several number)
cause a concurrence in ends betwixt the two thousand three hundred days, and
the one thousand three hundred thirty five; the one thousand two hundred and
sixty days, and the one thousand two hundred and ninety, which upon the
account of the Reasons laid down in my Key, These. 17. and These. 34. must be.

2 Because the several suppositions upon which this opinion is built, are not
only in themselves uncertain, but even inconsistent with other parts of the
Scripture History, and Right-reason. And therefore of necessity the foundation
being sandy, must the opinion fall.

Now the things by Dr. Lightfoot supposed, which are bottom for this opinion,
are these.

1 That Artaxerxes Ahasuerus, mentioned Ezra 4.6, 7. was Son and next Successor
in the Persian Monarchy to Cyrus. Asserted in his Chronicle upon the Book of
Hesther.

2 That this Artaxerxes Ahasuerus reigned but fourteen years in all. Asserted
upon Hesther 10.

3 That Darius, in the sixth of whose Reign the Temple-work was finished Ezra
6.15. and Artaxerxes, in the seventh of whose Reign Ezra went up to Jerusalem,
Ezra 7.1, 7. and Nehemiah afterward in the twentieth, Nehem. 2. was one and
the same person under two names. In the Chronicle upon Ezra, Chap. 6. Chap. 7.
Chap. 9, 10.

4 That it was the complete number of seventy years from the time that
Nebuch^^nezzar destroyed the first Temple, until Darius second year, in which
the building of the second was advanced. In the Chronicle upon Hesther. 10.

5 That Ezra was Son to that Serajah the High Priest, whom Nebuchadnezzar slew
at the time the first Temple was destroyed, 2 King. 25.18, 22. and therefore
must necessarily be born before the destruction of Solomon's Temple; which being
fifty years before Cyrus first, and Ezra being so active now in the days of
Artaxerxes, it cannot agree to his age and activity, that the time betwixt
Cyrus first, and Artaxerxes twenty, should be long. Upon Ezra 7.

6 That the design of the Holy Ghost in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah is to
give us a Chronicle of the Porsian Kings. Upon Nohemiah p. 204.

These Six Particulars, which I find here and there scattered in Doctor
Light-foot, and have for the better discussing of the thing put them into this
order, will upon a due examination be all of them found too light.

1 Particular, That Artaxerxes Ahasuerus was next successor to Cyrus.

Ans. This is a thing very unlikely; 1. Because Cyrus Son being so deadly an
enemy to the Jews, as that he by his power did put a stop to the work of the
Temple, his Father yet living (as is by Doctor Light-foot himself, p. 190. and
others assirmed) we cannot conceive the Jews would attempt to build whilst he
was alive; or put case they should, there would be no need of writing Letters
to this wicked wretch, and in them coining false accusations to cause the work
to cease, (as the Adversaries do to Artaxerxes) for he of himself was, and
would have been ready enough to hinder the work.

2 The very Circumstances of the Text argue this Artaxerxes to have been at a
further distance from Cyrus then his immediate Successor; for, 1. He seems to
have been a very stranger to the state of the Jewish affairs, and therefore
receiving Letters about them, causes the Chronicles to be searched, Ezra 4.19.
to find what manner of people the Jews had been: now it is not likely that
Cyrus Son should be such a stranger to this People, their State, and Affairs,
whom his Father knew so well, and he succeeding his Father (according to Doctor
Light-foot) after his Father had reigned three years. 2. He seems likewise to
have been altogether unacquainted with Cyrus decree, which Cyrus Son was not;
for how could he, and yet hinder it whilst his Father was alive? But this
Artaxerxes was, which the Adversaries knew well enough, or undoubtedly durst
not otherwise have charged the Jews with building a City, when themselves knew
it was but a Temple, lest hereby they should give the King occasion to reply,
What now, are they building a City? I am sure my Father Cyrus never decreed
that; and so by this, their craft and malice should come out.

All the color that I find in Doctor Light-foot for this opinion, is, That
Cyrus Son was a hinderer, and so was this Artaxerxes, p. 190. But does it
therefore follow he must needs be Cyrus Son? might not Cyrus Son be one
hinderer, and this Artaxerxes another after him? which is the more likely
opinion for the Reasons before given.

Now in case this Link prove weak, the Chain is easily broken: for if between
Cyrus and Artaxerxes did reign any other King, then will the years betwixt
Cyrus first, and the twentieth of the other Artaxerxes be more then thirty
seven.

2 Particular, That Artaxerxes Ahasuerus reigned but fourteen years in all.

Ans. It is the grant of Doctor Light-foot, that Artaxerxes Ahasuerus, Ezra 4.
is the same with that Ahasuerus we read of in Esther, upon which grant (as
sufficient for us) we shall at present go, leaving the proof of the thing to
another place; now let us by this rule examine the Position. We read in Esther
that full thirteen years of Ahasuerus reign were run out in that very Month
wherein the Jews cut off their enemies in Shushan, and elsewhere, as is
evident. Compare Chap. 3.7. with Chap. 9.1. He has then from this day
(according to Doctor Light-foots account) but one year more to reign.

Now let it be observed what after this was done, and see whether or no the
thing were likely to be compassed in a year.

First, Mordecai sends Letters to all the Jews that were in all the Provinces
of King Ahasuerus, far and near to establish the fourteenth, and fifteenth
days of the Month Adar, as days of Thanksgiving to be kept perpetually every
year, Chap. 9.20, 21.

Secondly, The Jews of the several Provinces receive these Letters, and upon
receipt assemble together, Ordain, and Institute for themselves and posterity,
that these days should be observed as Mordecai had written, ver. 23.26, 27, 28.

Thirdly, The report of this is carried back again to Shushan from all
quarters, and thereupon Esther the Queen, and Mordecai the Jew, write Letters
the second time, and send to all the Jews, in the one hundred and twenty seven
Provinces, to confirm what upon receipt of Mordecai's first Letters they had
decreed for themselves and their ^eed, ver. 29, 30, 31.

Now observe, the Dominions of Ahasuerus, over which the Jews were scattered,
were so vast and large, that when upon Esthers Petition a Counter-decree was to
be sent forth to put stop to the Decree of Haman, although the sending of it
fotth was seven or eight Months before the time Hamans Decree was to have been
put in execution, as will appear by comparing Chap. 8.9. with Chap. 9.1. yet
lest through the length of the way it should come too late, Mordecai sends
Posts on Hors-back every way, and that upon swift Beasts, Chap. 8.10. and
withal they go forth hastened and pressed on, verse. 14. Now if in seven Months
time by swift running Posts there could hardly be a conveyance of a Message
into all parts of Ahasuerus Dominions, how can we imagine that afterward, when
Letters were sent forth not thus hastened, but more leasurely, they should be
conveyed all over Ahasuerus Kingdom, and the Jews thereupon from several parts
meet together, hold a Council, institute a Day to be kept by themselves and
posterity, and the report of this when done returned again to the Court from
all parts, and upon this, new Letters by way of ratification of their
proceedings sent again from the Court to the Jews thorow-out all the one
hundred twenty seven Provinces, and all this within the space of one year.

Add hereto, That the greatness of Mordecai under this Ahasuerus, Chap. 10.
his being accepted of the multitude of his Brethren, his seeking and
endeavoring, as before their deliverance, so now the wealth of his People, his
speaking peace to all his Seed, seems clearly to argue that these things were
not of one years continuance, but of a longer time. Such choice mercies given
of God to his people, especially after such bitter storms, are not usually so
short lived.

This stone removed, the building goes to decay, for in case Artaxerxes
Ahasuerus reigned but one year more then fourteen, then will there be found
upwards of thirty seven years betwixt the first of Cyrus, and the twentieth of
Artaxerxes.

3 Particular, That Darius, Ezra 6. and Artaxerxes, Chap. 7. are one and the
same, only a change of the name, and so consequently the seventh of Artaxerxes
when Ezra went up to Jerusalem, Ezra 7.7. was the year following that in which
the Temple was finished, which is called the sixth of Darius, chap. 6.15.

Answ. This I can by no means give assent to.

1 Because I find Artaxerxes mentioned as a person distinct from Darius, Chap.
6.14. And the Elders of the Jews builded -- and finished it, according to the
Commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus
and Darius, and Artaxerxes King of Persia: now by the same reason that Cyrus is
a distinct Person from Darius, by the same must Artaxerxes likewise. Now the
Artaxerxes here named cannot be that Artaxerxes we read of, Chapter four, 1.
Because he was before Darius time, but this seems by the order of placing to
have been afterward. 2. He was a hinderer of Gods Work among the Jews, yea put
such a stop thereto, that upon the very stop he put, it is said, Ezra 4.24.
The work ceased until the second year of Darius; but this Artaxerxes is a
furtherer, and such a one as did further Gods work effectually, as did Cyrus
and Darius; he must therefore be that Artaxerxes Ezra speaks of afterward.

Obj. If it be said, But how did he give command for building the Temple, which
work the text says expressly was finished in the sixth of Darius, which was
before his time?

I answer; 1. We may very well understand these words of something done by
Artaxerxes, with the vast sums of Money he gave himself, and commanded his
Treasurers, Chap. 7.15, 16, 20, 21, 22. to give forth to Ezra, either by way of
reparation of the Temple, which through many years time since the same was
built was gone to decay; or else by way of Ornament, adding to the beauty of
the building, which is manifestly hinted, verse. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of
our Fathers, which has put such a thing as this in the Kings heart, to
beautify the House of the Lord which is in Jerusalem; and also the very words
of the Decree, verse. 20.23. import as much as one of these: Or,

2. I may answer, That those words, The Elders of the Jews builded and finished
it according to the Commandment of Cyrus -- are not to be understood in so
strict a sense as to limit each command to the Temple-work only; but in a more
large sense, as having reference to those several Commands given forth by the
Persian Kings, which concerned the Jews welfare, and the carrying on Gods Work
among them, whereof one was given forth by Cyrus in the first of his reign,
another afterward by Darius, and two more after that by Artaxerxes; and
because Artaxerxes had in a more especial manner been Benefactor to Ezra, and
the Jews in his time, therefore Ezra, upon occasion of relating the story of
the finishing of the House, having made mention of the other two, Cyrus and
Darius, will not pass over Artaxerxes, but by anticipation names him before,
though his Story come not in till afterward; not so much minding the curiosity
of that particular Question, whether all three had been forwarders of that
particular work of building Gods House, as being intent to express the truth
of the matter in general, viz. That all three, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes
had been friends to the Jews, and furtherers of Gods work among them.

2 Because Ezra, coming up to Jerusalem in the 7th of Artaxerxes, finds a High
Priest, who was Grandchild to him that was High Priest in the 6th of Darius,
when the Temple-work was finished; Jeshua being then High Priest, but one
Eliashib is now High Priest; compare Ezra 10.6. with Neh. 3.20, 21 True, Ezra
calls not Eliashib High Priest at this time, as does Nehemiah afterward; yet no
other High Priest being mentioned, and withal Eliashib being so aged that he
had then a Son, a Priest, viz. Johanan, Ezra. 10.6. it is very probable he was
at this time High Priest. Now observe, this Eliashib was Grandchild to Jeshua
who acted with Zerubbabel, as Nehem. 12.10. And Jeshua begat Jojakim, Jojakim
also begat Eliashib -- All laid together, can we imagine that in the space of
one year (for by Doctor Light-foots reckoning it is no more) the Grandfather
should be dead, and the Father after him, and the Grandchild High Priest in
the room of Grandfather and Father? or suppose he were not High Priest till
afterward, yet so aged as to have a Son grown up to be a Priest, who can
believe it?

3 Because Nehemiah, Chap. 5.15. makes mention of Governors to have been in
Jerusalem before his time, that had oppressed the people, and that did not fear
God; for in this he opposes himself to them, he feared God, therefore did not
so as those former Governors. Now amongst these we may not reckon Zerubbabel,
who was a righteous Prince, one that feared God, and also Governor from the
first coming out of Babylon until the second Temple was finished; nor may we
take in any Governors who did bear rule afterward from the time that Ezra
went up to Jerusalem until the days of Nehemiah, because in all this time Ezra
was authorized by King Artaxerxes to set Governors and Magistrates over the
people, Chap. 7.25. And thou Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God that is in thy
hand, set Magistrates and Judges --; now it is not likely that Ezra, a man
inspired by God, would set up such Governors, or if through mistake he should
the first time so do, yet having seen the evil of it, he would be more wary in
his next choice. These unjust oppressing Governors must therefore be supposed
to bear rule betwixt Zerubbabels time and Ezraes; and if so, then cannot we
think with Doctor Light-foot the time should be so little as one year; if more,
then of necessity must Darius and Artaxerxes be two distinct persons

Now this which is the main Foundationstone not being firm, the building must
needs be weak: for if Darius were one person, and Artaxerxes another, then put
case Darius dyed that very year the Temple was finished, which is a thing very
unlikely, considering he craved the prayers of Gods people, unto whom he had
been such a friend, that he might live long, Ezra 6.11. And also suppose
Artaxerxes his next Successor, yet because Ezraes going up is not till
Artaxerxes seventh year, there will be upon the result six years more then
Doctor Light-foot has accounted for, which makes such a breach in his building
as cannot be made up again.

4 Particular, That it was seventy years complete, and no more, from the time
the first Temple was destroyed, until the second of Darius, when the building
of the second was advanced.

Ans. This opinion standing upon the two first Suppositions, viz. 1. That
Artaxerxes Ahasuerus was Cyrus next Successor. 2. That this Artaxerxes
Ahasuerus reigned but fourteen years in all, both which we have before
disproved, it falls of it self; for in case we conceive any other King to have
reigned betwixt Cyrus and Artaxerxes Ahasuerus, or conceive Artaxerxes
Ahasuerus to have reigned more years then fourteen, the number of years amounts
to above seventy, and if so, then Doctor Light-foots computation must needs be
amiss.

5 Particular, That Ezra was Son to that Serajah the High Priest, whom
Nebuchadnezzar slew at the time the first Temple was destroyed, which Doctor
Light-foot proves from Ezraes Genealogy, Chap. 7.1.

Ans. This I must confess, look upon it one way, it seems to have in it much
strength, yet look upon it another, and it seems altogether improbable; for,
according to this reckoning, suppose Ezra to be born but the year before
Jerusalems destruction, when his Father was slain, yet must we (as says Doctor
Light-foot himself) suppose him fifty years old at least in that very year
which the Scripture calls Cyrus first; Now laying hereunto Doctor Light-foots
own words upon Nehem. 13. which are these, Ezra (says he) lived near the times
of Jaddua, who met Alexander the Great coming to Jerusalem, for he wrote the
Book of Chronicles in the time of Iohanan Iadduaes Father, Nehem. 12.23. and so
he lived well toward the expiration of the Persian Monarchy. Now let us lay
all together and weigh the whole; Ezra was fifty years old in Cyrus first year,
after that he must outlive four generations, and in the fifth generation write
the Book of the Chronicles; that four generations (though Doctor Light-foot
does not observe it) did pass betwixt the first of Cyrus and the days of
Iohanan Iadduaes father, is evident, Nehem. 12.10, 11. And Jeshua begat
Jojakim, Jojakim also begat Eliashib, and Eliashib begat Jojada, and Jojada
begat Jonathan, and Jonathan begat Jaddua Now observe, Ieshua was High Priest
in the first year of Cyrus, at the coming out of Babylon, Ezra 3.2. Ezra
out-lives him, there is one generation; Jojakim succeeded him, there is a
second; Eliashib him, there was a third; Jojada him, there was a fourth. All
these Ezra outlived, and in the fifth generation, namely of Johanan or
Jonathan Jadduaes Father, he wrote the Book of the Chronicles; he must
therefore certainly be very aged, that after fifty years of age should outlive
four generations, and live to see the fifth; yet this did Ezra in case he were
Son to that Serajah.

It is therefore (Iconceive) much better to say, that that Serajah, the Son of
Azariah, the Son of Hilkiah -- mentioned Ezra 7.1. was not immediate Father to
Ezra, but rather Grandfather, or Great Grandfather; now Ezra coming out of
his Loins is called his Son, though he were not the immediate Son, or next
Issue, for one of these Reasons.

Either first, because that Serajah was more famoussy known, being High Priest,
and killed at the sacking of Jerusalem, then possibly Ezraes next Father was,
and therefore Ezra passes over him in silence, and begins his Descent from the
other, who was more famously known.

Or secondly, because that Serajah was the first in the Line of Ezra upwards
that was High Priest: for though others did come betwixt Ezra and him, yet were
none of them High Priests; for the Priesthood from Serajah went on in another
Line, not that of Ezraes Father, but that of Iehosadaz (or Iosedech) father of
Ieshua, 1 Chronicles. 6.14, 15. Ezraes Father therefore, though he came of the House
of Aaron, yet because he was not of Aarons Line he passes him over, beginning
his Genealogy from the first of his Ancestors that was of that Line, namely
Serajah.

Or Thirdly (which I rather incline to) because it is very probable Ezraes
immediate Father was also named Serajah, and because the name of Father, and
Grandfather, or Great Grandfather was the same, he therefore in counting his
Pedigree passes over his Father, and such other (if any did come between) as
passed betwixt him and Serajah, and begins (as I have said) from him. Now a
like example to this we have in the very text, Ezra 7. if we compare it with 1 Chronicles. 6.4. to 15. for in the Genealogy, as we have it in Ezra, we find
betwixt Shallum and Merarioth but four generations, viz. of Zadok, of Ahitub,
of Amariah, of Azariah; but in the very same Genealogy as it is laid down in
the Chronicles, we have betwixt these two no less then ten Generations; And
what is the reason hereof? Why this; we have in the Chronicles between Shallum
and Merarioth two Zadoks, two Ahitubs, two Amariahs, two Azariahs; now Ezra in
his Genealogy to shun repetitions, contents himself with naming each one, and
then leaps over the rest of the same name. Now as I said, Ezraes Father being
in all likelihood named Serajah, that Ezra might not come over with the same
name twice, he therefore omits him, and begins with that Serajah, who yet was
more remote, carrying on his Pedigree from him. And that the thing I have said,
viz. That Ezraes Father was named Serajah, yet not Serajah the High Priest,
has in it a probability, is clear, because Nichem. 11.11. we read of one
Serajah, which could not be Serajah the High Priest, who was slain long before,
but this Serajah was then living, and dwelling in Jerusalem, and yet
notwithstanding his Line is the very same with Ezraes, for he is Son of
Hilkiah, Son of Meshullam, (or Shallum) Son of Zadok, etc. and therefore in all
likelihood no other but Ezraes Father.

And here again observe as a further confirmation of the thing before noted,
viz. That because the same name should not be brought over twice, therefore is
Serajah the High Priest here passed over, and all betwixt him and Nehemiahs
Serajah; and the Pedigree of this Serajah begins with Hilkiah, the Son of
Shallum, the Son of Zadok, though yet Hilkiah was not immediate Father to this
Serajah, but at a great distance separated from him two or three generations at
least; two we read of, Ezra 7.1. viz. Serajah the High Priest, and Azariah,
which both come betwixt Nehemiahs Serajah and Hilkiah. I say therefore, that it
is a thing very likely, that Ezraes immediate Father was named Serajah, and for
the reason he would not come twice over with the same name, and the former
reasons put together, he therefore passes him over, and begins more upwards in
his Line, viz. with Serajah the High Priest, which is a thing more probable by
far, then to imagine that Ezra who was fifty years old in the first of
Cyrits, should afterward outlive four Generations, and in the Fifth be a
Writer of Chronicles, as does necessarily follow upon Doctor Light-foots
opinion; yea that he who was fifty years old when the Persian Monarchy began,
should live (as says Doctor Lightfoot) till toward the expiration of it;
which considering that the Persian Monarchy lasted two hundred years, it
beginning (says Helvicus) in the sixty second Olympiad, and ending in the one
hundred and twelfth, now to each Olympiad four years being allowed (which is
the rule of computation by Olympiads) the fifty Olympiads of the Persian
Monarchy make up the even sum of two hundred years, which is a term so long,
that notwithstanding with God nothing is impossible, yet to me it seems very
improbable, That Ezra, a man fifty years old at the beginning of this time,
should live toward or near the end of it. This very number of years I confess
is not mentioned in Scripture; yet however the foregoing Text assuring us this
Monarchy lasted no less then five generations, we may well conclude the time
could not be much less:

6 Particular, That the design of the Holy Chost, in Ezra and Nehemiah, is to
give us a Chronicle of the Persian Kings.

Ans. This cannot I conceive, but judge the contrary, viz. That the design of
the Holy Ghost is another thing, namely, to record the state of the Jewish
affairs, not in the least intending a Chronicle of the Kings of Persia; and my
reason is, because the Scripture has not ascertained us that Artaxerxes
Ahasuerus was next Successor to Cyrus, nor Darius to him, nor has it told us
how long any one of the Persian Kings did reign, and therefore it seems very
unlikely that the intendment of the Holy Ghost should be to give us a Chronicle
of the times, and yet leave us altogether in the dark, as to the persons that
reigned, and the time how long.

Nay, what need was there of continuing the ordinary Scripture Chronicle any
further then the end of the seventy years Captivity? seeing with the first of
Cyrus, where the seventy years expire, we have a Divine Chronology left us of
the whole of the time from that very year, until the second coming of Christ;
if therefore we have but sufficient left us in the Scripture to make out upon
sure grounds this account, viz. of the two thousand three hundred years, we
need not after once they are begun, carry on the Scripture Chronicle upon any
other foot but this only, of the two thousand three hundred years. By the help
of which number, being ordered by a wonderful hand of Providence, there to
begin where the seventy years of the Captivity ended, (after which we are
altogether in the dark, as to the questions, Who reigned, or how long? having
nothing (were this number thrown aside) to build our says upon but Human
reports) we have a certain Scripture Chronology from the very day of the
Creation until the day of Christ's second coming. Those know not what they
lose, nor indeed what inconvenience in this respect they draw upon themselves,
who would have these two thousand three hundred days to be Natural days; nor
that Author neither, who would have but half so many years understood as there
are days, so fixing the head of this number downwards very low in the times of
the New Testament; for seeing Daniels four hundred and ninety years cannot be
begun with the first of Cyrus (as I have proved before) but do begin with the
twentieth of Artaxerxes, let it be shown from any other Scripture (this Number,
and the Argument lying in it, being set aside) the certain number of years
betwixt Cyrus first, and the twentieth of Artaxerxes; if this can be done, I am
wonderously mistaken, and I think I may be bold to say it cannot; If it be not
done, I am sure then the very grounds of Chronology will be fallible; and if
so, what may we expect the Conclusions will be? Well therefore (if all be
considered) may this number go under the title of the account of the Wonderful
Numberer, as Daniel calls it.

By this I am further confirmed in my beginning of the two thousand three
hundred years, that I have begun them aright, in beginning them with the first
of Cyrus; and that they may not be begun either higher or lower for what need
have we of beginning them with the beginning of Nebuchadnezzars Tyranny over
Israel, seeing the duration of that is set forth by another number of Seventy
years, to the end of which Seventy years the grounds of Chronologers are
perfect, without a supply from this? to carry this therefore up into that time
is superfluous.

Again, should we begin them lower then the first of Cyrus, then because we
have no other Scripture-ground to go upon but this only, for many years that
followed, a defect will be (as I have said) in the very foundation of
Chronology. Seeing therefore we may not begin them either higher or lowet, the
beginning we have stated, and that only is the truth.

From all that has been said, it appears, that Dr. Lightfoot's Suppositions,
are but Suppositions, not having in them the force of Arguments to uphold the
thing they would countenance; Nay, the very things themselves, look upon them in
our Answers, do clearly argue the time betwixt Cyrus first, and Artaxerxes
twentieth, to be much more then seven and thirty years.

Besides, Dr. Lightfoots suppository grounds, something farther of a like
nature may be urged, which seems to argue that the time betwixt Cyrus first,
and Artaxerxes twentieth year, could not be long. As

First, the names of those who sealed the Covenant with Nehemiah, Chap. 10. are
many of them the very same with the names found in the Register of those who
came up with Zerubbabel, Ezra. 2. it seems therefore that those persons were
now living, if so, then cannot the time be esteemed long.

Ans. The names, Ezra 2. and again Nehem. 10. are not names of men, as
particular persons, but as Heads of Families, for which cause the persons
mentioned by name, are called the chief of the People, the Princes, Nobles,
Neh. 9.38. Chap. 10.14.29. Hence the Head of the Family of Parosh, goes under
the name of Parosh (as he was a public person, and Head of a Family so called)
in the generation Zerubbabel lived in, and also afterward in Nehemiahs
generation. Not that Parosh (and so of all the rest) signifies in both one and
the same particular person, but indeed the Head or common person of one and the
same Family, which (that the distinction of Families hereby might be the more
conspicuous, and the better preserved) is called Parosh in Zerubbabels time,
and Nehemiahs likewise, though these two were separated at least a generation
from each other, as I have already observed. And that it is a thing ordinary to
give to a public person, whether Prince, or Nobleman, as Marquess, Earl,
etc. besides his own proper name (which is peculiar to him) a name common to
him, and all that do, or shall succeed him in his place, as such, is a thing we
cannot be ignorant of. And also (which is the thing to be minded) as such a one
who is a public person in all his public actions, lays by his private name,
and acts by virtue of his name as such; so the Heads of each Family acting as
public persons; First, In leading their Families forth out of Babylon in
Zerubbabels time; Secondly, In sealing the Covenant for themselves, and the
whole Family they were Heads of, in Nehemiahs time, they lose their names as
they were private men, and retain only that common name, which was given to
them as public persons; and hence it comes to pass, that there is still the
use of the same names, though yet persons and generations were different.

Secondly, The Register mentioned Nehem. 7. does somewhat vary, in respect of
the number of persons in sundry of the Families, from that we read of Ezra 2.
Now what may be the reason hereof? Why, (says Dr. Lightfoot in his Harmony
upon Nehem ah, page 204.) Nehemiahs Register is a Register of the persons as
they were then living in his time; but Ezraes of the persons as they were at
their first coming up with Zerubbabel in the first year of Cyrus. And if so,
then considering that the variation betwixt one Register and the other, is but
small, it will strongly argue, that the time betwixt Zerubbabel and Nehemiah
could not be long.

Ans. The Reason given by Dr. Lightfoot is a mistake, and against the Text, and
will not reconcile each place; For observe, It is expressly said of Nehemiahs
Register Chap. 7. that the same was found by Nehemiah, yea and found so written
as he delivers it in the following verses, verse. 5. And my God put it into my
heart to gather together the Nobles, and the Rulers, and the People, that they
might be reckoned by Genealogre. And I found a Register of the Genealogic of
them which came up at the first, and found written therein, These are the
Children of the Province, etc. The Register therefore was not a Register made
up partly of the persons then living, and partly of those mentioned in the old
Register, because then the Register should be of Nehemiahs making; but the
Register he speaks of, was a Register he sound written to his hand. Nay, how
can we think it should be so, seeing it was upwards of seven and thirty years
(in case we follow Dr. Lightfoots own reckoning) from the time Zerubbabel went
up (when the first Register was made) unto this time, which was after Nehemiah
was come to Jerusalem, and had built the walls of the City? Now observe, as
there is in most families mentioned in either Register the very same number of
persons; so likewise is there in both Registers one and the same number of
Horses, Mules, Camels, Asses, as compare, Ezra 2.66, 67. with Nehem. 7.68, 69.
Now who can believe it, that in seven and thirty years there should not be
diminished, nor increased not one person in many Families, which Families too
consisted some of diverse hundreds of persons, some of thousands? Nor in so
great a multitude, not one Horse, nor a Mule? It is therefore more consonant to
truth, and will better reconcile each place, to say, That as Zerubbabel at his
first coming up drew that Register, Ezra 2. So suddenly after, when by coming
and going, some change and alteration was made of persons, he drew a second;
which second List or Catalogue, Nehemiah in searching lights upon, but misseth
the first. And as this does much better reconcile each place, so does it no way
injure us; Nay, that Nehemiah is fain to go to search old Registers to find the
Genealogy of the persons then living, is an Argumeat rather that the former
generation who came up with Zerubbabel was extinct, yea had been so some time
(the persons now living having in a manner forgotten their descent) then that
they should be alive.

Thirdly, Ezra is particularized by name, as being one of those that came up at
the first with Zerubbabel, Nehem. 12.1. it cannot therefore be, considering how
active this Ezra was even in Nehemiahs days, that the distance of time betwixt
Zerubbabel and Nehemiah should be very great.

Ans. No Argument at all is, or can be fetched out of the Books of Ezra and
Nehemiah from the agreement or likelihood of names, unless only in such
places, where besides the bare name we have something else laid down that
carries proof with it, that we are by the same name always to understand the
same particular person, and no other. And the reason is, because it is a thing
of most common use in these two Books, to give the same names to diverse and
sundry persons, as who consults either book diligently shall find no less then
three or four different Jeshuaes, and about some eight or nine distinct
Zechariahs; four several Eliashibs, viz. Eliashib the High Priest, and three
other of that name, we have in the tenth Chapter of Ezra only; Seven or eight
distinct Shemiahs, and as many Meshullams are recorded in these two books.
Diverse other like instances its most easy to produce. Whence it follows, that
the use of the same name proves nothing at all as to this or that particular
person, in case there be not in the Text some other notation, which devolves
the name upon this or that person, as considered distinct from all others; As
for example, When Jeshua is called, either Jeshua the High Priest, or Jeshua
the son of Jozadak, this is a manifest notation of the person, distinguishing
him from all others of that name; when Nehemiah is called Nehemiah the
Tirshatha, or the Governor, or Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah, this denotes the
particular person, and distinguishes him from that Nehemiah the son of Azbuk,
Chap. 3.16. But now in the Text objected, we have only a bare name, without any
other notation, and therefore it proves nothing. Nay, it is manifest from the
Text, that that Ezra who is recorded as one of them that came up with
Zerubbabel, cannot be the Ezra so much spoken of in this Book; For observe,
verse. 12, 13, etc. and we shall find, that in the days of Jojakim, who was
Father to that Eliashib that was High Priest in the days of Nehemiah (as verse.
10.) the Ezra who came up with Zerubbabel, and also the Serajah, the Jeremiah,
Amariah, etc. mentioned with him, verse. 1, 2. were gone, and another generation
were come up in their rooms, in the place of Serajah, we have now Merajah; of
Jeremiah, Hananiah; of Ezra, Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan, and so of all
the rest; so that not only this Ezra is gone, but there is a change even of a
whole generation in the days of Joiakim. And this Jojakim being father to
Eliashib must needs be of the generation before Nehemiah, for in Nehemiahs
days, Eliashib the son is High Priest, by consequence therefore Jojakim was
now dead. Now consider, the Ezra who wrote the book of Ezra, lived and acted
with Nehemiah, but the Ezra who came up with Zerubbabel was removed, and
another in his place a generation before Nehemiahs days; therefore though the
name is one, yet have we not one, but two persons signified by it; the Ezra who
came up with Zerubbabel was one, the Ezra who acted with Nehemiah another; and
for this reason is this latter (as seems to me) called Ezra the Priest, the
Scribe, verse. 26. and Ezra the Scribe, verse. 36. to distinguish him from the
foregoing Ezra, verse. 1.

From the whole it appears, that as Dr. Lightfoots Allegations singly are too
weak, so these added to them (which (if I mistake not) is the utmost that with
color of reason can be urged from Scripture-Text) will not help his opinion,
to narrow the time betwixt Cyrus first, and Artaxerxes twentieth into so little
a compass as thirty seven years; nor will they maintain any other opinion
whatsoever, that either is, or may be stated, that does or shall so shorten
this time, as that the whole put together will not amount to more then one full
age.

Yet with all let me say, when I consider the whole, and how great a show of
reason there is (if things laid down in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah be taken
up upon the first look) to cut this time short, I do not at all wonder, that
the Jewish Writers (whose averseness to take up reports from Heathens, though
ever so true, and aptness to look upon these Books as a Chronicle (a thing
never intended by the Holy Ghost) and misunderstanding the Story by taking up
things too hastily, might cause in them this error) should adhere to this
opinion of the shortness of the time betwixt the first coming up from the
Captivity, and Nehemiahs days, and that Dr. Lightfoot, Mr. Broughton, and
others, should follow them; for truly there seems at first blush, to be much
more reason for such an opinion, then any other; but when things are once
thoroughly weighed, and well digested, the contrary is manifest, and an
unprejudiced eye will easily see that this Thread must be drawn out somewhat
more at length, then the Jewish Writers, or Chronologers that adhere to them
will allow of.

The Conclusion is, That the Opinion of Dr. Lightfoot, and others, who
following the steps of the Jewish Writers do bring this time into a little
scantling, is a mistake, and not that certain rule by which we are to measure
this Period.

SECT. 2.
Seeing we may not steer our course by the foregoing opinion, it is necessary
that some further enquiry be made into this business, viz. What number of years
passed betwixt the first of Cyrus, and the twentieth of Nehemiahs Artaxerxes.

Now because Artaxerxes (as also Darius) was a name common to more then one or
two of the Persian Monarchs, we must therefore in order to the Principal
Question in the first place discuss another, viz.

Quest. What Artaxerxes was that from whom Nehemiah received Commission to
build Jerusalem?

Ans. That we may the better find out this, I shall first enquire, What Darius
that was by whose order the Temple work was revived; for that Darius was
Predecessor to this Artaxerxes, as is evident.

1 From his place in the Story, we read of Darius, Ezra 5. but not of this
Artaxerxes till afterward.

2 The Holy Ghost making a clear distinction betwxit Cyrus, Darius, and
Artaxerxes, places Artaxerxes after Darius, as being his Successor, as he does
Darius after Cyrus as his, Ezra 6.14.

3 Ezra coming up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of that very same
Artaxerxes, in whose twentieth Nehemiah received his Commission, finds a
Temple there, and did sacrifise, Ezra 8.34, 35. therefore must this Artaxerxes
be Successor to Darius, for until the sixth of Darius no Temple was built.

Nay, he was not only Successor to him, but Successor at such a distance, as
appears to me he was not his next Successor, but rather next to his next, which
is clear from that great change and alteration that there was in the Jewish
Church and State both, betwixt the sixth year of the one, and the seventh of
the other.

1 In the Church, in the sixth year of Darius, Jeshua in all probability was
alive, and High Priest, as lay these Scriptures together, Hag. 1.14, 15. Chap.
2.2, 3, 4. Zech. 3.6, 7. Chap. 6.11, 12. but in the seventh of Artaxerxes (as I
have before observed) Eliashib who was Grandchilde to Jeshua, stands in place
of his Grandfather.

2 In the State, there had been Governors that oppressed the people, and did
not fear God, betwixt Zerubbabels time, who was Governor in the sixth of
Darius (and how long after is not known to us) and Ezraes, who came up to
Jerusalem in the seventh of Artaxerxes, which is an Argument of some good
distance of time betwixt these two.

The question here then will be,

What Darius was that who by his Decree did the second time set the Temple-work
on foot?

Ans. Some (and not a few) will have this Darius to be Darius Hystasper, who
succeeded Cambyses the Son of Cyrus in the Kingdom: But this cannot be, because
betwixt Cyrus and that Darius who set the Temple-work on foot, did reign one
Artaxerxe, Chapter 4.7. by whom the work was hindered; but none such reigned betwixt
Cyrus and Darius Hystaspes.

To say (as do some) this Artaxerxes, though recorded before, yet reigned after
Darius, is so expressly against the Text, that I cannot admit such a thought,
for the Copy of the Letters of Artaxerxes is the very thing which puts stop to
the work of the Temple; for it seems the Jews upon the change that now was in
the Empire, through the death of the Monarch that was, had by virtue of their
old Commission from Cyrus, set upon, anew of themselves, the Temple-work, as
hoping the new Prince would favor their enterprise; now the enemies seeing
this, dispatch away Letters in haste to Artaxerxes, containing a charge against
the Jews, who in answer returns them Letters, with a strict command to go up to
Jerusalem, and cause the work to cease, which upon receipt of, and reading the
Kings Letter, they straightway did, and thereupon the Work of God ceased until
the second year of Darius, Ezra 4.23, 24. it is therefore a Question without
question that Darius was Successor to this Artaxerxes, as he was Predecessor to
the other.

Some others therefore perceiving that the former opinion will not agree with
the Text, will have this Artaxerxes to be Cyrus Son, and next Successor
(commonly called by Historians Cambyses) but this opinion is as unlikely as the
other is untrue, as I have proved already in answer to Doctor Lightfoot.

There is yet another opinion, which affirms this Artaxerxes to be Smerdis
Magus, the Counterfeit, who reigned seven Months betwixt Cambyses and Darius
Hystaspes. But certainly had the cessation of the Work of the House of God been
for no longer time then is given to it by this opinion, which cannot be much
above a year, if we consider that Smerdis (as themselves say) reigned but seven
Months, out of which seven Months we must allow some time for the news of
Cambyses death, being brought to Judahs Adversaries; some time more for their
sending their Letters, (which being subscribed by so many sundry people, living
in sundry places, as verse ninth intimates, it is likely could not be much less
time in preparing) some more time for that search of the Chronicles upon this
Letter, verse. 19. and some more yet for the Kings answer to them again; and
considering withal that Darius Hystaspes who succeeded Smordis, did (according
to their Principle) in the second year of his reign set the work on foot again;
the whole compared together it will appear, that the work could not cease very
little more then one year; which time being so short, it can hardly be thought
that the Scripture would take notice of it, much less with such an Emphasis,
setting such a mark upon this business, as verse last; Then ceased the Work of
the House of God, so it ceased until the second year of Darius. None that
reads the words can think the cessation here spoken of was only a Twelve-months
business. I say not that the very story of Smerdis (which though unto mere
stories I give little credit, yet being the Adversaries Weapons I may use them)
the which reports him all his time in a manner to have been shut up in his
Chamber, neither daring to show himself abroad, nor admitting any to come to
him, gives just ground of suspicion he could nor be this Artaxerxes, who seems
by what is recorded of him in this Chapter, Ezra 4. to have been no such
retired person, but of a more public life.

But to put an end to this variety of opinions, I take it the Text it self has
decieed the Controversy, telling us plainly that this Artaxerxes was no other
then Ahasuerus; he who is called Artaxerxes verse. 7. being called Ahasuerus
verse 6. the person in both being one and the same; only the Holy Ghost having
first made mention of the accusation of Judahs Adversaries in the general, with
a declaration of the time when they wrote it, viz. in the beginning of
Ahasuerus reign, verse six, proceeds to mention the same more particularly,
with the names of the Persons that wrote it, and a Copy of the Accusation it
self, and what effect it had; in which following discourse there is only a
change of the name, he being now called Artaxerxes (a name common to many of
the Persian Kings, as Pharaoh was to the Egyptians) who had before been called
Ahasuerus. If you ask what Ahasuerus this was, I answer, The same in all
likelihood that we read of throughout the Book of Hester; for, setting aside
Hesters story, we do not read of the name Ahasuerus but twice in all the Bible,
Dan. 9.1. and here in Ezra. That Ahasuerus Daniel mentions cannot be Hesters
Ahasuerus, for that Ahasuerus Daniel tells us was King of the Medes only,
Hesters is King of Media and Persia both; Hester 1.3. 2. Daniels Ahasuerus
being Father to that Darius who together with Cyrus took Babylon, could not
(because the Babylonian Monarchy was standing in his days, and possessing a
great part of those Countries) have his Monarchy extended from India even to
Aethiopia, over one hundred twenty seven Provinces, which Ahasuerus who married
Hester had, Chapter 1.1. In all likelihood therefore (we reading of no other of
that name) this Ahasuerns Artaxerxes, Ezra mentions, is the very same with him
we read of in Hester. And indeed the Apccryphal Book of Hester (which although
I credit not as Scripture, yet may the same credit be given to it as to other
Histories) calls him by no other name then Artaxerxes, who in Hester is called
Ahasuerus; so that it seems either name was given to him, and because of that
(he being known to some by the one, to some by the other) does Ezra give him
both, first calling him Ahasuerus, then Artaxerxes.

If it be said, But if this Artaxerxes were Ahasuerus in Hester, one would
think Hester having such influence upon him, and Mordecai such power under him,
it should have caused that the work of the Temple should have gone on again?

Ans. Not so, for the Decree to hinder the Work of the Temple was made, as the
Text says, in the beginning of his reign, which was before that Hester was
married to him. Now a Decree once made, Hester (as appears in the business of
Haman) was not forward to move the King to alter his Decree; yea, put case she
had, yet was it a custom amongst the Medes and Persians, not to repeal any Law,
whilst the King that made it lived; and therefore Ahasuerus, though Hester
begged it on her knees, could not repeal the Decree against the Jews, only by
another Decree gives them liberty to stand up in their own defense, and make
resistance against those that should seek their lives. So that I say the Law
once made, it was not an easy thing, though Hester was greatly in the Kings
favor, and Mordecai in great power, to repeal it, whilst Ahasuerus lived, but
for his life the work is, and must be at a stand, though Darius after him
(which is an argument that this custom of making irrepealable Laws was binding
only to that King that made them, the term of his own life, but not to his
Successor or Successors) did repeal this Statute, and by a contrary Decree set
the work on foot again.

Now it being so, that in all likelihood that Ahasuerus Husband to Hester is
the same here meant that hindered the work of the Temple, then, as both the
former opinions (which carry not half the probability this does) concerning
Cambyses and Smerdis are disproved; who both put together (and allowing them
whatsoever is in any History given to them for the time of their reign) did not
reign so many years as we have in Scripture recorded touching this Artaxerxes:
so it is evident that Darius Hystaspes could not be that Darius that gave life
again to the Temple-work; for he succeeded in the Monarchy (as all affirm)
within one year after the death of Cambyses, Cyrus Son, and next Successor; but
now, betwixt Cyrus and that Darius, did reign, and that for many years, one
Ahasuerus, or Artaxerxes, by whom the work was obstructed.

If any yet further curiously enquire, which of those Kings named by the Greeks
this Ahasuerus should be, seeing they give to none of the Persian Monarchs that
name;

I answer; I suppose him to be Darius Hystaspes himself, and amongst other
Reasons might be named, this is one, The activeness of Mordecai in his Court;
now Mordecai being one of those carried Captive in the days of Jeconiah, Hester
2.5, 6. which was at the beginning of the seventy years, the age of Mordecai,
in case we fix upon any of the Persian Monarchs on this side Hystaspes, will be
such as will hardly agree with the story of him and his activity; and this
being so, the supposed helper of the Temple-work, is the seal hinderer of it.

The Conclusion is, That that Darius who after Cyrus set the Temple-work on
foot, cannot be Darius Hystaspes.

Another opinion there is, which will have this Darius to be Darius Nothus; but
to this cannot I subscribe, partly for what I have already said in answer to
Master Medes beginning of the seventy weeks, who there maintains this opinion;
and further, for what I said but even now, in my answer to Doctor Lightfoot,
That Ezra upon his coming to Jerusalem found that generation who had been
builders of the Temple, and the next generation to these, extinct, and in their
Graves, and a third generation surviving. Now Darius Nothus reigning but
nineteen years, we can hardly think ( Artaxerxes being next Successor to him)
that by the seventh of Artaxerxes when Ezra went up to Jerusalem, which
accounting from the sixth of Darius, when the work of the Temple was finished
(at which time Zerubbabel and the rest were alive) amounts but to one and
twenty years; that I say in one and twenty years space (though it is granted
many might) yet that a whole generation should be gone, and the generation
after them, and a third generation come in place, seems very strange.

Darius Nothus therefore was not that Darius which did advance the building of
the Temple.

Quest. But what Darius are we then to fix upon?

Ans. Darius Longimanus, called most commonly, Artaxerxes Longimanus, who was
Son to Xerxes the Great, and Father to Darius Nothus.

Now the reason why I fix here, is, because this fixation agrees well to the
story of things on both sides, in respect of time more especially.

1 For the succeeding part of the story, that which follows betwixt the
finishing the Temple-work, and the building Jerusalem, it will well suit with
it; for this Darius reigning forty years, (which long reign above other his
Predecessors I conceive was the fruit of Gods Peoples prayers, which Darius
makes one reason of his Decree for carrying on the work of the Temple, that the
Jews might offer Sacrifice, and pray for his life, Ezra 6.11.) I say, he
reigning forty years; if we begin from the sixth year of his reign when the
Temple-work was finished, and adding to the thirty four years, the remainder of
his reign after the Temple was built, the nineteen years of Darius Nothus his
Successor, and the seven years of Artaxerxes who succeeded him, at which time
Ezra went up to Jerusalem, the whole amounts to sixty years; and if we also
take in the thirteen years after, when Nehemiah went up, it advanceeth the
number to seventy three: now that in the space of about seventy years there
should be such a change of Governors and People, the old dead and gone, new
come in their room, is no strange thing to conceive. This opinion therefore
well suits the succeeding part of the story.

2 For the foregoing part, it suits it much better then any of the other
opinions. For, those that fix upon Darius Hystaspes, cannot (as I have proved)
find an Artaxerxes between him and Cyrus, that was a hinderer to the work,
which yet that such a one was, is evident from the story. Those that fix upon
Nothus make the time so wide betwixt the laying the foundation of the Temple,
and the finishing the work, as can hardly be imagined; neither of these
opinions therefore will suit with that part of the Divine Story, which precedes
the building of the Temple. But ours, which fixes upon Longimanus, will suit it
very well; for first, The block that lies in the way of the first of the two
former opinions, is by it removed, we having already found an Artaxerxes that
was a hinderer, and also a Predecessor to this Longimanus. Secondly, The block
that lies in the way of the second, in regard of the length of the time, is
hereby well removed, our opinion cutting the time betwixt the laying the
Temples foundation, and the finishing the work, shorter by full forty years
then that opinion does.

Obj. But yet it may be said, That even according to our opinion, the time
betwixt Cyrus first, and Darius second year will seem too long, for walking by
our own rule laid down in our Key, These. 45.48. the time amounts to seventy
years, thus; Cyrus, three years. Cambyses with the Magi, eight. Darius
Hystaspes, thirty six. Xerxes, twenty one. Darius Longimanus, two.


The current year, viz. the second of Longimanus, I take into the number,
because it is very probable it was not till toward the end of that year that
Darius Decree came forth, for the Jews fall not to the work till the latter end
of the sixth month, Hag. 1.14, 14, 15. and it was some time after that ( as
Ezraes Story makes appear) that the Decree came forth; which may therefore
possibly, and most likely, if we thoroughly weigh the whole of Zecharies Vision,
be in that eleventh Month he mentions, Zec. 1.7. and being so, but a month and
a few days are wanting of a complete year, which little want, where the account
is by years, is never reckoned.) Now hence the Objection rises; If seventy
years be allotted to this time (which our opinion grants) then must the age of
some persons, viz. those who had seen Solomon's Temple, and were alive at this
day, as Hag. 2.2, 3. be no less then one hundred and thirty years; for suppose
them to be sixty years old in Cyrus first; to which sixty, adding these
seventy, we have the aforesaid number; which age seems to be too great for the
generations since Moses his time.

Ans. Not so; for we find Jehosada the High Priest (who was not long before
the Babylonian Captivity) to have lived as long, 2 Chronicles. 24.15. and also (as
is testified in the first Book of Maccabees) Mattathias the Priest, Father to
Judas Maccabeus lived one hundred forty six years, Chap. 2. verse last. Indeed
the age might seem too great, should we (as do some) six upon Darius Nothus, so
taking in forty years more; but here it is otherwise, forty years is cut off,
which in a man's age is no little matter.

Again, Observe, that this age was not the age of Zerubbabel, Jeshua, and that
generation that came out of Babylon, but the age of those who were carried into
Babylon by Nebucadnezzar, and so indeed were of the generation before
Zerubbabel, and the multitude that came up with him, though yet some of them
were living at this day.

Obj. 2. I have met with it objected, That the time from Cyrus first, to the
end of Darius second, could not be very long, because no Priest was by the Law
to officiate above twenty years; from thirty years old to fifty was their
limited time, Numb. 4. verse. 2, 3, 22, 23, 30, 35, 30, etc. now Jeshua was High
Priest in Cyrus first, and so likewise in Darius second, the distance therefore
could not be great, no not twenty years.

Ans. This Law was not a Law for the High Priest, but only for the inferior
Priests, the Levites, as is clear;

1 Because wheresoever it is spoken of, Levites only are mentioned, as being
subject to it.

2 Because the work it self, that at fifty years of age they were exempted
from, was servile work, work that was a burden, as the bearing about of the
Tabernacle, verse. 24, 25, 26. which work too they were to be appointed unto by
the High Priest, as their Master and Lord, as verse. 19, 27. therefore did not
this work, and so not this Law, belong to him.

3 I find particular instances of High Priests that did officiate when they
were above fifty years old; what shall we say to Eli? was not Eli High Priest
when upwards of fifty, considering he was ninety eight years old when he died,
1 Samuel 4.15. and yet Samuel (who it is evident was born in the time of Elies
Priesthood) but a child even then when Eli was very old, and his eyes dim, as
is clear, chap. 2. compare verse. 18, 19. with ver. 22. and chap. 3. verse. 2.
compare with verse. 8.

But the instance of Iehojada is undeniable; for observe, he creates Ioash
King, 2 Chronicles. 23. Ioash reigns forty years, chap. 24.1. Iehosada dies before
Ioash, ver. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Iehosada is one hundred and thirty years
old when he dies, ver. 15. if therefore Iehojada died in Ioash his fortieth
year, yet considering that he crowned Ioash King, and that in the time of his
Priesthood, and died not till he was aged one hundred and thirty years, it will
necessarily follow that he was High Priest at ninety years old. This Law
therefore was not a Law for the High Priest, but only for the Levites; they
ceased to officiate at fifty years of age, but the High Priest was such during
life; and indeed he could not otherwise have been a fit Type of Christ, who
ever lives to make intercession for us.

This Objection, because I have met with it, I thought good to answer, though
otherwise I should never have objected it to my self.

I know nothing else can be said for a shorter time, unless we should here
again bring up those forty six years, John 2.20. with Daniels seven weeks,
chap. 9.25. both which I have answered before in traversing the seventy weeks.

The time therefore from the beginning of Cyrus first, unto the end of Darius
second, may well be reckoned seventy years, notwithstanding the weight of any
objection against it.

But to come nearer; what if we may find in Scripture this time to be meted
and measured seventy years? If the Scripture measure agree to the measure of
the ancient Greeks, it will add credit to their reports in more things then
this one.

Let us here take into consideration Zecharies seventy years, Chap. 1.12. chap.
7.5. this seeming to me to be their proper place.

That these seventy years should be understood of the seventy years of the
Captivity, cannot be, because (as Doctor Lightfoot has well observed in his
Chronicle upon Hester ten) the seventy years of the Captivity, beginning with
the fourth of Jehojakim, did end long before this time, viz. with the third of
Belshazzar, or the last year of the Babylonian Monarchy; but the seventy years
Zechary speaks of, bring us to the second of Darius, which is many years
upwards in the Persian Monarchy.

Doctor Lightfoots own account will not neither help the business; for as he
has nothing but those former suppositions (which having been put into the
balance were found too light) to maintain that conception, viz. That that
Darius who advanced the work of the Temple, did reign at such a distance from
Cyrus; so if these two things be thoroughly scanned,

1 What Darius it was who set this work on foot.

2 At what distance from Cyrus (I speak now of time in the general only) the
compelling circumstances of the story, each duly weighed and laid together,
will necessarily infer him to have lived, (both which my former discourse will
give some light into) it will then appear, That Doctor Lightfoot himself has
exceeded the bounds of seventy years, as many years as he charge upon the
foregoing reckoning, accounting it worthy, for that reason only, to be cast
out; by his own rule therefore, his own must go out with it.

What will those Opinions make of these seventy years, that will have the
finishing of the Temple-work to stand at forty six years distance from Cyrus,
as some; or else at one hundred and eleven, or one hundred and thirteen years,
as others; seeing it is most evident that the complaint the Angel makes of
seventy years sufferings was in the second of Darius, Zech. 1.7. compared with
ver. 12. which was but four years before the work was finished, as appears from
Ezra 6.15. May these allow the seventy years to be the years of the Captivity?
if so, there had need be some good reason shown for it, why the Holy Ghost,
after the seventy years of the Captivity were ended, and forty and odd years
more run out (as it follows upon the one opinion) or upwards of an hundred
years more, (as it follows upon the other) should speak still of seventy years.

For my own part, I think these seventy years are to be reckoned from the first
of Cyrus, from the beginning of which year until the end of Darius second, (at
which time the Angel makes this complaint, and therefore the time of the
complaint is expressly noted to be in the eleventh Month, upon the twenty fourth
day of the Month, in the second year of Darius, which was the very close of the
year, only one Month and a few days wanting) are reckoned by the Greek
Historians exactly seventy years, as I have before observed, and so indeed
these seventy years are not the seventy years of the Captivity, but another
seventy, taking beginning where they end?

Obj. But if so, why does the Angel plead Gods having had indignation against
his people threescore and ten years? he might have pleaded twice threescore and
ten years.

Ans. We must consider the Angel here spoken of (which is Jesus Christ) now
speaks by way of complaint, How long, Lord will thou not have mercy -- and
therefore he purposely lets fall the first seventy years, taking no notice of
them, because as to that time he had no cause to complain, they had deserved it
highly, provoked his Father, for which cause Jerusalem was justly made a
ruinous heap: It was the penalty of that Law, or outward Covenant made with
this people at the coming out of Egypt, that in case they did rebel they
should be carried captive into other Countries out of their own Land, Levit.
26. verse. 27, 28. to the end; and observe, this was the highest punishment of
all, inflicted for highest breach of the Law, therefore mentioned in the last
place. Now all the seventy years of the Captivity they were under this very
punishment, therefore the thing being most righteous, and indeed a thing
unavoydable, if God would be just, considering the terms of the Covenant this
people stood under, Christ (who pleads righteously) will not complain of it,
lest he should complain of his Father for doing that which was most righteous,
and which he could not without breach of Justice have omitted. But now as to
the time that passed afterward, he had cause to complain, because all this
time was over and above the prefixed time of their punishment, and therefore
he complains, Lord how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the
Cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these threescore and
ten years? as to say, These seventy years of thy indignation are more then
should be; and that Christ speaks by way of complaint is clear, because God is
fain to give him good words to still him, and tell him the work should be
deferred no longer, verse. 13, 14, 16, 17. an Argument that he had some cause to
complain, and that upon this account, the work had been deferred, and that for
so long a time as seventy years. So that this Text, rightly considered, is an
Argument for us, and holds forth thus much, That we are not to begin these
seventy years till the seventy of the Captivity were ended; for Christ
complains of the wrath of his Father to his people all these seventy years; but
as to the seventy years of the Captivity, which was only satisfaction to that
outward Covenant they had broken, Christ had no cause to complain of one day of
that, nor would he, the punishment being most just, and the Covenant broken,
and no punishment inflicted had been unjust.

Obj. 2. But if this opinion be true, why also are the Fasts of the fourth, and
the fifth, and the seventh, and the tenth Month said to be of seventy years
continuance, Zach. 7.5. with Chap. 8.19. seeing from the time Jerusalem was
taken, the Temple destroyed, etc. which things are the grounds of their
fasting, it was now to this time (as we account it) one hundred and twenty
years, viz. fifty in Babylon after Jerusalem and the Temple were destroyed, and
seventy after the coming thence?

Ans. The only foot that this Objection stands upon, is a supposition that the
aforesaid Fasts were kept in Babylon; Now as to that I answer.

1 That there is no Scripture proving such a thing. That, Psalm. 137.1, 2. will
not do it, for it is one thing to weep occasionally, (which is the weeping
there mentioned, Gods people sit down by the Rivers of Babylon, one while they
call Sion to remembrance, another while they are scoffed at by the Babylonians,
these things draw forth occasional tears) but it is another to weep in the
solemn Assembly, and as a solemn Ordinance, which calls upon me to weep and
mourn, and that at such a time. Now such was the weeping of the fourth, and
fifth, and seventh, and tenth Months, which were times of weeping and mourning,
instituted and ordained by the public authority of the Jewish Church, to be
celebrated yearly, though by the way remember, that their practice in this is
not a binding rule to us in Gospel days; National institutions in Spiritual
matters ceasing with their National Church.

2 As there is no Scripture for it, that these solemn Fasts were kept in
Babylon; so look upon the thing in reason, and it seems no way likely or
probable; for consider, the Fasts were Public and National, kept not by some
particular persons, but by the whole Body of the Congregation of Israel, as
appears, Chap. 7. ver. 5, 6. Now it may with good reason be queried, Whether it
be a thing at all probable, that the Babylonians would admit of such exercises
under their very Noses?

Obj. If it be said, Though the thing were public, as to the Jews, that is,
the whole Body of that Nation in Babylon did Fast, yet might they so appoint
their meetings, as that the thing might well be kept from the knowledge of the
Babylonians?

I answer; Consider, that as these Fasts were Public, so also they were set
Fasts, appointed to several times, and these celebrated annually, year after
year, and that for a long time, seventy years; all which things laid together,
we cannot imagine that the celebration of so many days, for so many years
together, should, or could be a thing so private as to be hid from the
Babylonians; if it were known, then I say must they be kept with their
allowance. Now considering Babylon the place, Satan's busy rage to stir up his
Instruments against any Spiritual work, the Babylonians themselves being
Idolaters, and Worshippers of a false god, withal the occasions of these
solemn meetings, whereof that of the fourth Month was in memorial of
Nebuchadnezzars taking Jerusalem, which fell out in this Month, 2 King. 25.3,
4. Jer. 39.2, 3. That of the fifth, for the burning of the Temple, which was
done the tenth day of this Month, 2 King. 25.8, 9. Jer. 52.12, 13. That of the
seventh Month for the death of Gedaliah, which happened in this Month, and was
the cause of the total dispersing of the remnant left in Judea, Ier. 41.1, etc.
That of the tenth, for Nebuchadnezzars siege which was laid against Jerusalem
in the tenth day of this Month, 2 King. 25.1. Jer. 52.4. All which occasions of
these solemn Assemblies (that of the seventh Month excepted) was such as might
suggest to the Babylonians, that this people assembled together yearly to
lament their good success and prosperity. Let us lay all together, and where
we want a determinate rule, conjecture, whether (the premises considered) it be
a thing likely that the Babylonians would permit such constant yearly Exercises
in Babylon or no?

I am therefore inclined to think, That the appointment and celebration of
these Public solemn Fasts, was not in Babylon, but upon their coming thence;
after the people of Israel had liberty given them by Cyrus to return from
Babylon, and were come up to Jerusalem, with their hearts greatly raised
through the present sense of their deliverance, and also with expectations of
something more then ordinary, that God would now do for them; and having no
sooner set hand to the work, but are stopped, contrary to expectation, they are
now put upon looking backwards, to see what might be the cause God should deal
thus with them. And to this, their hearts being now melted, and affected under
the present sense of their deliverance, they are in a frame and posture much
better then while they remained in Babylon under a Cloud, and a sense of wrath,
which we know ever unfits, and makes a Soul incapable of looking back upon
former ways and walkings. Now looking backwards they find, That they had
received such and such heavy strokes from God formerly, which strokes fell upon
the whole Body of the Nation, yet had they never as yet in any solemn way
humbled themselves before God for those their sins and provocations, which
brought these strokes upon them: Hereupon they appoint several days of
Humiliation to be kept yearly, till the anger of the Lord should be removed;
and the better to stir up their hearts, (through a putting them in remembrance
by the stroke) they appoint their days upon such and such times as the strokes,
which did prove most fatal to them, fell upon them, which is all the reason can
be given of the appointment of the Fasts in such and such Months, as is before
specified.

And therefore observe, in the fourth of Darius, in the ninth Month, when now
the people of God perceiving the storm to be well blown over, the Temple-work
being now on foot again, and brought to some perfection, do send men, as
Sherezer, Regemmelech, etc. to enquire whether they should any longer (it
seeming that God was now pacified) go on with that fasting which they had
continued for seventy years; the answer is given by the Prophet to the
Congregation there present, and the People that were in the Land, ver. 4.5, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10. and not to those in Babylon, of whom not one syllable is spoken. A
clear Argument that Sherezer, Regemmelech, etc. were not sent by the people in
Babylon, (as says the general opinion) but were indeed employed, being two
Honorable persons, by the whole Body of the People now in the Land, to go up
to the House of the Lord, and enquire for them, concerning this practice they
had so long continued among them; Whether Gods wrath seeming now to be
pacified, they should continue it any longer. Answer hereupon by the Prophet is
given to the people of the Land, proving clearly, that this Fast was not a Fast
in Babylon, but a Fast that had been kept up and continued by the people of the
Land, which (as I have said) began upon their coming thither, and the cause
till this day remaining, had been continued by them ever since; through which
long continuance of time it was even now grown into a form, therefore God by
the Prophet seems at first to disown it, Chap. 7.5, 6. and yet afterward (as
being a thing lawful and good in its first institution, though through
continuance of time abused by them) he ownes it, Chap. 8.19. So that this text
rightly understood, is so far from hurting us, that contrariwise it brings
with it a second testimony to prove the truth of our Assertion, that it was
seventy years betwixt Cyrus, and the Darius that forwarded the Temple-work.

If any should yet think our measure to be misapplied, and that surely it could
not be so long as seventy years from the return of the Captivity to the end of
Darius second, I shall add one consideration more, viz. That Iddo, who was
Grandfather to the Prophet Zechary, as appears Zech. 1.1. was one of them that
came up with Zerubbabel, as we shall find, Nehem. 12.4. which Iddo Nehemiah
speaks of, that it was the same person, and not another of the same name
appears, in that we find Zechariah, (and that in the days of Jojakim son of
Jeshua, which well agrees to the latter times of Zechariahs Prophecy) mentioned
by name, as succeeding in the line of Iddo, ver. 16. and though Zechariah is
there recorded amongst the chief of the Priests, yet does not that hinder but
it should be this very Zechariah, seeing most ordinarily Prophets were taken
from amongst the Priests; Jeremiah was of the Priests of Anathoth, and yet a
Prophet, Jer. 1.1. Ezekiel was a Priest, Ezekiel. 1.3. and yet a Prophet. All
therefore that can be gathered thence is, That Zechariah as he was a Prophet,
so also he was one of the chief of the Priests.

Now Zechariah who mentions these seventy years, being Grandchild to one that
came up with Zerubbabel, it may very well be thought, that betwixt these two,
as much time as seventy years may be allowed, and yet no monstrous Conclusion.

From the whole it appears, That to fix the advance of the Temple-work upon the
second year of Darius Longimanus, does not at all jarre, but rather has an
admirable concurrency, so as no opinion besides it, with what seems to be most
clear in Scripture, as touching the time betwixt Cyrus first year, and Darius
second.

Withal (though I would not be overcurious, for I hate overmuch niceness and
curiosity in Notions, as well as in Words, yet let me say) hereby we gain
this, to run the time betwixt the beginning of the Babylonish Captivity, and
Christ's Passion, all along upon seventies; (the Number so famous for setting
forth this time.)

First, We have Seventy years Captivity in Babylon.

Secondly, Seventy years of mourning in the Land after their return thence,
before the Work of the Temple can go on.

Thirdly, After that we have Seventy years, and seven odd, (observe, though we
have some odd, yet they run still upon the Number seven) before the Jews can
have liberty to build their City, and form themselves into a Commonwealth; for
so many years passed betwixt Darius second, and the time of Nehemiahs
Commission.

Lastly, We have Seventy Weeks, which makes seven seventies, from the building
Jerusalem, to the Passion of Christ.

In a word, from the beginning of the Captivity, until Christ's Passion, we
have ten Seventies, and three odd years; for though I mentioned even now seven
odd years, yet it must be remembered, that four years out of that seven are to
be deducted, to supply the want of those four years, which I have before proved
are to be cut off from the seventeeth and last of Daniels weeks; these
deducted, there then remains three odd only. Now allowing these three to the
time Christ Preached, which was three years, we may then say, That from the
beginning of the Babylonish Captivity, when Israel lost their Kingdom, to the
annoynting of the Messiah, or the first visible appearance of Christ their
King, was exactly ten times seventy years, which makes seven hundred, running
still upon the Number seven, both in the tens and hundreds. Within which time
Matthew makes mention of fourteen Generations to have lived, Matthew. 1.17. Note,
That they must make short Generations, that begin the seventy weeks with the
first of Cyrus.

Seeing therefore that to pitch upon Darius Longimanus, as he that in his
second year set on foot the work of the Temple, does better then any other
opinion agree to the Divine Story, and other Scriptures, as to the time and
things foregoing and succeeding the Temple-building, I do therefore conclude,
That that Darius, whom the Greeks call Longimanus, was the Darius under whom
the Temple-work was finished.

Another Question now will arise, (which answered, we come to our main
Conclusion driven at throughout this Section) viz. What Artaxerxes was that
which succeeded Darius Longimanus? for (as I said at first) the Artaxerxes we
are now enquiring after must needs be, by the clear circumstances of the text,
such a one as did succeed that Darius, which gave life to the building of the
Temple.

Now this is confessed on all hands to be that Artaxerxes whom the Greeks call
Mnemon, who was next Successor to Longimanus his next, Darius Nothus succeeding
Longimanus, and Artaxerxes Mnemon, Darius Nothus.

This Artaxerxes was he that first gave Commission to Ezra, in the seventh year
of his reign, to go up to Jerusalem, furnishing him largely with Moneys, and
afterward to Nehemiah, in the twentieth of his reign, to build Jerusalem;
which friendliness of his to Gods Cause and people went not unrewarded, for he
reigned forty three years.

And which I cannot but mention to set it before Rulers, of all the Persian
Monarchs, Longimanus and Mnemon, who had been of the most forward in favoring
the People of God, and promoting his Cause, were blessed of God with length of
days beyond any their Predecessors, or Successors in the Empire.

And which is another thing most observable, that by looking over these
Histories mine eye has been cast upon, viz. That so long as any of the Race of
Cyrus (who first appeared to own the Cause of God) did continue, so long did
the Persian Monarchy stand; but under the very first King that was of another
Race, viz. Darius Codomannus, or Darius the last, who was (as is affirmed) a
stranger to the blood of Cyrus, the whole Monarchy is lost, and translated from
the Medes and Persians to the Grecians; So mindful was God of what Cyrus did
for his people, that whilst any of his Seed remained, he would not give the
Kingdom to another.

Now, besides what has been said already from the scope of our Discourse since
I entered this Section, it is a thing most evident, that that Artaxerxes from
whom Nehemiah received his Commission, was, yea can be no other than,
Artaxerxes Mnemon, because two things are clear in Scripture concerning this
Artaxerxes, which can be applied to no other but Mnemon; as,

1 That he reigned many years, two and thirty Nehemiah mentions, Chap. 13.6.

2 That the time of his reign was toward the latter end of the Persian
Monarchy, which is clear hence, because Nehemiah, who lived all the time of
this Artaxerxes, did afterward live to see that Generation in which the
Monarchy was translated: for he makes particular mention of Iaddus the High
Priest, who met Alexander the Great at his coming to Jerusalem, and of that
Darius under whom the Monarchy was lost, Nehem. 12.11.22. which clearly proves
this Artaxerxes must be Mnemen, none of the Monarchs after him reigning so
long, as the Scripture it self records him to have done.

Ere I can yet reach our Conclusion, there is one knob in the way to be even'd.

Obj. If Artaxerxes Mnemon be the Artaxerxes we are to six upon, from the
twentieth of whose reign Daniels seventy weeks are to be begun, then
considering they end with Christ's Passion, Daniels account will superabound the
account of all Historians, who find not so many years as four hundred and
ninety betwixt the one time and the other.

Ans. 1. There are not so many over and above in this account, but there are
full as many wanting in their account, who begin Daniels seventy weeks with the
Decree of Cyrus; and whether we reckon more or less, the matter is one and the
same; yet is the bone there swallowed without pricking, by not a few godly and
able men.

2 I answer; In case what I have said as touching the beginning and ending of
Daniels seventy weeks be truth, and it will not accord with Daniels Prophecy of
the seventy weeks, nor with other Scriptures, to state any other beginning or
ending; then of necessity must we either condemn the Holy Ghost for mentioning
more years within that time then indeed there are, or Historians of neglect, in
not having accounted for so many years as they should; and who shall we? Let
God be true, but every man a Liar.

If it be said, But why will I depart from the reports of Human Writers here,
when as I made use of them before to measure another time?

Ans. 1. I did not make use of them before, as building any faith upon them,
but because I find the account they have kept of the time to be agreeable to
the Scripture account; and so far I am bound to believe they have kept
accounts aright, not because they say so, but because the Scripture says so;
and this I verily think, that there is sufficient in Scripture to make out this
our account, though they (I mean the Heathen Writers) were not; yet withal I
am of the mind, that the considering what they say, and laying it to those
things that are left us in the Word, may (through the Spirits guidance) be a
help to us in things wherein they are in the right, as to the more speedy
finding them, and the more casie making them out; yet we holding this as a most
constant and infallible rule, That all their reports must be bowed to the
Scripture, and not one tittle of Scripture made to bow to them; Upon this
Principle therefore, supposing the Heathen Writers to have computed sixty or
eighty years from Cyrus first to Longimanus second, yet would I reckon seventy,
and not regard their reports; and also upon this Principle, because the
Scripture has so clearly determined the beginning and ending of the seventy
weeks, I judge I am bound to account as many years betwixt time and time as
Daniel does, though Human Writers will not allow it. This Scripture rule once
found determines all the different accounts of times that are left us by Human
Writers, and declares whether or no any of them be in the truth; and in case
any are, who they are.

But secondly, Should we go to the bare Authority of Man, yet in common reason
more credit is to be given to what is recorded by the Greeks as touching the
times of the Persian Monarchy, then to what Writers in after times did record,
as touching the continuance of the Grecian, and the succeeding years of the
Roman until Christ. The reason is, because the Monarchy of the Persians was
more stable, and not subject to those strange mutations, (tossing the Ball of
the Kingdom from one to another, and back again) which ordinarily cause
mistakes in Historians. But who knows any thing of the Grecian Monarchy, knows
that it was after Alexanders death a very heap of confusion, through the
scuffle that arose betwixt Alexanders Captains, as was the whole World
afterward, when that terrible Beast, the Roman Monarchy, was rising; so that
within this time the best of Historians might mistake, and lose many years. If
I had not therefore Scripture to back me, yet this would a little help the
cause, why I follow the reports of some, and reject others, because more credit
upon a mere rational account is to be given to those I follow, then to the
other from whom I dissent.

From the whole of my Discourse in this Section my Conclusion is, That that
Artaxerxes, in the twentieth of whose reign Nehemiah went up to Jerusalem, was
Artaxerxes Mnemon.

SECT. 3.
It being clear from what we have said in the foregoing Section, That
Artaxerxes Mnemon was the Artaxerxes that gave Commission to Nehemiah, in the
twentieth year of his reign, to go up to Jerusalem and build it; The way now
lies open for us to compute the years appertaining to this period, which is the
first upon account, though in order of handling I have placed it in the cloze
of our Discourse, as seeming to me to be in that respect its proper place.

The Question is, What number of years are we to account from Cyrus first,
where begins the two thousand three hundred days, till Artaxerxes Mnemons
twentieth (or to speak more properly his one and twentieth) where begins
Daniels seventy weeks?

If the Scripture will help us here, then need we not much regard what
Chronologers say; but we may without, and though it be against them, conclude
the full and certain number of years even from Cyrus first till Christ's
Passion, for as for the time betwixt Mnemons twentieth and Christ's Passion,
Daniels seventy weeks are an infallible rule to measure that by; now, if a like
Scripture-rule, or a rule equivalent thereunto, whose very matter whereof it is
made is the Word, may be found to measure the time betwixt Cyrus first, and
Mnemons twentieth, then have we the measure of the Sanctuary to mete the time
from Cyrus first till our Lords Passion; this being the only approved and
sealed measure, all other measures must be squared by it, not it by them.

The Account the Greeks give us of this time, (which almost all Chronologers
adhere unto) I have laid down in my Key, These. 45, 46, 47. by which reckoning
(but three years being allowed to Cyrus after his taking Babylon) the years are
one hundred forty seven.

The reason why I give to Cyrus but three years, when the Greeks allow him
thirty, I have also there declared, These. 48.

Some more persons then I have there specified did reign in the Persian
Monarchy betwixt Cyrus and Artaxerxes Mnemon, as betwixt Cambyses and Darius
Hystaspes, the Magi reigned seven Months; betwixt Xerxes and Artaxerxes
Longimanus, Artabanus reigned seven Months; betwixt Artaxerxes Longimanus, and
Darius Nothus, reigned first Xerxes the second two Months, after him Sogdianus
seven Months. But the time of the reign of these, as laid down by Chronologers,
does not at all break squares, as to the foregoing number of one hundred forty
seven years, for the seven Months of the Magi are reckoned into the last year
of Cambyses, to whom, together with the Magi, eight years is given, but he
alone reigned but seven years and five months, to which Chronologers add the
seven months of the Magi, so giving eight years to Cambyses. So for the rest,
Artabanus seven months are included in the last year of Xerxes, whose reign
with these seven months added made up but twenty one years. The two months of
Xerxes the second, and the seven of Sogdianus are all included in the fortieth
and last year of Longimanus, who with these nine months added, reigned forty
years.

And for this reason, because these reigned so short a time, no one of them
filling up a year, and the time of the reign of each being always included in
the reign of his Predecessor, are the Names of these by many left out, and not
put into the ordinary Catalogue of the Persian Kings.

But should I lay the bottom of my demonstration here, I should depart from my
own rule; I am therefore to enquire what Scripture says to our Question, and
whether that will allow this number of years, yea or no.

As to the Question therefore, first in the general, let us see whether there
be any footing in Scripture for so long a time, leaving the set number of
years.

Now as to this let it only be minded again which has been proved already,
viz. That it was Seventy years from the first of Cyrus, till the time that the
Work of the second Temple was again set on foot by Darius; here we have (the
odd seven years set aside) the half of the time, now for the other seventy
seven we have this to say (the ground of which has been also laid down
before) that Jeshua was High Priest in Darius second year, Ezra 5.1, 2. but now
in Artaxerxes twentieth, Eliashib ( Jeshuaes Grandchild) was High Priest,
Nehem. 3.1, 20. who also was so aged at Ezraes coming up to Jerusalem, which
was thirteen years before Nehemiahs, that he had a Son a Priest, Ezra 10.6.
time must be allowed for this change, and to allow seventy seven years is no
absurd conclusion. Put the one and the other together, and as many years as one
hundred forty seven may well be thought to have passed, betwixt the time of
Cyrus Decree, and Nehemiahs Commission.

But it will be said, Although it may be conceived that this time was as long,
yet is not what has been said ground sufficient for a determined time; But now
the time we are seeking after must be a determined time, for a few years more
or less puts our whole account out of order.

In answer hereto, I grant that we have not a determined time of one hundred
forty seven years upon any particular sum mentioned in Scripture, but in case
we have it upon general Scripture Principles, or the account of any gross
sum, and no particular text so contradicting, but that the time may be judged
as long, the proof is good, and proof of this kind is as firm as any other; for
if proof by a gross sum be not admitted, let any (if they can) cast the time
how many years Israel abode in Egypt, and after that how many years it was
from Ioshuaes dividing to the twelve Tribes the Land of Canaan by Lot, until
the time that the Judges began to bear rule; these times can be counted no
otherwise, but only by a gross sum; if therefore proof by a gross sum be
denied, the very foundation of all Chronology is razed.

Now I say, though we have not any particular Text that does ascertain us that
this time was exactly a hundred forty and seven years, neither more nor less;
yet we have it upon general Scripture principles, and the account of a gross
sum.

My Argument lies thus, The two thousand three hundred days must expire at the
same point with the one thousand three hundred thirty five. The truth of this
is evident beyond denial, from what has been already said as touching either
Prophecy, that Chap. 8. and the other Chap. 11, 12. which determines, First,
that the matter and scope of either Prophecy is one and the same. Secondly,
that either Prophecy has one and the same end, both shutting up with the end
or final destruction of the fourth Monarchy. This being so, the two thousand
three hundred days, which bring us to the end of one Prophecy; the one
thousand three hundred thirty five, which brings us to the end of the other,
must necessarily expire at one and the same point.

Hence I conclude,

That having so much of the two thousand three hundred days upon firm and
particular ground as will make the two thousand three hundred days to end with
the one thousand three hundred thirty five, saving only these one hundred forty
seven years, that therefore because they must end together, and with this
allowance will, but without it cannot, must the remaining years run upon the
gross sum, and so be counted one hundred forty seven, not a year more or
less. And this consequence is so natural and necessary, that put case the
account of the Greeks were thrown out of the doors, and all that we have said
before in our two former Sections and this, proving that the time may well be
judged as long, were yet unsaid, yet in case no particular Scripture do
necessarily prove this time must be either shorter or longer, I say this alone
determines that the years from Cyrus first, to the time of Nehemiahs
Commission, must be one hundred forty seven, not a year more or less.

If it be said, But the weight of our Argument lies upon the beginning of the
one thousand three hundred thirty five days; which should another beginning
then that which I have elsewhere stated be found for them, our Conclusion is
nothing.

I answer, Whosoever is not satisfied with that beginning we have formerly laid
down, but seeks another, must mind these two things; 1 That he so six the head
of the one thousand three hundred thirty five days, as that he make them to
expire at the same point with the two thousand three hundred. 2 That he also
make the one thousand two hundred and ninety, (which arises from the same Head
with the one thousand three hundred thirty five) to end at the same point with
the one thousand two hundred and sixty. If either of these be not done, those
manifest Scripture-principles, laid down in my Key, These. 17. and These. 34. are
destroyed. Now he that shall undertake this work, I question not but that after
he has well considered all, he will find it a more easy thing to believe,
then prove.

But secondly, I answer, That the beginning of the one thousand three hundred
thirty five days with Julian, is the only beginning (setting the Harmony
aside) that is consonant to truth. I argue thus, The taking away of the daily
sacrifice, and setting up the abomination that makes desolate, which is the
Head of this number, Dan. 12.11, 12. must be taken either in a litteral sense,
as referring to the people of the Jews, or in a spiritual, as referring to the
Gentile Saints. That the words should here be understood in a spiritual sense
is no way likely to be the mind of Daniel in this place, the reason is clear,
because, the promise of a certain time of Deliverance, verse. 1. which was the
very thing that put Daniel upon querying, and drew forth these answers about
the time, is made expressly to the Jews, which therefore are twice in that first
verse called Daniels People. The Prince that stands for the children of thy
people -- at that time shall thy people be delivered. -- Although the
Gentile-Saints in Daniel are called the holy people, the understanding people,
the people that know their God, the Saints of the most high, etc. yet are they
never called thy people; that is a phrase peculiar to the Jews, as chap. 9.24.
chap. 10.14. chap. 11.14. and no where applied to the Gentiles. Now whereas the
Holy Ghost when he gives forth that time of deliverance by way of Promise,
which afterward he measures, uses this phrase twice together, thy people,
thy people, it clearly denotes, that he is speaking of the Jews, and that the
time of deliverance first promised, afterward measured, has a special
relation to that people; so as that no deliverance whatsoever from Captivity
and Bondage, unless it be a deliverance of Natural Jews, can be a fulfilling
of this place. Seeing therefore that the taking away of the daily Sacrifice in
this place must be understood literally, we must apply it to the time when
this was done in part, or in the beginning, or else to the time when this work
was thoroughly perfected. The partial performance hereof was in Vespatians time,
when the Jews losing their Temple, in respect of the outward building, were put
by sacrifising, and could sacrifise no longer, the place in which all their
Sacrifices were to be offered, being now demolished. This is that Christ points
at, Matthew. 24.15. and this was, to speak properly, rather a Cessation of the
daily Sacrifice, then a taking it away.

The complete performance hereof was in Julians time, when the Jews lost their
Temple, not only in respect of building, but also in respect of the very being
of it, the very foundation being now removed, and the Temple-ground it self
lost by an Earthquake.

Now the Question is, Whether of the two are we to choose for our Head to the
one thousand three hundred thirty five days, whether the demolishing of the
Temple-building in Vespasians time, or the utter destruction of the Temple
being, in Julians?

Ans. Not the first, because the deliverance pointed at in the end of this
time, being (upon our aforesaid ground) a deliverance of the people of the
Jews, the event (considering that the time from that beginning is expired long
since) does necessarily prove it false. And this Argument from the event is
firm and good, considering the premises, viz. That the Jews are here spoken of,
and assurance given to Daniel of their deliverance after such a time. If
therefore we see the time run out, and that many years, and yet no such thing
in accomplishment as the Jews deliverance, we may truly say, some other
beginning must be sought; for there can be no error in the Word it self,
whatsoever may be in men's interpretations thereof. It necessarily therefore
follows, (because the words being to be understood literally, as pointing to
the Jewish people, and the place of their Worship, we have no other beginning)
that we should begin with the second, viz. The completing of this work of
Temple-desolation, which fell out in the time of Julian. So that to begin the
one thousand three hundred thirty five days with Julian, has more approbation
from Scripture (waving our Harmony) than any other opinion.

Now the one thousand three hundred thirty five days being begun there, our
former Argument for one hundred forty seven years betwixt the coming out of
Babylon, and Nehemiahs time, will appear good upon the gross sum: for, by this
allowance, the two thousand three hundred days will, without it cannot, end (as
yet they must) with the one thousand three hundred thirty five.

That the Greeks, and most Chronologers that follow their accounts, do compute
the same number of years from the beginning of Cyrus first, until the end of
Artaxerxes Mnemons twentieth, cannot be looked upon as an Argument against us,
but if any thing, it is rather an Argument for us; Let us not, because every
man is a Liar, make the Word of God (which in this case speaks enough for us,
though men had said nothing) a Liar too. If the Devil should speak agreeable to
this rule, so far there is truth in him; but if Angels speak against it, it
is because there is no truth in them.

Obj. But Daniel, chap. 11.1, 2. reckons but four Kings, after Cyrus, to have
reigned in the whole Persian Monarchy, until the time that the Monarchy was
translated to the Greeks. And if so, then may not this time, which contains not
the whole, but a part of the time of that Monarchy, be counted so long as one
hundred forty seven years.

Ans. Should I grant the thing, yet is it not impossible; for if but four
reigned, if we allow to the reign of each fifty years (which is no thing
miraculous) the three first alone will exceed our time, and the others reign
added will go as far as any conceive the Persian Monarchy did last. They that
urge this, must prove from Scripture, that these did not reign so long, or they
do nothing against our former Arguments, which do strongly infer, (till the
contrary be proved) that if betwixt Cyrus and Alexander, but four did reign,
they must reign so long.

But secondly, I do not grant the thing, nor see the least show of reason from
the text to recede from the account of the Greeks, but rather to adhere to them.

The Question is, Whether the fourth King there spoken of be the last King of
the Persian Monarchy, yea or no?

Ans. Daniel says not so, nor will his words rightly interpreted infer so
much. The words in Daniel, (which were spoken in the third year of Cyrus, as
Daniel 10.1.) are only these, Behold, there shall stand up yet, (i. e.
succeeding Cyrus, who was present King when this was spoken) three Kings in
Persia, and the fourth (i. e. the King that should succeed these three) shall
be far richer than they all, and by his strength, through his riches, he
shall stir up all against the Realm of Graecia.

Here is not a word that the fourth should be the last, but that the fourth
should be richer than all the other, and by his strength, through his riches,
stir up all against the Realm of Graecia. Now how exactly does this answer to
what is recorded by the Greek Historians? if we count the Government of the
Magi to be one of the three first Kings that succeeded Cyrus; for though they
continued in the Government but a little while, for which cause some (as I have
said) confound their reign with the reign of Cambyses; yet they being a Head
distinct, the Scripture, which speaks of things distinctly, and as they are,
account them so, not regarding their short continuance.

Now I say, the Magi being reckoned one of these three, how patly do Daniels
words answer to the reports of the Greeks? for Cyrus they reckon as the first,
and the founder of the Persian Monarchy; after him they reckon, 1 Cambyses, 2
The Magi. 3 Darius Hystaspes. Here are the three standing up after Cyrus, the
fourth they mention (who succeeded Darius Hystaspes) is Xerxes the Great, who
is famously known in the stories of those ancient Writers, for two things.

1 For his Riches, which his Father Darius Hystaspes had hoorded up, and that
in so great abundance, that he was called the Hoorder of the Kingdom.

2 For his notable expedition against Greece, carrying with him no less than a
Million of Soldiers (some reckon them very many more, almost two Millions)
which were transported over the Sea, with upwards of five thousand Galleys, and
other Vessels. See Sir Walter Rawleighs History of the World, Lib. 3. Cap. 6.
Sect. 1. These two things which Xerxes (who according to the Greeks was the
fourth King after Cyrus) was so famous for, are the very things pointed at by
Daniel, as 1. That the fourth King should be far richer than they all, i. e.
than all his Predecessors. 2. That by his strength, through his riches, he
should stir up all against the Realm of Graecia.

Obj. But though Daniel does not call the fourth King after Cyrus, the last of
the Persian Monarchy, yet the following words infer little less; for the very
next that we read of after this fourth King, is Alexander the Great, verse. 3.
And a mighty King shall stand up, that shall rule with great Dominion, and do
according to his will. These words can be understood of none but Alexander the
Great, as the following verse makes appear. And when he shall stand up, his
Kingdom shall be broken, (so was Alexanders by his sudden death) and shall be
divided toward the four Winds of Heaven, and not to his posterity; ( thus was
Alexanders, who dying without issue, his Kingdom was divided betwixt his four
chief Captains) nor according to his Dominion which he ruled, i. e. none of
Alexanders Captains were so potent as he; which words agree exactly to those,
Dan. 8. verse. 8, 21, 22. where we have the very same description of Alexander.

Ans. I grant it, that Alexander is here meant, yet does it not therefore
follow that the fourth King before mentioned must be the last of the Persian
Monarchy, unless it could be proved, that Daniels enumeration of Kings,
respects the whole Monarchy of the Persians, so as not one King more reigned in
that Monarchy than is there mentioned, which I am sure cannot be done from
Scripture. The story of Ezra will not at all help it, till they have proved the
same of that also, viz. That it is a perfect Chronicle, and has given us a
perfect enumeration of the Persian Monarchs; which is a thing (as I have
formerly observed) not in the least intended in those Books.

But rather to put the matter out of all doubt, the business in Daniel lies
thus. The Holy Ghost is treating, not of particular Kings, but of Monarchies in
general; and therefore it is no part of his scope to tell us how many Kings
did reign in this or that Monarchy, (which is not a thing observed in any of
the Kingdoms afterward spoken of in this Chapter, therefore should not be
urged as any part of the scope here) but his drift is to show us;

1 How many Monarchies, from that time until the time of the end, should be
in the world.

2 What remarkable changes should be in these Monarchies themselves, not as to
the reign of particular Kings, but as to the alteration of Governments.

3 What more noted things should be done in the time of these Monarchies, by
either of them, as considered under this or that Government, either against
Gods people that were, the Jews; or Gods people that are, the Gentiles; or
against both in the time of the end, or the evening of the Worlds, or worldly
Kingdoms day; or what more remarkable rents, occasioning fearful Civil broyls,
Commotions, Divisions, etc. should befall this or that Monarchy within the time
of its particular continuance.

And lastly, Whence, or upon what occasion, the translation of Monarchies from
one people to another (as from the Medes and Persians to the Greeks, from them
to the Romans, and from them the translation of the Kingdom and Dominion, and
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, into the hands of another
people, viz. The Saints of the most High, who till this day had always and ever
been crushed, by and under these Monarchies) should arise. In these things lies
the main scope of the Holy Ghost, who does not in the least drive at such a
thing, as to tell us what particular Kings succeeded one another in this or
that Monarchy, but only names things of this nature so far as they serve the
main scope, but no further.

Now observe, the thing the Holy Ghost would have us learn (as seems to me)
from the second and third verses of this Chapter, is this; As to take notice of
such a Monarchy as was that of the Persians, so more especially to mind the
cause, and the occasion of the translation of this Monarchy from the Persians
to the Graecians, and the time when this cause should be given, and the ground
of a Quarrel betwixt these two Nations laid. Now to make out this, he tells us,
how that after Gyrus three Kings should arise in Persia, and a fourth after
them, which fourth should be very rich, and strong, and through the greatness
of his strength and riches, should stir up all against the Realm of Graecia.
This (as I have before said) was most exactly to a tittle fulfilled in Xerxes
the Great, who was the fourth King after Cyrus in the Persian Monarchy;
exceeding all his Predecessors in power and riches, and with all his power
invades the Realm of Graecia. Here now is the ground of an inveterate hatred
and quarrel laid betwixt these two Nations, which afterward occasioned the
translation of the Monarchy; for the Greeks, though at present they maintained
their own Cause, and did worst their potent Enemy, yet was this work (as
Histories record) chiefly done by Sea, where (though they were but a handful to
the other, yet being of the two the more skilful in Sea-affairs, and the more
resolute in this kind of fight, having withal the better ships) in the great
Battle of Salamis they gained the day; yet when this was done, though hereby
they delivered themselves, were they not so potent by Land as to invade their
enemy. But many years after, when that valiant Commander, Alexander the Great
(who durst attempt any thing) arose in Greece, then the bad blood begotten by
this invasion (though it were more than a Generation or two before) began to
work, and the old grudge is remembered; and Alexander, in way of revenge of the
old Quarrel, invades the Persians, by which invasion the Monarchy is translated
from the Persians to the Graecians. So that the Holy Ghost takes notice of the
Kings reigning in Persia, only so far as serves his turn, viz. To point out
the time when the groundwork of that irreconcilable quarrel betwixt the
Persians and the Graecians should be laid, which would in time prove the
overthrow and translation of the Monarchy, as it then was in the hands of the
Persians. This was done by Xerxes invasion of Greece, which quarrel afterward
is taken up by Alexander, who to revenge the injury done to his Country (though
long before) by the Persians, invades them, overthrows their Power, wrests the
Monarchy out of their hands.

This is the true meaning of the place, without forcing or squeezing the text.
Now consider the thing, and what can more punctually agree to the Heathen
stories than does this of Daniel? to which, if we lay what we have said
before, as touching the time betwixt the return from the Captivity, and
Nehemiahs days, from both we may conclude, That these ancient Writers, (though
Heathens) have given us a true account of the Persian Monarchy, both as
touching the Persons that reigned, and the Time how long.

And notwithstanding the Jewish Writers, as Josephus, Philo, etc. vary from the
Greeks, yet are not their reports to be credited so much as the reports of the
Greeks; and the reason is, because we have much more ground to suspect them of
partiality, than the other; for Josephus, Philo, etc. might out of design
mention such Kings only as they find in Ezra, because, besides the
misunderstanding this place of Daniel, they might have such a conceit that
Ezraes Book was a perfect Chronicle, and therefore in naming more, should
cross not this only, but that also; and also, being Jews, might scorn to take
a relation from the Gentiles, whom they esteemed Liars, and accursed. But now
the Greeks had no temptation of this nature before them, which might move them
out of mere design to be silent as touching any Kings that were, or tell us of
Kings that were not. Nay, how can we readily think they should so do, when as
they do not only record Persons but their Acts, of which many are things known,
and famous? yea further, whereas the History-Writers themselves living at
sundry times of the Persian Monarchy, did each mention the King that reigned
whilst he lived, as Herodotus mentions Xerxes, Thucydides, Artaxerxes
Longimanus; Xenophon, Darius Nothus, Artaxerxes Mnemon, etc. Now is it likely
they would tell such lies in the very face of the times they lived in, as to
endeavor to make people believe such and such Kings reigned over them, when
every Child knew the contrary. Let us not Censure even Heathens beyond the
rules of Reason, nor, because we are sick of their reports, spew out the truth
of the Scripture with them.

This Objection therefore does not so offend us, but that we may,
notwithstanding it, safely and truly conclude, That the number of years from
Cyrus first, to Artaxerxes Mnemons twentieth (taking in each current year) are
one hundred forty seven.

SECT. 4.
Having found out the true and certain Number of years from Cyrus first, unto
the year of Christ's Passion, we are now to run the remaining years of the two
thousand three hundred, upon our Christian Epock, or that account which is
commonly called the Year of the Lord.

Here I must nakedly confess my self to be short of a clear Scripture-rule,
to ascertain us how many years have passed since the time of Christ's Passion.
And this I may say, it is a thing impossible (considering all Scripture Records
did cease suddenly after) that such a rule should be produced by any, as yet;
though withal I am of the mind, that a little time will furnish us with a
clear Scripture-rule (all the accounts of men being set aside) to measure the
years of the World by, and that from the day of the Creation, until Christ's
second coming. And lest this should seem a Paradox, I explain my self thus;
That I conceive the Scripture has determined the whole of this time, either by
particular sums, or gross sums; now concerning every gross sum this rule is
to be observed, That the ending of this or that gross sum (where the Scripture
has left us no other rule but only the gross sum) can never be apprehended by
a Divine Faith, but only in the accomplishment of that thing the gross sum
points at. When the thing is in being, then we may (though there were no
account of man's in the World) say, now so many years are past; but before it is
in being, though we know the true beginning of the gross sum, yet can we have
only a Human Faith as concerning its end, i.e. to say, at such or such a time
the thing pointed at by the gross sum will have its accomplishment. Now for so
much as concerns the time from the Creation until the ending of the seventy
years of the Captivity, we have it all in Scripture, partly upon particular
sums, partly such gross sums, whose ends being already passed, they are in
that respect as clear and demonstrative as any particular sum; but for the time
since, it runs wholly upon the gross sum, which gross sum is this wonderful
Number of two thousand three hundred years. Now observe, although we have
ground (and that from the necessary concurrency of each Number in their end, so
far as the fixation of the Head of the one thousand three hundred thirty five
with Julians Act, is Scripture Proof) to conclude, that at the time when Julian
set the Jews to re-edifie their Temple, so many years of the two thousand three
hundred were run out, as that the remaining years at that day were only one
thousand three hundred thirty five, yet can we not upon Scripture-ground
descend lower, until we shall see the Jews beginning to stir.

When this thing shall be visible, then may we, because Daniel has expressly
determined this to be forty five years before the ending of the one thousand
three hundred thirty five, or the two thousand three hundred days, upon
Scripture-ground also determine, That now so many of the two thousand three
hundred years are expired, as that the years which remain are only forty five.
This therefore would bring light into the whole, and, did we see their
stirring, it would be no difficult thing to measure by an infallible rule the
years of the world, from the Creation until Christ's second coming, (which
speaks much for the perfection of the Scriptures, viz. That they alone, without
any help of man's (could we but patiently wait for the times of manifestation)
are thoroughly able to perfect every of their accounts) but, till the set times
of manifestation, it cannot infallibly be; for taking it for granted, That we
have upon Scripture-account the Heads of Daniels one thousand two hundred and
ninety, or John's one thousand two hundred and sixty years, i. e. that the one
and the other must begin at such and such a year; yet must we (till we see the
things in accomplishment, that each Number points at) trust Human Records as to
this, viz. That so many years from the beginning of the one or the other
Number, until this day, are run out. This I say, till we see the
accomplishment of things, can never be known but by the accounts of men; but
when once we see things in accomplishment, then suppose men had kept no account
at all, yet may we determine as well without them as with them; and all
Conclusions then being founded upon pure Scripture, will be infallible.

Obj. But it may be said, Perhaps when these things pointed at by these Numbers
shall come to be in accomplishment, it will be so darkly, as that we shall not
be able to discern it.

Ans. Not so; for observe it, those actions which have been the
concluding-points of gross sums, God did never in Old Testament-times bring
forth in obscurity, but clearly and manifestly, so that his people could see
the action, and the end of the set time together; much less therefore should
we expect it in New Testamenttimes, in which all things are more clear. It is
therefore sufficient to call into question the Head of any Number whatsoever,
in case we see the whole of the time run out, and yet the thing in
accomplishment so dark, as that we cannot tell whether it be fulfilled or no.
God never dealt thus by his people in times of Old, when light was less,
therefore we are not to think he will deal thus by them in Gospel Times, when
light is greater. Most surely, when Gods times are run out, his very works will
be so manifest, that reason shall find no room for to object; Divine actions
will then silence reasoning.

I do therefore conclude, That although unto the beginning of the one thousand
three hundred thirty five days, our rule for the measuring of the two thousand
three hundred is clear from Scripture upon the foregoing Principle, that these
two Numbers end together, and therefore wheresoever we begin the one thousand
three hundred thirty five days, must we conclude, that with that time or year,
whatsoever it be, must of necessity be run out exactly nine hundred sixty five
of Daniels two thousand three hundred years; for otherwise the years remaining
of the two thousand three hundred will be more or less then one thousand
three hundred thirty five; and if so, then cannot the two thousand three
hundred, and the one thousand three hundred thirty five, end together; yet as
to the time since, till we see the Jews stirring, we cannot by any
Scripture-rule determine how many years have passed from that time to this.

Here therefore I freely confess, we are (and must be till we see things in
accomplishment) at a loss, as to our certain and infallible rule.

We may say, That it is a thing very probable, (and my reason for it I shall
give by and by) that our Christian Epock (more especially within this time)
has given us a true account, and neither lost nor gained years; but to
conclude the thing absolutely, because the testimony, though ever so true, is
but Human, we may not.

Though therefore I determine upon a particular year, yet not so absolutely,
but that I do confess, That in case men in their accounts of that time, which
at present to us is undetermined by Scripture, have lost or gained years; by so
much will things in accomplishment fall either sooner or later than the year I
have fixed upon.

Now, though I will not here take upon me to determine (as judging the thing
upon a pure Scripture-account indeterminable) whether Scaligers account of the
Year of our Lord, or the vulgar account be the true (only add, That should the
first, which fixes the day of Christ's Birth two years higher than the vulgar
account, be the truth, then the one thousand two hundred and sixty days, the
one thousand two hundred and ninety, do end with the end of the present year,
one thousand six hundred fifty four; but if the last, viz. the vulgar have the
truth in it, then do they end with the end of the year, one thousand six
hundred fifty six, the year I have always hitherto pitched upon for the
Witnesses Rise, Jews stirring, etc. though I confess I am in a great doubt,
which we are to hold to, but less than twelve Months will untie this knot, and
unriddle this Mystery;) yet that neither account, though they vary two years as
to their beginning, have since upon their reckoning either lost or gained
years, seems to me a probable truth upon our foregoing Principle, viz. of the
concurrence of the two thousand three hundred, and the one thousand three
hundred thirty five days, in their end. For supposing some miscarriage may have
crept into either of these, or rather both (for setting aside their small
difference as touching the beginning, they both, as to number of years since
Christ, speak the very same thing) in all likelihood the miscarriage must be
within the time of the first three hundred years; for since that time Christian
Religion has been the Religion of a principal part of the World, and has
always gone upon a public date; but now in case any miscarriage were in that
time, then seeing we must after once Daniels one thousand three hundred thirty
five years are begun, allow the like number of years (viz. one thousand three
hundred thirty five) of the two thousand three hundred, to it, that these two
by this allowance may concur in one end; it will follow, that so many years
over or under as the miscarriage has been, so many years, by that time we have
counted the years of the two thousand three hundred before Christ's Passion, and
the years of the two thousand three hundred which follow the beginning of the
one thousand three hundred thirty five, will be found within this time (viz.
betwixt Christ's Passion, and the beginning of the one thousand three hundred
thirty five years) over or under the general sum of two thousand three hundred;
for if the years within this time have been counted more than they should, then
will the total sum of the years be more upon account of the whole time put
together, than two thousand three hundred; if less, then less; so that the
two thousand three hundred must by this means either be stretched or crooked,
neither of which must be; for this, two thousand three hundred, is of all, the
most exquisite and perfect rule to measure times by, it being the very Date
that Heaven has set upon all worldly Kingdoms, the account that the wonderful
Numberer of times and seasons has left us. It therefore being a thing Divine,
determines of all accounts that are Human, but suffers it self to be determined
by none.

This Harmony therefore of the two thousand three hundred years, and the one
thousand three hundred thirty five in their end, as it does determine the truth
of all our account till Julian, viz. That we must of necessity reckon nine
hundred sixty five years, of the two thousand three hundred, to be expired at
the time of Julians Act, not a year more or less, for if upwards of nine
hundred sixty five years were expired before Julian, then would there not be
one thousand three hundred thirty five remaining; if less, then more, either
of which destroys the harmony: So likewise does it determine, that in all
probability our Christian Epock has neither lost nor gained years from that
time to this day, because if any where it had lost or gained years, it is
likely it should be within the first three hundred years; but there it did not,
therefore much more unlikely that since, (when Christian Religion has been
more famous, and gone upon the public Date of the greatest Empire in the
World) it should have lost or gained any.

Having thus made good the whole of our account, there is nothing now remaining
but that we cast it up, to the end we may see where, or with what year Daniels
two thousand three hundred years expire.

For the better doing hereof I shall divide the whole into Six Periods.

1. Period, Contains the number of years from the beginning of Cyrus first,
unto the end of Artaxerxes Mnemons twentieth, (note, That the twentieth year of
Mnemon, though Nehemiah received his Commission within that year, yet being the
current year, is to be reckoned into this Period; the same rule is also to be
observed in all the following Periods) the years of this Period are one hundred
forty seven.

2 Period, From the end of Artaxerxes Mnemons twentieth year, unto the end of
the thirty fourth year of our Lord; The years of this Period are (the four last
of Daniels four hundred and ninety being cut off, for our Reasons laid down in
opening Daniels seventy weeks) four hundred eighty six.

3 Period, From the end of the thirty fourth year of our Lord, until the end
of the year three hundred sixty six; the years of this Period are three hundred
thirty two.

These three first Periods contain years, nine hundred sixty five.

4 Period, From the end of the year three hundred sixty six, until the end of
the year three hundred ninety six; the years of this Period are thirty.

5 Period, From the end of the year three hundred ninety six, to the end of the
year one thousand six hundred fifty six; the years of this Period are one
thousand two hundred and sixty.

6 Period, From the end of the year one thousand six hundred fifty six, to the
end of the year one thousand seven hundred and one; the years of this Period
are forty five.

These three last Periods contain of years, one thousand three hundred thirty
five.

The years of the three first, and the three last Periods put together, make up
exactly 2300.

The sum of all is, That Christ's Personal Appearance,

Isreal's complete Redemption,

The final overthrow of Beast, and Great Turk,

The binding of the Dragon,

The total dissolution of the Fourth Monarchy,

The beginning of the one thousand years reign of Christ and the Saints, (all
which things are concurrent) falls to be, Anno Dom. one thousand seven hundred
and one, about forty seven, or forty eight years hence.

Yet whether or no Jesus Christ, who tells us, that for the Elects sake those
days (that is, the days of the sore trouble which will befall the Jews more
especially toward the ending-time of the last forty five years) shall be
shortened, may not appear some years sooner, and so cut short this determined
time, is a question too hard for me to decide; but the appearance of our
blessed Lord, the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, will put an end to
this, and all other Controversies. When we shall see no more (as all our sight
now is) through a Glass darkly, but face to face: Now we know in part, but
then shall we know perfectly, even as we are known.

In faith of which blessed day let us rejoice, in expectation of it let us
always be found waiting and watching, That whenever our Lord comes, whether
at even, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the morning, he may not,
coming suddenly, find us sleeping. And what I say unto you, I say unto all,
watch, Mark 13.37. So enable us Lord to do, and come O Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Amen, Amen.
The Calculation of Daniels 2300 Years, showing their beginning, their end, and
the Harmony of other Mystical Numbers with this.
The several Periods The years of each Period. The Harmony of other mystical
Numbers. The total Sum. 1 From Cyrus first to Artax. Muemons 20. 147. 2. From
Artax. 20. to Christ's Passion. A.D. 34 486. 633. 3. From Christ's Passion to
Julians act, A.D. 366. 332. 965. 4. From Julians act to Beasts Rise, A.D. 396.
30. With the beginning of this Period begins Daniels 1290, 1335 years. 995. 5.
From Beasts Rise to the end of his reign, A. D. 1656. 1260. John's 1260 years
begin and end this Period. 2255. Concurrent with the end of this Period is the
end of Dan. 1290. days, the 30 of the former Period added to the 1260 of this,
making up that number. Thus Dan. 1290. and John's 1260. concur in their end. 6.
From the end of Beasts reign, to the end of the Fourth Monarchy, A. D. 1701.
45. Concurrentwith the end of this Period is the end of Dan. 1335 years, the 45
years of this Period added to the 1200. of the two former, making up that
number. 2300. Thus the 1335 and the 2300. concur likewise in their end.

A General Rule for the right understanding of Prophecies, together with a more
full opening the great Mystery of Daniels little Horn.
IT is a most certain truth, That every Prophecy left us in the Word of God,
has in it self sufficient Characters to lead us, by comparing the Characters
of it with the mind of God in other Prophecies, to the knowledge of the
substance of that truth that is in it held forth; for otherwise the word should
be imperfect, and not able to expound it self.

These Characters are the Keys of this or that Prophecy, which when found, it
will be easy to unlock it; but if these be missed, all men's endeavors in
opening Prophecies will be in vain, and their labors lost.

These Keys, in some Prophecies where a man can hardly go any way but one, are
quickly and with ease found; but in others, where by reason of the various
turnings and windings there seem to be as many ways to go in as there are
words, the finding of them is a thing most hard; and the Searcher, in case he
have not a better guide than himself, shall never find them.

The knowledge of the true Keys of any Prophecy from Counterfeit ones, arises
from the fitness of the Keys to the Wards of the Lock, i.e. to the several
parts of the Prophecy it self, and all other Prophecies concurrent with it;
for this is certain, that if the true Key be found, it will open whatsoever
lies within that Prophecy, or any other that has dependence upon it. Hence,
those Keys how neatly soever they may be wrought, which will open but a part of
a Prophecy, but not the whole, are not the true Keys, but counterfeit.

Two things there are that are absolutely destructive to the finding of these
Keys.

1 An Affection to any pre-conceived opinion that may be in a man, as touching
this or that Prophecy, before yet he has found the certain Key thereof. So
far as any such thing is in any, instead of seeking the true key, he will
make a key, and form it to his own opinion.

2 A founding Conclusions (which should all be built upon manifest
demonstrations taken from the naked Letter of the Text, and no other
foundation) upon Allegories, i. e. because many things in this or that Prophecy
seem fairly to allude to such or such an event, therefore must that event
needs be the meaning of the Prophecy.

This is the most fallible way of interpreting Prophecies of all other; for how
easy a thing is it, considering that some Prophecies (as Daniels for instance)
lead us through many Ages, as many as amount to no less than two thousand
years and upwards, that within so long a time a man should find more
occurrencies than one that will in many things agree to what is foretold in
such or such a Prophecy?

Hence come those innumerable mistakes of Expositors, both of former, later,
and present times also, they run (without a due respect to the indubitable
Characters of the text) the meaning of this or that Prophecy, upon this or the
other likely event, and so, as many likely events as men's reading or wits can
help them to, so many interpretations shall we have of the Prophecy. And this
evil has crept in, by that in some sense good, but as it is ordinarily
understood and made use of, greatly abused Saying, viz. That the best
Interpreter of Prophecies is the event.

It is a most dangerous thing therefore to run from the naked Letter of the
text, when the meaning of any Prophecy is sought after, to Allegorical
flourishes, because where the Letter is set aside, and the Allegory made the
rule of interpretation, there can be no certainty of truth, in regard
Allegorical interpretations are as various as men's inventions.

Now how a man shall ever be able to judge of truth in variety, in case he
have not some other rule to walk by than that which produces this variety, I
cannot tell.

Although therefore it is confessed, that many phrases in this or the other
Prophecy do require a Spiritual meaning to be put upon them; yet (I say) the
Characters themselves, by which this or that Prophecy, as to scope and time, is
distinguished from all others, are ever to be looked for in the naked letter of
the Text, which is the only standing and fixed rule, and not in any Mystical or
Spiritual interpretations, which are as variable and uncertain as men's
imaginations; and in case these general Characters which are deducible only
from the letter, are once found, it will be then a thing more easy to give a
right sense of particular Phrases, and to determine concerning them, in which
we are to cleave to the literal, in which to seek a Spiritual interpretation.

For an example, I shall pitch upon Daniels little Horn, which as it is one of
the most famous Prophecies in all the Scripture; so is there not any one (I
mean that is so considerable) that has fallen under more mis-interpretations
then it; which mistakes are multiplied daily through that earnest inquiry that
by the Saints of this Generation is made after the mind of Daniel; and though
it may be thought, enough as to it has been already said in the precedent
Discourse, yet because some through weakness cannot, others biased with some
particular affection to this, or the other opinion, will not apply those things
as they ought to be applied, I thought it not unmeet to take up this Prophecy
here again, and make it the example of my Rule.

Now the sure and certain Characters of this little Horn, which are deducible
from the letter of the text, and which (all put together) cannot be made agree
to any opinion but only that which is the truth, are such as these.

1 CHARACTER, The Kingdom of the little Horn must be in the latter days; the
reason is, because the extreme and utmost part of Nebuchadnezzars great Image,
viz. the feet and toes, Dan. 2.41, 42, 43. are the same with the little Horn,
Chap. 7. This needs no proving, because it is universally granted, whatsoever
interpretation is by any put upon the little Horn, carries along with it this
concession, That the little Horns Kingdom, cha. 7. and the feet and toes of
Nebuchadnezzars Image, chap. 2. are the same, at leastwise in respect of time.
Now the feet and toes of Nebuchadnezzars Image falls within the later days; the
reason is, because the Image it self brings us down to the latter days, verse.
28. which cannot be, in case the feet and toes which are the extreme and utmost
part thereof, were not to be extended as far as the latter days.

To whose Kingdom this phrase is most properly appliable, the Apostles use of
the same phrase, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. does clearly teach us.

2 CHARACTER, This Kingdom of the little Horn must necessarily appertain to the
Roman Monarchy.

That it cannot belong to the Graetian is clear, because the Grecian Monarchy,
whether we consider it as united under Alexander, or as in its fourfold
division afterward, is comprehended under the third Beast, Dan. 7.6. but now
the Kingdom of the little Horn belongs not to the third Beast, for the Little
Horn arises among the ten Horns of the fourth, verse. 8.

That it cannot be any power distinct from, and succeeding the Roman Monarchy,
is also clear.

1 Because no place in Daniel or elsewhere does so much as once countenance any
such opinion as this, viz. That there should be any worldly Government
succeeding the Roman Monarchy. Nay, let me say, the Scripture is clear against
such a Notion, for it is manifest, Dan. 7.12, 13, 14. Revel. 19.11, 12.
compared with verse. 19, 20. That the destruction of the Beast, ( i.e. the Roman
Monarchy as under Antichrist) is upon the appearance of Christ; if so, where
shall we then find room for the Government of the little Horn to succeed the
Roman Monarchy?

2 Because the Beast is slain, his body destroyed, and given to the burning
flame: and that for the blasphemies of the little Horn, Dan. 7.11. This Beast
(I say) can be no other but the fourth and last Beast, verse. 7. which Beast is
the Roman Monarchy.

Hence I gather two things.

1 That the government of the little Horn cannot be a Government distinct from
the Roman Monarchy, a thing the Roman Monarchy has nothing to do with; for
then, why is the Roman Monarchy punished for the blasphemies of the little Horn?

2 That the Government of the little Horn cannot be a government succeeding the
Roman Monarchy; for it is most clear from the words, That the fourth Beasts
Kingdom is in being, and that at the time the little Horn blasphemes. Now it
would be improper to say, That the little Horns Government succeeds the Fourth
Monarchy, and yet that Monarchy still in being, even in the time of the little
Horns Dominion.

3 Because if the little Horns Kingdom, or Government, succeed the Roman
Monarchy, then have we in Daniel five Monarchies preceding the Kingdom of
Christ and his Saints, viz.

1 The Monarchy of the Babylonians.

2 Of the Medes and Persians.

3 Of the Graecians.

4 Of the Romans.

5 The Monarchy or Government of the little Horn. If so, then must not Christ's
Kingdom he called the Fifth Monarchy, but the Sixth.

If therefore the little Horn can neither belong to the Grecian Monarchy, nor
succeed the Roman, then must the same of necessity appertain to the Roman
Monarchy.

3 CHARACTER, The Little Horn must be a power equivalent to the whole body of
the Fourth Monarchy. This is clear, Dan. 2. which Prophecy considers the Fourth
Kingdom. 1 As an Iron Kingdom, verse. 40. 2 As a Kingdom of Iron and Clay, verse.
41, 42, 43. yet both but one Kingdom, and therefore that which is called the
Fourth Kingdom, verse. 40. is called the Kingdom, verse. 41, 42. showing us, That
the Holy Ghost was still speaking of one and the same Kingdom, for otherwise he
would for distinction sake have called the feet of Iron and Clay another
Kingdom, but calling it the Kingdom, it has a manifest reference to that
Kingdom he had mentioned last, viz. the Fourth, which Kingdom is called an Iron
Kingdom, to set forth the state before Antichrist came in, a Kingdom of Iron
and Clay, to set forth the state afterward.

They that would see more reason hereof, may consult with our foregoing
Discourse.

4 CHARACTER, The little Horn signifies such a power as consists of ten parts,
which ten parts are so many Kings, not succeeding in one and the same Kingdom,
but reigning in a Kingdom divided into ten parts. This appears Dan. 2.41, 42,
43, 44. for the Power here mentioned (which is the same with the little Horn,
Chap. 7.) consists of ten toes, verse. 42. which toes are called Kings, verse.
44. In the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom; which
words cannot have relation to all the Four Monarchies; for the God of Heaven
set up no Kingdom, no not in a Spiritual sense, in the time of any of the Four,
but the last only; why should it then be said, these Kings in the plural
number? if not to give us to understand,

1 That the ten toes here spoken of are to be understood of so many Kings.

2 That the Kingdom of the Stone should begin, and that before the Roman
Monarchy, as consisting of ten Kingdoms, should be ruined; for it is the
Kingdom of the Stone that smites the feet and toes, and breaks them to pieces.

Again observe, That these Kings are not to be understood of so many Kings
reigning successively in one and the same Kingdom, but must of Kings reigning
contemporary in so many distinct Kingdoms, which Kingdoms (though distinct in
themselves, yet) do all meet in one common Head, as the toes do all meet in the
feet, This is evidenced, not only by the distinction of the toes in themselves,
but also by the division of the fourth or grand Kingdom among them, so as that
no one has the whole, but one has this part, another that, therefore it is
said to be divided, verse. 41. And also by their endeavor to mingle themselves,
thereby to form themselves again (if it might be) into one entire Kingdom,
verse. 43. an Argument that they cannot be Kings succeeding each other, but must
be contemporary. To whom, or to what power this Character of ten Kings agrees,
see Rev. 17.11, 12, 13, etc.

5 CHARACTER, The little Horn is a Power of long continuance; which is clear,

1 From the many and great things attributed to the little Horn, Chap. 7.20,
21, etc. Chap. 8.10, 11, 12, 24, 25. but chiefly, Chap. 11. verse. 21. to 40.
which things cannot be performed in one, no not in many ages.

2 From sundry Phrases and expressions that the Holy Ghost uses in description
of him, Chap. 7.25. he shall wear out the Saints of the most High, which Phrase
plainly imports length of time; a short suffering, though ever so bitter,
cannot properly be said to wear out the Patient, but an affliction is said to
wear out a man when it is heavy and long. So Chap. 11.33. They that understand
among the people shall instruct many, yet they shall fall by the Sword, and by
flame, by Captivity, and by spoil many days; noting a long time, verse. 35. And
some of them of understanding shall fall to try them -- even to the time of the
end, because it is yet for a time appointed; which words clearly hold forth,
That the end is not presently to be expected, when this little Horn shall begin
to rage, but rather it is to be looked upon to be at some distance, therefore
these words are brought in together with the little Horns rage, the end is yet
for a time appointed; as to say, Do not look for the end presently, no, this
suffering must be both sharp and long also.

6 And last CHARACTER, The little Horn must be understood of such a Person,
State, or Power, unto whom the Characters Daniel in his Four Prophecies has
left us, will agree; 1 Universally. 2 In a more eminent manner than to any
other Person, State, or Power that ever has been in the world.

This Character, though it is not so properly built upon the express Letter of
the text, as are the foregoing, yet is it founded upon right reason,
consentaneous unto the letter of the text. For observe, the agreement of the
Characters of the little Horn to the Thing, Person, or Power signified by it,
must be,

1 Universal, for otherwise we irreverently, and blasphemously charge the Holy
Ghost with multiplying Characters ignorantly, and in vain, in case but one
Character be unappliable to the thing Characterized.

2 They must agree in a more eminent manner to that thing, whatsoever it be,
that is signified by the Little Horn, than to any other thing; the reason is,
because whatsoever is spoken of as done by the Little Horn, he is spoken of as
doing that thing by way of eminency, i.e. so, and in such manner, as never any
other did.

He is a Blasphemer by way of eminency; for he speaks great words against the
most High himself, Dan. 7.25. Mavelous things against the God of gods, Chap.
11.36. Magnifies himself to the Prince of the Host, Chap. 8.11. i.e. makes
himself equal with Christ.

An Idolater by way of eminency; for he honors a God whom his fathers knew
not, Cha. 11.38. a strange God, not acknowledged by any before him, verse. 39.

An Oppressor by way of eminency; for he changes Times and Laws, Dan. 7.25.
divides the Land for gain, Dan. 11.39 invades (not by force of Arms, but)
peaceably, the fattest places of the Province, doing therein that which his
Fathers have not done, nor his Fathers Fathers, Dan. 11.24.

A Persecutor by way of eminency; for he does by his Persecutions even wear out
the Saints of the most High, Chap. 7.25. Destroys wonderfully, i. e. so as
never any before him did, the mighty and holy people, Chap. 8.24. Destroys the
understanding people all manner of ways, by Sword, by Flame, by Captivity, and
by Spoil, Chap. 11 33. whatsoever he does, he does it by way of eminency, i. e.
in such manner as was never done before.

Thus much for the Characters of the Little Horn.

I shall in the Conclusion add this word, That as the foregoing Characters
agree to none so fitly as the Romish Antichrist (to whom as these, so all the
Characters besides them in Daniel, will most aptly accord) So, in case the
Romish Antichrist be not the little Horn, it will necessarily follow, that we
have nothing left us from first to last in this Prophecy that conc^rns
Antichrists rage against the Saints and holy City, his tyranny over, and
oppression of the Nations, which now has continued, in such manner, as the
like was never before it, for above one thousand two hundred years; for in case
the things spoken of the little Horn be not appliable thereto, nothing
throughout this Prophecy is. Whatsoever is spoken of the Fourth Beast, ver. 7.
of his dreadfulness and strength, his Iron teeth, his devouring, breaking in
pieces, stamping the residue with his feet, his having ten Horns, had all its
accomplishment, (as my foregoing discourse proves) in the Roman Monarchy
before Antichrist came in; which was the most dreadful Power, devouring,
breaking in pieces the Nations, stamping the residue, ( i. e. the Powers of the
Monarchies before it) with its feet, that ever the earth saw, and had also ten
Horns, being exactly divided into ten parts by Augustus Caesar. The whole
therefore of the seventh verse is but a description thereof, which will be more
clear, if we compare it with verse twenty three, which tells us, That the
power of this Fourth Beast was exercised, not against the Saints in any
peculiar way, as all Antichrists rage has been, and the little Horns is, but
against the whole earth, without difference or respect, making it its great and
only business to tread that down, and subdue it to it self; It shall be
diverse from all Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and tread it down,
and break it to pieces. This being so, I say, in case that part of the Prophecy
which concerns the Little Horn be not to be applied to Antichrists rage and
tyranny, no part is, and if so, let it be considered,

1 How unlikely a thing it is that the Holy Ghost, when he was informing Daniel
of the state of things in the World, from the time that the Kingdom of the
House of David was subjected by Nebuchadnezzar, till it should be restored by
and under Christ the true David, should leap over at once above half the time,
not leaving us throughout the whole Prophecy so much as one syllable to inform
us, what should be done within that time.

2 That he should leap over that time too, which was a time in many respects so
remarkable for observation, as never was time in the world before.

1 In respect of a new kind of Power bearing rule all this time, viz. a Civil
Power and a Spiritual mixed together, and in this mixture the Spiritual to be
the Head, the like to which was never found in any of the preceding Monarchies,
no not in the world before.

2 In respect of a new kind of Idolatry, worshipping a Breaden god, Saints;
Relics of Saints, etc. an Idolatry never heard of in the world before.

3 In respect of a new kind of Persocution, a Persecution of the precious
Servants of God, by one professing himself in his Title to be the Servant of
the Servants of God; a Persecution of the true and faithful Members of Christ,
by one stiling himself Christ's Vicar.

4 In respect of a new kind of Tyranny; tyrannizing over the Conscience, and
forcing it, making Merchandise of the souls of men, Revel. 18.12, 13.

5 In respect of a new kind of oppression; oppressing the people, robbing them
of their wealth and substance, by craft, and not by power; as what are all the
Popish inventions of Masses, Pardons, Pilgrimages, Penance, Purgatory, their
Abbeys, Monasteries, etc. but mere tricks and devices, by which they divide the
Land, Dan. 11.39. enter into the fattest places of every Province or Nation,
ver. 24. and this by craft, Dan. 8.25?

6 In respect of a new kind of Blasphemy; for a man to profess the greatest
holiness and love to God of all others, and yet to make himself God, suffer
himself to be called God, worshipped as God; thus robbing God of his honor,
whilst he professes to serve, love, and honor him.

I say, that a time having such noted Characters upon it, as never had time in
the world before, should by the Holy Ghost (whilst less things are observed)
be wholly buried in silence, cannot be thought.

Nay thirdly, That the Holy Ghost here should wholly leap over that time, and
those transactions, which are in a manner the subject of all, or most of the
Apocalyptical Visions, when as Daniel and John do help to expound each other,
is very strange.

An Objection.

The Conception of some good men of our days is, That the little Horns Kingdom
does not denote the whole body of Antichrist, but points at some singular
Person or Power that is to arise in the evening time of Antichrists Kingdom; so
making in their conclusion the Saints of this Age to be the only subjects of
the Little Horns rage.

Answer.

1 This is very improbable, though it were upon no other reason but the former
only, viz. the loss of so much, and withal so remarkable a time, as is, and
must be lost by this opinion.

2 Very uncomfortable; for supposing the Little Horn to be but newly risen, yet
if withal we consider those things which are most evident from the text,
concerning him. 1. That his continuance must be long. 2 That throughout this
long time, he shall in a most fearful and dismal manner rage and tyrannize,
trample the Saints, oppress the Nations; What an uncomfortable opinion is this
to us, and all the people of God at this day, who look for their redemption to
be at hand, to entertain such a thought, that the Little Horns Kingdom is but
now begun? which if so, then sure enough neither we, nor our Childrens
Children, no nor the Generation after them, shall ever live to behold those
glorious days, which, yet is the faith of many, will break forth even in this
Generation. Nay how uncomfortable a thing is it, to think that all the
Persecutions that have every yet been in the World, are in a manner but
Flea-bites, both for greatness and length of time, to that persecution that is
now beginning? which must be in case the Kingdom of the Little Horn be but now
begun; for he is the only Persecutor of the Saints, and oppressor of the
Nations by way of eminency; that Monster that never had the like before him,
nor shall have after him.

3 Grounded upon a mistake, which mistake is another conception of some, who
are of opinion that the Little Horn denotes a single Person, viz. That the
Little Horns rise and rage is to be the immediate forerunner of the Beasts
final ruin, and that for this reason the description of this Little Horn is
insisted upon so largely in Daniels Prophecies.

But this cannot be,

1 Because it is needless and superfluous so much should be foretold of this
Little Horn, to this end only, when as in case nothing had been spoken of him,
we have a more sure, certain, and undoubted word to point us to the ending-time
of the Beasts reign, viz. the truth of those soveral mystical numbers that
concern the Beast; It is unacquaintedness with the one has made good men so
apt to close in with this other.

2 Because the destruction of that which comprehends the whole of the Beasts
Kingdom, cannot be a sign of the destruction of the Beasts Kingdom; but so does
the Little Horn; for it is equivalent to the whole body of the Fourth Monarchy,
and is a Power consisting of ten Kingdoms, as I have before proved.

4 The foregoing conception savours too much of partiality, and of too high
thoughts of our selves, and too low of the Saints before us, whilst in effect
by such a conclusion we render the Holy Ghost mindeless of all the sufferings
of so many Millions of the precicus Servants of Jesus Christ, who in former
Ages have in the flames, by Sword, and otherwise, sacrificed their lives for
the testimony of Jesus, against the Beast, as not to mention one word of all
their sufferings; and yet so mindful of us, who comparatively with them have
never suffered the thousandth part, nor can suffer more should men do their
worst, as to leave such a large Narrative of our afflictions.

Nay further let me add, (which follows upon the other) we do hereby in a
manner accuse the most righteous God of partiality and inequality, whilst we
make him to forget all his other Children much better than we, and to take
notice of us, and our sufferings only. Let us not have so much affection to our
selves, as not only to lay aside all due respect to that blessed cloud of
Witnesses our Forerunners and Betters, but also to make the ways of the most
righteous God unequal; yet this (remembering what but now was said, that in case
by the Little Horns rage and blasphemy the tyranny of Antichrist be not set
forth, no mention at all is by Daniel made thereof) does necessarily follow,
such a conception being admitted.

The sum of all is, That as those Charactors of truth left us in the naked
letter of the text, are the most certain rule to go by, to find the mind of
the Holy Ghost in Prophecies; so walking by that rule, Daniels Little Horn is,
and can be no other, but, the whole body of the Romish Antichrist.

A particular Clause, in our Discourse about the Times, opened.
IT has been said in the close of my foregoing Discourse about the times,
That (it cannot be determined from Scripture, whether the present year one
thousand six hundred fifty four, or tho approaching year, one thousand six
hundred fifty six, be the last of the Beasts reign, and the Witnesses wearing
sackcloth.

The ground of this uncertainty lies in the doubtfulness of the year of our
Saviors Birth, which although the Scripture tells us it was in the days of
Augustus Gaesar, yet in regard it has not, told us, how long the said Augustus
Caesar reigned, therefore the doubt remains. Nor will Human Records help us
herein, because they are divided within themselves, and differ some from others
a year or two, as touching the number of the years the said Augustus reigned.

Two opinions there are about the time of Christ's Birth, the one fixing it two
years higher, the other two years lower. The Vulgar Account, (which we have
followed, because the most known, and the common Date) inclines to the latter.
The account of Scaliger (which is owned by other Modern Chronologers, as
Calvisius, Alstedius, Helvicus, etc.) chooses the former.

The difference betwixt these cannot be determined by Scripture, nor can it be
certainly made appear, till the event has decided it, which is the truth.

Our proof from Scripture is firm and good, that the year one thousand six
hundred fifty six from the birth of Christ, must necessarily be the last year
of the Beasts reign, and the Witnesses wearing sackcloth.

This is demonstrable from the two thousand three hundred days; for since that
with the year of Christ's Passion, which was, Anno Dom. thirty four, six hundred
thirty three of Daniels two thousand three hundred years were expired (as I
have proved) it therefore follows, that from that year to the end of the Fourth
Monarchy are to be reckoned but one thousand six hundred sixty seven years
more, which one thousand six hundred sixty seven years being added to the
former number six hundred thirty three, as they make up the two thousand three
hundred years (which are the utmost date of the Fourth Monarchy) complete; so
do they also make the two thousand three hundred years to expire with the year
from Christ's Birth, one thousand seven hundred and one, for add one thousand
six hundred sixty seven to thirty four (the year in which Christ suffered) and
we have the aforesaid sum. Now in regard the end of the Beasts reign, and the
Witnesses wearing Sackcloth falls forty five years before the final destruction
of the Fourth Monarchy, it therefore follows (the Date of the Fourth Monarchy
expiring in the year one thousand seven hundred and one from Christ's Birth)
that the end of the Beasts reign, and the Witnesses wearing Sackcloth, which is
to be fixed forty five years above the other, must of necessity expire with the
end of the year one thousand six hundred fifty six from the birth of Christ.

But now, because the time of Christ's Birth is (as to the year) doubtful,
therefore (I say) can it not be determined what year we are to pitch upon, as
the year one thousand six hundred fifty six from the Birth of Christ.

If the account of Scaliger (which ascends two years above the vulgar) be the
truth, then of necessity (in case years since Christ in the counting have not
been lost, as it is a thing very improbable any should, upon the reason we have
given in the precedent Discourse) must this present year one thousand six
hundred fifty four, be the last of the Beasts reign, and the Witnesses wearing
sackcloth; for in case Christ's Birth be to be fixed two years higher than the
beginning of our Vulgar account, it will follow, that the year which we
(following the Vulgar account) call the year one thousand six hundred fifty
four, ought to be accounted, and really is, from Christ's Birth the year one
thousand six hundred fifty six; and if so, then will the next year after this
be the year in which the German Witnesses, and the Saints elsewhere shall put
off their Sackcloth, and be no longer subject to the tyranny of the Beast. But
if the Vulgar account be true, then will the year we commonly call fifty six be
the last year of the Beasts tyranny, and the Witnesses wearing Sackcloth, and
consequently with the beginning of the year one thousand six hundred fifty
seven must we expect the blessed day of the Saints putting off their
Sackcloth, and leading into captivity that Beast, that for one thousand two
hundred and sixty years together has captivated them. This being a question of
great moment, which makes a variance two years throughout all our accounts, and
withal not being (as I judge) determinable by Scripture, unless (as I have
said) it could be proved how many years Augustus Caesar reigned, which in case
it could be done, then indeed John's beginning to preach in the fifteenth year
of Tiberius, Luke 3.1. would somewhat help us, I thought good (having but
hinted it before) to give here in our close the true and full state thereof,
leaving the two different accounts to the Readers consideration, and the
certain determination of the thing it self to the event; Only adding, that
although in my account of times I have walked by the Vulgar reckoning, as that
which is to persons generally best known, yet have I not done it from any such
light, as persuades me, that the Vulgar account is to be chosen and adhered
unto rather than the other; therefore having showed where this knot lies, I
leave it to time and Divine Providence to unty. A few days will resolve this
question, and many more.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX Wherein is contained, 1 Some Conclusions as touching Christ's
Kingdom, and the general Design, Scope, and Method of Daniels Prophecies. 2 A
General Rule for the right understanding of Prophecies, together with a more
full unfolding the Great Mystery of Daniels Little Horn. 3 An Explication of a
particular Clause in the foregoing Discourse about the Times.


BY J. T.

Printed at London by R. I. for L. Chapman, dwelling at the Sign of the Crown
in Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

A few Conclusions touching Christ's Kingdom, and the general Scope and Method
of Daniels Prophecies.
I. THat Christ should have an outward visible Kingdom, in which as King of
Kings he should be exalted, is the promise of the Father anciently made to
Christ, ( Genesis 49.10, 11. compared with Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. Revel. 19.15, 16.
Numb. 24.17, 18, 19. So Romans 4.13. compared with Gal. 3.16.) and is that thing
of which all the Prophets have spoken.

II. A Type of this Kingdom was the Kingdom of the House of David, erected in
the midst of Gods peculiar, in time of old, and bearing rule over the Nations
about it. Hence Christ as King goes frequently under the name of David, Ezekiel.
34.23, 24. Chap. 37.24, 25. Hos. 3.5.

III. This Kingdom became, in time, subjected by Nebuchadnezzar, and after that
wholly removed (the Scepter being taken away) by the Romans, at the time of
Christ's first coming, so that from Nebuchadnezzars time until this day, no
outward visible Kingdom, which may be called Christ's, has been in the world.

IV. Yet an outward visible Kingdom Christ shall have, else could not the
Promise have its fulfilling, nor the Type its Antitype.

V. But yet as David's Kingdom, the Type, was very little in its beginning, and
afterward became a Monarchy, bearing rule over the Nations about it: so does
this Kingdom of Christ begin as a Stone, afterward becomes a Mountain.

VI. Further, as David's Kingdom went to decay before Christ's first coming, its
absolute Sovereignty being taken away by Nebuchadnezzar, yet had not the
Scepter wholly removed until the time of his coming: So does this Kingdom
begin to recover, as it is the Stone, before Christ's second coming, therefore
said to be set up in the days of the ten Kings, Dan. 2.44. yet shall it not be
completely a great Mountain (or a Monarchy bearing rule over all the earth)
until this coming.

VII. Yet as God is swift to take Vengeance for his people, but slow to take
vengeance upon them: So when God comes to recover this outward Kingdom, by
breaking in pieces all worldly Powers that now possess it, the time betwixt
the beginning of this work, (which begins with the time where the Stone begins
to smite) and the completing of it, is by the determinate Counsel of God much
shorter, than was the time betwixt the subjecting and total removing of that
foregoing outward Kingdom, which was the Type of this.

VIII. As the people of God in the time of the Old and New Testament both, did
and do by faith expect this Kingdom, and shall accordingly, when the same shall
be set up be Joynt-heirs, and Inheritors thereof: So has God given us perfect
assurance of it, and how, and when the same shall be erected, and what should
befall the people of the Old Testament, and of the New also, throughout all
Ages till the erecting of it, and that out of the mouths of two infallible
Witnesses, viz. Daniel a Prophet of the Old Testament, and John an Apostle of
the New.

IX. The scope of Daniels Prophecies, which begin, some with, some suddenly
after, the time where the Kingdom of the Type was subjected, and terminate with
the complete setting up of the Kingdom of the Antitype; is to give full
assurance of the thing it self, viz. That this Kingdom, which for many Ages
together before Daniels time had had being in the Type, should also after many
days have being in the Antitype; and also to give certain knowledge (that
thereby the faith of Gods people throughout this long time might be the better
born up in a patient expectation of this Kingdom) how, and by whom the Scepter
of the World should be swayed from that day, in which the Kingdom of the House
of David was subjected, until the time the same should be restored with greater
Power and Glory, and more Dominion, than ever before it had, under Christ the
true David. And for this reason it is that Daniel takes notice of no worldly
Monarch before Nebuchadnezzar, by and under whom David's Kingdom was subjected.

X. As this outward visible Kingdom, throughout this long Period, was by Divine
appointment to fall into the hands of four great Monarchies, viz. 1 The
Babylonians, 2 Medes and Persians, 3 Grecians, 4 Romans, which one after the
other should possess the Kingdom, and bear rule over all the earth, till in
the end that Ruler should come, whose goings out have been from everlasting,
and whose right by Purchase, Promise, and Donation of the Father, the Kingdom
is, and take the same from the last of these into his own hands: So answerably
in the Book of Daniel we have in four Prophecies (his Seventy weeks excepted,
which treat of another thing) these described, the time of their reign
determined, and their final ruin (and therewith the revolution of the Kingdom
into the hands of Christ, and his Saints) foretold.

XI. The Fourfold Repetition of the same things, or the speaking of the same
things over in four Prophecies, was, to the end Daniel might have light let in
by degrees, as he was able to bear it, and also, that it might be set home more
strongly upon his heart, and the hearts of Gods people in general, to whom
these glorious Discoveries were made, that the things themselves were
established by God, and should most certainly be fulfilled in their season,
Genesis 41.32.

XII. The Prophecies themselves are, 1 That of the great Image, Chap. 2. 2 That
of the four Beasts, Chap. 7. 3 That of the Ram, Hee-Goat, and Little Horn,
Chap. 8. Lastly, Of the King of the North, and King of the South, Chap. 11. the
matter contained in the three first of these is represented to Daniel by way of
Vision, in the last, by lively voice.

XIII. The two first of these, viz. That of the Great Image, and that of the
four Beasts, comprehend within them all the four Monarchies; the two last, the
three last only; the reason whereof is, because Daniel had not his two last
Visions till the expiration of the first, or Babylonian Monarchy: Now
Prophecies being not of things past, but to come, therefore the Babylonian
Monarchy being passed at the time of the two last Visions, no mention at all is
made in them of that Monarchy.

XIV. The succession of these four Monarchies is excellently set forth in that
golden Method, and Order, that is observed in each of the aforesaid Prophecies;
the description of them in that wonderful suitableness and harmony that is in
the matter.

XV. The Babylonian Monarchy is the first, to which the Images head of fine
Gold, Dan. 2.32. compared with 37, 38. and that first Beast, Chap. 7.4. do
relate.

XVI. The Medes and Persians succeed the Babylonian, to whose Monarchy
belongs the silver Breast, and Arms of the Great Image, Chap. 2.32. The
second Beast, chap. 7.5. The Ram with two Horns, Chap. 8.3, 4, compared with
verse. 20. and what by lively voice is spoken to Daniel, Chap. 11. verse. 1, 2.

XVII. The two Arms joined to one Breast, which is the Persian resemblance,
Chap. 2. and the two Horns growing upon one Head, which is their resemblance,
Chap. 8. are a most lively emblem of two powerful Nations, viz. Medes and
Persians, either of which has an Arm, and a Horn of strength, uniting into
one, to make a Monarchy.

XVIII. The third Monarchy is of the Graecians, which is considered in Daniel,
First, as united in one; Secondly, as divided and broken.

XIX. To the Grecian Monarchy, in its united state, does belong that devouring
belly, which gathers all to it self, Chap. 2.32. That third Beast, considered
as winged, and swift in motion, Dan. 7.6. (which swiftness of march is noted
as peculiar to Alexander, Dan. 8.5. and is here excellently set forth by giving
four Wings, i. e. two pair of Wings to this Beast, noting his swift march, and
speedy conquests) the Great and notable Horn of the rough Goat, Dan. 8.5.
compared with verse. 21. and what is spoken to Daniel of that mighty King, Dan.
11.3.

XX. The divided state of the Grecian Monarchy, is set forth by the thighs of
the great Image, Dan. 2.32. the four Heads of the third Beast, Dan. 7.6. the
four Horns of the He-Goat coming up in the room of the great Horn, Dan. 8.8.
with verse. 22. and what by voice is delivered to Daniel chap. 11. ver. 4, 5,
etc. to ver. 14.

XXI. The Fourth and last Monarchy is of the Romans, which Monarchy in either
Prophecy is set forth in its twofold state. First, its state before
Antichrists rise. Secondly, its state afterward; the one I have formerly
called its pure Civil State, the other its mixed State.

XXII. The Roman Monarchy in its first State, wherein it chiefly attended to
the work of Conquering, and subduing Nations, is set forth by the Iron Legs of
the great Image, Dan. 2.33. which Iron-legged Kingdom, or rather this fourth
Kingdom considered as Iron-legged, is said to break in pieces, and subdue all
things, verse. 40. By the fourth Beast, Dan. 7.7. but yet considered only as a
warlike Beast, most dreadful and terrible to the Nations, devouring the whole
earth, treading it down, and breaking it in pieces, verse. 23. By the Little
Horn, considered in its first waxing great, Dan. 8.9. by which waxing it
becomes exceeding great, pushing down all standing in its way, toward the
South, and toward the West, and toward the pleasant Land; and by what is
spoken to Daniel, of the Conquests of the King of the North, verse. 14. to 21.

XXIII. The Roman Monarchy in its second State, wherein the work it principally
attends to, is, oppressing the Nations subdued already, persecuting the Saints,
treading under-foot the Holy City, is set forth by the feet of the great Image
of Iron and Clay, Dan. 2.33. by the Little Horn, Cha. 7. by the Little Horn in
its second waxing great, Chap. 8.10, 11, 12, 24, 25. by the vile Person, or
that proud King, Chap. 11. whose description we have at large, verse. 21. to
verse. 40. and afterward goes under the title of the King of the North, ver.
40. to the end of the Chapter.

XXIV. All the aforesaid Prophecies, though their beginnings are different, yet
have they but one and the same general end.

XXV. This end is the final dissolution of the Fourth Monarchy, and the
establishment of the Fifth, contemporary with both which is the Personal
appearance of Christ.

XXVI. The two last Prophecies conclude with the destruction of the Fourth
Monarchy, the two first with the greatness and glory of the Fifth, yet are not
for this reason their ends different, because, though the things themselves are
two, yet both shall be performed by that one act of Christ's Personal
appearance. It is the appearance of Christ that destroys the Fourth Monarchy,
establishes the Fifth.

XXVII. The admirable Harmony in every title betwixt these so ancient
Prophecies and the events; or betwixt the things foretold so many Ages ago,
and the things transacted in the Ages since, is a strong and convincing
Argument of the infallibility of the Prophecies themselves, and of the
certainty of the performance of the things yet to be accomplished.

XXVIII. The glorious work of setting up Christ's outward visible Kingdom, which
is the thing pointed at in all the foregoing Prophecies, is the great work of
the present age, and time we live in.

XXIX. The mystical Numbers of Daniel and John both, which direct us to the
time in which this Kingdom is to be set up, all which expire (as the foregoing
Discourse proves) within the compass of this Age; the visible dispensations
of God, which in our days have been very wonderful, all tending to such a
thing; the cries of Saints, and their faith and expectations generally looking
this way; the opposition of the Devil, and the World against, and the malignity
of men of worldly Principles, unto this glorious truth, and blessed work, do
all speak that we are come to the dawning of that day in which Christ will, in
despite of Satan, and the Worlds rage, and all the Carnal policy of men of
earthly Principles, establish his own Kingdom.

XXX. The former being true, it is in its self no strange thing, nor ought to
be matter of stumbling or offense to any, that the Witnesses of Christ in this
our day direct their testimony against Civil Powers (as they are in their
present constitution, bearing forth evidently the excellent brightness, and
the terrible form of the Great Image, Dan. 2.31.) which yet Saints of formet
Ages subjected themselves unto, and never meddled with, because the case with
them and us is vastly different. They lived within the compass of that time in
which the Great Image was to stand, the World and worldly Powers were to bear
rule; which that they might do till their day should come to an end, it was
necessary that Saints in all Ages heretofore should subject themselves to them,
and never bear a testimony simply and directly against Civil Powers of a
worldly constitution: nor indeed could it be any part of their testimony,
because God having set a time how long worldly Powers should continue, it
behooved not them to attempt before the time, to take from the World what by
Divine permission for such a time was allotted them. But now the case is
otherwise, for we being come to the beginning of that day, in which the Great
Image must be smitten, till the same is crumbled to dust, and finally carried
away with the wind of Gods Wrath, and that Kingdom and Dominion which before
the Great Image did hold as its by right, to be translated and given to the
Saints of the most High; as every Work of God must have light for its Basis,
because God leads his people to the execution of his will, not blinde-fold, but
by light; therefore of necessity must the Witnesses of Christ in this Age bear
forth such a testimony of truth as may lay a foundation in the hearts of Gods
people for such a work. And indeed, as the work that God is now about to do is
a new thing in the World, viz. the regaining that Kingdom which has been in
the hands of the World for now upwards of two thousand three hundred years (
viz. ever since the beginning of the Seventy years Captivity in Babylon) so by
the same reason, that truth which must be laid as foundation to this work, can
be no other but a new thing in the World. It is therefore no Argument against
the truth of Christ's visible Kingdom, that Saints, our predecessors in the Ages
before us, meddled not with these things, nor stickled in such a Cause or
Controversy as the Saints now do; it was then no part of their work, but it is
now the Masterpiece of ours.

And in case any then at that time did stickle, yet they brought nothing to
perfection, because they attempted Gods Work before his time. But now the time
being come, as God has in a more wonderful manner than ever stirred up the
hearts of his Saints to bear witness, so shall not their Witnesse-bearing (as
to this great thing) be in vain; for let the Devil and the World do their
worst, the outward visible Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the
Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall revolve (and that suddenly) into the hands
of the people of the Saints of the most High, who shall then take them Captives
whose Captives they were, and shall bear rule over their Oppressors. Amen.

Daniels Description of the Four Monarchies in Four Prophecies, and Christ's
Kingdom succeeding them, showed in the following Table.
First Monarchy. First Prophecy, Chap 2. Second Prophecy. Cha. 7. Third
Prophecy, Chap. 8. Fourth Prophecy. Cha. 11. Golden Head, verse. 32, 38 First
Beast, verse. 4. Second Monarchy Silver Breast and Arms, ver. 32, 39. Second
Beast, verse. 5. Ram with two Horns, verse 3, 4. with 20. The matter delivered
by voice, verse 1, 2. Third Monarchy United Divided Belly of the Image, ver.
32. Third Beast as swift and winged, ver. 6. Hee-Goats great Horn, ver. 5, 6,
7, 8. with 21. Mighty King, ruling with great Dominion, verse. 3. The Images
Thighs, verse. 32. Third Beast as having four Heads, ver. 6. Hee-Goate four
notable Horns, verse. 8.22. The matter delivered by voice, verse. 4, 5. to 14.
Fourth Monarchy Second State First State Iron Legs, verse. 33.40. Fourth Beast
as Warlike, subduing Nations, ver. 7. Little Horn, in its first waxing great,
ver. 9. King of the North described, verse. 14. to 21. Feet of Iron and clay,
ver. 33, 41, 42, 43. Little Horn, ver. 8, 20, 21, 24, 25, 26. Little Horn in
its second waxing great, ver. 10, 11, 12.24, 25. Vile Person, ver. 21. to 40.
and King of the North, ver. 40. to end. Christ's Kingdom, or 5. Mon. Begins as a
stone in the days of the ten Roman Kings, Chap. 2.34.44. Becomes a Mountain
filling the earth, upon Christ's appearance, and total dissolution of the Fourth
Monarchy, Chap. 2.35. Chap. 7.13, 14. with 26, 27.

A TABLE OF The most material things handled in this Book.
Part I. HAndling some things of more general concernment as to the whole
discourse.
Chapter 1. Showing the justifiableness of the enquiry, p. 1. to 9 Chap. 2.
Proving, That the mystical Numbers of Daniel and the Revelations, do hold forth
a certain, definite, and determinate time, p. 9. to 14 Chap. 3. Clearing and
confirming our General distinction, That the end of the Beasts tyranny relates
to one time, the end of the Fourth Monarchy to another. p. 14. to 21
Part II. COmputing the time of the Beast, and showing where the limited time
of his tyranny ends.
Chap. 1. Discussing some things of more general concernment, as to this
particular. Question. Sect. I. Stating the Question, and showing the ground we
are to go upon for answering it, viz. The forty two Months, the one thousand
two hundred and sixty Days, wherein these differ, and why the one number
reckons by months, the other by days, p. 21, 22 Sect. II. Proving, that both
days and months are Prophetical, p. 23 Sect. III. Showing, that the forty two
Months, the one thousand two hundred and sixty Days, signify one and the same
time, and also begin and end together, p. 24, to 28
Chap. 2. Disproving the sundry false beginnings of this Epock. Sect. I. That
the forty two Months, the one thousand two hundred and sixty Days, are not to
be begun with the time of Constantine the Great, p. 28. to 37 Sect. II. That
they are not to be begun with the year four hundred forty two, p. 37, 38 Sect.
III. That they are not to be begun with the time when Boniface was made
universal Bishop by Phocas, p. 39, 40
Chap. 3. Stating and confirming the true beginning. Sect. I. The true
beginning fixed Anno Dom. three hundred ninety six. This to be the true is
proved by two Reasons. 1 Taken from the Harmony of mystical Numbers. 2 From the
eminent Apostasy about this very time. p. 41, to 48
Sect. II. A third reason of our beginning taken from the devastation of the
Roman Empire. Two things proved. 1 That our account is to begin from the time
this devastation began. 2 That this was in the aforesaid year, p. 48, to 56

Chap. 4. Proving and confirming yet further our foregoing beginning. Sect. I.
A Fourth Argument of our beginning taken from the time of the rise of the
Beasts Horns, wherein is showed, First, When the Horns began to appear;
Secondly, That the rise of the Horns must necessarily be a little while after
the rise of the Beast, p. 56, to 61 Sect. II. An Objection made, Daniel saw the
rise of the little Horn after the rise of the ten. Here by way of digression is
discoursed of Daniels Little Horn, and it is proved, That Daniels little Horn
cannot signify Mahomet, or the Turkish power, p. 61. to 69 Here also
occasionally Daniels King of the North, and King of the South, chap. 11. is
discoursed of, p. 69. to 77
Sect. III. Proving, That by Daniels Little Horn cannot be meant William the
Conqueror, taking in with him the whole Norman Race of Kings sitting on the
English Throne, nor Charles Stuart the last of that Race, p. 77. to 83 Sect. IV.
A returning to the Objection, to which answer is given, p. 83. to 89 Sect. V.
Three Arguments more to prove our beginning. 1 Taken from the great likelihood
there is of the Witnesses lying dead at this day, which thing the aforesaid
beginning does necessarily infer, p. 89 2 Taken from the visibility of those
very things at this day, which the Scripture has foretold us shall occur
within the last three days and a half of the one thousand two hundred and
sixty. Five things are instanced in, which the Scripture has foretold shall
happen within that time, all which are visible at this day, p. 90, 91, 92
3 Our beginning may not be fixed either higher or lower, therefore must be as
it is stated, proved. p. 92. to 98


Part III. COmputing the time of the Fourth Monarchy.
Chap. 1. Of Daniels two thousand three hundred days. Sect. I. That the two
thousand three hundred days do not belong to the time and Story of Antiochus
Epiphanes; where is showed at large that Antiochus Epiphanes cannot be he of
whom so much is spoken in Daniels Prophecies, p. 98. to p. 120 Sect. II.
Proving, that the Little Horn, spoken of Dan. 8. signifies the whole Body of
the Roman Monarchy, p. 120. to p. 127 Sect. III. Showing, that the two thousand
three hundred days are not to be understood of half so many years, but signify
so many years complete, p. 127. to 133 Sect. IV. That the two thousand three
hundred days are not to be begun with the first year of Cyrus, p. 133. to 137
Sect. V. Showing two things: 1 That Darius the Mede, of whom Daniel speaks
Chap. 5.30. did not belong to the Babylonian Monarchy, but the Persian, p. 137.
to 142 2 That the first year of Darius the Mede, and the first of Cyrus the
Persian, are one and the same year, p. 142. to 152

Chap. 2. Wherein, in order to a more full clearing up of the foregoing
account, viz. of two thousand three hundred days, are Daniels seventy weeks
discussed. Sect. I. That the Seventy weeks do not relate to New
Testament-times, p. 152. to p. 161 Sect. II. That the Seventy weeks are not to
be begun with the Decree of Cyrus, p. 161. to 183 Sect. III. That they are not
to be begun with the Decree of Darius, Ezra 6.6, 7.8, etc. p. 183. to p. 193
Sect. IV. That they are not to be begun with the Decree of Artaxerxes, in the
seventh year of his reign, Ezra 7.11, 12, 13. p. 193 That they are to be begun
with the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah received his Commission to
build Jerusalem, Nehem. 2. p. 194. to 198
Sect. V. That the Seventy weeks end with the Passion of Christ, p. 198, 199
Sect. VI. A resolution of sundry knots about Daniels Seven weeks, his Sixty two
weeks, his one week, and his half week, p. 200. to 217 Sect. VII. An Objection
against our ending of the Seventy weeks, answered, p. 217. to 225
Chap. 3. Wherein enquiry is made into the number of the years that passed
betwixt the first of Cyrus, and the twentieth of Artaxerxes, when Nehemiah
received his Commission to build Jerusalem. Sect. I. Disproving the grounds of
that Opinion, which cuts this time much shorter than it should be, p. 225. to
251 Sect. II. Proving, That that Artaxerxes, from whom Nehemiah received his
Commission, was him whom the Greeks call Mnemon, p. 251. to p. 281 In order to
the clearing this, is showed, That that Darius who advanced the
Temple-building, could not be Darius Hystaspes, p. 253. to 281. nor Darius
Nothus, p. 259. but was Darius called by the Greeks Longimanus. Here Zecharies
seventy years are opened, p. 260. to p. 274
Sect. III. Proving, that the time betwixt Cyrus first, and Artaxerxes
twentieth, was exactly one hundred forty seven years, p. 281. to. p. 290 An
Objection from Dan. 12.1, 2. That but four Kings did reign in the Persian
Monarchy after Cyrus, answered, p. 290. to p. 298
Sect. IV. Something discussed about our Christian Epock, p. 298. to p. 305.
The computation of the whole, p. 306, 307, 308.


Added by way of Appendix.
1 A general Rule for the right understanding of Prophecies, together with a
more full opening the great Mystery of Daniels Little Horn, p. 311. to p. 320
2 A particular Clause in our Discourse about the times, opened, from p. 328. to
331 3 Some Conclusions touching Christ's Kingdom, etc.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed, and sold by Livewell Chapman.
THe Voice of the Spirit, or a Discovery of the Witnessing work of the Spirit,
by Sam Petto Minister of the Gospel.

The New Nonconformist, witnessing both to small and great, some of those
glorious things which the Apostles, the Prophets, and Moses did say should come
to pass. Written by Mr. Christopher Feak Minister of the Gospel, and now a
Prisoner for the Truth.

A Declaration of several of the Churches, and godly People, in and about the
City of London, concerning the Kingly interest of Christ, and the present
sufferings of his Cause, and Saints, in England.

A Sermon of the Fifth Monarchy, proving, that the Saints shall have a Kingdom
here on Earth, which is yet to come, after the Fourth Monarchy is destroyed by
the Sword of the Saints, the followers of the Lamb. Preached by Master Tho.
Goodwin, some years since, at Crooked Lane London.

An Image of our Reformed Times, or Jehu in his proper Colors; displayed in
some Exercitations on the second of Kings, the ninth and tenth Chapters,
setting forth, The opportunity was given him to do his work in, The Cause he
had committed to him to manage. Also his Policy, Zeal, Profession, Hypocrisy;
with his Sins, and their aggravations; reason for all this. Concluding with a
word, to Jehu, Jehonadab, his Counselor, and the persecuted and despised
people of God. By Col. Edward Lane of Hampin-nulo.

This Author has three other Books, being called, Generation-Work, in Three
Parts.

In the First Part is showed what Generation Work is, and how it differs from
other works of a Christian.

Secondly, That Saints in their several Generations have had their proper and
peculiar works of their Generations.

Thirdly, That it is of great concernment for a Saint to attend to the work of
his Generation.

Fourthly, What the present work is.

Fifthly, How each one may find out the part of it that is properly his work.

Sixthly, How the Work may be so carried on, as God may be served.

The Second Part is, An Exposition of the seven Vials, and other Apocalyptical
Mysteries.

The Third Part is, An Exposition of the Prophecies of the two Witnesses, from
the eleventh, twelfth, and fourteenth Chapters of the Revelations.

To which is added, A Key to unlock the Mystical Numbers in Daniel, and the
Revelation.


