To all ingenuous People: A second Intimation from the New Undertakers for
conveyance of Letters at half the rates to several parts of England and
Scotland.
WHereas several printed Papers have been scattered up and down the Cities of
London, and Westminster, and in many considerable Towns and places in England
and Scotland, intimating, that if any persons send their Letters by the Old
Post, they will have a free and safe going and coming, but if they send by the
New Undertakers, their passage will be interrupted, which we cannot but look
upon as a Design on purpose to deter all persons from bringing their Letters to
us, which Design we perceive is still carried on, as appears by a busy
Pamphleteer in his last weekly book of several Proceedings, in which the said
Paper is recited, as if the State had allowed thereof. And though diverse
persons employed by us in the carriage of our Mayle, have of late under false
colors and pretenses been much affronted and interrupted by some malicious
Post-Masters and others, acting only upon the account of Self-interest, yet
against them we are (upon good advice) proceeding by several Actions and
Indictments, and doubt not of Justice and reparation, according to due course
of Law, all such interruption being contrary to the Law of the Land.

And whereas we have hitherto gone on, and resolve still to proceed in the
management of our honest and just undertaking (which has already been so
serviceable to this Nation) in a legal and warrantable way: Now for the future
prevention of abuses and affronts to those persons that shall be employed by
us, and to the end the people of this Nation may not be deceived by those false
suggestions and pretenses, which hitherto have been published only to delude
them and abuse us; We whose names are hereunto subscribed, being the first
Undertakers for the speedy conveyance of Letters at half the Rates to several
parts of England and Scotland, do hereby declare to all Gentlemen, Merchants,
and other persons whatsoever, that we do intend resolvedly (by the help of God)
to continue the management of this our undertaking, and for the further
accommodation of all men of business, and for improvement of Trade, to carry
to places not formerly supplied, with the like conveyance; as also to add one
day more weekly for the sending out of Letters, (that is to say) Thursdaies as
well as Tuesdaies and Saturdaies, and to have returns answerably, the first
Thursday to begin the 28. of this present April, and the same places of receipt
to continue as formerly, we having received much encouragement by ingenuous and
public minded people, and no discouragement at all from Supreme Authority, nor
can it rationally be imagined, that ever they will countenance the Disturbers
of so public and beneficial an undertaking.

Clement Oxenbridge. Francis Thomson. Richard Blackwall. William Malyne.



