To all Ministers of Gods Word, Churchwardens, Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Constables, Tything-men, and other Officers whatsoever, To whom these may
concern,
Greeting.
Civitas and libertatis Westmon. in Com. Midd.
WHEREAS the Bearers hereof, Mrs. Jone Conoway Widow, the late Wife of James
Conoway Gentleman, and Mary Long Widow the late Wife of Derby Long Gentleman,
with their Children; Having been humble Petitioners to the Honorable houses
of Parliament for relief toward their great losses, sustained by the Rebels
of the Kingdom of Ireland, and as yet cannot have any Relief, by reason of
other matters of State, now in Agitation; and therefore are referred until
further Opportunity. And now residing here in languishing and starving
Condition, wanting means for their present support; And therefore we much
pitying and tenderly weighing their deplorable condition, Knowing them to be
true Protestants, and the Premises really true, do hereby earnestly request
all faithful Ministers of Gods word to stir up their several Congregations
to extend their pious and charitable Benevolence, toward the present and
future Relief of these poor widows and their Fatherless children, And the
Churchwardens Constables and other Officers to show them all lawful and
favorable respects, and relieving and lodging in due time, to prevent the
danger of the Law, and molestation by Soldiers or others. It being an Act, and
deed of charity to relieve the poor and to help the distressed. Given under
our hands and Seal of the City of Westminster, the 7th. day of August 1649.
Anno Dom. Millemo Sexcentissimo Quadragessimo Non^.

The bearers hereof are allowed nine Months to finish their Journey and no
longer at their perils.

George Plukenet, Phi: Greenwood, Nich: Ellis, Dominick White, Edmond Sudwell.



