Three Great and BLOODY FIGHTS BETWEEN The ENGLISH and the FRENCH:

THE FIRST, By Genesis Pen, and Genesis Venables, against Monsieur de Poince,
Governor of St. Christophers for the King of France: With the particulars
theref, the taking of the Isle De la Martinicque, and the Resolution of the
said Governor to fight it out to the last man, rather then to betray his Trust
and Loyalty to the KING.

THE SECOND, Near St. Mallovvs, continuing for the space of 8 hours: with the
number of Ships, sunk, ^ired, and taken.

THE THIRD, Near the Isle of Majorca, by Genesis Blake, and the valiant
Chevaliers, continuing for the space of 24 hours: With a true Narrative
thereof, and the total routing and sinking of both the two Generals, the Lord
Valbelle, and the L. de Lands, who had taken above 150 men of war besides
gallant Merchants.

London, Printed for Geoage Horton, 1655.

Two great and bloody Fights between the English and the French: the first, by
Genesis Blake, and the French Chevaliers, near the Isles of Majorca, which
continued for the space of 24 hours: the second, at the Isle of St.
Christophers, by Genesis Pen, and Mounsieur de Poince; with the subduing of all
the French in De la Martinicque, etc.
THe French having for some years last past made an incursion into the Isles
of St. Christophers, and de la Martinicque, at which time they became Masters
thereof, and subdued the English, keeping them as Vassals and slaves, and
exposing them to most inhumane cruelties and tortures; so that many honest men
were deprived of all Earthly Comforts and Enjoyments, till it pleased God to
use a means for their deliverance; by whose Series of Providence, great things
have been manifested and done for the English Nation at home, and now more
especially for his people abroad; as appears by these ensuing Demonstrations,
viz.

General Pen, and General Venables having steered their Coast for the Western
Islands, at last bare up toward St. Christophers, and wheeling off to the
South-west Point, tacked about for the Isle De la Martinicque, where Major
General Haines it is said landed with so considerable a party, that in seven
hours time he became wholly Master of all that was held by the French,
possessed their Plantations, and seized their Goods, secured the prisoners,
which are said to be 735, and placed his Garrisons: Since which time, we hear,
that they have summoned Monsieur de Poince (Governor for the King of France in
St. Christophers Island) who is resolved, if they assail him, to sell their
lives at a dear rate, and that no conditions shall be acceptable, though never
so equal, for that he will rather choose to die, then falsify his Loyalty.

The English Generals are now upon that coast and intend (by Gods permission)
suddenly to make an Attempt: Which the Governor understanding, has caused to
be raised great Bulworks and Fortifications, and thereupon planted many gallant
pieces of Ordnance; so that the work to some may seem to be difficult, but
feasible enough to such heroical Spirits, who are brass within, and steel
without; the English being thus characterized by the French prisoners.

And thus it appears they are; for from St. Malos they write, That diverse of
the French Merchant men returning from Provence, lad^n with Commodities, and
convoyed by five men of war, happened to meet with an English frigate, who after 8
hours fight, sunk 3 of them; but being so lamentably rent and torn, and
exceedingly over-powred, she at last gave them another broad side, and by
sinking of one down by her side, she charged through and so escaped; in which
Dispute, the enemy were so extremely battered and shattered, that not one of
them durst attempt a pursuit, this frigate had not sailed many Leagues, but she
met with an Ostender, who perceiving her to be very much impaired, bare up
close to her, presenting her with three broad sides, one after another: the
English frigate answered them again, and plied them so close with great and small
shot, that after four or five hours fight, the enemy declined Engagement, and
ran aground, where the men all perished, excepting four, who narrowly escaping
shipwreck, at last got to St. Malows.

To these great Atchievments, may be added the renowned Victory of General
Blake, which according to the most true inteligence is thus represented, viz.
That the said General having sent forth a squadron of ships toward the Islands
of Majorca and Minorca, after some Leagues past, they espied some ships under
sail, who making toward them, the other tacked about, opened their Ports, put
forth their Guns, manned their Decks, and prepared to fight them: so that
bearing up to each other, the Chevalier de Valie Commander of the French Van,
discharged two broad sides, and was answered again: He bare up the second time,
but came off with abundance of loss; for he was so gored by the Unicorn, that
his ship sprung a Leak, having at least five foot Water in the Hold; besides
his main Mast, Boltsprit and Misne, were cut off, by Iron bars, and Chain
shot, so that he caused his ship to run aground, by which means, he saved
himself, his treasure, and seven more in a Long boat, the rest perished, and
about 150 were slain and taken prisoners.

During which time of Action, the Chevalier de la Lands, who commantled the
rest of the French ships, were not in the least declining, but after 24 hours
bloody Conflict, was boarded and taken, and not a ship that belonged to him
escaped. These two Commanders were accounted the chief Hectors in those parts,
and scornd but to bid defiance to the proudest Foe that ever sailed upon the
sea, having vanquished in their time above 150 sail of men of war; and yet at
the last subdued with nine English Frigates, and the loss of 37 men; as the best
Intelligence, of these Times affirms.

FINIS.

