THE TIME-TROVBLER Crept in at the Window, DISTVRBING AND molesting the Church
of God, by false Heresies and ill opinions, sprung from his stirill brain,
sown by the Devil, reapt by his wicked heart, put into the barn of his evil
Conscience.

Discussed of between two loving friends, R. and L. this present year, 1642.

Wondering at the time?

LONDON, Printed for I. R. 1642.

THE TIME-TROVBLER Crept in at the Window, DISTVRBING AND molesting the Church
of God, by false Heresies and ill opinions, sprung from his stirill brain,
sown by the Devil, reapt by his wicked heart, put into the barn of his evil
Conscience.
Discussed of between two loving friends, R. and L. this present year, 1642.
Wondering at the time?

R. WHat is a time-troubler?


L. One that runs a whoring after his own Inventions:


R. Say not so; he has a marvelous natural reason, judgment, and memory:
for he cannot make you a Sermon of three hours long else; an hour his prayer,
and two hours his Sermon; although never brought up in the University; and
although never took any orders: The Apostles were called by Christ; he is
called by the Spirit (as he will make you believe.)


L. Then it is no matter for learning;


R. No: For he can make the people believe that he can discern the high
mysteries of the Word, without learning; as if a man can see without eyes: But
you may tell him that there is Construction and Elocution; and especially
Allegories, Tropologies, and Anagogies in the Word of God to be unfolded; for
the Scripture is full of them.


L Nay, but if he has a good memory and a bold Audacious spirit to blind your
ignorance withal; he can deliver so much matter as shall make up the time of
his Sermon although there be never a word of reason therein, much less a
sentence or a divine note of saving comfort: so he strikes, as an ignorant man
at the Anvill, though it be neither ryme nor reason he speaks; so his tongue
goes on, it is no matter with him.


R. Is it no matter for orders neither.


L. Yes, See the obstinacy of Jeroboam in the 13. Chapter of the first book
of Kings and in the two last verses, how he made of the lowest of the people
Priests of the high places; and how it turned to sin unto the house of
Jeroboam, even to root it out, and destroy it from the face of the earth.


R. It seems he has no reason indeed.


L. Has he no matter neither?


R. Truly but a little; he will make you believe he is the child of God.


L. Me thinks by this he should be as the proud Pharisie, for he makes long
prayers like him, and will justify himself not to be like others: besides he
will say it is no matter what the wicked will say of him; God will avenge his
quarrel. Although he has no learning of which I formerly touched; he loves to
be called Rabbi, for he will equal himself, or rather be above learned men;
for he will look to be better respected and regarded by his preaching, then
the reverend and learned Minister of the parish, And he loves the uppermost
seat in the Synagoges; Nay instead of suffering the Minister to have a place
in the Church with him; he would put him (if it lay in his power) quite out.


R. If it be so then I pray of what validity is learning; It seems a man may
miracolously be a preacher after the manner aforesaid; Quamvis nunquam fuerit
Academiae, or at all bred a scholar. Have I not told you enough before?


L. Why then; what need a man put his son to the University, when he can
without learning his Syllogismes to come to this promotion. A man need not be
at so an unnecessarie a charge, that is best and cheapest that can be attained
unto with least charge.


R. As far as I see by this, a man may go to the University and there be at
a great deal of charge, in commencing; and when he comes home to be little
the near?


L. Why then; What should one go to the University at all.


R. Not except you can please men when you come home.


L. This is pretty indeed, would I had known this sooner: then might I have
saved a great deal of charges in seeking to attain unto learning.


R. I thought you had known that the Apostles had no learning; yet they came
to be fishers of men.


L. Ay, but Christ called them miraculously. And do you not know the Brownists
hold that they are miraculously called by the spirit; do you believe that.


R. Yes; if they can with Peter walk on the Sea, or have the gift of knowledge
as a learned Scholar has. And do you not know that if they have a blind
devotion that it is no matter for learning.


L. You now talk strangly, as if learning were nothing worth: learning it is
the gift of God; and useful to his glory; and they that speak against
learning are like worms in books, that eat out the letter.


R. What is meant by learning.


L. Understanding and knowledge which, was Solomon's request of the Lord; and he
so pleased the Lord in asking such a request that he gave him all earthly
blessings besides. Can a Mechanical trades man without tools work in his
trade; no more can a man devide, or lay open the Word without learning: can the
end be attained unto without the means; No, except God please to have it
otherwise.


R. But all this while what is meant by their preaching in houses also.


L. They take it from the Apostles.


R. The Apostles were constrained unto it indeed because they were not suffered
to preach at the Temple of Jerusalem as you may read in Eusebius in his 4.
book concerning the History of the Church. It is not so with them; for they
may come to Church oftener then they do.


L. What is the reason that they will not take the Communion unless it be
sitting or standing, they are also blinded in this, because in their sauciness
out of pride they will seem to be hail-fellow well met with our Savior, may I
reverently speak it; put case they were to receive any thing of an earthly
King, would they not kneel, much more to the heavenly King.


R. It may be they can lay you down some reason.


L. What reason? Can one be two humble? It Is true the Apostles sat down with
our Savior at Supper and heard the charge given, Is a charge or command in
that force whilst it is in giving as it is afterward being ginen, truly no.
The Lord showed his love that they should be near him; shall not we show our
thankfulness in humility toward him. Yes; must we not then kneel in the
receiving of the Sacrament? Yes; What does the Lord require of thee, surely to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, to walk with thy God,
Micah. 6 8. Some other bad opinions they hold. They cannot abide the Cross.
No, by the Cross may be meant Christ sufferings for us, to remember what great
love he had toward us, to lay down his life for us, for our redemption. Nay,
another bad opinion they have of the bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus,
they cannot abide; although there is for it Scriptum est: As if God made not
the knee as well as the heart, As external worship without internal, is
hypocrisy; so internal worship without external, is incivilitie. If the
times revolt do not thou revolt: esteem of the Word, and prize every thing
according to his worth: and be not lead away, for it is through pride, and
self conceit, and idleness that they are carried away, Serve God and keep
his Commandments, and love his name, and be loving to thy neighbor and it
shall go well with thee: howsoever the world totters. One thing more I have to
say before I conclude. They cannot endure to say the Lords prayer, although his
Disciples were by him taught it, Luke 11.2. are they not then selfe-conceited
as I said before. They hold with no set form of prayer: Can a man come too
well prepared before the Lord: No, If we are in hope at any time, when we
stand in need to obtain any courtesy from any great man that we think can
pleasure us, O how well prepared will we come with some petition adorned with
most eloquent words, drawn by some skilful Artist, for fear we should not
obtain our request. Much more then ought we to come prepared to our Maker and
not to come in a presumptuous way hand over head. It is written also when ye
pray, use no vain repetitions as the Heathen: for they think to be heard for
their much babbling, Matt. 6.7. We sin therefore in our very prayers, and
therefore we should the rather desire to say that prayer whereby we might not
sin. The Lord keep us from sin and so I rest.


FINIS.

