TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE Lord General Monck.
The Unanimous Representation of the Apprentices and young men Inhabiting in
the City of London.
Humbly Shows,
THat the glory of our Nation, and the greatest comfort of our Lives in our
Civil Interests, consists in the Privileges and Liberties to which we were
born, and which are the undoubted Inheritance of all the free people of
England, among which the grand and Essential Privilege which discriminates
free men from slaves, is the interest which every man has in the Legislative
power of the Nation, by their Representatives assembled in Parliament: without
which, however we may flatter our selves, or be flattered by others, we are
truly no better then Vassals governed by the will and pleasure of those who
have no relation to us or our common Interest.

Now how much this dear Privilege of the People has been assaulted by the
open violence of some, and secret artifice of others, and to what a deplorable
condition we are brought at this present period, when heavy taxes are imposing
upon men's Estates, and new Laws upon our Persons without any consent of the
people had in a free Parliament, and how generally through the said
distractions in Government trading is decayed, and how much we are likely to
suffer thereby in our times and places, we cannot but Remonstrate to your
Excellency, constrained through the sense of our present sufferings and
apprehensions of greater to implore your assistance, most humbly beseeching
your Excellency by that ancient love you have born to your Native Country,
zeal to our Liberties, by that great renown you have lately gained in opposing
the cruel Rageing of the Sword by the common cries of the People, and by the
hopes and cheerful Expectation of all England now fixed upon you; And, lastly,
by your own personal concern in the same common cause as a freeborn English
man, that you would please to use those great advantages Divine Providence has
now put into your hands to the securing your Native Country from those
dangerous usurpations, and preserving us in those Liberties to which we were
borne. That no Tax may be imposed, nor new Law made, nor old abolisht but with
the consents of the people had by their Representatives in Parliament, freely
to be chosen without terror or limitations, and freely to sit without any Oath
or Engagement previous to their entrance, without which special Liberties the
Parliament cannot in any construction be esteemed the free Assembly of the
People; And by your Excellency's asserting of those our undoubted Rights in
your present advantages, you will certainly by the blessing of God, and
unanimous concurrence of the People accomplish our ends, and will thereby gain
the hearts and hands of the whole Nation, and the City in particular, and
purchase to your self a name that shall make every true English man call you
blessed, and Posterity shall hereafter delight to recount the famous Acts of
their worthy Patriot.

This was delivered to his Excellency at St. Albans, Thursday, Febr. 2. 1659.
by persons Elected for that purpose, and had a very cheerful Reception.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, Anno Dom* 1659.


