To his Grace his MAJESTY'S high Commissioner and the High Court of
PARLIAMENT, The humble Address of the Synod of Aberdeen.
THE various Dispensations wherewith the righteous and wise Lord of Heaven and
Earth has been exercising us these many years bygone, cries loud to all the
Subjects in Scotland, who have not laid aside all sense of sin and duty, to
reflect seriously upon the public Transactions of this Church and Nation;
especially upon the deportment thereof to the KING and the Royal Authority: And
while the Lord is pleased to fix such Thoughts upon our Spirits, we cannot,
unless we would blindfold our own Consciences, stop the mouth thereof, hide our
sin in our bosom with Adam, and keep fast Deceit under our Tongue, but give
glory to God in an ane humble and ingenuous Confession, as of the National
guiltiness of Scotland, so of our own iniquity, in so far as we have been any
way accessory to these sinful and rebellous affronts and wrongs which have
been put upon Royal Authority, whether during the Reign of our late most
Gracious Sovereign, that blessed Martyr CHARLES the I, or since his horrid
Murder, to our Gracious King, who now in the Lords most wonderful and gracious
Providence, reigns over us; and particularly we acknowledge these sad and
grievous sins, to be lying on the Land, and upon us, according to the several
Degrees and Measures of our accession, whether driven thereto by force and
violence of a prevailing party, through humane weakness in that hour of
Temptation, or by sinful silence and want of Courage to have plead it against
such Courses, viz. the rising in Arms against the King, the preaching up the
lawfulness of defensive Arms by Subjects against the Supreme Magistrate, which
is contrary to Scripture, to all sound Antiquity, to the constant practice of
the ancient primitive Church, to the Judgment of all sound Orthodox Divines,
contrary to our National Confession of Faith, and to the Oath of Allegiance,
popular Reformation without, much more against, the Kings special Consent and
Authority; The assisting the Kings Enemies by joining our Forces with them,
while as they were in Rebellion against their Sovereign lord and Master the
preaching down the Kings Cause and Interest, and preaching up the Interest of
his Enemies; the giving out a Paper, called A seasonable warning for delivering
up the King at Newcastle, and that without any Assurances either by Writ or
Pledges for his Majesty's Security, safety, honor and freedom, although there
was no sufficient Hostage in that Land to have been given for his sacred
Person; The preaching against the intend it Relief of his Majesty of precious
Memory, when he was a suffering Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, anno 1648, where
he was detained till at last these Usurpers brought him to that fatal Block;
The putting unjust Limitations and Restrictions upon out gracious King, who now
reigns over us by Gods blessing (in despite of all open and vailled Enemies,
who of late have put on the Robe of Loyalty) before he was admitted to the
Exercise of his Royal power; The indignities which were put upon his sacred
Majesty, by a factious and treacherous party in that infamous and treasonable
Remonstrance; The opposing of the public Resolutions, both of King, Church and
State by that party for the just and necessary defense of King, Religion,
Honor, Country and all which was dear to Men or Christians, the Land being
invaded, and one half thereof being possessed by an Army of Sectaries, who by
force and fraud had inslaved their own native Country, that ancient and famous
Kingdom of England: And although these sins of the Remonstrance, opposing of,
and protesting against the publict Resolutions, be not a National guiltiness,
both the one and the other being testified against and Condemned by the
generality of the State, Church and Country: yet these being the guiltiness of
a party in the Nation, we could not omit them as matters of just provocation
against God Almighty: The excluding of the Kings interest out of the state of
the quarrel betwix his Majesty's own Army, and that Usurper and Tyrant, Oliver
Cromwell, by that infamous Act of the west-Kirk: The forcing of the Kings
Majesty, being then in their power rather as a noble prisoner than a free King,
sore against his Royal will to subscribe Declarations against himself and his
Royal Family: The little sympathy with his Majesty in his sufferings abroad:
The sinful neglect of Duty for fear of men in not praying for him in publict,
sinful silence in nor preaching absolutely against the Usurpers, too much at
least passive compliance with them, sitting down like Issachar under the
burden, and being like Ephraim a silly dove without a heart. For those, and
sins of the like Nature done against the Royal authority, God in his Justice
and Wisdom, brought and kept us long under a sad Captivity and bondage. And
have not all the Land and we according unto the measure of our accession more
nor reason to confess guiltiness before God, Men and Angels, and to entreat
earnestly for mercy therefore at the throne of Grace? And now since is has
pleased the Eternal God, by whom Kings Reign, to bring back our native King,
and to settle him upon his Royal Ancestors throne, for which we shall desire to
bless the Lord while we live. We conceive that upon this signal Mercy God
calls us to engage, likeas hereby we do in the strength of God, engage our
selves never to be accessory to any disloyal principle or practice, but declare
our utter abhorrence thereof, and of every thing that may have any tendency
that way, oblieging not only our selves to subjection, obedience and submission
to the Royal Authority and Commands, but also to preach Loyalty, subjection,
obedience and submission, and to press the samen from the word of God and
according thereto upon all his Majesty's subjects under our Ministry. And that
it is sinful and ungodly for subjects to resist the Kings Authority but in
case of dissatisfaction in any thing commanded by his Majesty, it is their duty
to suffer: And because it has pleased the Kings Majesty and his high Court of
Parliament for the over reaching of several ministers in Scotland, their
outstreatching of Presbyterial Government by making it run in an excentick line
in meddling with civil concernments and ^o^ng ^i^h the supreme Authority, and
upon other grave Considerations, known to themselves, which becomes us not to
search unto, to take away and rescind the Laws and Acts of Parliament whereby
the Government of this Church had any Civil Authority. That it would please the
Kings Commissioner's Grace, and the High Court of Parliament, to Join with us
in this our earnest Petition, and to transmit the samen to his sacred Majesty.
That he will allow us to be still under his Majesty's protection; and that he
may be pleased in his Wisdom and Goodness, to settle the Government of this
rent Church, according to the Word of God, the practice of the ancient
primitive Church in such way as may be most consistent with Royal Authority,
may conduce most for godliness, for unity, peace and order, for a learned,
godly, peaceable, loyal Ministry, and most apt to preserve the peace of the
three Nations: For doing whereof, we shall be earnest to supplieat God in his
Majesty's behalf for Wisdom, Counsel and Direction. We have conceived this
Emission to be a duty lying upon us, in reference to God, to the King, to this
Church and Land, and for the exoneration of our own Consciences before the
World. And although this has been our principal motives, yet it has been no
small encouragement to this Synod, that we have been put in remembrance by
that Noble and worthy Lord the Earl of Marshell in his Letter to the Assembly
to this effect And for which the Synod renders his Lordship hearty thanks,
considering that he, having so great influence in this Corner of the Land, may
be very instrumental for advancing Religion, Justice and Loyalty here. And this
Paper we have ordained to be registered in our Synod Books ad futuram rei
memoriam: And in testimony of our unanimitie therein, We have all subscribed it
with our Hands. At the Kings College at Aberdeen the 18. of April 1661. years.

Mr. Alex: Ross Minister of Monimusk and Moderator. Mr. Jo. Patersone Minister
at Aberdeen Mr. John Menzies, Professor of Divinity and Minister at Aberdeen
Mr. Geo: Meldrum, Minist: at Aberdeen: Mr: Will:Douglas, Professor of Divinity
in the Kings College of old Aberdeen. Mr. Andr. Straughan Minister at Kintore
Mr: Will. Cheyne Minister at Byce. Mr. Geo. Melvil Min. at Upper-Macher: Mr:
Will:Chalmer, Min. at Skeene. Mr. Dav.Lyell, Min:at Banchorie-Devnie Mr: Dav:
Lindsay. Min: at Drum-maag. Mr. Alex: Garioch, Min. at Peter-Coulter Mr. Jo.
Seaton, Minister at Foverane. Mr Jo. Paterson, Minister at Eiloun: Mr:
Gilb:Anderson, Minister at Crudan: Mr: Will Mushatt, Minister at Slaines: Mr:
Will:Seatone, Min. at Logiebuthan: Mr Rob: Ogilvie, Minister at Methluck: Mr.
Will Keith Minister at Udny: Mr. Jo:Ross, Minister at Birss: Mr Geo. Burnett,
Min, at Kineardin, Mr Will. Seatone, Min. at Lumphanan, Mr. Tho. Ross, Minister
at Aboyne. Mr: Lod Dunl^, Minist: at Tarlan. Mr Arth. R^ss, Min. at Kinarnie.
Mr. An^. Skeene Min:at Clunnie. Mr Jo: Fergussone, Min:at Glenmuick Mr Rob:
Forbes, minist: at Coldstone, Mr. Will: Douglas, minist:at Middm^rr Mr Adam
Barclay, minister at Towie, Mr Will.Duncan, minister at Kildrimmie Mr Ja,
Gordon, minister at Touch Mr Will. Glass, minister at Cushnie, Me Geo.Garden,
minister at Clatt. Mr Tho. Thores, minister at Daviot. Mr Will. Forbes minist:
at Moeturie Mr Jo. Gellie, minister at Kinkell Mr Alex: Middletone, min, at
Rain Mr Ja. Willocks, minister at Kemnay Mr Geo:Milne, minister at Premnay,
and Clerk to the Assembly. Mr Arth;Ore, minist. at Colsalmond Mr Will: Burnett
minister at In^h Mr Jo.Strange, minister at Oyne Mr Will; Chalmer, minister at
Boynlie Mr James Chalmer, minister at Culian Mr Will.Stevintone, minister at
Fordyre Mr Jo, Watsone, minister at Ordefall Mr Andr:Hendersone. min: at
Deskford Mr. Will, Jaffray, min:at King Edward Mr Alex; Garden, minister at
Forgue Mr Will; Gray, minister at Aucterlesse Mr Ja; Moore minister at Rathen
Mr. Jo; Robertson, min. at Langfergus.

