TO HIS EXCELLENCY General MONK, THE Congratulation and Address of us the
Knights, Divines, Freeholders, and others of the County of Bucks.
Humbly shows,
THAT with all possible Gratitude we admire the wise and gracious Dispensation
of things by Almighty God, who has moved your self, and other the worthy
Officers with you to such just and honorable Resolutions, as to put your
selves into the Breach then, when Tyranny, Irreligion, and all Confusion like a
mighty Flood were ready to break in upon us. An Occasion in which, whether the
Noblensss of the Attempts, or the Happiness of the success were more
considerable, aftertimes will take pleasure to discourse: and we at present
congratulate these your sentiments of Honor and Conscience. Sir, Our Credit
abroad is inpaired, our Trade at home is decayed, our Fundamental Laws are
violated, our primitive Apostolic Religion endangered; The cause of all which
we humbly conceive is the force and violence put upon the Parliament in the
year 1648. and since to obviate all which evils we request the total removal of
that force, and that all surviving Members so secluded, be restored to the
discharge of their Trust, Vacancies be supplied by free Elections according to
Law, that no previous Oaths or Engagments be put upon any of them that shall be
chosen to sit, and Vote in Parliament. Sir; This is our desire, and as we
observe it is the voice of the whole people, and that is the voice of God; we
doubt not but that you have been reserved for such a time as this: in pursuance
of which we are ready to hazard our Lives and Estates.


