To the Honorable the House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble
Petition of the reduced Officers and Soldiers, in and about the City of LONDON.
Humbly showing:
THat your Petitioners having (not as Mercinaries, but like faithful and
freeborn Subjects) exposed their Estates to ruin, and their Lives to all
dangers, for the preservation of the King, the Privilege of Parliament, and
Liberty of the Subject, cannot but look upon these new Divisions, with sad and
bleeding hearts, and justly dread the evil consequence that does probably
threaten desolation to these three Kingdoms, if not timely prevented, by your
Honors great wisdoms and Care; And your Petitioners do cordially protest
before God and man, that they would gladly undergo the worst of ills, might
their Sufferings divert those heavy judgments from us, yet nothwithstanding
their Fidelity and constant affection to the Privilege and Honor of both
Houses of Parliament. They are sensible there has been strong endeavors to
render them odious to the World, under the notion of Fomenters of a new War,
and disturbers of a happy Peace; And have by that Colorable pretense, and for
some other reasons best known to your Honors, procured an Ordinance to banish
them this City, which if you shall put in execution without remunerating their
said Services, and Sufferings with some considerable part of their Arreares,
they must inevitably be liable to all the Miseries and Reproaches that are
incident to Vagabonds, and consequently perish, having spent their Patrimony,
lost their Employments, and some their Limbs to discharge their Consciences,
and duties to serve your Honors, and the Kingdoms safety.

Your Petitioners do thankfully acknowledge Your vigilance and restless
endeavors to prevent the effusion of more Blood and settle a happy Peace; And
our humble requests are, That your Honors would leave no means unattempted to
Complete the same; And that our abode in this City and necessitated addresses
to your Honors, may be no hinderance nor impede the speedy Consummation
thereof, You would be pleased in tender Consideration of the premises, to
grant them whose Accounts are already audited, that part of their Arreares
which appears due by their Debentures, and vendable Security for that part
which is respited on the public Faith; Provided they shall not be further
charged by the several Counties of the Kingdom; And that special order be
taken for the stating of their Accounts, who are not yet Cast up, and they
Licensed to attend the same, till they shall be proportionably satisfied; that
so your Petitioners (some of them being Strangers, others far remote from
their native Countries, and all deeply engaged and impoverished by their
tedious Attendances for their Arreares) may be enabled to discharge their
Debts; And as they have conformed themselves (in all the Course of this War)
to your Honors orders, so now being in some measure restored to their pristine
Condition, they shall withal cheerfulness yield perfect Obedience to the same.

And they shall ever pray, etc.

