TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BVRGESSES OF THE HOUSE OF Commons
now assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Company of Brewers of the City of London.
Shows,
THat your PETITIONERS are an ancient Corporation of great use in the City of
LONDON for Service both for Sea and Land, and do employ in their Calling many
thousands of poor Families in and about the said City, who yet have been for
about 30. years past mightily oppressed with many grievous Payments,
purveyances and impositions to his Majesty contrary to Law; and the like
whereof no Corporation nor calling whatsoever has suffered. All which have
been enforced from the abused sense or ill pursuance of a Statute 23. Hen. 8.
which as it directs the Justices of Peace at their quarterly Sessions to order
at their discretions the prizes of Beer and Ale; so it limits the Brewer not
to exceed the said rate under the penalty of six shilling for every Barrel.

That your Petitioners humbly conceive the intent of the said Statute was, that
the prizes of Beer and Ale should be regulated by the said Justices and varied
according to the prizes of Malt Hopps, and Fuel suitable to that ancient and
unrepealed Statute of 51. Hen. 3. and which we find was accordingly practiced
by the said Justices till about 30. years past at which time an imposition of
four pence for every quarter of Malt to the Kings Majesty was projected by
some evil Members, and accordingly exacted with all rigor and severitie to
the undoing of diverse Brewers, their Wives and Children.

That the Justices of peace in London and the near adjacent parts have not for
about 30. years past taken any consideration at all of the prizes of Malt,
Hopps, and Coals being of late years much dearer then in former times, nor of
the great increase of charges by servants wages house-rent, and caske
necessarily used by the said Brewers, but (as your Petitioners humbly conceive)
to countenance and continue the said imposition, have refused to set such a
rate as at which the Beer and Ale might be serviceable and your Petitioners
have any subsistence in their Callings.

That upon complaint in the Parliament, Anno tertio Reg. Carol. the said
imposition was voted illegal and so suppressed, but the said Parliament was no
sooner dissolved but your Petitioners were sued by information on the same
Statute of 23. Hen, 8. for very great sums of money, and had also their Beer
taken by purveyance in great quantities and no money paid for the same, but
after tedious and chargeable attendance, and for refusal were some of them a
long time imprisoned; by which then unresistable violence your Petitioners were
drawn in^o a new composition for almost 3000. l. per annum toward the charge
of furnishing his Majesty's Houses with Beer and Ale, which continued till the
beginning of this present Parliament, at which time your Petitioners not
doubting but to have relief against so insupportable a grievance did refuse to
pay it any longer, and did for remedy bring in a Bill long since into this
Honorable House.

That in Trinity Term last past several new informations were brought by one
Lionel Farington in the Courts of Exchequer and Common Pleas against your
Petitioners upon the said Statute of 23. Hen. 8. it being to many of your
Petitioners for more then their whole Estates are worth, and for which he will
have a Trial against some of them within 20. days.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that the Bill brought long since by
them into this Honorable House may be speedily read and committed, and that
such course may be taken by the great wisdom and favor of this Honorable
House, that as your Petitioners may for the future be preserved from the like
miserable grievances and troubles; so for the present they with their Families
and thousands more that depend upon them may be delivered from utter
destruction.

And they (as in all duty and conscience bound) shall ever pray for the
prosperous success of your unwearied endeavors, etc.

