To the High Court of PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Jreland, etc.
The humble Petition of poor Prisoners, in the several Prisons in and about
London.

SHOWS:
THat many of Your poor inslaved Petitioners suffer miserably (their
Imprisonment being most unjust) others of your said Petitioners, by the late
sad accidents of War, and their cruel Creditors, are utterly Undone; And
although some of your Petitioners have more Owing them by the State, then will
satisfy the Debts they lie for; yet all of Us by spending what we either had
or could borrow, upon Lawyers Clerks and Solicitors, and in bringing up of our
Witnesses several times, Fifty, a hundred, or two hundred miles, some more; by
Order of the Judges, and in expectation of Relief by the late Act, are by the
several Suspendings of the said Act and Ordinances, brought to a perishing
Condition, having spent much and can borrow no more, Friends (and all weary
with delays of justice) forsaking Us, and many lying upon the bare Bords for
want of means.

That many who lie as Sureties for other men, by the several suspendings of
the Act and Ordinances, as aforesaid, their Expenses having been so great, are
likewise in much Misery; whilst the Principals, Executors, and Administrators
of those deceased, though able to Satisfy, contrive means to obscure and
conceal their Estates.

That your Petitioners, their Wives, Children, and Friends; and likewise many
of their conscientious Creditors suffer much, whose Cries if Man refuse to
hearken too, the Lord will Answer to the punishment of all those who obstruct
their Relief; seeing to relieve the Poor, and set the oppressed Free, is a
work so acceptable to him.

Your Petitioners humble Prayer is, That during the Vacancie of the Expected
Act, the Judges suspended, or some others, may be again empowered to continue
Sitting to relieve the Poor who are many, and those who are undone by the
accident of War; and likewise those, who lie for other men's Debts, who are
able to Satisfy; and that those may not perish for Bread, to whom the State
owes more then will satisf^e the Debts they lie for.

And whereas your Petitioners finds the Charge of bringing up their Witnesses
to London to be so great; that they may have Liberty, either upon good
Security, to go down and be tried in their own Counties where they reside;
or that their said Witnesses may be there Examined by the Judges, or next
Justices; and their Examination being sent up, may be accepted of by the Judges
hear, seeing the Poverty of your Petitioners is so great, that many must lie
and perish for want of means to bring their Witnesses up to London.

And Your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.


