To His EXCELLENCY, The LORD GENERAL CROMWELL: And all the honest Officers and
Soldiers in the Army, for the Common-vv*ealth of ENGLAND.
The Humble Remonstrance of many Thousands in and about the City of London, on
the behalf of all the Free-Commoners of England.
SHOWS,
THat the 22 of March 1648, the Parliament declared, That they were trusted by
the people, for the Common good, and to procure the well-being of those whom
hey serve; and to remove Oppression and Arbitrary power, and all oppositions to
the peace and freedom of this Nation; and that they intend the common Interest
of those whom they serve, more then their own particulars: And they then
promised the due reformation of the Law, for the taking away of corruption and
abuses, delays, vexations, and unnecessary travel and expenses, and whatsoever
should be found really burdensome to the people, that evil might be punished,
and the good rewarded, and the people be eased in their burdens and Taxes, and
the debts of the Common wealth be justly satisfied. But alas, with grieved
hearts we have long expected some fruit of their promises, and that multitude
of days should utter knowledge: Yet all in vain, insomuch that we can no longer
forbear, but show our grievances for they are many and intolerable. My Lord,
there was a time, when your Excellency and our unparalleled Army was in a low
condition, and in your straights, you affirmed that you called upon God, and he
heard you and delivered you in your distress; sure God was pleased with you in
that for he gave your enemies into your hands, and settled the soles of your
feet in peace gave you large possessions, houses that you built not: was all
this that you only might live in peace, ease and rest, and say you have
married Wives, have Farms, Parks, Manors, and Kingly houses to see; and forget
the vows you then made? surely no. Are the people free? is perfect liberty
wrought for them? or are your vows quite forgotten? Is not the safety of the
people the supreme Law? Nay, are not you the peoples Army, and have they not
paid you? Are your promises yet performed? Why are you so remiss in the work of
the Lord? why do the people yet complain? Is not justice as necessary now, as
when the Parliament began? Our eyes have been upon you, but our hope is in God;
and though we be yet clouded, and in the dark, yet deliverance will come, and
we shall not be deceived.

And though the sons of Zerviah have seemed too strong for you; yet if your
Excellency now appear, all the honest members, which have not bowed their knees
to Baal, will to a man second you, and make good every syllable of that
Declaration, and revive the self denying Ordinance, and scorn to sit with a
company of mercenary Lawyers, who poison the counsels of the Parliament, and
turn justice and judgment to gall and wormwood, merely to enrich themselves by
the ruin of the people. Then your Excellency and those honest Members may
forthwith pass an Act, to authorize the Justices of peace, to keep a Court in
their several Counties, twice a week, in the most convenient place in each
County, to hear and determine all matters of debt, titles of lands, and other
civil differences, the same day they be brought before them, and put the
people to no more charge, but their attendance, according to the practice of
the Court of Requests, London, sitting in Guild Hall, by virtue of an Act of
Parliament, made in the third year of King James, and the 25 Chapter.

Then your Excellency and those honest Members may forthwith pass the annexed
Act, to authorize Commissioners of known fidelity, for the speedy examination
and redress of all the peoples grievances; though the several Committees
appointed by Parliament, have done little or nothing therein. And then we shall
see an Act to settle an Annual equal Representative, and Indentures drawn
between the Representors, and the Representative Counties, that we may no
longer trust in man; but have it known to the world, that the people are the
Legislative power, and that all that are entrusted by them, must act for them,
and be accomptable to them: Surely then may there be found men of such pure
principles, that will not forget the self-denying Ordinance, nor be seduced by
the Clergy to act in Spirituals, when their Commission is for Temporals. Then
shall those faithful persons who hazarded all for the Parliament, and many of
them lent more then their whole Estates, and now live in prison, nay, starve
for want of it; not to be put to uncover Cathedrals, and ransack the Monuments
of the dead; but be honestly paid with thanks and requitals. Then should not
the Public Faith be out-pawned, and so little care taken to redeem it, whilst
Millions of Treasure has been conveyed beyond the seas.

Then should there be a new little Book of only useful Statutes, portable,
that those that should keep them may know them; and not a Voluminous Idol, the
study of Lawyers their whole life time, to teach the people at great cost, and
with the hazard of their lives. Then shall justice be done at the charge of the
State, as of old, the poor fear no bribes, and the peoples whole inheritance
not spent every hundred year, or less, in tedious and useless suits in Law,
without account or punishment. Then should not poor Soldiers Debenters be
sold for a Twentieth part, and the benefit of the reft redound to their
enemies. Nor the honest Soldier pay twice for his quarter, whilst your bloody
enemies are forgiven plunder and outrages. Was not this the price of their
blood? and woe be to him that erecteth a City by blood, etc. Nor the honest
Soldier that would not do all things, laid aside without place or pay, and
starve for want thereof; whilst unworthy persons are employed both by sea and
land, in very great trust, to the losing the Honor of the Nation, gotten by the
blood and treasure of those who are now laid aside. Nor should the honest
sufferer for the Parliament be left without all provision, as if they had no
bodies promise for it. Nor should there be a five pound Act, a mere deceit, as
it is now used, while men of Estates lie in the upper Bench, and other prisons,
and cheat the people, and their Lands unsold. Nor the poor distressed
Protestants of Ireland, that lost their Estates, and fled hither for their
lives, starve here, and no account rendered of the moneys that was collected for
them, both in England and elsewhere; and many of their bloody Enemies suffered
to be released out of prison.

Then should the head of no Injustice stand upon any shoulders, since for that
the late King lost his. Then should perjuries, forgeries, and briberies, which
are grown to a great head amongst us be punished, though the Committee do
little or nothing therein. Nor should Death be inflicted for a trifle of five
shillings, (a thing called Felony) whilst vast sums are taken from the
Commonwealth, without any account, by Committee Men, and others. Then should
the poor be provided for, both in Gaols, and without, at least by their own;
and poor Seamen invited home, by certainty of pay, and assurance of a
competent share of the prize-goods, and liberty to adventure five pounds a man,
or more, according to their place and quality, in every Merchants ship, as in
Queen Elizabeth's days: this will endear them unto the States; and Lenity does
break more hearts then Sequestration. Then should Timber, the sinews of war by
Sea, be planted and preserved; and not sold to the Hollanders. Then should
Esquire Elsliott, and Edward Jinks not be stifled in that infamous prison of
Newgate; but be enforced to make good their Charges against the several
Members, or be punished severely.

My Lord, many of us were of this army under your own command, we fought for
our liberties, our blood, and our estates are in it, and we are witnesses that
your Excellency promised it unto us, and so did the Parliament; what can be
answered in this case? for when you wanted power, our lives was not dear to us,
and now you have power, our lives and liberties ought to be dear to you and
them, and not suffer us to starve through oppression; is not this the time? the
work is great; the children of Anack are mighty men, and have Cities walled
high; yet fear them not; for the good land is before your Excellency; and if
you will not enter in before us, but murmr, your Carcasses may be slain in
the wilderness, or you may be stung with fiery Serpents; and yet deliverance
shall come, for the spirits anointing caused the people to destroy the yoke of
the late King; and God has promised, hat the feet of the poor, and the steps
of the needy, shall tread down them that dwell on high; Esa. 10.27. Esa.
26.5.6. would you have us think that God sees not injustice in a Commonwealth
as well as in a Kingly Government, or that our freedom consists in having
the name of privilege of Parliament, instead of Kingly Prerogative, or The
Keepers of the Liberties of England, instead of Charles by the Grace of God,
etc. notwithstanding the same injustice and arbitrary power remains, nay and
is much increased; for shame up and be doing; we beseech you consider what will
become of your posterities too, as well as ours; let no man take your honor
from you, nor delude you, and lay your honor in the dust: for we profess to
all the world, that whatsoever injustice, whatever we want of perfect freedom,
and liberty, what blood is not expiated, what treasure is misspent, all our
complaints are before your Excellency, and the army, and must remain with you,
and be charged upon you; therefore if you will rise like a mighty Giant
refreshed with wine, and scorn a gift that blinds the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the righteous in judgment, and go forth in the strength of our God,
then shall the work of the Lord prosper in your hands. But if you will not, but
say there is a Lion in the way, and forget your vows and promises, and lead us
back again into Egypt; and say, the same old Kingly spirit in a new name shall
reign; we shall be enforced to cease from your Excellency, and lift up our eyes
to the hills, and expect deliverance some other way. O how can we expect to
have injustice in superiors punished speedily, and not left to succeeding
Parliaments, and men starve the mean while in prison; when every man is left to
act arbitrarily, and men accused of Treason, suffered to sit in the house? nay
some of us, will with our lives make good, that there be some in the house that
are utter enemies to the peace and safety of the Nation. O how shall we be able
to discern our friends from our foes in the house, except the faithful Members
do declare their protest to the people whom they serve, against all those that
act contrary to their trust, oppugning the law of God, the law of the land, and
the law of nature; for we humbly conceive this is the ready way to ease them
and you of your endless trouble, and secure the Commonwealth from future
dangers and miseries; for do we not see with what extreme difficulty, you
produce any thing that looks like justice? and how can we expect that the
grievances of the people should be redressed, when an eminent Member of the
House and Council of State, professed he would oppose the discovery of the
grievances, both in house and Council of State, when there was offered four
millions to have it done? as witness the ensuing engagement.

To the Right Honorable the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
WE whose names are under written, out of a desire to discharge a good
conscience, and zeal to promote the good and welfare of this our native
country, do hereby engage our lives and fortunes; to produce and prosecute such
discoveries of notorious treacheries, and concealment of public treasures and
lands, as will probably raise, at the least four millions of treasure, for the
use of the State; which we conceive may be for the constant pay of the army,
and prevent the selling of thsir arrears at under rates, and to ease the
grieved and discontented people of this Nation, from all assessments
whatsoever, for the space of four years next ensuing; provided, that this
honorable Council be pleased forthwith to draw up the form of an Act, to
authorize Commissioners for the examination of all manner of grievances
whatsoever, and all direct or indirect concealment of public treasure, and
present the same to the Parliament for the speedy passing thereof, before any
further adjournment or any Act of general pardon be concluded; and likewise
that this honorable Council would be pleased to afford from time to time an
effectual assistance in the prosecution of the aforesaid discoveries, for the
good of the Cmmonwealth, the better to indear the affections of the people to
the Parliament, Army, Navy, and this honorable Council, in the initiation of
this present government.

Given under our hands this 4th of September, 1649. William Pendred, John
Bernard, Ieffery Corbet, Devereux Gardioner, William Hill, William Bernard.
William Reex, Miles Arendale. Robert Coalman. William Harrison, Henry Mallow,



Can any men be so void of reason, as to persuade us that they can be true to
their trust, who act so contrary to the safety of the nation, and refuse such
an offer as this? does it not declare that they are guilty persons? we beseech
you Gentlemen consider, that God will not be mocked ( Galat. 6.7.) though you
and the corrupt members of the house, have very sufficiently mocked this nation
for diverse years past, feeding us with shals and shals; but truly we never knew
good words fill the bellies of the hungry, nor cloth the backs of the naked.
Oh how have we been betrayed both by sea and land! and when men shun the light,
it is because their deeds are evil, John 3.19, 20, 21. and hence it is, that
so many do oppose a new Representative; how can any rational man think it safe
to confide in such unfaithful trustees, who neither discharge their trust
reposed in them, nor make conscience of their oaths nor promises, in paying
their debts; but let the most faithful friends of the Commonwealth, lie
starving in all corners of the Commonwealth? and yet they can take care to
provide for our enemies, by an Act of free pardon. O how do these, and a
multitude of other actions declare their unfaithfulness! certainly they are not
the men whom we chose; if they be we were deceived in them, and will no longer
trust in them, but will have all Traitors, Cheaters, Arbitrary actors, and
betrayers of their trust, called to a strict account, that so many industrious
families may not starve through oppression; the Prophet tells us, that Christ
is just, Zachary 9.9. therefore we will never own any other King but him, he
shall be our King and our Lawgiver, and at his feet will we sacrifice our
lives, and all that is dear unto us, Esaias 33.22. James 4.12. therefore all
those that are for Christ and justice, let them declare themselves, that we may
know and own them, and then we shall adhere to them even from Dan to Beer-sheba;
for we are resolved, that all those that have been faithful in the House,
Army, Navy, and Commonwealth, by owning of Christ, and standing for Justice,
shall be had in singular honor, and shall shine like stars in the firmament;
and those that stand for Antichrist, in the opposing justice, or oppressing the
people, shall like clods of dirt, or unsavory salt, be thrown to the dunghill,
and there remain, Matthew. 5.13. for we do clearly see that we are sold to the
bloody Butchers of Rome, but we are resolved we will not be delivered up to them.

Therefore we beseech you, before it be too late, to go with us to the House
door, and not depart thence, till we have an Act for a Committee, to discover
and redress the grievances of the Commonwealth, that so those that have
betrayed their trust, and sold us to Antichrist, may reap the fruit of their
treachery; for these men, as they stand corrupted, will never let us have a new
Representative: How many months, nay, years we think, have they spent in
contriving a way for a new Representative, and will not do it? But we doubt
not, but a Committee of upright unbiassed men, will quickly find out the
Achans, and the execrable things; which will so unite us together in love, and
raise such a vast Bank of treasure, and perpetual revenue, as will make this
Nation a terror to the whole earth; and then our Trustees may carry on the
work of the Nation with ease and cheerfulness. And we do heartily beseech you,
as you tender the safety of your own persons, families, estates, and this whole
Commonwealth, that you do forthwith call a General Council, that so we may not
be betrayed in our discoveries, nor destroyed for our fidelity to our Country:
And then we shall discover a most dangerous design, tending to the destruction
both of Army, and Commonwealth; For God has made the hearts of those men fat,
and their ears heavy, that they will not hear the cry of the poor, Esaias 6.10.
Therefore they shall cry, and not be heard, Prove. 21.13. They are Physicians of
no value; they will not cure us, but rather make our wounds deeper and wider:
But the Sun of Righteousness will arise with healing on his wings, Mal. 4.2.
and all Nations, people, or persons, that will not submit to his Government,
and let him rule over them, shall be destroyed, Luke 19.27. Esa. 60.12. For
behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud, and all
that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up,
says the Lord of Hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch, Mal.
4.1.

And now my Lord, and Gentlemen all, we do humbly spread these things before
you, conceiving our condition just parallel with Paul's, when the ship was
between Sylla and Charibdis; and as we know you in your full condition,
swimming in prosperity, cannot be without strong temptations; neither can you
conceive, that we can be free from the like, and greater; for you know what
oppression will make wise men do, Eccles. 7.7. Therefore if we in our sinking
condition shall catch at any thing, hoping to be delivered by it, and if it
prove to be our destruction; we do appeal unto God, Angels and Men, whether you
shall not answer for all the blood which shall be spilt upon this account, or
no? For we dare call the most High God to record, our onsciences also
witnessing with us, that we have nothing in our eye, but the preserving of this
nation from perpetual slavery, or from sudden destruction by unsatiable,
bloody monsters: and so we do commit both you, and these lines into the hands
of that God, who is able to give them such a setting on upon your spirits, that
both sleep and food shall depart from you, until you by joining with us, have
put us into a safe posture.

FINIS

