To the High Court of Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.
The humble Petition of the Prisoners for Debt in the Vpper-Bench Prison.
SHOWS:
THat your Petitioners should be as truly sensible of the late Gracious Acts of
Parliament, and Ordinances made for their Relief and Liberty (were they duly
executed) as some of them are of their sixteen years imprisonment. many of your
Petitioners having taken their Oaths as poor, in October 1652 and others
before the 20. of October 1653.

Since that, many others of your Petitioners have been committed, not being
capable of the benefit of the said Acts, and Ordinances, for obtaining their
Liberties, though poor.

That such of your Petitioners as have taken their oaths as poor, in the year
1652. and before the 20. of October 1653. have ever since been obstructed of
their Liberties, by r^ason of their great necessity and want of money, to
prosecute their liberties, by suing forth Writs of habeas corpus (which have
been denied) and after them Writs of scire facias to summon their Creditors, to
show cause in the Upper-Bench Court at a certain day, why your Petitioners
should not be freed from imprisonment (having taken their oaths as poor)
according to the said Acts and Ordinances as aforesaid, and after the return of
the said scire facias, Writs of Supersedeas to free your Petitioners from
imprisonment absolutely, but the charge thereof is so great, that your
Petitioners have not been able to undergo the same.

That your Petitioners have likewise by Petition made their addresses several
times since the beginning of August last, for Relief and Liberty, to the
Judges appointed for Relief of Creditors, and poor Prisoners, London, etc.
(many of them having spent five pounds apiece and upwards) though with much
difficulty borrowed of their friends, in orders of summons, and serving them
upon their Creditors in remote Countries, Counselors, Clerks, and Solicitors
fees, Waiters wages, and other expenses, too heavy and great for your
Petitioners to disburse, not having the same: some have been ten, some twenty
times before them, and not yet discharged, though very poor; so that all your
Petitioners endeavors have proved in vain: and also many other of your
Petitioners have delivered to the said Judges, particulars of their Estates
upon oath, yet still detained in Prison.

That in effect all Prisoners for debt in this Commonwealth (being capable of
the benefit of the said Acts and Ordinances) (except your Petitioners and some
others, in and near the City of London) are by force and virtue thereof,
already freed and discharged from imprisonment.

And forasmuch as your Petitioners humbly conceive the said Judges are not as
yet fully empowered to examine and determine all Causes whatsoever, upon
Judgments and Executions, though illegally obtained, in differences between
Creditors and Prisoners.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that the said Judges may forthwith be
empowered to examine, hear, and determine all Causes and differences
whatsoever, between Creditors and Prisoners, (the said differences to be
delivered to the said Judges in writing) to be adjudged and determined without
pleading of Counsel, in regard both chargeable and impertinent, and has been
prejudicial to many poor men's Liberties. And some obdurate Adversaries have
bestowed 30 l in Counsel, purposely to keep poor men in Prison. And that all
Prisoners for Debt upon taking their Oaths as poor, and others upon delivery
of particulars of their Estates to the said Judges upon their oaths, may be
forthwith freed and discharged from imprisonment. And that in the mean time,
your Petitioners may be allowed Writs of habeas corpus, gratis, according to
the said late Acts and Ordinances, upon their own security by Bond, to enable
them to complete their Liberties, and be serviceable to the Common wealth, and
the preservation of their Families.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

