To his Highness the Lord Protector: The Humble Petition of the Seamen,
belonging to the Ships of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND,
SHOWS,
THat many of your Petitioners have served the Commonwealth of England in the
Parliaments service for diverse years last past, during the War against the
Cavileers, both in England, Scotland and Ireland; and also, in the late sharp
War with the Dutch.

That your Petitioners have been very free in hazarding themselves both at Sea
and Land, and have suffered great hardship: diverse of your Petitioners
fellow-Sea-men having sacrificed themselves; and some of our limbs are mangled,
and blood spilt, especially in those late conflicts with that enraged and
powerful Enemy of the Netherlands; besides great diseases and distempers,
sometimes occasioned through bad Victual, which in time of expected service,
your Petitioners have been necessitated to ear, their stations being not then
quitted.

That the Parliament declared, They intended to maintain and enlarge the
Liberties of the freepeople of England where infringed: which we were in great
hopes of, and the more encouraged to wait and expect, because the Army also
often declared for the same.

That your Petitioners notwithstanding continue under very great burdens,
being imprested, and haled on board the Commonwealths Ships, turned over and
confined there, under a degree of thraldom and bondage, to the utter ruin of
some of your Petitioners poor families. That pay appointed them being also
detained, sometimes ten, twelve, sixteen, and twenty months from them.

That many of your Petitioners fellow-Sea-men are sent abroad upon foreign
service, since the War with the Dutch, and some numbers more of us are designed
abroad, as we hear; and the rest of us we know not how soon may be either
appointed to such service, or turned over to those Ships that are going: and so
our Relations will be left in a perishing condition, as diverse of those are,
that spent themselves in the late Wars.

The Premises considered, your Petitioners humbly pray, Dutch Seamen, against
whom they have been such instruments in the Lord's hand, for the good of their
Country; but that if the Commonwealth have occasion to employ any of your
Petitioners, they may be hired as the Dutch are, and that they or their lawful
Attorney may be paid every six months at the furthest; and that such other
encouragements to their Relations may be assured, in case they are slain in the
service, as shall be agreeable with justice, and as their necessity calls for:
and that all other Liberties and Privileges due to your Petitioners, as
freemen of England, may be granted and secured.

And your Petitioners shall, as there is occasion, faithfully serve and pray.


