To the Honorable, The Commons assembled in Parliament: The humble Petition of
diverse Gentlemen, Ministers, and well-affected Inhabitants in the County of
Somerset,
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners calling to mind the continuate actions of your Enemies
for years past (especially those mentioned in your several Declarations) and
their late Design for a second War, find their Ayms destructive, and their
Malice adusted, and can expect no Peace from them (their specious pretense
notwithstanding:) But when your Petitioners reflect their thoughts on that
powerful Providence which has still attended your Preservation (even to the
height of Miracle) and frustrated that late Design (laid confidently for your
Ruin) by the hands of a few of your dispersed Army, weakened by neglect of
Friends, and fighting a potent enraged Enemy (emboldened with assurance of
Success) We your Petitioners rest in admiration of Gods mercy toward you; and
do hope shortly to enjoy a wellgrounded Peace (if the Vote of No further
Address be not too much forgotten) and a Reformation, according to the Word of
God (the result of our wishes and prayers) and to see Justice executed, the
ends of the National Covenant. In pursuance of which we humbly pray,

That you accept of that Peace which God, your Protector, tenders, and not take
one from flesh, or from the hands of your Enemies, lest the Kingdom, your
selves, and we, become their prey.

That a Reformation be speedied and settled, according to Gods Word.

That Justice be done on great Offenders (a second time brought before you) in
satisfaction of the blood shed in your quarrel, confessed by your very Enemies
to be innocent, and not to be quieted (we are confident) by an Act of Oblivion,
or otherwise, then by an impartial Justice.

That your Armies (approved faithful) be encouraged, duly paid, not laid aside,
until your Enemies have laid down their thoughts of Blood and Slaughter.

That the pious Ministry may have a settled sufficiency, and not deprived of
their augmentation; the fruits of your Justice, and reward of their Sufferings.

Die lovis, 21 Decembr. 1648.
THe House being informed, That some Gentlemen of the County of Somerset were
at the door, they were called in; and there presented a Petition, which was
entitled, The humble Petition of diverse Gentlemen, Ministers, and
well-affected Inhabitants of the County of Somerset, which after the
Petitioners were withdrawn, was read: The Petitioners being afterward called
in, Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer;

Gentlemen,
THe House has read your Petition, which consists of three Points, which
shows your great care of Justice, Safety and Religion; wherein you deserve
extraordinary Thanks, and the House has commanded me to give you Thanks, and I
do give you Thanks accordingly. And the House has commanded me to tell you,
That it is their Resolution with all speed to take into their serious
consideration the three Points of your Petition, consisting of Justice, Safety
and Religion.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Petition be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
Jan. 5. 1648.


