TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF COMMONS NOW ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. The humble
Petition of diverse Knights, Esquires, Ministers, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of
the County Palatine of Lancaster.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners with all the gratitude that thankful hearts can
express, do acknowledge the fidelity, patience, and unparaleld industry of
this Honorable House in the indevours to restore to order the discomposed
condition of this Church and State; and to put the same into a way to unity,
puretie, and peace. For purging the Fountains of Government, and establishing
his Majesty's royal Throne upon the old and sure foundation of impartial
justice, National Laws, and the Subjects love. For the blessed union of two
Kingdoms, to the terror of our enemies, the strength and splendor of both
Nations. For expunging out of the Church innovations, and confining Church men
to their proper functions; and the future hopes of a National Synod of able
Divines, to composse the Civil war of the Church, and settle the differences
both of doctrine and discipline. For restoring to the Subjects of this
Kingdom, courage, industry, and vivacitie of Spirit, by the freedom of their
persons and estates. For settling the present fruition, and the hopes of a
lasting possession of these high and unvalueable benefits, by disposing of the
Militia, and Forts of the Kingdom under the commands of persons of Honor and
unquestionable fidelity (of which number your Petitioners do acknowledge the
Noble Lord, the L. Wharton, appointed by Parliament Lord Lieutenant of this
County, whom with all thankfulness they do receive, and according to the
power wherewith he shall be trusted, will ever most readily and willingly
obey.) For giving life (by execution) to the Laws against Recusants, and
security of life to the Protestants by their disarming. For vindication of the
Privileges of Parliament, (the firm Basis of this Government, the inheritance
of the Subject, and the best guard of his Majesty's royal person, crown and
dignity:) So that by the blessing of Almighty God, and the prosperous care of
this Honorable House, the practices (whether foreign, or domestic) of the
enemies to this State, shall be averted, detected, and brought to naught.

Yet in regard the course of these great affairs, so highly concerning the
safety, plenty, and quiet of the Kingdom, has been much interrupted by
some, whose sinister ends, or corrupted understandings (capable of no
amendment) has made them active for introduction of public calamities. And
your Petitioners being seated in the mouth of danger, and having fresh and
daily spectacles of the Irish cruelties presented to their eyes, cannot choose
but apprehend fear from the noveltie of so great barbarism: And lest that
Kingdom (for want of timely ayds) being lost, the war (or rather the Massacre)
should be transported hither from the opposite shore, where the number of
popish Recusants, and the opportunity of landing may invite an invasion. Your
Petitioners therefore do in all humbleness present to the consideration of
this Honorable Assembly their fears, dangers, and desires; humbly praying

That such persons whether Ecclesiastical or Temporal, whose ends and
interesses are not the same with the Protestants of this Kingdom, may be
removed from the great counsel of the Kingdom.

That the distractions of the Church may be settled by a National Synod.

That the number of preaching Ministers may be augmented in this County, and a
better distribution of the Church revenue, that so the tithes of vast Parishes
may not be wholly drawn to the Parish Church, and the Ministers of the
Chapels far distant, be exposed to the exhibition of a poor and ignorant
auditorie.

That as well a provision be made for the distressed (and destitute of all the
comforts of this life) our poor brethren of Ireland, that in multitudes daily
arrive in this County; as a speedy aid advanced to stay the insolency and
cruelty of the enemy, whose boast is to make the fruitful parts of this
Kingdom the seat of war, when they have cleared that Kingdom from strangers.

THAT a Fleet of small Ships may be appointed for the guard of this Coast, as
well to prevent the aid and intelligence that may be given to the Rebels from
the Papists of these, or any other parts, as for defense of your Petitioners,
and other Protestants, his Majesty's faithful Subjects, inhabiting the
Maritime parts of this Kingdom, opposite to Ireland.

THAT the Recusants of this County may be disarmed, and such Ports or other
strengths, as yet remain in any of their keepings, may be disposed into the
hands of Protestants, and that sufficient Guards may be appointed in places
convenient, and the Militia of the County put into a posture for defense of
the same.

THAT the petition concerning the breach of Privileges at the Election of
Knights for this County (unparaleld by any Election in this Kingdom, as your
Petitioners believe)* As also the other grievances of the County (contained in
a petition exhibited twelve Months since, and more particularly related in a
Declaration lately presented to some Members of this Honorable House) may
receive examination, and redress: And that such as shall be found to have been
instruments of bringing in an Arbitrary and insolent Government, may make
reparation for the oppressions they have done to their Country, And henceforth
be excluded from the exercise of that authority, which (it may be feared) they
would again abuse, if they had again the like occasion.

And your Petitioners will be ever ready with their lives and estates to defend
his Majesty's Royal Person, the persons and Privileges of the Members of this
House, the Protestant Religion, and Laws of this Kingdom, and to bring to
condign punishment all opposers, as they are bound by their late Protestation:
And ever to pray for the happy proceedings of this Parliament.
Printed by Felix Kingston. 1641.


