To his Excellency the Lord Charles Fleetwood, and the rest of the Officers of
the ARMY.
SIRS,
HAving obtained favor from the Lord in this day of Apostasy to be faithful
to him in the promotion of righteousness, so long contended for, which for
sometime past, to the grief of our hearts, has been slighted and publicly
denied, by those, who formerly had solemnly (before the Lord and his people)
engaged for it; and now after our so long waiting upon the Lord, he has been
pleased to give us some grounds of hope, that we shall live to see the reviving
of the good Old Cause, by the taste you have given us of your willingness to
appear for it, in some of your late expressions. The understanding of which
(together with what we have observed by tracing the footsteps of providence in
your late transactions) gives us ground to believe that you are returning in
good earnest; the thoughts, of which, incourageth us to present unto you, what
the Lord has powerfully put upon our spirits, as the result of our several
meetings, wherein we doubt not but we have met with God.

1. That you consider when and where you turned aside from the way in which God
was pleased eminently to own you; and also whether you have not found a want of
that presence of the Lord going along with your Counsels and Affairs, which in
former times you were guided by, when that you appeared singly for God and your
Country.

2. Secondly, that you would take a re-view of that Declaration of that
memorable Parliament, published in the year 1648, March 17. wherein they
express the grounds of a Free State; and that the same Parliament (who changed
the Government from Kingly to a Commonwealth) may assemble themselves together,
for the exercise of the Supreme Trust committed to them, in the prosecution of
which on April 20. 1653. they were interrupted.

3. Thirdly, that you would consider who they were that from time to time have
obstructed the faithful proceedings of those that are among you, whose hearts
God has touched with a sense of the great neglect of their Duty to God and
their Country; and be admonished forthwith to dismiss them, out of your
Councils and Armies for time to come.

4. Lastly, that you would consider who they are that have been ejected the
Army, or otherwise forced to forsake it, for their Faithfulness to the Cause of
God and his People, in bearing their testimony against Tyranny and Oppression,
and with all speed call them to their Places, and admit them to your Councils.

In the doing of these things you will strengthen our hopes, that you are in
reality and truth for God and his people, who will be thereby engaged to
encourage and stand by you with their lives and Estates; otherwise our Fears
will be enlarged, that you are but daubing with untempered mortar; and you may
assuredly expect, that then the Lord will depart from you, and all the Faithful
decline you.

From several Thousands of faithful Friends to the Good old Cause, in and about
the City of London.
London, Printed by J. C. for Livewel Chapman. 1659.


