TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, And BVRGESSES, OF THE COMMONS-HOUSE OF
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of
Clothworkers of the City of London, in the behalf of themselves, and of the
Artizan Clothworkers of the same Company.
SHOWS,
THat whereas many thousand Families of Clothworkers in the City of London and
elsewhere, have for hundred of years heretofore maintained themselves, and
lived comfortably, by the rowing and shearing of broad and narrow Clothes.
Whiles they enjoyed the benefit of several Statutes provided for their better
employment, and relief; as namely, the Statute 33. Hen. 8. Chap. 19. which
prohibits any person or persons to transport any white woollen Cloth, above
the value of 4. l. or any colored Cloth, above the value of 3. l. undressed
under pain of forfeiting the same; and of 8. Eliz. Chap. 6. which enacts, that
for every nine Clothes unwrought to be shipped beyond the Seas, contrary to
any Statute in force, by virtue of any license to be granted, the party who
should carry over the same, shall transport one woollen Cloth of like sort,
length, breath, and goodness, ready wrought and dressed, under pain of
forfeiting for every such nine Clothes, transported contrary to this Statute
the sum of ten pounds, the moiety of all which forfeitures, were to accrue
to the Company of Cloth workers for the relief of their Poor; yet of late
years, diverse licenses and dispensations to transport Clothes unwrought have
been granted to sundry persons for their private lucre, contrary to these
Acts, whereby your Petitioners have been deprived of their natural birth
right, the dressing of English Cloth, and Aliens in foreign parts employed,
in, and enriched by their trade; to the great prejudice of your Petitioners,
and the Commonwealth; And whereas your Petitioners for their relief herein,
have formerly commenced suites against sundry Merchants for the forfeitures,
due unto them by the said Acts, their suites have been stopped by special
Orders from the Councel-Table: And one lately commenced against one Master
Thomas Smith, was by the entreaty of a Committee of this Honorable Assembly
surceased, upon promise, they should be relieved upon their Petition. And to
add to their affliction, many Gig-Mills for rowing of Cloth, have been
erected and used of late years about Stroudwater, by Thomas Web and diverse
others, contrary to the Statute of 5. Edw. 6. Chap. 22. Their Wardens in their
searches withstood by Cloathworkers, who are free of other Companies, as Master
Henry Leaves and others, against the express provision of 39. Eliz. Chap. 13.
Their wages for their work paid weekly heretofore, commonly deferred for
sundry Months by Merchants and Drapers, who employ them to their utter undoing.

In tender consideration, whereof your Petitioners humbly pray, that those
foresaid Statutes may be put in due execution, and all dispensations against
them declared void in Law; all Gig-mils suppressed, all Cloathworkers within
five miles every way distant from the City of London, incorporated into the
Company of Cloathworkers of the City of London, for the better regulating of
their Trade, and that all your Petitioners may recieve ready money for their
work, in such manner, and under the same penalties or greater, as the
Cloathworkers of Shrewsbury receive for their work by the Statute of 8. Eliz.
Chap. 7. and that all His Majesty's liege people may freely trade in Cloth,
according to the Statute of 12. Hen. 7. Chap. 6. and all Pattents to the
contrary be suppressed.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

