To the Honorable, the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of diverse well-affected People inhabiting in the Cities of
London and Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets and (...) adjacent.
SHOWS,
Promoters and approvers of the Petition of the 11. of September, 1648.

THat if it be altogether uncomfortable to say unto the naked and destitute of
daily food, be you warmed and filled, when nothing is given needful for the
body, how extremely grievous would it be to say unto such; ye are warmed, ye
are filled, when their cold and hunger is increased; but nothing ministered for
sustent^ation.

And yet except we should stifle our Consciences, betray the truth, and by a
sinful silence, even break our hearts; we cannot but attest and bear witness,
that, of this sad and woeful nature is our misery.

For how uncomfortable, yea, what torment of spirit, must it necessarily be to
a people that have done and suffered so much and so many several kinds of
afflictions, for recovery of our Native Liberties, and for redress of
grievances, not only to be frustrated in all our hopes, and to be deprived of
them by those who can and ought in Conscience to restore the one, and to
redress the other, (being obliged thereunto by all possible ties both to God
and Man,) but to be born down continually, by private and public discourses,
(yea, and to have it dangerous for any to deny) that we are a free people, that
we have enjoyed the first, and that this is the second year of Englands
Liberty, when God he knows, we find and feel the contrary: our just
fundamental Liberties, being never more invaded and restrained, our burdens
never more grievous, and which makes them ten fold more grievous: our very
groans, sighs and complaints (of late) meet with no relief, but are attended
with threats, bonds, imprisonments, yea death it self; a condition sufficient
to distract us, but that God, we trust, supports us for better things, in dread
of whose awful and glorious name, we dare neither by speech nor silence call
good evil, nor evil good; we dare not say, our Lib^rties are restored* or our
grievances as yet redressed.

And although there are a sort of men, formerly full of complaints, for want of
those Liberties, and frequent in Petitions for them whose mouths being since
stopped with Offices and employment of gain, Honor, or domination, or by
relations to such as have them, that are not only silent themselves, as to any
complaint now, but make it their works to suppress and silence all others, and
to boast of the happiness and freedom of these sad times; yet the woeful
lamentations of well minded people, throughout the Land, bear witness against
them; and the things themselves bear witness against them, and against all such
unchristian delusions: We judge our selves bound in Conscience, to bear our
witness perpetually, though 10000. High Courts of Justice (those new English
Monsters;) were set up to terriefie or devour us, choosing rather to suffer for
a cause so evidently righteous, then to enjoy the pleasures of corruption, for
a season; and it will be good that all such mockers, remember that it will be
bitterness in the latter end.

And that it may not be said unto us, as it was to the over-grieved Israelites,
ye are idle, ye are idle, or that we intend to asperse or scandalize Authority,
(a hard measure we frequently meet withal.) In the bowels of Christ Jesus we
beseech you, bear with us in comparing times with times, and the things of the
former times of bondage, with the present; so much cried up, for Liberty and
Freedom.

And surely it will be found, and cannot be denied, that if it were a breach of
known liberty, and a sore grievance that any Laws should be made, or Customs
brought in, contrary to our Native Liberties contained in Magna Charta: such
being null and void in themselves, and not to be obeyed, though made in full
Parliament: (as appears in the case of Empson and Dudley) how exceeding
grievous must the late Act declaring what shall be treason, that for unlicensed
Printing, and that for erecting the High Court of Justice, etc. appear in these
times; was imprisonment for debt, confessed by all to be an incroachment upon our
just Right? and is it not lamentable, it should be continued to the ruin of
the poorer, and to the sheltering of the richer sort of debtors, as it is known
to be? was it grievous, that all men were made liable to be attached by
Pursevants, to be adjudged, fined, imprisoned, by the Councel-board High
Commission and Star Chamber, without being tried by Juries, to be examined
against themselves, and imprisoned in illegal Prisons, and remote Castles, and
there to be most barbarously abused? And does not the same dealing from a
continued Parliament, a Council of State and Committees, executed by
Messengers, and Soldiers too, violently hauling and terrifying people, prove
much more grievous? If Tithes were then a burden to the industrious and
conscientious, is it not much heavier now, being exacted upon treble damages?
If Customs then were accounted an unreasonable burden, distructive to
traffic and navigation, can they be less, being required with more strictness
and severity? If Patents and Projects, and Ship Money, were intolerable
burdens and grievances: how much more burdensome and destructive to Trade, is
the Excise and the perplexities thereon depending to all Tradesmen, and
consequently to all industrious people? If the great number of Officers
belonging to the High Commission Star Chamber Councel-board, to Pattentees,
Projectors, Bishops, Courts, and the like, bred and fostered an interest
against the common freedom of the People, to their excessive charge and
trouble: all such being arguers for arbitrary power, and maintaine^ by the
sweat of other men's brows, is it not so and much more, by those many employed
about Customs, Excise, and in Committees: in so much, as men can har^ly say any
thing, or discourse together, for fear of being ensnared in their words by some
of them? If it were then deemed most injurious, to make it dangerous to mention
a Parliament: is it not most lamentable, that it should be now as dangerous to
move for a new Parliament, after so long continuance, and so many grievances
unremoved? If Conscience then were oppressed by Oaths of Allegiance and
supremacy is not the enforcement of the Engagement upon penalty of being
our-law'd, a greater grievance? If Conscience in divine worship were free only
to some, is not its freedom restrained now? or should we for that one part of
our just freedom, sell all the rest of our Birthright, (God forbid) and the
liberty of Printing more restrained, (except to books maintaining the most
tyranous principles ^as the Book entitled, The Case of the Commonwealth of
England stated, and the like, which to the shame of these times were freely
licenced. If those ti^es were judged of cruelty, in censuring men to be whipped,
gagged, and pillor'd, for small or verbal things; how can that time escape that
makes the like verbal things Capital, as is evident in many Acts of this
Parliament? If it were deemed of dangerous consequence, that almost all
Officers and Magistrates* both civil and military, as Judges, Sheriffs, and
Justices, etc. were not chosen in a free way by the People, (as by right they
ought) but were chosen and imposed by the Court, thereby to incline all men and
things to the bent of one particular party or Interest, rather then to the
impartial good of all, is it not as prejudicial to be so now? If monopolizing
of the principal Marchandizes of the Nation by Companies, were then esteemed a
most pernicious evil, they remain still much after the same manner, and so also
do Law-sutes, and all proceedings in Law, continue as full of tedious chargable
perplexities as ever, and the numbers of Lawyers, Attorneys, Solicitors,
Goalers, and their Officers, all feeding themselves fat, as the other Officers
forementioned) by the spoils of the distressed, never more countenanced, yea,
1000. pounds a piece per annum, added to the Judges above their ordinary Fees,
which alone was formerly accounted a large proportion, and great preferment. If
trials by extraordinary packt Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, and Trials by
Court-Martials, (though of loose and dissolute people) were esteemed utterly
destructive to the Lives and Liberties of the People, (as appears by the
Petition of Right,) are not those kinds of Trials more frequent now, or can any
thing exceed in dangerous Trials by High Courts of Justice, a Court against
which no legal defense or privilege is permitted, it being to be admired, that
in times pretending liberty, there should be found persons to serve in such a
Court. If these are the effects of Freedom, then are we free indeed; but if
they are, we have lost our understandings. If then be considered the manifold
miseries accompanying these ten years strife for liberty, as decay of Trade,
excessive Taxes, Poverty and War: to supply which, a new and never before heard
of grievance is added, as the loss of Servants and Children, through a liberty
given them, to betake themselves to Arms, though against their Master or
Parents liking, to the impoverishment of whole Families, and to the
unexpressible grief of many tenderhearted Fathers and Mothers. And then if the
Parliaments Declarations in behalf of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right,
with all things concerning Life, Limb, Liberty, and Estate, be duly weighed,
and after them, those of the Army, manifesting a most deep sense of the long
suffering of the Nation* for want thereof: would it not pierce and grieve the
most hard and stony heart, that yet all things should remain in this woeful
condition, as is evident they now do? And that through discontents, divisions,
and distractions, arising from so continued an unsettlement, and the
presumption of enemies thereupon, a War should frequently be threatened within
the bowels of the Land, (as more then once has been seen) and that a more
dangerous one then any yet is now already begun, and yet no regard taken for
the real restoration of our liberties, or redress either of old or new
grievances, (the only means of reconcilement) but in place thereof, all mouths
are stopped with the mere Title of a free Commonwealth, and of a free people, to
the heightening of all discontents, and withholding from the Army the
assistance of thousands of zealous cordial people, that upon the real (but not
verbal) restoration to just Liberties, and the real redress of those known
grievances, would readily assist them.

And therefore as you tender the preservation of Parliaments, from utter
annihilation, (a thing much to be feared upon prevalence of an Enemy, which God
defend) the supply and recruit of this Army, the speedy ending of this most
threatening War, as you regard the end for which the people chose you, or that
for which the Army reserved you; when they excluded the greater number of your
own Members: as you regard you own safeties, or that which is above all the
known will of God in the keeping of a good Conscience, and performance of all
your promises and vows, made in his all-seeing presence: We beg and beseech
you for the tender mercies of Christ, that you will be pleased instantly to
make a plenary restoration to our fundamental liberties, and really redress all
the grievances foremencioned; and for a clear pledge of your full purpose
therein, that you will immediately and for ever abolish the High Court of
Justice, (that Serpent ready with open mouth to devour us: and from which,
none can be safe, whilst treacherous Informers can be found) and to null all
things and proceedings appertaining thereunto, as a Plant, which our fore
Fathers never planted, but would have ventured all they had willingly, to have
rooted out any jurisdiction of so foreign a breed, so expressly opposite to all
English Liberties, as is manifest by what trouble and danger they under went in
all former times.

But if so be the whole work be too hard for you, or that you cannot agree
therein, before the War grows to fast upon you; We beseech you then to
remember the humble Petition and advice of his Excellency and Council of
Officers, the 20. of Jan. 1649. with those other Petitions to the same effect,
concerning the way of settlement by an agreement of the People, and that you
will be pleased to give countenance and protection to all peaceable people, in
entering into such an agreement as themselves shall judge most effectual to
their own safety, Freedom and well-being, and whereby they may set such express
bounds and limits, to all kinds of Authorities, so restore and establish their
fundamental Liberties, and so unrevocably remove their burdens, and redress
their grievances, as shall not be in the power of future Authorities or persons
(without certainty of punishment) to supplant the one, or to re-impose the
other; and this work we trust in God, you will freely encourage, having
acknowledged by your votes, the People to be the original power, from whom all
just Authorities are derived, which were unavailable, if you should (which God
forbid) withhold them from exercising the same, in a work wherein they are so
nearly concerned: and which once effected, would render the Nation absolutely
free, (not in word only) but in deed and in truth, to the exceeding joy of your
humble, (but as yet grieved Petitioners, and of all well-minded people) restore
it to much more unity within it self, and so, would become more formidable to
all sorts of Enemies, your labors would be exceedingly abated. And in
countenancing so just, so due a work, would bring great Honor to God, Peace,
Freedom, and prosperity to the Commonwealth, be at rest in your own
Consciences, guarded by the cordial volentary affection of the People, whilst
you live here, and remain as a sweet savor to all Posterity. And thus as
faithful Witnesses to the Truth, and in behalf of the Nations just Rights, we
have discharged our Consciences, referring the Issue and our selves wholly to
God, whom we continually worship in spirit and in truth; and before whose
righteous judgment we must all one day appear: and therefore although for the
Truths sake, our portion in this life should be scofs, reproaches, afflictions,
poverty, imprisonment, or Death: We have chosen it, rather then at that great
and terrible day of the Lord, to have our portion with the Hypocrite, or that
our Consciences should then testify against us, that we have made lies our
refuge. This is printed only for the better gathering of Subscriptions, it is
desired you would make no other use of it.


