To his Excellency the Lord General CROMWELL AND THE COUNCEL of STATE: The
humble Remonstrance of diverse well-affected Inhabitants of the Town of
COLCHESTER in ESSEX.
SHOWS,

THat we have been a long time much supported under our heavy pressures, with
the expectation of the performances o^ the many Vows and Engagements made by
your Excellency, the late Parliament, and the Army; that when the Nation
(through the blessing of God upon the Forces under your Command, and the
expense of our blood and treasure) wa^ free from the Common enemy, that we
should have been established upon principles of Righteousness, and Justice, and
been fa^ from oppression: But in stead thereof, how has Judgment been turned
into Wormwood, and Righteousness rejected as a thing o^ no value? How have our
Enemies been made the Chief? How has the Tabernacles of Robbers prospered? and
the oppressions o^ the Nation been increased? For which things sake, has the
Lord been as a swift witness to visit our former Governors, whose actions
declared, that they thought never to be removed.

But now seeing the set time is come, that God has put a period to his actings
in, and by, and through the late Parliament, and has given us occasion
(yielding all due respect to the precious amongst them) to take up the Proverb,
How has the Oppresso^ ceased? and where is the fury of the Oppressor? And has
highly honored you, and made you the Chief amongst the People; ou^ hopes and
prayers are.

I. That you may be faithful to God, to your own souls, and to the People of
this Commonwealth, whose eyes are upon you whose desires are toward you, and
whose prayers are for you; that the God of all might would strengthen you in
the inward and outward man, that a spirit of Judgment and Justice may rest
upon you, that you may do worthily in Ephratah, and famously in Bethlehem; that
by your means Judgment may run down our streets as Water, freely, fluently,
and impartially; and Righteousness a mighty Stream: And the rather, that you
would strengthen your hands in this work, from the consideration of the
quietness o^ the Nation, during this alteration of Government, which we cannot
but look upon, as a signal pledge and testimony of Gods presence with you, who
stils the raging of the Sea, and the tumults of the People,

II. That as you have cut Rahab, and wounded the Harlot, so you would search
into her intrals, and call the Money-mongers of the Nation to account, and make
them disgorge themselves, of those many millions of Money that they have
unrighteously heaped up to themselves as the Dust of the Streets.

III. That all unrighteousness, and Arbitrary powers, in all Courts of
Judicature and Committees, and what ever has the face^ of oppression, may be
taken away; that the Laws may be regulated, Trading encouraged, Tithes
annihillated, and another way (no^ compulsary) to maintain Ministers settled,
evil men punished, good men rewarded, and the public debts of the Nation
satisfied, according to your engagements at Tripplo, and New Market heaths; the
promises are registered with God, and Freedom is our inheritance.

IIII. That in all places you would appoint men to act under you; that may be
men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, that so we may in some
measure, arrive at the happy days promised, and prophesied of, that our
Officers shall be peace, and our Exactors righteousness; and consider what a
plague an evil man is in Magistracy.

V. That you may avoid those dangerous rocks, of self-seeking, and
self-advancing interests, which former powers have suffered shipwreck upon;
that your ears may be readily open to hear the cries of the poor and needy in
the land, that faces may not be known in judgment, that the poor may not be
subject to the oppression of the rich, nor the rich open to the disorder of the
poor; then shall not destruction be your heritage, nor you be brought low for
oppression, as other powers before you.

VI. That some faithful men may be appointed to take the Petitions of the
people, to whom the miseries and the grievances of the Nation may be truly
presented, that as the Lord hears and avengeth his elect (that cry day and
night unto him) though he tarry long: so the sighs and groans of this
languishing Commonwealth, may at last be heard, that we be no longer sold as
slaves, but that our privileges may be given us at our desires, and our
liberties at our requests; then shall you decree a thing, and it shall be
established unto you, and the light shall shine upon your ways.

VII. That your spirits may not in process of time cool, but that you would
execute judgment, in the morning of your proceedings, and deliver the land
that is nigh spoiled; and in the evening of your days let not your hand rest,
that our reformation may not be nominal, but real; that you would improve this
opportunity that God has given you to the height, for the glory of God, and
good of his people: so shall the upright love you, and men shall call you Trees
of the Lord, Plants of righteousness, God shall be glorified in you, and the
whole Nation shall have cause to bless God for you, and stand by you (as our
selves) with their Lives and Fortunes.

VIII. Consider that the Judgments of the Lord are abroad in the world,
Supreme powers must be emptied from vessel to vessel, until they do appear girt
about the paps with a golden girdle, and then they will not mind their own
interests, no nor their lives, in respect of the good of those whom they serve;
injustice shall be punished as in the late King, for no strong Hold or Sword
can be built or sharpened against Heaven; so shall you be as Joshua not only to
deliver, but to settle the people in Canaan.

IX. Remember what is spoken of the oppressing City; though Babylon should
mount up to Heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength,
yet from me shall spoilers come unto her, says the Lord, Jeremiah 51. 53.

Mr. John Furley, Mr. Thomas Peak, Mr. Richard Allen, Mr. John Vickers, Mr.
Robert Beal, Thomas Curling, Mr. Thomas Radham, Thomas Gibson, Mr. John Aston,
Mr. Thomas Hastewood. Mr. John Drywood. Mr. Nathaniel Strickson.
With diverse hundreds more in a Roll ready to be produced.


