To the Honorable Assembly of COMMONS, In this present PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of diverse of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy and other
Inhabitants of the County of SOMMERSET.
SHOWS,
THAT having with great joy of mind often heard of the pious inclination of
this Honorable Assembly unto the Reformation of Church Government, and having
of late (not without some regret) seen a Petition in the name of the Knights,
Gentlemen and others of this County, tending most to the Confirmation of
Episcopal power: We have thought it our duty likewise to rouse up our
affection unto Gods cause, and in all humility to lay these expressions thereof
at the feet of this great Council, as being (under God) the chief Arbitrator
between our joy and sorrow.

FOr the Present Church Government, of what right it is we may not dispute,
presuming it to be subject to the power of this Honorable Assembly; Neither
does it much import how ancient it is, or how near the Apostles days, seeing
we know that in the days of the Apostles themselves, the mystery of iniquity
began to work, and that by the efficatious operation of the same, the man of
sin has advanced himself from the Episcopal chair to the top of
Antichristian Tyranny. But that this Government is the wisest and most pious
tha^ any people has been blessed withal since the Apostles days (what ever
others may believe) we presume is no part of the Creed of this great Council;
whose godly zeal in purging the corruptions, and punishing the enemy of the
true Church, being already in part made manifest, does give us rather a just
cause to hope that God has yet some further blessing of Reformation for us, to
be wrought by the same hands, In prosecution whereof, if it shall enter into
your hearts at this time to give a deadly wound unto that power, against which
you have received so many Complaints, we are sure you shall not walk in an
unknown path, but such as has been trodden before you by almost all the
Churches of God which have exchanged the superstition and bondage of Rome, for
the glorious light and liberty of the Gospel. Neither may it be conceived as
the least degree of indignity offered to the blessed memory of those ancient or
later Bishops who have so well deserved of the Church of God both in life and
death, if that Government which they have adorned by their singular piety and
virtues being through the corruption and wickedness of those which have
succeeded them made intolerable, shall by your just authority be abolished. Or
if the number and merit of learned and godly Bishops famous in theie
generations be presumed to be a reasonable inducement for the continuation of
that Government, we leave it to consideration of this wise Council, whether
the great and far surpassing multitude of ambi^ious, ungodly, and infamous
Prelates, in most Countries and Ages bypast, be not a more effectual motive
for the extipation of the same. Hereunto if we add the present experience even
in these our days of their many insolences and outrages against the truth and
power of godliness, suppressing and corrupting Gods Ordinances, Vnhollowing
his day, persecuting his Ministers; Their late mischevous attempt to impose on
us and our posterity an insupportable Yoke of servitude and that which
deserves the highest pitch of Zeal and all the bowels of this Honorable
Senate, the notorious multitude of profane and scandalous Ministers, the most
active and malicious enemies unto Reformation, and the authority from which it
is desired. We trust that all this together, with much more well known to
this Honorable Assembly, will be sufficient to justify the fears we have
conceived of so dangerous a power.

WHEREFORE being persuaded in our minds, that it will be a work acceptable
unto God, of great advantage and comfort to the Churches of Christ, and no
less conducing to the safety, peace and strength of all His Majesty's
Kingdoms; We most humbly implore the Authority and zeal of this Honorable
Assembly to proceed unto the full accomplishment of the same; And having laid
the Axe to the root of this Tree, to do unto it as to a plant which the
Heavenly Father has not planted, that neither the spreading boughs of the
same may over-shadow the Vineyard of the LORD, nor the bitter fruit thereof
make sad the heart of the people of GOD any more for ever.

THESE are the desires of your most humble Petitioners, and we are persuaded,
would have been the expressions of Multitudes more of true-hearted Christians
and Subjects, had there not been some indirect practices used in soliciting
the former Petition; Whereby many were won to subscribe thereunto, who have
sithence declared themselves in the point of Episcopacie, to have been at the
doing thereof otherwise affected. Howbeit unto us it is sufficient, that
relying wholly on the good Providence of GOD, the Piety and Wisdom of this
Honorable Assembly, and the sincerity of our own intentions, we cannot want
the comforts of a good hope, while we have the liberty to power out our souls
unto Almighty God to continue and increase his favors and gracious aspect
toward this Honorable and Religious Assembly.

Printed for R. Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop without Lud-gate. 1642.


