To His EXCELLENCY Thomas Lord Fairfax: GENERAL of all the Forces raised by the
Parliament, for the Common Wealth of England.

The Humble Representation of the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers in the
Regiment of Horse, for the County of Northumberland.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year. 1648.

To his Excellency THOMAS LORD FAIRFAX General of all the Forces raised by the
Parliament for the Commonwealth of England.
The humble Representation of the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers in the
Regiment of Horse for the County of Northumberland;
Shows,
THat the people of this Nation, both by Nature, and as they are Englishmen,
are a Freeborn Generation; but by conquest and captivity, under William the
sixth Duke of Nomandies Bastard, they were made slaves, the property of their
Lands removed from the British Natives, to the Norman Invaders; the lands
which were vouchsafed to their occupation, translated from their own
Free-Simples into strange Tennours, by Knight, Homage, Villain, and other
services (to the conqueror and his Norman Earls, Lords, and Knights, which of
his Commanders, he made in every County) their free customs abrogated, their
Laws subverred, and shut up from the English understandings, into the French
Tongue, and all Writs, Processes, and Proceedings in Law, entered and issued
forth in Latin, and the poor Commons (that were used to have all their suits
ended in their several Hundreds once or twice a month) were forced then to
trudge up to London from all parts of the Land, to the new made Norman courts;
and none suffered in any Office, either in Church or Commonwealth, but those
Foreign Invaders. And to infatuate and bewitch the people with an adoration
and sacred Reverence of this Bastards Person and his Succession, his Clergy
(the better to settle his crown) then preached him up to be Gods Vicegerent, the
Lords Anointed, ascribing a certain Deity to his person, that in process of
time, the people (through ignorance) fell down and worshipped the Bastard and
his Successors, making the place of his usual presence as holy ground, to be
reverenced even in his absence; also preaching up the power the Bastard had
thus got over the land, to be the power of God, and he that did resist, to
resist to his own damnation.

And then, utterly to prevent the English of all recovery and relief by their
Parliaments in future, he created Lords by his Patent and Prerogative, to sit
by succession in Parliament, as Representers of his conquest and tyranny over
us, and not by election of the people, as Representers and Patrons of the
Commonwealth.

And to add unto this, to make his usurpation firm and inviolable, he subdued
the Law-giving power of the free people of England in their Parliaments, to the
Negative voice of Himself and Posterity, and nothing to be had or held, neither
Law, Land, or Liberty, but by Grace, by Royal Grant, or the like; as if our
selves were naturally their born slaves, and nothing our own of Right. And
under the yoke of this Norman captivity and villanage in every of the
Premises, with the most miserable effects and fruits thereof, we have bin held
by that succession, even to this Day.

And this King, to uphold the constitution and settlement of those principles
and forms of Tyranny, and in them h^s Dominion over us, brought a cruel and
bloody war upon the Nation; against whom, with your Excellency, under the
Authority of Parliament, we have freely engaged: to the end we might rescue the
Legislative powers of our English Parliaments, our free customs, and Native
Rights, from the bondage of that captivity, and so free our selves and all the
people, from the common oppressions of the Land, by a settlement of a just and
equal Government of Right and Freedom. And now it has pleased God to bless our
Engagement with an happy conquest over the cap^tal enemy of the people, and to
subdue him and his party under the power of the Parliament; we have e^pected
that the Parliament (being fully enabled) should set this Commonwealth at
Freedom, remove our Oppressions, and bring the capital Offenders and Destroyers
of the People to justice, without respect of Persons. But instead of this
discharge of their Trust, we find that they increase and multiply our
oppressions, countenance our enemies, reject and slight the just Directions and
Petitions of the People for common Right and Freedom; Discourage, and sometime
Imprison, and otherwise persecute the Promoters and Presenters, and burn their
Petitions by the hand of the common Hangman: (an Act so abhorred, as never to
be forgotten!) and betake themselves to a compliance and Treaty with our
conquered enemy, courting his pleasure, and allowing him a Negative Voice in
the pasting of all Acts of Parliament; whereby our Indemnity, our Laws, and
Liberties, are all subjected to his concession; his Will advanced above all
Law, above the Parliament and People; and himself put out of the reach of
Justice, and made accompt^ble to none.

Unto which yoke of Norman captivity (after all the blood that has bin spilt
against it) we are loath to be subjected again, as we see both we and all the
People must needs be, except the Army interpose betwixt the people and their
destroyers, and make good their Engagement at New-Market-Heath, with all their
Remonstrances, Declarations, and Promises to the people

May it therefore please your Excellency, to take these premises into your
timous and serious thoughts, and before it be too late, to improve that
opportunity of strength and power which God has now put into your hands, for
the relief and release of this oppressed long captivated Nation; that both we
and all the people may thereby be made safe and free: And in Order thereunto,
we humbly crave leave to propose these our subsequent des^res, in the behalf of
our selves and the Commonwealth.

1. That all Monopolies relating either to Sea or Land yet remaining, be
forthwith abolished.

2. That the exaction of Tithes, and all manner of Impropriations, be removed;
and that the public Ministry be otherwise provided for.

3. That Excise upon all Inland commodities be taken off, and that no Taxes or
Cesments be levied upon the People, but by the old way of Subsidies.

4. That a sufficient competency out of the Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands,
Kings Revenues, and Delinquents Estates, be ordered and set apart for the
discharge of the whole Arrears of the Soldiery, and constant payment of the
Army, whereby the people may be wholly eased of all free quarter and taxes for
the Army, and the Soldiery also satisfied.

5. That all Parliament-members, Committees, Excise-men, Sequestrators, etc. be
called to an impartial account for the moneys of the State.

6. That all enclosed Commons, and other ancient donations and rights belonging
to the poor (in the several Counties and Parishes of the Land) be restored to
their ancient and proper use, for the good of the comunalty.

7. That the ancient Tenures of Lands in the county of Northumberland,
Cumberland, etc. which have bin destroyed by several Earls and Lords of late
times, to the undoing of the comunalty in those parts, and utterly dis-inabling
them from all good Nurture in Learning or Trades, and forcing them from
Generation to Generation, to be hinds, half hinds, quarter hinds, shepherds,
and herdsmen, be now enquired into; and if no better, that the ancient right of
the old rents (for the good of those counties and commonwealth) be restored
again.

8. That all destitute Widows and poor Orphans, which have lost their husbands
and parents, and all Soldiers that have lost their limbs in the service of the
Parliament against the King, be comfortably provided for, by way of constant
stipend, and education of the children to Trades.

9. That public workhouses be erected for prevention of beggars, vagabonds,
and idle persons.

10. That till the time of more easy provision of payment for the Soldiery,
that no moneys for the Army be paid to the Parliament, their Committees, or
Deputies; but to such Treasurers of the Army as your Excellency shall appoint,
and to be collected by the Soldiery.

11. That a trade of Fishing upon the English coasts be settled by the State,
for the good of the commonwealth.

12. That the c^pital delinquents and incendiaries of the people be brought to
speedy justice; and in the first place, that the King (instead of a Treaty) be
brought to a fair trial, to make answer for all the innocent blood that has
bin spilt in the land, and for other things whereof he stands charged by the
Parliaments own Declaration; which shows the reasons of making no farther
Address unto him.

13. That the charge of the Army against the eleven impeached members be made
good; and all the members that sare in the Iuncto, when the Parliament fled to
the Army for refuge, be expelled the House.

14. That encouragement and protection be given to such as shall prosecute any
lawful charge or impeachment of treason, or other crime against any member in
Parliament; and that the members in Parliament, without respect of persons, be
disrobed of their protection, and left open and liable to the Law.

15. That Inquisition be made after the blood of colonel Rainsborough.

16. That all Judges, and other ministers of the State, be severely interdicted
from receiving any indictment or charge against any person, for any thing done
in relation to the first or second war against the King; and that all such so
imprisoned, be discharged; with reparations out of their prosecuters estates;
and in case of in ability, the said prosecuters to be answerably imprisoned.

17. That a period be set to this Parliament.

18. That an equal proportion throughout the several counties for the
Representatives in Parliament be assigned.

19. That a constant succession of Parliaments be settled, to be called and
chosen of course by the people, at a fixed day every year, or two years, as
shall be judged most safe and needful, and the same to end of course.

20. That our Parliaments for the future be secured and cleared from the
Negative Voice of any single person or persons whatsoever.

21. That no man henceforth presume to fit in this, or any other Parliament, by
patent or prerogative, or that is not elected by the free choice of the people.

22. That all Statutes, Laws, and Acts of Parliament, be made and ru^ only in
the Name of the Commons of England assembled in Parliament.

23. That no persons whatsoever that are Lawmakers, be Law-executioners, but
that a clear distinction be preserved and kept inviolable betwixt these two
principles and pillars of the Commonwealth for ever, that they be not
confounded together in the same persons, for fear of mine to the freedom of the
people.

24. That all Officers of the Common wealth be made to enjoy their places but
at a certain limited time: at the expiration whereof themselves to give an
account of their Stewardship, and continue no longer in their places, except by
a new election.

25. That no Parliament Magistrate, or other person whatsoever have power to
make any compulsive Law, or execute any Mulct or punishment touching matters of
Conscience and Religion: but that all civil people subject to the Laws of the
common wealth, though of several opinions and practices, (not being destructive
to the State) be protected and saved from all violence and injury in good Name,
person and estate.

26. That all Warrants and Commitments by virtue of any pretended Privilege or
Prerogative, of during pleasure, not showing the particular fact or crime, be
with the greatest severity intirdicted and declared void, for ever; with
provision for future security from such Arbitrary violence upon the people.
That all such (...) are so imprisoned be with Reparations released; and that
Lient. Col. John Lilburn and many others that have long suffered in that nature
by the House of Lords, may have ample and full Reparations out of their
Lordships Estates.

27. That the cruelties and extortions of Goalers be severely provided against;
and that for future no Fees be exacted from prisoners; but that fitting
accommodation both for lodging and diet for them, and a sufficient competency of
livelihood for Goalers at the public cost be provided.

28. That no man be kept in prison above a month; but in that space to be
brought to a trial by a lawful Jury of his equals; or else to be discharged of
course.

29. That no man be impressed to serve in the Wars.

30. That our Laws be few and plain, free from all ambiguous meanings, and all
in the English Tongue; and to be digested and printed in a Vollume; and one to
be provided to be kept in every Church throughout the land; and to be read over
at several seasons in open Congregation.

31. That all persons stand alike liable to the Laws of the Land, in all cases,
both criminal and civil: and that all protections by any pretended privilege
or prerogative whatsoever, be declared Void.

32. That no more trudging up to Westminster from all parts of the Land, for
the trial of suits of Law be had, but that (as of old) all suits both criminal
and civil, be ended in the several Hundreds.

33. That no person whatsoever, that has Lorn Arms for, or assisted the King,
in his Rebellion against the Parliament and people; or that otherwise is found
an enemy to this foundation of Justice and Freedom, be neither chosen, nor have
Voice in the choice of any Parliament Members, or other Officers, or Ministers
of State whatsoever.

34. That a solemn Contract upon there and the like Principles of Common Right
and Freedom be drawn betwixt the People and their Representors, to be
unalterable for ever.

35. That the respective Regiments of the Army (in order to their solemn
Engagement made at New market Heath) do with all possible expedition choose two
(or more) Deputies or Trustees (persons of known approved fidelity, for the
freedom of the Common wealth,) and each County also to do the like, jointly to
sit, consult and act in the behalf of themselves, the people, and Army; and
that the removal of our oppressions, and obtainment of our Freedom, according
to the premises abovesaid, be the only work of their Agitation.

36. That the said Deputies or Trustees be limited in their Session, to the
space of two months; at the expiration whereof their Session to terminate;
except continued by a new Election: and twelve days before the said Term be
expired, a new choice successively and of course, to be made till the
accomplishment of the Work; and that the former Deputies be made accountable to
the succeeding.

37. That this Council be a free Council, no Member thereof to be awed or
discountenanced in his Vote, by threats and frowns from any superior Officer:
and that no person whatsoever therein have a Negative Voice.

38. That till the accomplishment of this Work, in behalf of the Army and
People, that no disbanding of any part of the Soldiery be: except of persons
ill affected and dissentors from this Expedition.

For these things we declare, and with our Swords in our hands, as we are
Soldiers we challenge them as the price and purchase of our Blood, to live and
die for them against all opposers whatsoever: and as we are English men we do
claim them as our own Inheritance and Birthright: And humbly beg of your
Excellency That you will be pleased to give us and the Soldiery encouragement
therein, and so to appear before us, for the happy accomplishment of these
things: that both we and all the people, and the Generations that are yet
unborn may have just cause to bless God for your righteous conduct.

Signed in behalf of the Regiment. Joshua Wetwang. Edw. Hawnby. Edward Leake.
John Moors. John Grice. Francis Bartholmew. Edmund Badger. William Farrow.
John Pain. Tho. Baxter. John Baynes. John Griffin. Richard Leake. John Harison.



