TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of England, etc.
The Humble Petition and Representation of diverse well-affected of the County
of South-hampton.
THAT having seriously considered the wonderful Providence of God in the
Revolutions of late years, we cannot but greatly rejoice in his goodness, who
has so miraculously delivered us, and broke the Yoke of our Oppressors. We
still remember how victoriously he went forth with this Parliaments Forces by
Sea and Land, destroying the powers of our former enemies at home and abroad.
We also thankfully acknowledge his gracious Providence in defeating and
strangely disappointing the Counsels of others of late, who treading in the
steps of our former Oppressors made many of us fear our latter end would be
worse then our beginning. But the Almighty turned their Counsels into
foolishness, and has in Peace restored the Power and Authority of the Nation
to the People, whose undoubted right it is: and you their Representatives to
the place from whence you have been by force and injustice thus long
restrained; since which time our Calamities have been numerous and
insupportable, our Brethrens blood streaming in several parts of the world, our
Liberties scornfully trodden underfoot, our Treasures expended on Instruments
of our slavery at home, and abroad in personal quarrels* our Old Enemies
encouraged, Profaneness increased, the whole Nation oppressed and impoverished
and all this to set up an Interest contrary and destructive to that of the
Nation, and raise a party that has skinned the people to clothe themselves. But
our God having now restored our liberties, so that henceforth we hope through
Gods blessing, the Power and Peace, the Treasure and Trade of the Nation, the
Lives and Consciences, Liberties and Estates of the people thereof shall never
again be disposed of by, or sacrificed to the lust and ambition of a particular
Person or Family, or any other Usurpers of Power over the People: But that by
you and the Peoples successive equal Representatives in their general Courses,
all the concernments of the Nation shall be freely debated and determined
without any Check or Obstruction from a distinct and contrary Interest; And
that Religion may flourish the Gospel, with the Ordinances, Ministers and sober
Professors thereof may be maintained and encouraged, the Freedom, Rights and
Privileges of the People and their Representatives may be ever kept sacred and
inviolable, the Law equally Administered, and Courts of Justice freed from
Corruption. And in order to the security of the People and your selves, whilst
these great works and the settlement of the Government of the Commonwealth is
upon you, that the Militia and strength of the People may be speedily put into
a due form under the Power and Command of those persons of interest who have
showed their faithfulness and integrity to the Commonwealth without any
defection: So shall our enemies be ashamed, and all their attempts like his
that built Jericho, when God had destroyed it: and the Generations to come
shall bless God for their liberties (buried by others, but) revived by you in
making us a Happy Free State: for the attainment whereof, we together with our
prayers faithfully and freely promise to stand by you to the uttermost hazard
of the lives and fortunes of us.

Thursday, May 26. 1659.
THE House being informed that some Gentlemen of Hampshire were at the door,
they were called in, and being come to the Bar, Mr. Tulse on the behalf of
himself and the rest presented an humble Petition, and prayed that the same
might be read, which was Entitled The humble Petition and Representation of
diverse of the well affected of the County of South-hampton: And after the
Petitioners were withdrawn, was read; and afterward the Petitioners were again
called in, and Mr. Speaker gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, The House has read your Petition, and found therein many sober and
discreet expressions of your affections, and tenderness of the good and welfare
of the Nation, and will take the Particulars in the Petition, into their
consideration in due time. And for your good expressions and affections, they
have commanded me to give you their thanks: and I do give you the thanks of
this House accordingly.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street. 1659.


