TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of diverse afflicted WOMEN, in behalf of M: John Lilburn
Prisoner in Newgate.
HUMBLY SHOWS,
THat seeing nothing is more manifest then that God is pleased often times to
raise up the weakest means to work the mightiest effects, and inasmuch as the
holy Prophet David himself was prevented, by the timely addresses of weak
woman, from a most resolved purpose of shedding of Blood: Although we have
heard, to our no small grief, that no word of comfort has been drawn from you
by all the many Petitions presented unto you, in behalf of Mr. Lilburn, yea our
hearts melting in tenderness toward so great and causeless a sufferer, and*
being astonished with fear of the heaviest wrath of God, if your new Authority
should lay its foundation in his innocent blood, whose life has escaped, and
innocence been manifested in the worst of times, we could not forbear to make
this our humble application unto you, beseeching you to consider. Whether the
sparing of blood be not more suitable to the work before you, It being denied
unto David, because his hands had been dipped in blood, to build a Temple for the
Lord: and we humbly offer it unto you, Whether the ready pronenesse to the
spilling of blood in the last Parliament all along, although the Cause were
just, being seldom without some hardness of heart, too often with delight,
and many times with revenge, were not the maine cause that God forsook them,
and gave them up to strong delusions, placeing their security in worldly policy
and outward strength, and upon confidence thereof* doing all kind of injustice,
even as they did to Mr. Lilburne in their barbarous proceedings toward him,
rather then in the ways of Christ, who came not to destroy, but save men's
lives, neither did it profit them at all either with God or man. Then their
Voice was Jacobs, their tongues and Declarations filled ever with the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, or their frequent seeking of God, and holding
days of Prayer, whilst their hands were the hands of Esau, and their feet were
swift to shed blood, whilst their ears were deaf to Petitioners and Prisoners,
the Widow and the Fatherless were neglected by them, making no conscience of
trampling all the known ancient Liberties of the Nation under their feet, and
putting their Wills into Laws, as the Act for banishing Mr* Lilburn, in a
higher measure then all the tyrants that ever were before them, and for which
they are now cast out as unsavory Salt.

All that you have to say, as yet, for your selves, is, That they were broken
oss, that you might be grafted in Well: because of walking in the ways of
unbelief (such are worldly policies) they were broken off: and you stand by
faith and a good conscience both toward God and Man: Be not high minded, but
fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare
not you: Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God: on them that fell,
severity: but toward you goodness, if you continue in his goodness, otherwise
you also shall be cut off: For he is yesterday, today, and the same for ever.

Al which we crave leave to alude unto in your case, that, if it be possible,
we may prevail with* you to propose unto your selves to be unlike unto them in all things, not to walk in any way of their evil ways, as in pride, in keeping
at distance with other People, or in Apparel, Diet, housing, and Fantastique
Fashions, complements, couches and congees, Clothing in Scarlet, and Faring
deliciously every day, or in covetousness, advancing their estates, Families,
and Relations, upon the ruins of the People, taxing them without measure,
laying also of heavy burdens upon them, whilst Pharisee-like, they felt not the
weight with one of their fingars: scorned information, and despised Petitions:
yea, were come to that height, that none durst epproach their door with any
word concerning the Liberoies of the Nation. These things manifestly abounded
in them; but, os any thing, we, beseech you to watch over your selves against
the spilling of Blood, especially of the blood of the Innocent, which cries
aloud for vengeance in the ears of God.

And truly we cannot possibly conceive, but in your permitting M. Lilburn to be
imprisoned, and to be put upon his Trial for his life upon that sordid and
groundless ins^aring Act of theirs, you are so far guilty of the exposing his
innocent blood to an unjust hazard: and if the Jury should be so far misled in
their Judgments, as to find him guilty thereupon, as surely none that have any
spark of conscience will do, you cannot be acquitted in the sight of God: For
you ought to repeal that bloody Act, and deliver him out of that snare; it
being the most unheard of oruelty that ever was, that that Parliament shall be
justified by you, voting a man's estate from him, his person to banishment, and
enacting him to be a Felon, for what in it self was at the most but a Trespass,
and a Jury to be countenanced, encouraged, yea terrified with a party of horse
to find him guilty of Felony thereupon.

You see the thing is so gross, that even Women perceive the evil of it: We beg
you therefore, as upon our knees, not to persist in your resolution of making
good a^ Act so notoriously evil: and that you will not do the less* because
petitioned, another mortal disease of your Predecessors, nor abhor to change
your purpose once taken, though never so pernicious, an evil spirit which led
the ^ate King. Bishops, Lords, and Prelatical Clergy and will as many as use it,
to unavoidable ruin: but that you would be pleased to put a stop to M.
Lillburns Trial, and to make full inquiry into the whole matter upon which the
late Parliament grounded their unj^st Sentence and Act.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

