TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Both Houses of the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND ASSEMBLED AT
WESTMINSTER: The humble PETITION of diverse thousands, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Freeholders of the County of Surrey, together with the Borough of Southwark.
Presented to the Lords and Commons assembled at Westminster, on Tuesday the
16. of May, 1648.
YOur Petitioners having earnestly besought of God, and expected many years
from your wisdoms and Councels a full and comfortable redress of the grievous
miseries of this Kingdom; which blessing having hitherto failed us through the
manifold sins of us all, and diverse miscarriages: We, among others the
Freeborn Subjects of this Realm, crave humble leave to express our pious
affections to the public good, and our earnest desires for the preventing of
the continuance and increase of further evils, as follows:

That the KINGS MAJESTY, our only lawful Sovereign, may be restored to His due
Honor, and just Rights, according to our Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
which have been Taken by us, in the sight of God, and from which no power on
earth can absolve us; And therefore our Souls do yerne, and our Consciences do
grieve for it.

That HIS MAJESTY may forthwith be Established in His Throne, according to the
Splendour of His Ancestors; and that HIS MAJESTY, may for the present, come up
to this Parliament at Westminster with Honor and Safety to enter with you
into a Personal Treaty, for the composing of all former Differences, and the
granting of all lawful Desires.

That we, with all the Freeborn Subjects of this Realm may be governed no
otherwise then by the known Laws and Statutes now in force in this Kingdom.

That your speedy and grave wisdoms may prevent the miserable and unnatural
War beginning again in this distracted and exhausted Kingdom, and to prevent
by fair Treaty the Forces ready to be brought in from the Neighbor Kingdom,
and from other Nations not unlike to invade us: which we conceive (through the
mercy of God) may be soon Effected, by timely providing for the premises.

That not only the Ordinances made of late by the goodness and wisdom of the
two Houses of Parliament against the unsupportable and most wastfull burden of
Free-quartering of Soldiers may be duly executed, but forthwith order and care
may be taken as becomes Patriots that love their Country, for the Disbanding
of all Armies, (having their due Arreares paid) that we may enjoy (without
terrors and jealousies) a blessed and long-lookt-for Peace.

FINIS.
Printed at LONDON, in the Year, 1648.


