TO THE LORD MAYOR AND Court of Aldermen of the CITY of LONDON.
IT having been ever since the Reign of King John the undoubted Right of the
Citizens of London to Choose out of themselves two Sheriffs for the City of
London and County of Middlesex, which Right has been Confirmed to them by
several Acts of Parliament; and whereas the Citizens of London Assembled in a
Common Hall on the 24th day of June last past, did according to Ancient Custom,
by Majority of Votes, then Elect Thomas Papillon and John Dubois Merchants, to
be Sheriffs of the said City of London and County of Middlesex for the Year
ensuing; We Inhabitants and Freeholders of the County of Middlesex, in behalf
of our selves and others Freeholders and Inhabitants of the said County, have
thought it our Duty to desire your Lordship and this Court to Summon the said
Thomas Papillon and John Dubois to appear before you, and then according to
Ancient Usage require them to enter into Bonds for holding the Office of
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex for the ensuing Year; and in case they shall
be contented to give Bond for fo doing, that then they the said Thomas Papillon
and John Dubois, who have been according to the City Charter duly Elected
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, may have the usual Oaths Administered to them
which they ought to take for the due Execution of their Office; and that no
other Persons upon any pretense whatsoever, who have not been duly Elected by
Majority of Votes, may be Admitted or Sworn by your Lordship or this Court to
Execute the Office of Sheriffs of London or Middlesex, it being absolutely
contrary to your Oaths and the Charter of the City; and seeing our Lives and
Fortunes are so highly concerned in the due Execution of the Laws, of which
none but duly Elected Sheriffs can be Legal Executors; We think it necessary
to represent to your Lordship and this Court, that many and great Disorders and
Dangers are like to fall not only upon the City of London and County of
Middlesex, but likewise on the whole Kingdom, if any Persons who have not been
rightfully Chosen by the Major part of the Citizens of London qualified to
Elect, should be admitted or Sworn Sheriffs, because the Law accounts such
Persons Capital Offenders, who shall under Pretense of being Sheriffs of London
and Middlesex, (but indeed are not Legally so) Presume to Dispose of our Lives
and Estates.

We therefore desire your Lordship and this Court to take into your serious
Consideration our Just and necessary desires in this particular, which is of so
great Importance to the whole Kingdom; and make bold to tell your Lordship and
this Court, that all the fatal Consequences which shall happen by your not
doing what Justice in this Case requires of you, will be laid at your Doors.

London, Printed for E. Smith at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhil. 1682.


