My EDICT Royal.
HEar O England, God will sunder thee into small pieces, as the Finer does fill
his melting pot; for Jehovah his fierce wrath is kindled for to pluck up root
and branch, for the soul of the Land cries unto the Lord, for the fierce
vengance to be poured upon (...) oppressors, for God will thunder from Heaven
upon ^e habitation of wickedness, for the whole Land is run ^o perjury against
the Holy One of Israel; for thus says God, Your Faith, your Oaths, your
Protestation, your Covenants, your Fasts, your Vows, in all these your Souls
stand bound; which Covenants and Contracts God does call to seal with your
blood thereby, for to free your Souls from the death of Hell, in whichye shall
be bound till every Covenant be fully satisfied, every man's Spirit both dead
and alive have satisfaction.

Therefore houl, houl, houl, houl houl, houl, that is, your six days work, the
creation simptome, 6000 years before the expiation of your sufferings.

Thus says Jehovah the great King, The whole Government of this Nation is
accursed before me; di^ge your consciences, your hearts, and your bloody hands,
and then seek me empty, naked, clean, without your own wisdom, and then I will
inspire life, righteousness, that thereby your souls may feed on me; but (...)
are Traitors against my righteous Son Jesus, and (...) pure Law which ye so
often name, and always transgress, making it your image of stealth, that by
its pretense ye have cloaked your villainy, and robbed the Nations liberty. Thus
says God, Am I a theif? am I a Covenant-breaker? am I a murderer? am I a false
witness bearer? am I a circumventor? am I an idolator? am I a liar? am I an
oppressor? or am I unjust? or am I a perjured one? No; I am holy, and ye wicked
hell hounds are all that is there declared.

Thus says Jehovah, An Offering I require from the whole session conveened,
that is one piece of silver that is not thus polluted, either by cousning,
cheating, oppression, murder, deceit, fellon, profane blasphemy.
Covenant Breaking, sacrilege, robbery, free from the blood of the Widow, and
fatherless, innocent and simple; but ye are a conspiracy of Cain, that wicked
one that slew the innocent, and ye are wicked rebels, Traitors against the
Lord, this Nation, and the peace of your own Souls; and ye are that blosomed
whore, that daring the Sun, Men and Angels, prescribe me my way to be served in
their form.

This is Gods Word in the Mount of Israel's King, unto the Covenant-breakers:
God will cut you off every one man, woman, and child in his fierce wrath, and
he will give you your portion with the damned Spirits in Hell fire, to be
tormented day and night for ever, THAU.

Thus says Jehovah, I sent my Messenger to show the fierce wrath that is
kindled in me against ye Rebels, that transgress your Covenant for a frown of a
mortal man, whose breath is vain, his strength corruption.

Thus says Jehovah that made man and all things Do you reverence and fear
dust, nay, the worst of men, and dare you transgress the Commands of God, he is
the life of the Creation.

Thus says God, Because ye fear man more then me, into the hands of men have I
given your lives, your wives and children that know not me, and they shall deal
with you, as they that know not God, do unto Rebels and Traitors against Gods
Covenant, the Peoples Cause, the Nations Liberty, by you from the just owners
detained.

And hear now ye Traitors and Rebels against Jehovah, he will be avenged on you
all, and for this cause, first you judged every one in the notion of public
Faith. Faith is Gods holdment of the Soul unto himself by pure obedience in
man. Faith is the glorious demonstrator of God in man unto men his fellow
creatures, as men and women in Nations and Countries.

Thus says God, Because you have made my Name to be by you blasphemed in all
Countries adjacent, so will I make the sound of your punishment, sound as loud
and large an echo: first, you falsified your trust to you committed, and let
my honor and glory fall to be nothing worth, thereby to make your selves great
by robing all that ever engaged with an honest heart in my Name. So were they
cozened by your pretended Faith, my Covenant; and by this, cheat the Soldiers,
wages that the Nations Faith was engaged for to pay: it fell from 20 s. unto
2.6. and 169 s. Remember Robert Norwoods Sail, and then the public Faith at 1
s. a pound, and 1 s. and 4 d. are there not brave rates, yea, Traitors for Gods
holy Covenant to be bought and sold by perjured persons: the poor lands must
trust, and cheat.

Thus when it was let fall thus long, your Emmissio did purchase it, and the
sums are gathered into one great sum. Then you state your land where you
please, and cause a false value to be set on it; that for one pound, that cost
you one shilling four pence, the value of four pound, nay some 4 l. this is
villainy, and out of villainy you must erect us a form of God-serving: No, you
shall not lay your wicked yoke upon our neck, God will deliver us from ye
accursed men.

Thus God has delivered you into the hands of them that seek your lives, the
Lands Liberty. Take notice people I see the cause stated upon which the effect
does proceed, which is this judgment. The chief Actors in this conspiracy
against the Lord God Almighty shall be taken, and their gold and silver put in
pots, and they staked in the middle of their stuff, and so be burnt to ashes,
their wives and children slain with the sword, and if with child, the child
the spaun of their lust, broyled on the coals, their kindred slain ascending
and descending, their Lands return unto the Commonwealth to pay the Soldier
and the public Faith, that they have so traitorously betrayed. This is the
Word from Jehovah upon the Rebels.

And further, their whole Lands in this cause to be accounted felons goods, and
to return by the Statute of Trover and Conversion.

And thus says God, All Lands and Conveyances, that have been passed by these
men, shall return to be disposed by the Commonwealth, as it is true Lord over
all that it did employ, out of which the poor shall have a sufficiency, that
they may praise Jehovah for his mercy; but for my part not one penny, for I go
for FRANCE, and to ROME, and so to JERUS ALEM; only my Title, the whole
Forrest-Lands named Albion, now named England, as Heir apparent unto King
Stephen; and in my Title was Richard the second, and in my holdment from BARRON
TONI the ancient Forrester of England, and likewise our Title of ABBAR GAUVENI,
in which Title lies my LORD PROTECTOR's holdment unto his true Line; but the
LORD has cut him off and his issue, only in Clapool is something found. As I
am a man, my soul mourns; but GOD's Word must be wrote THAU, for he is my
younger Brother's Son.

Thus says JEHOVAH, I have sent unto him by breathings, and he will contemn
me even before Men and Angels.

Therefore says the LORD, Write this man, and his whole issue to destruction
every one, only in Clapool is somewhat found.

This is wrote the 12 day of the first Month, commanded by JEHOVAH, AB,
signifying the deliverance of my people the Jews.

Now I shall declare unto the whole earth the cause both of my burning and
breaking my Sword, Pistols, and Musket, and the spoiling the Barrel of Powder,
as also the burning the Bible termed the Word of GOD by ignorants, not knowing
GOD. And if any Man do wonder at its burning, it is because his soul knows
not the LORD that bought him: and further, his Name is not write in the book of
life; for all wonder and marvel, and admiration it is until CHRIST be come; but
when Faith is planted, wonderment sesseth, GOD reigns, Man is made obedient,
then as he made an idol depending upon that dead Letter. Christ is the living
life of righteousness, which is the spiritual life, invalved under them dark
expressions; and when CHRIST is come, the Soul is Gospel, GOD's voice is
sounded, the new Creation erected, Adam restored to his first sight. There is
the whole Mystery of the Gospel's History, these Words are true Scripture, The
Letter kills; but the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST is life eternal, opening dark
dead men into the Communion with the Father.

Therefore all People, Tongues and Nations, Know, That I did not burn the BIBLE
in contempt of GOD, or in contempt of its Record from GOD, for then I had
condemned my own life, which is framed in obedience unto that litteral
expression; but thus I had made an Idol of the BIBLE, because its living life
was not then rose in me, although thus much I had offered for the glory in the
Gospel contained.

Thus I forsook my Trade, made Restoration according to God's command upon me,
forsook all glory of this World, went out from men, became a Nazarite unto God,
yet all this was but short.

TAke notice people, who amongst you are come thus far, and all people know,
you are no nearer GOD, then light is to darkness, for all your praying,
preaching nor hearing; but so far as in Truth you practice GOD's command, and
you must be in the Faith of JESUS before any obedience can stand, and this work
does wholly undo man's wisdom, and inlets GOD's righteousness.

If you say, I burned the word of GOD.

I say, the Word of GOD cannot be burned, for it is GOD's Righteousness in my
Soul planted, and unto Men by my life declared in these Words, Sell all that
you have, and give unto the poor, and follow me: Do you not all know this to be
true Scripture? No, it is not true in you until you in obedience so act, that
the life of GOD may reign in your mortal bodies; for ye are to be wholly clean
in Body, Soul, and Spirit, and this Trial I state to try you by, yea, most have
high Names in your mouths, but whose heart is freed from covetousness? ye see
GOD is holy, are ye not lustful? who amongst you all does know one woman only,
for production of life; but ye are whore-masters and whores says Jehovah, that
do know and not bring forth.

THus says GOD, The dogs and toads are that you count the basest in the
Creation, is cleaner then all men and woman under heaven; for they act only
for life, and ye for your abominable lusts.

Thus take notice, what can be begotten, after he child does in the womb
testify the act.

But thus says God, he will cleanse the earth from all this beastly lust, by
fire, by sword, by famine, by plague, and pestilence, and scropian diseases,
till it be consumed unto his beautiful State, which the burning the Lord's tent
does configurate; for all things of never so great worth or curiosity will God
destroy until he come unto his state of beauty, and that is his own
righteousness which will be Christ's reign a thousand years according to the
record, for every word must have spiritual fulfilling and litteral also, which
is Monarch the fifth, the Jews Lords, the earth restored, for Jehovah shall
reign on Mount Sion, and the holy Law shall go forth of Jerusalem.

NOw I shall declare the truth of Jehovahs command unto me thus, three days
before I came down to the House, the name I know not by reason of its
Castrophe, ing, ing, ing, thus my body fainted, and my spirit in me retained
scarce strength to move my frame, and then my teeth beat in my head as the
fiercest ague that ever fell on man, my knees smote together, my hands quaked,
and my water fell from me, for the presence of God was terrible unto me; then
came the word of Jehovah, and said unto me, go down and slay the rebels against
me, and make sharp thy sword, for they have broken their Covenants, and stand
with their swords, saying we will break our Covenants in which our souls are
bound unto God; then I cried, O Lord will thou destroy the righteous with the
wicked? and the Lords wrath was kindled against me, and and said, go execute my
wrath on the rebels against me. Then the Lord commanded to burn his Tent only
save the Tent staff, and burn the Priests garments, with all that I had;
whereupon I began to burn many things, and my own books, for all books do but
image the life of some thing from the life expressing the true thing, and are
dead idols when you come to die, what good can all the written books in the
world do you, they are but dead letters, nay living men cannot save you, and
except Jesus Christ dwell in you; yea are reprobates, for he only is the word
of God that was made flesh, and he is the reconciler unto the father, I and my
Father are one, so the Scripture and the word of God abides for ever and
cannot be divided, but it does divide all dividings, and indraw all dividings
into one unity Satis Rex.

Then the Lord said when I was burning and got men to help me, Stay thine hand
thy sacrifice is accepted; then I burnt no more, the multitude began to rage,
and I said, may not I do what I will with my own? and I brought my gown, and
before all the people this was my shrine of shift in and by my trade I did
cheat and cozen the people, and threw it in the fire, and said whosoever does
not in all he does perserve every man's good, equal with his own, is a thief
and a murderer, which is but thus much, Love thy neighbor as thy self, this is
the Gospel where it is acted; and the day before I came over and returned back,
because they were gone, and that night the Lord did command me to hire two pair
of Oars, the one to carry me over and to stay on me both till I came back, and
give them twelve shillings for their day, and said unto them it is the King of
Isreal's pay, and know I cannot go over under, so has the Lord commanded me
when I come by water, and my pay and purse would scarce before given two pence.

This is the truth, Jehovah is my witness: now when I had don burning, the
people did rage so, that I was fain to go to boat with my sword drawn, and one
Roll Tichburn with me, and I borrowed an old sword for him to have in his
hand, but he knew nothing at all, only my safty from the people that did stone
us in the boat, and I cannot go without a a guard by reason of the heathen rage,
and imagine a vain thing, then I came thinking I had my petition, but it was
left on the table at home, and I came into the Loby, and spoke to Master Hull,
that he would help me to deliver it, and he said any scivile courtesy he would
do, but I must give it to a Member, and I said I know no men their, presently I
went down by the Lords command, for he said their was not enough, for all
should hear that the godly might fear. Then I went down unto the house, and had
two mess of broth and two pots of Ale for Tichburn and my self, then I was
commanded by Jehovah, for to go, and coming to the door, the doorkeeper of
the Loby pressed me betwixt the door and the wall, whereupon I came in I sliped
of my cloak, and drew my sword, and ran at him so hard, that the point came
within a foot of the hand, and would not enter, then I swange my sword round
about to have killed all that was nigh me; then I run to the door and strock it
with my foot, and then they gat hold on me, and threw me down and took away my
sword and committed me, now since God has shown me his meaning which is thus,
he gideth and governs all things, and caused me to preach his wrath that is
kindled against you all, to cut you off clean from the earth, only for a small
seed of his spirit detracted it; but as Jehovah lives, if they separate not
themselves, you shall all fall together, because the Lord caused me to preach
to them the danger they are in, with the hazard of my life. Lift not up your
heads, ye rebellious sons of wrath, for thus says Jehovah that I shall with
that sword and my stasse, although it would not cut them, I shall fight with an
hundred of Baals champions, I mean the chief Covenant-breakers, those that
robbed the soldier of his due earned wages, or them that felloniously stole
the faith of the Nation, with the promting, prating Priests, and by this
combat, the whole earth shall know who is God, Thau Rex Israel, let Jehovah
reign over all rebellious flesh.

But my hand shall not touch any of you, except as is stated, and for this let
all people that fear the Lord, praise the Lord that has tried his Anointed
unto the death, and yet has kept his hand from the life taking away of any
one; and though my hands shall be clean, you shall not escape, Jehovah has
sworn it, therefore you that fear the Lord assembly not your selves for lucre,
nor any end, for if ye will not hear by Jehovah, when God does bring the man
slayer, he shall make no difference because you have been warned, and ye harden
your necks against the holy God that would save you. Take warning, take
warning, take warning, fear, tremble, and depart their place and company, least
ye be partakers of their plagues.

Now all people see your liberty by my president amongst wicked men your lord
rulers, by their own unjust laws: they sent for me to examine me before a
Committee, and some friends were at prison, and went along with me, but because
of their wickedness, they are fearful of every wind, and according to their
wills, establish for our English laws; no man must hear me examined, but one or
two pressed in. The first queries were frivolus, as where I lived, and had I
not been at Rome, and my clothes did did trouble them, and they asked me who
gave me money for my clothes, I answered by their asking that question they
were free from charity, for they were to clothe the naked and feed the hungry.
Then they did ask why were my sleeves so laced, I said it was the Glob in the
four Spheres holdment, and I told them that they were no wiser then before.
The next was, why was the cullor green? I said it was the ancient Forrester of
England (all people take notice) and I did and would claim the whole Forest
land of Albian, now named England, in my predecessors Barron Toni, then people
crowded in, and they were afraid to sit any longer, I appeal unto their
consciences.

Then at night when none could know I was sent for, and no man but themselves
there, then they asked me where they left: then came the Spirit of God upon me,
and gave me both courage and wisdom, for God never fails, if you one him surely
depend; then I said I would declare the Lords word, my command faithfully, and
then they could not have any power to harm me; but if I should keep back one
word then their spirits would enter upon me to harm me. And this is the word
from Jehovah that came unto Theauraujon Taunijah, now named from Jehovah, Thau
Rex Israel.

These words I said before them, the Lord commanded me to come down, saying, GO
SLAY THE RECELS AGAINST ME; for they have broken their Covenants, and stand
with their swords in their hands, saying we will break all our Covenants with
the Lord, unto whom our souls stand bound.

Then I said, Lord will thou slay the godly with the wicked?

Then one of the Members of their own making, said what Covenant have we broken.

Answ. Then I said thus says the Lord, do not ask what Covenant have you
broken, but what one of all them Covenants your souls stand bound unto God,
have you kept? Then they answered and said, this man can preach: yea, said I
five times, three times at Eltham, and two times at Lambeth, and now your
Funeral Sermon, for thus says the Lord, ye are accursed before Jehovah, and he
will cut you off root and branch, for have you not condemned to death, and your
selves reign by the same law. Then they said, Why is my Lord Protectors ways
perverse and accursed before God? Thus God has shown me, that ye all are but
my Lord Protector, mind, you all and the rest are but my Lord Protector, for
know you all, that except you write his copy, you cannot sit here.

Then they said, how should they know it was the word of God that I spoke? Thus
said I shall ye know it, if my words do not smite you, and ye are righteous
men, then my words are from the devil, wright me this down, this is mine; then
the Chairman wrote the words, I repeating them. Thus shall you know it to be
Gods word, if my words do not smite you, and ye are righteous men, then my
words are from the devil. Then I cried aloud and said, if any man did fear God,
let him praise God that had tried me even to death, and I had not slain any
man, and now my hand should be clean from the blood of them, but God would
raise Butchers: then they said, who were the Butchers, then I said I will tell
you who they are, they are the soldiers whom you have cozened and cheated,
your armies shall divide, and they shall hew you assunder, and cut you off root
and branch, therefore if there be any that fear God, depart from among the
accursed men, for God will cut them off and their children, and not leave one
of them to piss on the earth.

Then they said, why did not I execute Gods command? I said God accept the will
for the deed, instance Abraham, then two rose and said I had said that God had
accepted my sacrifice or offering, I denied their words they affirmed, and upon
my illustrative they stated a position, and bid the Chairman wright it down,
and so to have taken away my life, because I had convinced them by Gods truth,
yet their wickedness is so great, that they defy the Lord that bought them,
even unto his very face, still those two men affirmed a position in plain
terms, them which would have taken away my life by their false witnessing,
proved thus, because God did stay their Chairmans hand, and two men, one of my
right hand, and one on my left, gave testimony that delivered me from my death,
and said my words were not positive, which knew all men, the laws, all
position. As thus for doing in such a thing, such an punishment, but yea asses
know for such an entention, if it had truly been the law cannot lay hold, and
know there can be no treason against all traitors, and that lies behind to come
in its place, you will say and judge Theauraujohn did write this book, I see
them that know me in the spirit do know I did write this book, but they that
would know me literally shall not know I write this book, and yet know you all
I did write this book, but whether dead or alive, you know not, this is one of
your own, but it is beyond your form: hear ye cheaters of the nations liberty I
write, and no man sees, how can any of your perjured ones, say he saw me spell
these words, write the letters that does contain my meaning, then it goes unto
the Priests, then it is another thing, and such a thing that no law in England
can lay hold upon. Thus my copy is consumed to give glory unto the Priests; the
Printer he printeth the copy, he dare not swear that he that gives him the
copy, saw him write the copy, its his trade to print, and by the free Law of
England, every man may use his lawful calling without mollestation, else ye
fools where is the grand Charter of Albion, now named England.

Know all men God does command to honor these three men, the Chairman and the
two men on each side, and I my self do give unto each of them their due
respect, as they were true witnesses of my true words, and so saved my life:
and thus says Jehovah, that when his Buchers, the man slayer shall excute his
just judgment on the rest; their life I have given unto them for a pray, but
their estates are gone because of a confederasie with the sons of Belial, their
names I will declare to the whole kingdom for their honor; so soon as I know
their names, for I knew not one man but Master Hull, as I went by into the room.

The next and last was this, I did beseech them consider that a man of peace, a
man that had forsaken all, that God should raise him up for to testify with
the hazard of his life, Gods fierce wrath kindled against them, to cut them off
quite from the earth. Then one answered and said, I fought with Colonel Rich;
then I said, Gentlemen I beseech you all to hear me in this matter, then they
heard me attentively, then I said, that when Colonel Rich and Captain French
that villain, with the rest of the thieves came to divide their theevish
purchases, the Parks, in which they had cheated the poor soldiers, by buying
their debenters for a song in comparison of their due right, for Gentlemen, I
said, thus, if I set a man to work till it comes unto twenty shillings, and
then give him ten graots, I count them cheating thieves and villains. What do
you think of this? At this word they were mute, and asked me what I was, and if
I loved the Quakers, and I said they were honest men, then they made strange,
then I said, I love all, as an Independent, Anabaptist, Papist, Cavileer, and
all men, if they were but what they said, but for to speak good words, and
under them good pretenses wrong and spoil others, them my soul did abhor and
loath. Gentlemen, I am a man that does acknowledge a State of Kings, Earls,
Barons, and Lords, which is Monarchy the fifth, Christ shall a thousand years.
This that I now write, is added, for to give the land notice from Jehovah, I do
from the Lord according unto our lineal dissent, as before the land it shall be
proved our right, to be royal, lineal, duly, without transposition, claim the
crown of England, and by the which true right, undoubtedly, when the records do
appear, and from that true right I do voice forth unto the world, though in
prison a degrasion of all honors conferred on and upon any person honorable or
worshipful from the day and year of the life, acting of the Duke of Gloucester,
named Richard the third Englands King, and also I degrad all title of Henry the
seventh, as none in heritance in Englands crown right, by which cheat Stuard
came in by marriage of Henry the sevenths daughter, and in this degraidment
lies the rest degraded, and an annihilated, for by Jehovah every man shall have
his due right, and my self not one farthing: and not my self, nor mine children
and people one penny, for I go to a greater inheritance, which is Jerusalem,
only I do retain my due right and title Albiton or Albion, that is, the lands
restoring, the oppressor cut off, the people shall praise God that made them,
when by righteousness they are restored.

Take notice all people of England, although by a Divine right I do challenge
and claim the whole Forest lands, as we shall prove in a lawful Sessions of
the Nations just chousing, and also our Royal title of Albanugaunny, The which
title does include the Crown of England: yet all people know we do scorn that
our title Royal should be expostulated with our younger brothers servants or
journiman, I mean my Lord Protector, and his chosing by him stated, for I tell
you the name Cromwell does degraid him Williams, will not hold him, but I know
that had not he transgressed all Jehovahs commands; he is bigger, greater, and
higher by a true lineal sign, then he is in his assention of his full right,
and whereas my life was jeparded for to declare a message from Jehovah to him
now, if he would give his whole riches, I would not see his face, for the Lord
has determined to cut him off root and branch, because he has hardened his
heart against the Lord, for the Lords word to me was his safty, if he would
have obayed and an increw of honor rightly stated, but he has forsaken the day
of mercy, therefore cut him now off, so says Jehovah.

This is the copy of a Letter sent to the House.
Mr. Speaker,
MY request unto the house is, that I may have an assignement from your house,
that I may with my keeper attend the House for right from the House, against
two Traitors in consistancy to morrow, being Thursday, which I shall make
charge against, for my charge and crime is but breach of Peace, for which I
have suffered imprisonment, and it cannot be breach of peace if you had not
broken your Covenants, because a free Parliament, a free egress unto that
Parliament. And know you all, that a door unto the door is a breach of the
subjects liberty, and for the breach of the subjects liberty, I do demand
justice upon that door keeper that broke my peace in pressing me betwixt the
door and the wall, in coming for right unto I know not what to name, and
against my liberty, the lands cause, I drew my sword, I desire that I may have
liberty with my keeper, to go to my Lord Protector, for the Lord has so
commanded me, That he set his foot upon my neck, if in me be iniquity, let him
slay me, or cause me to be put to death, for I labor to the Cause and wave the
Effect.

Thau Israel Rex.

This letter was sent presently after the cheat by night that commanded me to
be brought before them, and the Lord commanded me for to buy a lock and a
chain, saying, I do bind thee to stand by them, and as this chain and lock is
my burden upon thee, so are them assembled rebels against me and also against
the Gospel, Law, and all good men's liberty: thou shall keep the lock and give
them the key, and I will bring again by thee Englands liberty: so the lock is
on my leg night and day till approach our liberty. And this is a word from
Jehovah unto the assembly of rebels that have forsworn their own vows in which
their souls was bound unto me says the Lord, they are accursed catterpillers,
smiting the labor of every innocent; and thus says God that knows all
things, in whose hands is life and death, the life of man's soul after the
dissolution of the body, that formed the morning unto all beings, that gave
Paradise its being in the high Spheres Celestial, that hangs the Globe in its
four Spheres, that concentreth the air in every breath, that makes the wind
the life in creation. Thus says the Lord, that you scorn with your whole soul,
saying, we will establish our way, our course shall prosper, and we will reign,
although ye have oppressed the poor, cozened the rich, deceived all, and
assumed the Nations Title, birth right, law, liberty, and godliness has fetched
this design. Ye reprobates, says Jehovah, ought not you to have been servants
in your due rights, and not sinners against me, who am your life? but you have
contemned righteousness, justice, truth and equity, and your everlasting
salvation, which consists in a holy obedience unto my holy will revealed in
my litteral word, and you hypocrites have made my litteral word your
stalking-horse, that thereby you might erect your covetous practice. O ye
villains and traitors against me, says God, do you remember your houling, and
your hypocritical faces that you formed, that by that you might in snare the
honest godly men and women to deceive them?

Thus says God that formed all things and beings that he sent his servant to
show you high transgressions which he will not forgive because you have murdered
his servants that did and do testify the truth of actings unto your face;
should ye not says God have humbled your selves in sackcloth and ashes thereby
to have staid the fierce wrath that is kindled against you, but ye the highest
rebels that ever the earth bore, yet ye lift up your selves for all your
transgressions, and to the very face of your Maker, say what covenant have we
broke, and your consciences witness in you you have broken all that ever you
made. O houl ye dogs for your day of vengeance is now come for to cut you off
root and branch, and cleanse the earth from its oppresors and oppression.

Thus says God he himself will plead his servants cause; you say that he
offended very high, and not to be paralleled. I Jehovah, says my God, do
testify you are the cause and he obeyed my command faithfully therefore will I
honor my servant Isreal's King, the whole earth over and the Angels shall sing
hallilujahes in his praise Sebab almam almarrauim mugmahhuhm Sebarte Casti. For
he hazarded his life to free his soul from his engagement in the lands cause
which he covenant with the honest party at the first beginning, he bore
faithful witness to your faces, when you by no right could call him before you,
because you had betrayed the nation justs trust unto you committed, did not he
testify that he stood with you in covenant till you had all forsworn your
selves, and have you not; let God and the land witness; then you began to rage
at him, he said do not rage, he did not care one farthing for you all, for you
were all collered and could go no further then God would permit, and said he
knew you all did Gods work though you knew it not, this was in the only high
Committee that dare let none hear nor see what they did.

Look to it, God pleads with you himself by mortal man, and says, that if you
were all slain the covenant were kept, our souls disengaged that now unto God
stand bound for to maintain righteousness, justice, truth, and equity, in them
words lies our souls bound that covenanted against the Kings party: your power
cut off, the land freed from perjurers, the liberty gained, the land restored
covenant-breakers executed, and every man freed from you the oppressors, and
until this be done every man's soul stands bound into God to receive eternal
punishment, for so high an engagement, therefore see unto your selves every
man, God is just and will not clear the guilty. Thus says the Lord that formed
the heart in man, that it is death by all Englands law, for you to assume and
presume for to sit in that house without being rightly chosen duly in trust,
with whole free consent, the nations right, still inherent in your masters who
set you there, and do defend you in their right there sitting, and all knows
you have robbed your masters, assumed their right, and now give them your wills
for Englands true laws, and say we the Parliament of England, are the
commonwealth of England when the God of heaven, and the people in the lands
know you to be Traitors to both these themselves, and your own souls, for God
does say I will cut off the Covenant-braker from the earth, wicked men shall
not live half their time, as for my Lord Protector, his is but a derivative
Conmission, though he make it carry all by his superlative motion, if he say he
has obtained it by strength, bid him look: Was not the Commons his bottom?
Therefore, O man know thy foundation, and humble submission, that though thy
body falls by the people against whom thou have so highly transgressed, that
thy soul may have some ease for all thy wilful murders, for if not satisfaction
here, you shall satisfy Gods divine justice after death, till every one by you
wronged, be duly satisfied.

Now ye Jews my people, know that our Jah by his power declared in Elokim, will
manifest his high deliverance this year, beginning at the twenty third day of
December, but my Jehovah commanded me to name that day the first day of the
month AB, which does hold the whole import of the whole Alphabet Hebraick, as
the Fathers house, or the father indrawing his house, or the house indrawn into
the father, Vivat Rex.

Now hear my people Israel and Judah, this do I command from high, holy, and
dreadful, sacred Jehovah, which holy name I command, ye do not mention in your
mouths, least the Lord slay you for your presumption; this is my command upon
you, that you separate your selves inwardly and outwardly, and every one that
believes Iah to be faithful in his covenant made unto our fathers, that he
would gather us unto our own land, and the Temple shall be new built in that
stately high glory that al glory before is not worth the naming, which holy
pattern I have in its living intrinsecality, and provide every one a Tent, a
Tent, Tent, Tent, Tent, Tent, Tent, for thus says your Iah, That his holy
Angel shall smite this land, and security will be no in place, therefore take
no thought, only separate your selves, and be wholly in your selves, renounce
the world and all worldliness: for God is now trying all flesh by his pure law,
which is fire. Therefore hear, and obey, and your souls shall live; this is the
Lords command upon you, that you observe a day of restraint of mind, which is
a figure pointing to a new Sabbath, and the day is this, beginning the twenty
third day of December, which is the first day of the first month, named AB,
and count from that till you make a seventh, and bring your count to this
command, and so go on keeping a seventh, till I do command the drawing the
whole dispersed into one body together, for which command, at this time I from
the Lord shall receive and know you my people to the worlds blinding, that the
drawing my sword, consider the act, it holds thus much, that Jehovah by my hand
will deliver the captive Jews, and my hand shall unto Jehovahs glory build the
Temple, and recover the Germane State, to state every Prince and Peer in his
due holdment, according unto the command of the Lord, Who is, who is: for Leo
Septtentris whom the Lord has raised, the earth to restore, the families to
place the Church, in earth to rectify, and the Jews to make Lords over omnia
Terra and Tri, but unto Jerusalem all must pay, no King, no Prince, no Peer
shall stand but by tribute unto the holy land. Than.

Further take notice all people, that I do from the Lord declare a restoration
unto Maria, late Queen of England, for God has considered her sufferings, but
it is Eastward: and thus faith God, as her womb has brought forth by luft unto
death, it shall bring forth perfectly unto the glory of God, but she must,
fathers house, children, and kindred, all forsake, for on them all for God
vengeance take: for Rome now no more shall be, because of her idolatry, nor
Venice, nor Napels, nor Constantinople, nor Paris; there is a symptone
Hyrogliphycally tipifying, more including.

Hear my people, I require and command an offering from the greatest unto the
least, for to provide our Tent Royal, which is the Seat of Judgment in our
Tribes, and the remainder is for the poor people that have no house nor bread,
for they come first to me.

And ye great ones in England, by Jehovah, before you go out of England shall
be all even, for one six pence of this accursed money shall not cross the water
into France; for whosoever does disobey my command, he dies so soon as we are over,
but as the Lords sanctification is in you, so does the Lord by my hand state
you. But for my brethren the Jews beyond the Seas, it is another thing, for
there is many weapons of war to be made according to its pattern received and
wrote in the book of the Law, but no Guns, nor Powder, nor Bullets, nor any
Arms of English fashion, for that is a curse upon us, the very land we must
not name; but thus, the land of the North in which we were very long held,
serving the heathen idols for the living Addonia: for know all on earth, that
Leo Ori, is Judah stated, which is the heavens fixed into their received nature,
and Leo Septentrionalis is the heavens Ragation, which is Judah in captivity. So
though I write Leo Septentrio, I am being restored Leo Ori, and my Sination is
the beautous star Select an secret Pecajah, named Orion; so that my people, my
command is, that in your offering, you show your selves with a good heart,
least in the day of calamity you cry and say, O that our hearts had been larger
in extending unto our brethren, for a Tent is a house for a family, and many of
your chief advocaters have no house nor bread, and these be they that are the
first fruits unto God, as my self am, and has been a Nazarite unto my Jehovah
this five years, only interceding for my peoples sins, for their expiation,
and let the earth know, I have neither house nor bread, but from my people whom
God has given to know me in the spirits unity, but very few know my work.
Separate, separate, separate, separate, separate, separate, separate. Come out
of her, come of her, come out of her, come out of her, come out of her, come
out of her, come out of her, come out of her, come out of her, least ye be
partakers of her plagues, for the hour of execution of her denounced judgment
is to be poured on her suddenly, suddenly, suddenly; fly out of her Amies,
fly out of her Armies, fly out of her Armies, fly out of her Armies, fly
out her Armies, fly out her Armies, fly out of her Armies, fly out of her
Armies, for vengeance is coming, fly out of her ships, fly out of her ships,
fly out of her ships, fly out of her ships, fly out of her ships, for
desolation is decreed on her, fly out of her Cities, fly out of her Cities,
fly out of her Cities, fly out of her Cities, fly out of her Cities, fly
out of her Cities, fly out of her Cities; fly out of her Cities, fly out of
her Cities, for her vengeance shall upon her cease: Touch not her trading,
touch not her trading, touch not her trading, touch not her trading, touch not
her trading, touch not her trading, touch not her trading, for her sins
punishment shall be poured upon her, as is witnessed by all the holy prophets
and Apostles, she shall receive double according to her transgresments for all
her fornications, whoredoms, wherewith she has deceived all Nations.

I shall be at peace in England, but I disown any Power to be lawful now in
being, for the masters are robbed, the servant rule, and truth is cast out of
their school. Now I declare, being that the Lord has freed my soul by my
hazard of my life, to free my soul from my Covenant engaged with the honest
meaning men in the wars beginning. I do promise I will break no law, but live
in peace, neither will I obey any traitors command, for whosoever shall come to
me with any name or warrant from I know not what named themselves Parliament or
Commonwealth of England, I will duly resist and slay or be slain; therefore I
warn all that fear God, for coming to serve or cite me to appear: then let the
heathen Covenant-brakers come as many as they will, I weigh them not, for the
Lord is with me to defend his own right: all people, whereas the whole envy my
life, because I have told them the truth, if they take away my life, then know
that there is the living God, but if by me one instrument, and in their custody
do disperse them, and bring a judgment upon them, then let the whole earth
unanimously praise in acknowledgement that the God of Israel is the living
Addoni, the trial is stated by

ThauRam Tanjah Rex Israel and Anglise.

WRote in the night by the seeing eye that does unfold all villainy. You shall
never know who wrote this, but my people know I wrote this, and there can be no
oath where there can be no seeing; and ye asses know I scorn the oath Ex
oficio, which ye degraded in name and practice, in its nature that state holds
all your actings.

Who is for the holy wars, beginning at France? This original copy came to my
hand in prison, and I will pay for its printing, for the good of all, that the
wicked may cease from his wickedness, and the righteous may separate and act
forth his faith by his works. The ends are good, Thau.

FINIS.

