To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND: The humble Representation
and desires of diverse Freeholders and others well affected to the Commonwealth
of England, inhabiting within the County of Bedford.
SHOWS:
THat whereas we are fallen into those times, wherein the overturnings of many
foundations have been seen, and the deceitfulness of many hearts has been made
manifest, and many for their hypercrisie and rebellion against God have been
made examples of his justice; and when they have showed themselves a while,
have passed away, and their places have not been found, nor their names kept in
remembrance: and these changes have been wrought by him who changes not, and
these overturnings have come to pass that he might reign whose right it is. Now
therefore if you be found standing in like manner, in the same places, they
will be as slippery to you as they were to those that have both gone before and
succeeded you; for the Lord has appeared in great power and glory to stain the
pride of all flesh, and to bring to naught the counsels of the wicked, and to
make the wrath of men to praise him, and the remainder of wrath will he
restrain: and whereas the Lord has again brought you into your places, and put
a great price into your hands, Oh remember what the Lord has done by you and
for you in years past, what a Divine presence attended your Counsels at home,
and Armies abroad; and what a terror was upon your enemies round about: but how
soon did you forget his wonders, when peace and prosperity entered your borders?
were you not grown negligent in the work of the Lord? and for your remisness
might he not justly have given you up as a prey to the spoiler, and for your
and our unthankfulness (for so great deliverances) did he not suffer you to be
laid aside that so others might come up to act their parts, who promised fair;
but what is brought forth by them more than a lie, many are witnesses. You have
also seen them made an example before you; therefore take heed lest you thirst
after that which they thirsted after, and were overturned. For if after all
these things you shall again do the work of the Lord negligently, will not his
displeasure smoke against you above others? because you has he known and owned
in time past. Therefore take heed to your selves, lest fear and an evil he^t
surprise you, and weaken your hands: But be of good courage, and do the work of
the Lord perfectly, with an upright heart (not fearing what man can do unto
you) and let every abominable thing be removed, that so no brand may remain
upon you; and then hearts and prayers of the upright will be for you, and the
lives and estates of your Representers shall freely be exposed for your safety,
in your prosecuting of these and other good and righteous things which we humby
propose as follows.

I. That that great and intolerable burden of Tithes (so long complained
against) may be removed, which has been brought in (many hundreds of years
since the days of Christ) by the Pope, as a maintenance for his Ministers,
grounded upon misinterpretation of Scripture, and the people being possessed
that it would free them from the pains of Purgatory, and was testified against
by our famous Reformers John Wickliff, Walter Brute, William Thorp, and diverse
others who suffered in testimony against it, and other innovations, and is
found in our days a very great oppression to the Husbandman (it many times
exceeding the full years value of the land) as also a great burden on the
consciences of very many up right hearted people, who have suffered the
spoiling of their goods, and imprisonment of their bodies, as a testimony
against it (through the evil execution of bad Ministers of the Law) which Law
it self is grounded upon a supposed precedent right, which is now found to have
no footing in the Scriptures, nor sound reason, on which all our Laws ought to
be grounded. Yet so that respect be had, that some reasonable satisfaction may
be made to Impropriators according to equity and a good conscience, but not by
continuance of Tithe paying, and also that Mortuaries and all offerings and
other like thin^s may be quite rooted up.

II. That the Common Law of this Commonwealth may be truly regulated (right
reason being made the ground thereof) and plainly known in the English tongue
what they are, and that all Actions of Trespass, and things of small value may
be speedily tried in every County, and that the chargable and tedious suits in
the Chancery and Exchequer Chamber may either be regulated to le^s charge, or
taken away, and that no man be forced by oath or otherwise to be his own
accuser, and that none may be condemned or tried in Chambers or Corners, but in
open Courts by the verdict of their Peers, and offenders may receive punishment
proportionable to their offenses. And that the Ministers of the Law may be
liable to just punishment, in case they act contrary to, or refuse to do
Justice according to law and equity; all which punishments to be ascertained,
and not left at will; and that all penal Laws which are a snare upon many good
members of the Commonwealth may speedily be repealed, and the rest so abridged,
as that the people may not of necessity be ignorant of any part of the Law
under which they live. Also that no person that is to enter into any office be
caused to take any oath, or make any solemn promise, which he shall not be able
to perform, or cannot perform with a good conscience.

III. That provision may be made, that such who live peaceably in godliness and
honesty, though of different persuasions in matters of faith and worship, may
be equally protected and encouraged, and that the civil liberty of all persons
within this Commonwealth be so tendered, that neither their persons may be
imprisoned, nor their goods taken away, without the breach of some known Law,
and due prosecution thereupon. And that all such Magistrates and Ministers of
Justice, Jaylors, Bailiffs, and others may be proceeded against, and made
exemplary who have acted or shall act contrary hereunto.

IV. That the Malitia of this Commonwealth may be speedily settled in the hands
of such faithful persons, who have manifested the continuance of their
integrity to the Good old Cause of justice and freedom, and that all faithful
persons who have been ejected out of places of trust military or civil, or for
conscience sake have been necessitated to quit their employments, may be
speedily invited and restored to their former capacities, and that none for the
future may be employed in any place of trust, but such who are fitly qualified
thereunto, and have (without declension) manifested their good affection to the
Commonwealth. And that special care may be had to keep off all flatterers and
time servers.

V. That Wills may be proved, and administration of goods and chattels granted
in every County, and that all persons may have power to sue for their
respective Legacies and Portions in every such County, and that for the
preventing of fraud, a Register may be kept in each County of all sales of
lands and mortgages, and things of like nature; and that Deodands may be taken
off, and if any person shall kill either themselves or others, yet their heirs
and innocent families may not thereby be deprived of their right.

VI. That as you thought fit to take away wardships as a badge of the Norman
yoke, to the great ease of persons of great estates (though they much enriched
the public Treasury) so you would take some effectual course for the
alteration of Coppy-hold tenures (as great a mark of Tyranny) that the poor
Tenants thereof may not be left to the mercy of the Lords of such Manors
(whilst great men are made free) but may all have a proportionable taste (in
their capacities) of the benefit of a Commonwealths freedom.

VII. That in due season care may be taken, that the persons entrusted with the
Legislative power, may not be perpetuated in their power, but that all persons
within this Commonwealth may take of subjection as well as of rule; and in
order thereunto that in convenient time provision may be made for an equal
distribution of elections, and a due and safe electing of the Representatives
of this Commonwealth with such due qualifications both of the Electors and
Elected, as may consist with the interest and welfare thereof, and that all
those who have not given some signal testimony of their good affection to the
Good old cause, may be incapable of being elected.

This Representation being read Wednesday, June 16. the deliverers thereof
were called in, and Mr. Speakers, by order of the House, gave them this answer;
Gentlemen, The House has read over you^ Representation and Desires, and they
have observed the particulars, and therein find your good affections expressed;
and for that the House have commanded me to give you their Thanks, and I do
give you the Thanks of this House for your good affections; and as for the
particulars in your Petition, the House will take such of them, as they shall
find good for the Nation, into consideration in due time.

London, Printed for Thomas Brewster, at the Sign of the three Bibles in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.


