TO THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND:
The Humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London,
in Common Council Assembled.
Shows,
THat the Petitioners in a deep sense of what the City of London has lately
suffered by misapprehensions of their affections to the Parliament of England,
(to which in all times they have constantly adhered) do humbly adore that
gracious God, who has so mercifully restored this Honorable Parliament to the
exercise of their Trust, for this Cities just vindication, and their and the
Nations deliverance and preservation: and do with unfeigned thankfulness
acknowledge the happy concurrence of this Honorable House, in their late
worthy and prudent Resolves, in order to the general Settlement of the Nation,
and for your tenderness to this City, in enlarging their late imprisoned
Members, restoring their Common Council, and ordering their Gates and
Portcullisses, Posts and Chains, to be repaired at the public Charge,

By all which signal marks of Honor, and respects to your Petitioners, they do
find themselves fully drawn forth into duty and affection, to tender to this
Honorable House, their sincere and most ready service in all the capacities
God has put them in, for the maintenance of your Parliamentary Authority, and
safety of your persons: and your Petitioners hope they neither have, nor shall
forfeit that confidence, which the Parliament has always had of them.

The Petitioners do therefore Humbly pray that the Militia of London may be
forthwith settled in the hands of Citizens of known integrity and interest in
the City,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc. Sadler.

London Printed by John Redmayn in Lovells-Court in Pater-noster-Ro^^


