THEAVRAUIOHN High Priest to the JEWS, HIS Disputive challenge to the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, and the whole Hirach. of Roms Clargical
Priests. If the States, or men, or man, would hear of (...), live at Eltham,
but at M. Giles Calverts at the Black spred-Eagle, at the West end of Saint
Paul's church there you may be directed to my lodging, for know all people that
I turn my face from no man upon Earth.

In Amazanorum, Salmam, Addah.
O Early Beloved, The beauty of Excellency has so far unvailed it felf, that
the shining thereof is so strong, that it has caused the dead to raise their
dark malice to persecute the Dove of innocence, the innocent Dove Theauran^ohn
your Brother; who are the first fruits in that holy lump, or holy composed
figurative Figure in SABA EL: But Beloved, my Bonds and Imprisonments, they are
for the hope sake that God left in Oath unto our fore-father the Jews, that he
would gather their Branches (We their children) his dispersed ones, and build
her whom he had destroyed; and for the truth in that Oath, for the performance
thereof unto you my Brethren, God has sent me forth (the High Priest of God,
and Recorder to the thirteen Tribes of the Jews) for the return of the
captivity.

And know all people that my desent in my Line, I am inferior unto no man upon
the whole Globe, and yet I was made a Joseph unto my Parents, for they were
poor through the Tyrannical power reigning in the Norman Yoke, he subdued the
Noble Saxon Line, and deprived it of its right of regency. My desent is in the
Tribe of Reuben of the House of AUSTRIA, as England, France, and Spain shall
witness; as also the Record of my Generalogy will make appear.

And now my Brethren the Jews, in and for whose defense I stand, and for the
Oath made unto our twelve Tribes, but in this return 13 Tribes; as I shall de
nonstrate unto the clear view of them it does concern.

And now my Brethren, for the demonstration of the glorious clothing wherewith
my God has clothed me withal, I do challenge the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, as also the Assembly of dessembling, deceived, and deceiving
Clergy; to dispute in giving or taking the state in any Divine Mystery or
created thing; in the depth of height, or in the height in the depth of that
Hight which is in Ori. All Absalamss Am. Also I challenge the whole Hirarchie
of Rome, Et omnia in Terra hominem in se. That word se holds in its imbodiment
all learned Clergical men, and against no other will I dispute, but only
against the head of the Baallists and the Harlots children; and know, I will
not despute but before an audible number Oratoried, or before the States of the
Land; and if I do not confound ye Priests, and all men, then know. I am not
the High Priest, neither am I sent for the return of the Captivity, nor the
gathering the people in peace, which is the word of God, binding us up together
into the unity of one Spirit.

And if you dare not appear to despute, then know, I take your silence to
consent to my affirmation; and further know, that if you, out of all your
numbers of learned men, ye cannot select men, or man to appear as your
Champion to maintain your cause; then know ye, that you are Liars, Cheaters,
and Deceivers, and dare not come to the Light: And know, your old trade of
lies, it must be maintained by and with false Oaths, for to cry Blasphemy, and
Blasphemers, when you are not able for to answer or defend your selves; neither
dare bring your lies unto the Teast: Now by that word Teast, know, I was and am
the Goldsmiths, and God has made me the Refiners fire, to refine the Gold from
the dross, which is but thus much, to separate ye Priests from your trade of
lies.

Now if you be in the light, and as you say the Ministers of the Gospel, I pray
you be not ashamed both of your message and your Master; and know, that on the
fifth day of April 1652. (but this account is false) in Saint Paul's, that old
called Church, but now that new made Stable, there I shall appear, as a place
free for men to meet in peace, for to be confirmed in the word, if Life be in
themselves; for my Sheep shall hear my voice, but a Stranger they will not
hear; and my Sheep are not women, but Men; no^ men, but Man; not man, but the
Sons sons of God shining in the beauteous Excellency; which is the glorious
declarative of the eternal Deity in Se.

And know all people, I am not learned in what I declare, neither yet could I
ever speak unto the people, nor despute, but read unto the people what I had
wrote; but in my six months Imprisonment, in Newgate and the King's Bench, in
them two Land-Colledges I have taken my Degrees; and my Docter-ship is advanced
over Omnia terra, yet in Se, and in Se. But because King's Bench is an
excommunicated word amongst the great ones in our land, yet the poor of the
land feels the same nature in the Law; for before it was Leo, but now it is
Vulpes, that is, (to stretch the words in their intent, unto their full extent)
it is a Fex wraped in a Lion's skin; My Nobles, this Fox I must Cast out of
this Lion's skin, that is, when the Devil is cast out of deceived men, for
know, names are no things.

Now my Brethren, both Jews and Gentiles, let the curse of my God light upon
my understanding, if ever I shall forecast to set, or cause to compose two
words together to give any denotation by, thus far am I from lerning any
thing, that my prayer is this, Arki selexsi ori am; the English is, In thy
strength O my God deliver me from my own wisdom, for it is the Devil.

Now Brethren, I have lien near ten months wating for the word, an 100 and
fifty days in purification for receiving the word, and it is said unto me,
that on the fifth of April my mouth shall open, for I have been dark, and have
had no light. but now in confidence of that word that has spoken unto me, I
write unto you my Brethren, and you of the greatest learning I do not exempt;
and on that day being the fifth of Apr. to be in that place, Paul's Church, and
so weekly to meet and declare what God shall discover unto me or any of my
Brethren, whom God has fvrnished for the gathering the people into the unity,
out of this confused variety; and we meeting in peace, according to the Act of
State giving us Authority thereunto: And further we do entreat, that we in so
meeting in Innocence, may be and have preservation by the Law, as our
Birthright of integiity, this I intend, if your lying Spirits, Devils, Devils
Spirits do not hinder me.

But I hope the State will not wilfully shut their eyes against the light, but
be glad and rejoice to hear and see the truth drawn from the ly, which are ye
called Priests, for you say that you are called and sent of Christ; it must be
then messengers of his second coming, that is, to restore the captive Jews
according to the promise, and then your declarative must be in the height, in
the Divine wisdom, in the Beauteous Excellency, and delectable Oratory; and
now, if your learning will overreach my wisdom and knowledge, (though I am
unlearned, then I will subscribe unto you, and write THEAURAU JOHN High Priest
no more. But be you sure I will be there, and I expect the trial of your
selected choice, that makes me give you warning before to provide.

Now though I expect a Champion of yours, out of all the choice of your
glorious numbers, as you term them, even I expect and look for the select Ey
of your whole conclave I desire that he may be free from himself in persecution
of others, for persecution is of man's self-will, which is in deed and in truth
the Devil in man; now where you see persecution in man, that is the very Devil
in man; nay properer Devel-man, man-Devil; that is, Satan that deceiver, that
Man slayer, that Murderer, who was a Liar from the beginning.

Now I will desipher out unto the clear view of all people, who are the sons of
God, and who are the Devils moons or Devils children; Asaphel arki, that is,
Devils of strength and might.

First, Gods sons who are restored by Massah or Christ, they are children of
obedience, acting in love unto all, even unto the children of darkness or
Devils children, Not forgetting what they were reduced from before they were
made obedient in light; and in love they do demonstrate by their loveliness in
walking in the beams of Excellency, which is the light of love, and it is love
that gives darkness, or Devils light and sight, and does abstract their
dackness into lights own Ey, then that that was a Devil or darkness, is made
light, acting in love, then them two contraries by light is reconciled unto the
unity of one Spirit, and then behold all is then very good in all all one unto
all, the all, which is but one All in the all of all things.

Now you that are in darkness, that is Moan children, or children of the Devil,
you always act your Fathers work, which was, and is persecuting the light,
which are the children of God.

Now by your persecuting Any, you show you are Devlis, and in darkness, for
persecuting, it is from the Devil, for God and Christ is love and in love,
there is no persecution; for know, affoon as you appear in persecution, that
man does declare absolutely that he is possessed with the Devil.

For know that if ye be in light, you love them that are in darkness, and in
the bands of the Devil, because your selves were in darkness before you were
made light by that glorious Spirit of Christ the Lord, who has cast forth your
envious Devil, and turned you into the light of Life, which is the Spirit of
the living God.

Look upon Christ's own example, I do not bid you look unto his words, for ye
persecutors are all words, but no Foundation; or example in the truth, as by
your persecuting you declare your selves for to be the Devils children, and you
fetch your colored Cloak from Christ's own words, so indeed you are Angels in
words, but in action you are persecuting Devils.

Now you Persecutors, you dwell in forms, and know the form of the thing is
not the true thing, for the true light it is not in any man's form, or formed,
or forming; but it is Truth in its own root, unforming your Independancy, your
Annabaptisme, and your Antinomisme, and your Presbyte^anisme, and your Judisme,
and all the rest of these Base, Beggarly pached Cloaks of Knavery, under which
so many Woolfish Devils walk, devouring one another, and this is Religion;
which whilst you are devouring one another, you must have Christ's cloak to
cover all your Villainy under what kind of devouring soever. Now know that all
Religion is a ly, and a cheat, a deceat; for there is but one Truth and that is
Love, and that devoureth, not neither destroys any man, but lives in its own
fire, fed with its own heat, beholding all Beutious, desiring no part, but unto
all alike, alike unto all: Love it is Salma Oriam, that is, it is the
adornative beauty of select virtue.

Now if you be in the Gospel of Light, you must see none poor, neither in need,
neither can you be in true Love, unless all have an enjoyment as your selves,
and none want; for God is light, filling all his Creation with the Beams of
his fullness, and if his fullness has so shined upon thee, as to write upon thee
Digitus Dei, then thou walk in light, acting in Love, and thy Sealing of
light is demonstrated unto all in need; in acts of mercy and compassion; I had
need to speak plain them words, the meaning is, thou should not have it by
thee and let any want, if thou do, as the Lord lives thy Religion is all
lies, and the Devil himself reigns in thy heart uncast forth.

Now your old way of your lying Appol^onian Spirit, which is the Father of all
your litteral learned Clergical Priests, when you are not able to reach or
understand the Truth in the Spirit of light, then your Abbadonisme of
aspersions is cast forth, crying that the men are Blasphemors, Witches,
Sorcerers, Deceivers, and of the Devil.

Now hear in this very cry of aspersion, if trusy viewed, you in your lying
colors are clearly desiphered out, for know, they or that which accuses it, is
a Devil; a deceived Spirit, for if you were in light, then you were in Love,
then no accusation but Love, and that acting in mercy; for the Reducement of
them that are Deceived and in darkness Sabeanus alla Sam ardi peleg ory, the
English is, The sase light accuses not, but it is the Non resident that
flieteth crying, Segad, that word holds the full import.

Now my Brethren both Jews and Gentiles, since the power of my God did
overpower my understanding, and manhood, wisdom; which is indeed the very Devil
in man, and this Devil did the Lord cast forth of me, when the power of my God
in mercy fell upon me smiting me dead unto the earth; then I saw the great
light shine in me, and upon me, saying, Theaurau John my servant, I have chosen
thee my Shepherd, thou art adorned with the jewel of Exceliency, and this
saying or voice speaking I heard when I was with God in the High and holy
Mount; O Beloved, this saying is strange in our days, but it was and is true,
for it was in Gods own time, and he is not confined unto men's writings, as in
the Bible and Testament, but he is that eternal Root, that light, that life for
ever stable, and yet he is the cause of all moving Motions; for he is the
Center in which all is centered, he is Sabiamus, Arby, Allat, Arki. AZZIEL.

Now who amongst you have I wronged, and whose have I coveted, who amongst you
can tax me for disorderly walking? I confess, before I was a covetous Devil,
even such as you are, who are in love with money, gathering from others to fill
your unsatiated desires, and yet you pray and go to Church nay congregated, but
it is in the Devils company; for God is Love, illusterating forth Beams of
mercy, and you are Devils, by detracting from others by craft of villainy to
enrich your selves.

Now I entreat this and no more favor, that when God shall open my mouth, you
that intend to persecute when my words are speaking, bid me deliver that state
in writing unto you, and I will do it; for what I shall declare, I will give it
under my hand, and also maintain it; and now do not you go and coin your
inventions out of my words, for then it does become your own invention, and not
my words: This I know, that Abbadons spirits lies in wait to entrap innocents,
which indeed is but the Devil, Persecuting of the Children of light.

Ye my Nobles and States of England, I write cloase, and sure, for my charge
for couquest is for overcoming the whole learned Clergy in the world, and hear
my Lord Oliver Cromwell, I claim protection from you, by virtue of the Oath you
have sworn unto the People, and confirmed it by many reitterations, vows, and
protestations, as that protest at Huntington in the Market-house, my SELF there
present, and those words I challenge you to make good which you declared, the
words were these: You sought not ours, but us; and our welfare, and to stand
with us for the liberty of the Gospel, and the Law of the Land.

And now we have overcome our enemies, we must not name either law or Gospel in
the truth of them; as for my part I have suffered six months Imprisonment
within three days, this very hour for these words; being the main charge
against me charged, the words are these: I said that Hell and Damnation were
not as the Ministers held forth, neither as it is written in the insert or
Bible, this is my charge, and I leave it to the State to interpret their own
Act, and when they know whose Act it was I was condemned by, they shall know I
had not transgressed, and in seeking for Right by Law, there I found a
formality to chreat me of my money; so now I find that there is neither Law
nor Gospel, but man's will standing in strength for both; so a dear purchase I
have bought in standing for the Parliament, which word Parliament right
construed, is the truth of the Nations Right, the Nations Right stated in
truth, which in patience I wait for: For know, as the Lord lives, down all
shall come, for there is one turn yet more, look to it, My Lord it concerns
you: Arba Arraxsi Sabbuoli odi Okron. Read them words Scholars, then Exce.
yours who are in love, and that love declared by a holy life: Theaurau John,
Taniour High Preiste.

Now my Nobles of England, will it not appear strange to the World, that a man
that is unlearned in what he diclares, and never could despute, but wrote and
read the writing, and has challenged and called for an Answer to the whole
people of the world, and none is found able to answer my Books; the first is
Theaurau John His Au ora In Tranlagorum In Salem Gloria L. The second Book is,
Theaurau John His Theos Ori Apocalippical, or Gods light declared in Mysteries;
These Books are all to be had at Giles Calverts (at the black Spread-Eagle at
the West end of Saint Paul's Church) Bookseller. Now, If the Clergical Priests
had but answered my Books, and convinced me, before they falsely persecuted and
imprisoned me; but it is too high for their learned trade of Lies to answer,
nor is there any man living in the Earth, that is able to answer the Books;
this I know by my rule in Light, they durst not take my books and charge me in
what I had said, but coined their ASS like nonsenses upon my words, that is,
thus he said so, meaning so; Then know ye ASSES, that then it is your meaning
so, and not so my Words. Now Priests, will it not redound to your shame to
persecute that light that all your blind lying learning is not able to answer,
this shows you to be Cheats and Deceivers of the people, and if you will but
answer what your Trade of Lies will reach to, I will not Print the second part
of my Book called Theos Ori Apocalippical, for it is Higher wrote. You have
forgotten the Apostles being unlearned, that they overcame the great Rabbis:
Know, a greater work then that God is bringing forth by me and my brethren, and
we are not lyingly learned, in which you so much glory.

Brethren, what I have worte, I will maintain, and what I write I am the same,
But when I was a child, I spoke as a child, and so I acted, but now behold
childishness is vanished away OPHIEI. EL. I am in Prison at the writing hereof,
and the Prisons were always the Prophets Schools, we read true Lectures in
the empty walls, in our restralnt, without Baals Books, in which ye learned
Priests so much glory.

But beloved Brethren it is for your sakes, ye beuteous Sons and Daughters of
Sion, and Isreal's Seed, unto whom the Lord will make good his Oath that he has
sworn unto our Forefathers, which is our Return from our Captivity, and the
again building the glorious, glorifying, and glorified Temple; Even in
Jerusalem: Then, then, then, O Hallilujah AL Sabiamus AM.

O yes. Any manner of men or man, City o^ Country, in Oxford or Cambridge,
that can bring me word of any Clergicall Priests or Priest that can answer my
Books aforenamed, upon appearanee in full import of intent and Extent, they
shall be all well rewarded for their pains. So God save the True State of
England, and from all our Woolvish enemies, good Lord deliver us.

Brethren, this I commit unto your understanding, and let them that it conterns
or are not satisfied let them make search into the Heraldry where I have
suffered great Defraudations, for there has been as great a perjured Villainy
to uphold and secure this base pached Normane race, as ever was in any Land
under the whole Horiscope of Heaven: I know what I write, though it be dark
unto you. But I shall find out all the cheats in Herraldry without reading any
Books of their Ancestors percussed perjury, which has been a Trade too common
in our Land, as the demolishing whole Families, and race the due desent
Heridically; Which Heraldry it is in truth Gods seal, or Gods distinctions
rectifying his Children in their Essential Rites, rightly Essencied. Temporal,
and it is a glorious Maxim, truly defining, Literally decending, and in Truth
tying every one in his Linnage, in his birth right by Linneal desent; Now where
is Henry the 8 that robbed so many Families: Now our Lands being freed from the
Norman subjection, we may lawfully claim our Lands and Inheritatce in the
Commonwealth, as in cue right they by the Law of God and man do unto us
belong, and unto us ought to be delivered: My Name has held al these changes
in England from its Original, being the Hebrew Tan, Tani, Tanni, Tangoy, Toni,
Totni, Totneses but now in this return of the Captivity of the Jews my
Brethren, my God has sealed me with his glorious Seal, that is, Ruben,
Theaurau John, Taniour, Allah, AL,

Aeglicie Roma Adma In Sab Appostalie Appendex in R Palma Austria al Now search
your antientest Records and you shall find me, TRUE

I bear 3 Sabbs, Alba, and 3 Aszure, or 3 Barrese BLU.

Sword and coat of arms Theaurau John tany our High priest, recorder of ye
tribes of ye Jews for ye Cap^iuities Return.




