THARAM TANIAH, Leader of the LORDS Hosts, Unto his Brethren the QVAKERS
scornfully so called, who ARE the Children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; who
ARE circumcised in Heart; the JEWISH Race in descent, unto whom the Promise was
made,
I will turn them into my pure Language, by taking away their stony hearts: And
they shall all Tremble at my Word.

These things the Heathen dogs know not.


BRETHREN,
I Am that man JOSEPH whom my brethren sold into Egypt: but the Lord is with
me, for the Returning of my brethren.

I find THAT in the TABLES of heaven, which is the CABAL of ENOK the seventh
from Adam, That God would cast off Israel and Judah Five hundred times five
years, that is, not according to the Heathen Numberers, which are but Names,
and are LIARS: But according to the POLES of the Heavens, by their dimensions,
which does Gradiate the FIRE into our times of Numbers, Natures, and
TRANSMUTATIONS: which TIME ceased on the 23 of November, when the Lord smote me
dead in my shop, even in that particle Resh was the End, and a new beginning
Arri Orari Oramoas Or RESH: then I received Ratification in Essency, but not in
my own declared derivacy; but that grace received in my soul, it prevailed over
me, and opened my Imprisoned soul to see, seek, and settle my soul on its
Center.

My Lambs, my weak Babes, I am, have been, and shall be, that weak appearance:
but it is the Eternal Essence power, that without which none can receive
Eternal life.

But Brethren, now JOSEPH is JUDAH beloved of JAH, the prevalency with God,
with Man, and over all things: Now, ye my Lambs, my Brethren, JOSEPH-JUDAH is
REUBEN, that is, God's first sight, the highest discovery, and none can reach.
Now REUBEN ^ JACOB's STAR prevailing with God, and God does Turn REUBEN, which
is AARON, unto MOSES: and that very Alone Spirit, am I through mercy made, for
to lead forth my ^ambs, the Chosen of the LORD. Therefore, my Brethren, you
know not me, though (...) you is Something That does tender me, when you are
strong. And, my Brethren, though ^e stand in ONE, and are taught from the
living God Immediately within your souls, and ^o otherwise, This I do witness:

Yet, my Brethren, the Lord is known unto me in sight, as to say, face to face,
as the Lord himself shall show you in the TABLE in which he teaches you, and
that shall hold you, ^^d me, and all the Lord's Chosen. For I speak not to you
to intrude into you, nor to (...)ke any words from you: but ye are the SEAL
upon my soul, which is the Lords Covenant ^^r you, and you for me. So, my
Brethren, not in Name, nor in corrupt Nature, but in the li^^ng Life within the
SOUL of man which is the Eternal Spirit of the living God, which (...) the
peoples Gatherer out of all VANITY and DARKNESS, and makes all his SO GA^HERED
one Unity in himself by CHRIST CRISTOS.

^rote in the Tent of Judah, after my humble Offering on VAUTIAL, the Tenth DAY
NISAN, By me THAURAM TANIAH, Leader for the Captivities return. Theaur^^ John
tany our High priest and recorder of ye ^tribes of ye Jews for ye Cap^iuities
Return.D

seal
^his is not my EDICT, which is to be wrote. I cease Speaking, and rest till
Time.

