To the PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND: The humble Petition of
diverse Citizens and inhabitants in and about LONDON,
SHOWS,
THat after a long contest in this poor Island against tyranny and injustice,
(wherein the treasure of the Nation has been exhausted, and the precious blood
of many thousands spilt; wherein the Parliament were forced to spend their time
for many years in maintaining the War, and providing for the defense of their
lives, who engaged in that quarrel) God has pleased (we hope in mercy to this
Nation) to bring you together in a time of peace, to heal our breaches, to
establish firmly the ancient Rights and Freedoms of England, which were the
subject of this great Quarrel (which God has decided on our side) and to
settle such ways of dispensing impartial justice, that the Name of God may be
exalted in righteousness, and no man have cause to repent of the blood and
treasure expended in the pursuance of the same.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly crave leave to present to your Honors their
sense of the principal things wherein that tyranny consisted, against which we
did in judgment and conscience engage; which were,

1. The late Kings usurpation over Parliaments, to prevent their meeting, and
dissolve them when they were met, at pleasure, and especially under pretense of
a Negative voice; His denial and opposition of their supreme Trust to provide
in all things for the safety and welfare of the People.

2. His challenging of such an interest in the Militia, as to command the same
at his pleasure without the Parliament; and to place the subordinate commands
of the same in whom he pleased: whereby he would have had power to enforce
obedience to any of his illegal commands, whether in matters of Religion, or
matters Civil, and to have razed out (if he pleased) the very name and root of
Parliaments, which have been the ancient preservers of English Freedom.

3. His introducing of Arbitrary power to be exercised by his Council and
others, over men's persons and estates, when they ought to have been tried by
the Laws of the Land.

4. His challenge of a right (under pretense of Necessity, whereof he would
have been judge) to levy Moneys upon the people without their consent in
Parliament; and that in all these things he was unaccountable for what he did,
either to the Parliament, or any earthly power whatsoever.

And your Petitioners do further humbly mind your Honors of the many signal
testimonies which God has given of his displeasure against all that have
endeavored to support the aforesaid Tyranny, or have espoused that as their
Quarrel, under any notion whatsoever; and of the price now put into your hands,
to secure the Nation from future attempts and dangers of the like Tyranny: And
not only the Armies Declarations, and The Agreement of the People proposed by
them, (remaining upon Record in your House) but the Ruins and Spoils of the
Land, and of many thousand Families, The expense of many millions of Treasure,
The wounds, and scars, and lost members of many thousands, and, above all, The
precious blood of thousands of Gods People slain in the Quarrel, cries aloud to
you to call to God for wisdom, that you may be taught and enabled to establish
such a sure Foundation of Right, Freedom, and Justice, that the People of God
might not be put again upon such hazards and expenses of their Estates and
Lives for the defense of the same.

Therefore your Petitioners humbly pray,

That together with the constant succession of Parliaments (never being
entrusted for perpetuity) the Supreme Power and Trust, which the People commit
unto them, to make Laws, Contitutions and Offices for the Government of the
whole, and to call all Officers of Justice, and Ministers of State whatsoever
to account, may be so clearly declared and secured against all attempts to the
contrary, that no question may henceforth arise concerning the same.

That the Militia may be ordered with such wisdom and secutity, that it may not
be in the power of any single Person, (who may, while he is man, be corrupted)
to make use thereof against the People, or their successive Parliaments, either
to destroy their Being or their Freedom.

That no moneys may be levied upon the People, but by their common consent in
Parliaments.

That Wars being now ended, the Peoples Persons and Estates may be only
subject to be disposed of according to the Law of the Land, in the ancient way
of Trials by their Equals; that henceforth none may be reputed offenders, but
such as shall be found transgressors of the Law.

And, that as the safety of our Religion was concerned in the defense of our
Civil Rights, so such provision may now be made for the encouragement of the
sincere professors of the same, that no tender conscience may be oppressed. And
in doing these things, you will be glorious instruments in the Hand of God, and
honorable in your Country; And the Lives and Estates of your Petitioners will
be freely exposed to hazard in your Just Defense.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

