HIGH NEWS FOR JERUSALEM.
I Proclaim from the Lord of Hosts, the return of the Jews from their
Captivity, and the building of the Temple in glory in their own Land.

HEar O ye Jews my Brethren, I am a Jew of the Tribe of Reuben: but unknown to
me till the Lord spoke unto me by voice; whose voice I heard, but saw no
appearance, and he changed my name from Thomas to Theaurau John, since the 23.
of November 1649.

Now unto ye Jews my Brethren am I sent, to proclaim from the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel, your Return from your Captivity, in what Nation soever ye
are Scattered. From thence ye shall be gathered into your own Land: JERUSALEM
shall be built in Glory, in her own Land, even on her own foundation, as the
Lord has shown me, though it seem never so impossible in the Judgment of
Men; Yet by him that lives for evermore, it shall be accomplished. And ye my
Brethren, who say, Our Bones are dried, and our hope is gone, and we are clean
cut off; As the Lord lives, who brought our Fathers out of the Land of Egypt,
so Sure shall your Return be. And ye my Brethren, shall be the Glory of all
the Earth, and the sear of Nations, For I saw the Spirit of the Lord go forth,
to effect his own Work, and for his own Names sake will He bring this great
thing to pass.

Therefore my Brethren, Fear not; neither be afraid, for the Lord of Hosts is
your Leader, And I Theauraujohn, but now Theau Roam Tannijah your Captain
General and Leader, and also your Brother our Iah his Servant.

Whereas this Proclamation was confirmed by Thomas being changed into
Theauraujohn, so it is now affirmed, and for Confirmation of the truth in this
declared, I do subscribe my name Theau Roam Tannijah Leader of the Peoples.

Now hear all Peoples and Nations; whereas I was commanded by my holy Jehovah,
to retract from speaking unto any Person for 34 days, and 21 of the same days
to see no person, all which I have performed, and in that time I have received
my pattern-way and work, as also this ensuing declarative: and as NOAH his Ark
was his declared obedience from faith in fine received, which faith and
obedience was and is madness unto the world; to which obedience the worlds
sentence was, What will this mad man do? will he cause this Vessel to go upon
the dry Land? and Paul was mad unto the peoples then, but the end is faiths
Coronation: So now shall many Idiots say of this Insert; but know ye peoples
the stoutest heart shall fail in this great day of Jubilee; for it is the high
and mighty Revolve in Jehovahs Frame, unto which sacred, high and mighty name
let all peoples bow.

UPon the 18 Scene at twelve a Clock in the night, the word of my Jehovah came
unto me, saying, Write out this Edict, my Command, saying, Who among the
Inhabitants of Wales, England, Scotland, and Ireland, is for the returning unto
Jerusalem that good Land, given unto our Fathers so long ago? Now who amongst
the Inhabitants of the whole earth, will return unto Jerusalem? Let an
insertation amongst them be drawn, and their names subscribed in a Roll of
Parchment; for the Town, and City, and County, and let that Record be ready the
twelfth of June next in our 1653. for after that Record is received and
reviewed, there is to go forth another Edict, and after that second Edict,
there goes forth the third Edict; and that is all my Jehovah and your Iah has
commanded me for to do, to lift up my voice three times for the gathering of
the People. But it is not by multitude that we shall overcome, but it is
Iehovah's might that shall bring us into our own Land, and our ancient
inheritance, even Samaria and the six Nations unto her regency belonging. For
Jehovah is good and just, and faithful in all his ways, who will do this great
work, but not by men, but by his own might shall we in his strength reduce the
seven Nations unto our royal obedience, that we may partake of the good of the
Iehovah's goodness promised, as we have tasted of his wrath for our Rebellions.

So my Brethren this is to let you know the good that our Jehovah will bring us
unto, even a Land that flows with milk and honey, a fruitful Land, the glory
of the World, Isreal's inheritance: therefore ye be valiant in walking in the
strength of obedience; that is, the sacrifice that sanctifies us in and to our
Iah, for by obedience we are received into life. For my Brethren, obedience is
the key that does unlock the door into that goodly good Land here, and that
goodly good heritansial rest in the celestial center; where is rejoicing in
full strength in glory; which obedience is the inletting into that regency.

Thus says Jehovah unto his Servant Theauroam, your King and High Priest by
the holy anointing received in and by fire, and also the holy and sanctifying
Law and everlasting Covenant. In fire I have received them from that terrible
and everlasting burnings, that is a consuming fire unto all not purifyed.
Therefore by fire am I purifyed, for to stand betwixt my Jehovah and you his
people; for he has consecrated me in holy fire to stand betwixt you and
himself, for to conscene with him, and to declare unto you the things that he
commands unto you. Now hear O ye people what your Iah commands, for by that
name Iah will he be known to you. But you are commanded upon pain of death not
to name Jehovah; for in and by that sacred name Iehovh is he known unto me,
being your High Priest the holy anointed of my Jehovah and your Iah; that is in
and by his everlastingness, which is signified by his name Iah. It shall be
thus O ye holy ones; for you shall be no more Judah and Israel, or Israel and
Judah, but the holy Ones of your Iah and my Jehovah; for my Jehovah has
wrought his mighty work, for to bring them two Judah and Israel into one stick
in my hand. For my Lineage Genealogically runs from Jonathan the son of Saul in
Rehoboams line, that holds Israel, and also in the line of David, that holds
Judah; and both these conjoined in Aarons house, and confirmed in and by the
High priesthood, as by Genealogial demonstration in the true recorded Records:
for the darkness lies in Aaron, because he stands reckoned in the Tribe of
Levi, and he was and is of the Tribe of Reuben. Thus his Father was of Levi,
but the woman was a Reubenite; and the Tribe's dignity does carry it in the
Statute Genealogically. Thus it was Reubens royalty in and over all the Tribes,
that, whosoever without exception, should have a Wife given unto him out of the
Tribe of Reuben, the man so receiving lost his name, and his inheritance was
recorded under Reuben, and all his Children were Reubenites for ever. Thus the
Man was both disabled in estate, and name, and seed, until the Jubilee came,
and then the Land returned unto the own Tribe by an inheritansial Statute made
unto that conjunction. So now if you say, that Saul was King in Israel and
Judah; Lo, Behold, his Son Theauroam Tanniahhh; and if you shall say, that we
had David our King the beloved of our Jah, Lo, Theauroam Tanniahhh his Son: and
if you shall say, that Ahharon or Aaron was our Fathers Priest, the holy
anointed of our Jah, Behold his Son Theauroam Tanniahhh in his Fathers Fathers
Fathers stead, as our Jah had promised, that David should have a Son to stand
before his Throne in the glory of his Majesty.

Now hear, O my People, Thus say I Theauroam King of the seven Nations, and
High Priest by the holy Anointing by fire received, and in fire I have received
the holy Law and high and holy Covenant; and by the same high and holy and pure
divine and sacred Anointing, am also confirmed Recorder unto our Tribes, being
now thirteen; as also Captain general, and your Leader unto Jerusalem under my
supreme Lord and King Jehovah, there in the place that my Jehovah my supreme
has set me in by his holy anointing. I Theauroam your Captain General, do will
and command that ye observe this my command, that ye live honestly unto all,
and in a peaceable preservable way unto this State where ye now live: And
although I go Leader by an undu^^ted right, King and supreme Vicegerent upon
and over my seven Nations, yet am I in this Nation the meanest subject. My
Brethren, know that humility is all the foundations, and the greatest glory if
it be viewed with true sight; as you see a fair or rare house builded, you look
upon its high structure, and that you praise; but you do not then see its
greatest glory, which is its basis or foundation which is in the earth; that,
even that is the houses true glory, for it is the strong strength that bears
the houses frame. O my Brethren! if that last State were but viewed with true
eyes, you would become lower, and then you would become truly high; and then
are ye our Jah's his loveliness; for height without a sure sarbaxed strength in
the soale of it, cannot continue: So now I have done all, but uttering my
Voice. This is the first, Wales; because in her true right she is regent over
England; for the Natives are in Wales, and this is the first house in this Land
I am commanded to call unto, which is the house of Darby. Who in or of the
house of Darby will go unto Jerusalem, and build the Temple of our Jah the
great Jehovah? Who in or of Pembrook and Montgomery will go up? Who of
Carthamargain? Who in Brecnack will go up unto Jerusalem, and build the Temple
of our Jah and the great Jehovah? Who in Radnal will go up? Who in Limpster
will go up? Who in Cardiff will go up, and build the Temple in Jerusalem? Who
in all and of all, Wales and England, and Scotland, and Ireland, and who in the
whole Earth will go up unto Jerusalem, and build in the Temple unto our Jah
the great Jehovah? let them subscribe their names as is above said, and the
Records shall be received in every County, and so drawn into Rolls; for there
is to be three subscriptions. For whosoever will go, whose heart Jehovah has
touched, fear not to subscribe, lest you purchase a blot unto your House, and
your Family be forced to bear your shame: for whosoever will go, shall not be
left behind, neither Man, Woman, nor Children For Jehova and my Jah, our
Elokkim will destroy this Land utterly: See unto your selves whose faces are
set toward Jerusalem temporal, I speak plain, in the Land of Judeah and in the
City of Samaria, but now Samaritaniah. Wrote by me, and given under our
Signatory royal in our own Territories, yet in this Land stooping unto all
Signets or Signatories,

Theauroam Taniahhh Leaders of the Peoples unto Jerusalem.

Hear O Earth, and the Inhabitancing of English earth, Thus says Jah, thy
Sions King, and Hierusalems glory; Hear O Sion in all the Angle points in the
North, in which thou art a sojourner, a Pilgrimage captive in the thick
Idolatrous Idolatry. Thus says thy Jah, that he will cause thy Captivity for
to return, and thy return shall be unto thy sacred Jehovah; which turn thy
Priest has taken, and it is Embuildatory for the whole House, both of Judah
and Israel, and thy turning shall be into receiving the Law thy light, thy
land, the inheritance of thy Fathers the Sons of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
David your King shall lead you.

This is the word of Jehovah unto Theauroam Tannijah: Hear O ye people of the
ancient Covenant; for you has Jah an everlasting controversy with the
Inhabitants of the earth, for in righteousness our Jehovah will do judgment,
and in our Jah is the purity in truth demonstrated in his everlasting mercy. In
this shall it appear and be declared, in his taking into Covenant the seed of
the rejected Parents, our Fathers the ancient Israelites.

Now thus says your Jah, but my Jehovah; for in that high and sacred great and
holy Name will Jehovah be known unto me only, being I am his High Priest; but
unto ye his people, by his holy name Jah will he be known, in his everlasting
mercy will he be named amongst his people and upon his people, all which long
suffering lies in his sAcred name Jah: therefore be ye mindful that ye do not
name the great and high and mighty, and sacred name Jehovah, lest he consume
you in and for your disobedience; but Jah is your name for to call upon, or
Elokkim, or Above, or Eloah, or Al, or Addoniel, or El, or Am, or Hemanuel, or
Bethem. These be the names O Israel that thou shall name; for the Name God thou
shall say Eloah, and for Christ Bethem, and for Jesus Hemanuel. Them are thy
names O Israel, for thou shall not name in thy mouth a strange God. Neither
says your Jah will he be called upon by the name of an Heathen God, neither
answer thee O Israel but in his own prescript; therefore you who look for your
deliverence and Hierusalems glory, labor to forget the names of the Gods of the
Heathen: for this Land is an abhorration with all its fashions unto your Jah,
shall be destroyed as in the day of Sodom.

Now thus says your Jah, Hear O Israel my People, and Tannijahhhs house whom I
have tied ye my People into. For the house of Tannijahhh being builded, ye my
People are the builders and the building, that being built, then the Covenant
with David is performed, the light in Israel is restored, and mercy unto Readiness
house is from me Jah extended, for to take in again my ancient King, old
Isreal's Saul: for his was the house, and David but a family in that house. So
now thus says my Jah and my Jehovah, that in Tannijahhh is the house builded,
the families rectified, the promise made good both in mercy and judgment. Thus
in judgment I cast off Saul, to receive in my mercy his seed in my own house.
In mercy I gave David unto my people, that in my mercy I might refine his seed
by punishing them until the Families were fitted for to come into the house my
building. For O ye Sons of men, my ways are not like your ways; for I am Iah
in my Everlastingness. I act my ways, confounding man and the wisest beauty in
the Sons of men. For I AM Hallelujah in my self, but in my outgoings is motion
in its variety intensiously intended, and extended beyond the worm man his
finding out. Eck and Kleatt.

Yet thus says our Iah, that in the true Theology Saul and David do make one
man. Thus Saul is the outward appearance called man, on which stature all
outward eyes do look, and David is the intense wisdom in that appearance,
seated within for the guidance of the outward figure; for the outward figure is
weak, and the David is the strength within, which is Iah Elokkim everlasting in
prevalency; for the Bethem is the Refiner by Rectification in the outward
figure to bring it into its living intense Nature. So being done, then behold
Jehovah's Theology etymologically expressed in that figure man. Then Saul and
David are one man, and the first Spirit in the second Adam is again made one;
for the dead Adam is made the living Hemanuel Bethem. My Brethren you cannot
fathom my Theology, for it is beyond Divinity; for it is Via in se; that is,
Jah his King is Hemanuel's looking glass in omnia via: for none fathoms the
heart of an anointed King, but the Anointer, who is my Jehovah and your Jah,
and in us both Hemanuel.

This following Edict is engraven in Brass, and to be sent into Holland.

The Edictory Unto all the Jews the whole earth over, Greeting.
Ye my Brethren,
NOw thus says I Theauroam Tannijah the great King of the seven Nations, that
Jehovah my supreme Lord and Master has commanded me not to spare the
disobedience of any or all, and I have sworn in URIM and THUMMIM, that
whosoever does wilfully disobey my command being Iehovah's General in this
great Journey unto Hierusalam, he shall be put to death. I have sworn by my
Majesty being King of the seven Nations, by the sacred and holy anointing, from
Jehovah my King and Lawgiver, that I will not spare any that does transgress
wilfully my command, the holy Covenant and Jah his pure and undefiled LAW;
which LAW and Covenant I received in Fire, and every Letter, Syllable, and Peat
in burning flames of revengeful Fire: Therefore see unto your selves before you
do presume to enter into Covenant with your Iah but my Jehovah; For Iah is your
pure, and proper, and peculiar word or name, but Jehovah is my Heritansial
ingraftment, because I am High Priest from Jehovah my supreme King. Now thus
says your Iah but my Jehovah, that the House of SAUL and JONATHAN, and
REHOBOAM the Son of JONATHAN and the family of DAVID, these now all lie in the
Priesthood of AARON, but AHHARON: and in any of these Lines who do carry the
Majesty of royalty, they do carry it into REUBEN; thus, because REUBEN is the
royal Tie in all the families, as was given by me Iah unto MOSES AHHARON's
brother, under whose conduct your Fathers returned. For though they were taken
away, yet their Edicts directed the People. Now this was Reuben's dignified
royalty upon and over all the Tribes none excepted; for whosoever should have
to wife a daughter of the Tribe of REUBEN, without exception the man and his
inheritance were recorded in REUBENS Genealogy, so that the woman did bear the
man's right hereditatorily, and all the Children were Reubenites for ever; and
thus stands AARON wronged, being reckoned in and from the Tribe of LEVI, and he
is REUBEN; and from him, and to him I Jehovah has tied all the Fathers
beforenamed. And thus his name does bear whom I have chosen your Leader, THE AU
ROAM TAN TAN is his own name hereditorily. THE Ep is light, that stands for
AHHARON, that was my anointed Priest, as he now is this fourteenth day being
Sabbatty named Iehotial, that is the name of our Sabatty. AU does signify
David, for he feared before me. TO signifies my mercy that is unto
Transgressors, that was SAUL'S house; the Stemmes aforenamed do signify that in
my name AM, that is, your Leaders conjunct, or closing up all; and in that name
AM, I have unto Saul's house declared my everlastingness, in passing by their
Transgressions for my holy name sake, because I am Iah, everlasting mercy and
goodness to my house my holy Ones: for now it shall not be no more the house of
SAUL and the family of David, but they two are become one in my strength their
Ingrafter; and it shall be no more said the House of Israel and the House of
Judah, neither the House of Judah and the House of Israel, but the Lords House
his holy Ones. This is transcribed on Sabbatty, because the insert is holiness
it self.

Signed by me Theauroam Tannijahhh, King of the seven Nations, and Captain
General under my Master Jehovah, and High Priest and Leader of the Peoples unto
JERUSALEM my ancient seat Royal, the City of my Father David and my Father
Rehoboam, from Jonathan, the Son of Saul, and from AHHARON my GENELUSTRATED in
CENEALOGY.
Dated in January (so called) (...) my fourteenth day, being Sabbatty. Given
under our Sigatory royal in the year 1652, London. Unto the Synagogue of the
Jews in Amsterdam.
By Recordat THEAUROAM TANNIJAHH.
The Epistle Edictory upon the 21 Scene or day.
ANd the word of Jah spoke unto me, saying, Hear O my People, even ye whom I
have chosen, ye holy Ones, this is my command upon you, That ye do forsake all
the fashions of the Gentiles, in which ye have so long delighted your selves,
with all their deceitful Sorceries and Wichcrafts, ye shall not follow them in
any thing that they do, for they are the Children of my wrathful curse;
therefore follow not their ways, lest ye be partakers of their plagues that I
Jehovah will bring upon them, for to cut off their memorial from off the Earth.
Therefore hear and observe, This is thy manner in thy Salutations; which
Salutations of the Gentiles is a Monster-begetting, or a begetting-Monster.
Thus shall it be amongst ye my People, that when ye meet one another, as when
the man meets with the woman his friend or acquaintance, he shall not put off
his Hat unto her, as the Gentiles do in their meetings, but thus shall it be
amongst ye my people, ye shall not kiss one another as the Gentiles do, for
that I loath says your Jah: But thus shall ye act in your meetings or
Salutations; The woman shall stand upright if her body will bear it, and with
her hands hanging down upon her hips, that is the woman's posture always and
all times; if the woman's body will not bear uprightness, then she is but to
move that way prescribed; the man in his Salute unto the woman, when he meets
her, he shall a little bow himself in his head and body a little, and he shall
lay both his hands upon the woman's arms above the elbows, and so shall bear the
woman a little on his left side; and this is thy manner O Israel. Now the
reason why I Jah do command this manner in Salutation, it is this: for by
kissing is caused a fermentation whereby the body is diseased or disquieted by
the breath received from any one or other; for the breath has in its intense
Nature an intrinsecal begetrix in its includement, for the breath is abstracted
from all breathings, and is included into one abstract; and if either the man
or the woman be not stable in themselves, then into the strength of the others
breathing there is a contraction in its self, though the party be never moved
in their intenses; that is, his or her motion was never awakened by it. For
breathing in one another and to one another is the mother Begetrix of all
lustful brutishness. So much for your Salutes or kissing one another.

Now the man shall not kiss his sister his wife (for she is his sister) but in
the insealing his seed delivered; and no more for to know his sister till the
Child be twelve Months or twelve Moons old; for ye must be a wise people before
your Jah, who is holiness it self. And when the man does meet with man his
friend, he shall not put off his hat unto him, as the Gentiles do; but he shall
lift up his right hand in the wrist-joynt, that is in the hand point, and bow a
little as in the woman's prescription. Now the reason of the Man's lifting up
his right hand it is this, that he does in the truth in the uplifting his hand
rejoice to see his Brother in health; and he bowing his head does acknowledge
that it is the mercy of Jah to bring them together in health, for to refresh
one the other by their well sight. This is for men be they what they will,
unless it be unto the heads of the Tribes, and that prescript is to be in its
time and place in observance, but this is now, even now this present required
to be observed and obeyed of all, ye the people of our Elokkim, and these be
the Edictories commanded by your Jah and my Jehovah.

The next is, why the woman shall stand upright in her stature and the man bow
unto the woman, and laying both his hands upon the woman's arms, that is the
joint above the elbow, it is thus; The woman's uprightness is the man's glory;
for the woman is the man's strength in the illustration of his seed; for of one
man by the woman are many branches illustrated; so that the man being one
unity, by the woman is made multiplicity. That is one reason.

But here is the main. For the standing of the woman upright is not the
intention. For I speak things in the truth, which is the woman's being upright,
as in that demonstration she ought to be; that even that is the man's glory and
the woman's praise of excellency. Now the man's laying his hands upon the woman's
arms, it is this, he shows that in effect, that the uprightness in the woman
was and is the man's strength; and therefore he does acknowledge it before his
Jah in his bowing unto him, by the bending of his face downward

Now the man taking the woman unto his left side, it is thus, because that he
does declare that although the woman is his glory, yet the woman is his
weakness also; for by woman man is made very weak in his intensiality, that
word lies hid. But thus she is the man's weakness, for the man bowing upon the
woman, the man becomes very weak in himself, for to give his life an outlet in
issue by the woman his weakness; so you see the woman is man's glory and man's
weakness: Also this figure is allegorically allusive unto an higher
illustrative; so that the woman does illustrate the man, by the man's becoming
weak upon the woman.

The next is, thou shall not lie with thy Sister thy Wife; but only for
generation, no not in bed; for it is a bewitching evil, that will prove a sore
snare unto you both, for it is fire unto wood; but in all holy chastity in
purity, and purity in chastity shall you walk. In wisdoms way shall you act all
your doings says my Jehovah and your Jah, your everlasting Savior; for your
Jah will have you so wise in your peace that the cause shall be removed, so
that there can be no effect produced when there is no cause stated.

Per me Theauroam Tannijahhh High Priest.

The end of the first Edict unto the People my house our Jah his holy ones.
Let none seek to speak with me, for into silence I am returning, to be taught
a pure Language; for confirmation of this Insert, I have sealed this Edict with
our Se^l Signatory, March the 8. 1652.

Let none despise the day of small things, for small things proceed from the
greatest root.

seal


