To the KING of these Nations, THE HUMBLE REPRESENTATION OF Several SOCIETIES,
commonly called by the Name of ANABAPTISTS, Where in short they Declare their
Innocence, Sufferings, Dcsires and Resolutions.
WHereas, O King, there-have of late years happened in this Nation, many
strange Changes and Revolutions, to the great Amazement of the Sons of Men, by
which most men of all Ranks and Qualities have been subject to Err; from which
we cannot altogether Acquit our Selves; yet this we can boldly say, That
although some of us were in Arms under the former Powers, our End was not the
Destruction of men's lives, but rarher their Preservation, and to prevent the
rude Multitude of their Designs, which were no other then Ruin and Desolation
where they did prevail: This we say was our End, whatsoever our Adversaries do
say to our Reproach.

And whereas, O King, there have (within these few Days) been in the City of
London, very strange and unheard of Actions, to the wounding of our Souls, we
have been so far from Designing or Acting therein; that Envy it self cannot
justly Chargeus; Nevertheless such is the Portion of many of us, to be taken
out of our Houses, and from our Employments, beaten and abused in the Streets
by the rude Multitude, haled before the Justices and other Officers, and then
having nothing to Charge us with, they put to us the Oath, or Oaths, and upon
Refusal (though Christ has Prohibited Swearing at all, especially any
Promisary Oath) are we sent to Prison to the impoverishing and ruin of us, our
Wives and Children; which Opposition against Swearing now in us, is no more
then what the greatest Part of us were against under the former Powers.

But that which wounds us most, O King, is the late Proclamation, wherein there
is no Difference made, but as though all were alike in the Transgression, and
had all made an ill use of thine Indulgence, and forfeited our Liberty, which
does strengthen the rude Multitude in their Confidence, That we are Guilty of
some Pernicious Design against Thee, O King, and the Nation; which false Report
greatly obstruct our Liberties to Meet together to Pray and Edify one another;
as also to Meet in our own Houses to Pray one with another, which we humbly
conceive is our Right as Men and Christians; which if we do, we are liable to
be destroyed by the rude Multitude, though we cannot be Charged with any Fact:
Thus the Guiltless suffer with the Guilty, which is averse to the Mind of the
Holy and Just God.

And although our Consciences do bear us witness, that we have not abused our
Liberty by any ill use that we have made of Thine Indulgence, and that Thy
Proclamation (Prohibiting our Assembling together after our usual manner) do
not properly reach us, but that we ought to have had the benefit of Thy former
Declaration ascertaining our Christian Freedom; Yet for as much as the late
Disturbance might minister Cause of Jealousy, being done by some that
pretended Separation, but not of our Faith or Practice, such of us as have not
been Imprisoned, have since Thy Proclamation was extant, forborne to Meet, lest
it should be judged Contempt of Authority: So willing we are to prevent all
Grounds of Fear: And we do Challenge the World, to come forth and show wherein
we have offended Thee that we are thus dealt with; for we can truly say with
the Servant-of God of old, That Innocence is found in us, and against Thee, O
King, have we done no harm.

Wherefore, O King, our humble Desire is, That Thou would seriously weigh
our Innocence and Sufferings with our humble desires, as also our forbearance
to Assemble (least it should be deemed Contempt) until we had Cleared our
Innocence unto Thee, which here (in the Fear of the All-seeing God) we have
done: And if notwithstanding our just Complaint, Thine Ears be shut against our
Cry, and will not Release the Innocent out of Prison, nor Restore our Christian
Liberty, which of late we have been deprived of without just Cause; but upon
misinformation, and shall still be liable to be Destroyed by the rude
Multitude, that then we shall cast all our Care upon our God, and Assemble
together to Pray, and build up one another in the things of our Holy God, as he
has commanded us, leaving Thee, O King, and all the World to judge, Whether we
ought not to obey God rather then Man: And if for serving our God Thou
suffer us to be Destroyed, we shall commit our Righteous Cause to him that
Judges righteously, and has said, Vengeance is mine and I will repay it, Romans
12. 19. In the mean time we shall patiently wait, and mightily Cry unto the
Lord, until he Redeem us from the hands of our Oppressors: For the Lord has
said, He will Encamp about his House, and no Oppressors shall pass through
them any more; for now have I seen with mine eyes, says the Lord, Zach. 9. 8.
All which, O King, we shall commit to Thy Consideration, and shall be subject
to Thee in Civil things for Conscience sake; and Subscribe our Names for our
Selves, and the Congregation to which we do belong.

Thomas Perrot Jonathan Jenings Christopher Miles Thomas Smith William Pain
Richard Newbery Richard Day William Goodman Samuel Hodgkin, Henry Brown Walter
Pen John Hamersly Thomas Hayns Samuel Fulcher William Beacar John Manbee Samuel
Loveday Thomas Garner, John Michel Humphrey Jones Thomas Orchard Hugh Boulton
Thomas Clark Richard Tailor Robert Parker John Parker.


POSTSCRIPT.
LEt none Judge or Think amiss, that we do not give the King those Titles that
are commonly given unto him; for it is not out of any dis-respect to His
Person; being not willing to Deny Him any thing that is given Him of God: And
for these Words, Thee, Thou, and Thine, we find in Scripture to be given to the
greatest and best of Men that were in Authority, as also to God Himself, and to
our Lord Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660.


