TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Our Worthy and Grave SENATORS The LORD MAYOR, and
ALDERMEN, To be suddenly communicated and consulted with the COMMONALTY of the
City of LONDON, in Common Council Assembled.
The further humble Petition and Remonstrance of the Freemen and Prentices of
the City of LONDON.
Humbly acknowledging
THe favor and justice you did us in your so fatherly Reception of Us and our
humble Petition, which is with our hearty acknowledgement redoubled in us, by
Your late Votes of the 9th December present, wherein (among other things) You
were pleased (though We Attended not this Court for Answer to Our Petition, it
being so suddenly called, that We knew not of it) to order Thanks to us for it,
(and that the Particulars in our Petition were under Consideration) and that
upon the Report of the Committee appointed by this Court to Consider of the
Peace and Safety of this City, that the Militia of the same, has time out of
mind been in the Lo. Mayor, Aldermen and Commons of London, to Raise, Array,
and Exercise a Militia for their own Defense: Upon which Report, this
Honorable Court Voted the Asserting that Power, and gave Directions to a
Committee to Confer with the Lord Fleetwood about Settling the said MILITIA; as
also concerning a FREE PARLIAMENT, as being the only Expedient for the Peace
and Safety of this Nation

Now so it is, May it please You our Honorable Senators, to give Us leave, out
of the sadness of our spirits, to breath forth to You our Fears and Dangers
upon the Experience We had of the 5. of this Month, how the Mercenary Soldiers
did Murder, Slay, and Wound many of Us, only to prevent our peaceable Way of
Petitioning You for such things as concerned the Safety of this City, and
well-being of this Nation; that we cannot but be jealous by reason of their
then barbarous Usage of Us, their main DESIGN is to gain Time till a great Body
of Horse of Two thousand or more be Drawn from other Parts into this City,
(which We are not sensible of without good Grounds) will be Here in a very Few
days; when they will be Able not only to plant Guns at all our Gates, but make
Use of those Grenades and other prepared Instruments of Violence to the Ruin
and Destruction of the Rights and Liberties of this Famous City: Which done,
they will Command Your Persons and Purses to Satisfy their Lusts and Avarice,
and Charge their Cruelties and Murders upon You and Us, though innocent and
passive.

Out of our great sense and apprehension thereof, and as the only means to
prevent the evil Consequences that may follow, We hold it our Duties for the
good and safety of this City, and to prevent the michiefs that threaten us,
that You will be pleased seriously and suddenly to consider, that nothing can
make this City safe, nor us under You, but a sufficient strength within us, by
which you may defend Your selves and us from all such attempts as may be made
upon You, and obtain that universally desired Free Parliament.

It is therefore our humble and most earnest Prayer, as You have Voted the
Arraying of a Militia for the defense of the City is in the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Commons of London, That You will be pleased not to be deluded and
delayed by those who work wholly by their Plots and Policies to keep all power
in their own hands, to Subjugate and Enslave the Nation to their own Ambition
and Covetousness instantly without loss of one hours time Night or day, (the
Lords day also in this Exigency not exempted, being confident it is his own
work,) until You have made Choice of the most Valuable and Considerable Persons
in this City for Field Officers and Commanders for a Considerable Body to be
presently arrayed within this City for the defense thereof, which if You shall
delay you may unhappily be accessory to your and our Ruins. And that you may
with the more Courage and Confidence proceed therein, we hereby oblige our
Selves, our Lives, and all that is dear to us, if there shall be any
interruption in this our proceeding, We, with Seamen, Watermen, and all other
Artizens and Tradsmen of this City (who are in their Lively-hoods and Interests
engaged with us herein,) will rise as one Man in your Defense: which Safe and
Honorable way if upon any Dilatory pretense whatsoever (raised by Subtle
Designers to Entrap you,) You shall not instantly pursue to Action, We have
done our parts, and doubt not but GOD will out of his great Mercy and Wisdom
find out a way (though by weaker means to Accomplish this great Work, to which
Gracious Providence we Commit both You and Our Selves.

And will Constantly Pray, etc.

