mystical and geometric images including Star of David, globe and compasses,
and descending bird, and Hebrew and alchemical characters

THE AVRAV JOHN His Aurora in Tranlagorum in Salem Gloria. OR The discussive of
the Law and the Gospel betwixt the Jew and the Gentile in Salem Resurrectionem.

I Theaurau John. Allah. Al. am able to give a definition of all or part of the
part, of the History or Mystery in any quaerie stated either in the Law or
Gospel, for the reconciliation of both into One.

Arise and shine O Daughter Sion for thy light is come forth from thy God who
will honor thee with precious Ornaments of Glory and Dignity.

Imprematur.

I except against five letters in the english alphabet as WXYQF and OF is not
proper in any state substantial, but the four are false according to any true
state, for a true state cannot be wrote with a false letter.

I write 2 VV for W for X K for Y: I for Q: G for F: PH now C is weak but it is a
sure impeade.

Now though them letters be wrote it is for to let down the state to your
capacity, but I account them as they are stated in the insert now as the
letters stand no tongue in the earth can hold forth the Hebrew as the English
tongue can render it to it self in the perfection: take notice scholars I am
not book-learned, but I am heart-knowledged by divine inspiration.

farewell
O England, O Earth, Jew, Gentile, All ye Nations and People Behold, Behold the
beginning of days has sent you a new day a Gift, Peace and reconciliation in
himself, in one another: O England and all Nations behold, the king of
Righteousness is risen up in and upon you with healing: that prince of peace to
settle peace in your borders, O England my love to thee constrains me to weep
and to weep bitterly, least thou should not in this thy day know the things
that belong unto thy peace: here is not only the shutting up of an old year,
and beginning of a new as to our account, but it is the shutting up of theevening
of many ages, and the beginning of a new and most glorious day, the binding up
and casting away broken empty vessels lamps in which is no oil, doing away
shadows bringing in the substance, mighty anointings both to Jew and Gentile:
God, Christ, Iah, Jesus, Jehovah, Emanuel, Eloah, laying himself the
foundation and cornerstone: O England thou art torn from the top to the
abyss the bottom in thy civil in thy religious constitutions, who O who shall
bind thee up; are not thy very foundations rottenness, are not gray hairs
upon thee every whee; nay upon all the nations, wherefore has the Lord done
all this, but that he himself might be thy foundation alone: man cannot do
Iehovahs work, he indeed may pull down rotten branches, but none can lay
foundation but the Lord.

The Lord calls for your most serious and intentive consideration and
inspection: ye Jews my Brethren, ye Gentiles my Brethren be not offended at
names, ye Gentiles be not offended at Hi-priest, for then you must be offended
at Christ, of whom Paul writes that he was Hi-priest, for ever after the order
of Melchisedeck, and that he lives for ever, Hi-priest for ever to make
intercession for us, he who was without father without mother without beginning
of days or end of life, who blessed Abraham before he received circumcision
the seal of the covenant, Lo the Gentiles -- Isus the Jews Hi-priest, nay the
Gentiles Jesus the Gentiles Hi-priest also: my brethren the Jews stumble not,
be not offended at the Gentiles Jesus, who is your Iah your Hi-priest, consider
my dear brethren after whom my soul pants: would your God who loved you above
all the Nations of the earth give you an Hi-priest subject to death no it was
himself in Aaron, in Moses, and the rest, he who lives for ever they could not
as men do those mighty works, but it was God even your God Iah, Jehovah the
Gentiles Jesus, that did those great and mighty works in them and by them, both
Jew and Gentile brethren agree in this, that there is but one, that this one
only made, and is all things, gives life and being to all things, whither then
will the Jew, whither will the Gentile go for life, for salvation, for
deliverance, if there be no other one, but in this one, in whom from whom and
by whom are all things even God blessed for ever, Iah, Jehovah, Jesus, all
speaking, or signifying one and the same thing, which is life, deliverance,
salvation, to all that in love obey him: the difference then lies only in the
outwardnesse in name and form, O let us not contend, let us not strive, no
differ for or in the things that are not; knowing both have that which is my
brethren the Jews have not you in a greater measure lost, or are you not much
corrupted in the things left unto you by Moses and Aaron: so my brethren the
Gentiles is it not now with you, as it was with the Jews about the time that
deliverance, that salvation arose to you, are not the like differences amongst
you now, as was amongst them then: what true account can you my brethren the
Jews give of your institutions, and what true account can you my brethren the
Gentiles give of your institutions, if no true account then in truth, and by
good consequence no account only hold the foundation God: Thus is both law and
Gospel fully slain by that man sin, (not of sin) and the day of
resurrection is at hand both to Jew and Gentile in one life, in one law: for
life which is God, or Christ, or anointing is the law and Gospel in and unto us.

This Epistle was written by him who transcribed this book and is yours in love
to serve you ROBERT NORWOOD.

To the Reader.
BEloved brethren God has been pleased to manifest himself to me marvelously
as by this little manuscript will appear, if duly considered, in as great a
measure as he did in the times of our forefathers, for there is a light coming
forth that all the prophets pointed, unto that is the transcendency of
restoring the Jew and Gentile into one Radax, now for this work has God sent
me forth, and in this work I am Reuben, the Lords firstborn, and the first in
the first Trine, as wilappear in the manifestation of the dispensation: Now I
bescech you my brethren read exactly way carefully, a greater mystery never was
wrote: if rightly understood: The Lord give you understanding in all things.

Yours to serve you in love Theaurau John Tannijour Allah al High Priest Sabbah
Scribahjail.

TO THE STATES In ENGLAND, and of ENGLAND.
BEloved the divine law is in and from God, whose Majesty none can represent,
but it does include all, and is included in all and all things: comprehending
all and all things, and is comprehended of neither all nor nothing, but it
self comprehending, comprehending, comprehending and enjoying it self alone,
yet one, no one, but all, no all, yet all, no one, yet one, and that one, that
none can ever see: This is the perfect Trinity, forth from thence we came, to
it we must return again: This is the working of the three Persons so called
in the Deity in sesola in reveras sed homo, non homo, sed Deous inse so Pater
orbus in elma rationis in sesetera.

Now when I cite any language or tongue; know the Major includes the Minor, as
part Hebrew, part Latin: The Major it is properly wrote in, but I am forced to
cite many simblims or words for the radical examplication of the sentence for
no one language can carry the truth in its full species radically: But the
Radaxes in themselves which no man can speak: For they are the key and inlet
to the Deity, and outlet to his creatived creation and creations know no man
created the world, Neither no man gave a law unto the same, but Man in his
state was the conduit-pipe in which the Deity passed through in its own
commandings to effect the will of it self in sesola, non multus lattinnas:
Scholars you think I speak false Latin because I follow not learned lying
rule: Know a rule cannot be true that is learned, for the rule is life learning
and all things: Now how will you have your Rule to be measured, this must be
your answer, the learned Fathers and holy men left us this that we walk by,
and understand one another in: know that a ly with a ly is one method: Now know
you cannot read the truth in Saint Augustine, but your translated ly of
Augustine: know that the difference in the state citing Jehovah and every name
of him are distinct, and no name can hold him that is all things at once and
always the same for thus in God and of God that is all that can be spoken,
there is the whole Mystery of the Deity: so the truth in Augustine could not be
wrote, for it was it self, and the thing and name: now if no man can speak
the intentive of the spirit of the Radaxes Radiases is the proper word or
simblim in the Hebrew but the word or simblim must be stated according to the
Method or language, where it is wrote.

Now having made introduction into this Mystery of Mysteries through the light
of the eternal being, which is my light and life, in so great a measure that
my humanity cannot understand the divinity, neither have I yet strength to bare
it, I am like to a mite to the creation in this mystery intendant: And to be
truly nothing in our selves, that is passive, is to be wholly Gods all. I
beseech you brethren mind; I cite to you but cannot confer, for that in me
is it self, the same in you, if ye be in God, it is the union of one spirit, by
which we have not only boldness in him, but access to him in reality.

Now to come to the Methods Mystery, it is this: the Deity and humanity, which in
effect is all and all things. This is a strange state, but it is a true one, for
the humanity is the created of the Deity: Now to begin your translation says
Adam: Now I demand in what time and tongue that derived took both beginning and
name, I beseech you read with circumspection, for it is the eternal spirit
dictating forth into the understanding, that causes a resurrection from the
dead; there is one Mystery that the witnesses pointed unto that were President:
Now this I must declare unto the eternal praise of the Deity I had no learning
but in seven days when I was a part I received my divine learning by
inspiration so that my light is over all all languages, and truth in them I can
read. The ly I leave it to the inventors of it, as for our translation of our
divine mystery (as you call it) the translation is most false now for me to
asperse, and cannot prove it I should be found a false witness before my God,
but because that something you may know I know what I affirm, I have rendered
these reasons in English to the capacity of all.

The first the Radaxes by men radically understood, they understood not.

Secondly the spirit of the Radaxes, being unions in themselves entire, yet
their influences being mullicities.

Thirdly their conjuncts various.

Fourthly their adherents intricable.

Fifthly their intendant extent to this day is concealed.

Sixthly their combines is numerous.

Seventhly their evangelical life lives in themselves, which is God, and what
to whom he sends this message they are open unto and locked to the whole
creation, there is seven states stated, which is perfection pointed unto, that
the glory of glories that should come unto the Jews, the fullness of
transcendency: in excellency, know you that excellency exceeds transcendency:
Tran carries in it treas personas but excellency carries una persona which is
the whole 3 in the unions Deity, yet not confounding the three, but in this
state the greatest mystery, which the world knows not to this day: The name is
not knowledge, knowledge is the the thing and name, and in this I am the Lords
Reuben in the same, and to let you know what Reuben is, he is Gods first born,
that is no less then the evening, and the morn but these are hieroglyphiks or
saffiks to you, but to open your contracted time and name as Adam, now if Adam
was the first, where was he placed, the earth he gave to the sons of men, and
then he did not confine man to one place, I argue with you in your own ri^dle,
though I know how where and when, and what and how what came to be, that is the
mystery. Now to your Adam I state (...) Hamah, and prove this radically
radified in all learned learnings, nay your learnings, but to show you your
Hebrew is the tenth derivacy of and from the Hebrew radiases, and fallen weak
by handling, and mingling, and worst of all humanity adding and adjoining, and
weaving in his own invention, that is weakness, and has made that a ly which is
strength, but it is the same and is like a glass that shows him his vilifying
the same: now know that to write the Hebrew in full, it is Gods influence in his
full creation for, it is word in him, and name on, and in us, the substance in
himself: Now know I write the hebrew in his virgin state, as Moses wrote it,
and the same spirit in me dictating forth what it self pleases to insert, for
we are but servants, and pens in its own hand we are weak, nay we are weakest
men: So the fittest to be Gods scribes we are nothing, yet in that
nothingnesse, is Gods glory most illustrated to the confounding the learned
wise men: weak emeaneto confound strong, strongest strengths: Now Moses wrote
in Radaxes in voce Evangelorum sed legit hominibus, he spoke in the voice of
Angels, and ye read it as men, and by your reading, and endeavor you would
bring in your filthy humanity to be shearers, in that divine gift alas the more
ye reach the farther off, if not reached into first, and if reachings do not
reach from that divine reached unto you, and that in you reaches at and unto
from whence it came out: From this is the true reaching reach, that reaches
from, and unto: Mind this last state stated well: Now to come to our two names
Adam and Hamah: Now your intention with my truth, is one, but intention is not
truth always in its declaratives for the intentions in the heart are truth,
but by outward impeads it cannot reach to its declarative, and so men judge
that a ly which is Gods truth really, and royalty; Mind them words: Now to
prove your word Adam, thus I know now the less learned the best and greatest
scholar, now you state Adam as one man, Istate Hamah the man and whole
creation: Now Doctors I am the Doctor I am in your method thus a man is but one
man I grant that, but that man of many compounds, you will not deny me this,
now to know not some compounds of and in man, but to know al and every mite of
and in man in its adjunct and coatrifyings which are variety of varieties: I
give you one hint in the primum mobulis, that say you is the soul of man, or
spirit: The first I deny, and grant the second, that is the soul in which is
the preterparfuisse, and to that belongs one hundred and fifty creatives and
yet they give not life in sexa aurialis: In cophi or the heart is belonging 63
creatives, and yet no life sexta ne vo I ah (...) so in the rest of and in man
is creatives but this is by the way now to come to prove you name, for the man
I acknowledge to be Gods creation, but for God to put a false name, on a true
created, it cannot stand with his essential being, for as he is the truth so
his spelling and names are direct truth, for let me tell you the spellings of
God are the gatherings of his creative and joining them together is the
gatherings created now into himself, then the name he gives them is himself,
and can this be a false adjoining or conjoyning but this is mysterious: But to
come to your Adam Adam: Now whether 4 letters or 5 be more significant judge ye
as two did: now I say in the true spelling there is nod at all daleth is
animpeade, and in no method bears radical soundnes, though in his state he is
as proper and perfect as any of the rest, but thus you say God made man
perfect, it is true, then how can an impeade be in this perfect thing, or spell
this perfect thing, I would desire all you learned men in the earth to give me
the radical Radaxes of your Adam, and then in a moment I would declare my
Hamah and ye be so weak that you cannot spell the name, why was fained a garden
for the same, but seeming pleasant fruit is the tree, but time will not bear
the unlocking of this mystery which I shall do shortly, in your printed Hebrew
as you call it, for it is but call indeed, and call is weakness, and a ly, your
points and dividing the simblims or letters.

(Or letters as you call them) declare patching, and peecing, and indeed it is
so, so I say the fathers fathers conceived vanity, and the sons bring forth the
ly? Now to come to that divine law, which are we men, if we be in the truth,
for the law is but name, man is the law and thing, and name, Now man cannot be
without himself can he, no he is truly, and essentialy himself thus as he is
Gods representative, radically he is one of and in himself, yet detracting
from himself is the division, and I may say truly to indetractation from his
essential being, for he has annihilated himself in that he being himself he
would be more, not in respicie sanctus, sed in multa divicies, sed etiam non
probat devinies, sed mors sola in re in humitantibus in que sola est vita, non
loquiter, verbusus voce, sed nullos ad me sola gloria in santurum spiritus,
sola me opertet ad me, the english: Not in respect of being more holy then he
was, but he an holiness did conceive, which was riches nay life, but it proved
poverty and death, for there is a life in all things, if life were restored in
us, but we being dead things to us that are alive in themselves is dead to us,
so our enjoyment is sorrow, travel and tears, and trouble, there is the wages
of our disobedience: nay to all this the priests by subtle policy has let in
another Devil to torment us when we are dead, and hell to plague us in; To
fright us to themselves which is Abaddon, or Apollyon, but I wave this till
another time: here ly es the bondage of the creation a derivacy from this wrote
in the greek the oldest greek which you will say must be nearest; now the
differance betwixt the Indian greek and your greek is quite another thing in
sound and substance, this that you deifie so much, your essence your trade, for
I; account it no better, nay when the masters of your own company was in power
how many that would not hear a ly told was troubled and excommunicated, but God
has cut off the head of the Abadonisme and I hope nay I know I shall bind up
the Abbre, and chain up that deceiving Devil that has deceived the nations so
long now if you say I am against teaching, I answer I cannot for the true
teacher is God, and he makes an inlet for himself in his new creature, or else
he is in darkness: you will say what was not the Apostles teachers of God, and
ministers of the gospel; I say no they were dispensers of the eternal workings
of God in them to the same where it met, it was, nay and is the same, an union
in one spirit, they spoke from the root, you from the name of their dead
letter, you say Paul said so, yea and it is the word of God, God is word
himself, and not a lettered name, Paul was word you have not Paul's letters
spelled, then you are far from Paul's word, nay my brethren ye priests, ye have
a truth within you, and yet a ly, nay the ly is preached by you, for the
spellings of a ly cannot teach truth, but it is dark to you, and for you I cite
it, to cause you to look into your selves: now to cite one place in Matthew the
first and (...) verse that is an allusive to the whole method intended in the
whole book; now where will you find this chapter it is not Matthew, it is in
Saint Luke the 5 and the 18 verse it is not there it is in Saint John that is his
third epistle was wrote by Matthew as shall be declared for love is God: now
what greater love was there then this God sent himself to redeem himself:
who could captivate God, is not he all undeniable, then who is Gods opposer,
the Devil what is the Devil, it is not love, where does he dwell, in the hearst
nay spirits of men: when shall he be cast out, at the appearing of God, which
is the burning up of sin in man, but to prove Matthew the first, Luke the 5 and
John the 3 thus: Matthew, Luke, and John was one spirit, and in them one birth
in the Trine, and all in one another, and every one distinct by name, yet the
thing one, there is neither one nor a thousand nor a Million of Millions: for
the whole creation to him is but one man, was, is, and shall be light the same,
darkness the same, but distinct from one another: thus the Lord does unfold
himself in some more, in some less but the same spirit in all light to him
but dark in and to our selves: Now to know how this darkness came and
continues on, and over the face of the new creature, the new creature is not at
first able to unvaile that thick and heavy veil that lies upon it, why because
the manhood is not able to bear it at once or many times days and years: not
but that he was able to have made us able, but it is his pleasure so to make us,
and in thus being made our happiness consists in so being content, then in truth
his will is done in earth as in heaven, this is obedience to the law nay it is
the divine law in us, obedience is our royalty, our glory, our Majesty, our
excellency, our union in him, with our selves, and with one another, this is
love, this is God in us unto himself, for God is love: Now Jeremiah complains
of oppression, of injustice, and wickedness, what would he have done in these
days fours; who covenant in lies to destroy, O I weep for to see it, my soul
is in heaviness, and my tears flow continually for the afflicted, and
deliverance appears not in power, arise O Lord our God, and plead our cause
against our oppressors, and deliver thy chosen we are necessitated to them that
hate us, and thy law which is love they condemn: Now to account that to be
which is not is to embrace the ly, and let truth pass, thus to say we act
righteously we wrong God, but to speak truth though we cannot help people to
the enjoyment of it, we are innocent when we do not bid God speed to their
wicked works: Now what does a man get in, and among wicked men, reproach and
infamy, and counted the worst of men, though in truth they can charge him with
no crime, how are we termed Ranters, and lascivious and wicked: in this matter
I answer for my self, as the answer of another will not free me. Now know I
have been rent, and divided among many, and my day of healing is not come from
my God to me as yet, but it draws near, for I see hope in this lowest dust:
Now to declare my self I hate every evil way not by quivocation but in truth
as thus if I were not what I seem to be, Nay more then I can express, how
could I be the Lords Hi-priest, and holy writer of the law which is love as
these words import allah al Sabbah Scribah jail: Now know I never was any
scholar I could read English: In 7 days I was absent saw no man, and in that
time my God taught me, that now I am able to translate the Bible to it self
which is truth, then insert that truth into any language under heaven, and yet
not a quarter of a year since I came forth, My light is daily more and more,
yet I am sent to the Jews my brethren: Paul saw something when he said rejoice
ye Gentiles with his people now is the return to the Jews, which have been
outwardly cast off, but inward obedience is the sweet smelling savoured
sacrifice, the undeniable truth on both sides as Abraham believed and it is
Righteousness, the thing spoken from the Lord, is word and that word is
restoration to life from the dead, which word is obedience that is love O
wonderful, wonderful, the Jew in obedience love: that love is God, the
Gentile which word signifies an unbeliever, the unbeleever turned obedient
obedience is love, love is God, here is the Jew in God, the Gentile turned Jew,
and in God, where is the differance, it is in the name, what is the name Jehovah,
and Jesus, I am a Jew my Jefus is the Jews Jehovah the Jews Jehovah my Jesus,
these two are but names of the same intended thing, Thing is the substance of
both the names. Now my brethren the Jews by line cannot relish the name Jesus,
nor the Gentile cannot own the law, Now what is the law it is the gospel, what is
the gospel it is the law, the law is gospel being true revealed the gospel is law
concealed, the gospel is hid Paul says to them that are without: Now you have
translated OVRECOVS, that was Paul's words that his lips pronounced, and you
have stated an irrecoverable estate upon that, which Paul intended not, he was
better instructed then to state a final sentence, and difinition, on that him
self lay under not long before, but the word runs thus in Paul's true method,
if light be hid, it is to them that are without: Now mind the difference, if the
gospel be hid it is to them that are lost, what work is in this text, can all
your wit wave this cited translation, you cannot for your affirmaive will admit
no negosiation, but binds up finally, which Paul durst not do he had the root,
you not the leaves that grew of the twigs, therefore examine the rest, and you
will find no more odds but darkness stated for light in many places.

Now here is hope for all that was in darkness -- then which the Jews was most
opposite then, because the manifestation of Jesus was fresh before them as I may
say, and there was hope of their greater obedience Paul thought, and therefore
he stated many invitations that the word held forth dubiously, as the Scripture
is all mystery, as I shall open by and by in this little treatise to come to
the law Paul our Apostle says it is holy, just, and good, Christ says I came
not to destroy the law but to fulfill by what, by obedience, is obedience the
fulfilling the law, then remember Moses my servant, and the commandments I
commanded by him as my mouth speaking to you, that is you should obey me and
keep my commands for ever: Now let us reason as men, for we understand ever to
be always, and we are not guilty in not knowing, but knowledge makes us
guilty, for light is come but men love darkness, that is not departing from
that, and turning to that, light points them unto: Now what have you Gentiles
gotten with your upbraiding the Jews with their darkness, it preaches to you
the greater destruction, for it had been better you had not seen then in seeing
not obeying, for Christ is light, the law is light; Now the obedience to these
makes us it, and it us, and so an union with the father, all which is but
obedience: but to come nearer thus Christ say we, is our rule, which light is
truth, the anointed of the father, now if ye walk contrary to his prescript ye
are not ruled by him nor by his light, then take your own translated text, if
the gospel be hid, it is to them that be lost: Now they may in a proper sense be
said to be lost, that have had light; acknowledged it to be the light, and they
in darkness, that walk not in that light, when that light is utter darkness
to themselves, O poor souls I pity you in this that you think you are rich,
and need nothing, not knowing you are poor blind, and naked, is Christ your
hope, your glorying glory? alas, he is the substance of that lettered name: he
commands love ye are murderers, he commands, do work of mercy, how many starve
for want of bread? he says cloth, how many naked? O leave off the name, and in
your obedience pursue the thing, in new obedience, by better declarative acts,
it is a dishonor to name Jesus to act in other ways, are these the good works
of the gospel that should join and bring in unbe^ers. No, you put them by that
would come in, and indeed are enemies to Christ, and put him, in as much as in
you lies, to open shame; but you hurt your selves not him; for he is, ye are
not.

Now I come to the Jew my brethren according to the flesh, they are dark:
light is coming to them, and freedom too, from their outward bondage, to a
glorious freedom: Now though there is darkness, yet there is love one to
another, if we say darkness, and fruits of love proceed, is not that darkness
better then our seeing and doing nothing? Mind that state; well may that speak
for them, that if more light, more works; now we run contrary, the more we know
the less we do, but to turn to the vaste difference, that is betwixt these
two people so called, that is Jews and Gentiles, under which state the whole
creation lies entitled, that though men account many, yet to the Lord but one
people, yet two distinct, light and darkness, now the Jew is the seed to whom
the promise was made, saying in thy seed shall all the earth rejoice was this
made to Abraham when he was circumcised or before? before, for obedience led
him to the act: Now faith was before circumcision, and circumcision was a seal
to Abraham of the Ty or Covenant betwixt God and him: now know circumcision was
not a vain thing, because it was the declarative act of obedience of the
father of the faithful now we own Abraham to be the father of us both Jews and
Gentiles then if you be both sons where is your obedience to your father, that
commanded his children to walk in his ways, and his ways was Gods way, and
what he commanded, his God commanded him.

Now to come to the full state of Jew and Gentile, it is thus the name causes the
difference and not the substance; but the maine is, they being not in the being
is light is the cause of the censuring one another, for they that be in that
being never disputes, for to be is to end disputes; and not to be, is all
disputes; So then the shaddows dispute: the substance is one and both in one;
and so there is union and communion with our God; neither Jew nor Gentile,
neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, and this that
creates this new creature is obedience: now if obedience be the Ty that is
required of all, nay, it was the Ty on your Adam, (...) my Hamah which is the
same intended, now to be obedient is the restored being, for disobedience cast
out, and obedience brings in; here the depth of mystery lies to know how lost?
how restored? we fell, we all in Hamah that is Adam, your bible reads it so:
now the Jews law says do this and it is life, what is the meaning of that? was
it dubiously laid down? then the people could not be guilty; but it is as the
Radaxes are every one distinct and perfect unity in it self, and joined it is
the fame; so was al Gods declaratives to his people; for people could not have
been charged with guilty, but by disobedience, and they knowing clearly the
command was contrary to that that they would act, now it is properly stated: sed
hominibus in se spetiam in regulative sed nam meam orata alvahin obedeunter
hosaret ad me mecum, ad me solah sonat and at ono pon derah allah nedet ad me
male one seraret oloco solam per hoc oli medat in aquiesse: the English: but
men in all things would disobey me setting up themselves that I command not,
but to obey me in that light I prescribed unto them, but they denied me in all,
and so became nothing of me, but rest in themselves, which is no rest, but
death to that, should have been life: that is their enjoyment sorrow and misery.

But you scollars that view my book titled Aurora Tranlagorum: now know you
know not my learning, you learn it, but it is knowledge and learning; there is
learning, I count the parrets learning, that is headlearning, without
heart-knowledge: now know when Icite, any Latin, Hebrew, or Greek, or Arabic,
or Siriack, or transilvanian, or Muscovian, or Orcadialis, Orientalis, in any
one of these with anyone word I can influ the whole sentence, I can impede the
whole sentence, or any word in the sentence stating it betwixt two Radical
words, in any method I can lessen or weaken the Ty of any Bar in what word or
letter or sentence, I please and if you cannot do this, you cannot write true:
you know gimell is the Hebrew key, kion the greek key E the English Radical,
but you know not this method, nor none shall know it, but he to whom it is sent
if you were not stupid in ignorance, you might know me, and from whence I come;
and my work is the greatest on the whole Globe, for to bring variety into
unity; but not to dispute, but to give a state, or take a state, in any created
thing or things; in Earth, Air, fire, or water, Terrestrial, Ce estiall, the
influences of the stars: But to the matter of obedience, it is a due unto
God, and to be paid by us who are his leage-people.

Now to consider that disobedience casts forth, and obedience is an inlet to
happiness; now see how many pursues the one, and flies from the other; now we
are blind in disobeying, and seeing is to obey; it is the light of life, the
glory of Excellency, the divine truth, the law, the gospel the all required of
man.

Now know who requires it? God; for what? For our good; and shall we be such en
emies to our selves as not to retrune to our happiness? O Lord help us we are
a helpless lump, a stupid ignorance.

Now the main difference betwixt the Jew and Gentileis, when they neither of
them are in light; for darkness dispute names, and take it for things, but to
be in light is an end of disputes: for light is the substance and cannot stoop
to shadows or notions: Now to be in light, is to be the children of Abraham:
Then Jew and Gentile both one; and both restored Hamahs or Addams by obedience
in him.

Now to come to the point of points, nay the primum mobile, is this that causes
the far dissent of the Jew from the Gentile, is the humanity of Christ: now
know faith goes not to seek an author, for it is the substance and tries all: now
let us look into the devinity, and the humanity of Jesus and be circumspect
that by the one we confound not the other: it is a mystery to this day, the
Apostles they could not reach the height, and is it so easy to us that are
blind to them?

Now Christ is the glory of the father; by him created he the world; he is the
life of the world; without him made he nothing that was made: equal with the
father: now I deny any man can reach these, or any one of these; it is not what
another says, but the matter what I know; now this I know this very day, I
have the greatest reach in this that any man on the globe has; and yet I reach
not full, this is the divinity, the humanity is harder to define; now Christ
the first borne among many brethren, this text is wrong rendered; for the
Antecedent goes before the relative, as hos in patroas in a lagma in a saleph
in rem fratris, it is in his full intendant, he was the birth of the first
brethren know my knowledge transcends the translated coppies; as I shall
shortly show in my next book, which will be the Elementary alsabs: now I shall
cite a cite that was never cited yet: he was the first in the first trine
interceding, you understand not this mystery, he was the anointed of God, that
text holds pertinent to the state, but not rendered in full; but I pass that;
he died for us (says the text) that text is falsely transtated from the very
root, and another thing stated, for the thing intended; the word in the true
orthodox is these, ver non homo sed in loca pancaveret a man not a man but in
place of offense. Now look I beseech you all into this dubious text, and
conclude not before due examination, that text stands in entire latin, and
admits of no adjunct of any other language: ye have your derivacy from the
greek, that has violated the intended mystery: it is derived from this essency
in the greek ous te annagramon in sem seala alar ophone adriei sebat, this is
the true greek intendant to their state, but it is true wrote from the Hebrew
Radaxes as is here inserted, (...) I peat that last for your nodification; but
Tread without it, and never use no broken, patched, pieces of Radaxes to insert
I know not what as you do constantly; now you may lay on the same burden again,
and dispute for it you may, know what you will find in me, though I cite no
more on the affirmative: He sits on the right hand of God to intercede for
us; is not this open to the world what is made here? but I pass till time,
that truth may take place; while then I amsilent: though I know God wilconfound
all men; that the glory may be unto himself, not by might nor by power, but by
my word will I overcome them says the Lord my God.

Now if light be come from heaven to light the dark corners of the earth, let
us rejoice and give glory; for great things are at hand, do you think it is in
vain folly that people run to and fro in this City crying woe and vengeance, I
my self was forced to go and cry in the streets, woe unto this bloody City it
shall be destroyed; but because vengeance is not executed suddenly, therefore
are the hearts of the sons of men set on fire to do wickedness; though we
declare a time, and the time come not, know it effects its own end, and the
wicked goes on more wickedly, to make himself fit for the slaughter; we, sit
down and acknowledge what is truth is Gods, and that that is the ly is our
selves: and we are silent till the Lord appear to refresh our fainting spirits.

Now to come to this state betwixt Jew and Gentile, now the humanity of Christ
it does stumble the Jew: now let me speak; the humanity has been so handled
with humane hands, and heads that it does in a manner darken the divinity of
Christ, as I could show in diverse places, and confound all, and all men, I
weigh the Creation as a feather in the divine mystery; for I am the Lords
gimell: scholars you know that unlocking, and locking is all mystery in the
whole Creation, and none reaching me, if they could I was not fit to be the
Lords Hi-priest: now the Jews stand off through you Gentiles disorderly
walking, now where so much light in words is acknowledged to be, and such
fruits flow, that light for the effects are the declaratives of our inward
root; for by their fruit you shall know them: now to give a declarative of
that that should be the Crown of a believers acting, truly I blush and am
ashamed to declare it; because if the power that must bring in the Jews where
not stronger then that power of darkness that rules in most of you, I should
beat them quite OFF, but they are grafted in by the power of the Almighty, and
that ingrafting shall appear in glory to your shame, that seem, and are not;
but are of the synagogue of Satan that deceiver to deal plainly with you who
have been the great professors, how are you fallen? How is your glory turned
into shame? nay many of you (I may say) are unmand; this is strange but will
appear too true in the incluso; Now you are falssifiers of covenant, ye are
covetous oppressors unjust, having respect to your selves, unrespecting all
others; ye are adulterers, and whore-mongers; nay unsatiable, worse then
beasts; O that man should so far unman his noble spirit! that his
declaratives prove more ignorant then a beast; nay many of ye will plead for
it, I say, as ever I said it is lust, love is love, whose end is love: I shall
declare two points to try this by as I have ever affirmed the same.

First O man I speak to thee who art the head, thou art the male, thou come
to the female, and through thy persuasion thou bring her to thy will: what
this will is, love, or lust the effect I commit to judgment betwixt me and
you; having attained your will, she is made thereby incapable of an outward
substance: for very food she has not, you to another and more, and bring them
to the same incapacity, and never regard any of them at all; nay steal from
them, you love, you say, so well, and deceive all that trust you; and this is
your practice; does Christ set you such example? or his ministers teach so? now
to make your acts love, you ought to want your self, that the necessity, thus
laid on her might be releeved; for did ever man hate his own flesh? Judge ye
what I say: now your answer is all is good, and all is God: let me make an in
let into that seered conscience, and weighye with true weights, would it be
good for you to be starved to death judge ye? That thou would do to thy
self, do to another; this is love; the other is lust and this is the whole
required of man, O this English OF does all the mischief in the whole tongue,
it is as bad as the greek Y: they be two lying words holding dubious varieties.

Now to come to the nisity of distinction in this false word, I take this state
to state it in: God is good, and OF him are all things good, that word is a ly,
that OF him in that state, the true state according to the divine intendant
spirit: You had thought OF should have been placed there, but it would vilify
the intendant: now OF God, is nothing proper to his divine being; but in God
all things are, and by him all things consist, and exsist, and in flu, and are
impeaded by the same power here stated: now you that say all is God, and all is
good, in God all are good, from him the same, but this does not reach your
method; nor you: but OF God you and your method is not; now the state is
contradicted; it is your true emblem, for you are a contradictious generation;
your fathers were bad, that was the Antinomian, against them Policarpus did
inveigh; but ye are worse then the worst of them; for ye by consequence make
Jehovah nothing at all but a dead idol: nay so I may say with reverence to his
divine majesty, you make him your stalking horse; that is you show him, to
betray them that look on him: that is the poor innocent; he or she is devoured
and destroyed by you: this I know: but to the nisity of distinction OF, it is
certed for a negative, and is understood an affirmative, and here is in these
two letters a mischievous mystery; wounding when they are intended healings Now
of God, and in God, are two distincts as light, and darkness: now to say, to
be in God, is proper; but to say to be of God, is improper; now to bring the
nearest relation that can be stated is this, God is the father of us all, that
state is nonsense and a ly; as thus, God is the father of all, that is false
according to divine writing: for as God is truth, so all must, every letter
stated, and syllable, word and every conjunct, and adjunct, conjoined, and
adjoined in meeter and method: alas men blind cannot discern cullers, nor
humane learning fathom divine knowledge which is knowledge and learning, is a
ly without the foundation which is God himself, now to show the full face of
this dubious constellation that is (of) you would think it quickly done, that
(q) is another of the duplexes to be cast out when I come to my maine work,
that is the translations of the hidden truth that lies vilifyed in the ly which
is the greek tongue, now our forefathers desired, but no man was found worthy
to open the book, but the spirit that indicted it: if the spirit of Jesus or
Jehovah be in you, he is the expositer of his own intendants intended in the
divine and sacred evangelical expressing in almo Bonoso almare rogel
ophronorico ab se sola amantur albo boano so on abcissere nos peca oet nedet
almahosanneh alujah hah eli lo mollodinei el le avellet ad me hosaret peco oli
bedeneret: the english of these five languages cited, and all composure
inunionsunion.

The hidden depths are open making
to raise sleeping men to a waking,
to raise them from their security
and scale their eyes to see eternity.
And that great deep revealed to them:
that troublesome mountain, and hidden stem.
that star of glory in the sky
that is buried by man's incredulity.
Now to state the thing that is of; and (In:) oF, is aquiet asseveration from
any intendant, as of such a thing, such a thing is that is proper; for, to say
that this thing is or was of that thing is the negative, denying the
afirmative, so by consequence nothing at all but nonsense; God will not be
spelled so: thus to say this was such a man's son it is proper, but to say this is
the son of such a man; the first denies the second, and so no conclusive can be
made: Now to you Antenomen, that is your name: proper it is to you, for by acts
men declare, and your acts declare you to be the worst of beasts, wolves in
sheeps-clothing; now you are of God, but not in God: now to this you say, all
is God, and all is good; how will this hold with your actings? thus you may say
wickedness is not of God, but by him it is suffered, or else you could not have
a being: now God is good to all; it is his essential being, he must cease to be,
if he cease to be good, this I grant you: but what will this help you, nothing
at all, but load you the more; that God is good and has commanded you good
ways for you to walk in, and a declarative of that good law in you, being
Gods, ought to be expressed by a good warrantable walking before this good God,
or else you are found fighters against your own mercy: so much for that second
LY: all is God now here the point stated is more curious then oF, (and IN) thus
all is God; it is true in one sense, but your eyes reaches not that center: for
your eyes looks downward, your actings declare no less: properly and
essentially all things are God, for from him all things are and came, this I
grant you; but this I deny you: your carnal reason is of and from your self,
as you are an essential, being from that essential, essentially descended:
mind I entreat for the mystery is great, now from your essential there is in
you, desentiall, desentives, in concurring with that that is not, or with that
that is truth; now the state is fixed on its peremphisis; now the querie is to
be resolved; for these things am I sent forth involved in humanity, and not
humanity but divinity; not mingling with humanity, but am in my own divinity
entire, free, absolute, unnecessitated, yet acting perfect truth it self:
Brethren here I see something to high for me to understand: I say, as I said
before, I am but pen to this anointing, the more I see the appearance, the
less I am in my self: O Lord strengthen my humanity for thy divinity is a
burden to me, and causes my humanity to waste in tears continually: Now you
Antinomians, you create to your selves a LY: and that you deifie as God, and it
is let in the seat of God, and is not God thus you say God is good, so say I,
but go to distinctions to distinguish to a title, and you and all shall see you
are nothing in God, but of God, and by God you are suffered in your evil
ways; thus Gods goodness is nothing to you; for you take a goodness to your
selves, refusing his goodness; and choose you one of your own as I will
declare: for the point is wondrous great, and a gulf swallowing many, and
more will follow, that seeming pleasant paths, but they lead to destruction;
stolen bread is sweet, but bitterness in the latter end: now to your created
God of your own making, did not they in the old time worship stocks and stones?
do not you Gospellers worse? for you worship the Devil for the spirit of man
is a Devil, and ye worship that; thus you build your foundation, thus God is
good, and all is God, and we may do what we list; as we live so we die; and come
forth into other things as grass, Roots; who has deceived you? it is the Ly in
your right hand, and ye will not know it, because the knowledge is death to
your present enjoyments. O that you would hear and return, why will you destroy
your precious souls?

Now your being is of, not in God, but by God, not from God, but to God; you
shall be subject to his aispleasure, you that will not obey, shall obey by
force, for God is just, holy, and good; Now to let you know that that cloak of
Antinomianisme is well wore, it is 1245 years old, it has been turned by
Polycarpus, and yet it is on again afresh, and new trimmed, that it is better in
show, and fuller Napt then it was at first; for it took its being from a
Clothier in Armenia, and so to Germany, then to France, now England swarms with
Cloth of that color (Of) will hold in that state.

Now to come to the close of this point, it is this, that you are the name, and
not the thing, and ye are both name and the thing; and that is two lies in two
states: thus you are named Professors of the Gospel, that you have the name,
and are not the thing, that is one Ly in that state; the other is, you are the
name Ante nomen, and ye are the thing and name: now there is two lies in one
state, because the name is a ly, and the thing a ly, and yet both the name and
the thing hold the intendant intended; but it is a ly in the foundation, and
then no name, or thing can be stated, but must be as the foundation is: so much
for you Ante-no-men, or Ranters, all one in the root, though you branches look
one diverse from another, you are the same in your structure or building.

Now to the Jews, you rest my brethren according to the flesh, you rest in
your observation; now your observation to rest upon is, to make that rest
unrest to you, by resting upon that rest which is not true rest, and by
consequence no rest at all: God is your rest, and no ceremony is rest, but
unrest. Thus if your rest be in and upon God, then you rest in obeying his
Commands: but Moses my Brother (I own him now) in what Hieroglyphick state I
write, I know, but it is hid to you, he said, if you obey the Commandments,
which the Lord has commanded you, it shall go well with you; but if ye will
not obey my commandment, then I will scatter you: Now my Brethren, I that have
been scattered with you, am sensible of our estate. As the Lord has shown me
my Radax was Aaron, Moses his brother, the Lords Priest; then Zachariah was my
Radax, whom they slew betwixt the Temple and the Altar; after this I was
carried away with Jeconiah into Babylon in that seventy years captivity, then I
was Priest in Jerusalem in Hosha my Radax, and continued in the Priests Office
till the second Captivity, then I was carried into Egypt by Pharaoh Necho, and
returned with Zorobabel in the time of Salmanasser, not Jeconiah but Hosai; but
the Hebrew is translated wrong in that state, as I shall make appear when I
come to unfold the patched Translations, vilifying some Genealogies, and
Deifying some, and some left quite out, that are extant in other Records in the
Eastern Countries, as in Media, Persia, and Egypt; then into Captivity by Titus
Vespasian, and so to Rome, from Rome to France in Charlemaigne, from that
descent to Henry the seventh, that was true Heit to Englands Crown before the
conquest of William of Normandy, as from Saggus, Henegist, and Chropher, that
is a proper word, and pertinent to the intendant in its proper tongue: yet
beyond all this, now you will admire, and count it strange, now the end will
make the tractate declarative, assume of these things, let me add one I enjoy;
though I was unlearned, all languages under heaven I had given me in seven days
space; this is a miracle in our days, not to take up your thoughts: thus, when
God had a mighty work to do, did not he fit men with abilities, endued them
with Power? Did not the Apostles at being called, speak with new Tongues? now
ye Priests my Brethren, if you Priests, I much more; for unto me is this grace
given, that I should unseal the hidden depth of depths in all mysteries and all
knowledge: but I am a child as yet, but with my weakness I shall be wise,
through him that has loved me with everlasting love: Now ye Jews, my
Brethren, for our disobedience the Lord has cast us out of our inheritance,
and our glory lies in the dust, and poor Sion, for whom my Soul is pained even
to death for her deliverance. O God remember Sion and Jerusalem that thou have
chosen, Remember she, O Lord, is desolate, and her children in poverty, and
captivity, confound them that wish her hurt; and O Lord, bless them that wish
her welfare to restoration. O it had been better we had not known, then that we
should not enjoy: O God, the Children are come to the birth, and there is no
strength to bring forth; Our eyes are unto thee, O God, and in thee, and from
thee, and by thee shall we be restored: O all ye people, behold whose sorrow is
like our sorrow, we have been in captivity so many hundred years, and all rule
over us, and oppress us, what was the cause of this grievous stroke? it was
Disobedience: You disobedient know God is just, if he cast us off, how expect
you to stand? Look, sin is one and the same, now God is making inquisition for
blood, this I know; what the effect will be I know not; but thus God will repay
in wrath and sury: I see a black Sky, where that Meteor will dissolve it self
into the terrestial Orbs, I imagine; nay, I know fall it will with violence to
consume the lifted up in pride; but our deliverance is from God alone: now
Brethren, know we and our Fathers have done wickedly, and transgressed the holy
Covenant: now what is the Covenant? it is Love, and for want of Love has this
great evil come upon us, as we may with sad hearts, and sorrowful spirits set
to our seals; but I look fully to see Jerusalem restored, re-edified; for God
causes not this Learning to come forth to be preached in another World: Woe unto
the inhabitants of the Earth, for a fire is a kindling, and the flame will not
be quenched, till it effect its end: for days of sorrow and mourning is at
hand. Now John in the Revelation writes, and as it is translated, saying, The
time is at hand, how many hundred years was it wrote, that word is Truth in his
Radax, for it is the present tense stated, and holds ever and all ages, and
times, for at hand is: they looked for its appearance, and it hung, and does
hang, like a Commet in the Air, attracting the Eye of all that pass, that
Species being a Watchword to them: now this word Eusebean is the ancient Greek
word, or radical expression of some event dangerous in its adherents or
dependants, as to say, the destruction of this or that may be, nay, will be,
the destruction of this or that: so Eroclidon is the same in effect both Greek
Compounds from the Hebrew radiases, holding the same influ; but Eusabean is the
proper Word, as thus, it is Radaxed thus (...) Now Eroclidon is thus (...) yet
here is the odds, the one admits no adjunct, and the other does in its
defendant ittere, there it admits a connection, and may be impeaded there, and
the T Y lessened, which Eusabean cannot, because it is barred in Sambah, or
Samech, being the full significant in the intendant state stated: But to come
to the Divine Story, which is Christ in the flesh, seen of men, received up to
glory: here is in this the whole inklu of the whole Story, what Christ was he
is, now what he is, he was, and ever the same, no less he was, he is, and to
come, the Father, Father, Fathers glory, he is not dead but risen, a
resurrection daily, hourly, when he was in the grave, where was the life of
the Creation, sem in loco asaphet, El doni aberet in loco tem deni aharet, ad
me inter perati alvah in sabat, this I english not, non quia pecavi: sed, but
the people cannot bear it, it confounds the vveak, and shakes the strong; sed
sum in loco olva in latinam ad re quia non habuit, se in operis salvah heni
tenrei vele nec amico oli been dear ad me allah sola malta alsial ad me mecavi
(...) (...)
plecavi ad me inserta alvah ola denet amo oli benederet lama absane in so
operati addit verat alma, the divine Mystery is a sealed Book many times to him
that is Pon-Man, when I write, I have no knowledge, neither behind nor before,
but the word that comes, I haste to be rid of, for it is not like vvriting a
Letter, and thoughts how to contrive, but it is it self, expressing it self,
through this vail of flesh: Now to give the state, and take the state, I will
confound the whole Earth, not I, but the Light in me, to bring variety into
unity, and unity again into pure variety: Now the divine Vision of S. John,
that word is not well pleasing in our days, the thing intended is truth, then
it may plead privilege for the same, but his mysteries are various in
themselves, and in translating they have made them more various and doubtful,
as in this place. The Godhead bodily, and diverse such metamorphos'd things, I
cannot tell where to begin, but take a say to show the whole: Now I desire
to know what is meant by the Godhead bodily, from whence comes this Monster,
the Godhead bodily is absolute blasphemy, the Text ought to have been rendered
Evi en sanet arri beneal alter in ago asalet mem, the English thus, the Deity
is not confined, nor cannot be limited, then how can it be said to dvvell
boaily, when it is in all bodies at once, and one time, and alvvayes the same,
and yet not bodied? The Deity has no body, it is spirit, any it is life, and
life is not body; Doctors what say you? this calls for your judgments, the
body is a body when life is gone, and life is life, the body nothing: Now life
is the spirit of the spirit in Man, and not Man, nor of Man, nor by Man, yet
the life of the life of Man, this is a glimpse of the Divinity of Christ or
Jehovah, or Adoniel, or Aloah, or L, or Jah, or God the same all, all the same,
and but one Name, One thing tendered by these distincts: Now the next, He was
born of the Virgin Mary, how comes this from the Greek Abadonisme? how can he
that created all, and is all, be humanity, and born of a woman? that woman
intended in that state, is not known in that state, let me tell you that woman
is Hevah, that is, the Weak Creation in Man, and all things, as Paul says, the
whole Creation groans to be delivered, the very Beasts groan for a deliverance
with us: A Virgin shall conceive, the Text says, but it is a Virgin shall bring
forth her firstborn Son, what is this? it is the birth of God: That (of) bears a
right state there; now I am forced for your understanding to write (of) but the
intendant is contrary in me: Now what is meant by the Virgin and her Son? In
sentarie Octabris in se sola ad me, they shall call his name Emanuel, that is,
A Savior, I grant all this; the seed of the woman shall break his head, and he
shall bruise her heel, what is this? allusive to the same state, yet nothing to
the Greek rendered Translation, To us a Child is horn, to us a Son is given, I
deny the Minor, and grant the Major, this is a strange state, when the Major
includes the Minor, most times thus, I open, sed pars and partis in partis in
sepe locat, thus, A Child is born is granted, but not the Songiven, A Child is
the infant birth in the spirit of our spirit, which is Christ, or Gods spirit,
or unction, or anointing, that is, the Virgin shall conceive, but the word is A
Virgin shall bring forth a Child, which Child is Love. To us a son is given,
how? because he cannot be parted from himself, the Trine must cease operation,
then no Deity, thus God does deliver us by the influes of himself, and so does
awaken us to the resurrection of the just, made perfect by his Resurrection in
us, is not the Child the Minor? no, it is the Major, and it is all, for a child
is a son, and a child, and the child stated in that state includes the son, so
the son is but name, the substance being in name and thing, cited in the same
state, now the Major and Minor are both one and the same, no one or other, but
both one and other the same, he was anointed above his fellows, what is that?
He received a fuller measure then ever any did, or shall do, how was that? God
gave it to him not by measure, this is a great mystery that is, not known to
this day, the Apostles knew it not, as I am able to make manifest. Now know the
Spirit is not measure. but all beyond measure or comprehension, this reaches
not yet, God is God, Christ is God, the Spirit is God, and God every where
acting forth as he pleases: Now not that the body of Christ was more, but that
God the Father did reveal the light of, nay himself, through that vail, more
then any to that day: Now God is (A) nay, the Spirit, and does declare himself
wondrous ways, the whole Creation is but his unfoldings of himself, in his
varieties, and his clothing himself in the creative in their creatived estate:
Now afterward I shall unfold the humanity of Christ in some other place or
book, but it is not pertinent. Now I can say what you say, and you understand
not your selves, nor the intended mystery.

Now concerning the Greek tongue, that is our essential essence, it is the
Abadon, that Saint John saw, that Destroyer that rose out of the bottomless
pit, that is, the heart of Man, for your Philosophers and Stoics were very
curious in new coining new words, and nice Syllogismes, whilst they lost their
old stamp, for the wisdom of man is enmity against God (as Paul well said) but
that would not bar them, for invading and intrenching on, and into the truth to
make an inlet to their coined invention and nicety, in full, they turned their
glory into shame, for they have vilified the truth, by making it to bolster uy
their in-weaved Ly into the truth named. Now here comes the birth or generation
of deceit in their forged Dipthongs, As ae, ei, oa, au, el, uieii, etc. Of this
sort is to sound two in one, one in three, five in one, and from this invention
came the Now Logic, to prove that that is not to be by rule and consequence,
and to prove that that is not to be, to be by the same rule or consequence,
this is Logic; but now it is high Divinity amongst us called, but call is a ly,
and so is that bolstering Divinity: Now know I will not read any, nor look on
any books of Hebrew, Greek, or Latin, or read any Father: Now I cannot work at
all times, but when the Spirit will, I need no Authors, for a thousand or five
thousand years, I can find Authors. What is hid from light it self, remember I
said, I am but the Pen in the Spirit's hand, so as to say, I am nothing, that
is, Man: and man's, that is, at man's command to act when he will, by that
character you may know it, that it has its own stamp upon it, now it is not so
with me, sometime an hour one day, two days, three days at this time: Now I
have been desired to speak to baptism, and this Text stated, Go and teach all
Nations, and baptize them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; to which Text I deny the very being in Baptism named in his
essence, that Text was wrote in Hebrew, only a collateral Word was Greek, to
lessen the Ty in the state stated by S. Mark: the Radaxes in that Text is,
(...) there is the Radaxes, (...) hebraically cited, there is but one impeade
in the whole state, which will not admit admit of any liquid substance; the
impead is (...) caf, Now then you take (...) to be Impeaded, by reason of the
TY at his soal, that is a proper-word, and radically expressed; to let you know
it is Prin that is Arabaically wrote, to inlet the Greek Kion in, to lessen the
strength of the tied TY, to make an harmonious composure or assent in consent,
radically examplifying: Now the simblim or word derived from his Radax, is
Thufali ol obenen in se okorari abbah absaet; the derivasi is in English, Go
teach the people my knowledge, or knowledge of me: Where is there any bottom
for Baptism to stand in this Text? but it is translated so, and a custom;
Does Knowledge stand on Custom? no; Learning does stand on custom, for
Learning is a Ly, and so a custom, so a custom to Ly and Learning both; we
having Truth, need not go to see what another has said or does say, for truth
is the thing in query, a shadow and nothing; John baptized in Enon, and who?
Men and Women, Believers; what is this to Infants baptism? nothing for you:
well, to that I answer, if all then, but not a rest to rest on, but being in
faith in obedience to that, if it be moved within, it matters not; but the
state now and then was different, and will admit of no composure; for theirs
was in the womb, ours at the last breath: I write strangely, but it will be
true, for the Lord of the Vinyard is coming to call his servants to account for
the Talent delivered, and not being faithful in the thing, only holding a Name,
and that for the cloak to eflect an other end; he condemned this, I know he
will give his Vinyard to another people; and this is the Mystery opened in that
Parable: now what availed the Baptized at man's estate? In John's time they were
Believers, and to Believe, is Obedience in Love, and that is Lite Eternal; why
they must be Believers, else non baptizatus, in re locat ad me nullos in rem
pacuisse sed volemus in tertia loca ad meam in trinas personas aluat adoramus
in pacuisse velvat: The English, Not baptized because they did not believe, but
baptized because they did believe Now then, they had not such a measure of
headlearning, nor tongue equivocations, but in the innocence of their spirits
submitted to the command: Know a Believer must be an innocent harmless man.
Now know I can read a negative derivacy from an Affirmative state out from the
same Radaxes, by the collateral conjunct, and adjunct: now you admire I render
not the Word as you do; thus every Latin Word holding the same signification,
thus I show you in two words (sed, but,) this is quite another thing, in
another thing stated, (si, if,) it is glory in another state, as treas personas,
three persons; you see it is not named at all, not because I know not as you
know, but because I know the Truth, you have the learned Ly, and an old one,
now I can influ in the least compound, as se, or impeade or lessen the TY, in
rendering the state stated: But now to Baptism, thus, they were baptized, to
what? to John's Baptism, nay, to believe on him that should come after; who was
that? that was Christ, Life, Jehovah, Jah; this is but name, and cannot confer
the thing; the thing is it self, and the name is let down to hint us of the
thing; as that Text rendered, There is no name given under heaven, that we must
be saved by, but the name Christ Jesus; I say it is false translated in the
intendant in the Spirit (Of the Spirit) I speak your word (of) the true meaning
of the Spirit is, that they should believe in God, believe in him that sent me?
Who was that? The All of all things, so it is things the Spirit rests on, and
not names; for the name is not consistent with the thing, but the thing is the
material in all, of all, and by all that by it gave a being to all, therefore
is all, to that all be glory, Amen.

In truth Baptism was a seal of Fellowship, and no more, and that is all it
is, deifie it as you please, not that a man is better or worse for it, or
without it; Paul says, Circumcision or uncircumcision avails not, but
obedience in love is the birth of God: To that Child the reward of glory is
promised, and no other thing: To be in love, is to be in light; to be in light,
is to be in God, Amen.

Polycarpus in his writings he wrote hierogliphycally, and ye read it
literally; How say you, can we do otherwise? no, it is true, he wrote by light,
and ye read with spectacles of your own making, so you see not his scope: He
was an Historian indeed, but he was Divine as well as Humane, as his Citations
will manifest (that were his) but I deny you to have his words, for they were
pressed out when your Fathers fell a Printing; for ye printed out the true print,
and put a base stamp of your own on, not in him alone, but in Augustine, and
Jerome, and all the rest. Now you will say, this man is well learned, I say in
knowledge, for say you, he knows the Fathers: To that I answer, I know the
Fathers, and can cite Authors, and their word in any tongue under heaven, yet
never saw, nor read book in my life of them, nor any one of them. Now you
admire; to take off that admiration, I answer this, What is hid from the light
it self? Know but that short state truly, and admiration is gone: It Is for want
of Knowledge ye admire. Non sum in Re ex hock ad meam in sola mem derata alvah:
I am not in this matter to my own alone, but to you are these high things sent
to enlighten you. Now light is come to this poor wearied Nation, and from her
the Son of Righteousness shall arise in full luster to the whole earth; nay
the Declarative of Truth from the Radax it self, but for the sake of the cast
off Jews, as you say, but Arise and shine, for thy time is come, thou poor
Shulamite, thy God will adorn thee with glorious Majesty, as in thy Virgin
days, when thou wast the beautiful Queen, and Princess of the Provinces, when
thy beauty was fresh and delightful, and thy glory did atract the hearts and
eyes of the whole Nations, when thou wast chaste and unspotted; but thou have
fallen from thy first love: for what end? that thy fall might bring in others,
and a far more glorious resurrection to thy self, and enlighten the whole Earth
with thee: They shall come from far to worship in Jerusalem temporal: for that
state of coming can hold no other sense but Men and Women, to the House of the
Lord: There is neither Mule, nor swift Beasts in the Heavenly Jerusalem: I
Theaurau John saw and beheld, but that state to express, I am taken with the
inravishment: My Spirit will not keep centered in my body, for the out
reachings after that glory.

O, O, O, For O it is Devicie Devinam in Tranlagorum in Evangelorum in se vose
non hominem sed Evangelieficalius in re, ex re, id re negat, O vale, O vale, O
vale sed enim tempus quia resurrecksit ad se in meam oculous ad celum satiatam
ad me non locat verbus sed Devinam est, est, est, O no other Heaven I could
desire, so I mightenjoy but this rapture I am in at this Writing: O terra, O
Terra, O Terra Abballa ad me sed estemat te Skubulo oreat in se: Now to come
into Hell, which is this Earthly prison, oh how have I lost my enjoyment in
heaven, and Divine things? O that there were no place but that: This is error,
peccavi in this, because I see the state stated by the Eternal Being enim
tempus.

But to come to the dry bones, the Jews are intended in that mysterious alluse
for are they not now at this day bones without flesh and scaterd the earth
over? Have they not had the evil Vials of wrath poured on them? and shall not
the good promised be enjoyed by them? surely God is just. Ye Gentiles love the
Jews; my Brethren, ye Jews, love the Gentiles: do but this thoroughly, and
then neither Jew, nor Gentile, nor Gentile, neither Jew, but both one in the
Unity of Love, which is one Spirit, and both one in the Father; this is the
resurrection from death to life. Love, love is God, God is Mercy, this Mercy is
tendered to all: The Jew a name, the Gentile a name, but love is that that
unnames both, grafting it self into both, to bring both into it, and then is
written this new Name that no man knows, but he that has received it, which
is Love: My name is John, the significant is, the Dove; now the nature of a
Dove is Loving alone; alone is one, that one is God: The Dove brought an Olive
leaf in her mouth, as the Story says, what is the thing intendant in that
Hierogliphyck, for an Hierogliphick is an Emblem of somewhat more than is
expressed in that semblance, that semblance cited is to alluse to somewhat more
significant: F is imperfect, and to be laid by when I write the Divine Mystery;
the alluse in the Dove and her leaf, was not I think it was so, but I know it
is so: Think is a ly; Truth it self admits no thoughts, the Dove to Noah, his
name was Holah, that signifies highly beloved; now where God loves, it is
perfection, and his perfection is not spelt by or with a false Name: Can Truth
it self cite false names to illustrate the Truth? no you are deceived; now Noah
is derived from (...) Holah is derived from (...) there is perfection in the
last, and imperfection in the first; the TI in R Hettau is imperfect, now the
(...) them two you cannot spell, because it is perfection, they will bear it in
one and in both, as thus (...) that is, Man in his perfect estate, or Man
refined by God to himself: this is worth the deepest Judgments looking into
and upon: Now the Dove that then was Hieroglyphick, was the semblance of God
tendering nay giving himself to the people; the leaf was the peace that the
Manhood had destroyed, yet he would restore it in himself; for God made us
strong, we became weak; he causes a resurrection in us, that is, himself
arising and subjecting all things in us to love, and that love is God, and that
love begot us at first, and restores us in the second, and brings us into the
thira Person in the Trine. Now that word Trine is somewhat strange, but it is
the first, second, and third state, of the Deity, there is the Trine in the
Humanity, and the Trine is in, nay, is the whole creatived Creation; the
Father, the Son, and the Product, that is to say, the Triplicity, or three
Persons in the the Trinity: Now to know these truly, is life eternal, for true
knowledge is to be in the Trine, or else not knowledge, but foolish learning.
Now know, knowledge I honor, Learning that is knowledge, or else I should
dishonor God himself, that is knowledge and learning the height, and for
teaching and communion I honor, and fellowship one with another I honor, but
how far? for knowledge that is learning it teaches, and them teachings is
actual distributing love, the fruit is in its effects; now this is Truth, now
teaching as we teach, for to teach men to set up our selves, is teaching
without knowledge, which teaching is a Ly, and not the thing; for mind, most of
our Teachers teaches us themselves, and not God, or teach us to themselves from
God: I do not say nor intend all, neither would I have them that are not to
claim to them by this a privilege where it is not intended, for know you, I
know you to be a subtle generation, ye Priests, my Brethren, I acknowledge ye
to be my brethren that be in the being, that is love, hold one more, that is
love that declares it self by compassionate distributives, tives, tives. There
is in three perfection: now I read Hebrew to many, and ye are but essensed men,
but I will give you a radical expression that is in James his Epistle; He that
sees his brother in need, and relieves him not, how does the love of God dwell
in that man? that man is a ly, his Religion is vain. What a net full of Priests
and people catched at one pull? Many of these pulls will leave but few, that I
shall see clearly, that many are called, and call, but few are chosen: Thus for
teaching, and they themselves in the being: These are they that cause the way
of Truth to be evil spoken of, but it is in an evil way, pretending God, and
teachers in that good way; know, a good way cannot be taught, it is it self,
and teaches all; I am the way, He is that, why? it is Truth, Way, and Life. Now
the learned must be condemned, for learning them, they teach the lesson; and
the Priest blamed, and the people not excused; for know O man, within thee is
that that does condemn thee; not for that another says of thee, but for that
thou do thy self: let me tell thee, that if thy knowledge were to be got in
and by another, God could not condemn thy self; for, thou have a knowledge what
to do, nay ought to do, and not for doing that that thou know and ought
to do, for that comes thy just condemnation; so it will not excuse thee to say,
such a one taught me, no, no, thy self condemnest thy self, Witness, Judge,
Execution is in and within thy self: Teaching, Communion, and Fellowship, is a
threefold cord, have one of them in truth, ye have all, they are inseparable
companions; it is unions unity in its own variety, it is the Deity it self: now
to this I add this motto, To be in God, is to act in love, and he that is not
in love, is not in God, neither has known him: now know once more, I can speak
truth, if my self be radaxed in the truth, but I cannot confer truth to
another; take heed you do not make an Idol of dependant hearing, more doing
will be more answerable to our profession, and less hearing; yet it is clear
most of us never heard in our lives, for actions are declaratives whether we
have heard or not: you say such a man or woman is such a man's hearer, or hears
of such a Minister, if he a Minister indeed, thou dishonourest him, and the
Gospel, as ye say, and thy actings make him and it a Ly, for God who is light
and truth, thou set up a a truth contrary, and not that that he delivers:
Actions is true declaratives of that that is, and that that is not, for if ye
act righteousness, then are ye the children of light, or else ye have not seen
nor known light: now you leaders the Priests, they are turned Jews, for say
you, the Jews were valiant men, and the Priests most noble and valiant in
Wars, as the Stories record: if the Priest Jew, the people Jewish; why then the
Jew and the Gentile in this state are one; it is granted, it is truth in this
state, for he that is in darkness, be he Jew or Gentile, in that state they be
one, and the whole of the Creation is but one with them, for there is but light
and darkness in the whole earth: now to prove the Priests to be Jews, then they
are my brethren, then brethren ought to bear one with another: now my brethren,
that state you cannot deny me in Creation, and in Creation I am Reuben, and
though he lost his birthright in Jacobs story, yet he should recover at his
revolution, and first in the trine in that revolution, which the world cannot
hinder; here is more couched in this state, then all men on earth can reach
out, nor shall not, till time cause the product; but let me speak, Ruben holds
his Genealogy clear in pre-eminence, for a daughter of Reuben, what Tribe she
matched into, the Tribe lost the name till the fourth descent, the man was named
Reuben in Genealogy; and if a man took a Widow of the Rubenite, his children
by that woman were ever Rubenites, be of what Tribe soever. Now Judah held
thus, that if a man of another Tribe took a wife of Judah, the man lost not his
name, but the woman was reckoned of Judah till the fourth Genealogy or
descent, then the whole Issue fell to the Tribe the man was on, and remained so
for ever. Know by this, I am as I have declared, Recordat de tredesem tribas de
Jews: Recorder of the thirteen tribes of the Jews. So now, to take my place
by my Genealogy, ye Priests my brethren, if ye be, yet the state is sure in
the state of Creation, as before cited, now I write to you I must come close,
for you are quick eyed, but slow paced in veras; now I state this state, I am
nearer a Gentile in practice than you, for I act in love, I plead for love, I
plead for reconciliation by love; this is a declarative of truth in me to all;
exce meam action is in se in veras veritat as. I write it full bard in ^ Now to
state the TY that will hold us both and our evasions, that the way may be clear
deciphered in this decipheration, that the meanest capacity may reach into,
this you say, I am for the Law; I say so, I fay you are for the Gospel; you say
so: The state i^ stated, both in the state pleased: now to prove my self to be
of, is not proper, but in this state it must stand, for the people to
understand. Now to prove my self of the Gospel, and you of the Law may be done,
but to prove you to be of neither Gospel nor Law neither, this seems strange;
but on the event let the people pass sentence: now I am for the Law: I answer,
I am: now what is that Law I am for? that must be enquired into: Paul says,
that if there had been a Law given that could have given life, then
righteousness had been by the Law: Have you a greater TY for me then this? The
Law is death: it is granted, what would you have more? The Law or Sacrifice
could not perfect the comers thereunto: Do you understand Paul's word here?
it is well, I shall open them for you in another place that you know better then
this, but you will blush to hear them: now the Law is death undeniable, else it
could not make an inlet into a better and gloriouser life; whence comes this
original rule, except from this, The day thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death? What death this is, must be known; is it the death of our flesh, and of
our spirit? It is; how then to give life? to the imprisoned within the spirit
in our spirit: What is that? Life eternal; to know him is life eternal: Flesh
and blood cannot inberit eternal life, so says the Text: it is true, but this
does not clear the point: Once more, Sin is death, it is made by and of us, for
we and it are from God, but not in God; now to state the Law is death, but how?
in disobedience, and for disobedience, it lays hold, and its destruction of
us, is to give us a better being: thus we resting on the Law is death, because
it is a name of a thing, not the thing, but pointing unto another thing: The
Gospel is the same, the name is not the thing, but pointing us unto anothing:
thus these in this state are one, for they are both but letteted names of one
very same thing entire in it self, that is, God; for says the Law, Do thus,
the Gospel, thus; That saying cannot give us ability of doing, and in doing is
the true delarative of that that is done in us; for so long as we say; we are
names, as the Law is a name, the Gospel is a name, but doing is the thing; now
what thing is that they call for? Love; love why? where is love, there is no
law: Love is the fulflling the Law: Love is Gospel it self, and Law it self:
why then, where love is, there is neither law nor Gospel, it is it self, and
that self is Jehovah; thus are we one with him through love in the eternal
Spirit. Now my brethren, to your declaratives, Are ye as ye say? I cannot say
it, ye abound; how many in every one of your enclosures in want? this is not
love: How many have lost their lives by your aggravation, for your fetching
about your own purposes? Have you not said and unsaid? this is not the lesson
of Christ's teaching; no it is a declarative of your acts, that that says tongue
thou lie: and to the people you have a way, that you will not let them know;
for you say one thing, and do another: Is this the light of your Gospel? I
desire not to partake with you in this. Now to prove you Jews, that as you term
it, is a declarative; well, now to be an inlet into you, one more, this help I
give you ye Jews, the Priests were valiant men; now I know not how you will
prove, for a coward shows not before he comes to be tried, and now I see you
are harnassed with the ancient heroic weapons, whether the spirit be in the
cask or no, I leave to time to make manifest: Is this Christ's Gospel of peace?
Ye are Jews, for Christ convered none with a sword, to preach to them in
another world; I like not that Gospel: but I am afraid that when the time comes
you have one preached up, an innocent man to lead up to save you from danger,
else you have lost your old trade in all times: if it did well, then the
Priests hand was in it; but ill, that is took not well, the Priest had another
hole to creep out at; and indeed, the people in all ages have been set on by
you, you clap your hands, and the people fall together by the ears; when they
are at it for your quarrel, you will be sure to save your selves, and clap one
another, and by their fall raise your selves; but God has cut you in England,
but not down: Now to tell you plainly, the name of a Jew ye hate, the name of a
Preacher of the Gospel by acts you deny; So now, you are in effect neither Jews
nor Gospellers, yet both Jews and Gospellers, that is indeed Heathens; for the
unbelieving Gentile is a Heathen, the unbelieving Jew is a Heathen; for there is
but light and darkness in the whole Creation: now know that to this great work
that God is bringing about, there is many men fitting; as this day from an
unlearned man that is in the work, came a letter wrote in the Indian, Greek,
Hebrew, and Latin, of which languages he knows not one word, but thus dear
brother, and the next is Greek, and so carried on that his name is not to it:
Are we thus, and the world asleep? Sirs, the day is near, Return, why will ye
die and be destroyed? When was the like in the whole Creation? not since the
earth was; there is like to be the greatest overture that ever came unce men
inhabited the Globe; the great day is at hand that was prophesied so long ago;
The Earth shall burn as an Oven, and all the wicked and ungodly shall be as
stubble to this flame: Consider all ye proua that are lifted up and forget God,
he is a coming to take vengeance on all ungodly men. Alah alamanach, alvah
asanah ab si Herocloch absalamons in somanu in arorarum solamana acklah
abdonarielalo sanatar alma roi delit meco: This is wrote in the Tartarian
tongue in the East Armenia from the Hebrew Radaxes, the third descent in that
language from the Creation: Salu ablah vocoalis: High woe and alas is fallen
upon the Inhabitants of Oppressors, for Jehovah will thunder vengeance in a
flame of whirlwind, on and upon the rebellious sons of men; for iniquity is
great before the Lord, a consumption is coming to consume all that is not. Now
I beseech you, some of the words are brought down to your understanding, that
are more properly rendered in its own sense, but them you could not understand;
that high woe, is the cause of man's alas, as he is flesh, for the affliction
makes us cry is fallen: you may say, if it were fallen, as you say, we should
see it: Gods decree is done, though it fall not many years after. It is, that
is, it is decreed, it is fallen now, for Jehovah will hear: it is the present
tense and the furture tense stated; thus, to make it good; present and future
are all one to the Lord, but the present is stated, It is; and the future
impeads the present; this is the reason; it is for the chosen sakes they know
all, hearing this the decree is sealed, and it is his mercy in withholding his
decree, while his people is gathered out, for the spirit that speaks to them,
is the same with it that speaks; as Christ says, My sheep hear my voice, but a
stranger they will not hear; to you it is given to know the mystery of the
Kingdom: now know all you that read this book, it is a miracle that a man
unlearned should reach such a discovery; I answer again, what is it that light
reaches not? Once more, I am but penman, and to think any thing of me, you do
me wrong and your self, if any thing you retain or admire, return to him that
it belongs to, that is, my God: and if you see your God; to him be glory, I am
his, and your brother to serve you in love, which is the Gospel which is
Christ, which is God in the Trinity in Unity, worship him alone. Now to come
toward a conclusion, for my appointed time of three days is out that I have
been a part from men, and wrote hard; now beloved, I shall show you my method
in a short scope, for my time is Gods time; not when I will, but when he
pleases, then I write: Now I theaurau John show my heart, John is the alluse in
that name: that name God gave me by voice, saying, Theaurau John my servant, I
have chosen thee: judge by this book whose I am: But for John, he is a Dove,
he is the beloved Disciple, the highest for mystery; what is all this? it is
love; what is love? Love is God. O I could dwell here in repetition of these
words, Beloved God is Love:

So said my Brother John, his Eagles EY,
Had the high light in the Divine myster ie:
He from that Imperial Throne
Declar at the glory of Union:
O Unions variety,
It Is super, super, super transcendancy:
It Is divine, Evangelical,
It Is the glory Cilestial,
It Is the pavement of our God in glory bright,
Always a Day, there is no night:
It Is Sun, it is Moon, it is Stars, and all
This is not half Celestial.
A greater glory I poor John did see,
My ey is there, I see Eternity:
But I poor John in this House of Clay,
My comfort is, the ends my way
Unto that glorious Imperial Throne,
Where I shall reign in Union:
O then my sorrows then shall cease,
That on and in me now so fast increase:
O were not that pitched in mine ey,
I should faint in my misery.
My friends, you read these names, to you they be
From me full words in Misery:
The highest light, the most in tears,
Because he is drenching forth from fears.
But to return, I had almost lost my self in expressing the Sea of trouble I ly
under: Love, Love, Love, O my Beloved, how lovely are ye being in love! Why
love turns all things into it self; turns hatred, envy, malice, murder, it
turns all these, and more into it self; this is love! It Is the Philosophers
stone, that turns all into its inclu, this love there is no end in it, no
beginning, no middle, no part, it is one, it is all, it is all things; this all,
and one, and all things, is God, then to be Gods, is to love; O love one
another that this envy may have no being amongst you, nor in you. O that ye
would be but your selves, then you would be love; now when you are not in love,
you are not your selves: Love is the restoration from death to life. Would you
have a resurrection? it is love, or never, or no heaven; love purchases all,
pays all, unties all, and ties all: Love, there is no speaking of it, for it is
excellency, it is transcendant man's mouth to utter, the Evangelical voices are
too narrow to express love; I could dwell here for ever and ever, I cannot get
off from this rock: Love is the fulfilling of the Law, the obedience of the
Gospel, the inlet to eternal blessedness for ever, which without love, no
blessedness, but the wrath of God abides on us for ever (...) A lab (...)
hosaret (...) salvah (...) the Creation God in himself, and the Creation in it
self, and both in himself, that is Jehovah himself in himself, there is the
first perfection of the excellency of Hamah, your Adam, that is Man, and all
things with him in strength; this is the feigned Paradise and garden in Eden;
Eden is false wrote, for the significants, that is Creations, cannot be tied to
one place or garden, for the multiplicity cannot be confined to any one place,
except it be radically intendant in himself, for his glory he will not give to
any other, neither undignifying himself, so as to have his royal pre-eminence
confined in any one thing, for you cannot speak any one properly, but God he is
one, and all things to him are one, but not so in themselves properly or
essentially, but in him all is one, was one, and to come is the same, for
Jehovah cyphered is the union his name, the intent of Eden is the same, but not
rightly understood, for Eden cuts thus; Eden ought to have been Edenei, Eden is
no language, as I have wrote, but it is a divine Siphirates of Siphrates,
Siphrates them three are the same with Edeneiii, for the meaning of the
Eternity operating in it self, then where can any bar or stop be set, for you
cannot write an influ with a TY in the last letter (...) Nun is a bar in any
place except she be the radical, or leader in any state, Henok, (...) Ahlu,
Hene, (...) Ophrono, pallu (...) Peked, (...) Philiades oli oko araret alvah
deat sem hu hanri alvah pear (...) ralu (...) in se sahatt oan verriko bele in
hury peata perati.

The first decipherative is Jehovah: Now all People, Tongues, and Languages,
know that Jehovah is all over all, and evermore the same, the beginning, no
time; the all, no place, all places in one place, and all times in one time,
and that time is the time of all times, and yet he no time; this is he that
rules and reigns in eternity: this is deciphered Jehovah his name, and to it
obedience is the same. I Theaurau John Tanniour Allah al, hi-Priest send
greeting to my brethren both Jews and Gentiles, the perfect declarative of the
first state, but no time or years, neither is there time or years with him,
that is all time and years, but this is to let you and all people know, that
there is now a restoring the people to a pure language, for this thing am I
come forth, fitted with light and divine knowledge in the depth of depths, to
unseal that sealed book, and Evangelical light that lies wrapped in the womb of
the so called Law and Gospel, in se serta resi (...) obederat alma honasa huli
penerati alvah ableuvisse in se locat amarvissem humanet rokoas salah azaret
eltah alvah hon ono olephad in se mori melet ori neri maleorei onoriko olo
ophons narratus asa sardoas lobcim olet ammi Phikepead ebelleier elma hosai in
re meat olko ephrae peata alvah huri apanari in sem tulat in meadti amanet
oliko absalem inter amaferet oko asani alvah poi kopo pion inresenalis in re
pekat valuah Jahalu pai kautam absemuisse pelet amen oli veat anta onarial
alvah allet hoko nederem^^ in sem tion valvah pie deneat valko ophinoiei
pheredet pelko moneta seab tola mem in si lota phalla in poneie polik a vet
dina inter se pokuneri olo bonose seem alvah oli olimalto onori pikuat remi
moli poliat nem inteler lota vallalua meat oliriko in lobemus avar^t in si meam
in locamus allah vallue anakatur ablat pheniolue adna apalet homen in teu oat
alto mosisere verat adma liel pedi ovouvet odo moli asaderet manialta viat ono
ponri opaalet honosoophroriko in laniah mempala verat olo peat salvah eri nedet
hen mei abalet hosaret addi melet verko oli milet voko monsa anni pieti pel odi
lodeata in ri pei pel pelta tianna mam ori de let adma palu lah atti nedet
tuolo omen satar ollo adma osonet pek hosarret.

Here Learnings Learning you may see,
'I is carried on Alphabetically;
And yet no Alphabet you see,
But it is the Divinest Mystery.
So in tricable are all his ways,
That man his paintings cannot praise.
Now my Brethren, God according to his promise, which promise is himself, has
sent his declarative to the Inliabitants in and upon the Globe, and in, and
upon the influences, that influes the intricables variety in and upon the
same, that is the whole created by him: Now as is expressed before: I am Reuben
the Lords Gimell (...) in this new Creation, and the first in the first Trine,
descending in vive vose and in Evangelorum sem in phratris regi pecavit, non
vita sed enim vita est mors omnibus hominibus in loco alvat obiremus in solat
peco ori sem abtracte in disobedience; the English is, Man is fallen to nothing
by light, that is vita, life: Now you may say, How can light cause man to fall
to nothing? I answer, Light does not cause man to fall to nothing, but that man
is nothing by that light; as thus, man sees temporals, they see him, for sight
is not in man, but in the object that he sees to effect: now to be properly
said to see, none nor nothing can be said to see but God only; he is our sight
if we see; if not; we see not: thus in seeing, we see not, and in hearing, we
understand not, for not to be in light, is death, and not to be; one more, now
in him that is light we are, were, and shall be light, out darkness is this
vail we are in: now to come to the essential state of man, in his first state
that was innocence, so it is named, now to prove that name innocence, we must
consider what created has relation to, that is the mystery of man and all
things; How was man innocent? thus, he was nothing, and to be nothing is pure
innocence, that was when we were not; when was that? when there was no God;
when was that? never; for know God could not be, if not always the same; thus
I prove, that that comes to act after, is for want of knowledge before, and
that that was before, cannot act behind, which is time, times, time: look well
into your own riddle in Genesis, you see that he stood not at all, but
detracted and fell you say, so say I; thus his very being in flesh was his
fall, and he became like a beast that perishes: how, by reason that his body
now is and was beast-like, for it is said, skubulo, but dung: you are mistaken
to think this gross elementary substance is your bodies, alas this is hell;
your body is another thing, you are prisoned here, and your resurrection is at
going out of this hell to those paradaical bodies bodied in him that is Jesus,
Jehovah Adoniel, L, Jah, Eloah, Aove, Tele, Throon, God the same.

And here I cease, and cannot open this state, nor translate them languages
that are cited, but in my next book I shall open them, that I am sure of, but
the time I know not, till he that is my light set up in me himself, he is my
light, life, glory: glory to him which was, and is, and is to come, the Jehovah
omnipotent, Amen; no Amen to him, we say Amen, but includes that that cannot be
included, the Mystery is to come.

FINIS.
I Theaurau John the Jew, of the Tribe of Reuben, of the seed of David
according to the flesh and spirit, wrote this Book, only the Epistle I wrote
not; Now if any man or men be not satisfied in all, or part, or parts of the
part, I am willing in the humility of my spirit to render an account in
writing; for I have an impead in my speech: and this favor I require, which in
Justice ought not to be denied me being the Commoner of England. Now let no man
judge this book lest he be judged by the things therein contained: for I am
sent forth for the gathering the Jews my Brethren home ye say you pray for;
time will manifest it whether it be in truth or not; I know the Lord will
gather them, as he has spoken by all the Prophets, and the time is now come
that they shall be restored into their glorious Inheritance in the transcendant
excellent stately state that that ancient people my Brethren shall be stated
in, even in their own land, as the Lord has shown me. Once more judge not.

Blind men cannot discern colors, but the seeing Ey sees all things, as they
are, not as they seem; mind.

Selat ory a saba arry nedat me:

The Divine light cannot be measured by Human Learning.

Arry sele oli sapuit nedat mecum.

Nor the Divine Light stoop to man's capacity.

Id est vita non solemus in rem fasit

The seeing ey sees it self all things, we nothing in the thing.

Hereunto I have set my hand and seal, Theaurau John

Tannjour Allah Al Sabbah Skribahjail.

THough this Book was Licensed according to Law and Command, yet contrary to
that Law, it was hindered till this 25. of February, I could not get it Printed.
1650.

Oh this WILL, Not, LAW, overthrows the Nations Foundation.

This book is to be sold at the Stationers in common, and at the three golden
Lions without Temple Bar, you may have them, or hear where they are to be had.

depiction of a sickle next to a blazon or coat of arms with three horizontal
stripes

Imprimatur,

John Downame.

Courteous Reader,
SOme interruptions in the Printing this Treatise, together with the absence of
the Master-printer, has occasioned many errors, especially in the first part
thereof, the most material thou shall find here corrected to thy hand, those
lesser mistakes, and some pointings, be pleased to mend with thy pen as thou
read.

IN the first Epistle page 1. line 23, for whee, read where, p. 2. l. 11. for
Isas, r. Jesus, p. 3. l. 9, for only hold, r. only both hold. In the third
page of the Treatise, line 19. for president, r. precedent, p. 6. l. 15. for he
heart, r. the heart, l. 18. for you name, r. your name, p. 7. l. 22. for to
indetractation, r. too inderractation, p. 9. l. 4. for verse 10 r. verse 3. l.
24. r. and shall be, light the same, p 13. for unbeers. r. unbelievers, p. 14.
l. 13. r. they being not in the being, and leave out is light, p. 16. l. 20. r.
ought to be paid, p. 17. l. 1. for dispute. r. disputes p. 23 l. 31. for quiet,
r quite, l. 31. for his Ideny, r. this Ideny, p. 30. l. 10. where you find it
luma, r. lama. and after mecavi, insert these letters, (...) p. 35. l. 10. for
Thusali, r. Thus Ali, p. 39. l. 16. r. te skubulo sed skubulo orcat in se, p.
40. l. 29. r. (...) p. 43. l. 27. for hears, r. hearers.


