THE NATIONS RIGHT in Magna Charta discussed with the thing Called Parliament.
Whereas I Th^^urau John Tendered A Petition dated the 15 of November 1650. To
the Parliament so called; There is a name and a thing, and a thing, And a name,
And a name, And not the thing, And the Name and the thing both in one according
to the Obedience to the thing and name.

I Tendered my petition upon the declarative: It was but Name to me, And not the
thing, which caused this inquiry to be made, And to be declared that the people
may see and discern betwixt the Name and the thing.

Written by me Theaurau John Tannijjour Hipriest sabbah scribah Jail Earl of
Exex or otherwise Essex Tenet of Norway or Normandi Lord Paulet of seen in
France.

I John Tanni true Earl of Exex alias Essex of the seed royal desentive from
Aaron the Lords Hipreest, desentive from true right Henry the seventh, which
was of the raze of the Jews, of the Tartarian line, As my record of my
Gencoligie, will make appear from Aaron Moses brother; Here is a mystery in
this seeming seeing age, yet never more deeds of darkness acted by the sons
of men

Whereas I having laid my claim to the crown of England before any Acts came
forth by the members that are members, I deny all that be, to be in the being,
for he cannot properly be said to be, that is unradaxed; That is stands not in
and upon the foundation that gives a being to them all, and us all, that is
Magna Charra, and the petition of right; for mind; it is not names, but things
that is consistant with the good of the nation: for a name is not the thing but
the thing is the name and thing. So are not you that call your selves a
Parliament. For to make your name true, it must be declarative Acts done by
you, yet if it were so you are unradiased men in your conjunct as after I will
show not wronging you one tittle, nor any one for Truth is a direct rule
measuring all, unmeasuring none which is. Now not any Act that you cause to be
published can cut off, or lessen that that is. For that That is truth the
sayings of men cannot unsay it; Theirs is but lettered names. But it is the
Thing and will be. Because it has a being. The name none. You make an act to
be death to claim the crown in Charles Stuarts Line. Now what I have claimed,
is from Henry the true seventh. No^ as that villane 8 Henry has set them to
make his title good. By which treepwhole Stuart came in; yet he is a A Cheat in
that name Stuart; which I can declare, and weaken the Ly. For I count him no
better when Truth shall have her resurrection: Now my claim was past before
your Act came forth; And now you shall see I shall stoop to your will (Not Law)
And in obedience to your command, this you can make no claim to the crown of
England; But to that Command I state this full saying; WHAT I HAVE WRITTEN, I
HAVE WRITTEN; I beseech you all people take notice of this state, And judge
whether since the act I have laid any claim to the crown of England, yet I take
your commanding negative to be a co^^ifie to my affirmative, and so by state I
loose nothing. For truth is truth: so much for the first.

Now know I come as. Nay a Commonwealths-man-Nay the Commonwealths-man, and
head of your House by my Barrony of Oxon it is stated Oundell in Northampton in
Buckingham-shire; to let you know the meaning of that state; it is thus. That
villian Henry the 8 so called to deceive the Assinant. Stated it in two
Counties. That if claim was made in one, it lay in the other: So this was the
indendant cheat. And likewise repealed that Act of Richard the first and
third, And made it death to challenge any one into the field, and state place
and day: Now I have challenged both the Marquis of Herford, and the Earl of
Northumberland by letter, and he thatmade that statute to preserve his wicked
seed God has made it destructive. For they are challenged by that, that they
should be defended by as he thought and it is death for them to answer by his
own law, The challenge to Northumberland is in my brother Oliver Crumwells
right as he is heir aparant to Deavon and Northumberland: Only Northumberland
has my vicountcie as I shall make appear Now as I am a commoner of England.
Now I stare that state Essential none can deny, and in this state you are
bound to me: Now we shall, and all capacities look on, and into the question,
and state stated: Now know that your being and my being in that right of
rights. Nay that divine right intendant to all: 'Its Essential, wherein your
and mine is but one: Now comes the state of your being; being in right of, Nay
in Magna Charta, that is your life, and mine, and the nations, all conjoined
into one: Now in that one, all being right, out of, and from that radax: know
that in that right the Major, includes the Minor; Then where is your obedience
to the nation, and that, that gave you a being; The Major chose the Minor, not
to Lord but to love, Right redress; and suppress: now in the word suppress
we see powerful actings to all our griefs, and love and redress shut out of
door, is this the end you were chosen for? or that end our Fathers for our good
caused such a composure, that though they were dead, the life of their right
descentive might live in us and we in it; Alas we are the name, but they were
the Thing and name truly: we are nothing in that stock; for every man's right
is in, and by, and at a few men's wills: it is death to speak truth which is
the Thing, only we live in the name, which name is a ly without the thing.

Now to come to the true state of this our called Parliament fellow-Commoners
that cannot offend, if you understand your own Essence, ye were chosen but the
choice at first was not perfect; consistant with the intendant of our Radaxes;
there ought not in that choice parties to be made to make a choice, but a free
voluntary intendant was intended:

I beseech you brethren if you Be, yea will hear truth if you cannot do it be
assenters to it, and not opposers of it, in so doing you will be found fighters
against the Lord of hosts, whose breath is in you if you be in the truth, I
measure no man I hate no man, only the Lord has caused me to lay down to you
the rule to measure your selves by, if you be convinced that it is truth
follow after it, and ensue it and break off your transgressions by righteous
Actions, that the broken may be healed; For this I know great wrath is gone
forth from the Lord: Now to grant you were a (...), and set acting for the
intending, you were chosen, you (...), and abused and the Nations right not
only vilifide, destroyed, (...) of the Nations choice was called forth then be
came you another thing, and no Parliament according to the ancient right of
Mag^^ (...), and the Petition of right that has its essential right in and ^om
Magna Charta: there this is your proper state, you were no Parliament, that
though you in heart were right members, for the heart makes the right member of
a true assembly. This is an allusive allegory, but to state it home, you were
in truth your servants servants and no Parliament according to the ancient
right of Magna Carta, and the second petition of right in King James his time.
Now according to the right of our right there must be an account rendered for
the invading all our Rights in that state; O it had been a glorious work that
then a new choice had been according to true election, then was the time to
have made us a free people as you call us, but your calling us free, we cannot
say Amen, but we may safely affirm we are worse bound, And you now can not help
us, nor your selves, Nor can never recover: I know in what state this stands,
but I conseal. Now to speak proper you were the soldiers thing called a
Parliament: Now to them you proved the name, and not their intending thing, For
then they thought you should do right to them and they would do Right to you,
and you two held all our Rights by force from us: If you, or they or both had
caused a new choice: not that you had power by right to stand, and choose to
you: but the soldier standing defensive, having let the right down from you
into the people again in whom it is inhearent, and you have put your selves in
hazard of the New choosing again; which thing you ought to have done: And I
need not let you know this; for you know too much in doing no more: Now it is
just that they that wronged the Nation in their right, should be wronged by
them they wrongfully set up to have their right by, not regarding the Nations
wrong it suffers by them: Now I speak as a Commoner of England, nay I speak
for the whole Native: It is a dishonor to you that the soldier is not paid
fully to a penny it is his due, yea much hardship have they suffered for
nothing. Now I beseech you consider that when a Parliament is, it does right
maintaining the honor of the Nation in all its proper essences: Now I hope I
shall offend none that truly Are, for they that Be will endure looking into:
for truth seeks no covert nor Corner, but stands openly to be viewed of all and
viewes all; mind that state: But falsehood and a ly is seeking coverts
continually, and always building defensives, and yet never strong, but always
weak and fearful: The Righteous is as bold as a Lion walks in, and by one and
the same rule: Now if that rule which is here intendant be all your measures,
or the Major part, then fear will not possess you. But if ye be wicked, that
is weakness, and soon offended: But it is better to return though to the
Manhood disgrace, then to go on in stubbornness in an evil way, and resolve
thus, that though we have done thus, and conscience witness against us, we
will cut off to establish our own way not Gods way: Then know that guilt will
never be secured, but will cut off all, but it self: This is the true nature of
rebellion against the Command of God: That word true is not proper stated in
that sense, because truth cannot be in a ly; for nothing but truth confounds
the ly: Now to return, to you whom is intended thus much; if you say a
Parliament, I say the disgrace of the Nation; Thus will you stand to your
words, your vows, your Oaths, your Covenant, your engagement, now I know some
of the least Actors can with innocence, and uprightness stand to it. Now while
it is thus, the upright, and innocent suffers, for God has a people among you,
who are of a trembling heart, and now these suffer, through the miscarriages of
others, and are branded with the name of infamy: But my Brethren, God will
clear you in the day of restitution (and it is at hand) Now if men dare not own
their word, Oaths, Covenant, Engagement, nor stand by Magna Charta, these men
must be spirits; and not men, yet we see and feel these to be men; but if they
do disown that is stated: judge ye, are they fitted to be such men? know, so
much as a man is just, he is the representative of his makers majesty and no
farther: For your words let the Nation judge, which truly is essential, your
Judges hold the same method in the first state, as the Major chose the Minor, I
hope we that have stood for truth may now speak truth, though we cannot enjoy
it: your word and our adherents to you in the first, was for the Gospel, the
Law, the liberty of the subject, we that are the Commons: you having overcome
by our vaste charge, loss, and trouble what has been enjoyed of this by us
yet? but thus we have paid your request: I mean taxes, you have deducted the
fouldiers pay for his quarter in part, and the Country has had this by the
soldier eaten up, and no pay; whose wide purse holds that sum that was worse
then ten taxes together: this I know I felt, and from fence I speak only* Now I
blame not the soldier for this; but you, named Parliament: One more to that
when all the provision was spent, there comes another reckoning, the Excize-man
he must have so much for beer and meat, that was eaten by your, nay our own
soldiers; and never a penny for the substance, but so much for the pleasuring
the soldier, with parting with that we have for nothing; is this a
demonstrative of a true Parliament, I desire no offense may be taken of truth
for what I have writ I will maintain, and send the least Messenger, or porter I
will appear and answer by writing; for I have an impeade in my speech, and I
desire noe more favor: for truth is truth and will be though trod on: I am not
thus chastised to run into a corner, if he whom I serve will not deliver me, I
am content, so that deliverance come but to the poor peeled Nation, though I be
offered a sacrifice, and burnt to ashes for them I shall rejoice: he cannot be
that I am, but must be so in the reality of his sold before the eternal God:
know you, I know what I speak, though this state you cannot reach: So much for
the first freedom.

The next is to maintain the Law of the Land, and pull down tyranny, this we
were sworn to: Now what law is there preserved but all destroyed? for Magna
Charta is the being of all our beings; if we have then beings in the true right
of the Nation; in which being ye assembled have no being and then ye which have
no being, it is impossible for you to demonstrate a being to us that are (if we
durst say) in the right being, and ye in the wrong being: for you Be not for
us; but ours: I pray mind this the intention is good, if right construed: can
you say you are for us? It Is saying indeed, that saying stands you in little,
there is the price you pay for us; but prey upon us by consequence, does this
stand in full with your Covenant of pulling down Tyranny? Know tyranny is not a
name, but the Thing: We cut of Charles for tyranny, it^ writes a sad motto
amongst Tirants. Now what is a Tirant: An Oppressor, an Incrocher, a Conjoiner
to himself of that, that is not his, against that Thing the Nation covenanted,
not the name of tyranny, but the Thing: now where that Thing reigns in its
sphere, the Nation is bound by Oath to take it down or else they are perjured
men, and covenant-breakers, and let all the earth know covenant-breakers God
will judge: For the preservation of the Law, we have none made; know you that
an act or law, takes its birth at your rising, or dissolving, and not before:
Now good men may be made bad by sitting too long, and the custom of Parliament
was that the last should reform the first, if any miscarage was in the
foregoing state, and add what good, they in their wisdom thought good for the
Commonwealth: But we sit so close, so long that it gives a cause of jealousy we
are afraid that others should see what we have done: is truth ashamed that her
acts should be looked into? It Is not truth that is so: The next and greatest,
the influence of the people is wholly depopulated, in all their essential
liberties, so that Magna Charta which was their koatrified strength, now it is
of no use at all to them: now to deal plainly with you, if Magna Charta takes
being, and life, it can no ways, but by destruction of one or both, that is
the Parliament or people: Sirs it is heavy, and lamentable I mourn to see it,
yet cannot help it: happy is he whose hands and heart is not defiled with
blood, for blood must, and will have blood: now what is wanting? Why love, What
is Love? It is God; What is God? A King and he cannot reign over bloodthirsty
men: now know that king is but a name, and not the Thing, and king is the name
and the Thing: The manhood is not king, but the anointing is the king, But this
method is not known among you, for if it were better actions would flow: I know
my afflictions you have heard of, I have bin made hands, feet, food, eyes, and
clothing to many: I have been emptied of temporalls, but am filled with the
eternal being, which has loved me with everlasting love: now know I hate no
man's person, I envy none, I care for none, I am One, and that One that state
what you, nay the creation can, in earth, air, fire, water, Terrestrial,
Caelestial, the influences of the stars, I am able to answer, to give an
account, I am able to give a state, in these things in anyone of these things,
that the whole creation cannot answer, if they could I could not be high
Priest to my God.

I have put 3 small queries on this little manuscript that by them I may know
it to be my one.

What is the creative part of the Cabalesterial inclue in the Terresteriall
Orbs of the Theabarick: that word is Calde.

What is the inclue of Philiades in her coertive part in the new Trine in the
Hemispheer of sol that word new seems strange, but to let you know there is a
new birth in the Planitoriam scheme, or scine.

What is the inclusive PERTINEAT in the conclave of the medeterranean Assome:
Scholars look to PERTINEAT, I am but a child yet, and but 9 weeks since God
gave me this childish knowledge, yet with my child shnesse I desire you bear
with me: Now know that anger is weakness; And wrath that is not God: but by
God it is. Mind but That state last: Now for you to be angry because I do not
give you the name of Parliament, It is because you should not be destroyed:
Wisdom foresees the dangerous event that will fall on you in that state: your
method and rule, has been all along evasions: Now I will help you to the
best, yet it will not help you: For though I koatrefie you there, you fall in
another place appointed, but made by your selves. Now I speak as a Commoner,
that state cannot be denied me, And in that state I being it is for the Real,
not intentive good I take the whole to speak for. As I am the head of your
convene, (if ye were) by my Barrony of Oxon alias Essex: Now I have two rights,
nay three rights to stand on, and for: for Magna Charta, the being of our
Beings, and a commoner in that right in Magna Charta and by Magna Charta the
head of you, if you were: Now how can any state be stated betwixt that, that
has an essential being, And that that has none? To make good that state of
Evasion, I promised to you, it is thus: the commonwealth cannot in real truth
call you to an account, Neither ought they if you deny that name Parliament,
which if you affirm you undo your selves: Thus to be accountable to that, from
whence you had no being in their being, nor being by them, nor from them: but
this state you must bear with, your being is of, and upon them; Remember this
state was cited in the foregoing page speaking of God; This is mysterious, but
I state my method to the reach and overture of your Capacities: Now according
to the real rule of right, the commonwealth should render it self ridiculous
to demand a due where they committed no trust: your negative is truer then
their affimative in this state: this is a strange condition that all our
Estates are wasted, oppression goes on, and must go on; Though it is strange,
it is true, the sensatives can set to their seal: I would it were other ways.

But to find out this Thing that BEES upon us all: there it is we may swear
Thing, we feel it: Now to find this BE, that BEES every where amongst us: I
have found it first: I bring tidings: For this Thing sake am I sent forth to
undeceive the people, it is the soldiers intended right Thing to himself. He
gave it a being: and the Thing that he thought should have been in a sense life
to him, is proved death in a sense: for the Thing, nay his Thing proves but
name, and that name in that credit, that when he has done his duty to his
Thing, he thought it would have proved, and in his accounts he sinds it Thing,
and in deduction for his quarter, and by that his sum cut less, and then
counting at his agreement at 8 d. a day, for which many out of conscience
havedestroyed them, and theirs and coming to their Thing, it is but name, and
the name baring no more credit to him then to be worth to him 4 shil. a pound;
Is this payment for faithful service: judge all men soldiers this is truth
you know: my heart bleeds to see, but cannot help it: unlawful, and unjust
ways is ever paid in its own coin, and so it is just; your full sums agreed
of, is your due, as God is just, for there is a justness in the meeanest thing
and that is properly called Gods essential being (I speak after the manner of
men) now soldiers by creating your Parliament, if you can call it so, it
matters not to me: to me name is not; but things are the substance: now though
for the present your moneys would not make much of it a bove 4 shil a pound, it
would be inquired into now the cause came that procured the effect of your
sail of your due earned debt; was it weakness in your radax, that it was note
able to state a strong essence, that must be denied; for their power and your
power would have setched in your own dues, being the whole kingdom was under
your commands But it might be thus: In writing I can make the last letter take
the whole state, when I write in Mophes, that is in the Medish method then I
write k for coffe which is strong now from a radax; I can let fall a weak
essence, to take the state in k to the radax again: I am afraid of this juggling
nay plain dealing: I will prove it the soldier is necessitated through you, he
is forced to sell, you must be paymasters your derivacies draws up into
essencie; your essencie, and ye state the radax of the soldiers earned wages:
is it fair or foul let the world judge: true it is undeniable; how comes such
an involved inrolement of soldiers dues into a payment, for whose lands I know
not, but the soldiers due is the true due in that patched purchase; Now
soldiers I must show you your undues: for I have but one rule; you wronged the
Commonwealth, when you divided the Parliament, then you erred as is hinted
before: Now whereas ye soldiers wronged the Nation in their right, you are
rewarded with wrong by your own intended right; now to do the nation wrong,
having done so, you ought to do the Nation right, for that end you were set on
work: Now to do right to the Nation, is all you can do, take down your Thing
set up by you: that Thing nay name Parliament, and let the right descend into
the people again, and a new choice made, these to be accountable to you,
because they had a being of, and from and by you, in this doing you prove your
selves, nay they cause you prove your selves honest men at last, now this way
will prove good for the nation; Only the loss of their moneys: thus you may
account with them, that have so straightly accounted with you: take your due
where it is due to be taken: for your due God does know is deerly earned, and
justly ought to have been paid you natives know, it is not the soldier that
wrongs you, love the soldier, none can help you but he, it is he that should pay
the soldiers that wrongs you, who that is judge ye: now if any man or men be
offended at this truth here inserted, and count me an enemy to the Parliament:
know I cannot properly nor unproperly be an enemy to that that truly is not the
Thing but a name, nay death to them by law in and by Magna Charta to own the
same according to the right of the nations right; a Parliament is the glory of
the nation, Nay the truth of the Nation; it is the splendour and beauty of our
beauty, if by us it has a being, or else it can be no Parliament, now this I
honor, and would lay down my life for, as at first I stood for you, when you
were, and covenanted with you, and held with you till you from lambs turned
wolves, then I was afraid of you, I opposed Charles Stuart in ship money was
committed for it in London, my horse taken, and sold for shipmony in Cambrige
shire; by Pitcher of Trumpington then sheriff, know I ever stood against the
Thing Tyranny, and not the name, now I hope no man, no honest man or men, will
conceive anger against me for speaking the truth, as this I leave to all men to
judge of, But thus in plain terms, if any man, or men be angry and charge me
with crime, This I declare to all people, that, that Man or men I will prove
traitor, or traitors by the law of the land, by word, by promise, by
protestation, by oath, by covenant, by engagement, All this I will do so sure
as the Lord lives, I jest not, I am in True earnest. Look to it, I weep for it,
to your consciences I commit to judge of: But know a Ly with a Ly is one
Meathod, (...) one Meathod. But bring (...) to be measured by, Truth then it
will not hold, so much for this time.

Now know I am a mad man; And ye declare me so to be, it will be weakness in
you to question me; But know that A mad man is not to answer, by the law of the
land: I take that privilige, you cannot deny it, if you be men sensable bare
with my v^^knesse; God I hope will give me greater understanding: so I rest
your ^^at are truly the Lords; that sear him, and walk in obeeience to him.

Yours To serve you in love Theaurau John Tani.
From the three Golden Lions without Temple Bar. December 28. 1650.

