THEAURAUjOHN TANI His Second Part OF HIS Theous-Ori APOKOLIPIKAL: OR, God's
Light declared in Mysteries.

For which Epistles I was six months falsely imprisoned; as by judgment of my
Lord Chief Justice Rolls, and the rest of his brethren the Judges upon the
Upper Bench is declared.

And what I have written, I will maintain against all the Learned men in the
world: And I challenge the whole Universities, and their adherents, to answer
the Books, if they be able, or to a fair Dispute before the people. And if none
dare appear, then I conclude that they are in the dark, and dare not come to
the light.

device of TheaurauJohn Tany TheaurauIohn tany our High priest and recorder of
ye 13 tribes of ye Jews for ye Captiuities Return.


Wrote by me MAGI TANI EST.



Printed by J. C. and are to be sold by Richard Moon in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the Seven Stars, betwixt the two North-doors. 1653.

To the Reader.
Friends and Enemies,
BEloved, whereas in my first Book Theous ori I did promise unto the world
speedily the second part, being then wrote, for both the first and second were
wrote in one scene of light, but by reason of my false imprisonment for writing
the Copy, and the tossing from one Prison to another, two of the Copies I could
not find until now lately, wdich were in a friends hand: these things with
other necessities which were laid upon me, was the cause that I could not
discharge my promise.

Now thus much I do protest before God and his holy Angels; I was forced to
write, I neither understood nor knew what I wrote, and when it was wrote, I
could not rest till it were delivered unto the people. Now what I thus wrote,
Captain Robert Norwood did read, and by his wisdom dispute; but I would not
have you for to conclude a oneness in us two, for what the Captain has done,
or does, that is upon his account, and what I have done, and what I do, that is
upon mine account; for when I was a child, I held by any thing; but now
childishness is departed, and counsel is established on her Throne, as a short
time will manifest.

Now let the wise and prudent weigh in their secret and juditious judgments,
and I leave it to the whole to consider what they could cast me in prison for,
it will appear mad Rage in them, if they have condemned me for the things they
understood not; but blessed be the Lord, who now has given me understanding in
the book, and without the book, that I in my Masters name Jehovah, do challenge
the whole Clergy in the world to dispute in any created appearance, or any
spiritual or Divine intendant, or in the secret operating of the w^^^y ahbiss
unto, and in the bonds of Orion; or in the fruitful odoriferous influences of
the Pleiades; or the Helm of the Sun; or the celestial order of the Stars
centerall, and the Stars fugitive, or motional; or in the Scene of Angels,
which is Gods first days work, which is not to be expressed in the created
voice, but by Hieroglyphics the Scene may be somewhat illustrated.

Theauraujohn Taniour Recorder unto the Jews.

Epistle Dedicatory.
DEarly Beloved, ye Select Jews, whose rising glory is as the Arorau in
his-beautiest morning, to you is this Epistle Dedicatory, for the eye of beauty
it is, in the select unity, and not to be seen but in the Evangelical Scene,
which is not the created voice, but the Scene is in the Source or Assome bottom
abbiss bottomless, which Makzims being in their full import weighed, it is no
less then the abbss Deity.

So beloved, though I am in the body, my eye is in the Scene of the Deity; from
whence, as from my Sun, I reflect upon my dead corporality; Essiam quia caelum
non terra in etate.

Beloved, these confounding Makzims are let down to confound the wisdom of men
in this wise, but simple age; for the world is lost, and a Law of restoration
is sounded forth, for the return of the Captivity of the Jews, and the again
Building the Temple, and how so impossible it seems unto men, yet by him that
lives for evermore it shall be accomplished; unto which verification I
subscribe my name Theauraujohn High Priest and RECORDER to the thirteen Tribes
of the Jews.

Dearly beloved Brethren, both Jews and Gentiles, the Assome Abbiss of my
declarative, it reaches in its includement the celestial center, where there is
no voice but the Scene of Angels in the perfectest perfection in the Scene of
the Deity.

O Beloved, that you were but weighed out of your ponderous earth, then you
might behold my Scene; in which Phiriattical expression, I denote the
illusterious beauty of the Abbiss Deity.

O Halliluiah ori am assi selat oramus voce: The English is but darkness to
light in comparison of the state, but here is to what the English will bear; O
praise Jehovah in the declamation of the Evangelical Oratori, in the Abbiss
darkness of this earth. There is what the English will hold.

O beloved of God, my soul pants for your reducement, that is, from your dark
and dead Idols of your weaved traditional Records: and that you may be
enlightened to serve the true and living God, the Creator of all things, who is
not tied to your Forms of names, but he dwells in the truth of things, which
is the living life of all things, but in man and woman by a destributive love:
for God is love, and where you see love acted, (behold all people) even there
God dwells, and no where else, for God is love.

This state I have confirmed with an Exce, that you (the dark world) may know
in what estate you stand that act not in love: woe unto you, ye are bound up in
your iniquities, ye are sealed unto the day of vengeance, and ye now lie in the
Bonds of iniquity, and the gall of bitterness.

Now know, I cannot charge ye sighters against God so high as ye deserve,
because deceit is your Master, vanity your mind, rotteness your heart,
corruption is your Doom, and there, on you, wrath shall abide and remain a
time, Video exce

Yours, Theauraujohn Taniour Recorder to the 13 Tribes of the Jews.
Thus far is lately wrote.



Reader, Before thou go on farther, turn to the Errata at the end of the
Book.

Epistle 11. Elthars April the 21. 1651.
THe word of the Lord came unto me; Salem ori arri ne, Sele mem in re fasiebat
al denior, Sabat alliel.

The derivasy, Or the English, The God of glory from the Ski,
Beholding humane misierie;
He sent a Son a Savior to be,
Behold your riddle unridled mystery.


Thus Christ was, and is no loss then the life of God, his life is our living
life, If we are in life, else we are dead though we are living. Now beloved, I
come to set all things out of joint; That the joining joint, may be his true
self, without man's coined inventions; for the incarnation of Christ, it is
wrote by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, but what we have inserted, is neither
Matthews nor none of the rests, you have not the name of many of their words,
and then the knowledge in the Spirit, that was their light, you are very far
from, no nearer then light to darkness: the name to the thing is darkness to
light. Now before I begin, I desire you desire of God, that a clear manifest
discovery may be made known unto you, as the truth is in Jesus, who is the
light and life of the Father, the buty of excelency. Now know I come not to
asperse the true Scripture, but to take of man's invention, that is inserted for
the true Scripture, for all is not Scripture that is written in the Bible, and
the new Testament, for the truth in them both is but one truth, and one entire
Scripture; now it is said, that Christ his second coming is to Illusterate to
the view the clear discovery of the wisdom of God, and reconcile the
differences betwixt the Jews and the Gentiles, which lies in the abstract of
the Old and New Testament. But the vail is upon both Jews and Gentiles,
concerning the main reconcilement of both in this main maxim; that is, Massah
El Jah, or Jehovah; but to come to the beginning, that is the Incarnation of
Emanuel or Jesus or Christ. First he was very God, equal with the Father, what
was equal with the Father but himself? for he is, was, and shall be one entire
essence, in him self, before all, and in product from him all came, even this
Son which is the true Image of the Father.

Now I beseech you mind, the world was Christ, I am the life of the world,
these are his words essentially, for he was the maker of it and all things, and
let all people and Nations know, that the maker of all things could not die,
for with him must die all the things made in heaven and earth.

But to begin, Thus God sent forth his Son made of a woman. What was that? That
woman was no less then the life created of himself; that is to say his whole
creation, and he is the light of the whole creation. But to come to state one
entire State, says one text a woman shall compass a man: now the truth in that
text is this hevah alsiel agroanei selma, that is thus much, the strength of
God takes weakness into it, this is the meaning of the Spirit in that text.
Another text translated is in Isaiah, a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth
her first born and they shall call his name Emanuel, that is God with us, this
text I deny in the coherents, additicinal: thus is the words in the truth of
words, alsiel reme a sadi el dolorum in re fasisti nobat al dele a saous in re
a pher sele Emanuel, the English of the true text, and the Spirits meaning is
this; A Virgin pure does bring forth unto God that living life Emanuel; now how
can you confine these words that are a living life operating through the whole
Creation in every figure? now how comes this Emanuel to be enclosed or the
included, in the alone womb of one entire Virgin, when Emanuel is the Virgin
Spirit? that is, the life of God, living in man by operation? Now you add to
that state, to bring in your fleshly humanity, Thus much; a Virgin shall
conceive, and so bring it to the relation of our capacity, that a Virgin
brought forth Jesus, the same say I, but the manner and meaning must be truly
understood; Thus I say, them words have a Spiritual interpretation as well as
an outward signification.

Now mind, Mary that word is perfection, Emanuel is perfection also, So they be
two names, but the whole Creation that knows, knows that there is but one
perfection. Now I say, that Mary the Virgin brought forth Jesus, and I say, and
you in truth cannot deny, but that Jesus brought forth Mary, for without Christ
made the Father nothing that was made. (Now) mind this state, Mary brought
forth Christ, Thus Mary is Christ, and Christ is Mary, for both Mary and Christ
they be perfect names, of one entire and alone thing, the Caldean Tongue is
thus read, Ofagodo dolma maret eltah assi salos sabdi, the English is Jesus the
Savior is that pure alone thing, that cannot conjoyn into any one thing, for
he is the life of the whole.

O beloved of God, my soul pants after you, that you might be enlightened by the
Spirit of truth, but beloved you are so married to the dead letter, of whose
Translations you know not, neither what (Bait) is laid in the mystery, you know
its Originality was not wrote in English; and let me tell you, that without the
truth in that Spirit to the wisest man living, the record in Scripture is but a
dark riddle. Was not the Jewish Rabbis as deep learned in the Scriptures in
their litteral Expressions, as you great learned ones are in these blind times,
though we may think a great light is in us, when indeed it is only a learned
notional lie, for all learning is the lie, and it is the Whore that John saw
rise out of the bottomless pit; for know what man can learn in the divine
thing, it is but to speak a curious name of he knows not what, for the Spirits
teaching is a turning and a converting teaching, which man's words is but the
dead name of that living life, acting in power to the overturning all
oppositions. This is the Gospel that is a powerful Substance, compelling
obedience unto it self.

Now beloved, I come to let down the State to your capacity, and let no man
asperse my words, But let them take a copy from what is inserted, that
freedom I allow to all men, for my inserted shall not be barred from any man,
and to what I have wrote, I shall be willing to render an account to any. How
have I all along desired the Priests my Brethren to a fair despute, in giving
the state or taking the state, from them to answer to them, yet never could
obtain it, which does declare that they are in darkness, and dare not come to
the light; for light is not ashamed, but darkness; and a lie seeks shelter.

Now mind I beseech you my brethren, for I shall put in the leave^ that raises
the whole foundation. I beseech you mind, Christ as he is stated in your
Testament, could not be born, I say it is Blasphemy, to hold it forth according
to the written inserted. I entreat your attentions, and be ye like the noble
Bereans, that searched whether the things were so or no that were declared. Now
mind, what do I seek for at any man's hands, or any thing that any one of you
have; but blessed be the Lord, that has spared me a little of that abundance,
that he had committed to my trust, for in my washing is my refinement.

Now know Christ could not be properly said to be born, that was the birth and
glorious creator of all.

Secondly, He could not be born in one, that was the life and strength of all.

Thirdly, He could not be begotten, that out of him all things was produced.

Fourthly, He could not be flesh properly, for God is the Spirit of life in the
whole Creation.

Fifthly, He could not descend in flesh as we account, but he is a Spirit, and
his decent is spiritual into our Spirits, whereby he raises a Resurrection unto
himself, and by degrees our natural man is subjected, to the Spiritual man,
which is Christ the Lord, the life and glory of excellency in that word Ci. is
employed union.

Sixthly, He out of whose product all was, is, and to come, could not was not,
nor cannot be inclossed or included, for know a living life in all things
cannot be properly said to be only in one thing, or womb of a woman; If so,
then where is the life of all the rest, that are and cannot be no where
consistant but in Jesus their Savior.

I beseech you mind, I will give you your own words, thus say you, the same
say I, Jesus Christ was brought forth of the Virgin Mary, and lived on earth as
man does, till the appointed time of the Father, then the Spirit did descend;
that Spirit is Jesus, even that is the holy anointing above his fellows.

But we have brought the humanity to be very God in the earthly form, which is
absolute Blasphemy. For thus, man to confine his maker into his own thing
made, is to undeifie God and deifie himself, this is Antichrist in the highest
degree, as to ungod God, and make man God, So life in this sense made death,
and death is made life. For Ephuscos in Re ar alli-aam in re fasisty nebat
agoas am sele mem derala al. The derivasy, Or the English, The Lord the God
that dwells on high, cannot nor will not be confind to mutability, though all
things created have their time and change, yet still he that is their Changer,
he changes not. For his unchangeableness is their changeableness from better
to better, not from worss to worss, but they are changed from glory to glory,
Beloved look into your own selves with the enlightened eye, and when you see
your self begin to change you change in the beholding the glory of your
changer, for the beginning change is the end change, for our beholding is our
changing us into his Image, or us into himself. So beloved we are changed from
one glory to another degree, but still wrought by the same Spirit, for God who
changes all, is that only one cases from himself, and changes that cased into
himself, form whence it and all things had their origini. Selos in Re fasisti
ex in ar Sallu vivat in reme obbisus in re ex id in per ko non olemus servat,
The English is this, The heavenly light is God, in the appearing thing, and not
(...) the appearing thing, and that that appears, is not the thing, and that
that appears not, that even that is the thing of things, that is God the
glorious creator of all things, For God is a Spirit and cannot be seen.

Now beloved many of you would be pleased, so that I would prove what I
declare, by that you make your God that is the called Scripture, for to lay
down a point and run to fetch the Scripture, as you account it, to justify
what you have laid down, when many times that is a lie you have laid down, and
that is a truth in Scripture, in its own place; yet that Scripture by you is
made a lie by your producing it. I prove it thus, For me to state a lie, and
produce a truth to witness or bear out my lie, the truth is truth in it self,
yet a lie in me, thus I name (the) name, and know not the thing.

Again, The Scripture is true, I am the lie, thus the Scripture is the life of
God in me, I sound out from that principle by my voice, the acting from within,
that voice is a lie though it be from the true Spirit of God within. For thus
that that is a sound of, or from the thing, is not the thing, and that that is
not the thing, is but the sound of the thing, which is the lie in the whole
creation.

Now ye Priests in England, who have sounded from Antichrist, and not from the
true Christ; you have been and are a lie, Thieves and Robbers, deceivers, for
your substance you sounded from was and is a Lie, mistake me not, the intent is
truth. Now I shall declare to the whole people, that that has not the ro^^^^
in the ro^ght of Christ, Is Antichrist and the false Prophet that Deceiver,
that Accuser, that Mansla yer, that Murderer, that Locust that rose out of the
pottomless pit.

Now I come to unvail and unmask your deceaveableness, I beseech you all people
mind, know as the ro^ght is in the eternal being, such are the branchings
forth in the appearances. Now ye Clargy in England, this metaphorical
expression is, and will hold a large extent, Alma amaret assa alui denat all^
^ni Sele arkat apsi inde assisi negat alterum in Re aplaph in sab ^i el. The
English, The high sound from truth it self, is but a lie; for it is sound or
name of the thing, and not the true thing, the sound of a lie is nothing in the
senter, neither any thing in the product but confution to unstable Souls.

Now ye Priests my brethren by creation, but I desent from you in declaration,
and turn you to your own weaved invention, which is your Trade of Lies in
these Nations, these Nations is a word proper, for the Lie is but one in all
Nations, the word is proper in his restriction, for it confines all under, and
into one head or Redi.

O how have you lift up your lying trumpers, for the effecting your own self
ends. O who would not fight for the Gospel, and murder his brethren, he could
not be of God.

When the true Gospel you knew not, but sounded out your own lying hearts,
covered with that glorious name Gospel.

Now you have misserably ruined the Nation, and is it not just you who should
have been lights in goodness, should be partakers in the work you have wrought?

Now you have declared your selves, for by outward acts are the true
declarations, what is done in men and acted by men: for as the heart is, so are
the declarations. I speak your own words because ye should understand me. Now
I shall show you what the Gospel is, and I shall leave the desidement betwixt
you and me, to be desided by all people.

First, I say, That the Gospel cannot be preached by another, but by it self it
is the declarer and declared, it is the truth in the root or foundation, from
that rought, or foundation flows forth the outward sound, from the inward
significant. Now the truth within is the ro^ght of God, but the sound outwardly
is man's voice; that is, the Lie, it is Antichrist, for it speaks great names,
and it is but a sound, and nothing, which is but an atrie Lie fomented by man's
invention.

But now if this be granted, which cannot in truth if duly considered cannot be
denied, Then Priests where are you with your (Nomen) that name Gospel, that
Whore that you have decked up by the peoples spoil? if the sound from the true
light be a lie, I pray ye what is that ye sound from, that has no senter in
truth, but a lie in the root, and a lie in the branchings forth?

I speak in term that you may understand what I say. Now I begin to call to
you for proofs from your Scripture, to sustifie your actings, or else you have
not taught the Gospel, as you call it, but I will give you one hinte to help
you with; It is that you tax me for, because I do not site the Scripture, to
prove my delivered or expressions by. To which I answer thus, That that is not
against Scripture, is the Scripture, so says Christ though the words do not
bear the same expression, know all truth is but one Scripture, and all
Scriptures make up being speled together makes up the expression of but one
only truth. But know when I site a true maxim, and would produce a Scripture
to confirm it to you, the Translation is false in that state, and the maxim
stands alone in strength, being its basis is founded on the truth, and it needs
not the lie in the Translation to help to uphold it.

There is a plain reason in English, but brethren ye Priests, this is the light
in me expressing it self, for to unvail your gross lying darkness.

But to come to prove your selves preachers of the Gospel of Christ or
Ambassadors. Brethren this word to ye Priests, I will open from its original,
not by learning, for I am unlearned in what I declare, but by the Spirit of
Jesus that has made me the true Jew, Brought forth of the Tribe of Ruben, the
anointed of God for the carrying backof the captive Jews from the North. O
selat arri reme Rex sede sophim in absolemus in se Sopatar arma legagit el
donior al. The English, O the heavenly light that will appear in the beautiful
excellency of it self, in briging together again his dispersed people to
himself, and glorify them with his own glorious excellency. This the Spirits
lettings down to ye poor Jews my brethren, for whose sake I have forsaken all,
that I might seek thy welfare with my own, both being wrapped in union. Thou
Buteous dafter Sion Seron el, though thou art not gathered yet, mind thy beauty
remains and the crown of thy glory is now a setting on.

Now to open the word Ambassador, as I promised, the words is connexed in
diverse significants, as thus Em is proper hebrew, Bas is hebrew worte in kof
derived from Koahsh. Now Koahsh is a various maxim; the signification is thus,
it is the strength in letting down the strength in caseing away the strength, in
restoring or taking up in strength; it is read both an Affirmative and a
Negative. The word is proper thus: Em-bas-dor, that word is singular, it is
hebrew Dor, it is knowledge or generation, for generation implies the single
knowledge, which is one knowledge, that is all knowledge which is God the Lord,
I write it in three Sillables, as thus, Em bas dor that is perfect hebrew. Now
you great learned Rabbis, will not quarrel yet until I Sipherate the
signiphicants, and never a one does give a sound literally in the
decipheration in its adherent, the word I write in three significants he
braick, the Radiacies is this that is Resh Jod and Caph.

Now you are all lost and will say, that no one radical does give a sound in
the word Em bas dor, E is the proper English radical: I say, that them three
are the true radaxes in England, radaxes is the proper word: Resh Jod and Caph,
are the true radaxes being wrote in Mophes, that is in the Meaish Methodical
method thus: Resh is Gods wisdom in himself in man, Jod being stated behind
Resh is read negative et affirmative, that is negation and affirmation, thus
God does clusterate in Jod through Resh, and Resh combines in the insert with
Jod, so that these two in their proper state stated, in this insert is thus
much, God his wisdom, now ad Caph that is, an impead granted by all, now ad
Caph on the left hand, or the left point, and then she makes man, for in that
word radical, is exact three distinct sentered in one, that is, God his
strength and his weakness, that is, the Impead or (Shrine) in which the divine
does shadow it self, now this mystery is fetched from the radical root: now
close Resh Jod and Caph, then the truth is Gods strength declared in weakness,
which is proper in this word Em bas dor.

Now I come down from the Oriental View unto the lower derivasy, that you
derive from this word, and its figure is Emissio, that word is not lattin^
though it be read from that root, the true significant is to know, or sent; for
sent, is knowledge^ as well as the word Knowledge, now the word conexsed is
Bas, that word in the hebrew is strength, and has not a word of conextion in
any place, but the word in Spanish is Basshau, that is his proper sphere though
used in Turkey, but I speak the place of the word in its proper regency by a
created-dex-sela, which word Basshau signifies great, or high in esteem, the
import lies in the hebrew Bas-shau, is but a declaration from Bas, for Bas if
truly understood does carry in its sercumferance, all that is strength, and
strength that is life, and light does declare it self.

Now Dor is read Dora, now the proper significants of Dor is a generation,
knowledge, or knowledge in generation. Dora is thus much, the increase of
generation, the word Dora is a flock, a multitude it is wisdom It is strength,
it is beauty, it is all, ad but to Dor Aleph Hebraick, the^ read what you will of
excellencies, that word Dora will bear the state, So you are deseaved in the
Import of the word Dorau V or Vau give him but the full word, and grace in
grace of word, that is in our English Dorau, but in Hebrew it is Vaudorau, it
must be so wrote to bear the state, I have stated upon the maxims, that is to
say, Dor Dorau, now spel all together Embasdor, that is thus much, in import A
true witness bearer, that is the Spirits denotation in the word Embasdor.

Now Brethren, I have found your name in its Origini. I shall find your
declarative nature, and examine you to the true examination, for you are
troubled at Theaurau John, and I am troubled at you Priests, that say you are
the Ambassadors of Christ, that word Of will suit the most of you, for ye are
Of, and not in Christ.

Now I come to lay down the first ground, that is this, When God gives a name,
he gives something with that name; it is not as we give our Children names, but
God does give a substance, for he is the substance; and where he gives a Name,
he gives something else, that is himself, In his Son.

Brehren, Time will manifest it to you all, what Theaurau John is, but to come
to you Priests my Brethren, that say you are called and sent, and say you are
Embassidours of Christ. Now I deny you to be called or sent, neither are you
Christ's Embassidours, but thus your call is a lie. For it is learning, and
learning is that Whore that has deceived the Nations, for it has completed
the work of Antichrist, for who is an Antichrist but he that denies the Father
and the Son; that is thus much, the Father is God, and the Son is God, and
cannot be-learned.

Now you by you learning, You have as it were made Stairs, to pass up to
heaven or to go to God, when God is a Spirit, infusing himself into the simple
to make them wise. By this Cheat you have deceaved the Nations. O how you have
tortured and tormented the poor members of Christ, that would not allow your
wills and fancies, If not say amen to what you said, then presently they were
Heretics and Blasphemers, when indeed your selves were the men. O then you
would cause the Caterpillars, to fly from your named Spiritual corts, to smite
the poor upright, simple Innosent and harmless men, then you would tos a man
upon the horns of your Altar, while he was forced to seek Bread.

Nay further, The stricktest of your trade, was put them to death that opposed
you, or would not be conformable to your Gospel will or will Gospel, that was
and is your holy calling, or your called Jure Divine.

Brethren is not this true, that you have acted this openly, preached it
openly? may you not be ashamed of what you have done? but to color all this is
your shrine, you say that the Priests lips preserves knowledge, I say that
text is false translated, and them words thrust in to then in your trade of
lies. Thus I prove the Priest, that is the true Priest is knowledge, and he
has no lips nor body, for it is the Spirit of God dwelling in man; that is,
Gods Image in the earthly form or body of man.

That that preserves knowledge gives knowledge, Judge ye all people, If the
Priest can give or preserve knowledge. But one more to open clear, that that is
knowledge is a substance, and a substance is not a sound, and that is all the
Priests are, for they are but a sound and no more, and that that is stated in
that text is only of a thing, and not (...) the thing.

Indeed the Priests are quicker at their learned names then other men are,
because it is their trade, for he is not fit to make a Priest on, as we make
Priests among us men, except he be quick, nimble and acute, and a good
Scholar. Look into this indowments ye Priests, which is your fabric you build
from, Now thus qualified, then to the University, and there you are installed a
Priest, then you are sent to preach the Gospel as you call it.

But a Lie you have learned, a Lie you have conceived, and a Lie you have
declared; the root a Lie, and the branchings forth they are the same.

I affirm this against all the learned Priests in the world, I am a Priest
unlearned, yet knowledged I have no learned tongues, yet in any state coherent
to the intendant, I know all Tongues, and will with the deepest you can pick
out amongst all your flock of Priests, I will engage in any material matter or
Divine, and Spiritual Intendant, and what I had I received in seven days,. but
not at your Universities.

Now Priests if ye were not so mightily wrapped in partiality to your selves, I
would show you that miracle that you have no mind to see, It is a poor weak
Miccannich, I please you in that word, but to see him preach that you like not,
though he holds forth to the clear view of the enlightened the Divine and
sacred expressions, is not this a miracle? I say it is, I prove it so to be,
and a greater then if the Spirit of God should take one of you from your trade
of lies, and plant himself in you, who is truth, I tell you that the
desernative were hard to be discovered, by reason of the Lie you were grammered
in before: for where the Person is weakest and unfittest, there is the power of
miracle most illustrated, but this you like not, because it spoils your
ingrosed trade of lies. Let me but come to you, and hear your Sermon; I will
show them how you often say and unsay again, is not this lying? I leave to the
people to judge of who are judicious.

I will state one thing that has a great light and influence upon the peoples
persons and purses at this day, it is not taken off yet, that is, this great
trouble in which the Nation lies involved. Have not you Priests piped and the
people have danced, that dance to their own ruin and misery, and do you not
unpipe that piped dance, but the act is too ponderous to be reduced. For the
first-piping has killed and slain the people, and the second piping cannot
revive again the slain. Look in all Lands if that Babylonish whore has not
bewitched the people, to murder one anothhr for the Clergies own ends, which
is but to deceive the people more for their own rise, by their rule murder
all, till their wills is gotten into regency; this is the Clargies work, the
lying Clargy, the lying Priests. Behold I see a day coming that these Priests
locust, or locust Priests, shall be chained up or swept out of the Land.

For this I know, that the true Teacher shall erect his throne in the inward
man, which is the true teacher, substance, Priest, and voice, and act, for ye
shall all be taught of God.

Priests, where will be then your lips that should preserve knowledge? But that
lie was let in to entwine one strength to the Priest, Cab^le to make it Ackkor
or strong, Hoso Auallo o on oli sabdi, the English is, how and what shall be
your high calling ye Priests, when the Spirit is the true teacher dwelling in
the heart of man? Then I The aurausohn say, which is thus much being spoken,
Gods light says to ye Priests, pack and away with your trade of Lies, that
has brought this destruction upon the people, this Murdering the Nations, this
Distractions in Kingdoms, this Oppressing one another, this Hatred, this
Unchristian like, all this has its root from ye Priests, Question me I will
make it good to your greater shame, there shall not one Priest stand as now is
instituted, and know from this very day the sharp contest does begin, and the
fire shall never be quenched till it has consumed the whole Clargy in England.
O that that generous Nobillity were but planted in our State in England, that
they would but search the root from whence all our misery flows, for know
there can be no safe settlement unless it be upon a sure foundation, and there
is no sure foundation, but truth it self.

Now though men cannot settle truth, nor set in truth, yet thus much may be
done. The Palpable Lie may be secluded from place of regency, which is the
Clergy in England, and I will prove them Liars, Cheaters, Deceivers, Robbers,
Murderers, Oppressors, Blasphemers, Covetous.

And are these men fit men for Gospel Ministers? let them that are thus proved
be put down, and their lying silenced, and if I prove not the insert that is
here written, I will dye the death willingly; for I am a young Eliah amongst
Baals lying Priests, as will shortly appear.

Brethren, would you have me to speak the truth, as it is the truth in Jesus?
it is even thus, Gods power is even at the very door, to overcome and
over-turne Lying Learning. For I beseech you mind, truth by man cannot not be
learned, he may by learning get the Name, or Eloquent expression of the thing
by learning, but he is the farther off from the truth by that he has learned,
for truth is gotten neither by hearing nor learning, for it is the desent from
God into our Spirits, that raises the surrection of our Spirits into Life,
which is his truth, and from that root of truth within our Spirits being
wattered with the influences of his fullness, we that are Babes grow in and by
his strength till we be taken into himself, his takings are them of his own
teaching.

Now beloved I beseech you mind, and I will lay down the perfect Moddel of
every one of you, that is, what man is, and how composed and how acktuated and
how and from what opperating.

Now I beseech you mind attentively, for it is the greatest mystery that never
yet was wrote to the full, as I shall leave to be viewed of all Authors or
Historiographers, who have seen the opinion of many learned men.

Now I Theauraujohn am unlearned and unread, in any Microkosme or definative
adjuncts thereunto belonging, but to speak to all capacities the word is this,
the description of the little world in man or Sebastanaies, that is the same in
this Tongue.

Now I begin, Oli sede el. The English is this, The light of God set in man,
that is the first state.

Sede oli el Vau. The English, The light of man is set in God only.

There is the two states laid down. I beseech you mind, for we have had great
disputes about this little world Man or Sabastanaies in his first principle.
But now God has been pleased to let down the state more fuller and plainer.

Now mind, First God is the Reigning Essence, or Regency Essence in himself
alone.

Secondly, Man is a Derivative Essensied in that reigning Essence, for in him
we live, move, and have our being: then know, that that is and does wholly
depend upon another is Essensied in that he does depend upon. Now know you
cannot give any thing to hold semblance with the Essence of God, and the living
life of man, that is in the true propriety of speech, the Essence of God in
man. Brethren, many of you cannot bear that word, but thus the Soul of man,
which is the very same in its originallity. Now we will look into this desent
from God to make man thus: the Soul in man is the angel of God, That is the
pure divine Evangelicalquintessence, which is the same in the forecited state.

Now the reigning Essence, or God does cause out of himself a Voice Life, That
abstracted out of the four Elements, a composure of appearances of all things,
as well as the material or Beastial body of man.

Now there is a Body, there is an Essence from whom this living life or Soul
came to be placed in the abstracted four elements, in a visible Corporal body,
now there is set down the Case, the Derivative cased, the abstract of the the
beastial body corporal.

Yet here wants the Spirit of man, that the whole world cannot tell what it is,
where it shall cease, whether in Heaven or Hell, now this Spirit of man is to
be fetched forth: for it is the All, that is either in bondage or in freedom.

Now Priests where will your learning fetch this Spirit, that is the trouble of
all, nay the trouble of it self. Now mind, This Spirit of man is the
quintessence of the four Elements motional, and is always operating in the
body as the Coherents it was abstracted from, and is continually motional. Now
know, that that gives more motion to this quintessence of abstract Elementary,
it is the conjunction of, and with the Selestial bodies, for their
Ingreediences does cooperate in the abstract, and composed actuated and
operated, though he thinks that himself is the cause of acting, so it is but
subordinate to the operating of the Selestial bodies predominacy, for in truth
that that does act and the cause or motion be in another, the other may be
properly be said to act, and not that that does appear in the thing. Now let me
tell you that this poor innocent beast or body of Clay, does nothing, but the
Spirit of God and of man, them two do operate every man, under heaven. Thus I
open that I have abstracted in three, though I know them all three to be
trines, that is nine, but in three I lay the state down, because al may
understand. Thus the Soul, the Spirit and the Body. Now as in Gods regency
Essence their Spirit is proper, but in his derivative Essence, Soul is the
proper word, and holds thus much, Oli el the light of God in man, not of man,
Now the Spirit of man is proper thus, because it is the quintessence abstracted
out of the Elementary motions with its recedings from the selestial influenses,
and thus is man's composure.

But now comes the main matter, I say, that the living life, which is the Soul
of man returns to God, and cannot detract his Ti or Essence, and with obeying
the inward dictatings of that living Life, The Spirit of man is taken into the
called Paradise or Heaven, or Evangelical living, and for not obeying the
inward dictatings of that living Life within the Spirit of man, is cast forth
unto utter darkness, which is counted Hell. Now what is this Hell or darkness?
It Is a Separation from an enjoyment that it was capable of; that is, Hell, and
Devil, and Ly^r, and false Prophet, they shall not come forth till they have
paid the uttermost farthing, then shall they receive mercy; for know that God
is Good, and Just, and merciful, and he will not punish a Finite thing
Infinitely.

Now there is more in that Popish Tenent, then the Papish know of, but that
they hold is a mear Fancinated thing from that local place fained Purgatory,
Reme^el Salu in re. The English, Mind, the height of the Declarative does
undation the search, but this expression from the Tongue you understand not,
but this The high notation of hell does unbottom it. Thus that that has such a
high and great name that causes fear, it is Darkness, and darkness is not
knowledge; now that that is not known cannot have a senter, and that that has
no senter cannot have a being; for if a being, it must be in God. I prove it
thus, God is the being of all beings, and they refined return to their senter,
from whence was their original fountain. Now this Hell or Locallity of place, I
desire all the English Clargy, with their Essence Clergy; that is, Romes
called Priests. For brethren you are but Romes derivacie, and Romes derivacy is
from the Greek Tongue, and the called Testament, in which Testament is many
snares and fears to uphold the Popes supremacy, and their and your trade of
lies, and this Local Hell and the Devil are the fearful constellations, from
whence ye furiously Thunder to make men afraid, that you may thereby strengthen
your selves by the peoples submssion unto you, and that Whore learning that you
have set up.

Now Priests in short, I desire to know how you came by your Apostolical
calling, for you to say you are Priests, and are of the Apostolical
Institution: that I shall try, and leave it to the people to judge of whether
ye are so or no; If it prove you are not, then are ye Blasphemers, and that
Harlots locust that has deceived the Nations.

And the first Maxim I do lay down to prove it by is this. Hos se ad me nelle
one Sem albat ar o^au s^on hassbu^p^loct adba deleous in re. This is the
English Maxim to the height it will bear, all People mind, for I am putting a
leaver into the Priests roots, to unbottom them from that Lie, called
Apostolical Calling, which they hold Juri divino. Brethren ye Priests, here is
a deep search making into your Roo^s or bottoms: now comes the English from the
hebrew citation; that is this, I pray you mind, How slew the apostolical fore
seeing to ye named Priests, and the world never heard of it? This is one state
in that Maxim, there is two more Sates in that Sitation.

Now Scholars is it not strange, that from one abstract of Language to read in
English three States; as an Affermative and a Negative, and both their
derivatives in one entire Essence. The second State though negative read is
affermative. I Theauraujohn Eval alsiel do declare that ye Priests are liars
and deceivers, neither have you any thing to do in, or with the Apostolical
function, for ye are not anointed by God, as all and every one of his true
Messengers were and are. This I know by what the Lord has made know unto me.

Now if you are what you say, and would have us so to esteem you so, your
Derivative must be the Cords binding us up unto that belief: which must be
Miracles Signs and Wonders; for thus you must be Witnesses of his second
Coming, then you know it must be in greater appearances in glorious
manifestation, this you cannot deny.

Brethren ye Priests, I do not come to flatter you; but to hew and out you up
by the roots.

Another quere I desire that the Clargy may answer, What peace or
reconciliation has issued from your called Gospel in Europe? but woeful
murdering one another for your prating and lying quarrels. If ye were
Ministers of the Gospel, then peace would follow your declarings: but who more
ready then the Priests to engage the people one against another, for your own
Hellish ends. O that God would be pleased to open the eyes of our States, that
they would but look into the Clargies black bottom, from whence our misery
arises, for there cannot be peace in England till that Caterpillar locust be
swept out of the place of Regency.

Now Priests you will run to the Secular power, and there lies your Cab^^ of
strength to uphold you, you say such men are Blasphemers, and cry out upon
them; and then to the Majestrate to help you to hold up your Trade.

Now know that can be no Gospel,
That must be upheld by a humane Law;
But it is the Lie in the whole earth:
For the Gospel is Love, and then no Law;
But the Law makes it a trade, and the Law is your strength.
Now show me how many Converts did your Master Christ enforce into his
Conregation by a humane Law? but love was the tying Cord that bound his
together.

The Law is an inforcement to Idolatry, but not to the Gospel; because the
Gospel is Love.

Now Priests I shall desire no favor at your hands, but that we may come
before the State and People; and if I do not prove your Calling a trade of Lies
and deceit, I will be content to suffer for my aspersing you, If so it be
found: but I must not have Priests to accuse, and Priests to judge; this is not
with the privilege, nor liberty, nor freedom of our Nation.

For the Bishops are gone, and I Theauraujohn say, that the Clergy shall not
long stand, therefore your rage is great: ye Priests I pray you tell me, how
many sides and turnings would you take, so that at last you might but turn in
your own design, all that can be Imagined. One more, how came you to have your
holy Calling conferred unto you? I deny any man can confer the holy gift, or
holy anointing from Generation to Generation sixteen hundred year and more
together. This I answer, If man can confer Gods gift, I affirm he is as great,
nay greater then God himself. I prove it thus, God gave his Spirit in fullness
to Christ, being the first in the Trine, descending in Vive Vosa, the Apostles
they were endued with the same Spirit, but not in that full measure. These
Mysteries no man under heaven knows yet; but that light in me who is the true
discoverer of his own secret intendants.

One more, Ye Priests that have dranw unto you a congregated company, called
members of a Church, nay you would be called the Church Apostolical, or
according to the Apostolical institution. Now I deny any man to be a Priest
according to the Apostolical institution; as for the desidement I refer to the
juditious people to Judge of. Now I say that there was not, nor is not any true
visible Church, Select in any visible appearance since the Apstles time: Thus,
there is true members but not a true gathered Church Apostolical, in that you
are deceived thus, and in this ye take the name of their words, but the power
that did recead and accompany them words is retracted, and has been since that
Revolution of the Apostles, for that manifestation was confermed, for the
bringing in the Heathen to the acknowledgment of God, and was confirmed by
miracles singes and wonders: Then the Spirit did detract, as of the detraction
Christ's death was the figure.

Now I will show you what a Church Apostolical was and is; the people are
gathered by the Spirit of God, by which Spirit they are made a seeing and a
discerning people: Then the Priest ought to be the discerning East, and the
seeing East of them people; then that is a Head and Members of which temporal
figure Christ, and the Evangelical Spirits is the truth in the true senter in
Perfection. As Moses was commanded, See thou make them like the pattern I
showed thee in the Mount: Know he must be in the Mount with God, that does take
his pattern from God in his declarative.

Them words were wrote long ago, and now are coming forth in glory to be made
good, which is proper to Christ's second coming in Visible power, in signs and
wonders; of which declarative I Theauraujohn am the morning light, declaring
the peaceful tideings at hand.

Now ye Congregated Priests what a brazen whorish forehead have you put on your
selves, that you dare assume to your selves the hight of the Apostolical
foreknowledge, in that you dare act, and give, and deliver up to Satan? Now in
this you have declared your selves to be Antichrist in his full lusture, in
appearances; as I shall open plainly before all people.

First, I demand of you in my masters name Jehovab, that you do produce your
president for the matter of Excommunication: for mind, where that delivering up
to Satan was acted forth by the Apostles, in them did the Spirit reside, and
dwell, and rest with them in power of sign and miracle, which is not declared,
neither is in the called Church, and called Priests: for what is more in you
and your Congregated companies then is in Antichrist or that Babilonish whore
that is spoken of in Scripture? For she deceived the Nations by her
Enchantments, Sorceries, and Witchcraft, which is but thus much. I entreat you
mind, it is this, The word confined to men, confined to time, and confined to
place. I beseech you to take true notice wat Antichrist is and his Sorceries;
it is the confining the word to men, to time, and to place.

I pray mind but this sitacion that is stated, and it will unbottome and
Excommunicate all ye Priests from your trade of lies. Thus prove your selves to
be any more then ye have learned; then so far ye are in knowledge, yet no
Priests; for let me tell you, ye know not what a Priest is, Nor what that word
Priest means in his full import; a Priest is Gods representative in
righteousness, that is the Image of God in man, that is the Priest: now let me
tell you all, even ye gathered Churches ye shall all be broken, and God will
gather unto him the holy seed, from amongst you into one fold.

And now for men to assume to be Priests and members, when indeed he is no
Priest, neither they all true members: for know that apearances does make
members, and does not make true members in the intendant Church, which I deny
to you, for ye are they that are deceived, that have got the dead name; but ye
are not the true living thing, yet ye will take authority to name over men that
name, and the namer is an abomination before God.

Therefore I desire you, that you would but look into your own ways, and
search into the bottom; for it is darkness which is develish, and ye have
grievously sinned and blasphemed in taking and assuming unto your selves that
glorious name: when that is Gods glorious free gist or ^nointing upon man,
which is Gods inscrption wrote upon man Holiness to the Lord, and from this
Institution and ingraftment in the true thing, which is Gods mercy.

Brethren by creation ye Priests, ye are exhorsists that take up words and
names to name over and upon the people of Christ and his Apostles: ye intimate
the name thinking by them names, to do miracles, which is but a mere forged
falschood; for ye your selves are but the dead name; and they the Apostles were
the true living thing in the true root: That was, I may say God in the Bottom
or root, from whence in strength that Voice had power to cast down, and cast
forth, and raise up; this was Gods voice from the root, that overthrew all
opposition; but for man to name them words, and the effects not follow it, is
but Antichrist and a lie.

Brethren be not deceived, you are in no better case then thus, you think you
are rich and need nothing; when in truth you are but a name, and poor, and
blind, and naked, and yet know not the lie is in your right hand, and has
deceived you; for ye name a name that in truth ye know not.

But now I pass to the Apostolical effects, for the effects followed the Sound
or Name: That was this, the Blind received sight both in Spirit and Body; for
the Spirit is the healer of the same Body man, and men were weaned from the
love of the World to sell all, and distribute to every necessity as the Pastors
saw fit and needful.

But to answer this before I go any further. Ye Priests are ingrosers to your
selves greatness and prehemenency, and you are Directives to your Congregations
so to do: for know, the Priest ought to be the peoples Eye: Then I beseech you
people look what a Directive Eye you see withal, do you think your eye does
see Apostolically or Hypocritically? these two I leave you and the whole world
to judge of.

Now I come to matter of more concernment, that is this, And behold I saw a new
heaven and a new earth, the first heaven and the first earth were passed away,
and there was no more sea; And I The auraujohn saw the holy City, new
Jerusalem come down In Oli-el Emasanet from God out of heaven, prepared as a
Bride trimmed, adorned, beautified, Selected, for her Husband.

Now the mystery that lies buried within them faint words or weak expressings,
they are words of life, and power, and wisdom.

O sapuit ad amalum in re amamu^ seba oli Aneratory Salma magit legi amamus
sede oli mem oluani saluite Te egromene selmat am al sede oli been am Salu el
odi selose in re. This is the English of the Connection, abstracted from the
true Original.

O the Wisdom free from evil, it is God himself, in his Reigning Essence: But
man is weakness, that is evil; yet God does take this weakness into Strength,
and adorn it with beauty and excellency.

That is thus much, It Is letting down the New Jerusalem, whose beauty is so
excellent, that it turns all the beholders of it, into it self.

Now I come to Ephata, and open the mysterious words which are these. I saw a
new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away. I beseech you mind what was my brother John's meaning in this
strange and Phiriatical expression: was it of these Elementary Heavens that
Paul spoke of, the third Heaven? Or what was his meaning? for the word is
Translated into the singular number, that is to say, one heaven and one earth.

Now to know his and the Spirits meaning in them words, I affirm he wrote that
he did not understand in many places; for thus it is many times, the mystery is
a sealed Book to the Penman of it.

The meaning of his insert, was not as it is Translated, for the word Sabas is
read Saba, and is derived from Shin, which imports weakness.

Now the true meaning was and is, that the first Heavens was passed away, and
the Earth also; which is thus much, if truly viewed in that alone light it was
wrote; It was the Jews ceremonies, Typifying the height of the Transcendent
pattern celestial, their Abrogating and non- Residence amongst men on Earth.

And the Earth was that beauty and delight that man had in these Earthly
celebrations of joy and rejoicing.

Now I state the last first, and the first last; Now the new heaven and the new
earth was the Gospel of Jesus in power, turning all things into it self; that
was the power that John saw should accompany the declared Truth. But it is not
yet made good, neither could it be, until time time, time, and an half time;
which is Christ his second coming, to reduce both Jews and Gentiles, and
their two dispensations into one radical root; which is unto the Jews Hassa
Massah: I leave the knowledge locked in them two words, hid both from the Jews
and Gentiles, till time can bear it on both sides into one radical root or
Church of the first born.

Now for the word Sea, signifies a severation or partition from one another; or
in some places the word Sea, it is understood properly of People.

Now if the People be all reduced into one fold, then there is no more Sea,
that is, difference or severation; this is the Spirits meaning of the new
Heaven and the new Earth, wherein shall dwell righteousness; for they shall be
reduced into one root, and they shall all be taught of God, that is love, and
they taught of God shall act in love for ever. And I saw the holy City new
Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a Bride trimmed for her
husband: what was the meaning of this expression? it was the beauty of
excellency that the Spirit was beautified withal, that was so beauteous that
it did attract to its loveliness all the beholders; for the Spirit operative is
let down from God to man, and returns from man to God with its effects, or
message, and marriage, taking man into union with God, this is that new
Jerusalem that is ever and always the same in operation. For God is, and Is is
always no less nor greater, but the same holy for ever.

O beloved, were we but capable of the great change at hand, O how ought we to
walk in love one to another, not in envy and deceit!

Now one word to you Churches Congregated so called, do not you speak evil of
the things you understand not; for know the word does hold forth the second
appearing of Christ, in a more visible glory then ever yet was revealed, which
is the bringing in the Jews, and the preaching the everlasting Gospel, which
must raise out of the Grave of oblivion the buried truth, and abstract that and
the letting down of the Spirit, these two yet one in the senter, must be
inserted together, that all Nations may flow to the City Jerusalem, for they
shall say, of a surety God is with his people, we will go up to worship in
Jerusalem, the Mount of God, even in Hereb. O avallo hesseon andi dele selose
in re averietar sebat. The English. O the rich mercy of God shall be letten
down for the restoring of his ancient people the Jews, to cause their return
to their own land. Selah selalah, Selah; that is Englished, Praise, praise,
praise ye the Lord; these words do bear other imports as well as praise the
Lord.

Wrote by me Theaurausohn high Priest, Eval alsiel allah al Sabbah. Skribaiael
Tani the Jew.

Epistle 12. Wrote at Eltham, but the intendant of the delivery of this Epistle
was at Saint Paul's Church.
O Behold, behold ye desolate stones, a resurrection, a resurrection is now
entered into the celestial influences, for thy restoration: O all people behold
the desolate stones, they are the true emblem of Sions scattered Sons and
Daughters; but behold the accomplishment of thy sufferings the Lord has
finished. Behold O ye Jews, the Fishers, the Fishers, the Fishers are casting
forth their nets to draw thy draughts into multitudes, for the Lord thy God
will gather thee from all Coasts, whither the Lord disposed thee for a time,
time, time, and an half time, that the Lord might do his great work, for to
give glory to his great name before the face of all Nations.

Kabrioses in se oli asaphim, Senebattoi shener olorico sodomen a sabat al et
el in-re cabusse segat alli selorum in rem madad alvah semmam addoremus in re
faciebat elo on. The English of this state is this. The kabrious or gathering
the holy people is at hand, for God will turn to her he has laid by for a
season, but now he will cause her to return in Triumphs glorious majesty; and
from the North her power shall pass unto the holy Mount; and there the Lord
will feed them as in the days of old, and they shall reverence him with holy
worship, even in their own land, Hosea chap. 5. and verse. 8. Blow ye the
Trumpet in Gibbeah, and the Shalm in Ramah, cry out at Bethaven, after thee, O
Bensamin. This citation binds not much the confirmation; but we will look into
its bottom, for it is the eternal Spirits citation. Now this cry out at
Gibeah, it was a place of and in the Jews inheritance; now cry out, or blow
the Trumpet, it is one an the same distinction: but as there was a literal
calling upon to them people, so the same is now, for the return of the Jews is
at hand; for whose sake I am sent forth, for to proclaim Isreal's return: as is
thus much in the import of my name, which is thus, The aurau john, that is, God
his declarer of the morning, the peaceful tidings of good things.

Scholars, you know Theus, then Aurau, you know them two names, and John is the
beloved Dove, beloved of God, beloved of Noah.

Brethren ye Priests, though I am not learned, I begin to have knowledge
without any books of and in your learning, but shortly I shall unlearn your
learning, and bring in the influence of knowledge, unto this poor distressed
and wearied (...). O behold a root, a root of Jesse in the North; a stranger, a
stranger shall return home to his corn place, appointed of the Lord,

O appellaram in abbatorum semaim in abaalluisse in segorum remat ally oreneus
in a salem arri beneal adoremus in se saluat orieba halilusch sola, nos et
nos-in se rogat alli dele mem montra baieter-in se olat addoniel Selma et salem
in re. The English is this. O all people proclaim the great day of Jubelli
through the land of your captivity; Say aloud that Sions God comes in strength
to deliver his afflicted people out of the Northern Iron, that has held them
long by reason of its strength in the Yoke; but now peace and joy is coming
from God, to do his wondrous works before the sons of men. O all ye people,
fear the Lord, praise him, for his mercy is coming forth, in the deliverance of
his people, like unto a full flowing sea, that shall drown all the opposers of
his people; yet his inheritance they shall be safely preserved in these great
Seas of trouble that is coming upon the earth, even in the great storms is
Isreal's return, for his deliverer is the God the Lord, who is mighty in
battle. O beloved, God will reduce the Nations for your sake, O ye Jews, ye
holy seed, ye sons of Jacob, nay Israel. O salem, O salem, O salem ad te
Israel, from thy God, who will magnify thee with beauty of excellency, he
shall comfort thee according to the time wherein he has afflicted thee, Selah.

Treas trinitatas ad me in locubut el et in se avaret sebenius in re orcat al
dereus in se sabat allilujah in sem abatar aluat. The English. Three in one, to
me is one, and in that one his only name, I speak to ye my brethren the Jews,
for I am not sent unto the Gentiles, but unto the Jews, the Jews ye holy seed,
the holy rock my brethren; yet ye Gentiles shall rejoice with his people. O
Jerusalem, thou lie desolate, but strength is come from thy God, and the
veins of thy Children begin to receive nutriment or nourishment. Behold
adayaday thy watchman sees that is felicity to thee, O loving daughter Sion,
the birds being to feel the heat of thy Spring, for thy nuptials are at hand.

O diamanim hakkarim in se-el selat ori abraet addonier sela ori abba selorum
deem mentrac is selat araura aluat apphi selat in re. The English. O the
triangle of beauty is adorative, for thee thou poor Shulamite, for God will
honor thee before all the Nations, they shall come forth refined gold, in the
midst of thee is holiness, thy Priests shall be clothed in righteousness from
the Lord, and an immediate answer shall go along with thee, that thou shall
slide no more: thy watchman is the holy one that will incompass thee, and
under his shadow shall thou sing unto thy God in safety. There is the
Postscript Englished to a tittle, but it is read affirmatively and negatively,
but it is it self without man's polluted invention, O seen sapuit al been mem
delos in re sebestiana aluat eli ponderanet all ugostah albanum in re. The
English both affirmative and negative. O the seat of wisdom is in God himself,
that is perfection, and his showing to his people, they there by are inwrapped
into himself by the beauty of his excellency, this is affirmatively. Now to
read this insert negatively, it is this, God does take to himself a holy
people, that he will gather out of all Nations through the strength of his own
power, and he will beautify them with his own beauty: this is negative and
affirmative, for it is Gods will, and that is all.

As for the creature, it is as a drop of a bucket, or the dust of the balance.
O that the creature would but truly be content with what he truly is, then
would flow forth declaratives that he was a citizen, ingrafted into the new
Jerusalem, which ingraftment flowing forth from that root, it is Love, Peace,
Joy and Charity. Now I desire we that are named Christians of the Gospel of
Christ so called, would but look every one into himself, and see if this word
Charity be in our root, and be not deceived, for no Christians without charity
be our root, neither Gospel except charity, for charity is the Gospels root and
foundation.

Now I will show you (though I am unlearned) the original of this word charity,
it is the word of words, and a word of the greatest concernment that is named
in the true Scripture, for the word charity imports or denotes binding, the
word in the Hebrew is Rokas, it is wrote in Sambah or Sameck, the true Greek
word to be taken out of his Essence, which essence is Rokas: the Greek word
derived from that Essence, it is Kias: the Latin word in truth, is to make
these three words one single meaning or signification; the Latin word is
Christus: But Scholars, I say Christos, that is the proper word in the Latin;
now in English it is Christ, this is charity, for charity is Christ: Now I
prove it thus, Christ in Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and in English, is but one
entire and alone root, from whence flows forth in operation one entire act or
acting, that is, love in truth, and truth in love is charity, and charity in
truth is Christ, the Lord ruling in love, and distilling in beams of mercy, so
Christ is Christos Kias and Rokas, that is only the distinct names in their
tongues of one very true thing, that is Charity, or Christ, or love, or mercy,
or righteousness.

Now beloved is it not strange that a Circumcised Jew should bring unto the
view of the world the true declarative of Christ the Lord, and preach Jesus the
Savior to both Jews and Gentiles, for the reconcilement of both into one root?
and let me tell you ye Gentiles, that boast your selves in your Gospel, and in
the name Jesus; as the Lord lives, there is not one in ten thousands of people,
nay further, not one in ten millions of people, knows truly what Jesus their
Savior is, and ye are all lost in your supposed knowing, for ye are deceived
with the name, Jesus is the substance thing, and let me till you, it is not
your knowing him by name stands you in any stead, but it is his mercy that
takes you, of his free mercy into himself; nothing that you can learn, neither
any thing you can do, that purchases any favor or anger; but it is his free
alone mercy that takes his thing made, which is man, and the creation, into
himself, from whence in strength it in beauty issued forth, and being become
weak in and of it self, yet by God it is taken into his stable strength, there
to remain in glory. O olloavallo soam arby selos in sabietar alm^ ^nosauruva al
allat oli been am addoremu^ sebat allilujah selo^um apahaet al dele mem. The
English is this. O the height of mercy in God, that after detraction of his
thing made, he renews strength into his Image, and so does overcome weakness by
its submitting to strength, and so an union is made in the perfection; that is
to say thus much, God does cause obedience in the creature, and that obedience
is acknowledgement of digression, and that acknowledgement wrought from that
root obedience, which is truly Christ in the Soul, for he causes an
acknowledgement, God is satisfied through him, the Spirit of obedient man is
taken into perfection or heaven. Do not deceive your selves; God is not like
partial men, for God is love, mercy, and compassion.

Now let me show unto your view one place of Scripture so called, that you, and
I my self, in the days when I knew not God was much troubled at, that is a
text translated corruptly, from which place, that place in the Romans does hold
coherent, the text is this as you read it, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated, and this was before the Children were born: now I plainly see the Sarbax
or strength, that that place in the Romans fetches, that is implied thus much,
that it might stand with Gods decree, according to Gods election, as I have
declared, them words were none of Paul's.

But now brethren I beseech you by the mercy you have received, lay by all
prejudice opinions, and mind exactly and directly, for it is the maine
asperse, that lies upon the holy, and just, and glorious God, it is laid upon
him by the invention of man, first I will read the true text in the truth of
words, to express the entire union significant; which is this,
Eval-silo-reme-am sardet a salu o^oniel. In that word odoniel is the main
mistake, for it is rendered addoniel, the English of odoniel is the all-saving
mercy of God, and addoniel is God in his declarative of Justice. Now I read the
whole text coherent in the intendant, which is this, Jacob I love, Esau I hate.
Now let me tell you that these two are in every man and woman under heaven; For
Jacob is Gods delight, that was as much in that day or time as Christ with us,
for the maxims full drawn is both one, for it is in truth no less then the
Spirit of God in man, or Christ in flesh. Now Esau is the Spirit of man, that
was denoted in this word Esau, which word in the original signifies a searcher
or pryer, or deceit, or weakness, which is indeed that Spirit, that Paul says
is enmity against God, or higher, it is one with the Devil: I prove it thus,
Esau was and is that searching Spirit, that would pry into the secret of God,
which was a Spirit of disobedience, that was and is to be cast forth. Now Jacob
is an hebrew word, Scholars, it is wrote with three radiaces in Sambah or
Sameck, that is the name which is denominated in the highest strength in
pronounciation; that is the meaning when I say such a thing is wrote in Sambah
now the characters decyphering out this state are Rosh, Caph and Jod. Now
Scholars you quarrel with me because the radiaces do not give the true tone or
sound, let me demonstrate unto you that are the highest learned in the world in
the state or sitation, take notice and do you know, that in the Caballesterial
insertion the true knowledge in that mystery lies in the very averets or Frame
in the rough materials; that is knowing them in their true desendant, ^^ttere,
thus much, to know every radiace in his proper weight, in his (senter)
Original, and to know him in his true original senter; that is, both negatively
and affirmatively, and then to know the true state of all his combinements in
himself, and with all others in their various and dubious imports and
compounds; this is one hint of Theauraujohn unto you learned ones, though I my
self am unlearned. Now to show you Resh, Caph and Jod denotes Jacob, it is thus
much, Resh is wisdom, Caph does impede that wisdom, Jod does illustrate
through Caph and Resh, so to draw the consort into one entire insert, it is
thus much, Gods loveliness in man, or the Image of God in man, this is Jacob,
for he says the inserted; he Scripture was the figure of Christ. Now I have
shown you Jacob, Now I come to show you rough Esau, he is wrote with three
radiaces that are these, Sin, Zain and Hea. Now people I entreat your patience,
while I do define this state to our great learned ones: Now you great learned
Rabbis, If I according to your learning, had but stated Sambah in Shins stead,
then there had been some sound in the pronounciation, and do but read the state
contrary, then you might have made the stated state sounded Heza, and now it
sounds Hezin. Now I will show you the Original of them three radiaces, I hold
in the Hebrew term, or else radax in English is the proper word: Now Hea is
weakness; Heth is her essence, Zaine is a figitive compound in any state
according to the truth in the methodical method, is weakness, her essence lies
in Samah or Sameck, now shut these together, then it is the figitive Spirit in
weaknesses, that is the rebellious Spirit in man, which indeed is the Devil in
man, unto which Spirit Christ spoke when he said they were of their Father the
Devil, whose works they would do; because, they were guided by that figitive
Spirit, that deceiver, that Antichrist, which has prevailed over all Nations,
and now raigns in England in his predominatest sphere, yea and in the clothing
of holiness, or holy zeal, and the obeyers of him are deceived, and know not
that the Lie is in their right hand, and has deceived them.

But now to come to clear the goodness of God from that charged partiality by
man's false conception of his knowledge of him. I entreat you mind, First, I
say as I have declared, God could not choose when all was wrapped in the womb of
union; how could he choose, when nothing was produced but himself alone, in his
alone and entire Essence? I beseech you mind, for it will, if duly considered,
take off a great deal of trouble, out of both heads and hearts of many people,
who lie under eruel bondage of this corrupt and false conception, that God had
from Eternity ordained some unto salvation, and some unto damnation, which is
absolute Blasphemy: I prove it to be Blasphemy thus, that that can or will be
partial, it is not God, for God is just, and just does not nor cannot admit of
partiality, then let all the world know that God will not act that himself,
that he commands man being his representative to be warned of, which is these
words spoken by God to man; that is this command, do just without partiality.

Now you will say, are we not as the Pots in the hand of the Potter, and may
not God do what he will? who shall say why do thou so to his Maker? I pray
you mind, I entreat you, I say no, the comparison is weakness, and it is false,
I prove it thus, First, God is just, and he cannot be otherways, as for man he
is corrupt, and must be changed, to be made like unto God in Gods
righteousness: Now do you and all the world know, that God who I know is just,
and all people will say God is good and just and righteous; then how can this
God act partiality or weakness? thus, if God do condemn partiality in man; and
if it be as you say, that God did ordain some to Salvation, and some unto
Damnation, Is not be partial? I say he is, if it be true that you affirm: but I
say it is a Lie and false that you affirm, and Father it upon Paul, and God is
holy just and without partiality, neither did he decree any to Damnation or
Salvation, as you say and affirm; but that point I open not yet, though I know
that there is nothing that is wrote but shall be abstracted into truth; in
which Original it was first let down. But you will say thus, God made us, and
he may do with us what he pleases; I answer no, for he has but one attribute
in that matter, and that is just mercy to save his thing created, and no more,
I say that God had just mercy to create the creature, and just mercy to save
the creature, being made, and no more, not a little. Now you in your weakness
will say that I limit God, or confine the holy one; I say no, do you but truly
understand what that word just is, and I tell you it will keep you in your own
bounds, without censuring me, or judging God; for know just is perfection,
neither admitting nor degating; that is to say, neither more or less but it
self, that is in the word just. Now I tell you Jacob was ever saved, and ever
loved; I say Jesus ever saved, ever a Savior; I say Abraham ever saved; I say
the Image of God in man, the same ever saved, by reason it is one entire with
it self in a derivative, and will be one in Essence at the unmoddelling of
every figure: For man dies, and the Spirit returns unto God that gave it. Now I
prove of Esau there shall be saved; that is of that wicked or evil Spirit, that
is Children of the Devil, nay devilish children, Hos si selat-ar-al. The
English is this, The Spirit of darkness shall be made light and saved. Non
quantum sed magit sed maxci sele mem. The English is this. Not much nor little,
but the thing shall be taken into rest.

Now I beseech you mind what the Spirit says in this citation; not much nor
little, but the thing; what is that thing, and what is the much and little? The
much and little is nothing, but the sound of the thing in appearances; the
thing, that is the Spirit in that much and little made obedient, it shall be
taken into perfection or heaven; so that the disobeying Devil shall be made
obedient, and thus indeed and in truth: do not flatter your selves, for every
one of us present is in our weak dark and blind condition, which is guided and
ruled by the Devil, for his servants you are to whom you give obedience; and
whom do we obey until light arises in us, through the operation of his powerful
resurrection in us?

Ola olla osonno romi deleous in sesabat al ogo olemus sebat arbatar allab ak
obediah sab al oli mem. The English derivacie is this, the darkness is made
light by obedience, that will in obedience is Christ the interceder for the
accounted elect, but the proper word is chosen, and obedience is the
chocie-maker in the marriage, and upon that knot lock or ty does the whole
center stand. Now beloved let me entreat you but to consider one Scripture, as
you call it, it is thus much; the Elect cannot be deceived. Now what that is,
and where it does center. I will show you, it is in these two hebrew words, Oli
al, that is the (...)ght of God in man; that is the Image of God in man, that
cannot detract nor be deceived. This point is held by many, but the truth in
the thing is not understood.

Now mind I beseech you, was Christ sent to preach unto that that could not be
deceived, it was vain folly so to think, and the greatest weakness so to
think, but Christ came to cast forth the Devil, and to convert him that was
cast forth; now how is this doctrine to be understood? Selam arba a sadit al
oli mem durata sebat al oli mean seam abstrakcit oli senebassai elma avadet
selose in re semmam. The derivacie in English is this. The thing accounted
Devil and darkness, and perdition, is the false conception in man of and in the
true thing; that is God, who is both light and darkness, neither light nor
darkness, but the conjunct of both them two named semblances, that is to say
light and darkness, he does bring both them into one original center, which is
in God himself, from whence they had their issuing forth. Beloved it is not
what we account and conceive in our weak apprehensions, but God is, and that is
God acting in light and dark appearances: though that be Devil and darkness and
afflicted for sin, yet let me tell you it is light to God, for that that is to us
a burden, it is light from him to make us like himself, enlightening our Devil or
darkness, which is one and the same in their accounted center.

I beseech you let us plead together without prejudice opinion. Now mind, I
say there is but two Spirits, good and bad; that I do but say, for I know
beyond what is said, but it cannot be with convenience born nor delivered, for
it is a rending maxim, but I say as you say, there is but good and bad, light
and darkness, heaven and hell, is not this your own method? you cannot deny,
then I say Christ came not to call light or righteousness, but Sinners, Devils
to repentance; these are your own words, now as I said before, to teach the
Spirit that could not be deceived, it was vain folly that he that was all
wisdom would not do, for the Spirit could not be deceived, that is the living
life of man operative: But he came to preach to the disobedient Spirits in
prison.

Now what are these? this is the disobedient Spirit in man, that is the Devil
in man: now at Christ's own preaching this Devil is always cast forth, but not
by man's naming Christ's words, or the name preaching. For I tell you, that ye
are all even ye Priests, as far from preaching as light is from darkness, for
ye name a shadow for a substance; for if man could once preach, he then is
Christ, then he casts forth at his voice, but it is a spiritual voice from
the true center. Now it may be ye would know of me what I account Christ to be?
I answer, that the Christ that I know, he is one with the Father, and his
declaring himself in his declaratives is the living life of God operative in
the whole creation; that is to say the strength of God, in the whole created by
God, this is Christ the Savior, and for to account him any less, it is
undignfying the Divine and sacred deity of God himself.

Hos se in re sagat allilujah in re affermater al in re sabat alui dencus in
reamus sabat balilujab al,

O the thing of things is the strength of God, in which he let down the
created of himself; that is his Son, the light, and life, and strength and
beauty of and in the whole work of God, that is the English of the fore-fited
state.

O Beloved, that God would be pleased to open and unvail our hearts, nay
spirits, that we might but see the beauty of his loveliness, then we should be
drawn on of our selves into God the Lord our beauty and strength, dignity and
excellency.

O Amorum non Bellum. O then loveliness, not war would be our delight. Non oli
el. It is not the light of God we act in, when we murder one another, but it is
morse, death and darkness that we are in, that is the cause of such produced
effects.

O that we truly all knew but our selves, then we should not know War and
Oppression, and deceiving one another. Non oculos in re, we see not the thing
that is light, that light is life, that life is God in its Original center.

O Olemus oramus hackkarim el hashsha bele retenent affluous in re. O we will
not see; because it is a bridle to our affections, and will curb our desires,
and will at last be death to our actions, therefore we shut our eyes that we
might not see, that is the English out of the forecited state. But a fire, a
fire is coming in wrath, to enlighten the veiled darkness, in the Spirits of
the sons of men, and a consumption shall consume the lifted up, it is at hand,
even at hand, even at the door. Do not deceive your selves Brethren; do but
look into the sons of Clay, and see what a Potters work God is a bringing
forth, breaking some, and making others fit for his service. O amanem salem
hushsarim in re madad arkad al onesephari alma legaget el. The English is this,
O the strength of the hand of God that will be manifest, for the reducement of
the people unto obedience. Pelma hasanah al hegemoniah almoru in rasaiah halot
avado siah allorum sabat al. The English. The power of compulsion unresistable
shall appear, and overturn all opposition, and take its own place of regency
in its sphere, and act its own will and commands; which is but thus much,
Christ his second coming in power.

Now I beseech you brethren let us look and see what Christ his second coming
is: Now if you knew Christ, you might know his coming in a measure to your
selves, but he is not measure in himself; for he measures all, and is not nor
cannot be measured nor comprehended of any, nor of all; yet Theos aurau can
declare himself, that is, the light of God can declare himself so far as he
pleases to our capacities, that is just, because God is just, and no
otherways. Now Christ's second coming is to restore, confirm and confound, and
not to consume with fire the heavens and the earth, as we read it in many
places of the translation; but what we read there in that state is the lie,
falsely conceived against the true meaning of the Spirit, for in them books
called Scripture, is the lie, as well as in other books.

Thus, I am in darkness, I read a truth, it is a lie unto me, because I am not
one with that truth, though I read it to be made one with it; that is another
lie, because I make and account a strength to be in that dead name, and do not
look unto the strength that caused that produced declarative or name of
himself, to give as it were a stand to our motional affections, but know that
the divine and sacred teachings is the Spirit of God arising within you, that
over-powers your disobedience, and does bind up your disobedience, and does
cast it forth, and plant obedience in its room, which in true propriety of
speech it is Christ in his own glory. Now one thing I desire to commit to your
considerations; that is thus much, that text, that that is translated thus,
Christ in us the hope of glory: Now if it be granted that Christ is in us, he
is not hope, for he is glory, nay the Fathers glory, and we do hope till Christ
be come, then we teas our hope, for we enjoy take notice of this, we are in our
selves deliverd from that our accounted Devil, and Hell and Death. Now brethren
the main mystery is yet hid in these two denotations; Christ in us the hope of
glory. I say Christ in us is glory. Now comes the abstracts of these two into
one; that is this, when this effect is wrought by the Spirit, then are we not,
Christ is all unto God only one, for we then are not our own, but we are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and so an union betwixt Christ and us, and an
union betwixt God and Christ into one entire and alone Essence; then is the
Kingdom delivered up unto God by Christ, and then God the Father is as he was,
that is, all in all, and out of that all, all came forth, and into that all,
shall all be through Christ (who is the strength of God) be reduced into God,
and yet a visible creation of appearances in this world, so no end.

This is one glimps of the mystery of the divine Deity operative acting through
it self in the illustration of it self, this is wisdoms work and the Spirits
teaching.

O sapuit in re faciebat al donior lamed eluviah senebatoi reme amalum sabbat
al oly mem sebe nen deat al oli sede pelud alui a sareth hashsha obi. The
English is this, O the wisdom of God in making and creating, and creating and
making no end neither beginning, for what is detracted here, it is illustrated
in another form, and that illustration eclipsed by a greater beauty; so in
excellency there is no end, no beginning, but it self acting and operating in
it self, through it self, and unto it self; this is the called Trinas person as
in re, the three persons in the thing, but it is the thing, three persons, no
persons but the thing, nothing but the three, no three but one, and that in
union who is Jehovah Jere. O Emanu^l a hushsharim in sadoniel abrat trakxci el
oli selhene cai pelet al. The English. To what it will hold: O God with us, he
is the strong builder of the creation, and the same strong destroyer of the
creation, and the strong continuer and preserver of all things in appearances.
O all things destroyed, all things decline, nothing destroyed, nothing
declined; for God is, and is is the same always, no greater nor no less but
himself alone.

O Brethren that you were but able to bear the influences, that is the
infillings that are even at the very birth, it is loosened even from the
fastnings in the womb, but yet you cannot receive, by reason of your weakness,
which is the new birth that will free man from his supposed enemy. But I must
pass it till time, yet that time is at hand that Satan shall be bound and shut
up, that he shall deceive nor trouble the people no more, remember that word
THE^; People it is a word of limitation and distinction. Now beloved as in the
Scripture is many various maxims in their imports, and coherents in and with
others being compounded, and the main is the true, understanding the Hebrew
radically, not literally, that is nothing not worth owning comparatively; for
it is nothing to know the name, but to know the knowledge in the inside Spirit
of them outside letters Radiacies, or Semblances, or Siphraties. Now this
knowledge here inserted, I deny the Translator or Translators, that translated
our Bible and New Testament, to have perfectly literally, then short of my
explicatory intendant, for where the conjunct in any state was Dubious, or
sttated in a figitive maxim, as Zain, or Per^, or Heth in some states is
fugitive, and other words of great importance though fugitive: the meaning of a
fugitive, is words that wanders, and are not combinements in any state, but are
weak, and as I may say in English frothy, or light, invalid, or unstable, and
without solidity, this is some radiaces when they become numeral, as in man's
framing to cause the product by them composed to give a distinct semblance or
description by their denotation, as in the Translation of Daniel, the accounted
10 chapter and the 13 verse. I pray turn to the place, and see what can be
gathered to understand any thing by, and I shall show you how that error was
corruptly stated: the words are but The Prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood me, and I remained there by the King of Persia. Now I entreat you
mind, says one saying, All Scripture was wrote for our learning. Now I demand
what can be learned here more then mere nonsense? Now you Rabbis must say it
is mystery, for to uphold that Babylonish whore, that is and is not, and yet
is: Brethren let me speak to you, there is not neither in Old nor New Testament
any thing, but it shall be opened even in this age, of which opening I am the
morning-light, declaring God the power at hand. First I demand what it was that
converted, and taught, and strengthened Daniel? you must say God. I say, how
conveyed? you must say, and I know it was by the Spirit, that is accounted the
holy Ghost, that is and was Daniels teacher and instructor, and is also, the
teacher of all that is taught God; now the text is rendered in its import, thus.
Hessi perese nelle avallet medad, That word medad the import is not understood
in the Translation, but it is rendered false according to true method, Alui
bushsharim aval selos ad me seret negose, that is the true text in that state,
but it draws your three verses into one, that is thus much. O Daniel beloved of
God, fear not for I am with thee, and the King of Persia shall not prevail
against thee, but Michael shall deliver thee, and thou shall reign; in that
word reign is the abstract body of the fourteenth verse which is what shall
come to pass in the last days; For he that reigns according to the import
import of the insert sees all, for he sees with Gods eye. Now what is meant by
the Kingdom or Prince of Persia that opposed Daniel? was it a temporal Prince?
the insert speaks as it were intended, but it was not a temporal Prince; no, it
was that Spirit of darkness that opposed Daniel, in that he could not see
clearly what he did desire to see; and Michael is the strength of God in
teaching and instructing, who always prevails, for it is Gods Spirit
predominacy. I entreat you mind, so instructed they shall reign in knowing
and knowledge divine; that is, when God is their instructor: but to state the
word, Madad is dubious in the import, for the signification is various; for it
is a Country, a Place, a Kingdom, a Cave, a Separation, an Acting, and to this
effect the word Madad, so the Translators would make their own fancy, when they
could not understand the import of the word Madad, as it is too much and too
often all along in the Bible and the New Testament done Selos in re affirmatar
home or sabat aluab havi seen ocas addi senatar allu selt mem. The English is
this. It is not what vain man stateth or names, for his breath is in his
nostrils or is vanity, he points at something, and himself is nothing but
afleeting shadow of air, earth, fire and water, the abstract of these, this is
man reduced, man unto his first principle, the Elements secondary are his
essence he was abstracted, derived, or drawn forth from, this is your accounted
man and woman, but the soul or life of this is God, and they are properly Gods
soal, for the creation is Gods soal or footstool as you term it; mistake me
not, that word does stand dubiously to you, that is, God is the soul or life of
the whole creation in Christ, and so God is man's soul and life, but you would
have it thus, man's soul is of and from God. Brethren, it matters not what name
we set or give, for the thing is truth; that is to say, the Image of God in
man: but this dark place is light to some, and it is not like Paul's Epistles,
in some of them there is something hard to be understood, which says the
Translation the unlearned and the unstable wrest, as they do the other
Scriptures unto their own destruction.

I beseech you mind, I cannot let that place pass, for it is no less then
Blasphemy. Well may the natural Jews my brethren disowne the Testament through
their darkness, when such places is enforced by authority for divine Scripture,
it is a blasphemous Lie of man's invention: thus the citations is in the 2 of
Pet. 3. and the 16 verse, these words, As one that in all his Epistles speaks
of these things; amongst the which, some things are hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, (or pervert) as they do the
other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Now mind the quere I lay down,
the first is this, to try the truth in this main Maxim, of asperse: First, I
desire of you here present, whether you do believe that the truth be obtained
by Learning, the name of the Scripture; can your reading the Scriptures; teach
the gift that in that denoted is mentioned? if you can, then I say you can
command the Lord; which I deny, and you will not affirm; for all you can
learn, is but a bare Name, until the Spirit named be come, then it is scriptum
est, that is, it is inwritten in the spirit of that man or woman, this way I
received my teaching, but it is knowledge; this teaching cannot be destroyed,
for it is truth in power, and not learned; for Learning is the Lie, it is the
name of a thing, and it is not the thing, but the sound of a substance, and it
is nothing it self, but an abstract of air, composed by the actuation of the
motional man for denotation fake, and is nothing at all, for the highest, it is
but a voice or sound, from the true thing which is Christ in the Root. The
second quere is this, The unlearned cannot pervert the Scriptures; for unread,
unlearned; I hold your own Maxim, then the unlearned are free from destruction
of, or by perverting the Scriptures: I say, it is the learned (called Rabbis)
that pervert the Scripture, for the unlearned do not, nor cannot pervert the
Scriptures, but it is the great learned ones, for it is their Trade for to
pervert the Scriptures; but I cannot grant them that word they have stated upon
the unlearned, that is destruction. Now Brethren, you understand the import of
the word Destruction, now set me tell you, that the Decree of Election stands
you in small stead, though you account of it so high; if God should cut you
off, and destroy you, for naming a few dead names of words, and spellings of
letters together, can destroy you, or be your destruction.

Surely the Priests make a small God in this place, that a few names wrong
pronounced should out us off or destroy us. I beseech you mind, what a mighty
mercy of greatness and freeness is in God, that will cut off and destroy the
unlearned, for wresting or perverting the Scripture, when in truth they cannot,
but to show you this place is charged upon the Clergy, the great learned ones;
give them but their own words, that they have stated upon the unlearned, which
in truth is but mere nonsense for the unlearned is free from perverting the
Scriptures, but the great learned ones, it is their work; now grant them their
own words, then they must be destroyed; but I shall not grant them that word
destruction, only I will read the truth of the Spirit in that denotation or
Text, which they have falsely corrupted with many other Scriptures; the words
are these, Hos in aparan alli been an audet elko O Selirem Sebat al deloos in
re. The English is this in that Text: The Scripture is a dark Mysteric, that
man cannot reach without the Spiritual light, which learned man perverteth to
his deceiving, this is the true text as the Lord lives, and the Spirits meaning.

Now Priests where are you with your destruction? if not deceived you need no
mercy, for I say deceived is the foundation for mercy to illustrate her
heavenly influences into that, thereby deceit may vanish and righteousness
reign; for where fin did abound, there grace shall abound much more. O the
riches, and wisdom, and excellency in God, that has concluded all under
blindness and ignorance, that he may have mercy upon all, and our greatest
deceivings is the foil to set off and illustrate the riches of Gods free
measure in the transcendantest, magnificentest excellentest manner,
illustriously letting down his mercy to take away our imbecileness, our
weakness, our wickedness, unto whose Excellency the only one in unity, yet he
all variety, to whom be praise for ever more, Amen. No Amen in unity, Amen is
in variety.

Wrote by me THEAVRAV JOHN TANI the Jew, High Priest and Recorder to the
thirteen Tribes of the Jews.
Eval alsiel all ah al sabbah skribahsael. Thus far of this Book was
transcribed at the Prisonhouse of Newgate.



Epistle 13. Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved, the beauty of Excellency is in God alone, Esa. 5.7. surely the
Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah are
his pleasant plant; but the Lord looked for judgment, but behold oppression,
and he looked for righteousness, but behold a mourning or crying.

Beloved it is (...) inquired into, what the meaning is of my falling upon this
text of Scripture, which to me after I was guided unto, put me to a stand or
maze; and what God will bring out of it, at this very word, I know not one
tittle. Beloved Gods Vineyard are ye men and women accounted, by denotation in
the written word, and ye are so indeed, and in truth ye are not so, so ye are
and ye are not; that is, so many as walk in obedience, they are vine-branches,
and their root is Christ Jesus their Savior risen in them, by this own
strength and power, by whose power they are made obedient unto himself, by
having their corruptions changed and cast forth, and their whole all subdued by
Christ's reigning in them, and ingrafting them into God the Father through the
union of Spirit; so there the beginning has taken his end unto himself, and
then there is an oneness in intireness as at first, for in Christ or Massah,
God let down the creation, which Christ or Massah, is the strength of God, and
in that strength, that is Christ or Massah, God restores the all of the
creation unto himself again; that word The All, has more in it then any, or
all you do understand in that state that it does stand in: Now under the name
of this qualification you are Vine-branches indeed.

But now to show you in truth you are deceived, and are not Vinebranches; it is
thus, in truth you are uot, if not in the truth you are, that is to say truly,
if not in the root Christ, ye are indeed and in truth no Vine-branches, but ye
are Briars and Thorns, and hinderers in appearances of the true Vine-branches,
thus are ye hindereres of the true Vine-branches; and yet your hinderance of
them is a furtherance unto them, thus you are hindrances to them, when you do
not accept the truth declared by them and in them, for know, your own neglect
is their hinderance; thus you hinder them, in not being one with them; for they
that are not with us, are against us; but all this is short, yet once more, ye
are hinderers of the true Vinebranches; for in truth who hinders or opposes
Christ, but the Devil? and that Devil are ye, and the Vine-branches are we that
are in Christ. Deceive not your selves, if ye are not of Christ, then ye are of
the Devil, there is but two creations, and yet but one creation, and in that
one all creations. But to speak in term to your understanding, there is but
two, that is to say, God and the Devil; but because you are pleaders for the
Devil, take him unto your selves in your own term, and in that you will
understand him best to your own capacity: now let me tell you, so long as you
know a Devil, you neither have capacity nor understanding, though I cannot rob
you of your Devil, yet let me tell you this, if you understood or had true
capacity in truth, then there is no Devil, but God who is the light showing
thee his beauty, and that is his glorious truth, and in that truth there is no
Devil, and this is true understanding and capacity to know God to be thy God,
then this Devil has been a furtherer for thy good.

Now mind, how has these Thorns and Briars, and Devil been good unto the
Vine-branches? thus, the Thorns are the pricks from the Devil, which does
procure our unrest, till the Devil has (as I may say) hunted us home to our
God, who is our safe center, in which this cheat and cheating Devil has no
center, I term it a cheat, or deceit, or deceiving.

O that God would be pleased to open your eye, then you never see the Devil,
but you see always a Devil while you have a double eye or two eyes, but when
you see with the single eye, there is then no Devil to be seen with union his
eye. Brethren, it is your being more then truly you are, that makes you see a
Devil, for if you did but see your self to be your own self, then there is no
Devil, but God alone.

O I wish from my soul that you had but the true sight, then there would not be
this judging one another, and censuring one the other, but instead of this envy
which is the Devil; but you must have it in these words, this envy is from the
Devil.

But now I will show you how envy, you and the Devil are all one, and in one
Trine, which is the dark semblances figurative figure of Terra Evangelius in
re, that is to say, the light Evangelical in the thing; but to let it down from
the state to your capacity it is this; the Devil has his trine in figure, as
Christ has his figure in earthly appearances, but in their absolute and
adverse contrarieties: as for Christ's figure, that is declared already in this
Epistle in the Vine and the Vine-brances, as Christ being the Vines root, and
the branches naturally branching forth from that true root, which in the
Egyptick tongue the word that holds the method enclosed in its womb is Glavo,
in the true Hebrew, in Primus Maxi, the word is Okas, now the Greek word is
Theos, the Latin word Deus, there was in the Translation of this word, in the
New Testament from the Greek tongue the reason, I know why the word Logas or
Logos, for the variety of Dipthongs, which is the foundation of the Greek
tongue, their connexions being so knitted one in another in the pronounced
sound, that the true understanding in many words is perverted, and the sense in
its extent lies buried.

Now let me speak my man-sight and judgment, this is my own, yet there is
somewhat more in it then my judgment is, that whereas you read, In the
beginning was the word, which is in the import Logosh, but you say Logos. Now I
give you my reason why I sound H, as Logosh; it is because I dignifie him in
the Hebraick Resh, whose import in that compound word does import or denote the
binding strength, or strength word, for strong word will not hold; but the word
Koash is this, the strong binding root, that word Koash will bear the maxim in
his full denotation. Now I say if true read, before the beginning the root was,
you say in the beginnsng the word was: now know your maxim cannot bear it in
the state of God, for God was before appearances came forth by or in his word,
judge ye all of this, whether that the root was before the world was made, and
before appearonces did appear, root is the properest denotation. Paul says we
are his offspring, that is, we are branchings forth from that root, that was
before the beginning, as your text is read; which Translation is false in that
state, and though I am unlearned and unread in what I declare, and none more
ignorant, that has any learning, let me own my own, and that is this, I am a
liar, God is true, though it be somewhat strange, yet it is true, Brethren it
reaches every one of you.

I pray you take this to back my words withal, Paul says Let God be true, and
every man a liar, or all men are liars.

And now I come to show you the Devil, Envy and Man, and that last word Liars
will hold all. Thus, man was the Image of God, I beseech you mind, In true
propriety of speech God can have no Image; thus I prove it, The whole
altogether cannot figure out the Image of God, but thus they do, denote unto us
the wondrous greatness and power and sacred Majesty of God, for know God is to
be considered in the works of his royal creation, and not in himself, for God
is incomprehensable: I tell you it is as easy for a Gnat to swallow both the
sea and the land, as for man to comprehend what the eternal Majesty of God is.

But know I must state the word Image, because that you may understand my term.
Thus, God made man in own his Image or likeness, this is in the high light in
man, that is the soul in man, now the soul in man I say cannot detract its
derivacy, but the spirit of man is motional and has no center, whereby the
strength of its quick composure, that it is composed of or from, it is in
coherency in operation with the abstract it was abstracted from, for know the
Spirit of man is the abstract out of the quintessence of the four Elements with
its recedings from the celestial bodies in their influences, now I would not
have any of you to mistake my denotation or meaning.

Now I will state the state in Hebrew Greek and Latin and in English, that if
the query be queried it may be reduced, for the reducement of the query
queried, the Hebrew denotation is in these words Oli-Al, that is to say, the
light of God set in man, that is the Spirit from God, yet enclosed in flesh a
derivative, it does take this descent in nomination, that is (mind) Oli el vau,
that is, the light in man is wholly set in God, which is the soul in man, yet
Spirit from God, but soul will hold both from Gods denotation as well as
Spirit, for the Spirit from God is the soul in man, and the soul in man is set
wholly in God, for in him we live and move, and have our being; that is the
union, his tie unto himself.

Now in the Greek, the true word in the Originalest denotation, it is Oukessi
Avalle, that does denote thus much, the clearness in man is the Spirit. The
Latin denotation is, Ego s^^ vita mentis; that is, I I am the life of the
mind, or the minds life, which is but thus much by denotation, the soul is
Primus Maxzi; that is to say, the first strength in man that is the soul, now
upon the return to God Spirit does if it can be defined, does in the proper
place as it were take the Precedence in the return: but mind, I ever state the
soul in man to be Primus maxzi, that is the first strength in man, the
denotation lies very mysterious, that is it that causes the exactness in my
state laid down; now the first in man is the soul, that is the breath of God,
which is the being life in man, that is the soul in man.

Now I come to the Spirit in man, that is truly man's all, now that is Secundus
vita in homo, that is the second life in man, or the second living in man.

Now know I am coming to bring the Envy Devil and Man, all to make one Trine in
figure, and thus I begin.

First, The soul although it be in man, and be id est primus Maxzi, that is,
the first strength in man, yet it is not of man, neither has man any benefit
in that soul, until that secundus vita, till the second life be brought into
obedience unto the Primus maxzi, that is the first strength, Oli el vau; that
is thus much, the Spirit of man, that is Secundus vita in orbis, that is the
second life in this little world, be brought into obedience into Primus maxzi,
that is the first strength in this little world man. Now this is wrought by the
Spirit of God infusive into the Oli el vau, that is God infusing his Spirit,
which is word, which is Gospel, which is Light, which is Life, into the soul in
man, by that light which is Gods grace in the soul, the Beauty of that
excellency in the soul, it does illustrate into the Secumdus vita in orbis,
that is the second life in man, which is the Spirit in man, and by that beauty,
the Spirit in man is made obedient, which obedience is Christ in us, so by this
light or Spirit from God, we are reconciled in our selves; that is, the Soul,
and Spirit, and Body, for the body is acted by the Spirit in man, and not by
the Soul in that body till the light in the soul has overcome the darkness in
the Spirit, and a marriage be inde abetwixt the soul and the Spirit and the
Body: now then in this marriage with us, with Christ, with God, we are one
enlightened Trine in our selves, one with Christ, one with God, and all but one;
then we see him as he is, which sight makes us one with the Father, though a
derivative, yet in Essencie, and we shall be one in regency, Brethren here I
have shown you the beginning work, the way work, and the end work.

O oli el vau, amor in re sabat al halilujah in mem. The English of the Hebrew
state is this. O the light of love set in the soul in man by God, the word Re
does import God in this state, it does cause the ejaculations of Angels to
return to God, for his free gift of rest into the soul; this is the light
Trine figurative figuratively the semblance, in sanktum sanktorum, where there
is only union denoted unto us, that is in truth, Gods love or mecy praising
himself, thus God in mercy made a creation, and God gave mercy to restore his
creation, this restored being restored does sing Halilusah in viva vose in
Evangelious in Re. The English is this, The mercy or the saved do sing
Halilujah, in the living voice of Angels in the thing: so you see God his mercy
in creating, his mercy in receiving his created, that very mercy does praise
God, so in short Gods mercy does praise himself; take one place of Scripture, I
do not bid you believe me nor it, but stand upon your own center; the words
are these, Thy works praise thee O God, and we will sing unto thy Majesty. Now
I did bid you not believe me nor it; How? because I would not deceive you, nor
have you deceived, and John the Baptist my Brother spoke the same words in the
import, when he said I baptize you but with water, but there is one that will
baptize you with fire and the holy Ghost. John knew he was but a sound or a
voice, and knew that a voice or sound has no center, but is a composure
abstracted of air, which is but a lie or nothing, that is all that man can
teach; but the reason that I bid you not believe me, nor the place cited, it is
because I would not deceive your manhood, for the manhood will gather together
a stock of names and words of queries and answers and notions, which is all but
a Lie till the Spirit of the Lord be come, and cast forth that dark deceit, and
Christ erect his own glorious light. So I would entreat you becarefull, that
ye accept not a sound for the substance. Now I know that Gods light shall
unvail all these things unto you, that the true truth in the thing may be
illustrated, for Christ coming is like Fullers-sope or the Refiners fire, this
I know and have selt, and from the true knowledge in me I speak, though it be
in me and in you a truth in the heart or foul, yet that you and I both, and all
people speak, it is (...) but Lie in the mouth, for in the heart is wrote
Digitus Dei; that is, the finger-writing by God himself, you speak what is
done, and from that true root in the soul, yet know your voice is but a sound
from the thing, and is not the thing, and a sound is a Lie and not a substance,
for it is but a name of and from the thing, and not the thing, I instance thus, a
sign or picture of a man, is not a man; therefore in the true propriety of
true speech, it is no more nor no less then man's Lie.

Now to come to the Devil, he has a Trine figurative, the celestial Trine
temporal; as thus, the Devil, envy, and man, make up one temporal Trine; thus
the Spirit in man, nay man's spirit, is a Devil, and the strange birth that is
brought forth of Devil-man or Man-devil it is Envy.

Now that word Orga, it is a Caldee word, but it is the properest word to hold
in truth the coherency, but thus, this word Orga is envy, and this evy is the
Devil man, in man, from man, and by man, and against man, and this is envy in
man, or the Devil envy man or man-devil.

Now to come to state the connection, that exhales and draws the conjunction
together in this Trine; it is thus, I beseech you mind, Non serte pele esse,
this is a Latin state, though Pele be the ancient Orthodoxal word in the Greek
tougue. Now the English is thus much, Not sure nor certain being; or thus, no
certain being not sure; this is a strange state, but we must have stranger yet
before we can find out this Apollyon, that has inbondaged us unto his strange
being, that is so strange that it has no center, and not to be found out. Now
let me speak if all Languages can find him out, or all Arrs, or all Sciences,
or Earth, Air, Fire, or Water, I shall reach him if he can be found.

Non ocare in acaos in re, Here is another state more harder then the other,
let me tell you, The light in knowledge does find out the Devil, or the true
knowledge does out the Devil; but to open the forecited state, it is thus the
English, mind all you curious quick wits, while I define unto you this
deceivng Devil, the English of the stated Greek maxim is this, Not the lightest
in confusion in the thing.

Sed oculus in ve alli nen. But the eye in life sees no Devil or darkness, but
it is a severation from light, that is a composure of dark and seeming light,
and this is Hell or Devil, Quando in operati avaret nel medad al in re sem addi
aal oli abbit sole toro o^abit al beneam sabat. The English is this, When in
work he varieth, then the eye sees the Cave or Hell, but the high thing sees no
Devil but himself, for he and his sight sees no evil, or darkness or devil.

Solat arry absadet ve. The English is this, The safe strength evadeth the Lie.
I have gone thus far in this scarch, and cannot find a composed Devil; that is
a substance, and that substance a place of residence.

Quoas amalum sarbat alu alaous in amarere semer allat vel need mem in re sabat
altra nebat. The English is, How or why does light discover the Lie? Why? it is
the beauty of his own transcendencie.

The darkness is a shade for light,
Wherein it does it self delight.
Thus if truly understood,
Then the Devil is viewed.
But to let the state down, thus, God in his Essence, before he came forth in
created appearances, was all light, and Gods vailing himself in earthly
appearances, has eclipsed, as it were to the height of our expression his
glory in his Essential Essence, in his created derivative appearances; so that
the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends not the
light, but the light illustrating, causes a banishment of darkness, then there
is no Devil, not Death, but a daily Resurrection in glory into the pure and
divine being, which is God in and with us a derivative, yet one in the all
light Essencie, which is Teri-al. But to come to state this envy, Devil, and
man all in one Trine; thus, man is the Devil, thus the Spirit in man is the
Devil, and that by reason of the abstract it was abstracted from, it is quick
and fugitive and lusts to envy, nay, it is envy, and envy is the Devil. Semus
in ar I-in-e, it is the alone lustful deceit in man, for know whatsoever
centereth not in God is a Devil; for in the reducement there is, as the whole
Church called in England, for know it is but a called Church, and call is but a
Ly and not the thing, they all hold only that in the reducement, that we must
go either to Heaven or Hell, unto God or unto the Devil; and these two are as
it were Paymasters, as God the Father of mercy, and the Devil the Father of
envy: Now you that are not in God, ye must be and are in the Devil, thus the
Devils Trine made and upheld, thus the Spirit of man is man's proper all, thus
it is the life of man as he is natural man, until that spiritual light has
made it one by inlightning it, and so it obeying that light, there is an union
made in one, and so all one in union with that glorious Essence it was
descended from; for the darkness is unvailed, and light has caused obedience,
so that the day and night are both one, and night is gone in that clear day.

Now the Devil his Trine is thus, the Devil is the Serpentine Spirit in man,
that opposes the light of God, and while that Spirit is uncast forth, man is
wholly ruled by the lusts of the Devil, and his acts are in darkness in all
deceivea bleness in unrighteousness, for Satan and he is one. Mind Chirsts
words to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, then Peter was the Devil, acting in
that dark Spirit or dark light: Now how can it be properly said to be a dark
light? thus, the light is life, and the darkness is death; therefore where
darkness resides in predominacie, then a dark light, but the word runs thus,
they shall be cast into utter darkness.

Quande avalet armi assem pele avaret axzi pele Ethrati leget almae amaset
doly. The English is this, But the state is dark, for it is the denotation of
Hell, and you hold it all of you to be dark; then mind, this is a dark state,
for it is Greek; because the major language lies in the Greek tongue, and the
other languages are but conjuncts to the Greek, and from the Greek tongue, this
great deceivable Devil was clustrated, though what he is, and where he dwells,
all men that have said they have been Christ's Ambassadors, could never define
to this day.

Now I English the dark forecited state. (mind) When the contrary receives
strength, the light is eclipsed, and the light increasing, darkness vanishes
away, and flies in his airy Kingdom, of which Kingdom, he the Devil is Lord
predominate; for the light causes his combinement to his airy Region.

Now to be Priest-like as you call him, though the holiness in all men I
honor, and holiness in man or men, that is the true Priest, and not prating
man; but holy acts from the true root, that is a demonstration that the true
Priest dwells there, mind these words, for ye shall all be Kings and Priests
unto God, but he that names Christ must depart from every evil way. Now you
say man cannot think a good thought, then know he cannot turn from his evil
way; it is granted, but to come close, where the evil way is not departed from,
that man has but prated, and never heard Christ preach, in them words are
included both the called Priests and people: for if the Priest be not turned,
he prateth, Christ never preaches in him, and Christ never sent none, but he
preached in him first, and by their voice they sounded forth to the people, all
this is nothing yet, for the Devil may and does speak as high in expressing
words of godliness, as any in light can do; but when you come to search the
root, it is but a sound and not a doing or reforming to that that was spoken,
for Brethren until you are doers you are Devils and liars.

I will give you one more, It is not he that hears my words, says our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, but he that does my will, that man or woman, or both,
are my Disciples, but the same that the Spirit did denote to my brother John
the Baptist, the same confer I unto your capacity to judge of, upon whom thou
see the Spirit descend and abide, that is he: So I say to you, whomsoever you
see acting in love and charity, I had need speak this in plain English words,
that you may all hear what I mean by the sound I deliver to you: it is this,
When thou do as thou would be done unto; yet further, for illustration
into thy duty that thou owe unto thy Brethren, feed thine enemy, clothe him,
see none want. If one ask, if thou give, make his condition thine own: Thus,
if I were as he is, would I be content with the same I give unto him? Now
brethren, I am come to sound you all in the Truth, in the true Gospel. Now
apply my words unto my self, then you will say that I said a sound is a Lie,
and not the thing. Now I grant it, every sound is a lie. And now brethren look
to it; for ye are all but sounds and liars, if ye are not deers; for the doer
shall be justified in his deed.

Yet to come close, brethren; mind, I beseech you in the bowels of Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior; leave off this lying in hearing, and in truth be
doing: for ye dishonor the glorious Truth in the declarative of the true
Gospel. Let me tell you, which to my grief I speak it, God is witness upon my
soul that I lie not, That in many places where God and Christ was never named,
they walk more near the true Gospel, which is doing, then ye do, that have all
this preaching. But truly, if it were in power, the operation would be
demonstrated in our holy walking before God, the glorious Majesty of heaven
and earth.

Now I will speak in the English Tongue, the English action that reign in
predominacie. O how are our holy named Zelots, how are they become more brutish
in their lustful living, then the bestial beast! I am asnamed to name, but the
meaning you know. O how does Oaths and Drunkenness reign amongst us, for which
the Land shall mourn! But how does Deceit and Fraud reign, even from the higest
unto the lowest! O how do we cry up the Gospel, as though that were a cloak to
cover over all our wickednesses! I beseech you hear me: ye are the very Mystery
of Iniquity that my Brother John saw: for it is but a name, and no true thing.
And judge ye by your own doings, if God by his Spirit has preached in you. I
say, the Gospel and Christ you deny, an^ are bewitched with the highest
witchcraft of Satan; and ye are the highest form of the devils scholars, that
ever he taught: for his servant^ ye are, to whom ye obey. Lay Christ's Rule
home, and you see that it is doing that Christ commanded, and not saying So
now, until a turning unto obedience is come, ye are Liars, deceivers, and the
devils children.

Now I come to speak to the Devil and his Regencie, that is in the air; for he
is said to be predominate in the air: Sub Luna non in Patreas a Salma onari
reme Emishcio veniente amorarum in a Salma aphny audaret almat alliel in re
sabuisti almat on or. This state is the highest that can be wrote or denoted,
Sub Luna in re. For know, the Moon is knit in the thing, that thing in this
state is Jehovah; but to open the Mazzi sub Luna. Our forefathers were
peaceful men, and in their peace, they saw no Devil, but we that are the weak
children of the strong Parents, we sees Devil: Now you think the state is
easy, I tell you, the deepest judgment in the world by literal learning,
cannot reach the meaning of the English; for there is all that can be spoken.
But to this devil, and to show his Regencie, it is the air, from whence he and
all things Sub Luna was abstracted. Now know, the Devil by his power is greater
then man, for man is the Minor abstract, but if man and the Devil were but
drawn to their full Method, they are Signam Ve, that is, a sign of that same
sign: I could wish that it were understood: but to come to the Devils trine in
earthly appearances, it is this, the Devil-man, or Man-devil, but you will have
it the Devil in man. Now how could the Devil deceive man with signs and lying
wonders? thus, wonders and miracles are two distinct appearances, I prove it
thus.

The miracle is the foundation that wonder does rise upon, and the wonder is
notional, the miracle is the substance. Now the miracle in man, is the Devils
wonder, thus God does infuse grace into the soul, and then the Devil is cast
forth, that is the Devils wonder at being cast forth.

Now this Wonderer is the deceit in man, which is indeed the devil in man. Now
know, that the Devils Trine has the same expression in names, and quick, nay
quicker then the expression from the true root.

But now to come to the true view of God and the Devil. Gods Trine is acted in
Christ, and by obedience we are made sons in God. Now the Devil his Trine is
acted by the spirit of man, and that acts evil continually; and the greatest
devils scholars, they are the highest in Scripture, and by that they cover
their own devilish ends.

One more: when they both cease speaking, and come to be declared by the
Prophet in them, then the true Root does discover by his Prophet, that the
teaching was true, which teaching is acted forth in the bowels of mercy and
compassion, in distributive acts of mercy to the Poor and Afflicted. But when
we look for the fruits that the man that has not the Root Christ in him,
although he has sounded never so high and holily, yet I pray take Christ's own
mark to know them by, that is this, By their fruits ye shall know them. And
what fruits do the deceived bring forth? I give it a small name; but indeed,
what fruits do liars, that is, notional men, bring forth? only dishonor: I
beseech you mind, for it is the ax that is laid unto the root of all trees: for
when ye have as it were reached the Sphere or heaven with expression of words
in curious eloquent Oratory, and come down to your lives and conversations, why
ye were Angels in expression, and Devils in actions. Now let me tell you the
truth, ye Notional people, ye children of your father the devil; he was a Liar
from the beginning. O that them words from the beginning were but truly
understood; but it is not reached, but unto ye devils children, that is,
deceive not your selves, every one of you that are hearers and not doers, ye
are the devils children: for know, ye are but a name, and ye are not the thing
comprehended in that name: and so is your father the devil; for he is a name,
and no true thing, but a lie, and so are ye, while ye are hearers and not
doers: for the devil your father would be like God, and ye would be like
Christ's people, in hearing and speaking with the highest; but here comes the
separating Ax, that is thus: Christ's people are operative doers, and ye are
only operative hearers; and your doing is contrary to that you have heard; so
there you have set to your seals; for doing is the sealing to others what God
the merciful Creator and Lord of heaven and earth has done in us. Therefore I
entreat all in Christ's stead, never hear more, unless ye resolve to be doers of
his will, whose voice you seemingly desire to hear: for in hearing, and not
doing, ye treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, which is even at the very
door, ready to seize upon all disobedient hearers, and not doers of the things
they have heard: for God shall render wrath in fury, like flames of fire, upon
the disobedient hearers. Not he that hears my Word, but he that does my Will,
even that same man or woman is my disciple. Let me tell you, one doing is
better then all the hearing that ever you heard in all your days.

Now this that I have spoken, it is the Prophet that is sent, Non homo in
prophecy, sed propishe in re semmam. The English is this: Man is not the
prophesying Prophet, but the Prophet is the Prophecy; and yet both in one,
that is to say, in truth. Man is not the Prophet, but the light in man from
God, that, even that is the true teaching Prophet. Now know, that this Prophet
is never sent forth to one man at one time to reside in; but it is Gods light
at the time of Gods pleasure, when the people are lost, to renew them, and
connex them together by his Prophet, that is his union Spirit, in his appointed
gathered All.

Now I will discover unto you the notes or signs that you may know the Truth
in the Prophet, whether it be true or no that he declares: And I will come unto
the highest Instalments, thus: first, the Spirit of the Lord by communion goes
forth to gather the people: not by man's voice are the people gathered, but by
Gods power in his own Spirit: for man's voice is a Lie, but the true strength
gatherer is the Spirit of the Lord. Now know, that I know God will gather a
true figurative Church in England, and that gathering is the cause of all the
trouble upon the spirits of men at this day: and as the light does increase, so
does molestation and trouble increase upon the natural man, for Antichrist must
be before Christ in his creation: for out of a confused Chaos Gods union shall
be perfectly selected out. That is this work that is in the earth; it is
Thorakx alli, that is the high Revolve of the Revolution of the JEWS, and
their calling, that is a turning from dark and dead names, and dead idols,
though supposed Gods, to serve and worship the true and living God, that made
heaven and earth, and all things.

Now I come to denote the Prophet, that is as it were the head unto the
members. I beseech you mind, in that headship he is servant unto all. Mind
this state: for it was Christ's own example, Who will be greatest among you, let
him be servant unto all. That was Christ's own example: for he washed his
disciples feet. Now this Humility has cast out the devil, which is Pride and
Exaltation, and this lies written upon the spirit of that man in whom the
Spirit is in the Flue or fullness of it.

I have nothing but that I have received, neither do I understand what I have
received: But it is it self, and I am yours to serve you in love, which is the
Gospel in truth, and Truth in love is Christ, and Christ is Gods. So much for
the first Notation of D^vitie Devinam, of the divine riches or spiritual gift,
or the Spirits teachings, or the Spirit of Prophecy.

The second note of the true Spirit dwelling in man, is this. The man must and
is for the time taken wholly into the Spiritual work; that is this, his delight
is so far drawn into that lovely beau^y of excellency, that his love is wholly
in that divine light, so that he hates all ends and byrespects, only advancing
the glorious illustration of that beauteous excellency by voice of breath, and
does seal it with a holy, godly, liberal life, compassionate unto all. Thus
much Paul said, Walk as we are an example unto you, Be ye followers of us as we
are of Christ the Lord, for whose sake we hove forsaken all, and do count all
things but dung in comparison of Christ Jesus our Lord. Lex ^alionis in re. The
right understanding is Christ in the thing, or the thing is Christ in the right
understanding. But brethren, I would not have you ignorant of what has been
the reward of our Lord and Master, and of the Apostles his brethren and
servants; and all they that will live up in the life of godliness, they must
suffer persecution: for are we greater in this weak Age, then Christ our Lord
and Master was? Was not he counted a dceiver, a deluder, a drunkard, and a
devil, and gluttonous? As it was then, so it is at this day: for then darkness
did persecute light; even so it is at this day. O how are we censured for
Ranters, for Blasphemers, and of the devil. Now for what cause is this that we
suffer? it is first to make us perfect through sufferings, that we may be made
partakers of his holiness; secondly, that it might fill up the measure of their
wickedness, that destruction might come and take center in this Nation, in
these words, Fill ye up the measure of your sins.

Now Brethren let me speak unto you, not I, but Christ in me. I beseech you
walk so that your walking in, and doing from that root Christ, your life may be
demonstrated unto the sons of men, that the life of Christ lives in you, you in
it, and from that inliving life within ye, act outward acts of righteousness
and holiness, without which no man shall the Lord; and although ye are
condemned for blasphemy and blasphemers, yet I beseech you for Christ's sake,
let your light of doing acts of mercy be great, that so the illustration of
that beaut^ous truth may be by you so illustrated, that they may be ashamed,
that have an^ do asperse and speak evil of you wrongfully; and know I act the
life of the Gospel, which is doing, that you call blasphemy, So worship I the
God of my Forefathers in truth and righteousness; and let me tell you, that my
blasphemy is better then your high cry of the name holiness. Brethren, I would
not have any man to take the name for the thing; as to say that the Bible and
New Testament are the holy Scriptures, and the Gospel, and the holy word of
God, of which they are only the bare names, and not the thing, they say or
name what was done, and what is to do, and that is all the stead they stand you
in. But what is done in thee, O thou man and woman? them names and spelling,
and much invention of man interwoven in the named Scripture. Now the word of
God written upon the soul, that is the Scriptum est; that is, it is written in
the Spirit, what is that that is written? it is this, holiness unto the Lord,
written in thy soul by tha finger of God, that is it that shall stand thee in
stead, and not what is writ in another or by another, or what another shall
write: for let me tell thee, O thou man and woman, where and when God writes
that, then the false conception in man or woman ceases, which power is in the
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as he is a Savior and not in them dead names
called Gospel or Scripture, that does only name a name of his saving us, but it
is his substance without name that does save us and deliver us.

So beloved I would not have you deceived with the dead name, but the desire of
my soul is, that you with my own ingraftement, may be placed in the true
thing, which is God the Lord.

Now Beloved I walking and thus acting, know that that you in me count
blasphemy, is a glorious declarative of truth in righteousness, from that
ingraftment which is Christ in the soul; it is greater then your calling the
letter the word of God, and the holy Gospel of Christ.

Now let me tell you, that though you see and understand it not, Paul said, and
testified what I have declared, and prove me in this point a blasphemer, and
you must prove Paul a blasphemer. This I prove, I say that the name is not the
thing, but a sound from the thing, a sound is not a substance; anso by
consequence a Ly^, and nothing but an abstract of air Paul says that the
better is dead, and death kills. What odds is there betwixt Paul's words and
mine in this state? thus, Paul may name, or plant, and Apollo may water, but
God gives the blessing. Now if the letter be dead, know then all men it is a
Ly^ I prove it thus: Things in death, or dead, are not lively: for or what is
dead, there is but a name, and a name is but a Lie; for the substance there is
withdrawn into the thing, which is the life of all things; and the name is but
the dead ashes of that appearance. Judge ye all people, is the name life? Is it
life as thus, to illustrate: I say I will give such a thing unto such a one,
that is but name, and it is good to the party, when it is done, that is
received from the giver. So all names are a lie, till ^one be centred in that
named name, that is, the thing spoken of, or promised, be wholly really
performed unto the promised. So you see all names are nothings; and when the
substance is come, the promised name is returned into the acted thing.

Now draw all into one Maxzim, it is thus: God is the thing of all things: and
thing is as proper to denote the excellentest union, as any word in any or all
languages. I tell you it is a higher import in the Ori Abba, then JEHOVAH. You
cannot nor must not tell me, though you speak from your received opinion, what
the highest denotation is in any one Language or Tongue; for I know all Tongues
and Languages; and they are but one lighted life in the VE.

But brethren, know God is the Life, and all things are but names issued out
from that one Life; do but reduce them dead names to the living thing, then
they are not dead names as they were, but living things in the thing: that
state lies dubious, and so it shall stand unrefined yet. Now Paul's words were
the very same, for (says he) The letter kills, and the name is dead, but the
word of God abides for ever, turning all things, and planting, and
transplanting all things according to its own pleasure. Now the word of God
endures for ever, because it is the life on whom all dependances depends;
but death, that is, all names are but a Lie, and nothing but vanity in
appearances: So you see that a name is not the thing, neither is the written
insert called the Scripture, the word of God: for Gods writing is not upon
paper, but in the heart and spirit of his chosen ones. So brethren, deceive
your selves no longer with that dead Idol of your own making, for it is good in
its place, if a seeing eye enlightened do view it, he values it at the true
value: for brethren, our not being our selves, makes us see double, and that
double fight overthrowes our true valuation, for that that is good in his own
place, by our esteem of it, it does thereby become a God unto us, for what man
over values, or over-esteems, it is his Idol, and by consequence his God. Let
me speak; in the days of our vanity how many Gods have we sacrificed unto? Now
the shortest way to give a definition to the Querie, it is this, what have we
not sacrificed unto? Do not mistake me; the sacrificing unto is this, It is
obedience unto that that is not God: as thus: I esteem Gold, my love is drawn
unto, nay into it; what will not I do, that that God will not reward me for?
Because every God does seemingly promise reward: for every God does give
himself, if adored, to the person adoring. Or thus, again; I worship Honor:
how do I idolize that God, that will but procure me Honor! for Honor is the
God I look to be rewarded with: Though man goes many ways unto his God, yet the
end he counts his safe center, and the center is the end, and so a God. One
more, thus: God the great Creator of heaven and earth, is he unto whom all
obedience is due. Now he that does give that due, that is only due unto God
alone, unto any creature or creatures, it is to deny God his Creator his Royal
pre-eminence. Now this sacrifice does every man in his dark condition, as the
Apostle says, Such were we in times past, when we lived in the lusts of our
own desire, fulfilling our envious minds in all lustfulness. But now mind;
here is that that destroys all; but here comes the separating power of breaking
asunder our connection, that is Gods Word coming in power: But when the
mercifulness of God our Savior appeared, not through the righteousness that we
had done; but mind, of his free mercy he saved us, by renewing (...) our souls
the new birth; whereby they and we, and all that are enlightened, are renewed by
the principle of obedience: that is, lust is cast forth, and obedience is
planted and set upon the right object, that is, upon God; and then it acts
righteousness, and righteously.

O beloved, you high account of the name Gospel and Christians: it is the name
that is the cause of your greater loss: for the true Gospel of Jesus Christ is
this DONE in our souls or spirits; we doing unto others, from that gift which
is Gods free mercy unto us: we declare the work of God done in us, unto the
glory of God the Father, the free giver of that free gift: for brethren, the
Apostles must be as bad as ye hold me, in this state, Be ye doers of his will,
and not only hearers, only deceiving your selves. All hearing is but a lie,
that is, deceiving, until doing be come: for the doer shall be justified in his
deed; and the hearer, which is but a sound, and a lie, shall be cast forth, and
the doer is he, and only he, that shall be received into Christ the Lord:
this, this is the true Gospel. Si Deus almorarum in re. The English is, Love is
obeying the thing in all his commands.

Alui hessena amphi sele oraous-sebe-olat-al. The English is this: The height
in love does illustrate in the doer, to the example and invitation of others.

O agomeon in a salma onary in reab oly odoneus. O the height of love in the
creature, is in obedience acting the commands of the Creator and Savior. O
alpha in cretura in re saguisse elma amaset in rem. The English is this: The
beginning in the creature, is the light from the Creator, whereby he acts
obedience unto the Lord his God sola alone.

Theauranjohn Tani the Jew.

Epistle 14. Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved-brethren, that eternal word or root, it is the Gospel, it is not the
named word, but it is the power Gospel in the soul, which is not Christ in name
but word, God in power overturning the name and planting the thing, for the
true Gospel has not nor cannot bear any name that is cypnered out in letters,
for it is the new creation within the soul; and a spiritual work in truth of
term cannot be named, for a Spirit is spiritual; what is the meaning of
spiritual? it is in import in the word, as if it should be said, thou Spirit
art all, and to all there is not nor can be no proper name at all.

Brethen, my insert is beyond Apostolical, for it is Evangelical, and if you
have the Evangelical eye, then you see it mystery, the litteral eye sees me
not, I am life, if ye see meye are one with me, nay we, and as many as do see
are all but one in the union, for through Christ that is oobedience, we are
made one with the Father in the celestial center.

But beloved, now I come to cut your state that you are so fast stated in and
upon, and I shall show your deceiveable state stated, and held, and maintained;
and thus I begin, I will give your state the precedencie, for it was a name,
and that name was the written Bible and New Testament, their names are called,
and were called so before you and I were borne; that is, they were called the
word of God, the glorious Gospel of Christ, the holy Scriptures. Non sabbah
litteras sed sperituus devinus. The English is, The written letters are not
holy, but the intendant Spirit it is holy, and holy cannot stand on Paper and
Ink, but in the souls of men in that figure or Image, being that man he is the
fairest flower in Gods field, within this terrestrial Orb, and as wholly stands
in the soul of man, which is but obedience from man unto God, so wholly stands
the center-bearer in the whole creation. Beloved, you that are taught in the
Spirit, know what is spoken: for unto you is that teaching given, to understand
the mysteries of the kingdom.

Now brethren know, that your composure of letters and names in the Bible and
the New Testament, cannot give true knowledge in this Mystery of the Kingdom:
for the mystery in the Kingdom it is spiritual, and no name can define a
spiritual thing; for this is the reason, the one is Truth, the other is a Lie;
thus, the spirit it is Truth, Truth it has a center, nay it is the center of
all things, and all founds or names are but compositions, semblances, and
semblances are no substances, and no substance no center, therefore nothing, a
mere Idea, a mere Lie, a Fancy, a Shadow, a Vanity.

Now you will say that I deny the Scriptures, now I join issue with you your
selves mine enemies, you shall be judge; first, it is true I do deny the
Scriptures as you hold them forth, nor you understand not what you do hold
forth, that is it I affirm: for the insert or Scripture in many places is true
according to inserting or writing, but it is made a lie by your practicing.
This is the Scripture I affirm to be true Scriture.

First, I hold the Scripture to be true if truly wrote, you understand me not,
I pass now, I tell you you understand not the Scripture, but you make the
Scripture false, for the Scripture is true, they admonish all to love one
another, then wherefore do thou see thy brother in need? and wherefore do
thou wrong thy neighbor to set up thy self? The reason is this, I pray you
mind, thy self is thy Scripture, and thou have denied the literal word of God,
that thou call the word of God and the Gospel, but thou deniest Christ the
Lord, and his commands are cast behind thy back, and thou art both Scripture,
Law, and Word, and Gospel, thy self, and so indeed thou art the high
Antichrist; that is, Christ, the Law, the Word, the Gospel, the Scripture, all
these thou art enemy unto, nay a destroyer of them all.

Brethren, out of love I entreat you, out of knowledge I do admonish you, be ye
warned of this main condemnation that flows forth upon you by your own
knowledge and forwardness. I beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus our Lord
and Savior, remember the words of my Brother Peter the Apostle, they were
these, in the days of our ignorance God winked at, but now that all should
come to the knowledge of of the truth.

Now Brethren I beseech you mind, what you curious and eloqu^nt and quick
witted ones have gotten by your affirming that the Scriptures, as the Bible and
the New Testament, is the word of God, now you know that the word of God
abides for ever, and it is a word of power and discerning between the joints
and the marrow, nay betwixt the soul and the spirit. I beseech you mind, It
discerns betwixt the Apostolical doctrine and the Evangelical declarative,
whereof and from that root I affirm, that is the Evangelical expression, it is
beyond the Apostolical Insertation or writing, but to come to the word of God,
I affirm it to be himself, for if it be true word, it is true God, for God and
his word are not two but one ^ntire only one: now know Gods word is of that
power, nay it is that power that over-turneth all things into it self.

Now mind I beseech you, the Scripture that you say is the word of God, you
are a greater and stronger word then it, for it calls for obedience, you will
not obey, therefore by consequence you are a greater God then the Scripture or
the word of God, which ye call or count to be the word of God. Would you know
the highest of what it is? I tell you it is the writing Appestolical pointing to
the life Evangelical, of which things I am come forth to speak unto, that you
might not be no longer deceived by the Appestolical dead name, but to be drawn
to the view in light into the Evangelical living thing.

Now mind, upon this comes your nondemnation that you know the Scriptures, and
hold them in so high esteem in the name, as for to be the true word of God, and
though ye say this, and dispute thus, and persecute them that say not as you
say.

I entreat you take notice, you are the abominable belyers of your own word of
God as you call it, for you say it is truth, then why act you not in that
truth? again you say you know it to be Gods word, then know that if it were
Gods own word, and thou taught that knowledge by God, who is the giver of
knowledge, thereby to know him to be the only true God, this knowledge turns
the receiver of it into obedience, and then he sees God as he is, for he sees
God with Gods own eye; that is true sight without mixture: Now if God had
taught thee, then it had been effectual to the turning thee into obedience, and
know so taught so kept, for where God teaches he keeps, and obedience acts
forth in distributives of mercy, love; pity and compassion, for Gods teachings
are always effectings, and from them effectings flow forth actings of mercy
unto thy poor distressed brethren, which is a declared seal unto the people,
that thou art taught by God himself, and sealed with Gods seal, for know so
long as you are but sayers, ye are Devils and liars, and when you come to be
doers, then ye begin to declare that God has taught you the true Gospel, as
for ye and your Gospel, and your word of God, so long as it lies in the tongue
so long it is a lie, until the tongue in that body be turned into hands, and
them hands be made doing distributively unto every one in necessity, then I say
Id east non literas sed spiritus et divitie. The English is this, It is not
letters or names but the Spirits riches, which is planted in the soul, and has
silenced the lying tongue, and has caused an operation in the hands to be
acted forth unto the members of the same body, whereof Christ is the head, if
ye will be Christ's disciples ye are to sell all and follow him as he has
commanded, this is the word of God, and you know the text, then how are ye
Christ's servants withstanding the commands of your master? but I take this for
granted, this is a hard saying, and who can bear it?

I answer, he that commanded it, for if thou were but out of thy devilish
knowledge, then thou wast in Christ's strength, and his strength is thy strength
if he be thy teacher, then no command is hard, because the strength that
commanded in that same strength it is obeyed.

But now I will show you how you are all cheated and deceived that are not in
that strength, it is thus, ye are learners of Christ, and ye are treasurers up
of names, and verses, and texts, and disputes, and answers, all this is
learning of Christ. Now I Theauraujohn say and declare this day, that Christ
cannot be learned nor taught, for know that the height of learning is but
getting the name, But I beseech you brethren mind, it is Gods free gift
conferring the thing into the soul; that is it that makes an oneness betwixt
thee and himself, thou have learned the name, but he is the true thing, that
will not nor cannot stoop to thy naming his name, for the name is a mere lie
without the thing, which lie art thou until the thing named be come, which
thing is Gods free gift or Christ in the soul; alas what makes all this
disunion or division amongst us, and variety of opinions as is amongst us at
this day? I will show you the reason, it is because we gather unto us names,
and them names are variously named, and so by this we our selves gather our
selves into these opinionated names and gatherings together, but mind, we are
not gathered by God himself, but our selves gather our selves into selected
companies, and then judge others that are not as we are, when indeed we are all
this while but a name which is but a Ly, for know if we were gathered by the
Spirit of God, then no division would be amongst us, but an entire oneness in
the union Spirit, for whom and them that the Lord gathers they continue, for
they are centered in the alone center.

Now here is the difference betwixt our gathering our selves into Churches and
Companies and we being gathered by Gods Spirit, its gathering us thus, God
gathers all out of us; that is, all our names, notions, oppositions and
prejudices, and after them weeds are gathered, and bound up and cast forth,
then he makes the great Allah alba, that is, the high white plain in us and of
us, and in that white plain he gathers together and plants in that plain made
plain by his own word, this to be expressed in words Hevi-altiel. The English
is to say, Behol^ the great plain of the Lords making.

Now this is the Lords paper fitted for him to ensign himself in. Now this
plain being thus made, now comes the ensignement, which in words is thus
denoted in Hebrew, Oli el vau, which is in import as the words do stand
relatives unto Hevi altiel. The English is this, The whole light in man is
againset in God, this is the second Viva vita; that is, The spirit of man is
made obedient to act Gods will, and from this Ensignment flows holiness unto
the Lord.

Now thus gathered, thus they ever stand, and that that keeps them it is
Degitus dei in kor allah apparan hashsha. The English from this Hebraick state
it is this, That that keeps them it is the finger of God wrote upon and in the
clean and high table in the heart of soul of man, by the high strength of God
in power overturning all false writings, and then ingraving himself in his holy
mount, for says the Lord I dwell in the humble and meek spirit.

Now ye proud ones consider who is it that dwells in you: for God dwells in the
humble plain soul, in the dejected spirit. O beloved, the mourning spirit is
an Angels feast! O a poor pure heart is the Evangelical Throne! Therefore ye
poor, ye weak, ye nothings in your selves, why are ye cast down? it is because
the Spirit of God does rest upon ye, and in that glory that now you see your
selves nothing, then are ye the happiest happy, for your Iow nothingness in
your selves, it is Christ's riches in you that has made you so, and ye are
clothed with all, and that all is the riches of Christ, which is Gods free
mercy, that has taken you into himself; so now you are not your own natural
selves, but you are spiritually Christ's, and Christ is Gods: O happy thrice
happy are ye, when you are no longer you natural selves! then are ye the Lords
by his grace in us, then is the Temple builded in the spiritual Jerusalem,
which word does in the import denote thus much, The high peace is safe rest to
the weary soul, that lies in the word Jerusalem.

Now one word to ye assembled companies of dissembling deceived people, truly
I love you all every one; now why do ye jar and dis-joint and fall asunder one
from another? the reason is this, man's weakness was the cause of the conjunct
or combinement into assemblies; now know you it is strength that does gather
the true gathered, and strength does continue this gathered, and does knit them
gathered into an oneness with himself, this is Gods gathering, for man's
gathering is weakness; and know that as soon as light does appear in strength
into any one in your congregated companies, weakness cannot withstand strength,
so then your gathering is ungathered by a higer strength; now because you being
weakness, cannot comprehend that strength of light that is let down into the
soul of that party or parties, you cry out they are deceived and deluded, when
indeed your selves are the people.

Now unto that party so drawn up, your name Gospel was unto that party Word,
and Power, and Gospel and Life, in which word had you all been gathered at
first, you could not have been separated, but ye were but bare name, which is
but an Idea of the thing, for know that the substance casts forth the shadow.

Alas! Brethren God has a Church (as you term it) of the Jews in England, nay
the glory of all Lands lies in its root, and it is going forth, for whose sake
I am a Messenger, a Jew, nay the Jew crying before the way, the way and light
is coming forth like a full flowing Sea.

Brethren, I beseech you hear me, and weigh it seriously; know that there is
the greatest work to be done in England that ever the sons of men viewed.

First, Take this one hint in me, that am standing before you, I say that now
is the time of temptation coming upon the world, such as has not yet been. Now
know before that the Lord came upon me in that great power, I was humbled
fourteen weeks by fasting and praying diverse days, seeking earnestly to God,
but at length the power fell upon me, and I leave the effect to try the power,
by whose power it was, then was I smote dumb, blind, and dead, before the eyes
of hundreds, and then twenty one days my sufferings was unspeakable through
many temptations. I was deprived of my understanding a long time; now forty
wecks I wrote in the Languages, and understood not one word, God is my witness
I lie not, I was made to make a distribution of much.

Now unto you I have read my Epistles since my converse amongst you, and could
not speak to dispute until the last day. I have been smote twice dead, and
forced upon the return of my spirit to declare woe and destruction unto this
bloody City London.

Now I beseech you consider all these things, for they are but in figure what
this Land must suffer; yet I see no man turn from his evil ways. Nay brethren
in all ages God never destroyed a Nation, but the people had warning, and look
into your own hearts, if ye have light judge ye; how can the hypocriticaly
nation stand, the deceit of the World? But alas we cannot see until we feel!
but know God is coming (...) in vengeance, to take high souls from under feet,
bearing aproud heart, and he will make an evenness in our pride, for the proud
shall be destroyed, and the humility of the humble shall be exalted, for
affliction will make us know and own one another, when we are all naked, then
there will be an everness and an oneness, and this way God is coming and he
comes in haste; therefore be ye humbled low, that the Lord may exalt you in his
due time, for now is the hour of temptation coming upon all the world, the Lord
will make a Potters work amongst the sons of men; because their stock is a
doctrine of vanity, for Christ cannot be learned, Jeremiah the 10 and the 8
verse, and the 10 verse in that chapter, But the Lord is the God of truth, he
is the living God, and an everlasting King, at his anger the earth shall
tremble, and the nations cannot abide his wrath, take the 14 verse of the same
chapter, the words are these, but it is an abortive birth unto the wife man,
the words are these, Every man is a beast by his own knowledge. Then wise men
they standing most upon their own knowledge, they are the greatest beasts.
Qoarum in a salma manasaret e^^a a sadetpelko oni operat parma sadit veret. The
English is this, The high knowledge in man's self, it is the high working
Antichrist that has all along and does still deceive the people in the world
or upon the earth; so Antichrist is not in Rome, but the word Roma will bear
the denotation, for it holds height, but not the situation in Rome: for Rome so
called, must give way unto her elder sister England, for she has gotten the
start of all the world, and know that now she is in her height, and suddenly
shall be destroyed, and out of her fall righteousness shall rise unto the whole
world, this I know by the Spirit of the Lord, and after the sharp scourge
England shall be Primus maxzi in Evangelious in Re. The English is this, The
first undentable strength in the Evangelical thing or light.

O segat amabatar alvah hassary ackad el vauy abret axci penan pathro horbas
absit hegemonias alpha aparet. The English of this Hebrew state is, O the
knowledge by the spirit that shall be ingrafted in this Nation after that
affliction has opened the way for the plant to be let into to take root, and
from that root light shall spring unto the whole earth. This has been by the
Spirit revealed unto many, that from the North the root shall grow, and so unto
the holy Mount in Judea; and then the Temples restoration in the
transcendentest, magnificentest, excellentest glorious glorified glory.
Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna, Alvat al. These things I know and have seen, Even I
Theauraujohn Tani high Priest, with that eye that is sight it self.

Now one word to the Scorners of light, Go on, your days of account slumbers
not, for know judgment is already begun at the house of God, and know that the
sinners shall not escape unpunished, do but consider the high falling away in
England, even the very highest stars are fallen, and Satan works swiftly, for
his time is but short; and great refinings in a short bit of time, nay mite,
nay half mite, nay minute of time, nay it is not to be defined in truths rule,
it is so short.

Non statis in ko saluat seabbris segat aluat hoi-sele mem. The time is so
short that I cannot state it, for time is and it is time, and for a nothing
that is, man is nothing, and for nothing to state a time in a center it cannot
be, for the center is time, and time is the center, here is wisdom to the wise,
and understanding to the prudent, time is, time is not, not is time, and time
is not, now times are two, and times are one, not two times but one, and that
only one, In trinas in re, that is three in one thing.

O Beloved if ye perceive any thing in me that is light, know that it is this,
That I know the Land shall be destroyed; therefore I beseech you that fear the
Lord humble your selves, and walk low in love, for the time of vengeance
hastens: O a fire is coming, I tremble to hear thereof, therefore walk humbly
before God that in the evil day you may escape, as brands plucked out of the
fire.

Brethren, what I say unto you, I practice in my own person, for abstenance
and sorrow are my companions, crying to God for my peoples gathering, and my
complaint unto my God is this, O Lord thou have made me naked before this
people, and have caused terrible things to be declared, when I was not my self,
but know that mad men (so mad and fools) your own proverb is, oft-speak truth.
I have cried in the streets, I have declared what I have received, yet who
among you is departed from his evil ways? my heart pants and my spirit
fails and is weary, because I see such small turnings unto God by obedience.

O Beloved, that you were not more stupid then the beasts in your understanding
you might easily perceive, that if there be any God, as by many men's and women's
living they declare that there is not (else) they would not, nor durst not do
now as they do in this time of deceit.

O shall not the Lord throw down his wrath in his fury and anger upon this
hypocritical, this all-tongue Nation! But O people, deeds of mercy is not
amongst ye! for the Lord has looked from heaven, and behold nothing but
oppression is found in her.

Now know O England, that thou art but a scourge to others to be scourged for
scourging. O ye that fear the Lord happy are ye, for when destruction comes
upon the World, then even then is the time of your rejoicing, for the righteous
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance coming.

Now we that fear the Lord are now dead, but in afflictions then we live; so
beloved unto you poor dejected ones am I sent, with the Oliveleaf of peace,
even unto you, who are the precious ones in the sight of the Lord, though in
low esteem in the world, nay necessity so overpowreth you, that many of you
want bread. O this wanting bread in our Nation does declare we live but in the
name Gospel, for refreshing the poor and releiving the needy this is the
Gospels true thing; for which my soul mournes in secret, to hear and see the
name Gospel cried so high, and doing which is the true Gospels not owned
amongst us. O what a dishonor is it to the Gospel, that amongst us care is not
taken to supply the poor.

Now I will show you the reason, it is this; every man being a Gospel unto
himself, that is the cause; I prove it thus, if thou did once own Christ's
words to be Gospel, then thy self Gospel is cast forth, but thou ownest thy
own Gospel, that is, thy own self-will to be the truest Gospel, and so Christ
and his Gospel is cast forth, for thou say Christ shall not reign over thee,
by thy actions in plain English words thou declarest no less: therefore
brethren I beseech you every one of you free your selves from this high deceit,
and set to your seals that it is true, for doing is a seal unto others what the
Lord by his Spirit has done in thee, try whether thy walking and actions be
ruled by Christ's prescript or writing, which thou call the word of God; now
if thou actest contrary thou art word and Gospel, and God unto thy self for his
ye are to whom ye obey; one thing I will state clear to you wise ones, the
point is this, you say that the Bible and the New Testament, they are the word
of God, I say you belie them in saying so, for know if Gods word were of no
more power and force in it self, then it is in the insert or Testament, I say
you are a greater word and a God then that is; I prove it thus, that that you
say is Gods word commands obedience unto something, you in actions act
contrary, how can this be Gods word that cannot overpower you?

I pray you mind. Now you are Gods word, for the greatest strength that is
Gods word, and your strength commands that that is there commanded, and you act
freely your own will; now let all judge whether that you be not a greater
word, then that you calls Gods word, nay you make it a Lie, and become a God
unto your selves.

Let all people judge, now for you to acknowledge that writing to be Gods word,
and you are not reformed by that word; I tell you you make God a Liar, thus,
God says that his word is life, and you say you know it to be so, why then
knowledge in truth of that word it is life, unto all that it is commanded unto,
but it is death to thee, because thou have taken the bare notional name, and
unto thee was the word never sent in power, which is the communicated thing.

Now let me speak unto you, here is the difference, Christ says I am the door
the way and the life, Christ says I am the eternal word; now what is this unto
any man, until Christ be become thus unto us? I tell you we are before he come
and abide with us, we are unclean spirits, witches, and sorcerers, deceivers,
for we would climb over another way then Christ has taught us, I am the door
says Christ, but your actions answer for you, you will go in another way, that
is, by the power of your own strength.

This is every namer and national gatherer in the whole world, which is cast
forth at Christ's own appearing, and then all that you counted gain unto you,
is become loss unto you, through the excellency that is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

O that ye did but know what this Lord Jesus Christ is, or that you could bear
my knowledge in the thing. El massah arkad axsi sephraim aspah salma oni pele
labat arbattha koersim semar axsi. The English to what it will bear, God the
Savior is only strong and omnipotent in every thing, and he alone is the
restorer of himself in the whole creation in appearances, for this end were
they created, that they may be preserved through destruction, nothing can be
saved until it be destroyed, for destruction is absolute salvation by Christ.

Now hear a word O England, that is this, I know God is bringing about Zach.
10.3. My wrath was, but I know now it is kindled a against the Shepherds, and he
will visit the Goats, but the Lord will visit the house of Judah, and will make
them as his beautiful horse in the day of battle, the 4. verse 5. and 6. and so
on, for this work am I called and sent, for the proclaiming Isreal's return, for
the Lord will build her again, that he has destroyed, and plant her in the
magnificentest beauty of beauties, as is thus much, the Jews and Jerusalem
shall be the exalted beauty out of all beauties into one beautiousness, in
royal magnificence and adorative glory.

Now ye Jews my Brethren, be ye doers of works of mercy, which does declare
the strength of the Gentiles Gospel, being planted in your living souls, and do
not as the Gentiles do, that make a great sound of the name Gospel in the
tongue, but in heart and life they deny the power, and they now Crucify Christ
as the Jews did in times past; for the Gentiles name a name, and yet they
abhor the thing that is included in that name, but they are become a Law unto
themselves, in that they have abhorred the Gospel, and departed from it in its
power, Zachary the 12 Chapter, verse the second, and so forward, these
insertations of the Prophets are my witness and the Jews strength, for to
uphold their drooping spirits.

Beloved had you but eyes to see my sphere I move in, you might see the
Appostolical body for to be thick clay and ponderous to that Evangelical
lusture I recead from, the appostolical doctrine was light in the evangelical
part of it, but then he that views it, he must have the Evangelical eye, but
know that the Jews Ceremonies were beauteous for a time, and then vanished the
Appostolical beauteous for its time, which time is ended, they were both
beauteous in their times and now ended; but now comes the Evangelical living,
of which they both were but dark types, yet in them days splendorous, now know
if God should cease from varieties, he must cease from being God, but he is
various in his creation, and the^ varieti^ is the declarer of his entire union,
there lies the Mystery.

Now ye that be talking and prateing Gentiles, we that are in grafted Jews;
that is, Gods strength has subdued us unto himself, we are doers of deeds of
mercy unto them that are in necessity, and not only literal hearers thereby
deceiving our selves, as ye literal notional Christians or Gentiles are, for
not he that bears my words, but he that does my will, even that very man or
woman, it is Christ's Disciple on Disciples; therefore none come to hear me
more, unless ye intend to make a true spelling, that is doing what you hear
commanded, for ye are mockers of God by your so hearing and not doing, better
had it been for you that you never had heard, then having heard a command
commanded in them words you hold to be a truth, and yet you disobey this truth:
now let me tell you your condemnation is just, and cut of your own mouth
against your own self it must and will pass, I have heard this word, it is
truth, it commands righteousness, thou actest wickedness; here is thy
judgment. Now Brethren had God come unto you first in the power of his word,
you had been enlightened within the soul, and that light is strength to obey, if
by Christ it be taught, but you are so quick you will come in by the name
Gospel, and your own bestial reason must be your own guide, and so you are
guided in your own strength, from Christ unto the high Antichrist, now who is
an Antichrist: even he that denies the Father and the Son, who denies the
Father and the Son? even all that obey not the commands of Christ, which does
bring us unto God in union: so you may plainly see, and by that sight save a
great deal of time that you spend in study, that your brains are and have been
employed in about Antichrist, for if not Christ, then Antichrist. So now look
no more for Antichrist abroad or at Rome. For thou O man in darkness art
Antichrist, the Devil, the false Prophet, the Socerer, the Witchcraft, the
Liar, this is every man in his dark state, and we thrust it off one unto
another, and one Country unto another Nation, when indeed it is Antichrist his
trade to keep our eyes without, lest we should fee his deceit within,
Antichrist is the Whore that wipes her mouth, as it is said, saying with an
Amazonian face, I have done no wrong, when she has acted what she can.

Beloved thus dark are we, being but the mystery of iniquity. Brethren Jeremiah
the 8. and the 7. verse, these words, even the Stork in the air knows her
appointed times, and the Birds their season, but my people knows not the
judgments of the Lord, read the 8 verse and so unto the 12 verse, add to this
Ezekiel the 5 chapter and the 5. verse, so unto the 12, this was a sentence
against Jerusalem, but now I say and know, Tremble, Tremble, Tremble, O
England, for thy decree it is sealed, and from the sealing the declaring is
gone forth to warn the people that Destruct on is at the very door, therefore I
beseech you say it to heart, let every one cry unto God, though we are, neither
shall be delivered, yet thereby we may be humbled, that when the Judgment is
come it may find us not proud but humble, There is an humbling in man as Ahab
humbled himself, and went softly, it prevented Judgment: but I fear that you
are rocked in the strength of pride, and you and your pride will fall together,
how many of you have made a covenant with death, and you will not be released
that evil: it is a proud heart, that is the seal of deaths covenant, be
watchful that a proud heart be not found in thee, then thou art fast tied in
deaths covenant.

Revelations the 6 and the 5 verse, And the seal being opened, I saw a black
horse, and he that sat on him had balances in his hand.

Beloved I am carried thus from one text to another, but here I stand, for it
is my center place or place center; that is, for to weigh the substance out of
and from the seeming substances, for know my work is to weigh both the thing
and the name, and to give honor unto the thing, and to curse the name, for it
is one with the figure my brother Jesus caused, would you know who or what
Jesus cursed? It was the flourishing Figtree, that was a show of a goodly good
Tree afar of, to dark eyes; but to come close to the figtree, and you my
brethren, then the figtree are ye, and ye are the figtree, for ye are full of
beauteous leaves of expression, but come to the fruit ye are Devils in action.
Now you count the expression strange, but it it is true, therefore to be owned
by you, if you will do the Devils work be not ashamed of your Masters name: now
here you will use my own method, and say that the name is not the thing, and
that the Masters name is not the servants thing.

Now comes the plain definition; thus, God is light, that light is love, now
man in love he is in that light, and that light is Christ, and Christ is God;
now is not this a clear apparent truth? Now as God is light, the Devil he is
but darkness to that light; now in darkness is hatred, and hatred is the Devil,
and hate being in man predominate he is Satan or Apollyon; but these words will
not carry the intention of our English word Devil, if we would but let that
word stand in name, but we will have it thing, and so we are one with that
Apollyon or Abaddon, which you say is the English Devil, but the intendant
out-runs the name quite out, so brethren God and man make a declared truth,
Devil and man make a declared Lie: Now what is that Devil and man for? why it
is to set forth the glory in created appearances, though the Devil was never
created nor made, it is we that make him a creation, and judge ye how great
creators we worms and dust are, things are greater in esteem then many times in
truth they are.

But I pass now, let me tell you, the balance is come to weigh this Nation, and
Mean Tekel is found upon its basis, or in hebrew Orbus kabus all ah. The
English is, Thou art not weight in the highest balance, or in the center
weight, thy people are a vain people trusting in the name, but the knowledge
in the thing is not in them.

Bealah arki peal ardi neset doni. The English is this, Thou art high in name,
but in me says the Lord thou art not found, for then love was the connexing
thy joints or members one to another; but thou art Quas in tiby allah pealah
anvi pean ardi dele mem. The English is this, Thou art for thy self in every
man, and self is exalted and Charity cast forth, or is made a vagrant amongst
us, to our shame is this motto inserted upon us by the Spirit of God: this
saying is strange to you, but it is true, and you will feel it true if you
belong to light, as I have found; so shall many more to their sharp sorrow but
their after joy.

O Beloved, I mourn for you, I strive with God for you, beseeching him to
inlighten you in all spiritual knowledge and understanding; blessed be the
Lord, I can say in a safe conscience as ever Paul could say, I have not coveted
after no man's gold or silver, nor desired any thing of any man or of any of
you, but only that life part that my soul thirsts after to see it gathered
into union in the celestial center.

O beloved, my soul is ravished with the deliteful delight, for when I am poor,
then am I rich in him who is my riches, that is Christ the mercy and strength
of God.

Brethren ye and to ye only I speak, that are passed the Apostolical teaching,
and are come into the Evangelical living. Allah all ah allah hoei selma
amaseret one peon alpha haggarim semam in re ex al olo on. The English of this
hebrew state is to what the English will bear.

O the light, the light, the light of peace is in the Evanglical thing that is
in God, when we have passed these beggarly rudiments Apostolical which are dead
names, pointing us to the Evangelical living in God, for if Christ be come you
are no longer in the dead name, but you are risen in the life of Christ into
his body, that is Evangelical. Mind the Apostles words, We are dead, and our
life his hid with Christ in God.

Behold here is the greatest mystery in the world, men living speaking the
height of the Gospel as you call it, and these men are dead, the same condition
is every true newborn man and woman in; for our life is not in our selves,
nor in this body of dung, nor in things below, that is to say, these beggarly
rudiments or elements motional, but our life is in God the Evangelical caller
and gatherer of his people into himself, and for this cause God did send forth
his Spirit in men, to converse with that self same Spirit in men, that their
conversing by his power are turn(...) to converting; unto this end God made
some Apostles, some Pastors, some Ministers and teachers, some Evangelists, and
all was but the union of one Spirit in its efficacious varieties.

So now Brethren, the same work is God a bringing about now in England, and all
Lands, and it lies included in these Prophetic words of expression. I the Lord
will gather her, I have cast (...) off, and she shall rebefore me as in the
days of old.

Brethren this is the gathering the Church of the Jews, for whom I The
auraujohn and the rest of my brethren the Lord has made fishers, for to gather
the people into a figurative figure of the Evangelical building; therefore the
foundation of the Jews Church Evangeli(...) is laid here even in this house,
and the Lord my God add unto it daily thy increase of blessing: the place may
remove, but the people cannot be shaken, for God the Lord he is the Evangelical
center, so this meeting has been the gathering the Church of the Jews, and
the Jews Church is the true name. So you that are ashamed of the name of the
Jews, see me nor hear me no more Sebat allah am R.

Theauranjohn Taniour high Priest.
Epistle 15. Wrote at Eltham.
DEarly beloved Brethren, God is love, and know, that he that acts in love,
does act in God: Now I beseech you mind, how can it properly be said for man to
act in God? Thus it is, (if radically understood) the Spirit of God in man,
being predominate, that Spirit is in union with God in Essence, though it be
for a time a derivacie. Now the Querie would be resolved thus, God is love, how
is God love? Thus God is love, His fullness is a filling every want and
necessity in the whole Creation; that is, by distilling acts of courpassionate
refreshments to every distinct of his, or of himself.

Now let me speak, thus man is the Image of God in the earthly form, not of the
earthly form; the distinction lies in these two words, IN and OF.

Now beloved, to come close unto the matter of the main concernment, it is
this, that if you are not in God, then you are in the Devil: Now know that
there is but light and darkness in the whole Creation; now God he is the light,
the death (or darkness) is the called Devil: Now what is God? I answer, God is
light, which is love: now what is the Devil? he is death and darkness, which is
deceit.

Now see the distincts in these two, light and darkness, God and the Devil: now
if God or Christ be risen in us, to such a hight or perfect measure of
manifestation of himself, that by his light, we are subjected to act only from
that root, ( which root is love distribute) then are we said to be properly in
God, because the derivative Essence raigns in flesh, as the regencie essence
raigns in the reigning all, then the figure in the earthly form, it is as true
in truth, as the regency essence is in the reigning all; that is, the true
pattern figurative figure in sanctum sanctorum, that is to say, the holy
holiest; that word Est is the binding Maxzim in the reconciling any, or all
Maxzims; but to love, which is God acting in mercy toward, nay in (...) his
Creation: thus the influences of his mercifulness fills all things in Heaven
and earth, but it is conveyed through many motional motions of Earth, Air,
Water, and Fire, Elements in the Konaxci part, or the binding part outwardly in
the celestial predominacies in the fiery Regions in the Helmetta, that is, in
the burning light, in the inshuting conclave of Sol, in his Mida in re, that
is, in the middle of the thing, that is the truest and perspicuousest
demonstrative of God, figuratively of the whole all altogether created of God;
that is to say thus much, The Sun is the truest truth of figures, in all Gods
appearances in the whole created Terrestrial, for the Sun is secundus vita vive
in orbis, that is, the second living life in the created world; yet he is Death
to the living life, which is denoted Oli-al; them two Hebrew directers Oli Al,
it is the height of expression that is letten down unto the Sons of men; nay,
or the denomination unto Angels; for it is thus much in the import, that is to
say, The light Al, or the Al light, from whence all things descend in strength;
they invalid, are weak, by reason of the combustable cumbersome shrine they are
invailed in, or shut in; which is weakness to the strength in the inside
spirit, that is the life, for life cannot be touched with weakness, but
weakness it is made sensible by that life, for the weakness of it self so
called; though indeed and in truth if it were duly weighed, and radically
understood, there is but one in all appearances, be what it will; for that that
is not, nor has not a center, cannot be properly nor unproperly said to be any
thing.

Now let me speak, thus God, the Sun, and Man, they make one Trine, that Trine
receding, is union in the Regencie Essence, though two derivatives and both
essencied one in another: as the life of man has an essence in the Sun, (I
speak Terrestrial) so the Sun being a celestial body, it is essencied in God;
for from him all these appearances came, and their recedings are from him, and
their renewings are to him in strength.

Now to prove the terrestrial man for to be in Trine with the Sun, and with God
the Father of all things, it is thus.

God he is the All-Creator of the All-Things: The Sun is the second light from
God in strength, influentive into the terrestrial creation, through the
celestial motional motions; which motions being moved with the union motion,
they cause the produced product for to appear in the terrestrial world. Now the
word terrestrial, is not yet fully understood, but the word does import thus
much, Terra, that is the earth or earthly, that is Forma, a form or
semblances; for though terra be the earth, yet it is the the appearances in all
earthlinesses; so much for the word terra, sub intelligiter Forma in Terras.

Now I come to the binding, or middle connection, that is, Esterial; that is,
the binding inclue of that word Est, that is to say, is.

Now know, that est is the binding of all maxzims, into one Radical Center; so
that here you see, that ter is bound in est, so that it is to say, the earth is.

Now if you truly understood what this est is, it is the all of all things; for
God is, and that very is is God, who is all things in appearances, whereof the
earth is one ponderous composure of IS: so much for Ter Est.

Now I come unto Terial, and terial that word does import the earth tied to the
Creator of all: thus God that produced the earth himself, he is the Mida or
middle of connexed things; that word Cied, it is the same with IS, if radically
understood.

Now combine the word together, then in the property of true speech, the
meaning of the word Terresterial is this, the world, or the earth made by God,
tied in that God, who is the middle of that earth, that is the center; and that
center or middle, is God in every thing, and himself nothing, and yet he the
all of earth and all things. One word more terrestrial, thus, God is the earths
life, for of him it had a being, and he is the restorer of it, and it is
restored by the essence TIE, that it lies tied to in God; and by that tie or
essence, by his influence it is restored and renewed daily.

Now Scholars, here is one glimps of my knowledge, though I am unlearned: But
blessed be his name, that after my strong affliction, he has poured a sea of
knowledge into my soul, that is thus much, Oli El, the light of God in the soul
of man; from which light, does flow forth these expressions that you hear me
declare.

O avallo seon honi sepharim ammi sele oli a saphet el doni or et al rege lexci
am; the English to what it will bear in this state, for the English does darken
this illustrious state or citation from this Hebrew maxzims: now I open it. O
the highest knowing knowledge, is when the understanding in man is dead to the
thing he declares; for then the thing is it self declaring it self from the
Root, and as the Root is, so will the declaratives be.

Now brethren, judge you my declaratives, for they speak themselves in me, and
I in them, and so both in union: I am dead to the word, the word is life to me;
I declare the sound to you, thus is the spirit operative in the sons of men;
not all men, but where the spirit will, and when it pleases: The wind
blows, and thou hear the sound thereof, but thou know not whence it
comes, nor whither it goes, so Beloved, is every one that is born of the
spirit.

Hos in sela roma el al in re sebat oli odereous in se: O the wisdom of God is
hid from man, in the secret thing which is the life of all things in
appearances, that life is the spirit of God moving in his created frame or
fabric; O Oli El Vau, O thou light, the declarer of thy self in all thy things
made: Selos in re sapuit ad amalam sab or on seben sait pele mem. The English
is, the height of wisdom, is in knowing God in the things created or made, for
he cannot be known as he is in himself.

Pele Ezecheus in se sephi el oli in re sabat al. O the greatness of things
cannot demonstrate the heavenly light, but that light does demonstrate it self
as it self pleases, that is the english of the forecited state or citation in
the tongues.

Now Beloved, I have shown you one glimps of Gods goodness and Gods greatness,
in his distributive, destributive in distillation into and upon the creation,
in appearances, by his illustrious influences in strength, conveyed from
himself through the celestial Attire, that is, the high moving motions in the
sphere celestial, and so is conveyed by the Sun through the Moon into every
receptacle appearance in the terrestrial world, or form, or chaos, I prove it
so: for what is not union, is a chaos; I speak it as relative to man, but it is
union unto God; his varieties in themselves, is his delightful union in himself.

Now beloved, I come to show you how man is essencied in God, and then how he
is like God in the earthly figure; and if he be renewed to his figure, that is
the life of Christ risen up in man in predominacie, where man is wholly
subjected to the will of God, that is, man to be wholly passive, and the spirit
of God to be the sole and whole rule in the spirit of man; then the figure is
as true in the derivative essence, as it is in the reigning all.

Now beloved, I come to show you man, that is, man drawn up by the Spirit of
God, into union with God; as says one Text, Whereby we have an union with the
Father, through one spirit: that Text varieth little from the Original in its
import, for it is thus; whereby our union is made one through Christ. O how I
could joy if there were no more dismeeter in the whole conclave of the old and
new Testament! then had I not had this trouble that my manhood lies under; the
zeal I have against the aspersion that by weak and vain man is laid upon God,
only by the ignorance in man, and his false conception that man has upon the
sacred Majesty of God, that is, in not full understanding the denotation that
God has letten down, to put motional man to a stand or stof.

But now I come to denote how man is said to be like God, that is, the earthly
pattern of the Divine thing, in sanctum sanctorum: now man being made obedience,
he acts in love, from that Root obedience; which word in the Hebraick term, is
Rokas, in the Greek tongue it is Kias, in the Latin word it is Cristus, but
you would have it Cartas, but the word is neither Cristus nor Caritas, but the
true nominative case is Cristos: in the true Latin the import is binding, that
is the full import of the word Rokas, which is the essence from whence all
these are derived from: for the Hebrew is Pimus maxzi, that is, the first great
strength, that is the significant of Rokas. Now know, that obedience is the all
required of man, and obedience is the all gift from man to God, that is the
Rokas or binding strength of man to God, by Gods own gift, that is thus much in
import: In one Text, I (says God) will give them an obedient heart, and they
shall fear me.

Now this obedience is Gods free gift into man, that is to say, in truth of
words, it is Christ in the soul: now in man is this obedience set, which is
Christ, or the Spirit, or the holy Ghost, or the new Birth, or the Angel of God
in man.

Now know that at the descent of the Spirit into the Soul of man, it causes in
the Soul an erection of the heavenly figure, then does the Pattern temporal act
in true truth in the Pattern, as it is in the Seater: Though it be but a
derivative, yet it is in sanctification holding coherent with the Essence it
was derived from.

Now I may truly speak if truly understood, it is thus much, God in man and
man in God, that is by the derivative Essence essencied in Flesh, and yet not
flesh, but the subjecter of flesh to it self, and so both unto God; so the
marriage is completed in the union of one Spirit being thus, God in himself
and in man by his Spirit, this is the true pattern of the divine and sacred
Trinity operative in the earthly form, which is the figurative pattern of the
trine celestial, yet all in one, which in property of is speech Jehovah or Al,
for All if duly considered in this new dispensation, but it is but the old truth
reduced to his Originalest center in the true declarative, which by reason of
man's false conception of God, and his declarative; so that the truth in the
litteral expression is buried, and one of Gods declaratives mixed with man's
invention, by man's conceiving it to be so, and he not knowing the true import
of the various maxzims in their combinements in themselves and with others in
their addititional coherencies and adjuncts.

Now in this Sat if truly understood, the learned Rabbis may perceive that
by my pointing at these Maxzims, being I am unlearned in what I declare, it
might be a satisfactory satisfaction for them either to affirm against me, or
else to acknowledge it to be true what I say, least I do conclude that their
silence does give consent, through their ignorance in the citation I declare.

Now I have drawn up man, and stated him in his called center or earthly form,
to what can be required or can be attained to, in which man may in property of
speech be said to be like God, by the Spirit of God predominating in man to
man's subjectancie in the whole to the Spirit, thus that man bears this Motto
from God his own writing, be thou like me in my humane creation, this is the
new creation that God makes, or the called new birth in every one that is
brought forth unto God.

Now I come to the declaratives, that this new birth, if truly born and
brought forth unto God, OF you think would have been the true word, as to have
said to be born of God, that very OF makes all the state false; for in a true
state there must not be a false letter, so in a true sentence there must not be
a false word; and know that in the Translation in the Major OF is read in the
divine and sacred expressing or writing.

Now mind, I will not, neither can I give it the name Scripture, if it were
but for that one word OF, and that word but named once in the whole book: for
mind, we have and do read OF an Affirmative, and it is in our language or
speech a Negative.

Now I come not to dwell in the name or shadow, but to look into the center: I
mind not what is said, but the true truth is, in truth the thing is: and now
blessed be the Lord my God, he does increase my understanding.

Now mind, I come to show, not what is written, but what in your hearts you
hold a zeal for, the same, I ever did since God gave me light, and it is this,
the Scriptures and the Gospel; for the defense of them (through the strength of
my God) I would lay down my life for them: Now I will show you that in term,
that I may say, that I and you at this day are so zealous for, that is the
Scriptures so called: now the God that you ignorantly worship, him show I unto
you; and I beseech you take special notice, even you that are but notional; and
you likewise My brethren that are zealous, but not according to knowledge, as
through Gods goodness I shall make appear.

Non est nome sanktus in re sabat akzi a malet oli in rem medad alphi sele
arbat al. The English from this Hebrew state, and yet both Latin, Greek, and
Arraback, and Caldee, all these tongues, to make a true harmonious assent in
consent: But lest you learned Rabbis should contend with me that am unlearned,
only English I have, and that no man worse; but I will give you one hint of
knowledge and learning denoted unto me by the Spirit, and what spirit, let the
declaratives of it self speak, and the obedience and actions of my life speak
form, and so all judge; Look you be clean within, and then you judge righteous
judgment.

But now Scholars know, that the major includes the minor; so the major in that
state is Hebrew, wrote in Kof, that is the second strength in writing. Now let
me tell you Scholars, I will but state three Hebrew words, and I will make
their majority carry the state of five lines of Latin stated, but they will
not carry so much in no tongue; for know, the nearer you come to the center,
which is the Hebrew, the more you disearet the weak connexions dependancies:
For know, that the Arraback and Caldee and Syrriack and the Muscovite, in their
original center are as it were in the edge or verdge of the Hebrew.

Now you will say, that the majority of them languages is Hebrew; it is
granted, but write you in any one of them languages, it is not Hebrew: So
though the Hebrew her Regencie be over the languages, yet her predominacy may
be eclipsed by another tongue, when she is but an adjunct in the state or
sitation; for know, that in all tongues and languages there is an union consent
and assent, in a composed composure in their coherents; and the truth flows
from the head to the foot, and ascends from the foot to the head, as the rivers
from the sea to the sea, their centred center: But this knowledge in truth of
knowledge, by man is not to be understood, and none but the Spirit of God,
whose conveyances is in and through all tongues, into one language, that is the
scriptum est.

Now brethren, your long patience is your expectation of what is Scripture; I
beseech you mind, I cannot come when I would to open the state or citation out
of the tongues, though my desire is as great as yours can be; ye though I am
weary, I cannot leave writing the mystery that lies in the Hebrew state last
cited; when I thought to have opened it, when I named the english, I could
never come at it till now: non est nome sanklus in re. Now I beseech you mind
the english of the forecited state, The name is not the holy thing; now I read
negatively, The holy thing denies any name in truth of thing; but is, and is,
in truth has no name: Now mind, since the world was, there was not a greater
denotation by the spirit of the truth in God than this.

Now there is another citation in the same Hebrew state, which is this, The
true Scripture it is the divine life of God in the soul, and it is written by,
and with Digitus Dei, the spirit finger, or finger spirit by God. O that
destroying of, it wounds and destroys sense; for according to our Translation,
digitus Dei, the finger of God, that word of undoes the state.

Now I shall show you how your zeal is evacuated, and how you come misled
concerning that you call the Bible and new Testament, calling them the
Scriptures, or the word of God; the Word was made flesh, and in that flesh
there is a Table and a Book, that even that God does write upon, that is
Holmess to himself. But to come to speak to you brethren, even ye blind
persecuting Zealots, truly I love you all, and pity all, for ye cannot do
right, till light be come. Brethren, I demand of you from whence zeal proceeds,
if it be true zeal in light, it proceeds from that scriptum est, that is from
that inward and inmost Vail unvailed, though you know it not. Now know but
this, that nothing without can give life to your zeal within, but it lives in
it self; and from that small appearance within to the notional man, he, as he
is, sees outwardly, and he catches at the glimmerings within, and through that
false conception, he states all without upon man's writing, or the Signam manum,
or sign of a man's hand, of man's spellings, so man not drawn into obedience to
the spirit of God within, he builds upon outward words, and names in books
without.

Now I beseech you mind, did any of you receive remission of sins by man's
preaching? you, and I my self did think so, thus, such a man is a man of God,
and he is able to turn any man; now how was that? because Gods power within
thee did begin to unfetter thee, for it was Gods spirit did begin inwardly to
illustrate, and thy resurrection and walking was from that light within, and
thou accounted that it was done by man, or hearing or reading; here thou wast a
greater Idolater then before: now here thou sacrificest to man, and in this act
thou make and accountest him thy God converter: or the Bible or Testament
were thy Idols, when indeed and in truth it was only the alone descent of Gods
mercy, conveyed by his spiritual light arising in thy soul, that caused thy
awaking from the corruptible estate of death and darkness. Now mind, I desire
to know of you my brethren, whether the knowledge does lie outwardly in objects
declared, or in the inmost or inward understanding in the spiritus, that is, in
the spirit, in that word th; in that import it is a Greek word, and it does
denote God his Spirit, that is th spirit; and you read it the spirit, not
understanding the import of the word: Now if that be granted, that cannot be
denied, if duly considered that the understanding lives, and lies within the
inmost spirit, why does not man act always right and in truth of zeal? I
answer, though it be Gods Spirit in the heart, and the heart be sanctified, yet
a body of corruption does remain; for know, that the inward righteousness
cannot be demonstrated outwardly, for it is another creation in man, and not of
man, nor by man, but by God himself; and this creation that is spiritual,
cannot be demonstrated temporal.

Now here grows the mistake, for the outward motional man, that is, man's spirit
that is quick and motional, and so swift, that it is a subject of deceit, and
subject to deceit, only by the a yrie composure it was abstracted from, this
is man's spirit natural.

Now to show the maxzim, it is this: The spirit in the flue or full motion
moves in man, this is Gods spirit in man, and it does (through the operative
power) inlighten the dark spirit in man, that is, man's natural spirit; but till
that the spirit of God has wholly subjected the natural spirit of man unto its
own light, there is a greater declarative of false light than before; for when
we were dead to life in the spirit of darkness, then we were one with the
world, but being making alive in, or by the spirit of God, there is a great
strong work declared, both of truth, and the lie, by a strong motion acting in
strength, that is, when the strong man sin is standing for the conquest, and
the opposition never ceases, till the spirit of God has gotten the
prevalencie. Now in this conquest by the spirit of God, this natural spirit
speaks great names of things, till that the spirit of God come like a sith
and cuts down the natural spirit even by the roots, and causes an erection of
righteousness, then where sin did abound, there grace shall abound much more,
unto the praise or glory of God, which is denoted in this Hebrew word Gehest,
the ancient Greek word is Siah, the Latin word is Cristus, but I say Cristos:
the Hebrew word does denominate thus much, A root, a strength unresistable, a
Form, a Tower, and a Cave, and a Circle. The Greek word Siah, does import to
know or overcome, or to remain, or sent; the Latin word Cristos does import an
anointing, a knowing, and it will bear no more. Now know that Massah is a
Savior, and a Deliverer, now all these is but the Gospel in the intendant.

Now let me speak to you, all that can be spoken of the Gospel, that glorious
word, and that magnificent transcendantest Gospel, which word and Gospel are
two words, but one entire beauty of excellency: that is not your called word of
God, neither Bible, nor the new Testament, nor that you call Gospel and the
word of God; but every life appearance is Gods word, and not dead letters or
names set together, now that you are zealous for: I my self have been as great
a Zelot for them dead names, called the written word of God.

Now I will show you that, which in truth none in majoritie can deny, that is
this; Gods word is truth, and endures for ever, you cannot deny this: The Word
was made flesh, that Text is false, for the word in truth, is in that Text the
Word dwelt in flesh; now mind, the soul of man enlightened by Gods spirit is the
Gospel, the Word, and the Truth, and the living life of God in man; for then
God is said to dwell with men, that is, when God rules by his Spirit in the
soul, that is the Gospel, and the holy word of God in the soul, and not the
dead letters and names that we by reading do so idolize; and I do affirm, that
by man it is made the great Idol in Europe by this false conception; for man
thinks that he renews from that outward word, and knows not that it is the gift
of God illuminating within. One word more to conclude this point: Do you think
that motion in the soul arises from without, or from the life principle within?
judge ye, whether your understanding be not within your selves every one of
you, the truth of that true knowledge is the gift of God into thy soul, and
this is thy Idolatry, that thou sacrificest the gift given to be learned in and
from the dead name of man's false composure of names together, so thou make
the living God, and his richest and greatest gift to be conferred to thee
through that, and from, and by that dead name, written word, or name Gospel.
Now word and Gospel it is the living life of God in you by the Spirit of
himself, that is the Gospel, judge ye all whether it be so or not; for as I
have declared, it is not the name that can confer the thing, but the thing it
self does confer it self without the name, and then man speaks the name from
the thing done; that is in short thus much, God has given the Gospel, or the
Spirit, or the Word, or life into the soul of man, then it is Scriptum est, it
is then inwritten digitus Dei with the finger of God, O! that of undoes all,
but I intend it another thing then is there stated.

Now know, that the word of God cannot be written by none but himself, here
again you are all deceived, that thinks that it can be wrote by man; for know,
that the word of God abides for ever, it is the living life of God in the
soul, and that is wrote by, and with the finger by God himself; for the naming
the words that flows from the ingraftment, that is, the light of God in the
soul. Now write this upon paper, it is but a lie, compare it with the truth in
the heart, for that Scriptum est in cor, that is, the writing in the heart by
the finger of God, it remains for ever: Wherefore does it remain for ever? Enim
est digitus Dei, for it is written by the finger of God; and that writing is,
and is is that writing, and cannot be defaced, and that writing causes the soul
to move from death to life, and at last raises the soul into the celestial
center.

O amalam orbeus in re fasisti nebat alli El. The English is, O the evil in the
eye of the soul, by the writing of God upon that soul is cast forth. Now I
entreat you mind all people, this is all the contest betwixt me and the enemies
of light, that is this; I say (by the grace given me) that the name is not the
thing: now you say that the name is the thing, by consequence, but you
understand not what you say. You say that the Bible and the new Testament is
the word of God, which I deny; and I affirm it is but the name of that word,
and falsely spelled and set together, and man's invention added in many places
for ends of concernment.

Now I say, the word of God can no man write, but God himself, and to ascribe
that to the writing, that belongs to God himself, you thereby rob God of his
glory, and are grievous Idolaters. Now let me speak, I say there is such a
Justness in God, and such a justness in his declarative written, that if one
word, or letter, or tittle in the whole books be not true in word, and in
truth, in time, and truth in place, it ought to be rejected and refused: for
know, there is no perfection but in God, and the spellings or denotation of God
must be perfect to a mite, nay to it self, otherwise we make God a Liar and an
imperfect thing, which far be it from us to think so.

Now to come to close and state a Quere, and it is to the great learned ones in
all Tongues and Languages, if they dare affirm that the Translation of the
Bible and the new Testament is truth in all its coherencies and dependancies,
and in adjuncts and conjuncts, and in affinacy and definacy, and in reluctance,
to a tittle, to a mite, to it self, let them be put to their Oaths in this, and
when they have done, it is not the word of God, but the writing by man, which
is but Signam manum, the sign of the hand, naming the outward sound from the
inward significant.

Now I Theauraujohn say, and affirm, that the writing in English cannot hold
the truth in Translation from the Hebrew, by reason of the weakness in it, and
the excluding certain letters, I know of y, and f, and q, and w, and other
dubious consonants in consequence that are wholly destructive to the true truth
in the signification; therefore blessed be the Lord our God that has sent his
Light to reduce you from your Idolizing the shadow or name, and by his
resurrection in you, shows you the truth and the true thing, which is Christ
the Lord, the beauty of excellency, which is Massah, or al, or Jehovah. Salem
ad te Israel arbat.

Wrote by me Theauraujohn Taniour the Jew, Allah al sabbah Skribahjael.
High Priest.

Epistle 16. Wrote at Eltham.
O Beloved, the word is life, and life is light, and light is God, the glorious
Creator of the whole all altogether. Now brethren, my God will furnish me with
Raddical expressions, whereby to let down the true meaning in the intendant,
and at this time, and in this Epistle is diverse matters in name let down, the
first is this; Primus maxzi, that is the Oli al in man, that is, Gods Image in
man, that is the soul in man, and that soul tied with the essence Ti into God,
or in God, both the expressions will hold; so as the soul is the light of God
set in man, so is the light of man wholly set in God.

Now to illustrate thus the Ti of God in the soul of man, it is an onenes,
though a derivative with himself in Essencie, and shall be at the unmodeling of
every figure, it shall be taken into regencie; I shall through the light
conveyed unto me, unvail this great contested for amongst us concerning the
soul, Id est de faciendam a Deo vors vita alvi pele athrat. The English of the
first state, (speaking of the soul) it is to say, the making of God; now mind,
there is the first state. The second is this, the strong life is Gods making
himself, mind, I am the life of the world, or I am the strong life in the
world, mind, this is Gods Omnipotency.

But to come to define these words, that is two words, and you hold them to be
one word in the weight of the import: The word in Hebrew in the Orthodox, it is
Veau, or Vea, signifying Gods making from himself, and yet tied in himself;
thus Ve is in all states a severation, but Ve being barred in by Alif,
(Scholars this citation is for you, though it be from an unlearned man) thus
Alif includes the separating Ve or Vau; for in the separating connection, Alif
does bind the connexied into his majority; thus Ve it severs, Alif is the first
declarative of Gods strength. And know, the first is the tying strength, that
produces all things in appearances, and the strength in them appearances is
truth, and by truth God does keep the Creations tied in himself, for in him we
live, move, and have our beings, this is a true written sentence, but not Gods
word.

Now I come to show you that great mystery that few or none of you understand,
that is, these two distinct words, whereby you are wrapped in ignorance, that
is this; says the insert in the Bible, God made man in his own image or
likeness. The both comparisons I deny, in their affirmative state, and it is
said, God created them both male and female. Now brethren, what odds do you
judge there is in these two words? nay I may say them one word; they are two
distincts in God himself, and we in our weak English make a connection, nay an
oneness and an entireness of these two words, God made man in his own image, or
God Created man in his own Image.

Now I beseech you brethren mind, God made, the proper word in the ancientest
Copy, the word is Akkivene, that does import, Gods making ^trength, and
strength is making. Now to understand this making in God first, and in man
next, being the product by Akkivene, that is man was produced by Gods strength:
First to quere in God, it is vanity so to do, but take this short state, God
is, and that is strength.

But to come to the conjunct of this strength, whereof man is one, nay, the
gloriousest figure in Gods earthly field, made in the image of God. Now do all
people in the world know that man was not made? For know, that that you account
the body and the soul, are the body; and man he is denoted by the Spirit, that
is, the strength of God in man, that is the man, and the Scriptures hold forth
the same, for there is a natural man, and there is a Spiritual man: now you
understand it to be a man in grace or favor with God, a man that is sealed by
the Spirit of God, as it is said: but let me tell you, that Oli al does inhabit
in every man and woman, and they inhabit not it, until the natural is subjected
to the spiritual, and then it is properly said, and if in property of speech
understood, that man is subject to man, and so both to God in the union Spirit:
for mind, the man Christ Jesus, the Creator and bringer forth of all things by
his own power.

Now that you account man, it is but the name, Oli al is the man, that is, Gods
light is the man in your little world, for be you not so ignorant, I tell you,
that in every one of you is many Creations, and when the word runs in the
singular, it does hold forth for the most part the man, that is, the soul in
man. Now as God in himself is the souls life absolutely free, so is the soul,
that is Gods man, or Gods strength, that is the bodies life, absolutely free,
and that is no Creation but the spirit, and the body of man that is Created,
but the soul is made, but the body and spirit they are Created.

Now here is the highest flight that ever was viewed, and it is this, I pray
you do not judge the things you understand not: O apparatau salma ar ii el
selma onosiel ero or moaus salma abbadet pele, that Greek compound Pele is to
bring the words in truth of writing into our Horizon, the English of that
Hebraick state is this, O the appearances in peace is into the inman, which the
out-man cannot understand, because he is an earthly Creation. Now brethren,
this you cannot deny, for your own written in(...) says the same, that The
natural man perceives not the things of God. Alds, this you refer to others,
and count them natural men that have not so great a measure of knowledge as you
have: Alas, still you are, and must bear this natural man, and the spiritual
man in degrees, yet in all, and shall be in all, until the unmodeling every
created appearance or figure. Now I hope this cannot be blasphemy, for I
acknowledge God the Father, the strength of God the Son, and the product the
holy Ghost. And for man, ^acknowledge the soul, the spirit, and the body, and a
resurrection of this all, and of these all every one: you understand not which,
if any of you do but declare it in writing, and I shall make it appear that you
do not understand the resurrection.

Now judge not, lest you be judged, now you say, I judge you: no, it is not I,
but it is one greater then I whom ye know not, even he judges you, I judge you
not, for I understand not what I write, therefore I judge no man: but know,
betwixt Gods making and his Creating, it is no more but light and darkness, for
Gods making is Gods light, Gods Creating is the enclosing that light made, into
Created appearances, so the light is Gods making, the creating is composing or
connexing darknesses to create a vail to enshrine the made light into.

Now it is thus, the soul in man is made in God, and the spirit and the body is
the shrine in which the soul is set, that is (as you term it) the Image of God
in man, or oli al, that is, the light of God in man.

Toas alui sepe pene el vadi annexit salui bele peterma al sam abrit pel. The
English of this Greek state is this. The accounted man is but a sleep-house for
the light, or soul, or spirit of God to reside it self in, till the unknitting
the figure or sleep-house, and its reducement to its center, then the light or
spirit Essensi, it is taken into the essence Regencie, and so one again as it
was at the first in one: and in this whole scope, lies in these words, Man
dies, and the spirit returns to God that gave it, and at this point I being
filent, while the strength of my manhood is destroyed: but know, that I shall
begin to dispute, then know, that the dead begins to arise, for you have known
and seen my weakness all along since I have been conversant amongst you, but
now know, I shall reach you all, for my instructor is God the Lord.

Quas habit elpha areme mali-penan ory koas in a sab baalma magit pele terte
esse vakare. The English is this, Because it has not been given me to dispute,
therefore I have outwardly suffered, only to confound my pride in my manhood:
for know, if the tinckture of pride, or self, be not clean purged forth, it
will grow to the dishonor of the giver of his greatest gift, that is, man's
spirit will appropriate unto it self; but afflictions is the salve that cures
this fore, for which blessed be the Lord I have a fullness in them, yet my
comfort is this, I see through them. Quoas sola armatally beneam inre mendah
alui sele mem hose. The English is this, Afflictions alone does confound the
outward man, but by and through them afflictions, pride is consumed, and
perfection is obtained as gift, not upon desert; these afflictions here are our
Royal Robes, in the Evangelical being.

Non hos amalam adma othratia luah sele mem. The English: Not our evil
sufferings can destroy us, but they refine us fit for the Lords service, for
the Lord chastens every son he receives.

So let me speak or sound to you, ye poor dejected ones, that are cast down
under your burdens, I say, not I, but the Lord in me says, rejoice, in that
you are made partakers of Christ's sufferings, for I tell you, it is the earnest
of your future inheritance, for if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with
him, so it is your weakness that heaps more forrow upon your selves, when
indeed, you have the greatest cause to rejoice; but you want eyes to see; for
the which end, afflictions are the eye salve for to inlighten your darkness,
and for that end that you may see, are afflictions sent.

Now I state the Secundus vita vive in homo, that is, the second life living in
man, that is, the spirit in man, that is, man's natural spirit, which is
abstracted created, that that is abstracted is created, but made is one with
the Maker, but not in an abstract his making; for Gods making it is all light,
and his creating is in the weaknesses for to enshrine the light into, for mind,
light was, and it was not made nor created, that light is God himself, and that
light illustrated darknesses, and then behold a creation, that word creation as
it stands, as from God, and all creations are but his one creation.

Now I come to the Secundus vita vive in homo, sed non est vita Evangelies in
re. The English of that Latin state, but it is not the life of Angels in the
thing. Tuos asby bele a vert pele nenos in mexhrati absit pele avertet pele
necal. The English of this ancient Greek state is this, think it not strange
that I cite it ancient Greek; mind, there is Grekus Arraback, there is Grekus
Muscovitus, there is Grekus orcadus Orientalis sub luna in 54 degrees Saturn
transcendant, that Tropic is undiscovered to this side world, the four Greek
tongues is in the East Armenia.

Now I open the state forecited, and the reason I shall demonstrate of the
four Greek tongues, the English is this, Though there be a being, it is not the
Evangelical being, till the living spirit which the Evangelical Maker has made
it one with it self, then the spirit man is obedient to the light conveyed into
the soul, so an oneness thereby conjunct in light, and so an union with the
Father.

Now to render the reason, though I am unlearned, nor have any understanding in
what I declare, but I commit my declarative to your juditious judgments to
judge of. The first Greek is true, because the Derivasie was derived from the
Hebrew, in full strength, coherent with its essential essence, and is as true,
though a derivasie, as the essence it was derived from. Secundus derivationem
in re, id est non recte quia abstraksi allah. The English is, The second
derivasie is weak in the thing, because the abstract was but from a derivasie.

Tertia et quator, The third and fourth are the same, and false to the first:
for know, that the difference betwixt the first and the fourth, is as light and
darkness, in the weight of their import. I give you one instance in Engand: How
long has it had denomination in and by that name? Now what was wrote for
English 13 hundred year ago? and what for nine hundred year ago? and what was
wrote six hundred year ago for English? and what was wrote three hundred year
ago, and what two hundred year ago?

Now by this rule, which is not the rule I intend, I will show you what
English; the majority of the tongue includes the Minor: Now in England has the
Caldee tongue been the proper tongue, the Arrabak, the Siriak. Now you think it
strange, but it is true, and this we have now, it is a borrowed abstract out of
many tongues, though that you count it English; but how many Lattinified words,
and Hebrew words is in English? So if the language be denoted from the
Kingdom, so many you may find in one Kingdom; but by the peoples
captivating, is the Language distracted or violated; for the Greek is the
hardest tongue in the world, to be truly defined, by reason of the conjunct
Dipthongs: but take this as a hint to your consideration, look on our old
English, and compare it with this that now is, and judge ye the difference.

But now brethren, to come to the matter of more concernment, and it is this,
Christ seen of Angels, believed on, received up to glory; this is Christ our
head, our elder Brother, our Son, our Savior; and he that has created us for
this purpose is God, that has also given us the earnest of his Spirit, through
the which earnest we are bold to go out of the body; why are we bold to go out
of the body? Because we are out of our selves, and in obedience, which is light
or Christ in the soul, and in that strength there is no danger: Christ is our
Conqueror, Lust is subdued, the Paradise is prepared, we are invited, and the
Bridegroom is coming to take his poor Bride, in her self poor, but rich in him,
and her earnest is her conductor to her heavenly center; then men is man, and
man is Christ, and Christ is God the Father.

Now I come to explicate them words, and search their center thus, Christ seen
of Angels, men cannot see Christ, that is, weakness cannot view strength, if it
could, then the creation could view God: now God says, No man can see my face
and live; but the Angels see Christ, now what is an Angel must be enquired
into: now if you know not an Angel, you never saw Christ, for Christ is seen
with no other eye but the Angels eye, Adot pole ethrai avel sele saphat allphe
sele mem. The English is, Christ the Lord is seen with no eye but his own eye,
which eye is the Host in heaven. Now how can men see Christ? not until he
leave the number men, and come to be man, that is Christ in union, then in
Christ's own strength he sees Christ, as to say, man sees Christ with Christ's
own eye or sight. Now what is Christ's eye? Why it is Gods gift, what is Gods
gift? it is obedience, what is obedience? it is light, what is light? it is
love, what is love? why it is God, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God.
Beloved brethren, deceive not your selves, for without love you see not, nor
never shall see God; for it is Gods only gift letten down to draw us to
himself, I will draw them in cords of love unto me, says the Lord our God.

This was transcribed in the Prison at the King's Bench. Theauraujohn
High Priest.

Epistle 17. Wrote at Eltham.
BEloved brethren, God is love, and he that acts in love, acts in God, for
then the spirit has taken that man or woman into it self; and so an oneness in
love betwixt man and the spirit, and by the Spirit we are made one with the
Father in love; for here is a decipheration of love, Why love it is Evangelical
sementing or kniting heaven and earthly together into one composed union. Why
love is but one, love is all, and love ties all, and unties all, and then ties
all into it self: love, there is in it no beginning, no end, no middle, no
part, yet it is all parts, and but one middle, which middle is the center in the
whole Creation, which is God the Lord.

O Beloved, did you but know how lovely ye are being in love! Beloved, love
shows the deformity in all that is not in love, but it is not seen but by loves
own eye. O what an oneness is there in your self, being in love! what a oneness
in multiplicities being in love! O beloved brethren, love is the knot that ties
all the brethren members into amity, and amity is the way to unity, and unity
makes variety, yet it is all in love; so that varieties in love makes one unity
in the celestial center.

Brethren, the harm I wish you is, O that ye were out of your selves, and in
love planted, then ye nere in Christ, and Christ is one with the Father. O
beloved, I am sick of love, that paineth me, the fullness of my desire is, to
distribute love amongst ye, that thereby the members might be gathered, and
then the body composed of love, O the lovely body! When the members are all
made of love.

Truly my brethren, this beauteous beautified body, are every one of ye, if
Christ be in you, and yet you all but one body, whereof Christ is the Head in
the heavenly Jerusalem, or the celestial center; the first Epistle of John,
Chap. 4. v. 16. these words, We have known and believed the love that God has
in us. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him. Herein is love perfect, that we should have boldness in the day of
judgment.

Brethren, to be out of fear, is to be in love, and what is it that makes man's
life burdensome unto himself? is it not fear? I pray mind, fear God, that is
love God, and then no fear, for that love casts out fear, and erecteth his
stately Throne upon the ruinated fear, then peace in earth as there is in
heaven. Aven arry sele orcas abrit sele mell oe non. The English is, the
fearful man walks in death all his days, so man's life (as we account it) is
man's fearful death dying daily; this is in every man where love is not planted
in the soul.

O beloved, being that love is such an high securing strength, O how ought we
to press after it as after the precious Pearl that the Merchant in the Gospel
sold all to purchase: truly every one of you must be that Merchant, or else
love cannot be obtained, for it lies in this, Forsake all and follow me.

Brethren, in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles are diverse names, for
one intended thing (as in this place the Pearl, the forsaking all, the bringing
all, the bring nothing) all this is but thus much, that a man must be unmanned;
that is, vanity must be cast forth, and our desiraeble mind slain, before we
can be joined into Christ in union.

Brethren, be not ashamed of the greatest glory which is love, it was my
brother John's Motto, Beloved, love ye one another, not in tongue, but in deed
and in truth. For know, love is the stability of truth, love makes us to obey
all in love, love is the due from man to God, and from man to his neighbor:
brethren, here is my Brother John's recorded Motto, we know that we are passed
from death to life, because we love the brethren. Hos in Christos affirmata
alvah penan asaddi elma appadet nesit pego alarama samait pelma The English of
this Arraback state brethren, To love one another it is God-like, but to hate
one another is Abaddon, or Appollyon, or Devil-like.

Brethren, if you were not wilfully blind, you might see what condition your
salvation stands in, for this prescript is a true looking-glass, whereby you
may see a witness to your soul, that you are passed from death to life, or
still your rest is in death. Beloved, to be in love, is to be one with Christ,
and so one with God. Beloved, love is the Key that unlocks the door into the
heavenly Jerusalem, or the Celestial Center.

O amorum in arbinariam in a salma legaget alma amaset haggarim. The English of
this ancient Hebraick state is this, O the love is the strong arch that builded
the foundation is erected, whose top reaches the Paradiacal essence, it is as
to say, love it is the strong arch, that bears all into the celestial
dwelling, the state from the tongue would let it down no lower then the first
sitation, for the Hebrew will not bend to our capasitie, as our English will.

Beloved, I have shown you, every one of you that are in love, I have shown
you, even that is, your center is in the Paradise of God; this is their
inheritance that is passed from death to life; because they love the brethren,
or the love of God dwells in them, that is their beautified beauty. Now I come
to the Major part of this world, whose acts are not in love, but in darkness as
envy, for the one does set off the other, and the beauty of the one is the
clearliest viewed by his contrary.

Non orbis in vita sed mors inveliciei penan arme^ el. The English, The world
is not in light which is love, but is in darkness unto death. Sed viva vite in
amor aluat hosai penecentalis sevatar arbare^ pedero ox on in re festat. The
English is, but the living life of love is God, and when he comes, that that
was unto death, is turned into life, by the power of the most high Creator.
Then darkness which was unto death, the same is made life, through the strength
of Christ our Lord, who is the strength of God.

Now Brethren, as love rises to heaven, so hatred carries down to night or
darkness, or hell. Brethren, I pray wrest not my words to your own hurt; let
them stand, though you understand them not, I do, and the places name.

Now do not you out of my name coin to your self a disturbing thing Abaddon or
Apollyon, in penan acy logos nexce el pele neat arby, The English is this, that
the deceiver, or Satan does dwell in night or dark men, whereby he does enslave
them to his own vasalage; that is, Satan does make men act his will, nay Satan
does act himself then: for man is Satan, if by him acted. Now Christ cast forth
this Devil at his appearing, but not at Christ being named by weak devil man:
for when man is once come to be true Christ, then he casts out the devil, but
not before: so till we be Christ, we are but airy names, nay one with the
Devil; for Christ says to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan. Quando Petrus in
elma amer sit pele negoas in rem. The English is this; when Peter out of pity
or man-love bid Christ forbear to go thither, and by that means escape, one
would have thought that this had been no hurt, but out of a careful pity of
love to Christ: but know you, Christ does not dwell in man's foolish pity, but
in obeying the command commanded of the Father, so that Peter's love, was but
Peter's dark Vail to save Christ's outside, and that was but dung, and was not
Christ, Christ was the inward free spirit in Christ that acts obediently, as,
mind I beseech you, what a willing Savior Christ's outward body was, had not
the power (Christ within) been the obedience Christ, you had had a poor
Savior: for these words I cite, and I leave them to your judgment, Father let
this Cup pass from me. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. What a
great Savior was Christ's flesh? so great a Savior is your Bible and new
Testament gotten by your learning, when you stand in need of them, you shall
find them like Christ's flesh: for let me tell you, they are Christ's figurative
flesh and no more, that is, they are dark pointings to the inside spirit, that
is the Evangelical living; of which thing, I and my Brethren in our produced
product shall make manifest: for behold, a revolution is begun, in which I
Theauraujohn am the first in the first trine, desending in viva voce in
Evangelio jus in re Sabbah, that is, in the living Evangelical voice or
expressing the light in the thing.

O sapuit ille ad aramus orgoas sad ma appulet ardi den^an (...) tripoas in
eligelious in sem. The English is this, O the wisdom that he will pour forth
into the sons of men filling them with light in his divine and sacred goodness.

But now I come to dark natural men; that is, men not in love but in envy, that
is men-devils, as is proved in Peter; as thus, a deceiver is a devil, a liar;
and all dark works are devils works: But now know that thou O man or woman that
art not in love, art in wrath and under the curse: how is that? thou art a doer
of the works of darkness, and death is their center.

Now to thee the Law says do thus, and not in doing thus thou art condemned by
the Law; now to them that are risen with Christ they act in love, and what the
Law commands it is to them under its command, but love is the new Jerusalem that
is above, which is the mother of us all, this was part of Paul's doctrine
Aligorical alusive aluding thing in show to things in substance which was in
the center, Romans the 3 Chapter and the 20 verse. By the works of the Law is
no man justified, what then are we justified by? the faith in Jesus Christ in
believing, which is but love, I pray take the 30 verse of the same chapter, for
it is one God that shall justify Circumcision of faith, and uncircumcision
through faith; how is this? it is thus, the seed of Abraham are believers, and
from believing acts of obedience as circumcised according to command, the
uncircumcised Gentile only through faith beleiving in Jesus the mercy of God,
so both interests is knit in one, what was the salvation of our fore Fathers?
It was they did believe a Messiah should come and obedient to the Law that was
salvation, we believe he is come, obedience from that root is salvation, the
Jews look for a deliverer to come, their obedience to the commands is to them
life, for we must not think that the beloved people though cast off temporally,
are cast off eternally.

Brethren look to your selves and judge not others, Romans the 9 and 25 verse,
Brethren I would not have you ignorant of this secret, that partly obstinacy
is come to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, and this is my
message to the whole world, that God is coming to make good his promise, that
is this, the deliverer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away ungodliness
from Jacob, and so all Israel shall be saved.

O Brethren here lies the Mystery of Mysteries in them words, that is, God will
make all Israel, that is, light in Gods strength, and that shall be saved;
beloved, then there is in Israel in that peremphaical expression, there is
neither Jew nor Gentile, but love, and love is Christ, and Christ i^ God, here
the winding mystery, none but the evangelical eye can view it, and he that sees
not is in darkness, and darkness is in death.

O Beloved that ye were but a true seeing people, then ye would be doing, for
want of sight is the want of duty, and duty is declared by by doing, and having
this evangelicall sight, we may perceive our root we sprang from, unto which
root now I come for sight to view it, and then knowledge from that root to
declare it.

And now I begin with my babe knowledge, Job the 38 chapter and the 7 verse,
When the Stars in their morning praised me together, and all the children of
God rejoiced, this text is false translated, for the text in the true words are
these. Hevi alsiel reme mem asadit errone aksi pele agas sab oli in rem alvat.
The English is, In my moruning the Essence creative did obey in cheerfulness or
in rejoicing.

Brethren before I come to my dialect, which is Cabbalestical, I shall denote
unto you the improper denotations in the text being rendered according to our
capacity in the English tongue, and I will maintain the text falsely
Translated, and prove his coherency in disjunct from the intendant.

Now mind, There was no Stars then, though that word Stars be put in, for
Stars were fixed in the Firmament, and were made in the third days work,
though they be stated in the fourth days work in Genesis, and I am able to
give a clear demonstration to wise men not wedded to their own conceit, that
will be satisfactory for the same, but the Stars denote light and in light is
God praised, and not in darkness; I have given the text this help, the word
morning will hold, for God is the morning of, and to all things; but to find
the Children of God before there was a creation, this is hard.

Now I desire to know what it is that makes the Children of God? Is it not
flesh and spirit, for if not flesh, Sons in light, and then we are what we were
before we were created, before the Essence did descend into flesh; so know that
the morning whereunto this text does point, there was then neither Stars nor
Children, then they could not praise, but their Essence creative as I sited did
rejoice in God, they did what we being in love do at our return out of this
invailment of flesh, that is, sing praise in the selestial center when we have
finished our course, we shall have our crown in the heavenly kingdom where is
joy without sorrow, mirth without mourning, all sorrow gone, all joy and
rejoyceing evermore increasing in us continually singing praises unto God the
Lord who is holy righteous, and just, and good, that has redeemed us unto
himself by his own power through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Quas ammalet seon albi arri madad alvah he ly hose^ al biah ablu henon arkad
emi penat al. The English of this low derivacie yet he brew, because the
majority of this state is wrote in hebrew, the tenth derivacie; thus often has
the Hebrew lost in his definition, the English is this, What or when the high
light was in it self alone? then there was no Stars nor children, but in the
Essence creative all did rejoice together in me or in my being. Brethren ye
differ, and are stounded when I speak two or three words of Latin then Hebrew
or Greek: Know that the spirit composeth all tongues into one truth, but not as
you do compose: and stand you still on your own Basis, till by miracle God has
confirmed his truth in me, and then let yours fall, till then hold: the council
is safe, judge ye, is it not?

Now brethren, you make one word bear one signification most an end, I make one
word take forty according to his combinements in the state: I can make tu
thou, I can make it stand for dark, or light, or hell, or heaven, or sea, or
land, or Angel, or sun, or Devil: So your wisdom in your learned method is
lost, for that end I come forth to confound your lying learning, your
exorcisme, your blasphemy; and I shall put an end to it, and save your brains
from that studied ly, which travel to some has been so great, that thereby
they have confounded themselves.

Po^ O alogoos in a salma perny a sadit pelma madiana a saby al. O the height
in learning is but the witchcraft of the mind, that does deceive the simple man
in the same body, this is a state from that Arrabeck tongue. I pray Scholars
see what an honor the spirit does put upon your great study and pains, what
spirit I leave you to judge: you will say it is an evil spirit to you, it is to
your lying learning, but it is true light to you, if you had but eyes to see.

Brethren, the amors or love of death, is to the lovely in himself, for death
is life being in God. Now the love of learning is that beauteous whore that
bewitches the natural ingenious spirit in man unto death: for her lovely sight
is but death two ways, First it is death because it is but name, Secondly it
is death when the substance does come; for then thy gain that thou counted
life, is become unto thee death, as Paul says, That that I accounted gain, was
loss unto me, for the excellent knowledge in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Beloved brethren. I come not in the eloquentness of man's even weaved
connexions, that is, with man's curious composers, for the Apostles and Prophets
they took not a verse to study a Sermon, but wrote the Texts that you study
from: Now what they wrote was true, what you study is a ly; the smooth
composure in their writing, is not found a composure composed as yours is;
theirs was life to them, yours being studied is death to you: for know, it is
but name, and not the substance thing, which is Christ the Lord.

Now beloved, I come to the main Doctrine of all that is in the new Testament,
that is, Ackki Cristus in sabat re el vau salvat ori in se, The English is
this, Christ is the strong Savior to the trusting soul in knowledge, for
without knowledge, Christ no Savior; and that knowledge must be Christ in the
soul: it is his own teaching that brings us to life in himself.

But now I come to show you Christ the Savior, whom multitudes of knowing
people as they think, they know him not; Id est non corpus sed alvah a Deo in
spiritus, It is not the body that is Christ, but it is the high spirit in the
body: now the mystery does begin, I entreat you mind, for I must treat
Allegorically as well as literally: Non sanguise selma a maxi pele ethrati
sele meos in saba almat rogel perene aks elle nene sabat, not the composure of
the Elements is the body of Christ: but mind the word spirit that commands
them abstracted elements into a composure.

O beloved, I could wish that I had the highest learned men in the world to
speak to, for you cannot fathom my reach, though litteral; I beseech you mind
me exactly, and distinctly, that you asperse not me, neither wrong the
Scripture nor your selves, the point is this.

First I demand, do you believe that that body of Jesus that died at Jerusalem
was our Savior, for the Scripture says that he offered up willingly an
acceptable sacrifice unto God for us? This is a true Scripture, for it is God
himself, he is our alone free Savior. Now beloved, this Scripture is, and has
been owned many hundred years together, but if it has been viewed with veiled
eyes, the truth cannot be reached; for you know that the Scripture speaks of
Christ's second coming, which is the Sun in light, to unvail all the mystery
both in the Law and the Gospel, which is his preaching within our souls,
teaching us the Evangelical truths, that is a true sight in all things, both
Allegorically, Mysteriously, and Literally.

Now I come to the called Scriptures that are literally expressed, they are
Christ's body shadowie, pointing us unto a higher resurrection, as Paul says,
Let us go on to a further height, not laying again the beggarly rudiments of
the first principles.

Now Brethren, for Christ's body that suffered, that is not your Savior, nor
Christ's body, mind me, for Christ's body is obedience in the whole new man, for
what Christ did, he did it figuratively, and yet true Christ is your true
Savior: now that must be sought, Christ says, I will destroy this Temple in
three days: The Words that I speak, is spirit and life. All these are mystery:
let me tell you, that there is not one word that came from Christ and his
Apostles, but were all mystery, if the insert had been truly translated,
whereof to make up the Romish Church a body, they have bodyed Christ in a body
that the Spirit never intended. In alagma senaim maxsi sadaos in re perflex
sele nos oramus sabat al. The English is this, The Church of Rome has built
their Church upon that body which is not Christ's body, but upon man's dung, and
not Christ's, for true Christ has not, nor cannot have any true corporal body,
for he is a spirit, and a spirit is free from flesh, and imbodies himself where
he pleases, but it is in the soul, that is not of the body, but is the Divine
riches of Christ, and Christ's riches are spiritual in the souls of men, there
is one glimpse of Christ's body.

Now know that that body of flesh that suffered at Jerusalem was not Christ's
body, but in that body was spiritual obedience, that was the Son of God, and
that Son in the obedient spirit in that body, that was Christ your Savior,
which Savior is in you, offering up you unto God, which is but thus much,
obedience in love unto God: for do you know, and all people, that God does give
into the soul light, that light is Christ, which in the soul is obedience: so
that God is God in regencie, Christ in the soul, in every man that is in light,
that light is obedience; hereby man is made obedient, and so one with the
Father through the Spirit, and that light in the soul is perfect Christ.

Now as ever the light in the soul is Christ in flesh, God in spirit, do not
mistake me, for God is the Creator, Christ is the strength of God, the holy
Ghost and Christ are both one in the earthly creation: for God is the Creator,
Christ is the strength of that created, the holy Ghost is the valley in which
the two Persons as you say act, but I say one union in all that has been
spoken, and no Persons: for know, that a spiritual essence cannot be person in
true truth, but if you say Persons, and I say God, here is no difference
between us; for say you what you can say, I know beyond what you and the
creation can say, for mind, saying is nothing, and knowledge is all things.

Wrote by me Theauraujohn Taniour Allah High. Priest, allah all.

Epistle 18. Wrote at Eltham. June 28. 1651.
O Beloved, God is love! O beloved, so great is my desire that love should be
engrafted in every one of you, that my soul painteth after my God for you, even
that he would fill your souls with love, which love in truth is God himself
planted in you. Brethren, let me tell you, that then Christ raigns in his
kingdom, that is in your spirits, ye being in love: for know, that Christ has
an earthly Kingdom, but the Spirit in that earthly Kingdom that is his
Throne; I will come and dwell within the humble and meek spirit says the Lord.

Alvah havilah el asui arab salu in rem madad ai in sele mem. The English, O
the height of Christ's Throne is situate in the low spirits of humble men in the
earthly form, that is the English of that Hebrew state: brethren, I am coming
down to the Hebrew that is now used, which is the tenth derivasi of, and from
the first Hebrew that was wrote Hieroglyphically, Moses wrote it Radically,
that was in Roots; for know, that in the Hebrew three Radiaces or letters as
you count, will denote any word in the creation, without any more adjuncts.

Now beloved, God is love, and love is light, and light is the true guide to
God himself: thus God is love, he let down his loveliness in created
appearances, he giving light into the soul of man, it is guided by that light
into the center it came out from, which is God himself. Now brethren, the
truest name that Christ can be ciphered out unto the sons of men, is this, in
Hebrew Sabbah oli, the English is, the whole holy light, that is true Christ.

Now I will show you the word that Christ is denoted from, and what the word in
import will bear, and give you the reasons to conduce the proof of what I have
laid down. Christ in the Greek is Cristos, which if truly understood, does
denote unto us Light, the Hebrew does hold more full in strength of
illustration, for nothing can hold with its Original, that is no strength to
the Original strength: for know, that from the Original, that that is, it is
but derived from the Original, in which lies the glory of that derived. The
first proof to this is, that God is the Original, we and the whole creation is
but derived from God, who is the all of our continuing good, and the glory is
still in himself, and our glory in him; he is our Original; there is the first
Original, and his reason rendered.

The second reason of glory in the Original is this, That the derivasi has its
dependancie on the Original it was derived from: as Adam, the first figure, our
glory in creation lies in Adam, as we are a derivation from that figure, that
is the outside figure. But now I come to the inward spirit, that is light, or
Christ in the soul, which is but the same; now to prove true light to be true
Christ thus, Sabah oli apethrat al in re sabie pelma amaret al. The English of
this Araback state the whole holy light, is in English Christ; the whole holy
light, is Christ that turns in the whole moving motion in the whole creation,
this is light.

Now by this light is denoted Christ's other faculty, that word does not bear
the state clear, but Oukssi, to denote the second conjunct in the declaring
Christ in his second faculty or oukssi. Brethren, you must bear with the word,
though you understand not, for I must write every conjunct in truth of word, in
truth of time, in truth of place; for my stating one Hebrew word or state, does
bind the whole English afore-cited into truth of word, time, and place.

But now I come to Christ's second faculty or oukssi, and I shall cite the
first state to prove the second, and give you Scripture in affirmation; but God
must make my named names words to you, by writing them upon your souls, and
that writing of his upon you, makes you and his word one, you and I one by the
same word, and that word drawn into himself, we are all one with him as we were
at first, this is the Gospel in power of the Spirit, that must work this
effect, and when this is so written, then man's self ends is departed, Christ's
Throne is erected, man's will is wholly subdued to act in love, then, and not
before takes this Commandment his root, that is, I love my Neighbor as my
self; for then you that were Neighbors are one in love, and love in Christ is
the soul, and Christ is God.

Now do not think that I say the soul is Christ, but Christ in the soul is
light, that light is Christ, that light in its Original center is very God; if
Christ be not in you, then ye are dead: now you read Reprobates. which word
does vilify the intendant as thus, dead to day, alive in Christ to morrow,
which the word Reprobate cuts off and excludes in our intention for ever.

But now I come to prove that light is strength, and strength is light, and
suddenly thus. Arab axsi salma avaran anni pethrai radax ab lu sonary. The
English is, The light in strength, is God in his creation, and the strength in
light, is God in appearances. Or thus, God is light, that light is strength,
God is strength, that strength is light, that light in strength descended into
appearances; the strength light and life in them appearances, is Christ, which
is the light and life of God; which in appearances is Primus maxci, that is,
the first undeniable; but in creation, Secundus persona, I give you that, but
it is Secundus vita in creationem in re, ad id ex in re Now I break your Latin
connexions and conjuncts; the reason is, man's inventions cannot spell nor
conjoyn Gods truth: for know, Gods truth does confound man's invention, and
know, that Gods truth in no age was revealed, but to confound man's invention,
and when men's invention had wrought a full Babel, though they account it
Wisdom, Strength, and Beauty; yet then, even then, when men are concluding,
their labors are finished, and they will enjoy themselves in beholding their
work; just then, and not before, comes the stone unhewed, and breaks asunder;
for God never appeared but to confound man's invention, that the wise might be
caught in their own craftiness.

England, this is thy Motto, that is involved in this Motto, thy rendings to
ruin is even at the door, yet I will read you the intent of that you will
count contradiction: brethren, let us walk honestly in things, though we differ
in names, for in doing we are justified, and in saying and not in doing are we
condemned: for know, saying gives us notice what we ought to do, and saying
makes us guilty of not having done.

But the English to that Latin, that is Primus maxci, that is, the first
undeniable in creation, he was the Firstborn, and to the Church of the
Firstborn: now know, life is the first birth, and Christ says, I am the life
of the world; now this is a binding state.

Now you say Christ is Secundus persona, the second Person in creation, I say,
in that state he is not only Secundus persona as you count, but as you in this
point I count not; for I say, Sola Deus inter, vara alvah hapsi been am in re.
The English is, Christ was God alone in creation, in the high moving motion;
that high moving motion, is God in union in creating, so then una, not duo.

Now I come to Secundus vita in creationem in re ad id ex in re. The English
is, Christ is the second living life in creation, that is, the second thing in
that of the thing, and to the thing, the lise in the thing, that is the life of
the creation, which lies in these words, I am the life of the world: there is
more in them Latin words cited, then ever was demonstrated if truly
understood: now this state I lay down (and do not determine) thus, whether that
the second living life in the whole creation, can properly in truth of word be
called Person or not? God is Wisdom to the wise, and Council to the foolish
ones, The simple he will teach in his way, and the arogancy of the proud he
will contemn.

Now brethren, I would not have you ignorant of what was the glory of the
Gospel in the truth of it, I tell you, that the true Gospel is not only
talkative as man's creation does give it a being, but the true Gospel is active
in goodness; now this acting goodness must be inquired into, and found out what
it is, and every one be an example unto others acting therein. Brethren, it is
round, the definition is strange, truly my brethren, I say as Peter and John
said going into the Temple, Such as I have I give un^o you. But I shall open
unto you as the unfoldings are opened unto me, the Gospel of Christ is round,
the acting goodness is and must be round; now I shall draw the emblem, The
world is round, the Gospel is round, the soul of man is round; now all these
are in every man and woman under heaven, the soul, Gospel, and the world.

But the true meaning must be understood, First, the soul is round, else the
world and its creation could not hold its figure in competency with it in its
adherency. The Gospel is round; and that holds in competency with the soul, but
it being last takes the first state and subdues all; for mind, first a world,
then man, then the Gospel, and then comes goodness, righteousness; from what?
from neither world, nor man, but from the Gospel: now my brethren, this is a
strange metaphorical expression, but it is a true assertion.

Now here comes the true decipheration, and from this decipheration comes the
clear definition. Now comes the clear view, that brethren you may apprehend
every one of your standings, whether you are upon the Gospel built, or upon
man's foundation; that is, man's defending his actions by the name Gospel, and
speaking of the spiritual intentions of the Gospel.

Now mind, before the Gospel comes to any, know that there is a world, and man
in this world acting a oneness, or an agreeableness in one; thus man sees
something in the world that has a seeming beauty, unto which his understanding
is subdued, upon this subdument there is an oneness in love betwixt the worldly
things and man; the world loves her own, that is Christ's words.

Now upon these two (yet one) comes the Gospel, and that does illustrate into
the soul a far greater beauty of loveliness. Now here begins man's trouble,
being wedded to the worldly appearances, the present enjoyment holds fast, the
beams of the Gospel begin to heat both these as man and the world: now the
Gospel being Gods strength, never loses its end; My word shall effect the end
whereunto it is sent says the Lord.

Now beloved, here is the contest begun betwixt the world-man, and man-world,
both being one, by reason that the world has eonquered the understanding of
man, and so man has yielded up his all unto the world; for know, the world
cannot yield up unto man, because of its majority, but man yields himself to
the world, by reason of his minority and smallness of competencie
comparatively; now upon these two, yet one; and again two, and yet again all
made one by the Gospel: so then the trine is erected in terra, in earth, when
the Gospel is planted, then comes this Motto in truth, Thy will be done in
earth as it is heaven; nay, then the will of God is done in earth as it is in
heaven, which is world-man, man-world made obedient to the Gospel.

But to open their circumferences it is thus, The world round, the soul of man
round, the Gospel round, thus I prove man, word, and world all round, and all
in Trines, the greatest mystery that ever was wrote, therefore mind.

First know that God created the round world, whose consistance is of earth,
the influentives of the celestial bodies, and the life operation in the sun,
sub^ Deus, under God, this is the first trine or the Basis for man; now man in
his Trine is this, soul, spirit, and body. Now I come to show how these Trines
in their tinctures hold together.

First the earth, that is Masor orbis, the great world, now God said, as the
Text is rendered, God made man of the dust of the earth, so there is a oneness
in the earth and in the body of man: now here comes the deceit, Every thing
loves his own, so man must by that rule love the earth he was made on, for in
every oneness is an entireness loving it self; for man and woman (being in
truth so) love one another, by reason of the true oneness in them, if they be
truly one, which in truth of description ought to be; so much for the body of
man, and the pondrous or massy body of the earth.

Now I come to the influences of the celestial bodies, and know, that they are
placed in man's connexions, which is millions, as in the earth; for these
celestial bodies hold more the truth of figure, then the earthly bodies can:
for know, the more nearer the spheres you come, the more spiritual you must be;
for let me tell you, the descent from them spiritual bodies, are the livening
living in this gross terrestials; so know, there is a perfect oneness in the
celestial influences, thus the influences causes all products in earthly
appearances, as the spirit of man.

Now mind, I state the soul the first in man, the last in God, proved thus, God
made man, and breathed in him the breath of life, and he became a living soul.
I beseech you mind, Man dies, and the spirit (or soul) returns to God that gave
it.

I pray you mind, first man was made, and then life was breathed, which life
was the whole all that erected the fabric of man; the fall of this sabrick, or
man dying, the spirit returns to God that gave it: Now mind, here is the error,
know, God withdrawing, is man's disceasing; for mind, the Text runs as though
man did die, and then God did receive, that Text gives glory to man, and
lessens the glory and strength of God: for Gods withdrawing in that appearance,
is the cause of deceasing: so let God have his pre-eminence, as Paul says, Let
God be true and every man a liar, so brethren, the truth lies not in names, but
in things, not as they are said to be and reported to be, but as they are in
the substance, and substance has its center. Now brethren, the soul is one
with the Gospel, nay if you can say properly a true soul, I will swear that is
true word and Gospel, for it is the living life of God in you, bringing your
natural man to act in obedience, into spiritual righteousness declared in life
and conversation, by distributing acts of mercy and relief to thy own Members,
that is of Christ's body. Now what is Christ's body temporal? I affirm it is the
whole creation, and in that all men and women: Christ says Love thine enemy,
love him that persecutes thee.

Now brethren, I shall unvail one deceivable cheat amongst us, that count it a
dishonor if that you do not name them people of the Gospel, and holy spiritual
Christians, now mind, members of Christ's body spiritual, to them thou can do
that body no good: now David said, My righteousness extends not to thee, but to
the Saints: and My delight is in them that excel in virtue.

Brethren, does virtue and righteousness dwell in speaking names? no, I say all
is lies if not declared in thing, that is doing, for the doer shall be
justified, and the sayer condemned: alas brethren, if you be spiritual and act
not mercifulness, that is (I must speak plain) not to relieve the poor
oppressed, thou have gotten Satan's highest shrine of shift to deceive thy self
and Christ's members.

David said, I will not offer unto the Lord a sacrifice that shall stand me in
nothing: to which our Nation I speak, of the majority of it, I will learn
apace, and that I may be full and fluent in tongue to dispute names, it is the
only way to be great, it is the Lands Livery, and I will have a Cloak of that
color, then if I have but that name, I am rich; and a called spiritual man
holds his Religion at the cheapest Rate.

O say such people, he prayed most devoutly, and he is a most heavenly man:
when that man that has prayed so long, and so high spoken, except he act
according to what he has spoken, I will in words tell you what I mean, that
is, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, oppress none, set free them bounden, if
this be not, all your Religion is a lie, a vanity, a cheat, deceived and
deceiving; you never prayed in your life, for it is not coming before God with
a head full of names, but with an humble heart full of good things, actions in
goodness and mercy to men, does declare that God has written the Gospel in the
heart and foul of that man or woman.

O ovallo ovallo, ovallo on sephi agarim meteros in re. O England, O England, O
England, thy counterfeiting feasts, God will discover thy skirts, suddenly, for
he is coming for to search for the blood thou have shed for thy own ends.

O England, thy self ends is the good you great Endeavourers endeavor after,
have you not all along cried up a good name? but you have acted the evil
thing; the time of recompense is at the very door: this I know, that the
appointment of thy scourge is entered into the celestial influences, and as the
Lord lives, the product shall be produced; Therefore tremble O England, and woe
unto thee O France, thy judgment is appointed, and the time hastens.

Beloved, days of mourning and sorrow is at hand, for the earth is ripe, ready
to be reaped, the time detracting is only for the peoples gathering, this I
know, the storm is coming will cause you to own one another.

Brethren, you are too high to receive instruction, but God by afflictions will
bring you down.

Brethren, I cannot confine my Method, Seen arab ablah al in sem arkad al. The
English is, The strong strength is searching for wickedness, to displace it,
and plant righteousness; then when we have been plunged and purged from
iniquity, then we shall rejoice in valuing our deliverance at the full value,
or full worth; Thus far is the English of that Hebrew state read both
affirmatively and negatively.

Now beloved, the Gospel or word has conquered the world-man, or man-world,
when man acts round roundly righteousness: know, a round thing has the
smallest center; for the very abbat or bottom touches the center, and all the
whole circumference stands to be viewed: now thou being centered upon the
Gospel, though thou stand open to be viewed of the world, thy center is
Christ, which is not seen, neither can the world see, because his center is
spiritual, and all look with carnal eyes, and that sight cannot discover a
spiritual thing or being.

Eusei selma a maset petra agma marci alvat horai senan arkad pallu erni senean
avarat pal hoi nereat allu mikak appi sola vereat annu maad poke. The major is
Greek in this citation, and does denote unto us thus much, The center of all
things is not seen, which am I says the Lord, and move not, and am the cause
of all motion; though not seen: for the centered c^nter moves not; its
stability is the cause of all moving motions.

So the cause of all motion is from within, or not seen, so that without is the
invailment of the motion that moves all things, so that that appears is not,
and that that is not seen, even that is; which lies in these words, No man can
see me and live, as Moses desired to behold the Face of God, the answer was
this, No man can see me and live, but thou shall see my back-parts; but the
word acose which signifies the outsidings of God in terra, for know, no man
like Moses in Theos ologi, that was, in knowing Gods declaratives of God in his
appearances; Solomon was wise, but short of Moses, for Moses was Gods eye as I
may say, Solomon was but Gods ear I may comparatively say.

Now the out-sidings of God, for to hold in truth of words, it must be to
decipher Gods out-sidings, it must he cited Pluralities of Multiplicities, and
Multiplicities of Pluralities; these words must all be understood, and then you
have light in the drift in my intendant.

Now the back-parts as the text holds it forth, but I say it is improper, but
the word is acose, that is, the out-sidings of God, but you will have it the
back-parts of God.

Now what was this? It was the creations genuine, and germine, and the knowing
the influences in their consanguinity and generatori abstracts in their
combinements and recedings, which is only known in the truth in knowledge, in
the cabalesterial inspirative knowledge; for by cutward studies, great things
in the secrets of nature are known, by reason that in man is the seeds of all
compounds in Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, colestial, terrestial, that is man's
compounds; and in all these has man a natural faculty, only the predominate
of these man is wholly swayed by; for know, if that there were not in man an
oneness in every of these, man could not apprehend any thing in these, but it is
oneness with them, gives him view into them; but their multiplicity confounds
man in his true genuine understanding them perfectly.

Now this is Adam in the Garden amongst the Trees, that is, man viewing darkly
Gods creation, these Trees are in man, unknown to man, one with man, and not
yet understood by man; but that spirit that touched Daniel, and caused strength
in him to understand that, even that is he that discovers this hidden Mystery,
which is this God in his regencie, God is his derivacie, and God in his
definacie; there is again a glimpse of three, and all these in one union be.

Selose in re apparet O (...) soni arpha sal oli em medad allu sonan ai pele
am. The English both affirmatively and negatively, yet both they again
affirmatively; thus the heavenly light is loyal in the regencie, loyal in the
derivacie, loyal in the definacy, that is the regencie going forth in
derivacies, and taking up again its definacies defined, so here is once more
three, and all again in union be.

Again, the derivacie appears, the definacie defined returns, the regencie
receives, and here is three, and they in union be.

Again, the defined definacie returns into regencie: now you perceive but two,
there is no more; for man dying, that is the definacie defined, the spirit
returns to the regency, which is God the Lord: Brethren, this God has let
down, that the world may know that the unlearned mad man, God has taught
knowledge, as shortly will apyear.

Qoas amalet el sadit phe al in rem madad alui seen am aphphy selos in re
affirmater on. The English of this Hebrew sitation is this, What evil has
Christ done unto you, that you should contemn his omommands in England, ye
Priests and people, you will find the Lamb whom you have slain, turn a Lion in
life, and rend the Nation in pieces, for Gods glory Christ will not have given
to another, and thus you have done, holding forth Christ high in great names of
Religion, by which means the Nation is drawn into perjury, you Inventers of
this deceit, have offered up Christ and his Gospel a sacrifice to your own
lusts, for Christ is in the Majority of the Nation, only a Bail to catch the
simple, for to satiate the desire of men in Authority, so Christ is cried up to
effect another end; so you have made your great glory Christ to become of no
value, by reason you have engaged so deep in his Name, and made nothing good
you engaged his Name unto: a day, a day, a day of vengeance is coming for
Covenant-breakers, then God himself will judge.

Now brethren ye great ones be not angry if a mad man tell you the truth, truth
is truth, let it proceed from love or envy, I speak to men's actions.

Now your shall know how and whether I have spoken truth unto you, examine your
lives and conversations, and if you have not acted as I have spoken, then you
are in the truth, but if you have done it, envy not me for telling you the
truth, but give thanks to God for discovering his light unto you, that thereby
you may be reformed.

O how beautiful is the feet of the Messenger that brings the glad tidings of
peace: mind, depart from thy covetousness, and false ends, and oppression, then
there is beauty in thee, there light is welcome, but before, it is like the
Executioners Axe to hew down thee and thy self-ended covetousness, thereby to
make thee one with it self in light, but light is enmity to darkness, until it
has destroyed the darkness, and centered it self in darkness stead or
foundation, then truth raigns, and then the new Jerusalem is come down out of
Heaven, the marriage is made, which marriage, I beseech thee O Lord hasten, for
thy chosen oppressed sakes, who at this day are very low, arise in thy power,
and rend the Nations that thy chosen Israel may be free.

The end of this.
Spherarive ackklah al.
Wrote by me Theauraujohn Taniour High Priest to the Jews.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader,
BEing that my insert or writing is not according to men's Dialect Traditional,
in which Dialect, men frame their cutious wits to an exact pointing, herein
has the Printer failed, in pointing the Spirits intendings, but in your
understanding with diligence, the sense may be gathered, and likewise some
words are left out and misplaced, which this Errata will make a discovery of:
my being in the Country, and sickness was the cause that there is some mistake,
the Printer being left to the management of the Copy.

But let me tell you, the Spirit of God in them that wrote the Scriptures, did
not make breaks and poyntings, nor Texts as they stand in the Bible and
Testament, but this is man's invention, in framing the close composed connexions
into variety of distractions.

By me Theauraujohn Tani.

Errata.
Page 2. line 15. for life read whole. p. 3. l. 28. for leaves r. lever. p. 4.
l. 1. for in r. into. p. 4. l. 21. for fasisty r. fatisti. l. 32. r. one that.
l. 33. r.. l. 34. r. abbisus. l. 36. r. and not the p. 5. l. 15. r. his rool,
ib. root. l. 19. r. root. l. 22. r. absissi. l. 27. r. descent. l. 30. r.
intendant restriction. l. 31. 1. untruths under. l. 32. r. lying. p. 6. l. 4.
r. root. l. 11. r. root, l. 38. r. This is. p. 7. l. 2. r. down. l. 3. r.
casting away. l. 22. is an. l. 24. distincts. l. 25. r. that is thus much, the
Father, Son, and the product, that is Caph the impede. l. 32. r. Latin. l. 33.
r. knowledge. l. 39. r. Bas. Shau is. p. 8. l. 40. r. Divini. p. 9. l. 9. r.
not the. l. 26. r. days,. p. 10. l. 13. r. Priests Cable. l. 17. r.
unchristian-like walking. p. 11. l. 15 r. in his. p. 12. l. 7. 8. r. and os the
se alone, is truly the spirit of man composed. l. 14. in every. l. 24. detract.
l 36. r. fancinated. p. 13. l. 22. r. Apostolical anointing. l. 24. r. States.
p. 14. l. 7. r. Cable. l. 38. r. intendants. p. 16. l. 8. the intendant. l. 18.
r. this ingraftment flows forth the Apostolical power and instit. p. 17. l. 11.
r. alvani. p. 19. l. 12. Kabrious. p. 20. l. 8. r. sola vos. l. 9. r.
montrabaieter in. l. 26. locabit, ib. sebemus. l. 33. a day a day. l. 38. r.
adornative. p. 22. l. 9. alma onosaurana. p. 23. l. 10. r. tone. l. 13.
insertation. l. 15. r. ittere. l. 20. r. one hint. l. 21. r.. l. 28. r.. l. 33.
r. Hezsa, ib. Hezsin. l. 36. r. fugitive. l. 39. r. fugit. p. 24. l. 38. r.
tittle. p. 25. l. 29. for height, r. the high light. p. 26. l. 10. r. rending.
l. 16. r. of God in man. l. 40. for on, r. out. p. 27. l. 19. r. hall u. p. 28.
l. 6. for seal, r. cease. l. 33. r. sephene rai. p. 29. l. 2. r. th people. l.
13. r. Peers. l. 17. r. thus are, p. 37. l. 1. r. reach. l. 2. denoted insert.
l. 32. for or; r. for. l. 38. r. deleos. p 32. l. 6. for measure, r. mercy. p.
35. l. 31. for through. l. 10. r. you read. p. 36. l. 19. r. sum. p. 36. l. 30.
r. thus is. p. 39. l. 30. thus is. p. 44. l. 37. r. outward, ib. r. shall see.
p. 45. r. thing. p. 47. l. 19. r. this. p. 51. l. 43. r. digitus. p. 52. l. 16.
r. yournat. p. 53. l. 22. r. hypocriticallying. l. 24. for shortly, r. swiftly.
ib. r. akethe. p. 56. l. 25. r. notional. p. 57. l. 24. for then various, r.
them varieties. p. 58. l. 40. for caused, r. cursed. p. 60. l. 3. for light,
light, light, r. height, height, height. l. 17. for turning, r. turned. l. 22.
r. I have cast off. ib. r. rejoice. l. 28. r. licall. p. 61. l. 22. r.
distributive. p. 63. l. 44. r. distributived in. p. 64. l. 4. r receptacle. l.
29. r. charitas. l. 33. r. primus. p. 65. l. 11. r. speech is. p. 72. l. 41. r.
arriel. p. 73. l. 26. r. sleep-house. l. 27. r. sleep-house. p. 78. l 3. for
non, r. nen. p. 79. l. 6. r. penerentalis. l. 16. r. ary. p. 80. l. 2. r.
appalet. l. 23. r. acts.


