To the Right Honorable WILL: LENTHAL Speaker to the PARLIAMENT. By him to be
communicated to the MEMBERS Sitting at Westminster.
WHEREAS We the Gentlemen and Freeholders of this County of Berks, were
generally met together at Abingdon, upon some intimation of an Election of a
Knight of the Shire, in pursuance of your Order, for the filling up of this
Parliament; and that some solicitations were used throughout the County for
Voices, and being jealous to be surprised therein by any Clandestine carriage
of the Writ: And whereas at this Meeting it was further taken into
consideration, that this County have with the rest of this Nation been deeply
sensible of many insupportable grievances and oppressions of late days,
occasioned through the want of a real, settled, and regular Government; and in
particular, that the Commissioners for the Militia having formerly charged the
Country to provide Arms, which was done accordingly, the said Commissioners do
yet direct their Warrants for the bringing in of Twenty shillings for every
Foot Arms; which we are very confident is besides the intent of the Act which
impowers them, and are ignorant otherwise by what Authority they proceed
therein; That therefore, having seriously consulted the Remedies which might be
proper for these and the like Inconveniences for the future, and by Gods
blessing reduce us unto a firm, free, and legal settlement of our Rights, Civil
and Religious; We conceived it to be our duty toward God and our Country,
without any private ends whatsoever, to declare our selves in this sense; That
we take the most satisfactory expedient for it, will be, the recalling of all
those Members that were secluded in 1648. and that before the first force upon
the Parliament. And, that in the Elections which shall be of any other Members
in the vacant places, such due course may be taken, as that the Country may
not any way be surprised or overawed therein: And, that the secluded Members
may be admitted to Sit without any Oath or Engagement to restrain their
Freedom in the least; Wherein we shall be ready to defend You and Them with
whatsoever is dearest unto us, against all opposition: And pray unto Almighty
God for his assistance to the happy accomplishment of what may best conduce to
the Peace and Safety of this Nation.

[This is subscribed by most of the chief Gentlemen and Freeholders of the
County of Berks.]
LONDON, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little Britain. 1659.


