To the Right Honorable The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, assembled IN
PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the Workmen-Printers, Freemen of the City of
London,
Shows,
THat in the time of the late general Liberty of Printing English Bibles, and
Testaments at London, and until the 6. of March 1655. last past, there were
above sixty Workmen-Printers employed in constant work at several
Printing-houses; whereby the Books were vended at very moderate rates, to the
great accommodation and benefit of the Commonwealth, and encouragement, and
comfortable support of your Petitioners; but by means of an undue, and
unlawful entrance of the late translated Copy of the Bible, then made in the
Register of the Company of Stationers, and other unjust proceedings used by
Henry Hills and John Field Printers, in reference to their Monopolizing ever
since of the sole printing of Bibles and Testaments, and suppressing all other
Master-Printers in that good work; (Whereby they themselves employ not above
ten or twelve persons in their service, and inhanse the prices of their Books
to excessive dear rates,) The Commonwealth is abused by an unreasonable
necessity, and your Petitioners are for the generality of them much prejudiced
and abridged in their hopes of livelihood and fortunes, and many of them
reduced to extreme want and poverty, to the great grief of themselves and their
relations.

May it therefore most graciously please your Honors to hear and redress your
Petitioners Grievances with all convenience, being of such universal influence
upon, and concernment to the good of the Commonwealth.

And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, etc. Signed by George
Hawkins. John Sporier. Thomas Webster. John Richardson. John Dever. Bryan
Lambert. James Gray. Henry Barrow. Roger Vaughan. Thomas Milbourne senior.


For themselves, and in the names of 150. Workmen-Printers in London.


