To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons, now assembled in Parliament,
The humble Petition of many of the Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of Kent; the Cities of Canterbury and Rochester, and
the County of Canterbury, the Cinque ports and their Members, and other
Corporations within the said County,
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners, or many of them, have heretofore exhibited to both
Houses of Parliament, a Petition concurring with those of the renowned City of
London, and other several Counties of this Kingdom, expressing their zeal to
true Religion, and the pure Worship of God, and their loyal affection to the
Kings most excellent Majesty, both Houses, and the Kingdoms: That your
Petitioners do with all humility return their utmost thanks unto this
Honorable Assembly, for your favorable and gentle acceptance of their
Petitions, your great care, vigilancie, and incessant labors for the
advancement of the true reformed Religion, the Honor and Welfare of His
Majesty and His Kingdoms; for your continued endeavors, for a right
understanding between His Majesty and Parliament; for your instant addresses
to His Majesty, to dissuade his personal expedition into Ireland; and
especially for that to us so welcome, a Declaration of the Lords and Commons
April 9. 1642. concerning your pious intentions for a necessary Reformation:
And that your Petitioners do most heartily rejoice to behold the happy union
of both Houses of Parliament, and mutual concurrence of them and the whole
Kingdom, wherein under his Majesty the safety of all the three Kingdoms does
consist.

Yet your Petitioners cannot but plainly express with what sad hearts they
think on the many evil occurrents, which interrupt your unparalelld pains,
and interecept the fruit of your faithful Counsels from us; amongst which this
is not the least, (viz.) a Petition (as we humbly conceive) of dangerous
consequence, contrived by some few, and published the last Assizes holden for
this County at Maidstone; and then, yea, yet advanced for Subscribers, and
intended to be exhibited to this Honorable House, as the Petition of the whole
body of this County, to cause the whole Kingdom to believe that Petition to be
the Act of the whole County of Kent, or the major part thereof; whereby a great
scandal is brought upon this loyal and peaceable County, the same Petition
being styled The Kentish Petition, which we know is not the Act of the body of
the County, as it seems to speak, for as much as it was disavowed by many of
the then Grand Jury, and Justices of the Bench, and by all us your Petitioners,
whose names are underwritten.

Wherefore our humble and earnest prayer is, That your Honors would be pleased
to accept this our Vindication of our selves, and the County, who utterly
disclaim the said Petition; humbly leaving it to the Wisdom, Justice, and
Clemency of this Honorable Assembly, to d^fference between the active
Contrivers and Promoters, and unadvised Subscribers of it.

To lift up your hearts above all discouragements in the ways of the Lord,
according to that your so Religious Resolution, for Reformation in the Church,
for a Consultation with Godly and Learned Divines; and for the establishing of
a Preaching Ministry throughout the whole Kingdom.

And we your humble Petitioners (being sensible that to oppose, or slight His
Majesty's Parliament, or the Orders thereof, were to hazard the safety of His
Royal Person, and all His Kingdoms, and to further the designs of our
Enemies, who hope by causing our Division to triumph in our Confusion) are
unanimously resolved to maintain and defend, as far as Lawfully we may, with
our lives, power, and estates, His Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate;
As also the Power and Privileges of the Parliament, according to the late
Protestation, and the duty of your Petitioners, and all other His Majesty's
loving People, and faithful Subjects:

And shall daily pray, etc.
London printed for Edward Blackmore at the Angel in Paul's Churchyard.


