To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition and Remonstrance of the Nobility and Gentry of the County
of YORK.
Shows,
THat this County is extremely perplexed, by reason of the public Acts of
Hostility committed by Sir John Hotham, and the Garrison at Hull, to the great
disturbance of the Peace of this County, threatening no less than ruin and
destruction of it. That the first putting a Garrison into that Town, was
pretended to be to defend it against the Papists at home, and the invasion of
foreign Enemies: Since that time, the Gates have been shut against Our
gracious Sovereign, and entrance denied to His own Royal Person, several
persons have been thrown out of the Town, and expelled from their own
Freeholders, and personal Estates, and some part of the Country is drowned by
Sir John Hotham, to the utter ruin of many Families. Sallies have been made
with Armed men, who have burned and plundered houses, and murdered their
fellow Subjects, (when we were confident of a Cessation,) with all the
circumstances of rage and cruelty, which uses to be contracted by a long and
bloody War. After all this, His Majesty (who has kept His Residence here,
with all the Demonstrations of Care, and Affection toward us) graciously
forbeares, to lay any Siege to that place, and has declared to us, That by no
Act of His, this County shall be made the Seat of a War: And yet by the new
supply of Soldiers taken into Hull, and the late Actions there (which we
conceive, to be manifestly against the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, the
Petition of Right, and the late Protestation) we have cause to fear, that some
violence is intended both against our persons and fortunes.

The Premises considered, we cannot but be infinitely jealous, That Sir John
Hotham cannot derive his authority, to commit such barbarous Acts of Hostility,
from the two Houses of Parliament, from whom we expect all the effects of happy
Peace and preservation of Our Laws and Liberties.

We humbly desire therefore to know, whether these outrages are done by your
Authority, and whether this County must be subject to that Garrison, that we
may thereupon provide in such a manner for our safeties, that these Injuries,
Violences, and Oppressions be no longer imposed upon us, by our fellow
Subjects, but that we may be all liable to the known Laws of the Land, to
which we are borne, and which is the only security and evidence we have for
our lives and fortunes.

These three Instances, amongst many others, of Sir John Hothams Acts of late,
we thought good to Annex
He stayed two Ships at Hull, John Rauson and Watson Masters of them, being
laden with Cloth to the value of near forty Thousand Pound stayed by him,
contrary both to the Kings pleasure, and the Order of Prrliament, and tending
the great destruction of Trade. Mr. Wright, a Gentleman of quality, taken
Prisoner, since His Majesty's drawing His Forces from Hull, traveling from His
House to York. A Drummer of one of His Majesty's Captains taken, and forced
to march naked through three hundred Musketires, and whipped by each of them.
Subscribed and consented unto by all the Nobility of Yorkshire, 40. Baronets
and Knights, and diverse Esquires and Persons of quality.

First Printed at York, and now reprinted at London for William Smith, 1642.


