To the Right Honorable the HOUSE of LORDS, Assembled in the High Court of
PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the
Peace, and Commons of the County of ESSEX, on the behalf of themselves, and the
County.
Humbly shows:
THat your Petitioners who have in all your dangers been found ready to engage
their lives and fortunes for your securities in the defense of Religion, and
just Liberty, as by our National Covenant by us solemnly taken we are obliged*
We who have been by Gods acceptance made more then ordinarily Isntrumental in
all the suppressing of the Common Enemy; We who have labored to preserve our
selves, not thereby so much seeking our private comforts, as that we might be
continued a people able to do You service in all Your pious and faithful
undertakings; have now a great and unsupportable Army quartered upon us, which
for the Reasons hereafter mentioned we desire may be removed, and otherwise
disposed of. And in the first place we humbly offer to Your considerations, how
unconvenient a thing it will be, for so great an Army to lay out their Quarters
so near a Parliament, where all things are wanting, and dear; as makes us fear
there is some design to have an awing influence upon the proceedings of
Parliament, and those who are willing to submit to Your Government: And we the
rather fear it, because the Army is now brought into these parts, when all the
Kingdom takes notice that You are about the disbanding of it, and settling the
Government of the Church; both which, we humbly conceive, are most necessary to
be dispatched. And we have reason to believe, that some in that Army will not
be promoters of those good and necessary Works, being men of Erroneous
Judgments, and opposite to the Government of the Parliament; who make it their
business in all places where they come, to work upon the ignorantest people,
persuading them into the like Errors, which tends much to the destruction of
all good Government, either in Church or Commonwealth. In the next place, they
humbly desire this Honorable Assembly, to remember their first free will
offerings upon the Propositions, with what cheerfulness, and in what
multitudes they put themselves forth to make up the first Army, which was
raised for the defense of the Parliament. After that, raised two private
Armies, at their own Charge, for the public Service of the Kingdom; The one,
under the Command of the Lord Gray of Wark; and the other under the Earl of
Manchester; whom they paid several years: and all that time did not only
defend themselves at home, but upon every Alarm went forth into other Counties
with their Trained Bands, and other Auxiliary Forces. And now God has blessed us
out of the hands of our Enemies, our hope is, we shall not be eaten up,
enslaved, and destroyed by an Army raised for our defense. In the last place,
we humbly offer to Your Considerations, the sad and dying condition of Ireland,
That this Army, or such part thereof as shall be thought necessary, might be
employed for the Recovery of that Kingdom, wherein the safety of this, is so
much concerned.

And Your Petitioners, as in duty bound, shall, etc.

