To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament:
The humble Declaration and Resolution of the Deputy-Lievtenants, Colonells,
Captains, and Officers, assented unto, and with great cheerfulness approved
of, by the Soldiers of the Trained Bands within the County of Southampton, at
the general Musters begun the 21 day of June, 1642. being to the number of
above five thousand men, besides a great many Volunteers, who then offered to
serve in Person.
HUMBLY ACKNOVVLEDGE,
THat the Ordinance of Parliament concerning the Militia, does much conduce to
the defense of the true Protestant Religion, The security of His Majesty's
sacred Person. The preservation of the public Peace, and Privilege of
Parliament, against the evils that threaten them, by Foreign Invasion,
Rebellion, or Insurrection. Nevertheless, with great sense and grief of heart,
we cannot but apprehend the continual Practices and Attempts of the Malignant
Party, to invalidate the said Ordinance, wickedly endeavoring to cross the
settlement of the Militia as aforesaid, by color of a Proclamation set forth
in His Majesty's Name, forbidding the Execution thereof; Which we humbly
conceive to be Illegal, upon those Reasons laid down in the late Declaration
of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the said Proclamation; and thereby
unjustly to hazard the very Being and Constitution of this Kingdom.

Therefore in pursuance of the said Ordinance, and in obedience thereunto,
being assembled in Arms, we have thought it our duties, hereby to make our
humble tender unto this Honorable Assembly, of our Lives and Fortunes, in
maintenance of the said Ordinance, so necessary for the defense of our
Religion, His Majesty's sacred Person, The public Peace of this Kingdom, The
Privilege, and very Existence of Parliament.

The Lords Answer.
MY Lords have taken your Petition into Consideration, and receive much
contentment in the good affections you have expressed (...) seasonably and
necessarily, for the good of the King and Kingdom, and for their Lordships
(...)ent in the performance of their Duty* For which they give you hearty
thanks: And my Lords do (...) That (God willing) they resolve to insist in
their form(...) declared Resolutions for the upholding the true Religion, The
Kings Authority in the highest Court, whic(...) by sundry late Declarations and
Practices to abuse the people, they find so much vilified and invaded, Th(...)
Privileges of Parliament, The free course of Justice, The Laws and Peace of
this Kingdom, notwithstanding any dangers and hazards that for that Cause
befall them.

That for the manifestation of their good Affections, and their Lordships kind
acceptance thereof, the(...) have commanded your Petition and this Answer, to
be forthwith printed and published.

Die Veneris, 2 Julii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Declaration and Answer be
forthwith Printed an(...) Published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

July 6. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.


