TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL The Master, Wardens, and Assistants of the Company of
GROCERS.
The Humble Petition of Major Salloway.
SHOWS,
THat being Smok't out of the Parliament, and sent to their Warehouse, the
Tower, he has looked about him and bethought himself, how if in Lieu of his
being their Tenant at will and pleasure, they had made him Lieutenant of the
place; he might like Baxter to the Goldsmiths been a great Honor and Ornament
to your Company: He ^ell remembers himself, to have once been of your Cunning
Profession, but that it is no more ^hen a Puny Craft to the Grand Mystery of a
Senator, and that the Devil ought not to be longer ^aited with a GROCER. He
applies himself therefore to your Worships, Beseeching your ^rotherly
Intercession for him to the Parliament, and presumes to advise you of the words
where^ith he stands Charged, and which he Humbly Requests you to Extenuate:
First that he cared ^ot a FIG for the Parliament; That they were sweetly
Dissolved in the Armies Tears like a^y Sugar; That a Retail Safety Committee
Man, was better then a Tail Parliament Mem^er; That he your Petitioner was too
Sweet-sented for such a House; besides this he conjectures ^lso that the
Parliament have taken Pepper in their Nose at his being Spiced with Sir Harry
Vane's ^rinciples, by whom he was Garbled and made Net for the interest of John
Lambert, when he ^hrew out the Refuse and the Tare.

He therefore beseeches you to mind the Parliament that he is a Frail-Man, and
in such a year and ^^ch inconstant changeable weather, they must not expect
Reasons for what he did, and that if he (...) not Current it is General Moncks
fault, that engrost all and spoild the Market, and has also trad^d into Spain
for better things then Plums. And furthermore to hint to the Parliament his
Submissive demeanor at his charge in the House; how Gingerly he sat, and how
Tongue-bitten, how ^e reverenced the Mace, so that he has great hopes he shall
not be Bank-rumpt or Disseated, though for a while he may be superseded, and in
good time suspended. But if the worst come to the worst he has a small stock
to set up with at Queen-Hithe, which with your ^elping hand to a beginner may
prove better then the stock he had from Sir Harry, and if all ^rades fail him
(as he never doubted of that last) he is sure to have a License to sell Stued
^runes Excise Free.

In tender consideration therefore of these Premises, May it please this
worshipful Society, effectually to Address themselves to, and Mediate with the
Parliament that they would be pleased to put into the Scale his present
Heaviness, and Balance their Anger with his former Merits, and rebate pro
Parliament rato, that's 60. for 500. considering what a bad Bargain he has
made, and how bad the Times are, that have more need of a Committee of
Insurance then Safety: always remembering that good City Adage, To do as they
would be done by; no man knowing whose Turn may be next, according as your
learned Clerk Mr. Bunbury has it in his Suburb-Exercises upon Ganymede.

And your Petitioner, etc.
Printed for Henry James.


