To the Right Honorable THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: The humble
Petition and Representation of diverse well-affected Masters and Commanders of
Ships;
Shows,
THat as in Judgment and Conscience (being thereunto induced by the solemn
Declarations of this Honorable House) they at first did, and still do,
contribute their Estates, and adventure their lives, for the preservation of
the Parliaments honor, so they also expected the securing of the peoples just
Rights and Liberties.

That, contrary to the said Declarations, and their own Expectations, they have
found such practices promoted of late days, as has not only wounded the
Parliaments honor, and made them become odious in the eyes of many of the
Nation, but also (instead of Freedom and Preservation, so solemnly promised to
the People) slavery and oppression is entaild to them and their posterity, as
the only price of that blood and treasure so freely lent and expended in the
late War.

That as Seamen have not had the least share in contributing their Estates, and
venturing their Lives, for to preserve your honor and their own Freedom, so
none has reaped less benefit, nor found more disrespect nor discouragement
from the Parliament then they.

That though they have constantly paid Customs, which were ordained and granted
for no other end but that the Seas might be guarded by a competent number of
Ships for the advancing of Trade, and encouragement of those men which should
venture their Estates in a Merchandising way to support the several
Manufactures of the Nation; as appears by many Statutes, especially that of the
1. of King James, Chap. 33. Yea though as an Additional Charge we have paid
Excise also; yet we have found our selves wholly neglected and oppressed, and
the Seas worse guarded then ever, no Convoy being allowed to secure our ships
and goods in their passage to the Netherlands, or France, by reason whereof
Your Petitioners are almost utterly ruined.

That for want of provision herein Merchants daily refuse to ship their goods
with us, and choose rather to ship them in Dutch Bottoms, whom they say have a
constant Convoy, and can set sail at a day, then with us, who they say must (to
the loss of their markets) stay in the Downs till a Convoy be ready; for which
cause several goods has been several times taken from abord us, and shipped with
Hollanders, so that hereby the Dutch have engrossed all the Trade from the
English, to the great prejudice of this Nation, and to the impoverishing of
many hundred families, whose livelyhoods depend thereon.

That we find our real and constant adherence to the Parliament has added in a
great measure to our misery; for such is the Malignancy of many Merchants, that
they refuse to employ us because we have been active in supporting your
Interest in the Navy, especially in assisting the Earl of Warwick in the making
up the present Fleet; for which we receive many reproaches, nay, assaults and
affronts, not only to the detriment of our names, but hazard of our lives, by
evil affected persons; so that unless this honorable House be pleased to take
us into timely consideration, we are like not only to be exposed to want and
misery, but also to be necessitated to fly to the prime Laws of Nature for
refuge, and to abandon those (whose hands we have strengthened hitherto with
hopes of p^eservation thereby) who had a power but not wills to relieve us, and
become servants to other Nations, who will doubtless suffer us to reap some
fruit of our labor, if we be instrumental in the increase and support of their
glory.

We are sensible, though willing to forget the great oppressions we lie under
by Monopolies and restraint of Trade; the illegal Liberty taken, and
countenanced in Merchants shipping Goods in Foreign Bottoms, contrary to
several Statutes, especially 2 Rich. 2. chap. 3. 14 Rich. 2. chap. 6. 1 Eliz.
chap. 13. etc.

The rigorous exaction of Customs and Excise, even of the poorest Seamen, and
vexatious proceedings of Committees thereupon, to the total disheartening of
all Seamen; whereby our Trade at Sea, which was wont to be the glory of the
Nation, is now totally lost, and many thousands which lived comfortably
thereon, and were serviceable to the Commonwealth, are either forced to
abandon England, and serve in other Countries, or else apply themselves to some
other way of Living to maintain their Families.

If therefore there yet be any bowels of Compassion remaining in you toward a
distressed, yea almost destroyed people, let some yernings of spirit be
speedily manifested: and as an evidence thereof we desire.

That since the Hollander has almost engrossed all the Trade at Sea, and now
absolutely refuses to grant Convoys to the English as heretofore; and
forasmuch as thereby our Trade is wholly destroyed, some Merchants not daring,
and others absolutely refusing to ship their Goods with us, for want hereof;
and several quantities of fine goods being now in the Netherland, which cannot
be brought home (being now, not only denied a Convoy by the Dutch; but also
express command given to their Convoyers that none of them shall take any
English Ships into their protection) although some English Ships have waited
there this three months for the same.

That therefore this House would be pleased to appoint four or five fitting
ships to serve as constant Convoys to guard our shipping from Gravesend into
the Ports in the Netherlands and France, and return back with others homeward
bound: That being the constant order of the Hollander, by which means their
Trade is increased, and they mightily enriched. That this House will prevent
that necessity which must (if not removed) occasion an estrangement of our
affections and assistance toward you. That as soon as may be all Monopolies and
restraint of Trade be removed, and some way taken to prevent the shipping of
Goods in Foreign Bottoms, to the end that Trade may again be restored, and the
Glory of the Nation preserved.

And Your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
This Petition being presented by several Masters and Commanders of Ships, the
honorable House of Commons after the reading thereof made two Orders to this
effect: Die Lunae, 11 September 1648.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That it be referred to the
Committee of Complaints to receive the particular grievances complained of by
the Petitioners, and that they Report them to this House.

Ordered that a Reference be sent unto the Lord Admiral, to the end that a
constant Convoy may be provided to Guard the Merchants Ships, for the advance
of the Trade of the Nation.


