To the right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens, in
Common Counsel assembled. The humble Petition of the Youngmen and Apprentices
of the City of London, and the Liberties thereof;
SHOWING,
THat your Petitioners finding the great decay of Trade, (and that by trade
this City subsists,) and that thereby their Masters, whom they serve, are
maintained, and already are much impoverished by the decay thereof; and
thereby, and by the burdens imposed upon them, are in a short time like to be
ruined; and your Petitioners expectation, by their service, to enjoy any
benefit of Trade hereafter, or to live with any comfort, to their great
discouragement, as yet* is vain and hopeless: And that the Peace in this
Kingdom, by the Judgment of the Council of this City, and of all the Adjacent
Counties (as by their several Printed Petitions may appear) will not be had but
by a Personal Treaty with his Majesty; And that that Treaty by the Judgment of
your Lordship, the Aldermen and Common Council of the City, and the Officers of
the Trained Bands, for the place, is conceived to be in this City, as the
fittest and most convenient.

And whereas the two honorable Houses of Parliament seem jealous that there may
be tumults raised in the time of Treaty; We your Petitioners do not only engage
that no such tumults shall be raised by us, but that if any be raised by any
ill affected Persons whatsoever, we shall be ready to spend our lives in their
suppressing.

Yet notwithstanding, some factious persons, who having enriched themselves by
this unnatural War, (being adverse to all Peace and setledness, and especially
to the Fundamental Government of this Kingdom by MONARCHY, and the established
Laws which we have covenanted to maintain) do endeavor to obtain from this
Honorable Court, by some Petition of theirs, that the said Treaty may be
defensive, which tends in effect (and is their design) it may not be at all.

And that London is the fittest place for the said Treaty, these Reasons do
evince in our understanding; (viz.) First, For that is the only safe place for
the preservation of his Majesty's person. Secondly, For that it is his
Majesty's Chamber. Thirdly, For that he is there near his great Council.
Fourthly, For that all other places have been as yet unsuccessful. Fifthly,
From hence no Force can surprise him. And sixthly, It is necessary that the
stain of fomenting this War be taken off from this City, by some signal
demonstration of the loyalty of the City to his Majesty's Person.

We therefore humbly pray that your Lordship and the rest of this Council will
adhere to your former late Resolutions, and not render us desperate as persons
that must be void of any expectation of the fruit of our services by any
continuing Trade: for it is our apprehension and the judgment of many wise men,
that Peace must be concluded by a Personal Treaty in this City, or not at all:
And if no Peace be established, the Trade, we shall be sure of, is of Blood,
Spoil, Famine, and Bondage, which make us desire, 1. That you will give no
countenance to any such Petition so destructive to his Majesty and his
Posterity, the Peace of the Kingdom and Welfare of this City. 2. That no
private Listings be further made in this City until such Treaty. 3. That there
may be a Cessation of Arms procured by your mediation in all parts of the
Kingdom, until the Treaty be ended; and that a speedy course be taken to
disband all Armies. 4. That your Lordship and this Honorable Court would be
pleased to present these our Desire to the two Houses of Parliament.


And we shall ever pray.

