To the Right Honorable, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland.
The humble Petition of Mary Countess of Sterling, and John Blount her husband,
Sir Robert Croke K^ight, and Dame Susan his wife, Henry Alexander, alias
Zinzan, and Jacoba his wife, Sackvile Glemham, and Peter Glemham (the said
Countess Dame Susan, Jacoba, Sackvile, and Peter Glemham, being Grandchildren
of Sir Peter Vanlore the elder, deceased; and your Petitioners the said
Countess, Dame Susan, and Jacoba, being also the right Heirs of the said Sir
Peter, and of Dame Mary Powel his daughter, (late the wife of Sir Edward Powel
deceased) (that is to say) Daughters and Heirs of Sir Peter Vanlore the
younger (deceased) only son and heir of the said Sir Peter the elder.

SHOWS,
THat the said Sir Peter Vanlore (the elder) did in his lifetime settle the
Castle and Parkes of the Devizes in Wiltshire (worth 600 l. yearly) and the
fifth part of diverse other his Manors and Lands (worth 2500 l. yearly) upon
the said Lady Powel his Daughter, and the Heirs of her body; and for default of
such issue, the reversion of the said Castle and Parks to his own right Heirs
(which your Petitioners the said Countess, Dame Susanna, and Jacoba, are) and
entayled the said fifth part of his other Manors and Lands (for default of
issue of the said Lady Powel) upon all your petitioners, and diverse other his
Grand children, by name, and died; and the said Lady Powel about the 6 day of
October, 1651. died without issue; and your petitioners (the said Countess,
Dame Susan, and Jacoba) ought to be thereby initled to the said Castle and
Parkes of the Devizes, as right Heirs thereunto; and all your petitioners, to
their proportionable parts of the said fifth part, according to the settlement
of the said Sir Peter Vanlore the elder.

That because the said Sir Edward Powel could not prevail with his said wife
(by whom he had no Issue) to dis-inherit her own Heirs, and to settle her
Estate upon the said Sir Edward and his Kindred, He threatened, and many ways
abused, and evil entreated her, and left her company, so that the differences
betwixt them grew implacable, and they lived apart for about fifteen years
before her death, keeping each a several house and family.

That one Thomas Levingston having married Anne Caesar alias Adelmare (a Neice
of the said Lady Powel) diverse unlawful means and practices were attempted by
the said Anne Levingston, and Robert Levingston (brother or kinsman of the said
Thomas Levingston) and John Preston, servant of the said Thomas, to procure the
said Lady Powel to dispose of her Estate to the said Anne, with purpose to
share the same amongst them; as namely, tampering with a Witch, and delivery of
the said Lady Powels hair, and paring of her nails, to be made use of in
unlawful ways, in order to obtain the ends aforesaid: And the said Anne
Levingston (having never had any issue) counterfeited her self to be with
child, and bought a dead child, and solemnly lay in therewith, and sent word to
the Lady Powel she was delivered of a child, whereas it is known the Lady Powel
was so displeased with, and disaffected to the said Levingston and his wife,
that she was unwilling they should come near her, and would unwillingly speak
before them, saying, They came but to betray her.

That the said Sir Edward, Tho. Levingston, and his wife, failing in their
several single attempts upon the said Lady to get her estate, they then
bethought themselves to join together; and the said Lady Powel about the
beginning of September 1651. lying dangerously sick of her last sickness (and
whereof she soon after dyed) at a house in Chelsey (purchased by the Lady
Vanlore her Mother) wherein the said Lady Powel had long lived sole and
separate) the said Sir Edward Powel, Thomas Levingston, and Anne his wife, and
one William Hinson, alias Powel (a Justice of peace in Middlesex, Nephew of the
said Sir Edward) knowing of the Lady Powels sickness, and that she had a great
real and personal estate at her dispose (some with, and some without the
consent of the said Sir Edward) they, together with the said To: Levingston,
John Preston, Adam Brown, Honor Emet, Anne Barnes, and other their servants
and confederates, did (according to a complot between them) upon, or about the
7. day of the same September, forcibly enter into, and detain the said house at
Chelsey (wherein the said Lady Powel then lay dying, and whereto the said Sir
Edward, and his Confederates, had no right or title) and guarded it with diverse
desperate persons, hired and kept in pay for that purpose, and armed with
Swords, Grenades, Guns, and pistols charged with bullets, and commanded to do
execution upon any that should attempt to visit her without their leave; they
caused all the said Ladies servants to be arrested by the then Undersheriff of
Middlesex (whom they brought with them) upon false and feigned actions of many
thousand pounds, at the suit of the said Sir Edward Powel, which they never
prosecuted, but became nonsuit in, and hurried the said servants away,
refusing to take bayl to the pretended Actions (although sufficient bayl was
tendered) they fixed strong Chains, and with them chained up the doors of the
said house, and in Warlike manner kept it, and kept the nearest friends and
kindred of the said Lady (which came to visit her in sickness) from her, until
she dyed, denying them access unto her, and telling them that if they would not
be gone, they should be removed thence by violence, and that they should never
see her face more, although the Lady much desired to see them; and Mistress
Levingston told the said Lady Powel her friends might come unto her (if they
would) but they had all forsaken her; they engaged their Confederates in this
force to secrecy and fidelity, by Rings of gold given to them with this Motto
inscribed, Never to be forgotten, nor yet requited; they discharged the said
Lady Powels Apothecary (employed by Sir The odore Myhern her physician) and
brought her a new physician and Apothecary (whom she never saw before, and
which were no ways acquainted with her many infirmities) and fearing this new
physician (being an honest man) should dislike or discover their dealings, they
engaged him by his promise before ever he came thither, to intermeddle with
nothing (whatsoever he should see or hear) but his physic; they placed new and
strange servants upon her, whom she never saw before, against her will; one to
attend her person, and another to be her Chamber maid, and which were no ways
acquainted with her many Diseases; and promised and gave the said servants
(being both of mean, and one of them of infamous relations) extraordinary wages
and gifts for this service, and brought them from Mr. Levingstons own house in
London into the said Lady Powels house at Midnight; and fearing lest the said
Lady Powel should find means to make known their inhumane usage of her from her
Chamber window (which opened into a Neighbors ground adjoining) they made shuts
to her Chamber window, and forbad that neighbor to permit any of the said
Ladies friends to come into that ground, or stand near the house; and upon the
arrest and removal of the said Ladies servants by the said Undersheriff, Mrs.
Levingston in great joy cried out the plot bath taken, the plot has taken.

That having thus by force and practice secluded all but themselves, and an old
infirm woman lately deceased, (which they then kept locked up in the house, and
ever after till her death kept close, for some bad purposes, as your
petitioners suspect) they (upon the 18 day of the same September, brought the
late Judge Warburton, then one of the Judges of the Common Pleas (who knew not
the said Lady Powel) from London, unto the said house at Chelsey, then chained
up and kept guarded with the said armed men, and then and there procured the
said Lady (as the said late Judge certifies) to levy 7 several Fines of the
said Castle, parkes, and fifth part of the said Manors and lands unto one
Anthony Basset an Apothecary, a Recusant papist of Mrs. Levingstons
acquaintance, but a meet stranger to the said Lady Powel; which Fines (as the
said Complotters affirm) were declared by some Writing (pretended to be about
the same time sealed by the said Lady Powel) to the use of the said Sir Ed.
Powel, Levingston and his wife; whereas the said Lady Powel never directed the
drawing of the said Writings, nor had them read unto her. And the said Tho.
Levingston did at the same time also (without any direction of the said Lady
Powel) frame another Writing, whereby as he pretends the said Lady Powel gave
unto the said Mrs. Levingston and her Confederates a personal estate, to the
value of forty thousand pounds, which was your petitioners said Grandfathers,
excluding your petitioners from any benefit therein who are of nearest Kindred
to the said Lady Powel; whereas in truth the said Lady in her lifetime utterly
detested the said Levingston and his wife, as persons of an evil and dangerous
conversation, and oft-times has been heard to wish the said Anne Levingston
were not of her kindred; and it was so far from the said Lady Powels purpose to
dis-inherit your Petitioners, that even in that her last sickness she was heard
to express her self with much affection in particular to your Petitioner the
Lady Croke, saying, She must and would do well for her Neice Croke, for she had
been ever loving to her, and had many children.

That the said Confederates suspecting (as they had cause): he sudden death of
the Lady Powel (who died thus imprisoned upon the sixth day of October.
following) might render all their fines ineffectual; they (by practice with one
William Gardener an Attorney) procured several Writs of Covenant, and Dedimus
potestatem, for passing the said fines, to be made out with Antedates of the
first and second days of Trinity Term before, and made returnable the same
Trinity Term: And to deprive your petitioners of all possibility of relief by
Writ of Error, or otherwise; they caused the same fines to be enrolled of
Record, as acknowledged and levied in the said Trinity Term (about four months
before themselves pretend they were acknowledged) and contrary to the intent of
the Statute made in the three and twentieth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and ancient practice; which course is so dangerous (if admitted) as
tends to the deceiving of all such as shall purchase any Land, and may tend
to the disinherison of many more.

That to put a mask of Godliness upon their wicked designs, they procured one
Thorold (a sequestered Divine, of Mr. Levingstons acquaintance, but a mere
stranger to the Lady Powel) to come into the house, and reside there with them
during these transactions; forbidding and excluding the Minister of the parish,
his Wife, and Family, to come there, although the Lady Powel much affected the
said Minister of the parish, and his Wife (his said Wife having long lived with
the Lady Vanlore her mother;) Nor would they suffer the said Minister of the
parish, but caused the said Thorold to preach the Ladies funeral Sermon, and in
the Pulpit to publish her recorcilement to the said Sir Edward before her
death, and that she had made Mrs. Levingston her heir, according to her former
purposes; whereof he (being a stranger) could have no knowledge (if any such
purposes had been) and they afterward gratified the said Thorold for so doing.

That Mr. Levingston with his own hand wrote a Certificate of Sir Edward Powels
kindness to his Lady, and got the said Lady (as he pr^tends) to subscribe it
with her name, to this effect, That although it might be conceived by some
ill-affected persons, that she was under a force and restraint, yet in truth
she was not, but was kindly used by Sir Edward, and that she was well pleased
with her condition, Whereas the very next day after the Certificate bears date,
the Lady Powel did much complain of this usage of her, and deploring her
condition, cried out for relief, and said* That their plot was to make her
disinherite the right heirs, but that she would be torn in pieces with wild
horses before she would do it; and publicly told Mrs. Levingston, That it was
her doings to have he^ thus used, but (that notwithstanding) she should not be
at all the better for her Estate; and the said Certificate (being publicly
produced by the said Mr. Levingston, and read in the Court of Common Pleas
before the Judges there) did appear to them to be of so strange a nature. that
they openly told the said Mr. Levingston, he had over-acted his part therein.

That the said Mr. Hynson alias Powel, during all these forcible transactions,
being a Justice of Peace for the County of Middlesex, by reputation thereof
procured the assistance of the under Sheriff, and the rest of his confederates,
and that he, and his Uncle Sir Edward Powel were bound by Recognizance, to some
persons in trust for the Lady Powels sole and private benefit, in the sum of
Eight thousand pounds with defeazance to be void by payment of Four thousand
pounds, and that Two thousand pounds, (part thereof) was to have been paid by
the said Sir Edward, and Mr. Hynson (for the Ladies benefit) in that very
month wherein the said Lady Powel died thus imprisoned: By which it is evident
they sought their own gain and advantage in helping Mr. Levinston and his Wife
to get this Estate, who have the power to discharge the said debt of Eight
thousand pounds (if the writings thus unduly obtained by them shall be upheld.

That your petitioners so soon as they had notice of the said fines so taken as
aforesaid, (which was about four days after) did by advice of learned Council,
address themselves to the said Judge Warburton to stop the passing of them,
which the said Judge would not do, but said, That if he had known so much
before he had taken the said fines as he had done since, he yould not have
taken them; and thereupon the first day of the next ensuing Term (which was so
soon as possibly they could) they complained of the said force and practice to
the Court of Common Pleas, where the Chief Justice thereof did openly affirm,
That he knew not what was force and fraud, if these actions of the confederates
were not; and Judge Puliston, and Judge Atkins (two other of the then Judges)
did also in open Court several times vehemently express themselves against the
foulness of the said practice in obtaining the said fines; but said, that they
were so far proceeded in, that it was past their ^ower to relieve your
petitioners, but there was a Parliament then sitting that might, and they
believed would relieve them.

That your petitioners have addressed themselves to the two late Parliaments
for relief, the first whereof was so far sensible of the foulness of the crime,
that they part^^ularly excepted it out of the Act of General Pardon, but had no
leisure time for the hearing of your petitioners Cause, or giving them relief
before their dissolution. And the Committee for petitions of the lat^
Parliament were pleased to hear their Case at large by Examinations on both
parts taken upon Oath, wherein the several practices before mentioned were made
appear unto them; and they gave order for (...) thereof to the Parliament by
Mr. Rous then Chairman, and now a Member of this Honorable Court: but before
the report was made, the said Parliament did dissolve, so that your petitioners
(after a g^^at expense in attendance upon both the said late Parliaments) do
still remain without report or relief.

That Mr. Levingston and his Wife (in the Lady Powels life time) desired one
Mr. Vandenbemden, a Grandchild interessed in the Lands in question (and a late
pe^itioner against these fines) to have joined with them in this practice, and
shared with them in the gain, but he refused so to do: And the said Mr.
Levingston and his wife being conscious to themselves of their evil doings, and
little right unto this Estate have (since the Lady Powels death) by Articles in
writing under their Hands and Seals (ready to be produced) agreed with the said
Mr. Vandenbemdon, to reconvey unto him (or to his use) his share of the lands
in question.

Your petitioners therefore (who are the parents of above twenty children, and
this Estate whereof they are deprived by the said Levingston and his wife (who
have no issue) being the best part of your petitioners livelihood to maintain
themselves and their said children,) being by the Court of Common Pleas
declared remediless elsewhere then in Parliament, Do humbly beseech your Honors
to vouchsafe them some peedy relief, either upon Report of the truth of the
perticulars herein alleged, to be made by the said Mr. Rous or otherwise. And
that the said fines and all the said Deeds (so unduly obtained) may be nulled
and vacated, Offenders punished, and like fraud and injustice for the future by
some good means prevented, to the discouragement of all such as may hereafter
attempt a Deathbed disinherison by so foul a practice. Note by old Sir Peter's
settlement of his Estate, Mistress Levingston (although she has no child) is to
have a fourth of the fifth part of the Lands in question, although the Fines be
vacated,



