To the Right Honorable, the Supreme Court of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Sentinels in the Regiment formerly belonging to
Major General Goffe.
SHOWS,
THat your Petitioners have faithfully served this Commonwealth for many years
in the defense of the Good Old Cause, for which they were raised by your
Honors, who during your former Sessions were conscionably careful for their
preservation, by allowing them due Pay; but since the time that you were
interrupted from your Trusts by Oliver late Protector, they have been, and
continue still extremely behind hand, and in Arrears, besides the Abridgement
and deduction of a part of their daily Pay, by their said Major Generals means,
(as they humbly conceive) and hope your Honors will seriously consider, and
call in question.

That your Petitioners humbly suppose the Country have paid their Taxes
before hand, besides the Excise, which their Landlords tell them of, and
grumble at, and the Customs, Delinquents Estates, and other advantages,
whereby far greater sums might (and no doubt have been raised) then will
satisfy their Arrears: All which they doubt not but your Honors will call to
just Account.

That many of their Families who have constantly adhered to this Parliament,
without the least thoughts of any deserting the Good Old Cause, are in a sad
and suffering condition, insomuch that many times they are destitute of Bread
and Drink for their Wives and Children, having sold and pawned what they had to
satisfy their hungry Stomachs, and rackihg Landlords, and yet all too little;
Besides others that have no Families, are enforced to diet at the Cooks shops,
and ^he Victualers, upon the Officers engagement, for them at 6 d. per diem,
where they must either be content to take what the Victualer pleases, or fast,
having no other remedy: whereas, if they had their Pay, they might buy their
Commodities at the best and cheapest rates; but by this means the Sutlers are
enriched, and the Army ruined.

May it therefore please this honorable House of Parliament, seeing it has
pleased the Lord to own his Cause once more, and to open the door of hope after
so much backsliding, to take their sad Condition into your serious
Confideration, well weighing their patience in waiting for their Arrears; and
to take care for the payment of all that is due to them, and for their pay for
the future, so long as your Honors shall have occasion for them and those
ancient Officers, that have never declined from their first principles, may be
continued in their Commands, and others, who (being true and faithful all
along) have been displaced by the late Protector, restored to their Trusts in
their own Regiments, and no new Commanders, by finister ends and favor of
friends placed over them, but such whose Fidelity and Carriage they have been
acquainted with, and have served under in the greatest of hazards; and that
none of the Officers, who deserted this present Cause, and were excepted
against by the Army, may be suffered to have any Command over them.

Besides there are diverse of us (Old Soldiers) who have been imprisoned merely
for their constant adherence to this honorable Court of Parliament, our
undoubted Masters.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

