TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION:
An Humble PETITION on the behalf of many Thousands of Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy
men, Anabaptists, etc.
Humbly Shows,
THat your Petitioners are deeply sensible though not of their sins, and the
displeasure of God, yet of their unhappiness, and your Honors displeasure, and
of the woeful effects of it toward them: That they do with sad hearts remember
a time, when by their crafty insinuations, and dexterous compliances, they had
scrued themselves into the generallity of Places of Power and Trust in the
State, Army and Navy, whereby their Bowels were refreshed, their Backs
clothed, their (otherwise contemptible) selves, rendered considerable, and in a
capacity to gratify their Friends, and tread their Enemies under their feet:
That they do unfeignedly repent of their late great declination, and fall from
the height of their hopes, and of the fatal miscarriage of their renowned
General the Lord Lambert, and the Dissipation of his Forces, whereby so it is
(may it please your Honors) that your Petitioners are cast out of their places
like an abominable branch, are reduced to their first nothing, exposed to the
scorn and contempt of the wicked world, and the danger of the Law, which they
never understood nor regarded.

In consideration of the premises and diverse following considerations, your
Petitioners make their humble Application to you, that they may once more enjoy
the Sun shine of your honors favor, and may be restored unto their former
capacity, and may be for ever secured in the possession of all their liberties,
Civil and Religious; wherein they desire to be rightly understood; By Civil
Liberties they mean, not only that they may enjoy their common Rights as
English men, but that they may have a Monopoly of all places of command or
advantage in the Nation, and that none, but such as they approve of, may have a
share in them: And by Religious Liberty, they understand not only a liberty
from persecution themselves, but a power to persecute others, to pull down
Tithes, Ministers, and all such as shall not suit with their Principles, and
comply with their desires: And that you would please to forsake all other
Parties and Interests in the Nation, and cast your self wholly upon them for
your support, and defense.

1. Because your Petitioners being but few in number, and for the most part
inconsiderable in Estate, and Interest, and generally odious to this and all
other Natitions, it will argue a singular degree of generosity, and confidence,
and valor, and self-denial to rely upon them.

2. It is a point o^ highest Justice, and absolute necessity, that you should
confer places of profit upon such as cannot live without them, and that you
should bestow places of trust upon such as have been so long accustomed to
command that really they know not how to obey.

3. It is most reasonable that your Petitioners should enjoy such Liberty in
their sense, because they are so tender of the liberties of others, having by
their former Actings, and late Petition delivered to your Lordship's Honors,
Feb. 9. expressed their desires, that none may enjoy any place of Trust or
Profit either in Church or State, but such as shall subscribe the Oath of
Abjuration, and such as are against all Coercive power in matters of Religion,
whereby they do very well understand that the generality of sober and
conscientious men, Ministers and others, will be kept out of all power, put
under your Petitioners Feet, and they, and their Families undone, and brought
to utter ruin. Now, may it please your Honors, for as much as the generallity
of the sober party of the Nation will hereby be deprived of their liberty both
Civil and Religious if your Petitioners should not enjoy such liberty (as they
have expressed) there would be no liberty left in the whole Nation.

4. Because your Petitioners have been the unfortunate instruments of pulling
you out of the House two several times, the one under the late Tyrant Oliver,
when they set up a Mock-Parliament in opposition to you, the other under the
ever to be honored John Lambert, when they strongly hoped and endeavored to
keep you for ever out of doors. Now having, through their own folly and
cowardice, neglected the improvement of so great and Goodly opportunities; they
humbly crave that you would once more put them into a capacity of turning you
out of doors, and they promise to manage it the next time to better advantage.

5. Because you ought to mete out to men as they would measure out to others,
which is a part of justice; And therefore we may expect your gracious pardon of
our late defection, and that you would make us the objects of your clemency,
because as we have formerly desired, so we do not yet cease to call upon you,
and cry out for your severest justice and greatest rigor toward Sir George
Booth and all his adherents, who yet never were guilty of so desperate a design
as we were to overthrow the Government of the Nation by Parliaments.

6. Because it will be an act of mere grace and goodness to show any favor to
us, such as is no way by us deserved, and to say the truth cannot in any reason
be expected, and that whether you look upon us for the time past, present, or
to come; for the time past, because we have given such proof of our
perfidiousness, that we deserve never to be trusted more; for the present,
because it is not our choice or inclination, but our necessity that brings us
to you, having no other string to our Bow: for the future, because you will
thereby be engaged to settle the Nation in the way of a faction, and so
necessitate your selves to the perpetration of Armies and Taxes, and other
Burdens, and render your selves incapable of settling a Free State, by reason of
those everlasting heart burnings, which hereby you will create and foment, so
that if you shall please to gratify us in our request, and bring us into play
again, you will do an act of unparalleled grace and favor, and such as all
the world will wonder at, and you will make us laugh in our sleeves.

7. How ever you may suspect, that we only dissemble with you for the present,
for our own ends (as we have often done formerly) and that our principles at
present are not right and real to you; we desire you to hope that we shall grow
better, because we never use to hold our principles long: And if you think (as
well you may) that there is some secret engagement between us and Lambert, that
we shall join with him when ever he shall lift up his head and hold up his
finger (for doing of which we shall be enabled by your granting of our
petition) we entreat you to give no credit to it, because it is notoriously
known that our consciences are of such a make, that no Engagements, nor Oaths,
nor Covenants with God or men, could ever hold us, when our Interest obliged us
to break them, and we have left fresh Instances of late memory, that although
we received Commissions from your honors (to our great advantage, and the
grief of the whole Nation) and though some of us professed great repentance for
our former defection from you, and though we solemnly promised subjection and
faithfulness to you, yet as soon as ever we saw a door open ^or the better
promoting of our own interest (which is the Good Old Cause) we unanimously
deserted you and pulled you out of the house, and rejoiced at your dowfal, and it
was not our fault that ever you returned again to your power.

8. That we may not be tedious (as we use always to be in all our writings and
discourses;) we desire you to consider with your selves how hopeful and likly
a way this is to bring us to settlement, (which all people do so earnestly pant
after.) For seeing there is so great a sympathy between State and Chnrch, that
they laugh, and weep, live and dye together, it cannot be otherwise, but that
we who are such known friends to order and establishment in the Church, should
be the Authors and Promoters o^ Settlement in the State: And i^ any shall
unhappily object that we are a sort of men, whose Principles and Interests
engage us to unsettlement, it being both our proper humor, and only strength
and advantage to fish in troubled waters; we entreat them to consider that even
such a sort o^ men are most necessary in a State, and there can be no
settlement without them, as Music cannot be without discord, and bodies cannot
subsist without contrary elements. And besides our troublesome restlesness will
make all People the more desirous of rest, and so we shall prove the happy
occasions of the establishing of the public Peace. Upon which considerations,
we humbly lay our desires at your Honors Feet. And (because many of us cannot
fight)

Your Petitioners shall ever pray.
LONDON, Printed by D. Maxwell, 1660.


