To the Right Worshipful our Worthy PATRIOTS of our County of CORNWALL,
Assembled at TRVROE the 27th of December, Anno, 1659. The Humble Remonstrance
of us Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of CORNWALL.
Humbly Shows,
THat the Liberties, Freedoms and Privileges of the people of England, having
been long since owned, and Challenged by the people in Parliament, and in
Parliament, allowed and confirmed by the late King, and the preservation
thereof, having been constantly declared to be the chief end of their Trust,
who have succeeded the said King in the Government of these Nations, we could
not but think our selves on all hands sufficiently secured of our liberties,
and so (scorning those who would persuade us to a contrary belief) have
peaceably and too too securely sat down under our own Vines, not suspeting the
loss of that which seemed with so much zeal contended for, and with such care
continued and confirmed to us.

In which security we should still have rested (insensible of the wrongs of
others) had it not pleased him that never sleeps to awaken us, and by our own
sufferings to inform us, that were not safe, but that our dangers require that
we should exclaim with the Prophet, That they have healed the Daughter of my
people with sweet words, saying Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace, Jer. 8.
11.

Wherefore we knowing it to be the duty of every Freeman to stand Sentinel over
his Privileges, and at all times to call in Aid, his Fellow Freemen to
disappoint such as shall offer an Invasion upon their Rights, we in discharge
of that duty Cry unto you, for being such as have a double call, being blessed
with double Talents, as made strong for the help of the weak, unto you we
humbly Remonstrate and Complain with the same Prophet.

1. That our servants have ruled over us, and none will deliever us out of
their hands, for certain disorderly persons lately imbodied, taking advantage
of the present distractions of the Nation, contrary to our Ancient and
undoubted Rights and privileges, have of late entered the houses, taken away,
and disposed the goods, Frighted the wives, threatened and abused the persons
of many of us, to the terror of us all Lament. 5. 8.

2. And to our greater astonishment, such boldness have they gained (by
passing uncomptrouled) as that they dare not only promise themselves impunity,
but also brag, that our innocence and Laws (the only weapons that are left us)
are too weak to withstand their wills in defense of what as yet we possess.

3. And to take from us and our Posterity all hopes of ever regaining our
rights, they openly declare against our having of any more Parliaments, the
only expedient for effecting our Freedoms, they Contemn the Law, the only
means for gaining redress for our wrongs; And the better to increase their
Numbers to effect what they so threaten, and to defend what they have so
usurped, they not only despise, but also threaten to destroy the Ministry,
who are our spiritual Shepherds, whose study is disposed to inform, and
reclaim such whose weakness may be apt to be seduced by the seditious, so that
they being both resolute in their practices, and desperate in their principles,
that a stop may be put to persons, and actions so destructive to our Religion,
Freedoms and Liberties.

We Humbly Pray,
That you would use your endeavors for the speedy calling of a Free
Parliament, and that in the mean time during this Interval of Government
(whiles it is with us, as once it was with Israel, Judges 17. 6. That ye the
Heads of our Tribes, and Fathers of our Country) for our ancient Liberties,
would recall your ancient Spirits, and take such care in settling of this our
County, for the defense of our Rights against the outrages of such Lawless
persons, as that the Prophesies of our Enemies may not be gratified, to the
reproach of such who have credited our Public Declarations and Protestations.

Truroe, 31 December. 1659. And besides our Prayers you shall receive from us
such services as good Patriots may justly Challenge, from their obliged
Countrymen.
We the Sheriff, Gentlemen, and Freeholders of the County of Cornwall, being
met here to consult the peace and safety of the said County, in these times of
eminent dangers and confusion, think our selves obliged to Remonstrate and
Declare, and do hereby Remonstrate and Declare on the behalf of our selves and
the said County, for the Vindicating of the Parliament, from all Force and
Violence whatsoever, and for the restoring the Members thereof to their
Freedoms, Liberties, Privileges, and just Rights, and for the speedy Election
of new Members in the places of those that are dead, and that we will improve
our endeavors for the effecting thereof, or for the speedy calling of a Free
Parliament, we looking on Parliament Authority as the only probable means under
God left us, for the securing the Rights, Freedoms, peace and safety, and the
effecting the settlement of this Nation.

This Declaration was Proclaimed by order in the Marketplace at Truroe the 31
of December, 1659.

Printed, by Nathaniel Thomas, 1659.


