To the right Honorable the Lords and COMMONS assembled in the high Court of
PARLIAMENT.
The humble Repromission and Resolution, of the Captains and Soldiers of the
Trained Bands, and other Inhabitants of the County of ESSEX.
Humbly shows;
THAT we having with joy and admiration, observed the wise and gracious
Passages and Proceeding of this Parliament: and the pious, tender, and
affectionate care of your Honors, for the preservation of the Peace and Honor
of his most excellent Majesty, and these three thrice happily united
Kingdoms; represented to the World in your several Ordinances, Declarations,
Votes and Remonstrances, sufficient to stop the mouth (if it were possible) of
envy and malignity it self) cannot but with grief and indignation wonder to
hear, that there should yet be found, and that even about the Regal Throne,
such unnatural and evil affected spirits, and malignant Counselors, who,
desirous to swim to the haven of their ambitious hopes, in the blood of their
dearest Friends and Countrymen, do continually instill into his Majesty's
Royal breast, a sinister conceit, and mis-interpretation of your most Humble
and Loyal Affections, and noble Actions, and Undertakings.

Wherefore we understanding (not by misinformation of flying reports, but) by
the late Votes and Declarations of both your Honorable Houses.

That his Majesty seduced by wicked Council, intends to make War against
the Parliament: That so to do is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his
People, contrary to his Oath: And that whosoever shall serve, or assist him in
such Wars, are Traitors by the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

And withal perceiving your most Christian and Heroical Resolutions to persist
in your Honorable Endeavors: for the public safety, though you should
(which God avert) perish in the work.

We thought it our duties most humbly to represent to your Honors, the
faithful affections and inviolable resolutions of our souls to Stand or Fall,
Live or Die, together with you: According to our PROTESTATION.

Thus with our hands upon our Swords, we stand ready at your command, to
perform our Vows to God and Oaths of fidelity to his Majesty, In taking up
Arms against those false Flatterers, and Traitors: who abuse his Royal Favor,
intending under the glorious Title of his Name and Standard, to fight against
the Peace and Honor of their Sovereign, against Religion, and the Laws: and
to make a prey and spoil, of three flourishing Kingdoms at once: And to spend
our dearest blood in the defense of the lives, and liberties of our Country
men; the Laws which are the life of our liberty, and Peace; Religion more
precious then both; and the King and Parliament: In whose lives lies bound up
the life of all the rest. Whosoever is otherwise affected, we hold him not
worthy the name of a Soldier but a Proditor of his King and Country to all
Posterity.

Lastly, finding a multitude of well affected People, whose hearts are good to
join with us but want Arms we most humbly crave, That Restitution may be made
of those Arms, which weretaken out of their County; either out of the store
lately arrived from HVLL; or otherwise as to your most excellent Wisdom shall
seem best.

And we shall ever Pray.
This Resolution was presented to the Trained Bands, and Companies of
Volunteers, who appeared at Dunmow: Jun. 10. 1642. And was received with
universal Approbation, by holding up of Hands, throwing up of Hatts, and
Acclamations: professing, That they held them unworthy to live, that should
dislike it. And it was within three days after, subscribed with ten Thousand
Hands.

LONDON, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for William Larnar at the Sign of the
Bible in Little East cheap.


