TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORDS AND COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of
EXETER.
Humbly shows,
THat they have received late Petitions from the Commons of the said City and
County, signed by very many hands, wherein they present the great decay and
deadness in the Trades of the said City; especially in the manufacture of
Serges or Perpetuanies: as also the distresses of our Brethren in Ireland,
which Kingdom has afforded great relief and trade to these parts: And in
their said Petitions do apprehend the grounds of all to arise from the
distractions in the City of London, which, as they humbly conceive, are
occasioned by the infringing of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, and
the just liberty of the Subject; and by the opposition and hindrances which
the Bishops and Popish party have laid in the way of the proceedings of your
honorable Assembly: And do further show, that (unless God by some speedy and
timely remedy do prevent it) this City and County are like greatly to be
endangered by reason of the decay of the Comerce (with its inseparable
companion Poverty) which will, as they justly fear, stir up many thousand
persons to insolent and outrageous actions.

They do therefore earnestly pray us to present the premises to your Honors,
with their great fears and sensible apprehensions, that the source of all does
spring from the Bishops, the Popish party, and their designs.

We thought it our bounden duty humbly to prefer and present the same to your
Honors accordingly, being very sensible of the said grievances and fears, and
knowing that they cannot but inevitably occasion ruin and confusion to this
City and County, unless God in his mercy prevent it by your Honors wise and
speedy endeavors.

Wherefore we humbly pray your Honors to take these our desires and humble
requests into your deep considerations: That the true Protestant Religion may
be still preserved, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament maintained, and
the just Liberties of the Subject supported; and that the Popish party may be
dis-armed, which (notwithstanding the former Laws and Orders) have been
neglected; and that the Kingdom may be put into a posture of Defense, and the
Forts and places of strength may be committed to the hands of trusty persons;
and that the power of voting in Parliament may be taken from the Bishops and
Popish Lords, and also the said distresses of our afflicted Brethren in Ireland
may thoroughly be taken to heart, and speedily remedied. So may we expect the
happiness and flourishing of this Kingdom, and shall have more and more cause
to bless God for his Majesty; and your Honors.

And, as duty binds us, shall ever pray, etc.
Printed for William Hope, 1641.


