To the Right Honorable the House of Peers Now Assembled in Parliament. The
humble Petition of many thousands of Courtiers, Citizens, Gentlemen's and
Trades-mens wives, inhabiting within the Cities of London and Westminster,
concerning the staying of the Queens intended voyage into Holland; with many
serious causes and weighty reasons, (which they desire) may induce the
Honorable House to detain Her Majesty.
Presented and read in the House by the Lord Mandevill, the 10. of February.
1641.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioners, their Husbands, their Children, and their Families,
amounting to many thousand souls; have lived in plentiful and good fashion,
by the exercise of several Trades, and venting of diverse works: For learning
whereof, many of them have served Apprentiships, others taken houses and shops
both in the City and Suburbs, and also in the Exchanges at very great rents:
All depending wholly for the sale of their commodities, (which is the
maintenance and very existence and being of themselves, their husbands, and
families) upon the splendour and glory of the English Court, and principally
upon that of the Queens Majesty; By occasion of whose Royal presence we have
hitherto had ready utterance for our commodities, and were thereby enabled to
pay our rents, and live in good repute: But upon late notice that her Majesty
is resolved instantly to depart the Kingdom, we cannot but thereby fore see an
utter cessation and decay of all our trading; So shall we become utterly
disabled to pay our rents, support our selves, or our families; and can
apprehend nothing but distraction, penury, and ruin: Or that our eminent and
inevitable necessities will produce some violent effect. And your Petitioners
have cause to fear that this sudden resolution in her Majesty is occasioned
by some just distaste taken at diverse unusual and tumultuous assemblies, to
the affright of her Royal Person, and at the unpunisht printing of many
licentious and scandalous Pamphlets; some covertly, some plainly, wounding her
sacred Majesty in the opinion of the vulgar, as an Abbettor or Counselor of
such designs, which are pretended to disturb the peaceable government both of
this Kingdom and Ireland: Whereas your Petitioners are confident She was not
only a solicitous Mediator for the assembling of this gracious Parliament, but
that since Her coming into this Kingdom She never did ill office to any
particular Subject, but has often been an Instrument of many Acts of mercy and
grace to multitudes of distressed people.

And your Petitioners likewise considering the great happiness brought to this
Nation in her Princely Issue, of which native comfort this Nation has been
barren now almost a hundred years; are the more encouraged,

Humbly to pray, That this Honorable Assembly would give some speedy assurance
to Her Majesty, that the Authors and Instigators of such seditious tumults and
scandalls shall be strictly enquired after, and punished; and that She may
receive such public vindication by the Parliament, against all such calumners
of Her sacred Majesty; and give Her that due honor and reverence we are sure
She merits, and join with us in Petition for Her continual residence amongst
us: whereby She receiving full assurance of the love and fidelity of Her
Subjects in this Kingdom; your Petitioners may with some comfort address
themselves to Her Majesty's compassion of her affectionate people, humbly to
pray her stay.

So shall they have cause to pray for your Honors prosperity in all your
actions: And ever remain the true and faithful Protestants to the Church of
England, till death.
London printed for T. Hales. 1641.


