To the Right Honorable, the Commons of England Assembled in Parliament. The
humble Petition of diverse well-affected people, Inhabitants of the Cities of
LONDON and WESTMINSTER, the Burough of SOUTHWARK, HAMBLETS and places adjacent,
Promoters and approvers of the Petition of the 11. of September, 1648.
SHOWS,
THat although we abhor nothing more, then the designing of any thing to the
danger and prejudice of this Commonwealth of England, and utterly detest all
such plots and confederacies, as were entered into by Eusebius Andrews, lately
adjudged, by the High Court of Justice, to dye as a Traitor for the same, yet
deeply weighing, that of all the Fundamental Liberties of England, none were
ever either by people or Parliaments, esteemed so precious, as Trials by
Juryes, consisting of indifferent uningaged sworn men, although for facts of
highest Treason, against the very safety and being of the Commonwealth;
whereby the public peace has been saved, and justice done upon the greatest
Traitors. And that for preservation of the said just way of Trials, the 29.
Chap. of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, were principally constituted,
and have been ever by our Ancestors exceedingly contended for; and for which
chiefly, the Parliament undertook their War against the late King, as without
which Magna Charta and the Petition of Right, were both dead and useless to the
people.

And being well assured that the principal cause of abolishing the High
Commission, Councel-Table and Star Chamber (in all which they never attempted
life) was, for that they were contrary to the 29. Chap. of Magna Charta and the
Petition of Right, in proceeding without Juries, And being very sensible of the
manifest danger of Trials by another way (without any respect to the person of
the said Andrews otherwise then as bound in duty and Conscience, to preserve
this our Fundamental Liberty, indeed our sole Liberty, and without which,
Liberty is but an empty name) Grieving at our very souls, to have seen the same
violated more then ONCE in this kind, which (after your Declarations of Febr.
and March 1648. to maintain inviolable that most excellent Law (as you call it)
of the Petition of Right, with all things incident and belonging to the Lives,
Liberties and properties of the people of England) We hoped would have been the
last.

We therefore most earnestly entreat, that you will be pleased to suspend
execution of the said Eusebius Andrews, and to admit unto him and to all other
offenders whatsoever, the benefit of Legal Trials by Juryes in an ordinary way,
and that the High Court of Justice may for ever cease; that so this our
Fundamenoal Liberty (abundantly more prized by us then our Lives, and all our
Relations) may stand firm and inviolable to all future Generations; and our
selves and all other Lovers of the ancient good Laws and Liberties of England,
may be truly encouraged, heartily and cheerfully to serve and assist you
against the Common enemy; which we humbly presume, your Honors will find of
more safety to your selves and the Authority of this Nation, then the
continuance of an High Court of Justice.

And as in duty bound we shall ever pray, etc.

