To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and other
substantial Inhabitants of the County of YORK.
Shows,
THat they cannot be afraid, themselves, or any other shall inour your
displeasures for declaring their just fears in an humble way, or representing
that these general distractions have a more powerful influence and operation
upon this particular County, than upon any other Member, or part of this
Kingdom, whereby for diverse years last past it has endured the miseries which
inevitably follow Armies, paying nevertheless Taxes and Subsidies, equally to
other Counties which have been free from those Burdens and Pressures, and have
besides laid out great sums of Money for billiting Soldiers (whereof a very
small part is hitherto re-imbursed) to the great exhausting the whole County,
and ruin of diverse Persons and Families: Yet the discontented Retirement of
His Majesty from you His great Council, and the different Commands since
severally issuing and proceeding, especially concerning the Militia, which
distracts the minds of all who desire to build up their obedience upon a sure
and known foundation, and the great distaste His Majesty takes to have a
Garrison, without His allowance, kept so near His Sacred Person, and the many
inconveniences which may from thence arise to this County, do make us already
sensible of more dangerous effects than have hitherto befallen us; especially
seeing thereby Trade and Commerce (the very subsistence of this County) which
hitherto stayed in all the late noise of Arms and Tumults, is now driven away
and frighted from among us, whereby we suffer before hand the ruinous
consequences of a real War, and from thence apprehend the greatest of
Calamities to follow, unless Gods blessing and a speedy union do happily
prevent them from the sense of those imminent mischiefs, and consideration of
His Majesty's Expressions of His good intentions and endeavors for Peace and a
right Understanding, we are bold in all humility to Pe^ition,

That a timely remedy may be applied, lest our Disease grow desperately past
Cure, without such applications as may endanger the vital Spirits of the
Kingdom: That since your selves have declared his Majesty's absence to be the
main hinderance of this necessary Work, and his Majesty expressed his
willingness to return when you shall give life to the Laws of the Land, for
his security against Tumults; That his Majesty may receive such assurance, for
His secure residing in all places, and such Invitations as may allure His abode
with you, his Great Council; That such a due regard may be had for the
reparation of his Majesty's Honor, as well in this unfortunate business of
Hull, as (where it has in any sort been blemished, and where he may justly
expect it) together with the safety of the Kingdom, as may evidence to all the
world, that nothing is dearer to us then the security and glory of our King and
Kingdom, whose Honor and Reputation, both at home and abroad, must stand and
fall together; That his Majesty's gracious Message of the twentieth of January
(which your selves then so termed, and gave humble thanks for) as also his
others since his retirement, may be taken into such serious consideration, as
may give hopes to all good Subjects of an effectual concurrence: That we may
not be distracted by contrary Commands, but that the known Law of the Land,
which we humbly conceive is the fundamental Liberty of the Subject, and no
Arbitrary government may be the Rule of our Obedience, and the Guide and
Determiner of all our Actions and Differences: And we, according to our
Allegiance, shall be ready to maintain His Majesty's Royal Person, Crown, and
Dignity, his just Rights and Prerogative, together with the lawful Privileges
of Parliament, the just Liberty of the Subject, the true Protestant Profession,
and the Peace of the Land.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Imprinted at York, and reprinted at London for Richard Lownes, June 8. 1642.


