TO The Right Honorable the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled.
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected Magistrates, Ministers, Citizens,
and other Inhabitants in the City of LONDON, and parts adjacent.
Shows,
THAT we cannot but take notice of the many obstructions you have met withal,
whilst with indefatigable care and diligence, you have been earnestly laboring
and endeavoring the deliverance of the People of this Kingdom, from those
many and great Invasions made, and much more intended upon our Religious and
Civil liberties, had not your hands assisted, by the Almighty God interposed;
for which we cannot but render all humble and hearty thanks. And now finding
the same evil spirit reviving and working much more strongly and effectually,
though much more closely and cunningly, under specious pretenses, attempting
that by subtilty, which they through the goodness of our God could not obtain
by power; using such things as an occasion and means to divide, which at first
were ordained for the uniting of all the godly and honest People of the three
Kingdoms, upon safe and just principles, viz. The Protestation of May, 1641.
The Vow of June, 1643. and the Solemn League and Covenant in Febr. 1643. and
other your several Votes and Declarations to the same effect, (...) although
your Petitioners do most heartily desire a right understanding, and happy
reconcilement of all differences between the King and Parliament; yet is it far
from the thoughts of the Petitioners, and they hope of any other, that have
lately out of good affection, petitioned for a Personal Treaty, to make use of
the Tumults, Commotions, Revolts of Castles and Ships, thereby engaging the
Kingdom in a new War; or of any other difficulties the Parliament has been,
or may be exposed unto, to precipitate their Councels, or to destroy their
Forces that now are, or hereafter shall be raised, being (as the Petitioners
humbly conceive) contrary to their said Protestation, Vow, and Covenant: as it
is also to necessitate the Parliament to a Treaty, until such satisfaction and
security be first given, as may attain the ends of our former Engagements.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that you will adhere to the said
Protestations, Vow; and Covenant, and to the constant tenor of all your former
Declarations, and not recede from those first and just Principles, viz. The
safety of your selves, and all that have and shall adhere to you, and the
Reformation and Preservation of Religion, and the maintenance and defense of
our Laws, and Liberties, which you have openly held forth to all the world;
and by which you have engaged all the honest well-affected people of the three
Kingdoms to serve you with their lives and estates; left you betray your
selves and them to the merciless cruelties of those that seek your and their
destruction, and draw the blood of many innocent persons upon you and yours.
For prevention whereof, your Petitioners further humbly desire, you will
faithfully persevere in the due prosecution of your said just undertakings and
Engagements; and that such a course by your Wisdoms may be taken, for security
and satisfaction to be given as aforesaid, that neither His Majesty, nor any
other may have occasion or opportunity of renewing the old, or raising a new
War. And in so doing, That God who has hitherto owned you and your Cause, will
assuredly do so still; And we your Petitioners with many thousands more, as
formerly, so are still ready in pursuance of the said Protestation, Vow, and
Covenant, with their lives and estates, to adventure all with you and your
Forces in this Common Cause against all opposition.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

