To the Right Honorable THE LD. FLEETWOOD, To be Communicated to the OFFICERS
Of the ARMY, THE Humble Representation of diverse well-affected Persons of the
City of Westminster and parts Adjacent.

April 27 LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman. 1659.

To the Right Honorable THE LORD FLEETWOOD, To be Communicated to the OFFICERS
of the ARMY.
WHeteas you have by your late Declaration and Transactions, made it manifest,
that you are sensible of your backslidings; and that yet you have cordial
affections to the Good Old Cause, and to our Liberties, both Religious and
Civil; we with many thousands more rejoice on your behalf, and bless the Lord
for your seasonable appearance for the vindication and resurrection of that
precious Cause, which has cost so much Blood and Treasure: several corrupt
Parties having lately with much subtlety combined and improved their several
interests to destroy the same; and to bring in upon us an Inundation of Tyranny
and slavery, both in things Civil and Religious.

You cannot be ignorant, and it is the sense generally of all the well-affected
people, who have constantly adhered to you in the prosecution of the Good Old
Cause, that the Lord did vouchsafe his glorious presence with that renowned
long Parliament, in their Counsels and Armies: never was there a Parliament
more victorious by a constant series of gracious Providence: never was there a
Parliament that did more fully assert and vindicate the Liberties of the
People, and make better provision for the Soldiers in defense thereof; though
in all Politic Bodies, through humane frailty, there will be great
miscarriages and mal-administrations.

But alas, how has the presence and glory of God departed from these Nations,
and from you in particular, since the interruption of that renowned victorious
Parliament, and the advancement of a private personal Interest, in stead of the
Weal-publick! Our Treasure has been exhausted, many thousands of our dear
Countrymen slain, and illegally Imprisoned, and ruined, and our poor Nation
like to be made a prey to a foreign Enemy, if the Lord in mercy prevent not:
Whereas before, the Parliament of England, and their Armies, were a terror to
all the Nations round about us.

And among other evils, this renowned Army has been exceedingly corrupted, by
the endeavor of self-seekers; many of their faithful Officers have been laid
aside, and others put in their places, who never adhered to the Good Old Cause,
and the assertors thereof in their great straights.

We hope that the Lord is now about to restore in some measure the primitive
beauty and glory of this Army; which no doubt will be done, if your actions and
performances be suitable to your words and expressions; the times now requiring
that you should be active in purging the Army in order to the settlement of
this Commonwealth; and that you should constantly consult and advise with the
most prudent and judicious of your old friends, who having kept their
integrity, may administer much light and help to you in this wilderness of
distraction.

Wherefore we humbly desire you, for the honor of God, for the satisfaction of
the Saints, and the good of your poor dying Country; That you would forthwith
recall, and restore your honest public spirited Officers, of whose fidelity you
have had sufficient experience, to their several places and Commands in the
Army; and to turn out those, be they never so great, who have manifested their
enmity and disaffection to that Good Old Cause, and the public interest of
these Nations. It being impossible that you should cheerfully and unanimously
carry on the great Work which is now upon the wheel, so long as such corrupt
Instruments and Time-servers have such Commands in this Army, which God so
eminently owned whilst they owned him and his Cause.

We further desire, that you would be a means, that the Long Parliament, who
declared for the Government of a Free State in the Legislative Authority of
this Commonwealth, may speedily return to their trusts: They and you being
engaged against Monarchy, and to be true to the Government as then established
without King or House of Lords.

And this we humbly propose as the best and safest way to revive and strengthen
the Good Old Cause, and all those honest men that are concerned therein. Many
of the Members of that Parliament, being, we hope, more refined and fitted by
their several Trials, for carrying on the Work, since they were disturbed in
managing the Government of this Commonwealth.

Nor can we rationally conceive, that any other way or model which can be
thought of at present, will be an effectual means to prevent a new War, and to
restrain the abuses of the Law, and secure and preserve us from Monarchy and
Tyranny, or the Arbitrary and unlimited power of the Sword, if this means and
expedient, which legally ought to take place, be rejected; all other ways and
means which have been attempted hitherto, having proved ineffectual and
fruitless.

And hereby you will make it appear, that in this late great undertaking of
yours, you have not sought your own particular advantage, or the greaming of
your selves, but the public good of your Country; it being your wisdom and
safety, to return again into that way, where you found much of the presence and
assistance of God; and from which having departed, your way has been hedged up
with thorns, and surrounded with insuperable difficulties.

In doing those things, and whatsoever else has a tendencie to the public
good of these Nations, we trust the Lord will yet delight to dwell in the midst
of you, and will make you a further blessing to this Commonwealth, and
specially to his own peculiar People, who have powered out many prayers and
tears for you in the defense of that precious Cause, whereunto you have so
often born witness; and in the further prosecution whereof, we are resolved by
the Lords assistance to live and die with you.

But if after all these shaking and stupendous Providence, and this late
undertaking of yours, you should lift up your selves or any Party among your
selves, or should be instrumental by the Sword to advance any other private
Interest or family whatsoever, against which the Lord has so eminently
witnessed from heaven, we, with thousands more, who cordially love the Good Old
Cause, cannot own you in such ways; nor will the Lord go along with you in
your Counsels and enterprises; but will visit by some remarkable Judgment or
other, for this perpetual Backsliding from Him and his Cause. But we hope
better things from you by the Lords assistance, and such things as may rejoice
the hearts of all your true Friends, and be a terror to all the Enemies of this
Commonwealth.

This Paper was presented April 25. 1659.

And this Answer was returned, (to wit) THat several of the Things therein
contained, were already under consideration, and they should do as the Lord
should direct them.


