TO THE SVPREME AVTHORITY OF ENGLAND The COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.
The Humble Petition of diverse well-affected WOMEN, of the Cities of London and
Westminster, the Borough of Southwark, Hamblets, and Parts Adjacent. Affecters
and Approvers of the Petition of Sept. 11. 1648.
Shows,
THat since we are assured of our Creation in the image of God, and of an
interest in Christ, equal unto men, as also of a proportionable share in the
Freedoms of this Common wealth, we cannot but wonder and grieve that we should
appear so despicable in your eyes, as to be thought unworthy to Petition or
represent our Grievances to this Honorable House.

Have we not an equal interest with the men of this Nation, in those liberties
and securities, contained in the Petition of Right, and other the good Laws of
the Land? are any of our lives, limbs, liberties or goods to be taken from us
more then from Men, but by due process of Law and conviction of twelve sworn
men of the Neighborhood?

And can you imagine us to be so sottish or stupid, as not to perceive, or not
to be sencible when daily those strong defenses of our Peace and welfare are
broken down, and trod under-foot by force and arbitrary power.

Would you have us keep at home in our houses, when men of such faithfulness
and integrity as the FOUR PRISONERS our friends in the Tower, are fetched out of
their beds, and forced from their Houses by Soldiers, to the affrighting and
undoing of themselves, their wives, children, and families? Are not our
husbands, or selves, our children and families by the same rule as liable to
the like unjust cruelties as they?

Shall such men as Capt. Bray be made close Prisoners, and such as Mr Sawyer
snatched up and carried away, beaten and buffetted at the pleasure of some
Officers of the Army; and such as Mr Blanck kept close Prisoner, and after most
barbarous usage be forced to run the Gantlop, and be most slave-like and
cruelly whipped; and must we keep at home in our houses, as if we our lives and
liberties and all, were not concerned?

Nay, shall such valiant religious men as Mr Robert Lockyer be lya-ble to Law
Martial, and be judged by his Adversaries, and most unhumanly shot to death?
Shall the blood of War be shed in time of Peace? does not the word of God
expressly condemn it? does not the Petition of Right declare, that no person
ought to be judged by Law Martial (except in time of War) and that all
Commissions given to execute Martial Law in time of Peace, are contrary to the
Laws and Statutes of the Land? Does not Sir Ed. Cook in his chapter of Murder
in the third part of his Institutes, hold it for good Law (and since owned and
published by this Parliament) that for a General or other Officers of an Army
in time of Peace, to put any man (although a Soldier) to death by color of
Marshal Law, it is absolute murder in that General? And has it not by this
House in the case of the late Earl of Strafford been adjudged high Treason? And
are we Christians, and shall we sit still and keep at home, while such men as
have born continual testimony against the unjustice of all times, and
unrighteousness of men, be picked out and be delivered up to the slaughter, and
yet must we show no sense of their sufferings, no tenderness of affections, no
bowels of compassion nor bear any testimony against so abominable cruelty and
injustice?

Have such men as these continually hazarded their lives, spent their estates
and time, lost their liberties, and thought nothing too precious, for defense
of us, our lives, and liberties, bin as a Guard by day, and as a Watch by
night; and when for this they are in trouble and greatest danger, persecuted
and hated even to the death; and should we be so basely ungrateful, as to
neglect them in the day of their affliction? No, far be it from us: Let it be
accounted folly, presumption, madness, or whatsoever in us, whilst we have life
and breath, we will never leave them, nor forsake them, nor ever cease to
importune you (having yet so much hopes of you, as of the unjust Judge
mentioned Luke 18. to obtain Justice, if not for Justice sake, yet for
Importunity) or to use any other means for the enlargement and reparation of
those of them that live: and for Justice against such, as have bin the cause of
M. Lockiers death: Nor will we ever rest until we have prevailed, that We, our
Husbands, Children, Friends, and Servants, may not be liable to be thus abused,
violated, and butchered at men's Wills and Pleasures. But if nothing will
satisfy but the blood of those just men, those constant undaunted Asserters of
the Peoples Freedoms will satisfy your thirst, drink also, and be glutted with
our blood, and let us all fall together: Take the blood of one more, and take
all: Slay one, slay all.

And therefore again, we entreat you to review our last petition in behalf of
our Friends above mentioned, and not to slight the things therein contained,
because they are presented unto you by the weak hand of Women, it being an
usual thing with God, by weak means to work mighty effects: For we are no whit
satisfied with the answer you gave unto our Husbands and Friends, but do
equally with them remain liable to those snares laid in your Declaration, which
makes the Abetters of the Book laid to our Friends charge, no less then
Traitors, when as hardly any discourse can be touching the affairs of the
present times, but falls within the compass of that Book: So that all liberty
of Discourse is thereby utterly taken away, then which there can be no greater
slavery.

Nor shall we be satisfied, however you deal with our Friends, except you free
them from under their present extrajudicial imprisonment and force upon them,
and give them full Reparations for their forceable Attachment, etc. And leave
them from first to last, to be proceeded against by due Process of Law, and
give them respect from you, answerable to their good and faithful Service to
the Commonwealth.

Our houses being worse then Prisons to us, and our Lives worse then death; the
sight of our Husbands and Children, matter of grief, sorrow, and affliction to
us, until you grant our desires, and therefore, if ever you intend any good to
this miserable Nation, harden not your hearts against Petitioners, nor deny us
in things so evidently just and reasonable, as you would not be dishonorable
to all Posterity.


