To the Right Honorable The KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BURGESSES Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
The Humble Petition of the Merchants Trading to the Dominion^ of the King of
SPAIN.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners being surprised by the Spanish Embargo in the late
Rupture made with this Nation, di^ thereby loose the most considerable part of
their Estates which they then had in the King of Spains Dominion^ but had some
proportion of their effects preserved by the Covert of some Confidents of the
Spanish Nation, into whose hands they were cast by their Factors.

That your Petitioners were necessitated so far to comply with the said
Spaniards so entrusted, as to purchas^ their effective fidelity in remitting
home their remaining Estates; they used their Credits to furnish new supplie^
into the said Spaniards hands: who by their cunning practices of making partial
Returns* with promises o^ good advantage, in the bottoms of their Accounts,
have trained your Petitioners on from time to time to ^ continued Trade with
them. But your Petitioners having now at last made a costly experience that
the^^ remedy is worse then their disease, have thought it their duty, for the
good of this Nation (as well as their own Interest) to accuse themselves of
that indiscretion into which their first necessities drew them: and to beg
you^ Honors Provident direction to prevent the further progress of those
inconveniences into which that indiscretion has cast them.

The inconveniences that your Petitioners have feelingly discovered, Are,

First, That the Trust that they have given those People whom they cannot call
to account, has given reins to their avarice and dishonest^ to undervalew all
our Native Commodities, at least one quarter part of what they formerly yielded
when our Nation sold them; and to over rate all their Returns of Wines and
Fruit above half of what we usually paid for them in times of Peace. And which
is yet worse, when the^ had your Petitioners Goods in their hands, they told
them plainly they must not expect any Returns of them, unless they remitted
them considerable sums of moneys to as great a value as their goods: so as the
one half of the Goods we imported were paid for, and lost out of the Common
Stock of the Nation.

Secondly, That the whole Trade of the Exports and Imports of Goods to and from
Spain, was necessarily to be done on Dutch Bottom which they were necessitated
to buy, and cause to be sailed by Dutch Men; and the most part of the Goods
Exported carried first into Holand, for the better disguise both of the Goods
and property of them, and procuring Convoy; whereby they contracted an heavy
load o^ charges, both of Customs, Provisions, and otherways.

Thirdly, And notwithstanding those Charges in Holland,

That there was not one Ship that Traded to any Port of Spain with English Men's
Estates, but was enforced to purchase the connivanc^ of the Spanish Officers of
the Contra-bando, with great sums of money; from 2 to 500 lb. per Ship,
according to her burden.

Fourthly, That those Spanish Agents by the employment they have had from your
Petitioners, have waded so far into the mysteries of o^^ Trade, as that they
have practiced ways to engross the whole advantage into their own hands; by
erecting a Factory of their own Nation whom they have sent hither; some under
the notion of Jews, and others of Studients, pretending to be bound for
Flanders, persons of a^^ Ages, to provide a succession of their own People;
that in case of a Peace they may be fastened in the whole of that Trade; as
they have a^ready attained all that is profitable in it, by buying our
Manufacturies at the first hand: so as the English Merchant shall make no
advantag^^ in transporting them: And Vending here the Wines and Fruit of their
Spanish Principals in a vast proportion, beyond what the^ Export; remitting the
overplus of the Product of those Spanish Commodities by Exchange into Italy,
and Flanders: whereby the Stoc^ of our Nation is exhausted, and the King of
Spain his occasions in those Parts served: to the prejudice of this State.

And therefore your Petitioners Humbly conceiving that by a total obstruction
of Importing of Spanish Wines, and Fruits, the Stock (...) the Nation may be
much preserved, the advantage of a subtle Enemy abated, and his interest in
the Canary Islands much endangered; in r^gard those Islands have nothing to
procure them a subsistence but their Wines; nor any other Nation to Vend them
but the English.

Your Petitioners do Humbly pray, that it may please your Honors to enact by
your Authority, that during the War with Spain (...) Wines, and Fruit of the
growth of any of the King of Spains Dominions may be prohibited to be Imported
to any of the Ports or Plac^^ in obedience to this Commonwealth; upon pain of
confiscation of the Ships and Goods. And that such other provisions may be mad^
as may best obviate the present inconveniences of that destructive Trade.

And your Petitioners shall Pray, and^
London, Printed by Joseph Moxon: at the Sign of Atlas on Cornhill. 1659.


