A Word of Reproof TO THE PRIESTS OR MINISTERS, WHO Boast of their Ministry
and Ordinances, and yet live in Pride, Disdain, Persecution, etc. SHEVVING What
such are; and how little cause they have to exclaim against those who separate
from them. AS ALSO A word to the Papists Discovering their Foundation to be
carnal and sandy. In a LETTER sent to some supposed Priests or Jesuits in the
North, BY WILLIAM TOMLINSON.

In the Cup wherein she has filled to you, fill to her double. London, Printed
for Tho. Wait, and are to be sold at the Pavement in York, 1653.

A word of Reproof to the Priests or Ministers who boast of their Ministry and
Ordinances and yet live in Pride, disdain, persecution, etc.
O Ye Priests, I do not call you Priests out of derision (I love not that)
though some must deride you. But because most of you were ordained to your
office under that very name, and few or none of you have renounced that your
Ordination Secondly because you conform yourselves more to the Priests under
the Law, then to the Ministers of the Gospel. The truth is ye are not worthy of
that name: for it is a name peculiar to the Saints only, and to all the Saints
under the ministration of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. Revel. 1.6.
you call your selves the Ministers of Jesus Christ, when as you do nothing
resemble him. You have nothing to bear you out to be so, but only great
swelling words. As the Jews once gloried in the Temple, when the Lord was
departed out of it, crying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord, as if those great words had been argument enough to bear it
out to be the Temple of the Lord, when he had left it. So you cry the Ministers
of the Lord, the Ministers of Lord; the Ministers of Christ, the Ministers of
Christ; the Ministers of the Gospel, the Ministers of the Gospel; as if those
great words were enough to prove you to be so; when as the Lord is departed
from you and your Ministry: and leaves it to become as the blood of a dead
man, Revel. 16.3. In which no life is to be found but death, and stifeling of
the Spirit. For that holy unction which moves upon the hearts of the Babes of
Christ, and weaklings, in stead of being strengthened, is among you strangled,
and rendered as delusion, and fancy, and a thing which they must not trust to,
though this testimony be given of it from above, That it is Truth, and is no
lie, and is the only preservative against seducing; and the guide or Teacher
that keeps us abiding in Christ. 1 John 2.26.27. For that Unction is Christ
moving in us, and as he is according to that obeyed and yielded to, so he
abides with us, and we abide in him. By that he leads on from truth to truth,
and so from strength to strength, from comfort to comfort, from light to light,
until he lead into clearness and fullness, and present us perfect before God
and the Father, without spot and blemish before his Throne. Yet dare you
blaspheme this holy Spirit, which is no other but Christ himself in flesh,
which you deny, fighting against him in every appearance of his in flesh, and
thereby manifestly declare your selves to be Antichrist, and not the Ministers
of Jesus Christ, as you proudly boast your selves to be. He is Antichrist that
denies the Father and the Son, 1 John 2.22. He that denies the Son, denies the
Father also, for they two are one. And he that denies the Spirit or Unction
that moves upon the hearts of Christ's Scholars, and fights against it, when he
would come and appear in flesh, he denies both the Father and the Son, for
these three are one. 1 John 4.3. Every Spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ
come in flesh is not of God: and this is that Spirit of Antichrist whereof you
have heard that it should come and even now already is it in the world. I say
every Spirit that confesses not Christ come in the flesh: for so the words are
more truly rendered as some of you know. And so rendered they hold forth a
constant Character or mark of that Spirit of Antichrist. It does not confess
Christ come, (that is when he comes or appears) in flesh, or in his servants.
To say (as it is translated in the English) every Spirit that confesses not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh; To say thus, is not a full Character of
Antichrist: For the Papists themselves, and the Pope (whom you all say is
Antichrist,) He does not deny but that Jesus Christ is come, that is, once came
in flesh. Therefore in that sense it discovers not Antichrist. But both He and
They, and You do all deny and fight against Christ come in flesh of his
servants, that is when he comes and appears in them. Therefore in the same
sense wherein it discovers him, (I mean the Pope,) to be Antichrist, in the
same it discovers you also to be Antichrist For as he fights against the
Appearances of the Lord and confesses not Christ in those commings of his in
flesh, whereby he leads his people out of his mystery: so no more do you
confess Christ in those commings of his in flesh now, whereby he would lead his
people out from under your mystery. So that I say the Spirit of Antichrist
manifests it self in you: and yet are you bold to cry up your selves, The
Ministers of Christ; The Ministers of the Gospel: as if you were able by these
words to strike dead all Reasons to the contrary. You do wisely in your
generation to keep you there, and so to fear and dazzle the minds of men with
those great words, keeping them off as far as you can from reasoning about it:
making them by your great words of Gospel Ministers, and I know not what, to
fear even to question whether you be so or not. Oh ye Opposers, will you always
strive against the Truth? how many of you who stand in the public Ministry
(as you call it) have been leaders of the People out of Error? How many of you
have lighted the People by your examples to forsake and renounce the world and
the things thereof; yea I may say, The Relliques of the Romish trash, that Idol
service Book, and all the trumpery of it? Nay have not the People, therein
rather taught you? are they first in the obedience? do not you stick to it
until the stream of the People shame you from it; and the fear of loosing of
your livings (as you call them) make you to part with it? Is it not thus with
you also in other appearances of Christ, when he comes in flesh in weakness, in
his servants to consume the mystery of iniquity? do you not stand out striving
and opposing until the last? If you can epsy failings and weaknesses in that
weak flesh in which Christ comes, those you use as instruments to fight withal
against his appearings in that weak flesh: and so you stumble at that stumbling
stone. Yea you speak evil of that which God approves of. If one come to you in
meekness and calmnes of spirit using gentleness and patience toward you,
over-mastering you with reasonings out of the Scriptures, Oh then you clamor,
such a one is a dangerous fellow; He is as ill as a esuite; Its as dangerous to
come in his company as to go into an house infected with the plague; such like
railing accusations proceed from you to scar the people, and to turn them away
from trying the Spirits whether they be of God, contrary to command, 1 John
4.1. On the other side, if one come in the true severity of the Spirit as Paul
and Steven and others, yea as Christ the Prince of meekness himself sometimes
did, and tell you what you are, warning you of the judgments that shall come
upon you, then such are cried out against as judging, censorious railing
persons. Let the innocent nature of the Lamb come to you in what way he will,
whether mourning, or piping and dancing, whether in Austerity, or more liberty,
yet you will attribute it all to the Devil. Let us tell you that the Lord
teaches us inwardly by his Spirit, you say that is the spirit of delusion. Let
us say nothing of that but only bring the writings of the Scriptures, then you
say the Devil can put Scripture into men's mouths. It Is true, the Devil can put
Scripture into men's mouths; but consider into whose months he does put
Scripture, whether into the mouths of those who would destroy his works, or of
those who uphold them. Indeed where a Kingdom of Fride and vain glory and
covetousness, and pomp of the world and such like works of the Devil is upheld
by Scripture, there its likely that the Devil does put Scripture into men's
mouths, teaching them to wrest it to their own destruction. But its strange
that the Devil should put Scripture into men's mouths to destroy his works
therewith: shall we say that Christ is become now an upholder of the works of
darkness, and the Devil a destroyer of them? This is the consequence of such
Doctrine when you say, Its the Devil that puts Scripture into the mouths of
such as would destroy his works. You call your selves, The Ministers of Jesus
Christ. But if you be not so, and yet say you are, consider in calmness of
mind what you then are. Some called themselves Jews and were not, and this was
Blasphemy. So to say that you are Ministers of Jesus Christ, if you be not so,
what is this but Blasphemy? For do not you Blaspheme that holy Name when you
ascribe to him such Ministers as love the world and the things of it, But hate
his children whom he has chosen out of the world. Them whom he has made as
signs and wonders in the world by some appearances of his in them, them ye
hate. Yea though words have fallen sometimes from your own mouths, which have
driven some of them from you, yet you hate and oppose them for obeying that
which your own mouths have uttered. When you have told the People that they
worship God in vain if they have but the traditions of man for their ground,
yet if any of them hereupon have left your traditions you have been their
greatest enemies. Thus you hate the practice of Christianity, though you
sometimes speak of it. You hate to deny your selves, and to take up your Cross,
and follow Christ. You hate to condescend to those of low degree, and to make
them your equals, lest your familiarily bring you to contempt. You hate the
way of Christ's allowance for his Ministers: namely, to receive only what is
freely given, and of them only who receive spiritual things of you. You hate
the way and manner of Christ's Ministration: and choose rather the manner of the
Oratory of the Nations. Paul reasoned with them in the Synagogues, he suffered
others to speak to him and reason with him in the Synagogues, This you hate.
Christ and his true Ministers Preached without Praying before and after as you
do, and this you hate. In the Churches, or assemblings of Believers they might
all Prophecy, as they received the gift, and power, one by one, but this you
hate. In these, and in many other things you hate to be reformed. Showing forth
to every one your dislike of the things of Christ, and yet you blush not to
boast your selves to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ. Consider if this be not
to Blaspheme his name: and again consider it. Lay aside Passion, and consider
also whether that spirit of Jezebel, Rev. 2.20. Do not rather act in you, who
called her self a Prophetess, and yet taught the servants of the Lord to
commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. Do not you keep
the People in that spiritual fornication which all Nations have been drunk
with, even to worship God after the traditions of men; and so to eat things
sacrificed to Idols: things dedicated to your Idols of Honor and covetousness,
and your bellies, I say things dedicated to these, and upheld for the honor of
these; such things, such sacrifices must the People feed upon. But you shall
not long continue to feed the flock with such things; no nor your selves
neither: for the Lord will deliver his flock from your mouth, that they may not
be meat for you, as he has promised. Ezekiel. 34.10.

The Lord has made me and others as examples among you for many years, and
has made our lives a speaking voice to call out from your Ministry, and by his
strength has held us as by an Anchor from returning to you; making us to abide
in this our Testimony: And now I must also declare further against you (with
the rest of my fellow servants) then yet I have uttered, and discover to the
People what you are.

You are that Antichrist (as I said before) spoken of in the Scriptures Because
you deny Christ coming in flesh. Some of you have been convinced of some
things, and seemed to make out after them, until the world stole upon your
hearts, and then you have sought to quench and smother those motions both in
your selves and others. Others of you have been at continual defiance against
the breakings forth of truth in every degree; and thus you stand in opposition
against the truth. You neither enter in your felves, nor suffer those who are
entering to go in.

You are the false Prophets which are spoken of, and although you come in
sheeps clothing, yet inwardly you are ravening Wolves, and now the day is
breaking, and discovers you plainly to be so by your works. Mat. 7. v. 16. By
their works yea shall know them says our Lord, you are easy enough to be
discerned, when men look upon your works. Indeed when men look upon your
devotion, your prayers, your lifting up of your hands, and eyes to heaven, your
sighings, and feigned tone and expressions, your seeming affections and such
like, you hereby deceive the hearts of the simple. But these will not serve
your turns now, your Covering is too narrow, it will not hide your nakedness.
You are brought to the touch stone. Your work, Your works, they are your
discovery. Your works are the works of Sodom, pride, idelnes, fulness of bread,
covetousnes, wrath, malice, backbiting, persecution, disdainfulnes. Oh the
proud disdainful spirit that is among you! Is it not just so with you as it
was with the Pharisees? What do thou teach us said they; and is not the same
in your hearts also against all that say any thing against you, if they appear
not to be brought up in your Schools? But by such as you so scornfully
disdain, even by such shall you be overthrown and confounded.

You have clamoured against others, calling them wandering Stars, and falling
Stars; as if the region of your traditions and humain inventions had been the
firmament of truth, and as if all that fell from these things, had fallen from
Heaven and from grace. But it will be made manifest to all men, that you are
fallen from the firmament of truth, from the ways, and from the words of the
Apostles, and are found wandering in the foggy mists of humain inventions. You
have had a whores forehead, impudent and bold to cast those names upon others,
which do most properly belong to your selves. Whether are they the falling
Stars who arise in their spirits casting off every weight that binds down to
the earth, that they may walk up closer to the example of their Lord Christ,
and his holy Apostles: or they who fall downwards toward the earth, with Demas
loving this present world; but forsaking the footsteps of the Apostles; fixing
their roots into the earth, being held fast with the allurements thereof?

You have called every one Deceivers, and Seducers, who have stepped forth from
you, groping after the truth. But consider well whether you your selves shall
not be found Grand Seducers. First consider the Multitude of Deceivers, how
many they are whom this whorish spirit of fornication and seducing does
possess. It sits upon many waters, Rev. 17.1. And those waters are Peoples,
and Multitude, and Nations, and tongues. v. 15. And again its said, all nations
drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, Rev. 18.3. And again, By thy
sorceries were all nations deceived. v. 23. Now at whose hands do all nations
receive this cup of fornication, but at the hands of the national ministeries?
and who are the sorcerers who deceive all nations but their national teachers?
who in some things imitate the true messengers of the Lord, but thereby take
advantage to oppose them the more strongly in other things, and even in such
things, as wherein their removing out of Egypt, spiritual lies: and so keep
them as fast locked up in the house of Bondage as they can. Even as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses to keep Israel after the flesh still in Pharaohs house
of Bondage. A few that start aside out of these general Delusions cannot be
they who thus deceive and seduce all nations. Again, look upon the spirit of
Persecution, the Bloody spirit, stained with blood: and where find we that? Who
are the persecuters; and who the persecuted? Are not those whom the national
teachers call seducers the Persecuted; and are not the national teachers
themselves the Persecuters? Judge by this where to find the seducers, for this
is none of the least Characters. Its not the nature of the lamb to persecute;
nor of them that follow the lamb. No they come out of great tribulation. They
are nailed to the Cross of Christ; and for his sake are slain all the day long:
and are as sheep appointed to the slaughter. But on the other side the Seducers
and Deceivers drink blood. They thirst after, and procure the blood of saints;
not under the notion of saints, that was never known, but under the notion of
Deceivers, and Blasphemers, and Heretics, and such like. And so in her is
found Blood, Blood, Blood, even all the blood of any that are slain upon the
earth; Blood of Prophets, Blood of Saints, Blood of the witnesses of Jesus.
Rev. 17.6. Chap. 18.24. Again we may guess at the Seducers, and Deceivers by
the worldly pomp and Riches which they fall down to, and deck themselves
withal, for the whorish spirit which seduceth is an earthly spirit, and so
delights in an earthly kingdom; in the precious things of the earth. Rev.
17.4. They are every one for their gain from their quarter they can remove from
worse quarters to better for a little more money, at their pleasure: and this is
usually their call from one place to another. There be few of them but one may
hire them from one place to another for forty pounds more per annum, if there
be but equal honor and other accommodations in both places, and thus are they
the hirelings of men, bought and sold for earthly riches, even as bruit beasts
in a market, and they that give most get them. Thus they press after the ways
of Balaam, tempting the Lord until he give them up to the swinge of their own
hearts, as he did Balaam. But it is otherwise with the true messengers of the
Lord. They prophecy in sackcloth, and the nearer that any one comes to the
truth, the more he is made to die to this world, and to the things thereof.

You call others Heretics, Schismatics, Sectaries and Separatists, (which are
terms that signify a separation and division from the truth, from the saints
who stand in the truth, and from Christ.) You are full of names of Blasphemy,
and that's one character of the deluding spirit: your mouths, I say, are full
of such names, but which of you shows the people, how they come to be worthy
of such names, to whom you apply them; and why you call them so as you do. Its
an easy thing to call any one by any name or odious term falsely, and as you
do, without ground for it. That we may therefore understand better who they
are, that are heretics and schismatics indeed let us mind where is the knot
of all true union; the center in which all must meet, who do not separate, and
make schism. Is it not in Christ who is the Truth? Suppose that Christ were
here in person upon earth, and a few despised men break off from the body of
the Jews, (as once they did,) and follow him, all the rest cleaving fast still
to their Judaisme: tell me now, whether are these few who forsake the body of
the Jews, their rites and ceremonies to follow Christ, or they who stick still
in them, the Heretics, and Schismatics? So when Christ's comes in Spirit, and
calls a People out of Babylon, from the confusion of men's inventions, which
has overspread the Earth, and wherewith all nations are made drunk, a few in
comparison of the rest, come out by degrees, the rest stick still in the
Confusion. Which of these now are the Seperatist, the Shismaticks, the
Heretics, in Scripture account, making a rent and Schism from Christ* are not
they the further off from Schism and Heresy, who obey Christ herein, and come
out of Babylon, though they be but a few in comparison of the rest: for they
follow him herein who is the knot of union: and so herein cannot be the
Schismatics and Heretics and Separatists and Sectarists which the Scripture
condemns. For their separation from the confusion, and them that dwell
therein, is not a separation from Christ, nor from truth, being stricktly
commanded, and pressed both by promise and threatening. Rev. 18. Come out of
her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of
her plagues. And again 2 Cor. 6.17. Wherefore come out from among them and be
ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive
you; and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. I say, coming out from your Humane inventions, and
from all other inventions of man, though never so finely gilded, is here
commanded, being comprehended under the word Babylon. I know that you will put
off from your selves the word Babylon, and apply it to Rome: and they at Rome
will apply it to something else: for it is not to be expected that the
Merchants of Babylon should confess against themselves that they are so; lest
people should buy their Merchandise no more.

Tell us what is Babylon outward if it be not a building or frame of Humane
inventions whose top pretends to reach to Heaven (as the Tower of Babel was
intended to do) and so promises to set People in thither. If it be any other
thing tell us what it is.

Now you either trade in these Humane inventions: or you trade with the pure
Ordinances of Christ. If you trade with Humane inventions, and make sale of
them; then I think it will be found that you are in the number of the Merchants
of Babylon, enriching your selves with the abundance of her delicacies,
delicate carved images of your own brains, and of other men's: and if so it will
be found no Heresy, Schisms, or unwarrantable separation to come out from
amongst you. If you say, that you trade with the pure Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, (for traders you are) then I desire to know which one of them you will
avouch to be the pure Ordinance of Christ, answering the pattern as you uphold
it.

Secondly I desire to know upon what ground you dare buy and sell any pure
Ordinance of Christ, or gift of the holy Ghost, (if it be so.)

I know that you want not words to cry them up for the Ordinances of Christ. As
the Jews did with the Temple; and as you do with your ministry; so you cry
them up for the Ordinances of Christ, the Ordinances of Christ, crying to the
People, Oh take heed how you turn your backs on the Ordinances of Christ. But
as I said of your Ministry, so I say of your Ordinances; It is not enough to
say only that they are so. Which of you take the pains to show the People what
the Ordinances of Christ were: and compares yours with them, that the People
may see them to be so? The truth is you dare not bring them to the light, nor
suffer them to come to the light, lest they should be made manifest. For they
are as far different from the pure Ordinances of Christ, or practices of
Christ, and his followers, as Nadabs and Abihu's strange fire was from the true
fire, if not further.

You say, you have Baptism, you have prayer, you have Preaching, you have
singing of Psalms, and some of you have the Communion, and were not these
Ordinances of Christ? I answer you Nadab and Abihu had their Censer, they had
fire, and they had Incense; which things were commanded by the Lord. Yet for
all this they did that which the Lord commanded them not. Levit. 10.1. And so
you may have these things, and yet be as far off from the right as they were.

First compare your Baptism with that which the followers of Christ practiced.
You Baptize Infants: where did they Baptize any? have you any example, or any
rule for the Baptizing of them? Is not this built upon the sandy conjectures
and consequences of your own imaginations? I know that some of the acutest of
you say, That it is built upon the Promise, which belongs to the children with
their Fathers. But let such consider whether it was the Promise belonging to
them; or their receiving of that Promise, that was the ground of Baptism.
Which of the Apostles did administer Baptism to any of those to whom the
Promise did belong, until they received that Promise by faith?

As for your Prayer which you use before and after your Sermons, I know not one
example left you for it, either by Christ, or by any of his Apostles. What can
you plead for it, seeing they did not so? Did they fall short in what they
ought to do? what! was Christ and the Apostles unfaithful in the work of their
Ministry, to leave such a thing out; and to leave it unto you to amend what
they failed in? No, no, your praying before and after is for the honor and
magnificence of your Idol which is to accompany it: and that is your Preaching:
(be patient with this expression until you have the explication of it, for I
shall not only call it so, and there leave it, as you do with many things.)

I say your Preaching is an Idol. I do not say that Preaching is an Idol.
Preaching is publishing, or declaring abroad, or telling to one another openly,
whether by conference or any other way. Thus they preached or published, or
told abroad what Christ had done to one that was deaf, and had an impediment
in his speech Mark 7.36. (...) they preached it, which word you know is used
where preaching is expressed, and yet it signifies no more here but telling
abroad; or publishing as it is rendered in the English. So likewise the
multitude of Believers who were scattered abroad, Act. 8.1. Went every where
Preaching the word. verse. 4. that is declaring it, or telling it abroad where
ever they came: and this was Preaching, and Preaching to conversion too. So
Paul's Preacling in the Synagogues, was it not for the most part Reasoning with
them. Acts 17.2.3. that is, speaking to them, and suffering them to speak to
him. But you do Idolize the manner of the Heathen Oratorie made in Pulpits; and
all other speaking must give place to that, and fall down silent before that
Idol: or else you will exercise Nebuchadnezzars Laws upon them, Dan. 3.

If any manner of speaking will not be silent, and fall down and worship that
comely honorable manner of Oratory when it shall be set up, then to Prison
with him, make him fast. What Is this but to do as Nebuchadnezzar did, when he
had set up a golden image, and cast those that would not worship it into a
fiery furnace? Did ever Truth stand in need of Prisons to make men fall down to
it? Did ever any thing in that kind, need prison or furnace to make another
thing stoop to it, except only Idols? Did ever Christ or any of his Apostles
call to Magistrates, and Constables, and other Officers to take others away to
prison who interrupted them? or needed they any other thing to keep men silent
while they spoke, besides the Authority and Power of their words? Surely if you
be their successors as you would have men believe, and if your Preaching be
like theirs, you would not need any other thing to make men silent but the
power of your words. But its an Idol, and so needs iron to uphold and defend
it: and to fasten it as it were in a wall lest it fall. It may be some will
say, Has not God converted souls by this manner of Preaching in Pulpits? I
answer if any were thereby converted, it was by some words of Truth falling
upon the hearts of the hearers, which might have had the same effect in other
manner of speaking: and therefore the converson of such is not to be ascribed
to that Idolized manner of Preaching Sermons in Pulpits: but to the Power of
Truth which ought to have liberty to be spoken in other manner, but cannot for
that Idol. I do willingly give my Testimony, that the times of ignorance God
winked at, and was pleased to step in, and give much power sometimes to the
words of some who have spoken in that way, especially to such as have been
under some suffering for not being fully conformable. Yea Babylon it self
cannot keep him out, but for his chosen sake he will speak to them there, even
in the midst of confusion. But what then! now when light is breaking out, and
discovering things more clearly, He calls upon all men to repent, and forsake
the Error of their doings: and he that does not follow the light, shall have
nothing left him to uphold, but an Idol. For God is departing out of that which
is not his own purely: and will leave it dead and dry, without life, without
nourishment. Yea he has already withdrawn himself, and where formerly some
life has been found, now it is become as the blood of a dead man. Again, if
your manner of Preaching be not an Image, an Idol of your own, or other men's
imaginations; but the pure offspring of the Spirit: then tell us how it comes
to pass, that you can limit that holy Spirit now by the hour: does the Spirit
Order you, and administer words and matter to you by the hour; or you Order him
and keep him to your hour? O vain men, is it not the Idol of your own heads;
the formings of your own brain; your woven and carved Oration-like speeches,
that you have this power over; to reach to what length you would have them, and
to stop where you would have them? They who have tasted of the Spirits
ministering by them can witness that they then could not be stretched out to the
hour, or limited by the hour. Again, is not your Preaching an Idol; when as
you uphold it only for Gain? Its from your own mouths; Take away livings, say
you, (that is tithes and other hire) and what will become of the Gospel? that
is of your Gospel. Oh ye earthly spirited men, does the care of the Gospel lie
only upon the shoulders of Hirelings? Surely surely, the time was when as the
truth of the Gospel was upheld by suffering the loss of all things: and is it
now upheld by hire? It was upheld, and also spread abroad by a few sufferers;
but now it seems its otherwise. No hire, no Gospel: no Livings, no Preaching. I
think so indeed. Such is your care of the Gospel. You are worthy to be called
Gospel Preachers, and Gospel Ministers: and yet the want of hire will divide
between you and your Gospel. Take away the one, and take away the other also:
for so you speak, plain out, and are not ashamed. Woe is us, has God committed
his Gospel to such careless ones? has he hung it upon so tickle a point, and
in these times when men are ready every where to withdraw their stipends, but
only that they are held to it by awe. No, no, your Gospel, and your Preaching
is your Diana, an Idol, a gainful Idol; and by that craft you have your gain.
If you should let the magnificence of it fall to the ground your gain were
lost. And therefore it behooves you to cry it up, as the Ephesians did their
Diana. Act. 19.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Cry it up with a shout and noise of words,
with staves and clubs, and Constables and Bayliffes, and sines and Prisons, for
this will be your best Argument. Tell the People ingeniously as Demetrius did,
That by this craft or Art you have your wealth, and therefore it behooves you to
uphold it: Not that you care for the Gospel any further then its made a gainful
trade; and upheld by you as an Idol, to bring in your gain: for take away gain,
and farewell your Gospel and Preaching: all dies with hire if that be taken
away. Much more may be said to your Preaching, but I pass on to your singing.

You have Psalms indeed, but how come you by them? In the Primitive Church,
that is, in the first gathering of Saints out of the world into fellowships one
with another by the Apostles, they had Psalms, 1 Cor. 14.26 One had a Psalm,
another a Revelation, another an interpretation. They had all these and such
like gifts given them by the Spirit, which ministered to every one severally as
he pleased, 1 Cor. 12.11. But whence have you your Psalms? Does the Spirit of
the Lord minister them to you? Or do not you (because you want that gift) set
up a Clark: or reader in many of your Congregations to supply the want of that
gift; as if he were the ministering spirit to minister a Psalm to all the
Congregation: what is this pure fire from the Altar: or strange fire like
Nadabs, and Abihu's, taken from the Kitchen of your smoakie imaginations? Or
else you have your Psalms from your Books, and so all times are alike to you;
you can sing when you will, and forbear when you will: which would not be if
the spirit (which breathes when and where he lists) did administer them to
you: for he would rule you, and not you him. Did not Christ ascend on high, and
give gifts to men for the work of his ministry? But you descend to make use of
the invented Rimes and Metters of men to make up with your ministry. I know
and witness, that sincerity of heart expressing and breathing forth it self in
these things in the time of ignorance, has been accepted, and cherished by the
Lord: but now when light is come to discover them to be of humane invention, in
respect of the form and use of them, and yet men cry them up for the Ordinances
of Jesus Christ: the Spirit of the Lord arises up in indignation against them,
as they are so abused. If you say, where are those gifts of singing which are
spoken off* there is no such thing to be found. I Answer you. They are not to be
found with you: you are the Land of Captivity, you are Babylon, we may sit down
by the Rivers of Babylon, weeping in remembrance of Zion (while we are held
captive by you) for how should any sing the Lords songs in a strange Land? The
shadows are not yet fled away: the winter is not yet over and gone: and
therefore we cannot say to you, that the time of singing is come: we cannot
tell you that the voice of the Turtle is to be heard in your Land. It may be it
is heard somewhere, though you hear it not.

Lastly you have that among some of you which you call Communion. But where
that Communion lies I cannot tell. If it were Communion with God and Christ,
then the Nature of God and Christ, which they have communion with at that
Supper (as you call it, though it be a dinner) would put forth it self in the
partakers of it. They would walk as children of light, and not as children of
darkness, in the works of darkness. If any man say, he has fellowship (or
Communion) with God and walk in darkness, he lies, and does not the Truth. 1 John 1.6. But your Communion shows forth no such thing accompanying it. For
men come to it proud; and they go away proud. They come covetous, and they go
away covetous. They come persecutors, and they go away persecutors. They come
worldly minded ones, and they go away worldly minded. Now they who are such,
know neither the the Father nor the Son nor have Communion or fellowship with
them. Yea it may be they come Extortioners, Oppressors, hard hearted task
masters of Egypt, liars, cheaters, Over-reachers defrauders, drunkards,
swearers, whore-mongers, full of malice and revenge; and such like. Thus they
come, and thus they go as they came, having no participation or Communion of
the Divine nature in their Spirits to alter them. But thus come and go in their
sinful nature having Communion with the spirit of darkness, and
unrighteousness while they pretend Communion with God: and thus go on eating
and drinking unworthily they know not what: and you suffer them to do so, and
do it with them: eating and drinking judgment to your selves, while you thus
take the Name of God and Christ in vain. 1 Cor. 11.29. This is not to eat the
Lords Supper This is not to eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood: for
then would ye become dead to this world with him, and Christ would live again
in you. Take notice of the words which Paul the servant of the Lord spoke. 1
Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the
blood of Christ? The bread which we break is it not the Communion of the Body
of Christ? Now the right Communicants, are one bread, and one Body, being all
made partakers of that one bread. verse. 17. which bread is Christ. But ye
cannot be partakers of this bread, nor have Communion with it, so long as you
are in your Gentilisme or heathenish Nature, living in Pride, Covetousness,
Persecution, oppressing, overreaching, uncleanness, lies and such like. For
says Paul, v. 21. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils:
ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and of the table of devils. Now the
things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils, and not to God,
verse. 20. Gentiles are every one in their Gentilising nature; and what ever
they sacrifice, that is, what ever worship they offer in pretense as to God, it
is to Devils, and not to God. Though they say it is to God as the Athenians did
Act. 17.23. Yet God ownes it not: such as worship him in Spirit and in Truth,
those are they whom he seeks to worship him. As for those who walk in the
works of darkness, he has not Communion with them, nor they with him. For what
Communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6.14. Further you have not so much
as Communion one with another, in that which you call Communion: for which of
you imparts to the rest of the Communicants, as every one has need. You are so
far from Community in these outward things, that you will go to Law for your
propriety one with another, if you apprehend your selves but a little wronged
therein, contrary to the mind and counsel of Christ. Mat. 5.40.

Thus it is apparent, for all your boasting of the Ordinances of Christ, I say
it is apparent, that you have but a counterfeit image of the form of some of
them: and not the very true image of those which you have. If you had the very
express image of all the outward forms of Ordinances of Christ, or practices
of the Apostles and Believers: yet these were poor things to boast of, and to
be exalted with Laodicean-like for if you had all these in form nearer then
they are among any people in this Nation, yet if your spirits fall downwards
and become earthly, the Lord would leave them, and slip away from you to
another people who arise in their spirits casting off every weight, and the
sins which beset them, or hinder them, that they might run with patience the
race set before them. Yea let me tell you that if you had not only a true
image and form of Ordinances; but also a form of godliness in words and sayings
of Christ and the Apostles always in your mouths; Yet all this could not
bind or hold the Lord with you. But still he would slip away from under all
these; leaving these as husks and chafe for you who are disobedient and
earthly to feed upon, and boast your selves in; while in the mean time another
people should enjoy his presence: for it is not any form of godliness that the
Lord takes pleasure in: but the Power, the Truth, the life, the spirit. And
therefore he does not bind us his servants to abide in Communion with any,
that live in any form of godliness without the Power. But commands us by his
Apostle to turn away from such. 2 Timothy 3.5. And this is no unwarrantable
Schism or separation. So that whether we look at the form of Ordinances, or at
the Power of godliness we have warrant enough to turn away from you, and to
have no fellowship in your holy things. For as I said, you have but an image of
some Ordinances only, and that without the life and Power of them. Others
traditions of Christ you do altogether disown, for they will not stand with
your profit, as namely to deny your selves to take up his Cross daily and
follow Christ: which is a great Ordinance of Christ; for without this one
cannot be his Disciple. Again you disown the liberty which Christ has given to
all his members, namely. Ye may all prophecy, one by one, that all may learn,
and all may be comforted. You disown every gift that would bring to naught the
magnificence of your Diana. But what you can form to profit your selves withal
that you retain: And can add also other things, (to make Merchandise of them)
which have no shadow of any footstep in the practices of the true Messengers of
Christ, as namely, Your Marrying of Persons for money; your buryings for money;
and your most absurd Mortuaries or stipend which you challenge for the dead.
Your funeral sermons for money also. I am weary with raking in these filthy
puddles: which are fit for nothing but swine to wallow in.

And thus though you both add and diminish from the things of Christ, and
Counterfeit other things which you uphold for your gain; yet all that separate
from you must be cried against as Heretics Sectarists, Schismatics,
Separatists.

Indeed there is a separation, which I do not here plead for: and that's a
separation upon conceit of ones own holiness, because they are devout in some
outward observations of worship more then other men: such as are spoken of Isa.
65.5. Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou. These
are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day: and these were devout
in holding up Ordinances: rather then they would have no sacrifice they would
sacrifice in Gardens: and rather then they would have no incense they would
offer it upon Altars of Brick verse. 3. They are charged to be a people who walk
after their own thoughts, verse. 2. Such also were the Pharisees, who stood
glorying in their own outside painted holiness; and thanked God that they were
not as other men, and even as this Publicane: when as within, they were full of
rottenness, and all uncleanness: full of envy, wrath, malice, persecution,
disdain, covetousness, pride and such like. And all these they retained under a
show of godliness, and outward observation of Ceremonies and traditions of
their Fathers. They were strict in washing off the defilement which they had
any way contracted, if water would have done it. They bare great reverence to
the sacrifices upon the Altar, which were Ordinances then in force. They made
conscience of paying tithe of all they had, even of Mint and Annise and Cummin.
They were not wanting in prayers, and fastings to the Lord, and their prayers
were no short ones, which gave all to think, that they were not weary of
serving the Lord. Yea they compassed Sea and Land too to beget people to the
Lord, to make proselites: thus they appeared righteous unto men. But yet for
all that they were but whited Sepulchers full of Hypocrisy, and iniquity, when
that light came which was able to discover them: and to uncover their hearts by
their works. Even by their covetousness, and hard heartedness to the poor
Widows, by their love of honor, by their neglect of the weightier matters of
the Law, Judgment, Mercy, Faith: as also by that persecuting spirit which was
in them; and such like: and yet these men added one thing more to gloss all
the rest over the better, they abhorred to be companions to Publicanes and
sinners, and blamed Christ for eating and drinking with such. Yea they made it
matter of thankfulness to God, acknowledging it to be his work, that they were
not such: and thus they said in their hearts, Stand by thy self, for I am
holier then thou. There were some also spoken of in the Epistle of Jude,
ungodly men, walking after their own lusts, sensual, not having the Spirit
ver. 19. These separated themselves from the fellowship of those Saints, who
stood in the pure truth: turning the grace of God into lasciviousness; the pure
Love into wantonness. They crept in unawares, and drew an image of the pure
Love and grace of God shed abroad upon the Saints, and in their carnal hearts
it became wantonness, and lasciviousness: and so they withdrew themselves
again, and separated from that holy fellow-ship to follow their ungodly lusts
of uncleanness, covetousness, gluttony and such like. Now I say such
separations as these I do not plead for. But I own and defend that separation
from the inventions and traditions and Formalities of men which is commanded in
Scripture under the name Babylon. Rev. 18.4. Jer. 50.8. Chapter 51.6, 45. The whole
chapters speak much thereof.

Oh ye Priests, ye Merchants of Babylon, out of the North there arised up a
Nation against you, which shall make your Land desolate. Chapter 50.3. chapter 51.48.
It is time to separate from your Babylonish inventions: for the hewers are
already entered into your forest. Oh thou that dwell upon many waters,
thine end is come and the measure of thy covetousness Jer. 51.13. Thy strength
fails, the mighty men of Babylon have forborne to fight: they have remained in
their holds; they are become as women, Jer. 51.30. If my application fail, it
will not fail long. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the
habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a Cage of every
unclean and hateful bird. All Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of
her fornications: and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with
her; and the Merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her
delicacies, Rev. 18.2, 3. And for this cause is she fallen, Because she made
all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. Rev. 14.8.
Therefore to obey that voice from Heaven which has said in the hearts of many
come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive not of her plague; I say to obey this voice is not Heresy, Schism,
and such a separation as you have made it.

Heresy and Schism and Separation and Sects rightly taken is this, To
separate, divide or make a rent and breach from the truth, and from them that
dwell therein: as namely from the Spirit and life of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
from such Apostles and servants of his as have walked or do walk in that
spirit, and in that life: and from them in that thing wherein there is truth.
But you cannot be said to be such: you are far enough from the paths and
spirit too that dwelt in them. And therefore I leave it to the daylight which
shall arise in men's consciences to discover whether you your selves be not
Grand Heretics, grand Schismatics, grand Seperatists, swarving from the Life
and Spirit of them, whom you cry up in words.

And such grand Schismatics and Heretics you are, that you would stop up the
way for ever (if it were in your power) to keep men from returning back again
into the purity and Simplicity of that truth from which you are separated:
crying out to the people, to take heed of Heresy and Schism, and separation,
scaring them with these terms, when as you your selves are the Schismatics
and Separatists from the Truth: and so while you bid others beware of it, you
hold them fast in it.

O ye Deceivers God will require his flock at your hands. Their Redeemer is
strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall thoroughly plead their cause,
and deliver them out of your hands. Jer. 50.33, 34. Eze. 34.10, 11.12, etc.

I pass on now to other terms which you have used against such as have pressed
toward the Truth. For I must fill to you in your own Cup. You call others
unlearned and unstable from the words of Peter in his second Epistle. Chapter 3. v.
16. And say that they wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction. We will
first consider these words as they are translated: and afterward as they may
be more truly translated: and see to whom they may most properly be applied.
First for the word unlearned: we shall see who they are that are unlearned, by
taking notice what Learning is. Learning is nothing else but A right
understanding of things as they are in themselves: an appendance whereof is
Eloquence, which is a clear uttering of things rightly understood, to the
understandings of others. I have seldom heard of any learned man of any depth
of Judgment that will say that Eloquence lies in dark expressions, and hidden
words, and vainglorious sounds of words which some delight in: but in a plain,
pertinent, clear expression that comes home to the understandings of others:
that's to speak the thing out, that's Eloquence. I know well, that there is an
Eloquence, which is Eloquence but only to some, to others it is an unknown
tongue, I am not against this, if it do clearly and pertinently express Truth:
let men speak out truth as they can: but yet mind what Paul said, I had rather
speak five words with the understanding, then ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue: speaking home to others understanding comes nearest to the end of
speaking. Now here is the very End of Schools and Universities, namely, To
bring men to a right understanding of things as they are in themselves, in
truth, and to profit their utterance and demonstration of that truth that is in
things, and for this end are disputations in Schools about Questions Moral,
Philosophical, Divine, etc. Now he that reaches nearest home to these Ends,
namely to understand things as they are really in themselves, and to utter
forth the same to the understandings of others, he is the most Learned, Let his
Education be what it will: for he reaches that, which all Universities are
erected for in the right ends of them. Further the top of all learning, or the
principal learning lies in a clear understanding of the highest things, or of
the things of Christ and the clear Demonstration of these things to the
understandings of others by words which the spirit administers; is the chiefest
Eloquence. If learning and Eloquence consist in any thing else let them who
list, declare wherein it lies. Now these things being well weighed, may in some
measure discover to us who are learned, who are unlearned. Namely those who
best reach these ends, be it in what way soever, by study, by Education, or by
Revelation, they are the most learned. If one man be brought up at an
University, and spend many years there: another follows his employment in some
outward calling, walking in obedience to the light that's in him. Now let these
two meet at the end of seven years; and he that has followed his calling, and
the light communicated to him be better instructed in the mysteries of Jesus
Christ, then the other; and be more able to declare them with profit to the
hearers then the other: yea to confound the other by the Scriptures, and
discover his ignorance and disobedience: then let any rational man tell us
which of these two men is the more Learned, and which is the more unlearned in
the things of Christ. Now whether there be not many presidents of these
afforded in this Nation of ours, let the experience of these times testify.
And yet the unlearned ignorant Priests cry out against others as unlearned, who
have more learning then themselves. Now for the word unstable that which is
stability they account Instability. For stability is to stick close to the
Lord, and to follow him whithersoever he goes, it is not to fix our roots into
the earth, and there to stick fast. Suppose that when the Lord led his people
out of Egypt, some would sit down by the fleshpots of Egypt, others would set
forward, but yet sit down by the way, at some of those places where the cloud
that led them stood still, others where the tabernacle was pitched for a
season, others would turn back again unto Egypt: but others as Caleb and Joshua
followed the Lord fully: removing from place to place, not turning back again
in their hearts, but keeping entirely to the guide that led them. Now tell me,
were Caleb and Joshua the unstable ones, who could no where sit down with the
rest that turned back in their hearts to Egypt: or they who had motions for a
time to go forward, but afterward turned back again? So the Lamb may have as
many removes out of Babylon and Egypt spiritual for ought I know; and if so:
then whether are they who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes; or they who
have motions forth of this Babylon, but turn back again in their hearts,
choosing rather to sit down at ease there, then to go on. I say which of these
are the unstable ones? judge in your selves. But shall I tell you that the
instability of many shall be laid to the charge of you Priests. You have met
them and buffetted them with your terrible words, and have turned away many a
soul from following the Lamb. Yea I my self have not been without buffettings
from some of you. Others (whom my soul tenderly looks upon with much
compassion) have broken from you, and have broken the Ice as it were, pressing
forward after the Truth, and to find out the way for us toward Zion. Yet
through the violence of your Tempests, have been made to turn into creekes for
harbor, where to make their stand, lest they should be overwhelmed in your
Tempests: and so have been slacked and taken off from their stability in
following the Lamb: and yet with an impudent for chead you brand that with
instabilitie which is stabilitie and strength. Let us now consider of the words
in a better translation. The words of Peter in the Greek tongue are these:
(...). 2 Pet. 3.16. And they are translated thus; Which they that are unlearned
and unstable wrest. (I desire tender spirits not to be offended, that I use
words here which they understand not; for I speak to those that do understand
the litterall sense of them; and must deal with them a little with their own
weapons.) The words which may more easily be understood if they were translated
nearer to the Greek words thus; Which they that are undiscipled, and unfixed
wrest: for by unlearned is meant undiscipled here in this place; and by
unstable is meant such as are unfixed in their hearts to Jesus Christ, and to
his Cross. Now a man cannot be a Disciple of Christ except he deny himself,
and take up his Cross daily and follow Christ. So that the meaning is this
plainly: which they who are undiscipled not taking up their Cross to follow
Christ: who are unfixed to Christ in their hearts halting between him and the
world, do wrest. For such as these are the wresters of the Scriptures to their
own destruction. These, because there is an edge of Scripture against them,
therefore they turn aside the edge of it with their slippery and misty
interpretations, that so they may sit at their ease enjoying the pleasures of
this world, and avoiding the Cross, rather then put their necks under the yoke
of Christ. That these are the unlearned ones spoken off in this place is plain
by the very word (...) which signifies one undiscipled: for when men unlearned
in another sense are spoken of, the word (...) is used, which signifies
illiterate: and in that sense indeed Peter and John were unlearned, that is
they were illiterate or ungrammerd men, Act. 4.13. Now herein is the foul Error
of the Priests who have altogether applied that in Peter to illiterate men,
such as Peter himself was who spoke them: whereas the words there are only
proper to undiscipled men, unlearned in the Truths of Christ, disobedient to
him in their hearts. These are the wresters of Scripture to their own
destruction. I apeal to your selves, whether the very words do not fairly lead
to this interpretation: or rather hold out this very sense without any further
interpretation. And so Peter's unlearned ones that wrest the Scriptures, are
very applicable to the greatest Doctors in the world. The most learned Rabbis,
and Commentators, and Disputants in the world may be, and for the most part are
(...) that is undiscipled: unsubdued to the yoke of Christ; and so most fit to
wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction.

Again let us leave the bare words and consider of the dealings of the Lord
with men, and from thence take notice who are most likely to wrest the
Scriptures. How come we to understand the Truth? is it not a thing given? Now
to whom is it given? Only to learned men brought up at Universities? noe: the
Lord chooses few of those to entrust with the Knowledge of his Truth. 1 Cor.
1.26, 27, 28. verses. Not many wise, and so on. But God has chosen the foolish
things, and weak things: and base things, and despised things, to do his works
by: that no flesh should glory, verse. 29. Now if he will choose such for his
works, who dare contradict; or say unto him why do thou so? or clamor against
his instruments, calling them unleamed, except only such as dare say any
thing? Did not Christ thank his Father for hiding the mysteries of his Kingdom
from the wise and prudent, and revealing them to babes? Mat. 11.25. And yet you
would arrogate to your selves a privilege of right understanding the Truth by
virtue of your acquired wisdom, by humane learning, and vilify all others that
want that learning, as wresters of the Scriptures to their own destruction:
when as often times that which you call wrested, is the very Truth lying in
plain words in the letter. The true Knowledge of the Doctrine of Christ, is not
given to Humane Learning, but to obedience to the will of God. Joh. 7.17. If
any man will do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whither it be of God.
Its plain therefore, that the most self-denying persons are most likely to know
the Doctrine of Christ best; to them its promised. Every degree of self denial
done in obedience to God, removes a vail from off the Creatures understanding,
and so he going on therein, has an abundant entrance opened unto him into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord: and the want of Humane learning cannot rob the
Obedient of this Entrance into the Kingdom of light: whereas on the contrary
Disobedience (though accompanied with never so much humane learning and wisdom)
folds up a man under blindness, and strong delusions; even to believe lies. 2
These. 2.11. And yet by you all truth must be ascribed to Universities, and
Humane learning, though God regard them not: and nothing taken notice of from
such as want that Humane learning, though God make use of such for the most
part, as his fittest instruments.

Lastly, you have not been sparing in calling others Blasphemers, but what
Blasphemy is one shall seldom hear from you. To Blaspheme is to speak evil of
one falsely, to slander, to reproach, to revile, to strike through ones name
with reproaches. Thus to revile the actings of the holy Spirit, is to Blaspheme
the holy Spirit: as some of the Pharisees did revile the words and actions of
Christ, when that Spirit put forth it self eminently in him in mighty works:
they said spitefully and revilingly, that he did it by Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils. Paul himself while he was Saul, a Persecuter, was also guilty in
part of Blasphemy against that holy name, speaking evil thereof: and he looked
upon it as a great thing that he obtained mercy. He did it ignorantly in
unbelief. Thus also Paul himself and others were Blasphemed afterward. Romans
3.8. As we be slanderously reported, etc. now the word slanderously reported is
in the Greek tongue (...) that is, as we be blasphemed. In the same sense it is
said 1 Cor. 4.13. being defamed we entreat, the Greek word is (...), that is
being blasphemed we entreat. Again, Tit. 3.2. we are bid to speak evil of no
man falsely, the word is, to Blaspheme no man, revile no man, slander no man.
Now you, O Priests are full of slandering reviling names; and so full of names
of Blasphemy. You Blaspheme Christ and his holy Spirit at every motion or step
whereby he moves forward in his people. Every motion that leads forward from
under the great mystery of iniquity toward Zion that you prosecute and dog
with revilings, which is nothing else but absolute Blasphemy. You Blaspheme
both God that leads forth calling him delusion and Devil, and fancy: and also
his Tabernacle (that is, his people in motion out of Egypt spiritual) calling
them Heretics, Schismatics, Separatists, Blasphemers, and such like, when as
in Truth you your selves are the things you so call. O fools and blind, when
will you see that the Tabernacle of God dwells under the cloud while its in the
wilderness: and is to come forth of great tribulation: that's the Character of
the Saints under which they must stand one day. But you by your Blasphemies, by
your slanders, and revilings, by odious terms, and other means are great
causers and promoters of that tribulation.

To the rest of your Blasphemies, I think I may not unfitly add this as one,
that you call a building made of wood and stone, the Church: whereas the Church
is the body of Christ. Surely, surely the very boys and children will ere long
deride your folly. Your are so wedded to this name, that if any call it by any
other name you deride them, though there be no reason why it should be called
Church. What! is it the Body of Christ? Why will you continue to Blaspheme the
name of Christ thus to call a dead house his Body? for the Church is his Body.
Col. 1, 18, 24. See if you can any where find a house of wood and stone called
Church in Scripture. If we call it Synagogue, or high place, or Idols Temple,
or Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird, we can better justify these,
because we find these names given to such like places in Scripture: but these
you abominate. Or if we call it steeple-house, or Pulpit-house from the form,
or adjunct, yet these you cannot bear. I would you would tell us what to call
them inoffencively. But I must tell you that if no name will serve you to call
them by, but that which is proper to the Body of Christ, we must in indignation
trample them under feet with the names which the Scripture has given to such
houses, calling them Idols Temples, high places, and such like.

Some I know will frivolously answer and say, Its not the place, but the
congregation which we call Church. I say that's an idle conceit: for if that
were so then the name Church should go along with the Congregation. But that it
does not: let the Congregation move all together if they will to any place, yet
the name Church moves not with it, but rests upon that Idolized Temple, and
when none is in it, yet its called Church. Again if you should call the
Congregation the Church, yet consider what you do: for as I said, the Church is
the very Body of Christ, acted by that Unction which is Christ, even by the
same spirit wherewith the person of the man Christ Jesus was acted. Take heed
how you call a company of people living in Humane inventions and traditions,
satisfying themselves with the bare name of Christians, having their spirits in
the earth: I say take heed how you call these the Body of Christ. A company of
people acted by a spirit of persecution, vain glory, covetousness, worldly
mindedness and such like, are these the Body of Christ acted by his spirit,
whenas they walk most contrary to it? No no, its somewhat else to be a
Christian. It may be some will say, true, too many do walk so, but all do not
so, some walk otherwise, and they are the Church. I answer, I do not deny but
that some there, may be of the Church, and not of that earthly Congregation,
though among them: but these cannot give the Denomination of Church to the
rest, because they are not of them, but only among them as captive children in
Babylon. So that I say now, if it were the Congregation it self (and not the
stone house) which you call Church, yet consider whether this would be free
from Blasphemy, if they shall be found the Synagogue of Satan.

These now are some of those things which may be said concerning you and your
Ordinances: both which you will needs father on Christ, crying them up for his
Ordinances and your selves for his Ministers: and more then this will the Lord
in time discover both concerning you and others.

You have set up your selves as leaders and guides of the people; but you have
hardened their hearts against the fear of the Lord: and so keep them from
entering into the very beginnings of wisdom: for the fear of the Lord is the
entrance into wisdom: how should it be expected that they should be moved to
fear him, when as you their teachers, say and do not. Do not you thereby teach
them to live in sayings without doings, and that without fear? For by your
examples you harden them in an hypocryticall form of words, without doing the
will of the Lord: for how do you think that they should learn to do the will of
the Lord from your mouths who are not moved through his fear to do it your
selves? You stand in the way letting and hindering men from entering into the
Kingdom: and neither enter in your selves, nor suffer those that are entering
to go in; so far as you can hinder. If they had not you to rest upon, they
would be stirred up the sooner to look after truth. The people themselves can
say of you, that some of you say well, but you do not as you say. This they see
in the best of you: but because of your examples set before them they rest in
doing as you do, sheltering themselves under your practice and disobedience,
although they see further. Thus by hardening the people in their evil ways you
rob and spoil them of that Peace and rest and light and comfort which obedience
to the Truth would lead them into. And so for all your boasting of your
ministry and Ordinances, yet you do not thereby lead up any of the People to
those high and noble ends, for which gifts, and ministry and the Ordinances of
Christ were given: namely, to a conformity to Jesus Christ in this world: and
to that end were they given, even to lead up to the measure of the stature of
the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 13. But how should you lead up further
then you go your selves? Nay, your ministry is so far from leading up to that
conformity that the nearer any comes to it, the more are your mouths opened
against them in your Pulpits. So that you are of that spirit, that sets it self
in the Temple of God over men's consciences opposing and exalting it self above
all that's called God; calling that delusion and fancy. 2 These. 2.4.

Thus I have hitherto finished my Testimony against that mystery which is
upheld by you, which the Lord is untwisting. In witness against which I have
been kept back from among you, and have suffered the loss of all things and do
suffer: and not only I but many others. This mystery of Humane inventions
mixed with some appearances of Truth has driven many into the Island of Patmos,
(of suffering) for many years, even all those John's who have been faithful to
the Revelation of it communicated to them. I for my own part through weakness
and hardness of heart, mine own and others have been made for sometime to
sojourn in Zoar. But now beholding so great burnings arising upon Sodom, I am
made to depart out of Zoar also. Behold there has been a great Deluge upon the
face of the Earth, overtopping all things: but some have been preserved as in
an ark: and now I see innocent Doves sent forth again (for some have returned)
to see if the waters be abated from the tops of the mountains: if that spirit
of innocence find nothing but an Olive leaf, it must return again until the
waters be further abated: these I write for those who understand.

And now I shall leave one Querie with you who are the National Ministers.

I pray tell me who are those Sorcerers which have been so numerous that they
have bewitched and deceived all Nations? those Enchanters who have made the
inhabiters of the earth drunk with the wine of their fornication? and with
whom the Kings of the earth have been so good friends that they have committed
fornication with them?

Postscript.
THese things which I have written are not from an intention to draw people off
from these men to follow or hing upon my self: no, but to witness with the rest
of my fellow sufferers against Delusion: and to help to bring down that proud
Lording spirit which is in the new Prelates; which would sit as God in the
Temple of God, Lording it over men's consciences through fained words, and
causing poor slaves and souls of men to dread them even as God himself. I say
my desire is to be helpful to bring down to the dust that deluding Lording
spirit, That the Consciences of people may stand open and free to the voice of
the Lord in them: and may not be captivated with such who live in words. And if
after these, others shall arise into the same spirit, as these have risen into
the spirit of the Prelates after their decease, He that has discovered them,
and these, will also discover such as shall succeed; and so in this sense, as
well as in outward Governments, Overturn, Overturn, Overturn, until he come
into his Temple whose right it is.

You may call these things which I have written flashes of new light if you
please (for so you brand every thing that breaks forth now in this dawning of
the morning after the sad night of Antichristian darkness.) But be it known to
you it is not so to me, being that same which has been sprinking up in me and
others these many years. For you have been a long time represented to me as men
under thick darkness, which has kept me off through the tender mercy of my God
from entering into your ways in which I could see no light. I have been only
brought to the brink of your Babylonish Rivers, which bring up your gain, I
mean your Ordinances, that I might taste of the bitterness of them; but there
have I been made to sit down weeping in remembrance of Zion: which Zion hastens
to appear. Allelujah.

Thou that read these things and art convinced of the truth of them, Boast
not against these men: But look toward the Lord who is making his righteous
Judgments manifest; and fear. For he will in due time discover much more then
this, both concerning them and others. He is about to fan the Nations, and to
gather his wheat into his Garner, and to burn up the light chaff with
unquenchable fire therefore Glory not. But let him that thinks hestandeth
take heed lest he fall. Be not high minded but fear. For my part I write not
these things out of bitterness against any of their persons, or to boast over
any of them, (for the Lord can soon make a blaspheming Saul to become a Paul.)
But rather to let proud boasting, reviling Preachers to see, what little cause
they have to carry so clamorously against those who withdraw from them. In
respect of my self I had rather be silent, and let them plow all the day long
upon my back with their revilings. But if these things shall be isntrumental
to bring some of them to consider their ways, and to look better to the
foundation of their practices, and to cease from beating their fellow servants
and be stirred up to seek the way to Zion that's as much as I look for: Farewell.

A Letter to the Papists.
SIRS,
HAving touched in discourse with you upon that which is the very foundation of
your Religion, and seeing it in my understanding to have nothing but the sands
to stand upon, I cannot but in love to you, represent again before you the same
thing that I then said to you, that you may seriously ponder it for it
overturns your Religion at the very root. Your foundation is this, that Peter
must have a succession, and secondly that the Bishops of Rome are the only
successors of Peter: and so they being the successors of Peter are the Church
built upon him the Rock, and from them all Teaching must flow. Here is your
Basis or foundation on which you stand.

Now friends consider whether an outward succession of Bodies inhabiting the
place where Peter lived (if he lived at Rome) be a good foundation for the
Church of Christ to stand upon. When Christ the promised seed came, you know
that the Church slipped away from the carnal seed to a spiritual, leaving the
carnal Jew boasting of its carnal succession, when as yet God had departed
from it. Now shall we think that God would ever after tie himself to a carnal
succession again, having once cut off Abraham's who was the friend of God?
Certainly if any may stand upon an outward succession, then Abraham's seed after
the flesh may, having so many Promises running to them in outward appearance.
But he is not a Jew now who is one outwardly, neither is Circumcision that
which is outward in the flesh: but he is a Jew who is one inwardly: and
Circumcision is that of the heart, and they who are of the faith of Abraham are
counted for the seed. So I say, he is not of the succession of Peter who is one
outwardly, but he who is of the same spirit with Peter. No Nation or place, or
outward order of men can confine the succession of Peter to themselves, since
God laid aside all such outward entailment from Abraham, and has betaken
himself only to a spiritual line, a spiritual seed. For it were contrary to
all reason that God should lay aside or cut off Abraham's carnal seed of the
Jews, to take in a spiritual seed out of any Nation, and yet after that take
up again a carnal or outward succession to Peter, and that in one part of one
Nation only, namely at Rome. For this were to build up again that which he had
formerly destroyed; and to destroy that which formerly he had built up. To
build up again a carnal succession to Peter, which he had destroyed in Abraham's
line; and to destroy and keep out a spiritual seed fearing God in all Nations
which once he had taken in. The Progress of the Lord with his Church is not a
going back from spiritual to Carnal, but a going forward from carnal to
spiritual, and after that to more spiritual.

Now that the Bishops of Rome are not the spiritual seed nor the spiritual
successors of Peter, nor the Rock upon which the Church of Christ is builded,
no nor the Church of Christ it self; nor the sole feeders of the flock of
Christ, no nor fit to be feeders of the flock of Christ at all, appears clearly
by their lives. You shall know them by their fruits or works, says Christ,
(speaking of false Prophets:) do men gather grapes of thorns or figgs of
thistles? No they are so far from being discovered by their fruits to be Peter's
spiritual successors, that their fruits discover them to be false Prophets,
yea and such as have the pre-eminence among those who have deceived the
Nations. This stands in great Characters upon their foreheads that all may run
and read, Mystery Babylon the great, the mother of Harlots, and abominations of
the Earth: For what abominations be there, that are not among them committed?
As for persecution they excel, being drunk with the blood of Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Rev. 17.5, 6. They are arrayed in purple, and
scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stone, and pearls, having a
golden cup in their hand full of abominations, and filthiness of their
fornication. verse. 4. How far are these things differing from the spirit that
was in Peter?

But to speak a little more particularly, that they are not Peter's spiritual
successors appears in this because they are the least conformable or like to
Peter of any men. For Peter did really in life deny himself, take up his cross
and follow Christ: they do not so, but are exalted like Princes in the earth,
possessing an earthly Kingdom. They have indeed many images of crosses, they
glory in the shadow but deny the practice, the life of the cross, which is
that which Christ called for, and Peter lived in, but they are far from. Again
as they have not the life of Peter, so they have not the spirit of Peter in
them, and therefore are not his successors, and so are not a Rock for the
Church of Christ to be built upon. It was not Peter's outside that was called a
Rock, but that spirit of life that was in him, which could flow into the
spirits of others and so cement many living stones into one spiritual house
with him. Now that they have not the spirit of Peter in them appears also by
their fruits, their lives: their fruits are the fruits of Sodom, and not the
fruits of the spirit: for they live in pride, fullness of bread, abundance of
idleness, covetousness, Persecution and such like. They seek the honor of this
world, and heap up to themselves, the riches of this world, and therefore
cannot be Believers, much less Rocks for the Church to stand on, Joh. 5.44. How
can ye believe who receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only? Now none receive greater honor among men then they do:
therefore none are further off from believing in Christ aright then they are.
Again they have not the true love of God in them. 1 John 2.15. If any man love
the world the love of the Father is not in him. And who are greater lovers of
the world then the Bishops of Rome are? Again they are not fit to teach others.
This also appears by their lives. For what have they to do to take the word of
God into their mouths, who hate to be reformed themselves, and to live as
Christ and his Apostles did? How can they build up the Church of Christ by
their Doctrine, who live contrary to the Doctrine of Christ? How can they teach
men to take up the cross and follow Christ, who are enemies to the cross of
Christ? whose God is their Belly, who glory in that which will be their shame,
who mind earthly things? Phil. 3.18, 19.

Thus I say their lives discover them to be nothing conformable to Peter; to
have none of that spirit in them, which dwelt in him; to be unbeleevers; to
want the love of the Father in them; to be unfit to teach others. All these I
say appear clearly by their lives, by their fruits, by their works; the
Character that Christ's gives to know false Prophets day. Mat. 7.15, 16.20. And
shall any man then look upon these men, as Peter's, as Rocks on which the Church
stands, as feeders of the sheep of the Lambs of Christ; as the head of the
Church: and patterns for the Church of Christ to follow? Friends it is love to
you and the Truth which makes me to represent these things to you. And I desire
that you may well consider where you stand, and on what you hang: whether you
stand on the Rock Christ, or on the sands of an outward succession: whether you
hang on a sure nail, or on a weak slippery pin. It behooves all to consider
well their foundation, for the Lord is coming to discover the foundations of
the Earth, and to shake them till all the buildings raised up upon the sands do
fall, though never so glorious.

W. Tomlinson.

FINIS.

