TO THE SVPREME AVTHORITY OF THIS NATION, the COMMONS of ENGLAND, in Parliament
assembled.
The Humble Petition of diverse Young men, and Apprentices of the City of
London, and parts adjacent: in behalf of Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Mr William
Walwin, Mr Thomas Prince, and Mr Richard Overton, now close Prisoners in the
Tower of London, without any declared just cause: and of Capt. William Bray in
the same condition in Windsor Castle.
Shows,
THat the honor of God, the good of the Nation in general, and the Lives,
Liberties and Estates of every Free Commoner in England in particular, is
deerer unto us than our very Lives.

That about the year 1642. when the late King endeavored in the like hostile
way to secure the persons of the same number of men (who were then all Members
of this House) you then declared that such his endeavor was against Magna
Charta, the Petition of Right, and other the fundamental Laws of the Land: as
also a breach of the Privilege of Parliament, and against the liberties of the
Subject; whom since you have declared to be a free People.

That in their just Vindication, you then as fellow Members, and we (though
bound to our Masters for a time, by our own free consent, yet) fellow Commoners
with them, did join together: (we adding our power unto your authority) in
managing whereof many of our deer friends and fellow Soldiers lost their
lives, and others with some of our selves are sorely wounded.

That our dear friends before mentioned are tender unto us, like the apple of
our eye, and shall never be otherwise until we see just and apparent cause to
the contrary.

That therefore it is no small grief and amazement to us, to see any
(especially such eminent upholders of Englands Liberties, as we do apprehend
them to be) violently fetched out of their beds and houses, and forced to
prison, there to be shut up, without allowing them so much as bread and water,
to maintain life, for the space of more than forty days and nights;
notwithstanding they are not known to be accused or suspected with the breach
of any other Law than the wills of some men in Authority.

That we apprehend there is too just cause for us to fear, that seeing there is
no particular Act either of Treason, Felony, or any other crime laid to their
charge, but only a general accusation (which neither in Law nor Reason is any
whit valid) that therefore instead of bringing them to a Legal Trial, they will
be destroyed in Prisons, and that not in an open way at one blow, but by the
most inhumane way of Martyrdom, viz. to be starved to death: for although they
have no allowance (which the worst of malefactors ought to have) yet their near
friends are forbidden either to releeve them with food, or other necessaries,
nor yet to comfort them in this their sad condition: though in never so
peaceable and earnest a manner desired.

That we cannot but take notice that the same condition which is theirs this
day, may be ours the next, though we judge our selves clear from doing any
thing justly deserving the same.

That we find by the answer to a late Petition, presented by some of our
Masters, in their behalfs, that it is not safe for them to move any more in
their behalf, though in the like way of Petitioning (the most inferior badge of
Freedom which we know.)

That therefore we are constrained by the law of Nature, and Reason which God
has given us, to appear for them, at least in this humble way, and in their
behalf, as they are Englishmen, and ^ellow Commoners with us, do humbly pray,

1. That we may be informed what particular offense every of them are
particularly guilty of; that so if any of them shall plainly appear to be
Malefactors, we may no longer take their parts.

2. That if no crime were legally laid to their charge before they were under
their present restraint, they may be forthwith enlarged, and have just
Reparation for the wrongs they have suffered.

3. That then, if any man have ought to lay to their charge, none but legal and
just proceedings be exercised toward them; the contrary whereof will certainly
be requited by him who is the Judge of all the Earth, and will do right.

4. That in case the former shall be, yet notwithstanding they may not be
debarred of those privileges which the worst of Thieves, Murderers and
Traitors do enjoy; viz. to have such allowances as have formerly been given to
Prisoners of the like nature* and be allowed the comfort of Friends in a
peaceable way, according to the Laws both of God and this Nation.

And if these our desires shall appear reasonable to you, so that we shall
thereby obtain the same, we shall therein rejoice; but if not, we shall fear
that the same (if not worse) oppressions which were by you condemned in former
powers, will now appear to ly upon the free Commoners of England, for the
deliverance from which we have contested hitherto: and for the same We shall
pray.


