A Short Catechism About BAPTISM.

By John Tombs, B. D.

HEB. 6. 2. Of the Doctrine of Baptisms.

LUKE 7. 35. But Wisdom is justified of all her children.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, next door to the Sign of the Peacock in
Aldersgate Street, 1659.

To the Christian Reader.
MAny are the things at this day charged on Antipaedobaptists in their doctrine
and practice, which have been proved to be unjustly imputed to them, by many
large Treatises extant in Print. For a more facile understanding of the truth
then by reading larger tracts, is this Compendium, in a manner of a Catechism
composed and published in this time, wherein others of different judgment,
have thought fit to declare their way to the World, which is done not because
this point of Baptism is judged the only or main point of our Religion, but
because the disagreement in other things is either small, or of particular
persons (whose cause is to be severed from that which is commonly held) and
therefore requires not a distinct confession or declaration from that which is
by others published. The aim of the Composer of it is the manifestation of the
truth, wherein he does rejoice, and desires thou may rejoice with him. His
motion is that of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 15, 16. As many of us as be perfect let
us be thus minded, and if ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
unto you. Nevertheless whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, let us mind the same thing.

Farewell.

A short Catechism about Baptism.
Quest. 1.

IS Baptism with water an Ordinance of Christ, to be continued by his Disciples
till the end of the World?

Answ. Baptism with water is an ordinance of Christ, which is to be continued
by his Disciples till the end of the World; as appears by his command, Mat. 28.
19, 20. Mark 16. 15, 16. it being to be joined with preaching of the Gospel,
and making Disciples, by preaching, and teaching them to observe all that
Christ commands, and so to be continued while these are to continue, which is
proved to be till the end of the world, by Christ's promise of his being with
them till then, which were vain, if the things appointed were not to be done so
long.

Quest. 2. Is not the end of the world, as much as the end of that age?

Answ. It appears that Matthew means by the end of the world, the last time, or
day, wherein there will be a separation of good and bad, the one to be burned
with fire, and the other to shine as the Sun, in that in the places wherein
Matthew uses the self-same form of speech (to wit, (...) Matthew. 13. 39, 40,
49. Matthew. 24. 3.) he cannot be understood to mean any other.

Quest. 3. May not the Baptizing in Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. be understood
of some other Baptism then that of water?

Answ. The Baptism there, must needs be understood of Baptism by water, since
Baptizing, where ever it is made John Baptists or the Disciples act which they
did or were to do, is meant of Baptizing with water, as John 4. 1, 2. and in
many other places it appears; and the Apostles by their practice and command,
Acts 2. 38. 41. Acts 8. 12. 13. 38. Acts 10. 47, 48. show that they so
understood Christ's appointment, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.

Quest. 4 May it not be meant of Baptizing by the Spirit, or afflictions?

Answ. It cannot be so understood, since Baptizing with the Spirit is no where
ascribed to any other then Christ, Matthew. 3. 11. Luke 3. 16. Nor is Baptism
with the Spirit a duty for us to do, but a free gift of Christ* not common to
all Disciples of Christ, but peculiar to some: and to appoint them the
baptizing by affliction, had been to make the Apostles persecutors.

Quest. 5. Why did Paul then say, Christ sent him not to Baptize? 1 Cor. 1. 16.

Answ. Not because he was not appointed at all to Baptize, for if so, he would
not have Baptized those he did Baptize, 1 Cor. 1. 14. 16. etc. But because it
was not the chief thing he was to do, as when the washing of water is said not
to save, 1 Pet. 3. 21. because it is not the only or principal means of saving.

Quest. 6. What is the Baptizing appointed by Jesus Christ?

Answ. The Baptizing appointed by Jesus Christ, is dipping of the whole body in
water into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as is manifest from the
term Baptizing, and the use of going into and coming up out of the water, Mat.
3. 16. Acts 8. 38, 39. the use of much water, John 3. 23. The resembling, by
the Baptism used, the burial and resurrection of Christ, Romans 6. 4. Col. 2. 12.
and the testimonies of the ancients of the first ages.

Quest. 7. May not the sprinkling or pouring water on the face, be the Baptism
of Christ?

Answ. Neither the Scripture, nor any ancient Author call sprinkling, or
pouring water on the face, Baptism, nor any use of it in the primative times
does countenance it, and therefore such sprinkling or pouring water is not the
Baptism which Christ appointed.

Quest. 8. What is it to Baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost?

Answ. It is not to Baptize only with the naming of those persons, but into
the profession of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as our Master or Teacher, as
appears by the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 13. Which show that if the Corinthians
had been Baptized into the name of Paul, they had professed him to be their
Master.

Quest. 9. Are they rightly Baptized, who are Baptized into the name of Jesus
Christ, though no other person be named?

Answ. They are, it being all one to Baptize into the name of Jesus Christ, and
to Baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as appears by the
precept, Acts 2. 38. and practice Acts 10. 48. Acts 19. 5. Though the
expression of each person be convenient.

Quest. 10. Are the persons to be Baptized altogether passive in their Baptism?

Answ. No; For Baptism is their duty required of them as well as the Baptizer,
Acts 2. 38. and Paul is commanded to arise and be Baptized, and wash away his
sins, calling on the name of the Lord, Acts 22. 16.

Quest. 11. Who are appointed to Baptize?

Answ. They who are appointed to preach the Gospel, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15,
16.

Quest. 12. Whom are they appointed to Baptize?

Ausw. Those who repent of sin, believe in Christ Jesus, and are his Disciples,
Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Acts 2. 38. Acts 8. 37.

Quest. 13. Were not Infants Baptized, when whole households were Baptized, Acts
16. ^5. 33.?

Answ. No; For it appears not there were any Infants in the houses, and the
texts show they were not Baptized, since the word was spoken to al in the house,
ver. 32. and all the house rejoiced believing God, ver. 34. and else where the
whole house is said to do that which Infants could not do, Acts 18. 8. Acts 10.
2. 1 Cor. 16. 15. compared with 1 Cor. 1. 16. John 4. 53.

Quest. 14. Is not Christ's speech and action to little children, Matthew. 19. 14,
15. Mark 10. 14, 15, 16. Luke 18. 16, 17. a warrant to Baptize Infants?

Answ. No, but an argument against it, since Christ did neither Baptize, nor
appoint those little children to be Baptized.

Quest. 15. Why should not Infants be Baptized since they were Circumcised?

Answ. The reason why Male Infants were to be Circumcised, was a particular
command of God to Abraham's house for special ends belonging to the time before
Christ, which Baptism has not, nor is there any command to use Baptism
according to the rule of Circumcision.

Quest. 16. Did not Baptism come in the room of Circumcision, Col. 2. 11, 12.
and so to be used as it was?

Answ. The Apostles words import not that our Baptism came in the room of the
Jews Circumcision, there is no mention of any bodily Circumcision but Christ's,
which our Baptism cannot be said to succeed to, as there it is made the cause
of Spiritual Circumcision, without arrogating that to it which belongs to
Christ alone, and Baptism is mentioned with faith, as the means whereby we are
in Christ, and complete in him.

Quest. 17. May we be said to be complete as the Jews without infant baptism?

Answ. Our compleatness is in that we have not ordinances as the Jews had, but
we are complete in that we have all in Christ without them, Col. 2. 8, 9, 10.

Quest. 18. Have not our children then less privilege then the Jews had?

Answ. No, for circumcision was a privilege only for a time, and
comparatively to the estate of the Gentiles who knew not God, but of it self
was a heavy yoke, Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5. 1. 2. 3.

Quest. 19. Why did the Jews then so much contend for it, Acts 15. 1. 5.

Answ. Because they too much esteemed the Law, and knew not their liberty by
the gospel.

Quest. 20. Had it not been a discomfort to the believing Jews to have their
children unbaptized, and so out of Covenant?

Answ. The want of Baptism to Infants was never any grievance to believers in
the New Testament, nor were they thereby put out of the Covenant of grace.

Quest. 21. Was not the proper reason of Circumcising the Infants of the Jews
the interest which they had in the Covenant to Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. to be a God
to him and his seed?

Answ. The end of Circumcision was indeed to be a token of the whole Covenant
made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. not only the promise, ver. 7. But
the formal proper distinguishing reason why some were to be Circumcised, and
others not, was Gods command alone, not the interest in the Covenant; since
Ishmael who was not a child of promise, Genesis 17. 20, 21. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and those who were in Abraham's house, though not of his seed, were Circumcised,
but no Females, nor Males under eight days old.

Quest. 22. Was not the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. the Covenant of grace?

Answ. It was, according to the hidden meaning of the Holy Ghost, the
Evangelical Covenant, Gal. 3. 16. But according to the open sense of the words,
a Covenant of Special benefits to Abraham's inheriting natural posterity, and
therefore not a pure gospel Covenant.

Quest. 23. Are not believers children comprehended under the promise, to be a
God to Abraham and his seed? Genesis 17. 7.

Answ. No, unless they become Abraham's seed according to Election of grace by
faith.

Quest. 24. Did Circumcision seal the Gospel covenant? Romans 4. 11.

Answ. That text speaks not of any ones Circumcision, but Abraham's, which
sealed the righteousness of faith he had before Circumcision, and assured
thereby righteousness to all, though uncircumcised, who should believe as he
did.

Quest. 25. Are not the Sacraments of the Christian, Church in their nature,
seals of the Covenant of grace?

Answ. The Scripture does no where so call them, nor does it mention this as
their end and use.

Quest. 26. Does not Peter, Acts 2. 38, 39. exhort the Jews to Baptize
themselves and their children, because the promise of grace is to believers and
their children?

Answ. Those he then spoke to were not then believers, and therefore the words,
Acts 2. 39. cannot be understood of a promise to believers and their children
as such, but the promises to all, fathers and children, as called of God: nor
are any exhorted to Baptism without foregoing repentance, nor is the promise
alleged as conferring right to Baptism, but as a motive to encourage them to
hope for pardon, though they wished Christ's blood to be on them and their
children, Matthew. 27. 25. In like sort as Joseph did, Genesis 50. 19, 20, 21.

Quest. 27. Are not the children of believers holy with Covenant-holiness, and
so to be Baptized, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Answ. There is nothing there ascribed to the faith of the believer, but to the
marriage relation, which was the only reason of their lawful living together,
and of which alone it is true that all the children of those parents, whereof
one is sanctified to the other, are holy, the rest unclean, that is,
illegitimate.

Quest. 28. Are not the Gentile believers children to be ingraffed by Baptism
with their Parents, as the Jews children were by Circumcision? Romans 11. 16, 17.

Answ. The ingraffing there is by giving Faith according to Election, and
therefore not meant of parents and children by an outward Ordinance into the
visible Church.

Quest. 29. Are not Infants of believers Disciples, by their Parents faith to
be Baptized? Matthew. 28. 19. Acts 15. 10.

Answ. No: For the Disciples there are only such as are made by preaching the
Gospel to them, nor are any termed Disciples, but those who heard and learned:
and the putting the yoke, Acts 15. 10. was by teaching brethren, ver. 1. and
therefore the Disciples, verse. 10. not Infants.

Quest. 30. Are not the Infants of believers visible members of the Christian
Church, by a law and ordinance, by Gods promise, to be God to them and their
seed, and precept, to dedicate them to God, unrepealed?

Answ. There is no such ordinance or law extant in Scripture, or deducible from
the law of nature, nor are Infants any where reckoned as visible members of the
Christian Church in the New Testament.

Quest. 31. Has not God promised, Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. to make every believer
a blessing, so as to cast ordinarily Elect children on Elect parents, and
thereby warranted Infant Baptism?

Answ. The promise does not pertain to any believers seed but Abraham's, who are
Heb. 6. 12, 13, 14. Gal. 3. 8, 9. Acts 3. 25. expounded to be Christ and true
believers only, who are to be Baptized, not their Infants, till they
themselves believe in their own persons.

Quest. 32. Did not Christ appoint, Matthew. 28. 19. the Disciples to Baptize
children with parents, as the Jews did Proselytes?

Answ. If the Jewish Baptism had been the pattern for Christian, the Apostles
would have so practiced, but their not so doing, shows they understood not it
to be Christ's mind.

Quest. 33. Is not the Infant Baptism sufficient if it be avouched at age?

Answ. It is not a sufficient discharge of their obedience to Christ's command,
which requires each person to be Baptized after his own repentance and
believing in Christ, Mark 16. 16. Matthew. 28. 19. Acts 2. 38. Ephesians. 4. 5.

Quest. 34. What is the chief end of Baptism?

Answ. To testify the Repentance, Faith, Hope, Love, and Resolution of the
Baptized to follow Christ, Gal. 3. 27. Romans 6. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 29. calling
upon the name of the Lord, Acts 22. 16.

Quest. 35. How came Infant Baptism to be common in the Christian Churches?

Answ. As Infant communion came from mistake of John 6. 53. So Infant Baptism
began about the third age of the Christian Church, from mistake of John 3. 5.
the opinion of its giving grace, and the necessity of it to save the Infant
dying from perishing, and after Augustins time became common, which before was
not so frequent.

Quest. 36. Is there any evil in it?

Answ. Infant Baptism tends much to harden people in presumption, as if they
were Christians before they know Christ, and hinders much the reformation of
Christian Churches, by filling them with ignorant and scandalous members,
besides the great sin of profaning Gods ordinance.

Quest. 37. Have not opposers of Infant Baptism, been wicked in the end?

Answ. Blessed be God experience proves the contrary, though some heretofore
proved seditious, and entertained great errors.

Quest. 38. Is there any good by Baptizing persons at age, which might not be,
though Infant Baptism were continued?

Answ. Yes, For thereby they would be solemnly engaged to adhere to Christ,
which is a strong tie on the Consciences, when it is done by a person
understandingly, according to Christ's mind, besides the assurance thereby of
union and conformity to Christ, and righteousness and life by him, Romans 6. 3,
4. Gal. 3. 26. 1 Pet. 3. 2. 1.

Quest. 39. What are Christians to do when they are Baptized?

Answ. To associate together in Church Communion, and to walk according to
their engagement, in obedience to them, who are over them in the Lord.

Quest. 40. Are persons so joined to separate from those they have joined to
upon defect in outward order and ordinances, or variation from the rule therein
by pastors or people?

Answ. No, Unless the evil be such in Faith, Worship, or Discipline, as is not
consistent with Christianity, or the state of a visible Church, or is
intolerable oppression, maintained with obstinacy, after endeavors to cure
them, to which end each member should keep and act in his station.

FINIS.

