TO THE SUPREME AVTHORITY The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, The
Humble Petition of many well afected People inhabitng the City of London,
Westminster, Southwark and parts adjacent, in behalf of the just Liberties of
the Commonwealth, highly concerned in the sentence against Lieutenant Col.
JOHN LILBURN.
HVMBLY SHWING.
THat if the many sold Services, and extreme Sufferings, of Lieutenant
Colonel John Lilburne, in oposition to Tyrany, and Oppression, and how
isntrumental he has been in the removal of diverse sorts of oppressiors, his
wonderful Deliverances and clear acquitments by legal Trials, from all
former accusations, without the least stayne to his reputation, if all these
could be forgotten, and that he stood in our thoughts, but as the meanest of
well affected persons, (and such at the least we must allow him, having in all
times adhered to Parliaments) yet in your late proceedings toward him, and
heavy censure upon him, we aprehend our native rights so much concerned that
we never conceived a greater cause of speedy application to you, for redress
then upon this sad occasion.

For certainly, it cannot be denied, but if he be really an offender, he is
such by the breach of some law, made and published before the fact, and ought
by due process of Law, and verdict of twelve men to be thereof convict, and
found guilty of such Crime, unto which the Law also has prescribed such a
punishment agreeable to that our fundamental Liberty, which enjoyneth, that no
freeman of England, should be adjudged of Life, Limb, Liberty, or Estate but
by Juries; a fredome which Parliaments in all ages Contended to preserve from
violation as the Birthright, and Chief inheritance of the People, as may
appear most remarkably in the Petition of Right, which you have styled that
most excellent Law.

And therefore we trust upon second thoughts (being the Parliament of England,)
you will be so far from bereaving us, (who have never forfeited our rights) of
this our native right, and way of Trials by Juryes, (for what is done unto any
one may be done unto every one) that you will preserve them entire to us, and
to posterity, from the encroachments of any, that would inovate upon them.

And if the original of the unhapy differences between Sir Arthur Haslerig,
and Mr. Lilburne, be duly weighed (being as we are informed) it will appear,
that Sr. Arthurs stoppage of moneys due to Mr. Lilburn without Legal process,
was the first occasion thereof.

And it is believed, that if Mr. Primats cause, (wherein Sr. Arthur, and Mr.
Lilburne have been engaged: had at any time either at first or last been
admitted to a Trial at law, and had passed any way by verdict of twelve sworn
men; all the trouble and inconveniencs arising thereupon had been prevented:
the way of determination by Major votes of Committees, being neither so
certain nor so satisfactory in any case as by way of Juries, the benefit of
Challenges and Exceptiones, and unanimous Consent, being all essential
Priveledges in the latter: whereas Committees' are tied to noe such rules, but
are at liberty to be present or absent at pleasure; besides Juries being
birthright, and the other but new and temporary, men do not, nor as (we
humbly conceive ever will) acquiesse in the one as on the other from whence, it
is not all together so much to be wondered at, if upon dissatisfactions, there
have been such frequent printing of men's cases, and dealings of Committees, as
there have been, and such harsh and inordinate heats, and expressions between
parties interested, such sudden and importunate appeals to your Authority,
being indeed all alike out of the true English road, and leading into nothing
but trouble and perplexity, breeding hatred and enmityes between worthy
families, affronts and disguste between persons of the same public affection
and interest, and to the rejoicing of none but public adversaryes, all which
and many more inconveniences can only be avoided, by referring all such cases
to the usual trials and final determination of law

And whereas you have consured Mr. Lilburne 7000 l. fine, and to perpetual
Panishment, and to dye as a fellon if he return, we are excedingly afflicted in
our spirits thereby, not only because he has not had the usual way of trial
by Jury which yet weighs very much with us, nor for that we believe he has
followed Mr. Primats cause out of strong persuasion of the justness thereof,
(the Cause in it self as we have been informed being very intricate and hard
to be understood, and so did not wilfully or intentionally carry it on against
his Conscience some of the Commissioners wishing to God it had therefore never
came before them, nor for that we believe him innocent of any wilful breach of
Parliament privilege, in delivering printed Petitions, before the original was
presented unto you, that being never before published, to be a breach, though
all these add to our grief, yet the main or our affliction arises from the
destructivenesse of the Sentence, and as being therein contrary to that other
our fundamental native right, which injoyns that Fines should have regard to
the qualities of the persons: a plowman saving his wainage, and a merchant his
merchandise, whereas this if relating to his estate, we believe is so far
from preserving him in his quality, as that it leaves himself, his wife and
children without sustenance, if in relation to his person, his affection to
Parliaments, and zeal to public freedom, renders all foreign Nations so
unsafe to him, as that in effect he is banished into a Wilderness, and exposed
naked to the fury of bears and lions.

The premises duly weighed, and for that (as we are informed) the parties
accused and censured, have had no means to see what report has been made by
the Honorable Committee, nor have had the liberty of exceptions thereunto, in
like Cases granted, and in that many well affected people that heard the
Debates, and Evidences on both sides, are unsatisfied both in point of
possession, and title to the Collary in question, that the honor of Parliament
may stand immaculate, our native fundamental rights inviolable, and all those
Gentlemen concerned in this Cause left, without any the least grudging, or just
complaint.

We have deemed our selves bound in Conscience in most humble manner to entreat
I. That you will be pleased to recall your forementioned grievous Sentence
upon Lieutenant Col. John Lilburn, and the rest concerned therein.

II. To give free liberty to Mr Primate to prosecute his Cuase, both for Title,
and possession at the Common Law, and therein to make use of what counsel he
shall think fit.

III. That Sir Arthur Haslerig be referred to take his course at Law, for
whatsoever injuries conceived to be done unto him by Lieutenant Col. John
Lilburn or any others, as was granted in Mr. Musgraves Case with the said Sir
Arthur, and that Mr. Lilburn or any others may have the same liberty against
Sir Arthur, if they conceive any cause.

IV. That you will appoint some speedy course for the receiving and answering
of Petitions, that so men through long attendance be not enforced unto ways
displeasing or inconvenient.

V. That you will very tenderly regain, and maintain every one of our
fundamental Native rights, as you would the very being and just constitution
of Parliaments, that being a principal part of our Native rights.

Lastly, That you will be pleased to conceive rightly of this our humble
application to you at this time upon this weighty occasion, and to admit no
harsh construction, or sinister suggestion thereupon, but to believe that in
the sincerity of our consciences, we have aimed only herein at the glory of
God, the honor, peace, and safety of Parliament and Commonwealth. And if by
your favorable acceptance we shall be made any ways isntrumental to those
just ends, it shall dissolve us into true thankfulness, And is in duty bound,

shall ever pray, etc. Presented January the 20. 1651.

