ROMANISM DISCUSSED, OR, An Answer to the nine first Articles of H. T. his
Manual of CONTROVERSIES.

Whereby is manifested, that H. T. has not (as he pretends) clearly
demonstrated the Truth of the Roman Religion by him falsely called Catholic, by
Texts of holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the first five
hundred years, common sense, and experience, nor fully answered the principal
Objections of Protestants, whom he unjustly terms Sectaries.

By John Tombs, B. D.

And commended to the World by Mr. Richard Baxter.

Jer 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the
old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your Souls.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, and are to sold by Jane Underhill, and Henry
Mourtlock, in Paul's Churchyard 1660.

TO THE English Romanists, Who term themselves CATHOLICS, Specially to those
of the Counties of Hereford and Worcester.
ALthough the prejudice wherewith you are prepossessed against the Truth
avouched by me, the Engagements whereby you are linked to the Roman See, the
Hopes that it is not unlikely you feed you selves with, of seeing your Native
Country reduced under the obedience of the Roman Papacy, besides the long
experience, which has been had, of the fruitlesness of Attempts to alter your
Opinion in Religion, how gross soever they have been proved to be, might have
deterred me from this Writing: yet since I have been instantly urged to it, and
am loath to imagine all of you tobe of so deplorable a wilfulness of spirit, as
that you will obstinately persist in your manifest Errors, and thereby cast
away your S^uls. I have adventured to publish this ensuing Treatise, that I
might not be guilty of betraying the Truth and your Souls by my silence. I have
been many years a Preacher in England, chiefly in the Counties of Hereford and
Worcester, and though I have not had much acquaintance with any of you, yet
some Conferences have left me not without hope that you might see your Error
about the Supremacy, and Infallibility of the Pope and Church of Rome, which is
the chief Point on which your Religion rests, as it is opposite to
Protestantism, although formerly and of late the French and some other Churches
have strongly opposed the Popes or Roman Churches Superiority above a General
Council, and their Infallibility in their Determinations. Certainly, these two
Points which are the Pillars of the Religion of the Roman party are so far from
being Catholic, that to him that shall impartially examine the Proofs, it will
appear, that they have been late Innovations, and are yet contradicted by a
great part of those Churches which hold communion with the Roman See. And for
many other Points of your Religion, if you would either use your Senses or your
understanding in judging by the Scripture, translated by your own party, what
is true or false, you could not be so besotted as to believe
Transubstantiation, Invocation of deceased Saints, Justification by your own
Works, and their Meritoriousness of eternal Life, Purgatory^fire, Prayer for
the Dead, another Propitiatory Sacrifice for Quick and Dead besides Christ's,
Communion under one kind only, Worshipping of Images and Relics, with some
other of your Tenets. For freeing you from which Errors, which are pernicious
to your Souls, if I could contribute any thing, I should count it a part of my
happiness, of which I should have some hopes were it that I perceived you free
from the Imposition of your Leaders on you, not to read such Writings as are
against them; which must of necessity enslave you to their Opinions, and hinder
you from an impartial Search after Truth: wherein what deceit is used by your
imagined Pastor the Pope, may appear, as by many other things, so especially
by the late carriage of Pope Innocent the tenth in the Controversies between
the Jansenists and Molinists in France, who being importuned to give Sentence
concerning the five Propositions of Jansenius (if we may believe Thomas White
one of your chief Disputants, and one whose approbation is to this Manual of
Controversies of H. T.) did in show condemn Jansenius his words, but did allow
his meaning. And that I may not be thought to misreport him, I will set down
his words in his Appendicula to his Sonus Buccinae, about the Censure of the
five Propositions of Jansenius, Sect. 9. where after he had showed that the
Propositions of Jansenius might be true in their sense, though the words were
liable to Exceptions, he adds, But whereto are all these things said? Is it
that I might enervate or reprehend the Popes Decree? Nothing less: I profess,
that was published by the best Counsel and special guidance of the Holy Spirit
which governs the Church. The Church was afflicted with Dissentions: one part
stood propped by the Truth and Authority of holy Scripture; the other being
guarded with the multitude of Princes, and of the common People circumvented
with the sound of words flattering humane weakness, took great courage. What
should the Father of the Church do? He allayed the more unquiet part by
granting them their words: the more obedient part he flatteringly comforted, by
commending to them their Senses. The former part of the Saying was confirmed by
a public Instrument. The later (if there be any credit to be given to men of
tender conscience) was done before the Orator of the most Christian King. It
is manifest by what has been said, with what rectitude of Faith and Divinity
this part shines; that that exhibites prudence worthy the Pope, thus take it.
Wherein it may be perceived, that however White speak favorably of the Pope,
yet he sets out his dealing in that business as unworthy an infallible Judge of
Controversies, which should have decided openly for Jansenius, whose
Propositions stood propped by the Truth and Authority of holy Scripture
according to their meaning, which Innocentius the tenth commended to them, that
they might hold them still in that meaning in a Conference; and yet he
condemned their Propositions in their words by his Bull published to quiet the
wrangling and potent party of Jesuits that had drawn the Princes and common
People to their side by words that flattered humane weakness in stead of Truth
glorifying God, than which in so weighty a matter what could be done more like
a Juggler or man-pleaser than a Servant of God constant in asserting Truth?
Which shows, that the Popes resolve not by the Spirit of God, or the holy
Scripture, but by humane policy, as it may be for their advantage, to keep
their party in obedience to them. And that it is not indeed any sincerity in
seeking Truth, or serious intention to feed the Souls of People with true
Doctrine, but to accommodate all their Determinations and Negotiations, as to
uphold their credit and authority, might be made abundantly appear by the
History of the Council of Trent, and many other ways, which I shall not
mention, being showed by many, and particularly by Mr. Richard Baxter in his
Key for Catholics; only this one instance out of Thomas White I mind you of,
because I think Thomas White is yet alive, and in England among you, as I
conceive by the Edition of the Dispute about Schism between him and Gunning.
And I beseech you give me leave to tell you, that I do much pity your Souls,
which you do enslave to the most deceitful of men the Roman Popes, and adhere
to your Priests, which either teach you not at all, but feed you with mere
shows, in your Masses and other Rites, or if they preach, either preach not the
Gospel of Jesus Christ at all, or corrupt it with mixture of humane Traditions,
but keep you from hearing those who teach in your own Language the Doctrine of
the holy Scripture without guile, the refusing whereof under pretense of your
fore-father's example, or the Pope's, and your Priests restraint, or our
imagined Heresy or Schism, and in stead of it pleasing your selves with Masses
in Latin, Auricular Confession, and Priests Absolution, and such like Chaff,
will never be justified before Christ at his Appearing, whose Precept is that
you search the Scripture, and Promise of Blessing to them that hear the Word of
God and keep it, the neglect of which is the neglect of that great Salvation
which is brought to us by Jesus Christ. Unto which, if you would attend, you
would quickly find the Deceits of your Popes and Priests, and deliver your
Souls from the Snares of Ignorance of the Gospel and Popish Errors, which now
destroy your Souls. If you yet shut your eyes against the Light of the Gospel
tendered to you by Protestant Preachers, and persist in your Error and
Superstition you Destruction will be of your selves, though thereby there is
cause given of mourning for you to all that love the Salvation of your Souls,
among whom I know my self to be one, and desire to be accounted as

Your unfeignedly desirous and studious Christ for your Souls JOHN TOMBS.

AN EPISTLE SENT BY Mr. RICHARD BAXTER To the AUTHOR, to be prefixed.
Readers,
WEre not the Judgments of God so dreadful, and infatuation so lamentable in
matters of everlasting consequence, and sin so odious, and the calamities of
the Church, the dishonor of God, and the Damnation of Souls such deplorable
things, as tolerate not a laughter in the standers by, it would seem one of the
most ridiculous things in the World, that a man of seeming wisdom should be a
Papist, and that so many Princes, and learned men, with the vulgar multitude,
should be able so far to renounce or intoxicate their Reason while they are
awake: And a Papist would be described, to be one that sets up his
understanding to be the laughing stock of the sober rational World. There are
abundance of Controversies among Physicians that concern men's lives; and yet I
have heard of none so vain, as to step forth and challenge the Authority of
being the universal Decider of them, or to charge God with folly or oversight,
if he have not appointed some such universal Judge in the World, to end all
Controversies in matters of such weight. But if in Physick's, Law, or any of
the Sciences, the Controversies should be never so many or so great, if yet you
could resolve them into sense it self, and bring all to the judgment of men's
eyes, and ears, and taste, and feeling, who would not laugh or hiss at him that
would still make them the matter of serious doubts?

The Papists finding that man is yet imperfect, and knows but in part, and
that in the Scripture there are some things are hard to be understood, and that
Earth has not so much Light as Heaven, imagine that hereby they have a fair
advantage to plead for an universal terrestrial Judge, and to reproach God, if
he have appointed none such, and next to plead that their Pope or his approved
Councils must needs have this Authority. And when they come to the Decision,
they are not ashamed to see after so many hundred years pretensions, that the
World is but baffled with the empty name of a Judge of Controversies, and that
Difficulties are no less Difficulties still, and Controversies are no where so
voluminous as with them. But this is a small matter with them. Their Judge
seems much wiser when he is silent than when he speaks. When he comes to a
Decision, and forms up thereby the Hodge-podge of Popery, they seem not to
smile at, nor be ashamed of the Picture which they have drawn; which is, of an
Harlot showing her nakedness, and committing her lewdness in the open
Assemblies, in the sight of the Sun. They openly proclaim their shame against
the light of all the acknowledged Principles in the World, their own or others,
and in opposition to all, or almost all that is commendable among men. The
charge seems high, but (in a few words) take the proof.

1. They confess the Scripture to be the Word of God: and yet when we would
appeal to that as the Rule of Faith and Life, or as a divine Revelation, in our
Disputes, they fly off, and tell us of its obscurity and the necessity of a
Judge. If they meet with a Hoc est corpus meum, they seem for a while to be
zealous for the Scripture: But tell them that Paul in 1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28.
does call it Bread after the Consecration, no less than three times in the
three next Verses, and then Scripture is nonsense to them till the Pope make
sense of it. It is one of their principal labors against us, to argue against
the Scriptures sufficiency to this use. By no means can we prevail with them to
stand to the Decision of the Scripture.

2. They excessively cry up the Church, and appeal to its Decision: and
therefore we might hope, that here if any where, we might have some hold of
them. But when it comes to the Point, they not only disown the judgment of
the Church, but impudently call Christ's Spouse a Strumpet, and cut off (in
their uncharitable imagination) two or three parts of the universal Church as
Heretics or Schismatics. The judgments of the Churches in Armenia, Ethiopia,
Egypt, Syria, the Greeks, and many more besides the Reformed Churches in the
West, is against their Popes universal Vicarship or Sovereignty, and many of
their Errors that depend thereon. And yet their judgment is not regarded by
this Faction. And if a third or fourth part (such as it is) of the Universal
Church, may cry up themselves as the Church to be appealed to, and condemn the
far greater part, why may not a tenth or a twentieth part do the like? Why may
not the Donatists, the Novatians, or the Greeks, (much more) do so as well as
Papists?

3. They cry up Tradition. And when we ask them, How we shall know it, and
where it is to be found, they tell us, principally in the profession and
practice of the present Church. And yet when two or three parts of the
universal Church profess that Tradition is against the Papal Monarchy, and
other Points depending on it; they cast Tradition behind their backs.

4. They cry up the Fathers: and when we bring their judgments against the
substance of Popery, they sometime vilify or accuse them as erroneous, and
sometime tell us, that Fathers as well as Scripture must be no otherwise
understood, than their Church expounds them.

5. They plead for and appeal to Councils; and (though we easily prove that
none of them were universal, yet such as they were) they call them all
Reprobate, which were not approved by their Pope, let the number of Bishops
there be never so great. And those that were approved, if they speak against
them, they reject also, either with lying shifts denying the approbation, or
saying, the acts are not de fide, or not conciliariter facta, or the sense must
be given by their present Church, or one such contemptible shift or other.

6. At least one would think they should stand to the judgment of the Pope,
which yet they will not: for shame forbids them to own the Doctrine of those
Popes that were Heretics or Infidels (and by Councils so judged): And others
they are forced to disown, because they contradict their Predecessors. And at
Rome the Cardinals are the Pope, while he that has the name is often made light
of. And how infallible he is judged by the French and the Venetians; how Sixtus
the fifth was valued by the Spaniards, and by Bellarmine, is commonly known.

7. But all this is nothing to their renunciation of humanity, even of the
common senses and reason of the world. When the matter is brought to the
Decision of their eyes, and taste, and feeling, whether Bread be Bread, and Wine
be Wine, and yet all Italy, Spain, Austria, Bavaria, etc. cannot resolve it;
yea, generally, (unless some latent Protestant) do pass their judgment against
their senses, and the senses of all sound men in the World; and that not in a
matter beyond the reach of sense (as whether Christ be there spiritually) but
in a matter belonging to sense, if any thing belong to it; as whether Bread be
Bread, etc. Kings and Nobles, Prelates and Priests, do all give their
judgment, that all their senses are deceived. And is it possible for these men
than to know any thing? or any controversy between us and them to be decided?
If we say that the Sun is light, or that the Pope is a man, and Scripture
legible, or that there are the Writings of Councils and Fathers extant in the
World, they may as well concur in a denial of all this, or any thing else that
sense should judge of. If they tell us that Scripture requires them to
contradict all their senses in this point; I answer,

1. Not that Scripture before mentioned, that calls it [Bread] after the
Consecration, thrice in the three next Verses.

2. And how know they that there is such a Scripture, if all their senses be so
fallible. If the certainty of sense be not supposed, a little Learning or Wit
might satisfy them, that Faith can have no certainty. But is it not a most
dreadful judgment of God, that Princes and Nations, Learned men, and some
that in their way are conscientious, should be given over to so much
inhumanity, and to make a Religion of this brutishness, (and worse) and to
persecute those with Fire and Sword, that are not so far forsaken by God, and
by their reason? and that they should so sollicitously labor the perversion of
States and Kingdoms for the promoting of stupidity or stark madness.

8. And (if we go from their Principles to their Ends, or Ways, we shall soon
see that) they are also against the Unity of the Church, while they pretend
this as their chiefest Argument, to draw men to their way. They set up a
corrupted Faction, and condemn the far greater part of the Church; and will
have no unity with any but those of their own Faction and Subjection: and fix
this as an essential part of their Religion, creating thereby an impossibility
of universal concord.

9. They also contradict the Experience of many thousand Saints; asserting that
they are all void of the Love of God and saving Grace, till they become subject
to the Pope of Rome; when as the Souls of these Believers have Experience of
the Love of God within them, and feel that Grace that proves their
Justification. I wonder what kind of thing it is that is called Love or
Holiness in a Papist, which Protestants and other Christians have not, and what
is the difference.

10. They are most notorious Enemies to Charity, condemning most of the
Christian World to Hell, for being out of their subjection.

11. They are notorious Enemies to Knowledge under pretense of Obedience and
Unity, and avoiding Heresy. They celebrate their Worship in a Language not
understood by the vulgar Worshippers. They hinder the People from Reading the
holy Scriptures, (which the ancient Fathers exhorted men and women to, as an
ordinary thing.) The quality of their Priests and People, testify this.

12. They oppose the Purity of divine Worship, setting up a multitude of humane
Inventions in stead thereof, and idolatrously (for no less can be said of it)
adoring a piece of consecrated Bread as their God.

13. They are Opposers of Holiness, both by the foresaid enmity to Knowledge,
Charity, and purity of Worship, and by many unholy Doctrines, and by deluding
Souls with an outside historical way of Religion, never required by the Lord,
consisting in a multitude of Ceremonies, and worshipping of Angels, and the
Souls of Saints, and Images, and Crosses, etc. Let Experience speak how much
the Life of Holiness is promoted by them.

14. They are Enemies to common Honesty, teaching the Doctrines of
Equivocations and Mental Reservations, and making many heinous sins venial, and
many of the most odious sins to be Duties, as killing Kings that are
excommunicated by the Pope, taking Oaths with the foresaid Reservations, and
breaking them, etc. For the Jesuits Doctrine, Montaltus the Jansenist, and many
of the French Clergy have pretty well opened it: and the Pope himself has
lately been fain to publish a condemnation of their Apology. And yet the power
and interest of the Jesuits and their followers among them, is not altogether
unknown to the World.

15. They are Enemies to Civil Peace and Government, (if there be any such in
the World) as their Doctrine and Practice of killing and deposing excommunicate
Princes, breaking Oaths, etc. shows. Bellarmine that will go a middle way,
gives the Pope power in ordine ad spiritualia, and indirectly to dispose of
Kingdoms, and tells us, that it is unlawful to tolerate heretical Kings that
propagate their Heresy, (that is, the ancient Faith.) How well Doctor Heylin
has vindicated their Council of Laterane in this, (whose Decrees stand as a
Monument of the horrid treasonable Doctrine of the Papists) I shall, if God
will, hereafter manifest: In the mean time, let any man read the words of the
Council, and judge.

And now whether a Religion that is at such open enmity with 1. Scripture, 2.
The Church, 3. Tradition, 4. Fathers, 5. Councils, 6. Some Popes, 7. The common
senses and Reason of all the World, even their own, 8. Unity of Christians, 9.
Knowledge, 10. Experience of Believers, 11. Charity, 12. Purity of Worship, 13.
Holiness, 14. Common Honesty, 15. And to Civil Government and Peace (which
might all easily be fully proved, though here but touched) I say, whether such
a Religion should be embraced and advanced with such diligence and violence,
and men's souls laid upon it, is the controversy before us. And whether it
should be tolerated (even the propagation of it, to the damnation of the
peoples souls) is now the Question which the juggling Papists have set a foot
among those that have made themselves our Rulers: and there are found men among
us, that call themselves Protestants and godly, that plead for the said
Toleration; (and consequently for the delivering up of these Nations to Popery,
if not to Spanish or other foreign Powers) which if they effect, and after
their contrary Professions, prove such Traitors to Christ, his Gospel and their
posterity, as they leave the Land of their Nativity in misery, they shall leave
their stinking names for a reproach and curse to future Generations; and on
such Pillars shall be written, [This pride, self-seeking, uncharitableness, and
schism has done.]

If thou marvel, Reader, that the learned Author of this Book and I, do join
thus against the common Adversary, after our own Differences in the one point
of Infant Baptism, thou do but marvel that we are Christians, and have not
made shipwreck of our Faith and Charity; and on the account of our
Imperfections and little Differences, cast away our salvation and the Churches
peace. Be it known to you that we are some years elder than when our
Differences begun: and therefore if we have made no progress in Holiness, we
are unexcusable. And we know that he that is strongest in holy Love, is
strongest in Grace. Marvel not then if we get some little increase by the
opportunities and mercies we possess; and if we forget not, that we are Members
of the same Christ, and Heirs of the same Kingdom, (where we hope to live in
perfect Love) when we draw nearer to it, and see that long we cannot be thence;
and when we see what havoc the Devil has made in the Churches of Christ, and
the Souls of multitudes seemingly religious, by uncharitableness and Schism. I
am sure the Soul that is most for Unity and Love is likest to those that are in
Heaven.

This also is my Answer to the Papists, that I know will make it my Reproach,
that I hold so much Communion with Anabaptists; that is, that I am not as
uncharitable and schismatical as they, that confine the Church to their deluded
Faction. We own nothing in each other that we discern to be evil; but we
unanimously practice so far as we are agreed. If sin have left England and
Europe any hopes, the Lord have mercy upon a divided self-destroying
Generation, and suffer not the sins of men professing godliness, to drive away
the Gospel, and send it to America, (according to Mr. Herbert's sad conjecture
in his Church Militant.) And, O that Professors of Godliness would consider,
both, what they have done, and how much of Holiness does consist in Charity,
Unity, and Peace, and leave not to the Papists the temptation or honor, of
seeming more unanimous and peaceable than we, lest they seem to themselves and
others more holy than we. Experience and Judgments will leave us the most
unexcusable people under Heaven, if we prevent not our own and the Churches
ruin, by a speedy, diligent return, to Charity and Peace. As these are the
thoughts which I judged most necessary on this occasion to communicate, so are
they the matter of my daily Prayers.

Reader, the times require thee to be well versed in the Controversies with the
Papists. If thou love thy Faith and Soul, be not lazy; but as there are
multitudes of excellent Treatises at hand against Popery, be not through
negligence a stranger to them. And among others, in this Treatise thou will
find the Adversary solidly confuted, and the vanity of his Reasonings
detected, (which briefly I did in his most material parts, in my Key for
Catholics.) And among the many excellent Treatises, against them, with which
Shops and Libraries abound, I commend to the Country Reader, that would see
much in a little room, and know the true grounds of confuting Popery, two
little Treatises, viz. Dr. Challoner's Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam, and
Dr. Peter Moulin's Answer to Cotton's Questions, with the Questions and
Challenges annexed. And for Arguments against Toleration of Popery, Dr.
Sutliffe's Answer to the Lay Papists Petition for Toleration, and Gabriel
Powel's Answer to the same. Whose side the Scriptures are on, read a little
Book called, The abatement of Popish Brags by Alexander Cook. Read also their
own [Catholick Moderatour, proving Protestants no Hereticks] and the Catholic
Judge or Moderatour of the Moderatour, by John of the Cross, etc. Shortly I
hope you may have Dr. Peter Moulin's excellent Treatise of the Novelty of
Popery, translated by his Reverend Son, and now going to the Press. The Lord
grant, that men's refusing to receive the Truth in the Love of it to their
Salvation, and their base subjecting it to their pride and worldly interests,
provoke not God to give them over to believe such Lies as are here detected,
and to withdraw the Gospel from an unworthy Nation. Amen.

November. 11. 1659. RI. BAXTER.

Errata.
Page 4. margin read White or de Albiis sonus. p. 5. l. 22. r. Ephesians. 1. 23.
p. 8. l. 2. r. Ezekiel. 37. p. 9. l. 30. r. being. p. 13 l. 20. r. six. l. 22. r.
he. p. 15. l. 3. 5. r. primacy. l. 5. r. last. l. 9, 10. r. inconsequent. l.
34. r. removed. p. 16. l. 7. r. better. l. 9. r. primacy. p. 17. l. 6. r.
decreed. p. 19. l. 33. r. brings. p. 21. l. 5. r. Milevis. p. 24. l. 24. r.
ninth. p. 25. l. 9. r. Marozia. l. 41. r. Gandavensis Andegavensis. p. 26. l.
11. r. ego. p. 32. l. 3. r. Ivo. p. 36. l. 30. r. to the. l. 35. r. councils.
p. 39. l. 37. r. the. p. 43. l. 28. r. Armenians. p. 50. l. 26. r. rood. l. 38.
r. second. p. 52. l. 12. r. Dr. p. 54. l. 17. r. way of. p. 55. l. 1. r.
Thuanus. p. 58. l. 14. r. commemorative. p. 59. l. 41. r. our. p. 65. l. 29. r.
conspicuity. p. 66. l. 14. r. has said. p. 70. l. 20. r. ambiguity. p. 73. l.
19. r. palpable. p. 80. l. 8. r. by which. p. 91. l. 46. r. truth. p. 95. l.
12. r. Bannez. p. 96. l. 11. r. does not. p. 98. l. 46. r. of. p. 110. l. 32.
r. conceits. p. 111. l. 22. r. (according l. 23. r. vealeth) l. 40. r. faction.
p. 113. d. l. 1. p. 122. l. 8. r. thousand. p. 124. l. 5. r. general. p. 1^5.
l. 39. r. deceived. p. 126. l. 18. r. of an. p 135. l. 1. 12. d. het. p. 140.
l. 25. r. one.

ROMANISM Discussed: OR, An ANSWER to the nine First Articles of H. T. his
Manual of Controversies.
ARTICLE I.
The Church of Rome is not demonstrated to be the true Church of God by its
succession.
SECT. I.
Of the Title Page of H. T. his Manual of Controversies, in which is showed to
be a vain vaunt of what he has not performed.

AMong the many Writings which have been dispersed for the seducing of the
English People from the Protestant Doctrine and Communion, to the embracing of
the Roman Tridentin opinions, a Book of H. T. that is, Henry Turbervile (at I
am told) has been instrumental thereto. It is styled (as Becanus, Cost^rus,
and others before had done theirs) A Manual of Controversies, in which he
pretends to have clearly demonstrated the truth of the Catholic Religion, by
which he means the Roman opinions, branched by him into 28 Articles; the truth
of which he has no otherwise demonstrated, than by showing that there is no
truth in them: Which will appear by considering that the two chief Points of
the Roman Religion, distinct from the Protestant, are, the Bishop of Rome's
Supremacy, and Transubstantiation of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, into
the very flesh and blood of Christ which he had of the blessed Virgin. Now if
he believe himself, that he has clearly demonstrated the truth of these by
Texts of holy Scripture, Councils of all Ages, Fathers of the first 500 years,
common Sense and Experience: yet there is so little said by him that carries a
show of proof of either; or rather there is so much in his own Writing as
gainsays it, that were there not a spirit of error which does possess men, they
would not believe him. For, that he has not clearly demonstrated the truth of
the Bishop of Rome's Supremacy over the whole Church, is apparent, in that he
has not demonstrated clearly Peter's Supremacy, there being no Texts brought
by him, Art. 7. to prove it, but Ephesians. 2. 20. Matthew. 16. 18. John 21. 16, 17,
18. Luke 22. 31. Matthew. 10. 2. Mark 3. Luke 2. Acts 1. of which the very first
proves, that other Apostles were Foundations as well as Peter, and therefore
the term Peter, or rock, Matthew. 16. 18. proves not the whole church so built on
Peter, as that thereby he is declared Supreme visible Head over them, or over
the whole church, any more than other Apostles were. Nor does feeding the sheep
of Christ, prove any other Supremacy than was in the Elders of Ephesus,
commanded to do the same, Acts 20. 28. and by Peter himself, as a fellow-Elder
with them, required of them, 1 Pet. 5 1, 2* And confirming the brethren, Luke
22. 31. is no more an argument of Peter's Supremacy, than the same thing is of
the Supremacy of Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14. 22. The other Texts show nothing
but priority of nomination or speaking; notwithstanding which, H. T. p. 97.
confesses the Apostles to have been equal in their calling to the Apostl^ship,
nothing at all of supremacy and rule over the Apostles and whole church is
deducible from them. And for Transubstantiation, or real substantial presence
of Christ's body and blood in the Eucharist, that which he alleges is the
words of institution, Marth. 26. 27, 28. Mark 14. 22, 24. Luke 22. 19, 20. 1
Cor. 11. 24, 25. which he would have it believed, are spoken without trope or
figure of speech, saying, p. 130. to whosoever shall peruse the Text, Matthew.
26. 27, 28. there is no mention of any f^gure in it; and yet p. 154. confesses
there is a figure in the word [chalice.] And for the Councils of all Ages,
says, p. 7. that the second and third Ages produced no Councils; and p. 25. he
says, In this tenth Age or Century I find no General Council, nor yet
Provincial, in which any controversy of moment was decided. And for Fathers of
the first 500 years, neither do any of the Fathers he cites ascribe to Peter
such a supremacy over the Apostles and the whole church, as the Romanists
assert; nor would any man imagine, that Iren^^us, Cyprian, or Augustine, should
intend such a supremacy to the Bishop of Rome, who knows the controversies
about Easter between Polycarpus and Anicetus, Polycrares, Irenaeus, and the
Asian Bishops, and Pope Victor; and about Rebaptization, between Cyprian and
S^ephanus; between the African Bishops, about Appeals to Rome, and Ca^lestinus
and other Bishops of Rome. And for the point of Transubstantiation, or real
substantial presence of Christ's flesh and blood in the Eucharist, the sayings
of Fathers being well viewed, speak not what he would have them; and
Augustine's words cited by him, p. 185. denying Judas to have eaten the bread
which was our Lord himself, must be understood as denying Transubstantiation,
since he acknowledges, he did eat the ^read of our Lord. As for common sense
and experience, how it should demonstrate clearly the Popes supremacy, is
beyond my apprehension, yea against it, since Histories and Travelers tell me,
that the Greek and other churches to this day deny the Popes supremacy. And
that Christ's real substantial bodily presence or transubstantiation, should be
demonstrated by common sense and experience, is so impudent an assertion as no
man can believe, but he that has tenounced common sense and experience. Nor
can H. T. believe himself in that, if he believe what he says, p. 203. The
body of Christ in the Sacrament is not the proper object of sense; p. 205. the
evidence of sense is not infallible in the Sacrament; which if there were no
more said, might satisfy an unprejudiced person, that this Author does not
easily deserve belief, but deals like a Mountebank, that commends his Salves
beyond their virtue; and when p. 72. he forbids us to try by the dead letter
(meaning the Scripture) or ^uman^ reason, it is a shrewd sign that what he said
in the Title Page of his Demonstration, was but a copy of his countenance, no
real thought of his own heart. Nevertheless for the undeceiving of those who
are willing to be undeceived, I shall examine his Writing, and show that he
has not at all demonstrated the Roman Doctrine to be true, nor answered the
Protestants objections; and that the true Fathers, Prophets, and Apostles, and
Teachers in the next Ages to them, have not taught the now Roman opinions, but
the contrary.

SECT. II.
Of the Epistles before H. T. his Manual, in which too much is ascribed to the
Church, and the Churches Authority deceitfully made the first point of his
Treatise.

LEtting pass other things in the Epistles, with the approbation and
commendation of those of his own way, as being no better than a kind of
complement of one Papist with another, of no moment but with that prejudiced
party, I shall only take notice of that passage in his Epistle to the Reader,
in which he says, but not truly, It is agreed by all parties, that the Church
founded in Christ's blood, was the only mistress of Divine Faith, and sole
repository of all revealed truths, at least for an age or two. For this is not
true of the church, but of Christ his Apostles, and their preaching and
writings. And therefore it is not true, which he thence infers, that the
controversies of the Church are the most important doubtless of all others, or
that on the notion and eviction of her authority, all other points essentially
depend for their knowledge and decision; which in effect is as if he had said,
Were there not a Pope and his council, the Scriptures would be ineffectual to
know the revealed truths of God, and to decide any controversies in Religion,
which I count little better than blasphemy; nor does he well to begin with that
point; were it that he intended to have cleared truth, he should first (as
Bellarmine and some others have done) have examined the points of the
Scriptures sufficiency, and the needlesness of unwritten Traditions, and
thereupon have examined the particular points in difference, that thereby the
Reader might have discerned whether the Roman church were the true church of
God, since the truth of the church is known by the truth of faith, which they
hold, as H. T. himself urges, p. 45. Succession in the profession of the same
faith from Christ, and his Apostles continued unto this time, is it by which
the Church is known; Ecclesia Christi est quae luscipit a Christo doctrinam,
seu cujus fides sundatur authoritate Christi. Thomas Whitsonus Bucci, Tract. 1.
Sect. 7.
and therefore we must first know whether the Roman Faith be the same with that
which Christ and his Apostles taught, before we can know the truth of their
succession, and of their Church. But H. T. after Becanus and others, conceives
it best for their design, to forestall Readers with the Authority of the Roman
Church; which being onc^ settled in men's minds, no marvel if they swallow down
such gross Doctrines as Transubstantiation, half Communion, Invocation and
Worship of Saints deceased, Angels, Relics, Images, Crucifixes, and the rest
of their errors and abuses, wherein any that reads the Scriptures may see how
far they are gone from the Primitive says taught by Christ and his Apostles;
nevertheless having premonished the Reader of this deceitful Artifice, I shall
examine his Book in the order he has chosen.

SECT. III.
The Tenet of the falsity of all Churches not owning the Pope, is showed to be
most absurd.

ARticle 1. says H. T. Our Tenet is, That the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome is the only true Church of God.

Answ. By the S^e of Rome, he means the Roman Bishop, or Pope, and the
Communion he means, is in the same Tenets which they hold according to the
Trent Canons, and Pius the fourth his Bull with subjection to the Bishop of
Rome's jurisdiction over the whole Church of Christ. In which sense the Tenet
is so palpably false, and so extremely uncharitable, that it is a marvel that
any that has the understanding of a man should embrace it, or the charity of a
Christian should brook it. For,

1. If the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome, be the only true
Church of God, then that Church only has eternal life, for only the true
Church of God has eternal life. Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, is their own
determination, Council. Lateran. 4. Can. 2. and elsewhere. But that Church which
is not in communion with the Sea of Rome, has eternal life; Ergo, it is the
true Church of God. The Minor is proved thus, That Church which believes in
Jesus Christ has eternal life: But other Churches besides those now in
communion with the Sea of Rome, believe in Jesus Christ; Ergo. The Major is
plain from John 3. 16, 18, 36. and 17. 3. and 20. 31. 1 John 5. 11, 12. Mark
16. 16. in which it is expressly said, that he that believes on Christ (without
any mention of Peter or the Pope) has eternal life. The Minor is proved by
their profession, and other evidences of their reality in believing; which if
any deny to prove true faith in them, he may as well deny there are any
believers in Christ in the world.

2. If there be no true Churches but such as are in communion with the Sea of
Rome, then there is some other name besides the Name of Jesus Christ given
among men, by which we must be saved, and there is salvation in some other
besides him, for men have salvation in that name by which they are the true
church of God; and if we be the true church of God by communion with the Pope,
we have salvation by the Pope. But this is most false and Antichristian, to
ascribe salvation to any other name besides the Name of Jesus Christ, as being
expressly contradictory to Peter's own words, Act. 4. 12. There is no salvation
in any other, neither is there any name under heaven given to men by which we
must be saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ; not Peter, or the Bishop of Rome.

3. If no churches be true churches of God, but such as are in communion with
the Sea of Rome, then Christ died for no other churches but them. For Christ
died for his church, Ephesians. 5. 25. it is not said, he gave himself for them who
are not his church. But sure it is very uncharitable to say, that Christ died
for no other than those that own the Pope, and contrary to the Scripture, that
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16.
therefore it is false and uncharitable, to exclude all but Romanists out of the
church of God.

4. If none be the true church of God, but such as are in communion with the Sea of Rome, then none are members of Christ, in Christ, the sons of God, but
such as are in communion with the Sea of Rome; for the true church of God only
are members of Christ, in Christ, the children of God, Ephesians. 23. But it is
false, that none are members of Christ, in Christ, or children of God, but such
as are in communion with the Sea of Rome; for the Apostle tells the Galatians,
Gal. 3. 26, 27. that they were all the sons of God by ^aith in Christ Jesus,
that as many as were baptized into Christ, had put on Christ, v. 28 that they
were all one in Christ Jesus, without any requiring of communion with the Sea
of Rome.

5. If none are the true church of God but such as are in communion with the Sea of Rome, then Christ is present with none by his Spirit and protection; but
such as are in that communion. For such as are not the true Church of God,
Christ is not present with them by his Spirit and protection, Romans 8. 9. Ye are
not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if the spirit of God dwell in you. If any
man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none of his, ver. 14 As many as
are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, 1 Cor. 6. 19. Know ye
not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, which ye have of God, and
ye are not your own, 2 Cor. 6. 16. For ye are the temple of the living God, as
God has said, that I will dwell in them, and walk amidst them, and I will be
their God, and they shall be my people. Revel. 2. 1. Christ walks in the
midst of the seven golden candlesticks. But Christ is present by his Spirit and
protection with other Churches and persons, than such as are in communion with
the Sea of Rome, even all that believe in Christ, and are the sons of God, as
is apparent in that they call Jesus the Lord, which none can do, but by the
holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12. 3. they cry Abba Father, and thereby show they have the
spirit of adoption, Gal. 4 6. Can any have the face to say, that the millions
of christian Greeks, and others in persecution, who servently invocated God in
the Name of Christ, have not the spirit of Christ, nor are his, because they
are not in communion with the Roman See? yea, is there not more evidence of
Christ's Spirit among them, than is in the Roman church, in which there is so
much uncleanness* and so little of holiness, that even H. T. to prove its
holiness, is fain to have recourse to some supposed Saints many hundreds of
years since, by reason of the late scarcity.

6. If none are the true church of God, but such as are in communion with the Sea of Rome, then none are the house of God but they, since the house of God is
the church of God, 1 Timothy 3. 15. But that is false; for persons not in
communion with the Sea of Rome may be built on Christ a spiritual house, 1 Pet.
2. 5. Otherwise, besides the foundation which is laid, to wit, Jesus Christ, it
were necessary there should be another foundation, on which they should be
built, to wit, Peter and his Successors. But Paul says, 1 Cor. 3, 11. No man
can lay any other foundation to build upon a spiritual house to God, but that
which is laid, Jesus Christ; and Peter himself, 1 Pet. 2. 4. tells us, Christ is
the living stone, on which they are built; and ver. 6. alleges the Scripture,
saying, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious, and he
that believes on him shall not be ashamed; therefore all that believe in
Christ, though they be not in communion with the Sea of Rome, are a spiritual
house, and a true church of God; which is confirmed by the words of the
Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21. where he says of the Ephesians, that they were of
the household of God, and were built on the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in whom all the
building fitly framed together, grows unto an holy temple in the Lord. In
whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the spirit.
And Ephesians. 4. 4. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in
one hope of your calling. 5 One Lord, one faith, one Baptism. 6 One God and
Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. 1 Cor. 12.
12. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that
one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. 13 For by one spirit are
we all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Greeks, whether we be bond
or free: and have been all made to drink into one spirit. V. 27. Now ye are the
body of Christ, and members in particular. From whence may be gathered, that
communion with Christ by his Spirit, Faith, and Baptism, without any communion
with the Sea of Rome, is sufficient to prove persons to be the house of God,
and the body of Christ, and consequently the true church of God. For that which
was sufficient to make the Ephesians and Corinthians the house of God, and body
of Christ, is sufficient now to make English or other people a church of God,
there being no more required thereto now, than was then; and the Apostle says,
Galat. 3. 28, 29. For ye are all one in Christ Jesus; If ye be Christ's, then
are ye Abra^ams seed, and heirs according to the promise, Col. 3. 11. Where
there is neither Gre^k nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all. But then there was no
more required to the being of the true church, or house of God, or body, but
communion with Christ by his Spirit, Faith, and Baptism, without communion with
the Sea of Rome, as the Texts alleged show; therefore this communion with
Christ is sufficient to make us English a true church of God, without communion
with the Sea of Rome.

7. If the first Apostolical churches were true churches before either Peter was
at Rome, or any church there gathered, then it is not necessary to the being of
the true church of God now, that persons be in communion with the Sea of Rome;
for there is no more required to the being of the true church of God now, than
was then, and it could not then be required to be in communion with the Sea of
Rome, when there was no Bishop nor church there. But there were Apostolical
true churches of God at Jerusalem, Samaria, and elsewhere, before either Peter
was at Rome, or any church there gathered (as the History of the new Testament
shows;) therefore it is not necessary to the being of the true church of God,
to be in communion with the Sea of Rome.

8. If there be none true churches but such as are in communion with the Sea of
Rome, then the churches in India and elsewhere so remote from Rome, that they
never heard of the Bishop or See of Rome, nor were required communion with it,
should be excluded from the church of Christ, though they hold the true faith,
because they do not that which being of mere positive institution, they are
unavoidably ignorant of, and consequently should be damned. But this is too
absurd, since it imputes to God tyranny, in requiring that which cannot be done,
and cruelty in damning for not doing it; Ergo.

9. If to be in communion with the Sea of Rome, be necessary to the being of
the true church, then were the Apostles and Fathers, who in their Writings and
Creeds never required this of the believers to constitute them a true church of
God, very unfaithful or defective in their Tradition, since they did not
require or teach this as necessary to the being of a true church of God; as may
be seen in their Writings and creeds. But this is false, as being contrary to
their protestations of their integrity, in not shunning to declare the whole
counsel of God, Acts 20. 26, 27. and elsewhere; Ergo.

10. If there were many Saints and Martyrs, acknowledged even by the Romanists
to be such, who did not hold communion with the Bishop of Rome, so as to own
him to be supreme visible head of the whole church, but did oppose him, and
lived and died in that opposition, and yet were in the church of God, then they
who hold not communion with the Sea of Rome may be the true church of God. But
the antecedent is true in Cyprian, Augustine, and many more opposing the Bishop
of Rome about rebaptization, appeals from Africa, keeping Easter, therefore
either they must be unsainted, or else it must be yielded, that persons who are
not now in communion with the Sea of Rome, may be true churches of God. I need
not insist any longer in proving the falsity of a tenet so palpably absurd, and
demonstrated to be so by Bishop Mortan in his Grand Imposture of the Roman
Church, and by others elsewhere, Let Us view H. T. his proof.

SECT. IV.
The succession of Bishops, Priests, and Laics, required by H. T. is not
necessary to the being of a true Church.

THat (says he) is the only true Church of God, which has had a continued
succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time. But the Church now in
communion with the Sea of Rome; and no other, has had a succession from Christ
and his Apostles to this time; therefore the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome, and no other, is the true church of God. For proof of the major he
alleges Isa. 59. 21. and 60. 1, 3, 11. and 62. 6. Ezech. 3. 26. Dan. 7. 13,
14. Matthew. 28. 20. John 14 16. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13* 14.

Answ. The succession he means, is expressed p. 45. to be a continued number of
Bishops, Priests, and Laics, succeeding one another in the profession of the
same faith. This succession may be either in the same place, or some place or
other indefinite, and it may be said to be continued without the least
interruption for the smallest space of time, or so continued that in each age
or century there has been such a succession, though with some intermission.
The succession in the profession of the same faith, may be either universal in
every point, or limited to fundamentals. The succession may be said to be
continued either so conspicuously, as that there is an Assembly of that people
in each age, which any Christians in any part of the world did, or might know,
as they do the Commonwealth of the Venetians, or Kingdom of France, o^ as
heretofore the Roman Commonwealth was known; or else obscurely, so as to be
known only to themselves, and some near neighbors. The proof of this
succession may be conceived to be out of History, or other clear Writings,
Records, or Monuments extant, expressing persons and their faith, or else it
may be conjectured from some more obscure intimations. This Author I conceive
from many passages following, understands his major here thus: That is the
only true Church of God, which has had in the same place a continued
succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time, without interruption any
notable time in any age, of a number of Bishops, Priests, and Laics,
succeeding one another in the profession of the same faith, not only in
fundamentals, but in other points also, so conspicuously, that all Christians
did or might know it as the Roman Empire, French Kingdom, or Venetian
Republique may be known, and this to be proved out of History, or other clear
Writings, Records, or Monuments, expressing the persons and their faith. For
such a succession this Author would have necessary to a true church, which he
imagines may be proved to be in the Roman church, and no other. But in this
sense his Proposition is most false, and no whit proved out of the Texts he
produces, and nullifies the Roman church it self, which he endeavors so much
to magnify, as to make it to be the only true church of God. In opposition
thereto I say, 1. There may be a true church of God, where there are no Bishops
or Priests at all. Which I prove, 1. From Acts 14. 23. where it is said, that
Barnabas and Paul after they had gathered the churches, they returned to them
and ordained Elders in every Church, which supposes they were churches
sometime before they had Elders ordained for them; therefore it follows, there
may be a true church without Bishops, Priests, or Elders, since those churches
were such before they had them. 2. From the definition of a true church. That is
a true church which has the definition of a true church. H. T. confesses
often this Proposition to be true. But a number of believers in Christ who have
no Elders, or Priests, or Bishops, has the definition of a true church; Ergo,
The minor is proved from the received definitions. Bellarm. Tom. 2. Controv. l.
de Eccles. milit. c. 1. Ecclesia est evocatio sive caetus vocatorum, the church
is the company of the called out; and other Authors speak conformably. But
there may be a ca^ling out* or a company of persons called out, though they
have no Bishops or Priests, therefore they may be a ture church of God. 3. That
company which has the essential parts of a true church, is a true church of
God; But a number of believers professing the faith of Christ, has the
essential parts of a true church. They are the matter of a church, in that they
are men, the form is faith, or the profession of it, no other thing can be
rightly assigned to be essential as constitutive of a true church; their
governors, order, special gifts, and other things tending to their well-being,
are common accidents, which may be, or not be, and yet the church remain a true
church. Therefore a number of believers professing the true faith of Christ,
without Bishops, is a true church of God. 2. It is not necessary to the being
of a true church, that there be a succession of Bishops distinct from
Presbyters, whom H. T. terms Priests. For 1. There are many Fathers and popish
Writers, who make them but one Order at first, Lumbard. sen^ent. l. 4.
distinct. 24. Apud vcteres iidem Episcopi and Presbyteri fuerunt. The Ancients
took Bishops and Priests for the same; therefore with them there were churches,
in which were no Bishops distinct from Presbyters. 2. Where there were two
Orders, yet they were not so necessary, but that the church may be without
them; otherwise in the vacancy of the Episcopal See (which has in Rome it self
been sometimes some years together, often many months and days) the church
should cease to be a true church of God; for then it would follow, that in such
vacancies the Roman church did cease to be. 3. It is not necessary to the being
of a true church, that there be a profession of the same faith in every point;
for then the Roman church should not be a true church in Paul's days, in which
it is clear from Romans 14. 2. that one believed he might eat all things, another
who was weak did eat herbs. Ver. 5. One man esteems one day above another,
another esteems every day alike. In after Ages the differences in the Roman
church it self, if reckoned, would make a large catalogue. 4. It is not
necessary to the being of a true church, that the company and their profession
be so visible, as that they may be discerned as the Roman Senate was, or the
Venetian Republique, and French Kingdom are. For then the disciples which were
assembled, the doors being shut for fear of the Jews, John 20. 19. had not been
a true church of God, nor the woman in the wilderness, Revel. 12. 14. nor those
that wand red in dens and caves of the earth, in deserts and mountains, Heb.
11. 38. then the Saints in persecution should not be blessed, as Christ says,
Matthew. 5. 10. but cursed, as ceasing to be the true church of God. 5. It is not
necessary to the bring of a true church, that there should be in it a
succession of Bishops, Priests, and Laics, professing the same faith; for then
the first company of such professors, though called out of the world, should
not be* a true church of God, for want of succession. 6. Much less is it
necessary, that there should be a succession in the same place. For then when
Christ removed the candlestick, that is, the church out of it is place, as he
threatens, Revel. 2. 5. though believers should come to dwell there a thousand
years after, they should not be a true church, because of the interruption of
succession in that place: the church at Jerusalem after the persecution had not
been a true church, if the Apostles had been scattered as well as the rest,
Acts 8. 1, 2. Does a church persecuted and drive^ out of a place cease to be a
church, because they and their successors are removed out of their dwellings?
Suppose the place wasted and destroyed, shall that destroy the being of the
church which was there before? 7. Much less is it necessary that there should
be a continuance without any notable interruption in each age. For there may be
many hindrances of elections of Bishops, and ordinations of Priests, there may
be scatterings of the Laics, as was at Jerusalem, Acts 8. 1. and yet the being
and verity of the church continue. 8. If a church must be judged no true
church, because no Writings or Monuments have kept the catalogue of Bishops,
Priests, and Laics, professing the same faith, from Christ till this time, a
church shall be condemned as no true church, for want of Writings and
Monuments, or because they are now lost by reason of the inundation of
barbarism and barbarous people, who spoil Learning and Arts, which yet Popish
Writers acknowledge to have happened in the ninth Age, termed by Genebrard,
Chron. l. 4. the unhappy age, for want of learned Writers; and H. T. himself,
p. 25. says, In this tenth Age or Century I find no General Council, nor yet
provincia^, in which any controversy of moment was decided.

SECT. V.
None of the Texts alleged by H. T. prove a necessity of such a succession, as
he imagines, to the being of a true Church.

AS for the Texts he alleges, they are all so impertinently alleged, that
it is likely, had he not presumed he should meet with very credulous Readers, he
would not have mentioned them, or at least he would have showed how he proves
his Proposition from them, it being necessary to do so, if he had a mind to
instruct, and not impose on his Readers. The first Text, Isa. 59. 21. is no
promise of such a succession in any visible church, as H. T. speaks of, but of
a continuance of Gods Word and Spirit with the persons there meant, which seem
to be peculiarly the Jews, by the Apostles alleging Romans 11. 26. However they
are only the Elect who can be there meant, since the promise is made good to
none other, none other have the Spirit of God not departing from them, not any
whole visible church among the Gentiles, from whom the Spirit of God may
depart. In the three next Texts, Isa. 60. 1, 3, 11. Isa. 62. 6. Ezekiel. 37. 26.
the very words apply the promises to Hieru^alem and the people of Israel, so
that if they speak of any continued succession in any visible church in all
Ages, it must be the Jewish, which it is certain has had no such succession,
but is broken off from the true Olive to this day; and therefore cannot be
meant of them in H. T. his sense, till they be reingrassed. The next, Dan. 7.
13, 14. speaks not of the continued succession which H. T. imagines of every
true visible church, but of the duration of Christ's dominion, which shall not
pass away to another; that is, there is no kingdom which shall succeed to it,
as there did to the former Monarchies, nor shall it be destroyed, as they were,
but shall be continued to Christ without any succession. So that this Text
mentions not H. T. his succession, but excludes succession of any other to
Christ's dominion. Matthew. 28. 20. intimates a succession to the end of the
world, of teachers, and so does Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14. but not in every true
visible church, nor so conspicuous, as that all may know and discern the
church, as men discern the assembly of the people of Rome, nor so apparent, as
that there may be produced a catalogue of Bishops, Priests, and Laics,
professing the same faith, from Christ's time till now. Much less does John 14.
16. prove such a succession, it being only a promise of the Spirits abiding
with the Apostles for ever; which is no promise to the Bishop of Rome, or any
other visible church now.

SECT. VI.
The succession pretended to be in the Roman Church, proves not the verity of
the Roman Church, but the contrary.

BU^ H. T. contenting himself to have set down these Texts, leaves the Reader
to extract what he can out of them, and passes on to the proof of his minor,
That the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome, and no other, has had a
continued succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time; which according
to his meaning, is as if he had said, The Church either in Rome, or Italy, or
Spain, or France, or Germany, or Poland, or any other part of the world, which
has owned the Pope and his doctrine, and been subject to his rule, and no
other, has had a continued succession of Bishops, Priests, and Laics,
professing the same faith with the now Bishop of Rome, so conspicuous as that
there may be a catalogue of such produced out of good records, and no other can
do so. So that then if he proves his Minor, he must prove, 1. That church to
have this succession continued. 2. That no other has. Which he takes on him to
do, by a catalogue of the Roman churches chief Pastors, Councils, Nations
converted, and public Professors of her Faith. But his catalogue proves not
that which it is brought for. For 1. many hundreds of years there has been no
one of the Roman Popes, or very few, who have been Pastors at all in the church
of God; they have been Statesmen, have meddled with the civil affairs of many
kingdoms, disturbed the Empire and many Kingdoms, advanced their base sons, who
are termed their nephews, and their kindred, made wars with christian Princes;
but have not preached the Gospel, nor expounded the Scriptures to the people,
though even the Council of Tre^t decree, Sess^^. de reform. c. 1. Sess. 23. de
reform. c. 1. that they ought to be resident, because they ought to feed their
flock with the Word, with Sacraments, with Prayers, and good Works, which is
the only feeding which can denominate men pastors of the church of God. But
the Popes have for a long time showed themselves neither to have skill nor will
thus to feed the flock by preaching the Gospel, but use to stay the flock of
Christ by their Bulls, Excommunications, and Inquisitions. 2. Of those he
reckons up, p. 32. from the year 1300. five or six of them cannot be termed the
Roman churches Pastors, but hire^ings, which forsook it, they being absent from
Rome, and inhabiting Avignon in France, many hundred miles from Rome, seventy
years together. 3. Some of them who are reckoned in the catalogue could not be
Pastors at their entry, one, to wit, Benedict. the ninth, being a boy almost
ten years old, as Baronius terms him, Ann. 1033. number. 6. Another, John the
thirteenth, a lad eighteen years old at most, as Baronius, Ann. 955. number. 2.
and 3. reckons, when they first were Popes. And if a great many of their own
best Writers in their times do not belly them, there was one of the Popes a
woman, and sat some years as Pope. 4. Their succession is a very uncertain
thing. For 1. It is certain that Jesus Christ was never Pastor of the Roman
church, as Bishop there seated; and it is very audaciously, if not
blasphemously done by H. T. to reckon him as chief Pastor of the Roman church,
and to make Peter and others as Successors to him in his pastoral Office, as if
it were ceased in his own Person, and transferred to another as his Successor.
Nor is it likely that Peter was ever at Rome, or Bishop there, notwithstanding
some of the Ancients by uncertain tradition have conceived he was. For neither
were the Apostles settled any where as Bishops of one place, nor were they to
be, it being against their commission, and peculiar work of planting churches
in many places. And Peter being the Apostle of the circumcision, Gal. 2. 7. and
his being many years in the parts about Judea (of which the Scripture makes
express mention) it is very improbable that he was at Rome at all, certainly
not so as to sit there as Bishop so many years, as some Writers do write of
him. And it is more likely, if any where, he was Bishop of Antioch, where it is
certain he was, Gal. 2. 11. and as good authority there is of his being Bishop
there, as of his being Bishop of Rome, and therefore the succession to Peter
was rather to be there than at Rome; nor is there any proof of translation of
Peter's See from Antioch to Rome. 2. Concerning the succession after Peter,
there is so much uncertainty, as may show how miserable a people they must
needs be, who have no better proof for their church than such uncertain
succession. For 1. There is no certainty, but difference among their own
Writers, who was next after, whether Linus or Clemens, or whether both
together, and the like concerning the order of Cletus, Anacletus, Clemens, as
may be seen in Platina and Onuphrius, and others. 2. It is manifest, that the
succession has been through dissension about the election sometimes a great
while interrupted, as Baronius confesses, Ann. 853. number. 63. It has fallen
out, that the Sea of Rome has been void above two years and five months, the
election being delayed through contention. 3. There have been many Schisms,
very near thirty, in which there have been two or three Popes at once, one
opposing, cursing and condemning the other, and no clear certainty who was the
right Pope, Nations and Princes being divided, some adhering to one, some to
another. 4. A great part of their succession, even by the confession of their
own Writers, is of Monsters, as they term them, more truly to be termed devils
incarnate rather than men, so abominably wicked, that hell has not worse in
it, not worthy of the name of Christians, much less of Pastors of the church of
God, not worse surely in any church, I think not the like for wickedness any
where; so that the succession of such Pastors is fitter to prove the Roman
party a Synagogue of Satan, the very seat of Antichrist, than the only true
church of God. Methinks no man that thinks well of Christ, should imagine he
would trust the Government of the Universal church with such men, but rather if
he intended to commit that care to any one, have chosen a better race than the
Popes have been to manage it. 5. Their succession is also by their own Writers
said to be with such wicked practices of poisoning predecessors, corrupting
Cardinals, power of notorious whores, dealing with the devil, Simony and
bribes, fightings and bloodshed, as proves them Successors to Nero, rather than
to Peter. So that if a man would draw an Argument to prove the Roman church to
be the Mother of barlots and abominations of the earth (as Rome is styled, Rev.
17. 5. by the confession of their own Writers) the story of the succession of
the Popes and their lives, might convince one that is not bewitched with their
sorceries, that such has been for many hundred years together the Church of
Rome. 6. It is also false, that those he calls chief Pastors, have had a
continued succession in the profession of the same Faith with the now Roman,
since it is not denied, that Pope Liberius joining with the Arians, and
subscribing to the condemnation of Athanasius, (as Hierom in his Chronicle and
Catalogue of writers, in that of Fortunatianus testifies) did, as Bellarmin
acknowledges, l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 9. by interpretation, if not expressly,
consent to the Arian heresy: and Pope Honorius the first in the sixth Synod at
Constantinople, Act. 12. and 13. Pope Agatho being President, was condemned as
a Monothelite by hundreds of Bishops, and after by other Synods; besides what
is charged on sundry other Popes even by Popish writers, as Anastasius, John
the 22. etc. As for H. T. his Catalogue of Councils, Nations converted, and
public Professors of the Romish Faith; it proves much less, that the Church
now in communion with the Sea of Rome, has had a continued succession of
Bishops, Priests and Laics, succeeding one another in the profession of the
same Faith, with the now Roman Church from Christ and his Apostles to this
time. For, 1. According to his own allegation, the agreement of profession is
never in any age entirely the same in points of Faith, before the sixteenth
Century and the Trent Council. In all the ages before, the most he can produce
is, that after the five or sixth first Centuries, some in each age held some of
the points now held by the Papists, but denied by Protestants; the most we can
find in the first ages, is some agreement in rites, and some privileges of the
Roman Bishop, taken either from forged writings imposed on the first Popes, or
some sayings of Fathers misinterpreted. 2. He confesses sundry ages, to wit,
the second and third produced no Councils; and that he finds no general council
nor yet provincial in the tenth age, in which any controversy of moment was
decided. 3. Of those Councils he does produce, there is no one general Council
alleged in the four first Centuries, which was held at Rome, or did acknowledge
subjection to the Bishop of Rome, as now they require, and they being all or
most of them of the Greek* Church, which did and does yet deny such communion
with the Sea of Rome, as H. T. means, it is falsely said, that they prove his
continued succession in the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome. 4.
For the Nations converted and Christian professors in his Catalogue, there were
few of them Romans or converted by any from Rome, or had any acquaintance with
the Roman Church or Bishops; and therefore to make them witnesses of a
succession of Bishops, Priests and Laics in the profession of the same Faith
continued from Christ and his Apostles to this time in the Church now in
communion with the Sea of Rome, is extreme impudence and vanity: nevertheless
let us view his Catalogue.

SECT. VII.
The Catalogue of H. T. is defective for the proof of his pretended succession
in the Roman Church, in the first three hundred years.

IN the first age he alleges Christ, and St. Peter the Apostle, Linus,
Cletus, Clemens, and the Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem, St. Peter
presiding Act. 15. as a general Council, and then he recites eleven Roman
Bishops from the year 100, and having said somewhat for Peter's presiding, and
the translation of his chair from Antioch to Rome; he names some Catholic
professors to the year 100. and the spreading of the Church over all those
Countries; to which St. Paul wrote his Epistles and some others, as France,
Spain, England, and some Catholic professors to the year 200. with a falsely,
so called Canon of the Apostles approved in the six^h General Synod.

Answ. That all this is little to his purpose, appears by considering. 1 That
it is manifestly false, which he supposes. 1. That because Christ is the chief
Pastor of the Catholic Church rightly so termed, and the Roman Church has
arrogantly usurped the title of the Catholic Church, and the Pope is Bishop of
that See; therefore the Pope must be successor to Christ in such a peculiar
manner, as no other Bishop or Pastor is; and that the title of Vicar of Christ
belongs to him peculiarly, which is the title blasphemously ascribed to him by
flattering Romanists. 2. That Christ has a successor in his Pastoral office,
though the Scripture ascribe to Christ, because of his living for ever, an
office which passes not to any other, as Aarons did, Heb. 7. 24. 3. That Peter
is successor to Christ in the Pastoral office he had, and no other Apostle, or
Bishop besides the Bishop of Rome; though if there were any that could
challenge succession to Christ or Peter, it should be rather the Bishop of
Jerusalem the mother Church, if any, where Christ Preached, and as the Apostle
and high Priest of our Profession offered himself, being Minister of the
circumcision, Romans 15. 8. and Peter was Apostle of the circumcision, Gal. 2. 7.
and Paul when he went to see him (which Romanists make an acknowledgement of
superiority) went to Jerusalem, Gal. 1. 17. not to Rome, and if he were
President in the Council, Act. 15. as H. T. imagins, it was at Jerusalem, not
at Rome. 4. It is false, that either Christ, or Peter, or the Catholic
Professors he names in the first and second ages, held the same profession of
Faith with the now Roman Church in the points, wherein the Protestants, who
hold the Doctrine of the Church of England, do dissent from them. 2. That if
all were granted, H. T. which he says about the succession in the two first
ages, yet it does not amount to the proof of so much as one of the twenty eight
Articles he holds in his Manual, or the Articles in Pope Pius the fourth his
Creed, to have been held by any of them, not the Popes supremacy,
transubstantiation, invocation of Saints deceased, half communion, worshipping
of Images, etc. For Peter might be President at the Council at Jerusalem, he
might translate his chair from Antioch to Rome, it might be decreed lawful to
appeal from other Bishops to the Bishop of Rome, chief honor might be given to
the Bishop of Rome; yet neither Peter nor the Bishop of Rome the head, visible
Monarch or Ruler over the Apostles and the whole Church: mention might be made
of oblation and sacrifice, yet the mass no properly so called sacrifice
propitiatory for quick and dead. There Is not a word in any of Christ's, or John
Baptists, or Peter's, or Paul's, or James, or John's, or Judes Sermons or
writings, to prove any of the points of Popery, but enough to the contrary. Nor
is there any of the rest of the Martyrs or Confessors alleged of the two first
ages, of whom he is able to produce any one sentence of theirs, which may
demonstrate their acknowledging of any one of the points now held by the
Romanists, which are by the Protestants forenamed contradicted: which will
appear by considering the frivolousness of what H. T. here produces. Peter,
says he, defined, Act. 15. 7, 8, 9, 10. That the Jewish ceremonies were not to
be imposed on the Gentiles, therefore he had the premacy over the Apostles and
the whole Church, as if the defining in a Council or College did prove
superiority. By the same reason it might be proved that James had the premacy,
since he spoke least, and according to his sentence was the decree. Paphnutius
in the Nicene Council, as Sozome^^l 1. hist. c. 22. relates, when the Council
was about to forbid Priests the use of wives, defined the contrary, and the
Nicene Council approved it; was he therefore the primate over the other Bishops
in the Council? as in consequence it is which H. T. adds: Hicrom says, Peter
was Prince and Author of the decree, therefore he had the primacy, that is the
supreme headship over the Apostles and whole Church, though being [Prince and
Author of the decree] imports no more, but to give sentence first, according to
which the decree was framed. But James who spoke after, was he according to
whose sentence the decree was framed entirely, however Peter began before; so
that by this reason James had the primacy, and not Peter. A like in consequent
is this, Peter remained not always at Antioch, as all that Church
acknowledges, nor did she ever challenge the first chair in any general
Council, as appears in the Councils, ergo Peter translated his chair from
Antioch to Rome: risum teneat is araici? As if Peter did always remain at Rome;
or that because we read not of Antioch's challenge, therefore it was not made,
or as if the not challenging the first chair, were because of Peter's
translation of his chair from thence to Rome, whereas the very decree of the
Chalcedon Council, Can. 28. gives Rome the first chair because of the dignity
of the City, not by reason of Peter's supremacy, or translation of his chair
from Antioch to Rome, of the same sort of inconsequence is the next. The
Council of Sardis (Sardica in Illyria, Anno Domini 400. Western Fathers 300.
Estern 76.) decreed, that in cases of Bishops for honor of St. Peter's memory,
it should be lawful to appeal from whatsoever Bishop to the Bishop of Rome,
Can. 3. therefore the primacy was in Peter, and after him in the Bishop of
Rome. For, 1. This Council (whatever it were) was not in the first or second
ages. 2. Nor was it reckoned, no not by the Roman Church of old among
O^cumenical Councils, much less by the Greeks who refused to be present, as
Socrates relates, l. 2. c. 16. unless Athana^ius were removed for not yielding,
whereto the Bishops of the East met by themselves at Philippi in Thracia, and
made decrees apart says Sozom. l. 3. c. 10. yea however in the late edition of
the Councils at Paris, corrupt devices are used to gain the credit of a general
Council to it, and for some advantage to the Papacy to make its Canons of
authority: yet H. T. makes it to have had but seventy six Eastern Fathers, when
there were three hundred Western; and the ignorance of any general Councils
establishing appeals from Africa to Rome in the sixth Council of Carthage,
shows that it was not taken for an O^cumenical Council. 3. Nor does the Canon
it self decree as H. T. sets down, that the Bishop of Rome should have power to
receive appeals, and to judge the cause, but in case of the deposition of a
Bishop, they permit the Bishop of Rome to deliberate whether the judgment
should be renewed, and then consider whether he should send some from his side
who might be present at the renewed cognizance of it, and if it should seem
meet, also appoint judges out of a neighboring Province: none of which give
the Bishop of Rome a judiciary power, but only a Directory. Nor was this to be
extended to any other than those of the western countries, the Africans and
Greeks ever rejecting it. 4. The very canon it self expresses the reason of
it, not any divine appointment, or ancient use, the Council of Nice having to
the contrary, Can. 5. determined that such controversies should be ended in a
provincial Council, but it was then proposed first by Hosius, for honor of St.
Peter's memory, and the last determination of the cause to be by a Council,
Can. 13. and 14. No betis that which H. T. adds, The Council of Chalcedon, Anno
451. said, All primary and chief honor according to the Canons was to be kept
for the Archbishop of old Rome, therefore this is good evidence that in the
first Age the primacy was in Peter and the Pope. For neither does that Council
held in the fifth Age mention what honor or primacy the Bishop of Rome had in
the two first Ages, nor does it ascribe to the Bishop of Rome any superiority,
but does expressly in that very Canon ascribe to the other Patriarchs equality
with the Roman Bishop in power, however he were first in order, and this was
determined notwithstanding the reluctance of the Popes Legates. The rest is as
vain. Pope Antherus Anno 238. said, Peter was changed from Antioch to Rome,
Gregory in the sixth Age said, he knew no Bishop, but is subject to the Sea of
Rome, Epist. 62. Ergo, Peter and the Pope had the supreme Headship over the
whole Church in the first Age. As if the counterfeit writing of a Pope in the
third Age, or the saying of a Pope in the sixth Age of what was then in use
(though not true, since the Greek Bishops to his knowledge were not subject)
without telling them by what means it was so, were a sufficient proof either of
right or possession in the first Age of so great a power as the Bishop of Rome
now claims, What he adds, that the (falsely so called) Canons of the Apostles
define, that if any Bishop or Priest (the oblation (H. T. ^oysts in the, word
Mass) being made) shall not communicate he should be excommunicate, as giving
suspicion of him who has sacrificed that he has not rightly offered, Can. 9.
approved in the sixth general Synod, therefore the Apostles professed a
sacrifice properly so called propitiatory for quick and dead in the Mass, is as
frivolous. For neither were those canons made by the Apostles, as many things
in them show, and if they were, private Masses used by Papists should be
condemned, nor does it follow there is mention of a Sacrifice and Offering,
therefore in the Mass was Christ offered as a propitiatory Sacrifice properly
so called, since it might be termed, as it is in many of the Ancients, an
eucharistical or commemorative Sacrifice, not a propitiatory Sacrifice,
properly so called. This H. T. in the two first Ages brings for the proof of
his Minor; let us go on to view his catalogue in the next Age.

He sets down fifteen Bishops of Rome, whereof the last Pope Marcellinus was
condemned in a Council at Sinuessa (if there were such a Council) for his
Idolatry, confesses no Councils in the second and third Ages, yet claims a
Succession of Popes, Martyrs, and Confessors sufficient for his purposes, and
then sets down Decrees of eight Popes in their Epistles, which have been long
since proved counterfeit by Dr. John Rainold confer. with Heart chap. 8. divis.
3. in which the Forger tells us, that Pope Anacletus decreed Anno Dom. 101.
that Priests when they sacrifice to our Lord must not do it alone, (which is
against private Masses, and proves not a propitiatory sacrifice properly so
called in the Mass) that the Apostles so appointed, and the Roman Church holds
(if so then the Roman Church, which now holds private Masses, holds not the
same tenet it did then) if more difficult questions shall arise, let them be
referred to the Apostolic See (of Rome, which is H. T. his Addition) for so
the Apostles have ordained by the commandment of our Lord (no where extant, nor
any way probable) that Pope Alexander decreed, that Bread only and Wine
mingled with Water should be offered in the Sacrifice of the Mass, that Pope
Sixtus declared Anno 129. that the sacred Mysteries and sacred Vessels should
not be touched but by sacred Ministers, and that the Priest beginning Mass, the
People should sing Holy! holy! holy! and that Telesphorus commanded the seven
Weeks of Lent ^o be fasted, Epist. Decret. Anno Dom. 139. Pius in his Epistle
to the Italians enjoined Penance for him, by whose negligence any of the Blood
of our Lord should be spilt, Anno Dom. 147. Anicetus tells us, that James was
made Bishop of Jerusalem by St. Peter, James and John, in his Decretal Epistle
to the Bishops of France. Soter decreed that no man should say Mass after he
had eaten or drunk. Zepherinus decreed that the greater causes of the Church
are to be determined by the Apostolic See, because so the Apostles and their
Successors had ordained, Epist. to the Bishops of Sicily, 217. And then H. T.
adds, These were all Bishops of Rome, but no Protestants I hope. Which is a
ridiculous passage, showing his folly in triumphing insolently over his
Adversaries upon such frivolous Allegations. For, 1. who that knows those times
of Persecution confessed by himself, p. 7. and therefore the second and third
Ages produced no Councils, in which many of the Popes were Martyrs, would
imagine that they should busy themselves in making Decrees about sacred
places, sacred vessels, hearing of greater causes, fasting in Lent, when they
were in danger to be shut up in Prisons, necessitated to hide themselves,
wanted perhaps food of any sort by reason of persecution? 2. Or who that reads
Authors of those and other Ages does not perceive in those Epistles the style
and terms of far later Ages? 3. But were it supposed they were the genuine
Epistles of those Popes, yet there is no proof from thence of the now Roman
faith held by them in the points gainsaid by Protestants, as v. g.
Transubstantiation, or the Popes visible Headship over the whole Church. They
might call the Eucharist a Sacrifice, yet not properly so called propitiatory
for quick and dead. Pius might call the spilling of Wine, spilling of Christ's
Blood, signified by it, as the Cup is termed the Blood of the New Testament,
because it is signified by it, Lent fast, fasting before Mass, mingling Water
and Wine might be appointed, yet no real substantial presence of Christ's Body
and Blood taught, the greater causes of the Church, and more difficult
questions referred to the Apostolic See, and yet no supreme Headship over the
whole Church deduced thence. As for the Tale of James his being made Bishop of
Jerusalem by St. Peter, James, and John, it rather makes against Peter's
Supremacy, than for it, fith in that no more is ascribed to Peter than to James
and John: so that we may grant him, that they were Popes of Rome, and yet aver
they were true Protestants in respect of their Doctrine, though differing in
frivolous ceremonies, if the Epistles alleged had been their own, (which is
altogether improbable) and slight the folly of H. T. in triumphing before the
victory.

His catalogue of catholic Professors to the year 300. is in like manner
ridiculous, some of them being of the African, A^ian, and Greek Churches, that
had no such communion with the Sea of Rome as H. T. makes necessary to the
being of a true Church; yea it is well known that Cyprian Bishop of Carthage,
and other African Bishops opposed Stephen and Cornelius Bishops of Rome about
Appeals to Roms, and in the point of Rebaptization of the baptized by
Heretics, which was afterward determined by the authority of the Nicene
Council, not by the bare authority of the Roman Bishops. Nor is one word
brought by H. T. that shows they held the same faith which the Roman Church now
holds in opposition to the Protestants. Thus have I examined his catalogue for
the first three hundred years, which were the best and purest times of the
Church, as being the times of the ten great Persecutions, and have not found
the Succession which H. T. asserts. Let Us view the rest.

SECT. VIII.
The Catalogue of H. T. is defective in proof of his pretended Succession in
the Roman Church in the fourth and fifth Centuries.

IN the fourth Age he begins with a catalogue of catholic Professors to the
year 400. of whom some were of the African Churches, some of the Greek, some of
the Asiatick, some of the Latin Churches: but he shows not that any one either
owned the Popes Supremacy, or the Doctrine of the Romanists, which he maintains
against the Protestants. Sure Hierom was no Assertor of the Papacy, who in his
Epistle to Euagrius makes Bishops and Presbyters the same, and the Bishop of
Rome of no higher, but of the same merit and Priesthood with the Bishop of
Eugubium. And for the Nations converted which he mentions, there were some of
them, as Indians and Ethiopians, who it is not likely ever heard of the Roman
Church, nor had any conversion from them. No^ is it likely that any of them
either owned the Popes or Church of Rome's Supremacy, or any point of Doctrine,
they now hold in opposition to the Protestants.

As for the fourteen Popes of this century, what ever their succession were,
(which is not without question) yet that they did assert as due to them such a
Supremacy as the Popes now claim, or that faith, which now the Papists hold in
opposition to the Protestants, cannot be proved. The same may be said of the
two general Councils he mentions in the fourth century, to wit, the first
Nicene, and the first Constantinopolitan: which never ascribed to the Bishop of
Rome any more power than to the Bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople, nor
after them the Ephesin and Chalcedonian in the fifth century. H. T. himself
says only, The first Nicene Council was approved by Pope Sylvester, but does
not affirm that either he called it, or was present at it, or was President of
it, And it being confessed that Hosius Bishop of Corduba was President there by
Bellarmine himself, lib. 1. de council. and Eccl. c. 19. tom* 2. controv. he
imagines, but proves not Hosius to have been the Popes Legate out of the
Council, or any one that was there. And whereas H. T. says, The first
Constantinopolitan Council (Fathers 1. 50.) Pope Damasus pre^iding, Anno 381.
against Macedonius, it is contradicted by Bellarmine in the same place. It is
also manifest that the Roman Pope was not President there, but Nectarius Bishop
of Constantinople: of which thing the cause is, because the Roman Pope was
neither present by himself, nor by his Legates. What he adds of Pope Caelestin
his presi^ing in the Council at Ephesus against Nestorius, Anno 431. is not
true, since it is manifest from the subscription to the Council, that Cyril of
Al^xandria was President there, and with him Juvenal of Jerusalem. And though
it be said, that Cyril held the place of Pope Caelestinus, yet that was in
giving suffrage to show the agreement of the Patriarchs, not in presidency, or
if in presidency, yet so as to be president, suo jure, by his own right, as one
of the Patriarchs without deputation from Rome. H. T. adds, The Chalcedon
Council (Fathers 600.) Pope Leo presiding, Anno Dom 451. against Eutyches. But
Pope Leo was president only by his Legates, and together with them Anatolius
Patriarch of Constantinople, and Juvenal of Jerusalem, did preside. And when
the Popes Legates opposed the ascribing to the Patriarch of Constantinople
equal authority and privileges with the Bishop of Rome, yet the six hundred
Fathers determined for the Patriarch of Constantinople.

But what do the Councils in these two Ages say for H. T. his Minor? He brings
some passages out of the Arabic Canons and the Decrees, as if the Nicene
Council asserted the Popes supremacy and the real presence. But those Arabic
canons are of no credit, being but lately (as they say) brought by a certain
Jesuit from the Patriarch of Alexandria, and those variously published by
Pisanus and Turrian, in which are eighty canons: whereas of old in the Nicene
Synod there were but twenty, and the Letter of the African Bishops (of whom
Augustine was one) in the sixth Synod at Carthage written to the Pope of Rome,
assuring that the copies of the Nicene canons which Cecilian Bishop of Carthage
brought from Nice, and the copies they had from Cyril of Alexandria and Atticus
of Constantinople, had not the canon about Appeals to Rome from all parts,
which three Bishops of Rome alleged; but the true canons of the Nicene council,
to wit, the fifth and the sixth being against the arrogated power about appeals
to the Bishop of Rome, in vain does H. T. obtrude his nine and thirtieth and
the threescore and fifth Can. Arab. for the Popes supremacy and prayer for the
dead. And for the canon, that forbids Deacons to give the Eucharist Presbyters
being present, (which he bring for the countenancing of the Sacrifice of the
Mass) the genuine words of the canon mention not a power in priests (as he
terms them) to offer sacrifice, which Deacons have not, but a restraint of
Deacons from that giving the Eucharist, Presbyters being present, which they
might do in their absence. And for the other testimonies which he fetches out
of the Decretals, for Baptisms, purging away sin, and the unbloody Sacrifice,
they are of no validity, being not taken out of the acts of the Council, but
the compiler of the canon law, who thrust into the canon law all sorts of
Determinations, whether they were chaff or wheat, genuine or supposititious.
And yet if they were genuine they may have a sense agreeing with protestant
doctrine.

The Decree of the first Constantinopolitan Council against Macedonius, which
decreed the Bishop of Constantinople to be chief next to the Bishop of Rome,
proves not that the Fathers then ascribed to the Bishop of Rome such a
supremacy of power as now the Popes arrogate over all Bishops, but the
contrary. For it does make the Bishop of Constantinople a chief, not under the
Bishop of Rome, but next him, and ascribes to him honor and dignity alike with
the Bishop of Rome, though in order of mentioning, sitting and some such like
acts it prefers the bishop of Rome.

In the first Ephesin council, if Peter were defined Head and Prince of the
Apostles, yet they never meant thereby superiority and power over them, but
priority in order, and excellency in virtue. The power of binding and loosing
sins was not given to Peter any otherwise than to other Apostles, John 20. 23.

In the third action (says H. T.) Pope Leo is called universal Archbishop.
And it is granted that the Council extolled Leo, yet they made him not
Universal Bishop over all bishops in the world, but he was styled Occumenical
Archbishop of old Rome, not by the council, but by particular men of the
council, which yet did give it to John of Constantinople: but by none was that
title then given to either in that sense in which now the Pope claims it; for
that very council did ascribe (...), equal privileges or Segniories to the
other Patriarchs with the bishop of Rome, notwithstanding the gainsaying of the
Popes Legates; which determination was again confirmed in the sixth Synod at
Constantinople in Trullo in the sixth Age. The sense in which the title of
Ecumenical, or Universal Bishop was given to any of the Patriarchs was not
given to them as ascribing to them supremacy and power over all bishops, and
churches, as afterward John of Constantinople affected the title, and Boniface
of Rome usurped it by the means of Phocas the Emperor, but it was given to
each of the Patriarchs for their eminency by reason of their great care of the
churches, in like manner as Paul said of himself, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Upon me comes
daily the care of all the Churches: which was therefore put on them because of
the dignity of their cities, and amplitude of the rule and dominion which was
exercised there by the Emperors Lieutenants, by means whereof the bishops of
those cities had the advantage of intelligence and assistance in the ordering
of things belonging to many churches in a large compass, even as at this day a
Patriarch at London has an advantage for the ordering of things concerning the
British and Irish churches: the regiment of the churches in those days much
following the government of the Empire, as is manifest by the acts of councils
and histories of those times. It is granted that in the fifth age Pope Leo
affected the extolling of Peter, and did it too immoderately, and that the
phrase of Peter's doing what the Pope did was in use: and this proves that then
ambition had crept in among the bishops, and the affecting of vain titles
increased, and that in respect of these things there was great corruption in
the Patriarchs and other bishops, which grew to an extreme height afterward;
yet neither in that age nor any other was that power over the whole church,
which now the Popes and their flatterers challenge ascribed unto them without
control of the sounder part, and is yet to this day opposed by the French
popish churches, and some other.

That which is added by H. T. of the Council of Eleberis in Spain, and the
second of Atles in France, about Priests abstaining from their Wives, or else
to be degraded, and that no man who was married could be made a Priest unless a
conversion were promised, is but of provincial Synods, not general councils,
about a matter only of Ecclesiastical Discipline, not a point of Faith, about
which alone is the Question, whether he can prove such a Succession as he
asserts in all ages: besides the Eleberin canon supposes they had then Wives;
and it appears that till then they did use them, and that there were married
priests: but many being corrupted in their opinions of Marriage by the debasing
of it as carnal, and extolling Virginity as meritorious, began to put that yoke
on men, which occasioned in after ages the intolerable tyranny of denying
Marriage to priests, against Gods allowance, and the practice of former ages.

The catholic professors he mentions to the year 500. were many of the Greek
and other churches, who, though they held communion with the bishop of Rome in
opposing the Heresies then risen, yet did neither acknowledge the Popes
supremacy now challenged, nor held the Doctrine the Romanists now teach in
opposition to Protestants.

As for the Nations converted, Scots, French, the Martyrs of Africa, which he
mentions, it is not showed, that either they were converted by any from Rome,
or acknowledged subjection to him as the supreme ecumenical bishop, or held
what the Romanists now hold against Protestants. And thus have I showed the
insufficiency for the proof of his Minor of the catalogue of H. T. of the first
five hundred years, within which he included his Demonstration, which were
better than the later, though not without their corruptions. I proceed to view
what he says of the sixth and other ages following.

SECT. IX.
The defect of H. T. his Catalogue for proof of his Succession in the sixth,
seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth Ages is showed.

H. T. in his catalogue from the year of Christ 500. reckons up thirteen chief
Pastors, one general Council, the second Constantinopolitan Pope Vigilius
prefiding (Fathers 165. An. Dom, 553.) against Anthimius and Theodore: but
Bellarmine himself confesses lib. 1. de council. c. 19. that Eutychius of
Constantinople was President there, though Vigilius Bishop of Rome was then at
Constantinople, As for that which Bellarmine cites out of Zonaras in the life
of Justinian, he cites it maimedly. For Zonaras said not that only Vigilius
was Prince of the Bishops who were present, but with him Eutychius of
Constantinople and Apollinaris of Alexandria. What H. T. mentions of the
definitions of the council is nothing against the protestants, nor for the
Papacy.

That which he allegeth out of the third council of Carthage is disorderly
placed in the sixth age, it being held, as is said, in the year 397. and is of
doubtful credit, since it mentions Pope Boniface as then living, though he sat
not, according to Onuphrius, till the year 419. but it matters not what it was,
since it was but a provincial Synod: and of the canons cited by H. T. the first
is only about a point not of Faith, concerning the celebrating the Mass,
Fasting; the other, which terms the Apocryphal books as canonical, may be
expounded, according to Hierom's distinction, that they are canonical to form
manners, not to inform faith. Yet this may be observed by the way, that the six
and twentieth Canon of the third Council of Carthage, which was authorized by
the sixth general council holden at Constantinople, in Trullo, as it is alleged
by Gratian in the Decrees did. 99. de primatibus, and by Pope Pelagius
approved, denies to any the title of Chief Priest, or Prince of Priests, but
alows only this Title, Bishop of the first See: whereupon the Gloss says,
that even the Bishop of Rome was not to be called the Universal Bishop.

The determination of the Council of Mileris about Childrens Baptism is
disorderly placed in the sixth age, being said to be held in the year 402. and
being no general council about a point not gainsaid by most protestants, is
impertinent to prove a succession of assertors of the Roman Doctrine opposite
to the protestants.

That which he allegeth out of the Caesar Augustan Council, which decreed that
Virgins should not be veiled till after forty years probation, makes against
the Papists, who in the Trent council, allow it sooner, and practice the
vasting of them before they are twenty years old.

That which he adds of Pope John the first his Decree, that Mass ought not to
be celebrated, but in places consecrated to our Lord, unless great necessity
should enforce it, because it is written, See thou offer not thy holocausts in
every place, which the Lord thy God has chosen, Deuteronomy. 12. shows the Popes
ignorance or Judaism, who applies this to the Mass, which was meant of Jewish
sacrificing in the Levitical Law, and makes the Mass to be an offering of an
holocaust, and every place consecrated by a bishop, the place that God
chooses, and also the vanity of this Scribler, who puts in his catalogue such
an impertinent testimony to prove a succession of the assertors of the Roman
faith, which I scarce think any sober papist would make any part of his faith
against protestants, nor do I think the papists in England would be content to
be tied to that Law.

In that which he adds of Catholic Professors to the year 600. he does not
show that they acknowledged the bishop of Rome's supremacy or the now Roman
faith. Yea Columbanus in this age, and after Aidanus, Colmannus, and others
lived and died in opposition to the Romans about Easter.

That Austin the Monk converted England, is only true of some part of it, and
it is true also that he did in many things pervert them, and it is said he was
an instigator of the murder of many British Christians better than himself: but
that either he, or Pope Gregory that sent him, held the same supremacy of the
pope, which now popes claim, or the now- Roman faith opposite to the
protestants cannot be showed. On the contrary, it is manifest enough, that
Gregory the great refused the Title of Universal Bishop, as profane, and
sacrilegious, and accounted the assumer of it to be a forerunner of
Antichrist, lib 4. epist. 32, 34, 36, 38, 39. and lib. 6. epist. 30. he allowed
not Worship of Images in his Epistle to Serenus bishop of Marseiles, he allowed
priests wives, nor did tie men to follow the order of the Roman church, which
shows the popes then not to have been altogether so bad as in the next age. In
which and throughout the rest of his Catalogue he can hardly show a Pope that
lived either the life of a Christian, or did the Office of a pastor of the
church of God, if any, sure not many: but in stead of Christian pastors a
generation of men of an ambitious and luxurious spirit, contending with
Emperors and Bishops for worldly greatness, persecuting godly Christians,
living in pomp, riot, and all kind of wickedness, are set down as chief
pastors of the universal church.

In the seventh age he reckons up nineteen Popes, whom he terms chief Pastors:
of them the second is Boniface the third, who obtained of Phocas the Emperor
(who by treason had gotten the Empire, slaying his Lord Mauritius and his
children) the title of universal Bishop, detested before by Gregory the great,
as profane and sacrilegious; and Honorius the first, is the fifth condemned in
the third Constantinopolitan Council, in which H. T. says, there were Fathers
two hundred eighty nine, Pope Agatho presiding, Anno Domini 680. against the
Monothelites, and that in it were condemned Sergius, Paulus, Petrus, Cyrus, and
Theodore, who most impiously taught, but one will and operation to be in
Christ. But this Author deceitfully conceals it, that the same Council in the
thirteenth action, did solemnly condemn Honorius the Pope of old Rome as a
Monothelite together with the rest; and again in the Greek edition the first
Chapter, and that Pope Agatho in his Epistle to the sixth Council, does
anathematize his predecessor Honorius as a Monothelite, and Pope Leo the
second, in his Epistle to Constantine the Emperor, inserted in the eighth
action of the sixth Synod, which was also done in the second Nicene Council,
termed the seventh synod in the last action.

As for that which H. T. adds of the definitions of the sixth Council against
Priests marriage, not giving grapes, mingling water and wine, adoration of the
Cross, consideration in him that binds and loses, invocating Saints; it is
not worth while to insist on the examination thereof, partly because some of
the definitions serve not the purpose; for though it be granted, that there
ought to be a particular knowledge of the sin of him that is to be absolved by
his confession of it, yet is not thereby the necessity of Popish auricular
confession proved, or the Priests power judicially and authoritatively to
absolve, and remit sins established, partly because they are not all points of
faith, but either of discipline, as about the marriage of men in orders, or of
Ceremonies, as about the mingling of water and wine in the Eucharist; and
partly because it is doubtful whether those Canons are truly ascribed to that
Council, there being some reasons tending to the contrary, and partly because
if they were their determinations, there is little reason to ascribe any
authority to them, after the first six hundred years barbarism, and many
corruptions being gotten into the Christian Churches, and the simplicity of the
Christian profession very much changed into contentions about Bishops Sees,
Ecclesiastical privileges, humane ceremonies, and such like abuses: yet, were
all granted which he allegeth of the councils definitions, neither the now
Roman supremacy nor faith is proved, nor from the Catholic professors, as he
terms them, or Nations converted are either of them avouched in that age.

In the eighth Century things grew worse. In it H. T. reckons thirteen Popes,
among whom there is not a man, of whom their own writers relate any thing that
belongs to the Pastors of the Church of Christ, to wit, the Preaching of the
Gospel; but their intermedling with the business of the Empire and Kingdoms,
making Kings monks, contentions about images in Churches, enlarging their
dominions, building walls, making decrees about shaven crowns and such like
toys... Two Popes, Zacharias and Stephen the second, can hardly be acquitted
from being sinfully instrumental in the deposing of Childerick King of France,
and the traitorous usurpation of Pepin.

As for the second Nicene Council, in which H. T. says, were three hundred and
fifty Fathers, Pope Adrian presiding, Anno Domini 787. against image breakers,
in which were decreed for images in Temples, and the veneration and worship of
the Saints, Relics, Images, and the Council of Sens about traditions, though
these things are but a few of the Popish doctrins, yet we grant, that then the
Popes had gotten to such height as to justle Emperors, and that the Churches
in Communion with the Papacy were in that age and the following so corrupt, as
that traditions of men and decrees of Bishops were more regarded than the
written Word; and that thereby placing of images in Temples, and their worship
got into the Christian Churches to the promoting of that Idolatry in the Roman
Church, which has made her the mother of harlots, and of abominations of the
earth: yet this was not done without opposition, not only in the Greek Empire,
but also in the Western: Charles the great calling a Council at Frankford,
which condemned the second Nicene Council.

And for the Catholic Professors, such as venerable Bede and others, though
they were tainted with the superstitions of those times about monkery, and
ceremonies, and ecclesiastical dignities and orders, yet that they held the now
Roman faith cannot be demonstrated, nor that the Nations mentioned to be
converted were converted to it. And for the miracles mentioned there is no
credit to be given to them, many such tales having been made, or such miracles
counterfieted in those days for deceiving the ignorant people: nor were they
done in such manner and to such purposes, as the miracles of Christ and his
Apostles were by which the Gospel was confirmed.

In the nineteenth age H. T. reckons up eighteen Popes, omitting the mention of
one of them as a woman; though a great number of Popish writers set her down as
Pope, and relate the story of her sitting in the chair some years, till she
travailed with child in procession. But if that were not true, yet the things
related by themselves of Formosus, Stephanus, Romanus show cruelty and
wickedness in the Popes of that age, one hating and undoing what another had
done, and thereby showing that they were rather of Cadmus, than St. Peter's race.

And for the fourth Constantinopolitan Council (Fathers one hundred and one)
Pope Adrian presiding, Anno Domini 869. against Photius, and for the Pope and
images, and against temporal Princes meddling in the election of Bishops; it is
an argument, that the Roman Bishops were gotten then by many wicked practices
to a great height of unjust power. And the deposition of Photius for reproving
the Emperor, together with his opposition of the Pope (whose works extant do
show him to have been of more worth for learning than any Pope in that age) and
the Epistle of Ulderick Bishop of Auspurg to Pope Nicolas the first, in which
he rebukes the wickedness of Popes in denying marriage to the Clergy, do prove
that the doctrine and tyranny of the Popes of Rome, did not freely pass without
control even in that age, which by the confession of Genebrard himself, Chron.
l. 4. was an unhappy age for want of any writer of worth in the Latin Church.

As for the Catholic professors mentioned by H. T. in this age, that they were
all of the Roman church, or professed her faith is not showed: not that the
Nations converted, were either converted by the Roman Bishops, or owned their
now claimed supremacy or professed faith; H. T. says the Russians were
converted by a Priest sent by the Emperor Basilius, and therefore had their
conversion from the Greek church whom they followed, and with whom they now
hold communion, not acknowledging the Bishop of Romes supremacy to this day,
and therefore that instance is manifestly against H. T. his purpose.

In the tenth age are reckoned twenty six Popes, whereof there is scarce any
that may be termed a Christian, much less a chief Pastor of the Christian
churches. Their own stories tell us of some of them that got the Popedom by
means of Mororia a notorious whore, others by cruel practices: one, to wit
Sylvester the second, by the help of the Devil, whose agents they were in
bringing a deluge of ignorance and wickedness into the world, which made that
age to be termed a miserable age, in which were neither famous writers, nor
Councils, nor Popes that cared for the public, by Bellarmin in his book of
Ecclesiastical writers, and of it H. T. here says, in this tenth age or
century I find no general council, nor yet provincial in which any controversy
of moment was decided. So that by his own confession, his catalogue of councils
fails him. And for his succession of chief Pastors, it is of such persons and
so uncertain a succession, and by such irregular ways, as yields proof that
Rome was the Synagogue of Satan, not the church of Christ. Of the catholic
professors added, some of them, as Dunstan, etc. were such, as it may be well
doubted whether they are in heaven or in hell. And for the Nations converted,
it is not proved they were of the now Roman faith.

SECT. X.
The defect of H. T. his catalogue of succession in the eleventh and twelfth
age is showed.

IN the eleventh age are reckoned eighteen Popes worse, if it may be, as bad as
any in hell; most of them magicians, if their own writers speak truth: from
Sylvester the second, to Gregory the seventh, all Necromancers, says Benno a
Cardinal of Rome; John the seventeenth or eighteenth, H. T. himself is not
resolved whether, so uncertain is his succession on which he builds the truth
of his church. Their practices were to poison one another, and to set up one
King and Emperor against another to advance their own greatness, and to
domineer over the greatest Princes by the terror of their excommunications, and
giving away their dominions: which was brought to a stupendous height by
Hildebrand, otherwise Gregory the seventh, under whose reign Satan seems to
have been let loose for the executing of vengeance on the Emperors, that had so
adored Popes, as to become their vassals (whom Pope Gregory the great
acknowledged his Lord) and committed fornication with the whore of Babylon.

Of councils H. T. names but one, telling us, that in this eleventh age about
the year 1049. Berengarius an Archdeacon of Ghent (of Aniou he should have
said, mistaking Gaudavensis for Adegavensis) began to broach his heresy (he
should more truly have said the doctrine of Christ, his Apostles, the Fathers,
even Gelasius himself Bishop of Rome, in the first five hundred years, and of
the most learned to that time) concerning the B. Sacrament, affirming it to be
only a sign or figure of the body and blood of Christ, not his true body and
blood; for which, says H. T. he was condemned in the council of Lateran under
Pope Nicolas the second, 1057. As also in the Roman council under Pope Gregory
the seventh, Anno 1073. where he abjured his heresy in open council, and died
a Catholic after diverse penances done for his sin. But methinks H. T. should
be ashamed to mention Berengarius his forced abjuration, in which Pope Nicolas
made him say, I believe that the body of our Lord Jesus Christ sensibly and in
very deed is touched with the hands of the Priests, and broken with, and rent,
and ground with the teeth of the faithful, de con. did. 2. Erg^ Berengarius,
which occasioned the gloss it self to say, unless you warily understand these
words of Berengarius, you will fall into a greater heresy than ever he held
any. And for his Catholic professors and Nations converted, wherein or how far
they avowed the Popes supremacy, and the now Roman faith is not showed by him;
nor do I believe he is able to prove, that they did avouch the Popes supremacy
which is now challenged, or in all things the now Roman doctrine, though Romish
superstitions, and the excessive esteem of the Popish Bishops did very much
corrupt men in those days. If the ignorant devotion of one Henricus the Emperor
with his wife, make any thing for the credit of the Roman papacy; the story of
another Henricus, to wit, the fourth, his wife and child's usage by Gregory the
seventh and other Popes is such, as that it demonstrates the Popes of those
times to have been no successors of Peter, either in doctrine or practice, but
devils incarnate rather than men. And however Anselms learning seem to credit
the papacy, yet in many points of doctrine he is not for the now Roman tenants,
as where he says on Romans 12. salvation consists not in man's merits, but in
Gods grace, and his contention with the King of England, being animated by the
Pope is an evidence, that the faith of Christ was not so much professed then as
the greatness of Bishops, and the unrighteous ways of Clergymen.

In the twelfth age are reckoned up eighteen Popes and three Lateran councils,
of which Popes it will be hard for H. T. to show what their faith was, or to
prove they did orderly succeed, especially considering how many Antipopes were
set up, and what abominable practices were used to get up into the chair, and
how wickedly they lived, as men that cared not what rebellions they raised,
what wars and bloodsheds they caused, not against infidels, but of subjects
against their sovereign Christian Emperors; not for the Gospel of Christ, or
their lawful liberties, but for the Popes most impudent claim of freedom from
subjection to Emperors, and investiture of Bishops and Abbats, things which
Jesus Christ and his Apostles never granted, but commanded the contrary. Their
own writers tell us so much of them, specially of Calixtus the second, Innocent
the second, Adrian the fourth, Alexander the third, and their monstrous pride
in oppressing and insulting on the Emperors, beyond what is to be found in any
Priests of Pagan Gods toward the Princes of the earth, as shows them to be
inspired by the devil, not guided by the Spirit of God. H. T. adds three
Lateran councils for instauration of discipline, for the right of the Clergy,
for reformation, with presidency of Calixtus the second, Anno 1122 of Innocent
the second, Anno 1139. which he tells us defined little in matters of
controversy, and so by his own confession prove not his succession in the
profession of the same faith. As for the ends in those two councils, which he
mentions, all the instauration of discipline therein was concerning monks in the
former, and in the later, the right of the clergy was about the Bishop of Romes
power in civil things at Rome, and exempting of clergy men from the Senate and
Consuls of Rome. Wherein the Romans desired to be restored to their ancient
power in civil things, but the Pope and his council withstood it,
anathematizing them that laid hands on a clergy man, yet limiting the Bishop of
Rome in some sort. These are the great businesses of three hundred at one time,
and one thousand Bishops and Abbats at another time. Which may show how little
the Popes and councils then regarded Christ's doctrine or precepts, but minded
the upholding their own inventions and their usurpations of power.

The third Lateran Council, says H. T. (Fathers three hundred) for
reformation, Pope Alexander the third presiding, Anno Domini 1179. condemned
Waldensis the Merchant of Lions, who taught the Apostles were lay men, that lay
men and women might consecrate and preach, that clergy men ought to have no
possessions or properties, that oaths were unlawful in all cases, that Priests
and Magistrates by mortal sin fell from their dignity, and were not to be
obeyed, etc. His tenants were here defined against, and he himself
anathematized.

But suppose all this were true that he so taught, and that the Pope with his
council condemned him, what is this to prove H. T. his minor, that a council in
that age professed the same faith with the now Roman against the Protestants?
Are the contrary tenants any of the Articles, which in his Manual of
Controversies H. T. defends against the Protestants? do the Protestant churches
in their confessions avow the same, which he here says the council ascribed to
Waldensis the Merchant of Lions? but to show the ignorance of this scribler,
the person who was Merchant of Lions in France was Petrus Waldus, from whom his
followers were termed Waldenses, whom I find to have been condemned in some
council at Rome about that time, but in the Lateran council 1179. I find other
decrees about Priests continency, the number of horses clergy men might have in
their visitations, and the exemption of Ecclesiastics from the judgment of
Laics, which it seems were the great business of reformation. As for the
Waldenses there is no cause to believe adversaries in their accusations of
them, especially such ignorant and malicious men as the Friars and Monks of
former and later times have been. Besides the experience which after ages
yielded about their belying Wicklef, Hus and others; our own times yield many
examples of Papists falsely reporting the tenants of Protestants. Though
Bellarmin be more ingenuous in setting down the Protestants doctrine than many
other writers, yet there is scarce a controversy, wherein he does not deal
deceitfully in representing the Protestants doctrine or their arguments and
answers. But the writings, professions, apologies put forth by Balthazar Lydius
in Latin, show that the opinions of the Waldenses were not such as the Papists
represent them, and the words of Reinerius an inquisitor and enemy to them in
his book of inquisition concerning them, does more truly acquaint us what they
were, which are thus, that whereas all other sects by the immanity of their
blasphemies against God do make men abhor them, this of the Lyonists (the same
with the Waldenses) has a great show of godliness, because they live justly
before men, and do believe all things well of God, and all the articles which
are contained in the Creed; only the Church of Rome they do blaspheme and hate.
And now we have more full knowledge of them, by Mr. Morlands history of the
Evangelical Churches of Piedmont. As for the Catholic professors H. T. adds in
this age, though Bernardus Abbas, commonly called St. Bernard be reckoned as a
professor of the new Roman faith, and it is not denied that he was
superstitious in some points; yet he freely noted diverse corruptions then
arising, as the feast of the Virgin Mary's conception, which tended to uphold
the conceit of her freedom from sin, Ep. 174. ad can. Lugd. the opinion of
merits, sermon. 1. de annunt. of justification by works, cant. sermon. 22. and ep.
190. of freewill, de great. and lib. arb. of keeping the law, cant. ser. 50: of
seven Sacraments, ser. 1. de Caena Domini, of uncertainty of Salvation, ep.
107. and the Popes greatness in temporalities, l. 2. confid. ad Eugen. And for
Hildegardis the Nun, her speeches and prophecies showed her dislike of the
proceedings of the clergy even of the Popes. Noribertus and some others were
noted for their superstitious ways of Monkery, Thomas Becket of Canterbury,
for his obstinacy against his Prince Henry the second, whom he traitorously
opposed to uphold the wickedness of the clergy, and others named, whether they
were of good or bad note it is of little moment, since its not denied there were
too many then infected with the Roman errors and superstitions. Nor is it of
much advantage, that Nicolas the Monk, after Pope, converted the Pomeranians
and Norwegians, that Pope being bad enough, and the conversion, if to Romish
superstition, rather than Christian faith, little crediting the Romish Church.

SECT. XI.
The defect of H. T. his catalogue of succession in the thirteenth and
fourteenth ages is showed.

IN the thirteenth century are set down seventeen Popes as chief Pastors, of
whom the first is Gelasius the second, who was first in the former age; but I
imagine, though it be not noted in the Errata, for Honorius the third who was a
bloody Bishop, as others before him, setting up Emperor against Emperor, cruel
Friars against the godly Waldenses, besides other wicked acts he did. The like
were Gregory the ninth, in whose time the bloody factions of Guelphs and
Gibellius happened, and Innocent the fourth whom Robert Grosthead Bishop of
Lincoln withstood, contemning his excommunication, and being dead was such a
terror to this wicked Pope as to hasten his death. Nicolas the third, whom H.
T. makes the converter of the Pomeranians and Norwegians, raised the quarrel
between Peter of Arragon and Charles of France for Sicily, whence grew the
massacre of the French called the Sicilian Vespers, and the last and worst of
them, Boniface the eighth is said to have entered like a Fox, reigned like a
Lion, died like a dog. H. T. adds two general Councils: the fourth Lateran
council (Fathers 1285.) Pope Innocent the third presiding, Anno 1215. And tells
us, that this Council desined that the universal Church of the faithful, is one
out of which no man is saved. Which definition we approve, and thereby the
doctrine of the Protestants is confirmed; who teach, that the Catholic Church
we believe, is the invisible Church of true believers; and that the Catholic
Church is not only the Roman Church, and those who subject themselves to the
Bishop of Rome, and profess the same faith with the now Roman Church: but all
the believers who believe the doctrine of the Gospel taught by Christ and his
Apostles, though they neither know nor own the Roman Church in the things
therein held against the Protestants, nor acknowledge any superiority of the
Bishop of Rome, are members of the Catholic Church; and that it is not the
Church of Rome (which is falsely called Catholic) out of which none can be
saved, but the universal Church of the faithful; in which who ever is by true
faith in Christ he may be saved, though he disclaims the Bishop of Rome as
Antichrist, and the faction or party joining with him as the Synagogue of
Satan; and consequently, that it is not as H. T. says in his Epistle to the
Reader, the most important controversy to know the notion and authority of the
Church; but to know the true faith, by which alone the true Church is known;
and it is a most impudent assertion, which H. T. takes on him in his first
Article to maintain, that the Church now in communion with the Sea of Rome is
the only true Church of God, unless he can prove none are believers but they.
So that this very definition of the Lateran council is sufficient to overthrow
the main drift of H. T. in this book, and to show how heedless or impudent a
writer he is.

H. T. tells us also that the fourth Lateran council defined in the profession
of faith, can. 1. that the true body and blood of Christ is in the Sacrament of
the Altar under the forms of bread and wine, the bread being transubstantiated
by the divine power into the body, and the wine into the blood. Which is
granted, if it be true, that the Council it self did define any thing, and not
Pope Innocent himself three years after the Council. Platina says in his life,
that many things then came into consultation indeed, and yet not any thing
could be openly decreed. But were it the Council or the Pope alone that thus
decreed, it was a most bold and presumptuous act in either or both to make that
a point of faith, of which, as Bellarm. tom. 3. cont. l. 3, c. 23. confesses.
Scotus in quartum sent. did. 11. q. 3. said, that the tenent of
transubstantiation was no tenet of faith before the Lateran Council, and Scotus
and Cameracensis expressly say, that neither by words of Scripture, nor by the
Creeds, nor sayings of the ancients are we compelled to the tenet of
transubstantiation. And Cardinal Cairt. in 3. Aq. q. 75. art. 1. says, that
nothing out of the Gospel does appear to compel us to understand these words
[this is my body] properly. To the same purpose John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, contra. capt. Babylon c. 1. For which reason Cuthbert Tonstal l. 1.
of the Eucharist, p. 46. said, perhaps it had been better to have left every
curious man to his conjecture, concerning the manner of Christ's body being in
the Eucharist, as before the Lateran Council it was left at liberty, and
therefore he was ost heard to say, if he had been present at the Lateran
Council, he would have endeavored to persuade Pope Innocent to have forborne
the decreeing of transubstantiation as an article of faith. And indeed the
reason of the Council is so grossly absurd, that had there been any
understanding men at the making of the decree, it is likely it had not passed.
For this reason they give of their decree, that to perfect the mystery of unity
we our selves may take of his what he received of ours, the bread being
transubstantiate into the body, the wine into blood by the divine power,
intimates, 1. That the bread is transubstantiate into the body and wine into
the blood, not either into body and blood, and then he that drinks not the wine
drinks not the blood, nor is it said to be transubstantiate into it as an
animate body, so that that determination makes it a transubstantiation without
life. 2. It faith that we may receive of his what he receives of ours; which in
plain sense intimates, that Christ receives our body and blood by eating and
drinking, as we do his. 3. It makes this the mystery of our unity, as if the
mystery of our unity by faith were not perfect without this gross Capernaitish
Cannibalitish eating Christ's very flesh made from bread by a Priest, and
drinking his very blood with our mouth, in drinking transubstantiate wine. All
which are such gross, irrational, unchristian absurdities, as had not the age
been blockish, and Popes and popish writers and people dementate, they would
with abhorrency have rejected that determination.

H. T. adds, that the fourth Lateran Council, can. 1. defined in the profession
of faith, that no man can make this Sacrament, but a Priest rightly ordained by
the keys of the Church given to the Apostles and their successors: which
although it be otherwise in the text, Matthew. 16. 19. expresses, wherein the
keys, not of the Church but of the Kingdom of heaven, are mentioned as given to
Peter, not to the Apostles and their successors; yet were it true that the keys
were given to the Apostles and their successors, this would overthrow the Popes
supremacy if it be deduced from that gift of the keys. For if Christ himself
gave the keys of the Church to the Apostles and their successors, then not to
Peter only and his successors, but to other Apostles and their successors as
well as Peter, and consequently according to their own principles to other
Bishops as well as the Bishop of Rome. As for the definition of the Council,
that none can make this Sacrament but a Priest, then it is to Priests only that
it is said [do this] (for from those words he deduceth, p. 215. the power to
make Christ's body) but that is most absurd, for then they only should eat, the
doing this being meant plainly of eating the bread, being spoken not to the
Priest conficient only, but to all the Apostles at table also, and if so, not
only the cup should be kept from the people, but the bread also, contrary to 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. and 11. 28.

H. T. tells us that they defined that baptism profits little ones as well as
those who are of riper years unto salvation, and condemned the heresy of Abbas
Joachim, which is nothing against the common tenet of the Protestants, though
it be suspected, that if Abbat Joachim had not been a man, whose reputed
holiness and free speeches against the Popes and the clergy troubled them, he
might have escaped that censure The definition concerning confession and
receiving at Easter are points of discipline, not part of the profession of
faith, and so impertinent to the present business.

H. T. mentions also the Council of Lions (Fathers one hundred) Pope Gregory
the tenth presiding, Anno 1274. against the Grecians, which is nothing against
the common tenet of the Protestants, and that which is added, this hitherto
(says the Council) the holy Roman Church (the mother and mistress of all
Churches) has preached and taught, (besides the nonsense how frequently
soever it be used of the Churches preaching and teaching, who preach not nor
teach, but they are preached to and taught) it is but a piece of palpably false
flattery, the Church of Rome being not the mother of all Churches, it being
certain, that the Church of Jerusalem was before that of Rome, and the
Jerusalem from above is styled the mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26.

Among his Catholic professors of this age H. T. nominates St. Dominick and
St. Francis, Institutors of their holy orders of Friars, but how they should be
Saints, whereof one was a bloody instigator of war against the innocent sheep
of Christ the Waldenses, and the other an observer of humane inventions, with
neglect of Gods command to work with his hands the thing that was good, that he
might have to give to him that needs, and how they should be called a holy
order, who were like to the institutors, but never appointed by God, I
understand not. Many learned men in those days demonstrated them to be no holy
orders, but a company of men that promoted the Popes usurpations and injuries,
to the great mischief of the Commonwealths and Churches of Christians.

Of the Nations converted, the Emperor Cassanes, with innumerable Tartarians
were not converted by the Church of Rome, nor owned the Popes supremacy or
faith, and therefore are no witnesses for the Papacy.

In the fourteenth age ten Popes are set down, of whom most ^^te at Avignon in
France, and so could not be Pastors of the Church of Rome: one is Clement the
fifth, who chained Francis Dandalus the Venetian Ambassador under his table to
feed with dogs, and lost at the pomp of his Coronation out of his mitre a
carbuncle valued at six thousand ^^orens. Another, John the twenty one, by
others John the twenty second, whom Bellarmin. de Pontifice Romans l. 4. c. 14.
confesses to have thought that the souls should not see God till after the
resurrection, though he adds a cold excuse, as if he might so think then
without danger of heresy, because no definition of the Church proceeded: which
is not true if he say rightly himself, l. 1. de eccl. triumph. c. 2. that the
same, that is, that the souls see God before the resurrection, teaches Innocent
the third (who was one hundred years before John the twenty one, by H. T. his
account) c. Apostolicam, extra, de Presbytero non Baptizat^. However, if there
were no definition, it proves a Pope may teach heresy, since John the twenty
second did earnestly press this on the Parisians, that they should believe as
he did. Of the rest their unpeaceableness in their contention with the Emperor
and among themselves in their Schisms, in which one Pope was set up against
another; diverse Popes at the same time, one owned by one, another by another,
makes the succession so uncertain, that even the Romanists disagree in the
succession, some putting in Clement the seventh in this age, whom H. T. leaves
out, some standing for one, some for others as the right Popes. Besides their
cruelty and covetousness, p^ove them rather Butchers than Pastors of the Church
of Christ.

H. T. adds one general Council of Vienna (Fathers three hundred) Pope Clement
the fifth presiding, Anno Domini 1311. in which he tells us, the Council
defined baptism to be necessary for infants, condemned the Begards and
Beguines, who held carnal lust done out of temptation to be no sin, and that we
ought not to show reverence at the elevation of the body of Christ, which last
alone is against Protestants in common. But the Council whether provincial or
general, being swayed by a proud prelate, Clement the fifth, its no marvel it
should make such decrees as then were made.

As for the Catholic Professors, there is scarce a man of any note, but Iro a
Canonist, whose profession will be of little weight with considerate men. That
an Emperor of Russia, if made a Christian, did embrace the Romish Religion,
and submit to the Pope, is not likely. The rest of the Nations converted, H. T.
proves not to have been converted from Rome, or to have held communion with the
Pope, if they did, it avails little to prove H. T. his Minor, that such rude
people did so.

SECT. XII.
The defect of H. T. his Catalogue in the fiftenth and sixteenth Ages is showed.

IN the fifteenth Age he reckons up thirteen Popes as chief Pastors, in which
number he leaves out Benedict the thirteenth, though reckoned by others, who
with Gregory the twelfth upheld a Schism of three Popes together, till they
with John 22. or 23. for diverse intolerable villainies were deposed, as Eugenius
the fourth was after at the Council of Basil: of the rest scarce any of worth
besides Pius the second, whose Writings remain under the name of Aeneas
Sylvius, and the last is Alexander the sixth, Roderique Borgia, who with his
son Caesar Borgia were so infamous for poysonings, covetousness and uncleanness
of body, that Rome, though the sink of wickedness, yet yielded few or none
worse in any Age.

H. T. tells us of two general Councils,, that of Constance, Anno 1415. against
John Wickliff, John Hus, and Hierom of Prague, Pope John the two and twentieth,
and Martin the fifth presiding: but the main end of its calling by Sigismund
the Emperor, was the composing of the Troubles by three Popes together, whom
it deposed, and decreed the Council to be above the Pope, which is against the
now Roman faith. It is true also, that they condemned sundry Articles of John
Wickliff, John Hus, and Hierom of Prague, whereof some were most falsely
ascribed to them, as the Works of John Wickliff and other testimonies do show.
And notwithstanding the safe conduct given by Sigismund the Emperor, to the
perpetual infamy of the popish party, they judged he was to deliver John Hus to
be burned, Sess. 19. whereupon the Emperors solemn faith was broken, and
thereupon they were burned, and Wickliffs bones, as they imagined, forty years
after his death were dug up and burned in England, and a most impious Decree
made, that, notwithstanding Christ 's institution and administering in both
kinds, and in the primitive Church it were received by the faithful in both
kinds, yet the custom was confirmed of receiving in one, and the requiring it
in both judged an error, and it was forbidden to be given the people in both
kinds, Sess. 13. The other Council H. T. mentions is the Council of Florence,
(Fathers 145.) Pope Eugenius presiding, Anno 1439. against many Heresies; which
defined Pugatory, the Popes headship, Transubstantiation, the Apocryphal books
canonical, the Grecians, Jacobites, Armenians, and Patriarch of Constantinople
subscribing this Council, and being reconciled to the church of Rome. But this
Council however it has a show of great authority, by reason of the presence of
the Patriarch of Constantinople, and some other of the Eastern Christian
churches, yet indeed it was of no authority, it being gotten together by a
Faction in opposition to the Council of Basil, which was decreed by Pope Martin
the fifth, to be ten years after the Council of Constance: and the end of it
was to divert the Fathers of the Council of Basil from deposing Eugenius the
fourth from his Popedom, which nevertheless they did for his ill Government,
and chose Amadeus Duke of Savoy, who was named Felix the fifth, who is omitted
therefore by H. T. though by others counted the lawful Pope: but H. T. thought
it best to omit him and the Council of Basil, which together with the Council
of Constance had determined that a general Council was above the Pope, and were
not bound to obey him, but might depose him, as the French churches yet to this
day do hold, so that they who are termed Catholics, and owned as children of
the church, yet do not profess the now- Roman faith of the Popes supremacy,
which H T. and the Jesuited party among Papists the Popes flatterers ascribe to
him. As for the presence of the Greeks in the Council of Florence it was of a
few needy ones driven out or brought low by the Turks, who yielded to that in
the Council for some relief to them in their low estate, which the Greek
churches after would not own, nor do yet to this day. And therefore that which
H. T. has done in setting down the Popes and Councils of this Age is done
deceitfully, concealing the true state of things, and so he has done of
Catholic Professors, mentioning some of small worth, but leaving out Gerson,
Picus Mirandulanus, and some others, though in communion with the Roman church,
and men of more abilities and repute than many of those he sets down, because
Gerson held that the Church might be without a Pope, in his book de
auferibilitate Papae; and he and others differed in some other points from the
now Roman tenets.

As for the Nations converted, which he mentions, they are names of people said
to be in Africa; but whether there be such people, or are converted, or what
numbers of them have been converted is known only by the vainglorious Writings
of some popish Writers of that sort, who for the extolling of the Papacy,
either feign that which is not, or it is likely make a Mountain of a Molehill,
such conversions as they boast of being not known to other people, though
sailing into, and trading in all parts of the known world.

H. T. adds his catalogue of chief Pastors in the sixteenth Age and half the
seventeenth to 1654. and sets down two and twenty Popes as chief Pastors of the
Church. Of them are Julius the second a Warrior; Leo the tenth, who to
maintain his Luxury, and for his sister Magdalen's Dowry, set Indulgences to
sale, himself venting his infidelity to Cardinal Bembus, as if he counted the
Gospel a profitable Fable; Paul the third an incestuous father of a Sodomitical
son, whom he cocker'd, full of cruelty and craft, sending an Army with
Farnesius to destroy the Protestants in Germany; Julius the third that created
his Ganymede Innocentius a boy Cardinal, and had for his Nuntio at Venice John
Casa Archbishop of Benevent, who in a book praised Sodomy; Paul the fourth
hated by the Romans for his cruelty; Pius the fourth that made the new creed of
the Roman church; Pius the fifth that excommunicated Queen Elizabeth; Gregory
the thirteenth that set up Stukely to get Ireland for his base son; Sixtus the
fifth that animated the Spaniard in the Expedition against England, 1588.
praised James Clement the Friar, who murdered Henry the third King of France;
Gregory the fourteenth who cursed Henry the fourth of France; Clement the
eighth, who before he absolved him, proudly lasheth his Ambassador with a Rod;
Paul the fifth who had the Title of Vicedeus given him, and not disclaimed, who
interdicted the Venetians for not obeying his Monitory to revoke their Laws
about Ecclesiastics, and to release two Ecclesiastic prisoners, one a
poysoner, another that committed uncleanness in a Temple, and did forbid the
taking the Oath of Allegiance in England by Papists, without doing any thing
against some of the priests privy to the Gunpowder Treason, to show their
detestation of it. Among them all there is not one that their own stories do
relate to have been a diligent preacher of the Gospel, but politicians, meddling
with the affairs of the Kingdoms and Empires of the World, and so no Successors
to our Lord Christ, or Peter the Apostle; but their memories are to be abhorred
specially by us English as the pests of mankind.

H. T. mentions two general Councils the last Lateran Council Pope Julius the
second and Leo the tenth presiding, 1512. I find not the certain number of
Fathers, it was a general Council. But Bellarmine lib. 2. de council. auth. cap.
13. says, Some doubt whether it were truly general: and there was reason, since
it was called by a Faction adhering to Julius the second to establish his
tyranny in opposition to another party gathered in France to establish the
pragmatick Sanction. But what did this Council define? The soul of man
immortal, and that there be as many humane souls as bodies, anathematizing all
such as obstinately defend or hold the contrary in the communion of the Church
of Rome, Sess 8. A point which a Council of Philosophers might have decided.
However it intimates there were that did then hold or teach the contrary in the
communion of the church of Rome, and that Pope John the two and twentieth his
Doctrine was not quite extinguished: but this Council is of little account
among a great party of the Papists themselves* It is the other Council the
Council of Trent Pope Paul the third and Pius the fourth presiding against
Martin Luther and his fellow Protestants, Anno 1546. of which he says, The
definitions are conformable to those of all precedent general Councils for us,
and against Sectaries, as our Adversaries know, and cannot deny. But this is
most false, it being by Bishop Jewel, and many other learned Protestants
averred and proved, that the Decrees of that Council in many points about the
Popes power, half communion, transubstantiation, worshipping Images, and other
points are contrary to the Councils and Fathers for the first five hundred
years at least. And for this Council not only Sleidan, but also Friar Paul, a
man greatly honored by the Venetian Senate for his learning, prudence, and
integrity in his History of the Trent Council has showed, that it was nothing
but a mere packed and fraudulent conventicle of a crew of prelates, most of
them Italians, some merely titular, and the Popes pensioners and parasites, few
of them who had any knowledge in the Scripture or Divinity, but canonists,
courtiers, and schoolmen, who understood not the Protestants Doctrine in the
great point of justification by faith, carried on by Paul the third, Julius the
third, Pius the fourth, and their Legates to cheat the World by innumerable
artifices, not only hindering the freedom of speech of the Protestants in the
Council, but also of some of the popish Bishops, when they endeavored to
recover the right of Bishops taken away from them by the Popes, in so much that
not only the Protestants have protested against it, but also the French Kings,
by their Ambassadors and Parliaments, and it is not owned by the French popish
churches unto this day, and the vanity and impiety of its Decrees has been
detected by Kemnitius, Calvin, and innumerable learned protestants, besides
what may be gathered from the contrary Writings of persons, who were there, as
Catharinus, Soto, Vega, and others; in so much that if men were not blinded
with prejudice and faction they would easily discern that Council to have been
a corrupt Synod justly to be detested.

As for the catholic professors he mentions, their profession adds but little
credit to their cause. For what advantage is it to prove the truth of the Roman
Tridentin Doctrine that it was professed by Catharina a woman, or Ignatius
Loyola a lame Soldier, the hypocritical Deviser of the Order of Jesuits, the
Incendiaries of the Christian States, and corrupters of Christian Nobility and
people by their abominable Devices in resolving cases of conscience sutably to
the lusts of men rather than the will of God, (as is showed in the late book of
the Mystery of Jesuitism) or by Edmund Campian a bold talkative calumniator,
and a traitorous zelot for the Popes tyranny, or by William Allen an English
Fugitive, who wrote seditious books to apologize for Stanley's Treachery, and
to provoke Queen Elizabeth's Subjects to Rebellion against so good a Prince?
And for the great multitudes converted in Italy, Spain, Germany, India,
Japonia, China, by Priests and Religious of the Roman Church, and likewise some
considerable persons of the English Nation, even in the heat of Persecution,
they are short of that which was undertaken of the conversion of Nations. The
conversions in the West Indies have been by horrid cruelties of the Spaniards
depopulating many countries, in which were millions of people, to get their
Treasure, not to the faith of Christ, but to the Roman yoke and superstitions
against their will, which has made Christian Religion-odious, and the Name of
God to be blasphemed. Those of China and Japonia are fictions, or so obscure,
as that they are not considerable. The conversions in Spain, France, Germany,
Polonia, have been by fire and faggot, the bloody Inquisition, persecutions,
Massacres, and such like arguments fetched from Hell. The hot persecution of
Papists here in England is, as all know that know England, a mere fiction: some
mulcts and restraints have been put on popish persons, but none put to death
merely for being Papists, but for that which the Law made Treason, being forced
to it by their incessant traitorous practices, and yet these also are executed
sparingly. The conversions to Popery in England have been by various artifices
upon various inducements, whereof none of them is evidence from the canonical
Scripture of the truth of popish Doctrine (they dare not stick to it without
help of unwritten tradition, and the Popes or his Councils explication, which
they must receive, though contrary to the exposition of their own most learned
and judicious Writers in their Commentaries) but the devices which they use are
calumniating Protestant Writers, mis-representing their Doctrine, forging
Writings of the Ancients, purging out of them such passages as make against
them, which do take effect by the levity of some, prejudice, discontent, or
some such like ill affection of others. And though Campian after his
vainglorious manner boasted of turning ten thousand in one year to the Popish
party, and the popish Priests do boast of their success, as when Musket was
reported to have converted Dr. King Bishop of London, and Weston reported to
the Earl of Warwick unknown his conversion to Popery, when the Earl knew it to
be false, yet as upon trial there was little cause for Campian's glorying, and
the reports of Musket's and Fisher's success heretofore; so I hope, however in
the time of the Wars they have mudded the Waters in England and entangled some
in their Nets, the Waters being settled they will be less able to deceive, and
souls which are now caught by them will by Gods blessing escape them. However
there is great cause to say, that those who are caught by popish Priests and
join to the church of Rome, as now it is, are for want of receiving the love of
the truth, that they might be saved, given over to believe Lies, and are in
danger to be damned, as the Apostle foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12.

What he adds of multitudes of provincial Councils omitted, all esta^lishing
the Roman tenets over the whole World, it is because they are no where to be
found, but the emptiness of this his Catalogue is a sure eviction that there is
not consent of Nations or Ages on behalf of the Papists.

SECT. XIII.
In which the Close of H. T. is retorted.

ANd for his close I thus retort it. Now let any rational and disinteressed man
be judge whether the Fathers of the first Councils for five or six hundred
years were true Protestants or Roman Catholics (that is, whether they have
taught and defined Protestant or Roman catholic Doctrines) and doubtless when
he has well read their Writings he will say, not Roman Catholics, but true
Protestants, and so by consequence all Ages, and countries which have received
and approved them for Orthodox, by humbly submitting to their Decrees, to wit,
all Ages since Christ's time, who with his holy Apostles and the orthodox
Fathers and Councils for many hundred years taught Doctrine contrary the now
Roman Tridentin faith. Therefore let no Papist or Sectary, such as H. T. is,
(who like as the Donatists excluded all from the Church, who were not of
Donatus his party; so he ^xcludes all from the Church of God, who are not of
the Bishop of Rome's party, and thereby shows himself a Schismatic divided
from the Catholic Church) delude himself and his ignorant and credulous
followers, with a pretense to Council, seeing there is no one to be found for
them (speaking of General and Ecumenical Councils for the first five or six
hundred years which were the best) which has defined and taught their positive
Doctrines, but all have more or less condemned all or some of them, according
to the occasions then emergent, and in particular that which Dr. John Rainold
in his Conference with Heart, cap. 9. divis. 4. said stands yet good, that all
Christian Churches, except the crew of the Italian Faction, have and do condemn
the Popes usurped Sovereignty over the whole Church of Christ, and that no
Council did give him that visible Mo^archy be now usurps, and the Jesuited
party now ascribe to him till the last Lateran Council under Pope Leo the
tenth, 1512. After which it was opposed by the University of Paris and the
French church, and even in the Trent council there was a party which strugled
against it in right of Bishops, though they were overborn by the Romish
devices, and the multitude of Italians. Even at this day the Jesuits have not
brought all the Papists under the Popes girdle: which makes the Pope cautelous
how he determins controversies among his own party, least the condemned party
appeal from him to a council, and the oppressed Kingdom set up a Patriarch of
its own. So that I may say it is an impossible task for this Scribler H. T. or
any of his party to make a true catalogue of chief Pastors or Councils, or
approved Doctors in all ages for the Popes supremacy, transubstantiation,
communion under one kind, worshipping of images, invocation and worshipping of
deceased Saints and their relics; but a better catalogue may be made of more
godly persons (with whom their Popes for this one thousand years are not to be
compared, their own writers being Judges) who have opposed these doctrins of
the now Romanists, as has been showed by many learned men to the eternal
confusion of Popish novelties, then this Author has here, or any Popish writer
elsewhere has made, to prove a succession of Pastors, Councils, Professors and
Nations avouching the present Roman opinions, which were never so avouched or
enjoined as now they are in Pope Pius the fourth his new Creed, till about one
hundred years ago. And to this insolent demand, where was your Church before
Luther? Protestants may reply to Papists, where was your church which believed,
as you now do, before Boniface the third, Gregory the seventh, Innocent the
third, and Leo the tenth? The speeches of the Fathers for the churches
continued succession, do none of them prove the major of H. T. his Syllogism,
that is the only true Church of God, which has had a continued succession from
Christ and his Apostles to this time, meaning it of local personal succession,
of which H. T. means it, but only of succession in holding the same doctrine.
Nor do any of them prove H. T. his minor, that the church now in communion with
the Sea of Rome and no other, has had a continued succession from Christ and
his Apostles to this time, for they were all dead above a thousand years before
this time. All that can be proved, is that in case of heresies or Schisms they
made use of the succession in the Roman church, (which was then less tainted
then some others) to repress them, yet so as that they alleged a succession in
other churches as well as it, but none ever, as this Author, held it necessary,
that all churches should own the Bishop of Romes supremacy, or the Roman
churches communion how corrupt soever they should prove: only while they
continued incorrupt in the faith they held communion with them, and so should
we, if they would embrace the primitive purity of doctrine and worship, which
Peter and Paul and other Apostles first taught in the churches of Christ, of
which that at Rome, though not the first, yet was one of the most famous, and
till their declining of great esteem.

SECT. XIV.
H. T. has not solved the Protestants objection.

H. T. takes upon him to solve objections against the Churches continued
succession, and says thus. Obj. Elias complained that he was left alone, 3
King. 19. therefore the church then failed. Answ. He spoke figuratively, for
God himself told him in the same Chapter, ver. 18. that he had seven thousand
at that time in Israel (where he was) who had not howed their knees to Baal:
and in the Kingdom of Juda there was then public profession of the true
religion in Jerusalem, paralip. 22. 14, 15. so that consequence is false.

To which I reply, this author shows himself deceitful in setting down our
tenet and argument, and slighty in his answer. For the tenet of the Protestants
is not, that the Church has failed, and that there is no continued succession
of men in the visible Church, who have held forth the truth against Popish
innovations. But that sometimes they have been by persecution so obscured, as
that however they have been discernable among themselves, yet not so to
adversaries, and to others of their brethren at a farther distance; nor perhaps
have they been so conspicuous, as that a catalogue might be made of the
succession of Pastors and people in the same place in every age, but ofttimes
they have been so dispersed, as to be in one age or time in one Country, and
another time in another; and that the monuments of their being and doctrine,
have been in part lost and in part obscured by inundations of barbarous
nations, persecutions of Popes and Popish Princes, and their knowledge and
profession has been sometimes larger, sometimes less, and still misreported by
adversaries. Nevertheless, that is, though they have been in such obscurity,
they have been true Churches of Christ; and notwithstanding we cannot prove
such a succession in any one City or Country of Pastors and people in every
thing agreeing with us, yet we may be a true Church as long as we hold the true
faith once delivered to the Saints, and now upon record in the holy Scriptures,
though we submit not to the Pope as chief Pastor, nor own the now Roman doctrine
in the articles required in the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth to be professed
over and above the ancient Creeds. In a word this we assert, that the defect of
a catalogue such as H. T. requires, and the obscurity of professors nullifies
not the verity of the Protestant Churches. And this is proved by the objection
thus. If there were a true Church in Israel in Elias his days, which was so
hidden as that Elias knew them not, and so could make no catalogue of them;
then there may be a true Church, whose professors may be so obscure, as that
neither in the same, nor in after ages a catalogue of them can be assigned. But
so it was; as appears by Elias his complaint, and Gods answer, 1 King. 19. 10,
14, 18. Ergo, there may be a true Church whose professors may be so obscure, as
that neither in the same nor in after ages a catalogue of them can be assigned.
Now what does he answer? that Elias spoke figuratively, because God said there
were seven thousand non-Baalites left in Israel, and that there was a Church in
Ju^ah then, and therefore the consequence false.

But to show the slightiness of this shifter (for I cannot term him rightly a
respondent) 1. He tells us not what figure he used, nor in what words, nor what
sense the speech bears according to that figure, nor how it serves for his
purpose to avoid the objection. I do not conceive what figure of speech he or
any man can imagine in that speech [I am left alone] unless he meant Ironically,
I am left alone, that is not left alone, which were a frantic conceit, or an
Hyperbole, or a Synecdoche of a part for the whole, one for many: but such an
Hyperbole or Synecdoche would make the speech nonsense [I, that is a few or
many are left alone] For this were nonsense and self contradicting, and
contrary to the intent of the speech, [I] being in the first person and that
doubled, [few or many] in the third: to say [few or many are left alone] when
[alone] excludes few, many, any more then one: to say [they seek my life, that
is of few or many] when [my] notes only him that spoke, to wit Elias, and no
other: to say [I have been jealous, that is a few or many have been jealous]
besides the citation, Romans 11. 3. (...) the occasion, end of the speech, and
answer of God show such an exposition would be the conceit of a man extreme
shallow or impudent. And his reason is as ridiculous, God himself told Elias in
the same chapter, ver. 18. that he had seven thousand at that time in Israel
(where he was) therefore Elias spoke figuratively, when he complained he was
left alone, 3 Kings 19. Nay the contrary follows, that he did not speak
figuratively, because God corrects him, and shows his mistake in saying he was
left alone, that is, there were no more besides himself left. 2. But yet if it
were granted that the speech is figurative, and the meaning as H. T. would have
it, it no whit avoids our objection, that the Church of God, though consisting
of seven thousand, yet were so obs^ure that they appeared so few to Elias, as
that he took himself to be left alone. As for the other exception of the
Kingdom of Juda, it takes not away the objection as the Protestants frame it,
but as H. T. frames it, it is not our objection; and so though the consequence
be false, yet it hurts not us, who gather not hence the failing of the Church,
but the obscurity of it, and that there may be a true Church, which is so
hidden, that it is not discerned at some times, no not by such an eminent
Prophet as Elias; and so though we cannot show our Church in every age before
Luther, yet there might be then, and we may be now a true Church for all that.

The next objection he brings is, that though Arian heresy infected the whole
world, Ergo, etc. and answers, you mistake, the fury of that lasted not full
fou^ years, viz. from the council of Ariminum to the death of Constantine, and
that only in the Eastern Churches, the Western feeling little or nothing by it.
St. Augustine answers the Donatists objecting the same; that even the canonical
Scriptures have this custom, that the word seems to be addressed to all, when
it reaches home only to some few, Epist. 48.

To which I reply, If the Arian fury lasted but four years, and in the Eastern
Churches only, yet it might have been more than one hundred, and then the
succession had ceased, and the Eastern Churches then were so obscure, that a
catalogue of professors could not be given, though there were doubtless then
true Churches in the East. But it is false which H. T. writes, that the Western
felt little or nothing by the Arian fury, for in Italy the Arians prevailed so
far, as to bring Liberius Bishop of Rome to subscribe to the council of
Ariminum. Nor do I know how the words of Augustine yield any thing in answer to
the objection, that in the time of the Arian prevalency the Church was so
obscured, that the whole world seemed to be Arians; therefore the Churches
succession may be so interrupted or obscured at least, as that a catalogue of
it is pastors and professors at all times cannot be framed. For suppose the
meaning of the speech should be, that the words concerning the number of Arians
seem to be addressed to all, when they reach home only to some few: yet, if the
words show the number so great, as that the other part of the Church were
obscured so as not to be discerned, they serve to prove there may be Churches,
which are so hidden as that a catalogue cannot be framed.

But the objection is further pressed thus. Object, St. Hierom says, the whole
world groaned and admired to see it self become Arian (in his book against
Luciferius.) To which H. T. says. Answ. If she wondered, she knew not when it
was done, if she groaned, she approved it not being done, therefore the major
part were still Catholic. To which I reply, if H. T. did not presume he should
meet with silly readers, he would not have thus frivolously inferred from those
words which were delivered to show the Arians to be the greater part, that the
major part was still Catholic. For who knows not that the expression is
Rhetorical and the meaning this, that Arians prevailed so much, that the whole
world, that is all the churches of the East and West were so infected, that
they were burdened with Arians as a man that groans under a burden, and that on
such a sudden, as that the accident was as it were a wonder? now from such
Catachrestical metaphors to infer as if they were proper, that while the world
was Arian, it knew not it was done, or approved it not, is all one as to say,
when they were Arians they knew not, nor liked Arian doctrine; that is while
they were Arians they were not Arians, which is to make Hieroms speech
self-contradicting.

But H. T. adds, Let St. Hierom answer for himself. The Bishops (says he
against Luciferius) that did the fact of Ariminum were deluded (viz. by the new
Creed there made, which might have born a good sense) few defending the fact,
and some lamenting it. And St. Augustine tells us, that the church then appeared
in her most constant members, Athanasius and others, ep. 48.

To which I reply, It is true, that when they came to see their error they did
lament it, yet were for the time Arians, and though Athanasius did not yield to
subscribe to it, yet Liberlus Bishop of Rome did. And I believe H. T. his
fellow Papists will not allow his speech, that the decree made at Ariminum
might have born a good sense. It is added by H. T. thus. Obj. The church will
fail in the time of Antichrist according to that, unless there come a revolt
first, etc. 2 These. 2. 3. Answ. No, she will not; she shall then suffer great
persecution, Apoc. 20. 8. and therefore shall be to suffer: many will revolt,
all shall not.

I reply, that if the revolt be of so many and the persecution so great, as
that they shall be dispersed and obscured so as not to appear; it is sufficient
to prove the succession to be then either so interrupted as not to be, or so
obscured as not to be discerned by enemies or brethren further off, and so as
that the making a catalogue of Pastors and professors in that age, cannot be
expected justly from the churches in after ages, which is enough for our
purpose to show, that the defect of such a catalogue shows not the nullity of
the Protestant churches, nor is with any justice or reason such a catalogue of
Pastors and professors in all ages required of them by Papists: Yet, however
this Author conceives, his fellows the Rhemists, Annot. on 2 These. 2. 3. think
the Apostasy shall be so great, as that Antichrist shall pull down generally
all kind of religious worship, saving that which must be done to himself alone:
nor is that, Apoc. 20. 8. to the contrary. For neither is it certain that time
is the time of Antichrists reign, nor, if it were, does it appear, that the
thing done is before the end of that reign.

But H. T. adds. Obj. What if men would not persevere? how then? you hold
freewill, I hope. Answ. With St. Augustine to the Donatists, as if the holy
Ghost were ignorant what would be the freewill of men, which yet foreseeing, he
foretold that the church of Christ should endure for ever. de unit. Eccles.
cap. 12.

I reply, what Protestant has thus objected I know not. The possibility of the
militant churches ceasing, is sufficiently proved by the holding of the acts of
freewill to be undetermined, or undeterminable by God. Nor does the answer
avoid it. For though, if the answer be good, the futurition of the churches
failing follows not from the holding of freewill; yet it shows not but that it
may be, and perhaps it will be hard for him to avoid the objection, that if
man's will be not determined by Gods decree, which is meant by freewill among
that sort of writers: then the Holy Ghost cannot foresee that the church
militant will endure for ever, it being in reason impossible, that there should
be certain foresight of that which is not certain to be before that act of
freewill in man which God himself cannot determine: A certain prescience of
that which is purely contingent, may be or not be before it, notwithstanding
any purpose in God, is according to all principles of reason impossible. If
this Author hold with many of the Romanists man's freewill, not to be determined
by Gods decree and influx on the will of man, or the Jesuits middle knowledge,
he has enough of Papists to oppose him. I have sufficiently showed the
futility of his dispute in the first Article of his Manual, the second follows.

ARTIC. II.
Protestants Succession sufficient.
Protestants have that Succession, which is sufficient to demonstrate them to
be a true Church of God.

SECT. I.
Protestant Churches need not prove such a Succession as Papists demand.

ART. 2. H. T. thus disputes, The true Church of God has had a continued
Succession from Christ to this time, and shall have from hence to the end of
the world, as has been proved. But the Protestant Church (and so of all other
Sectaries) has not a continued Succession from Christ to this time. Therefore
the Protestant Church is not the true Church of God. The Minor (which only
remains unproved) is cleared by the concession of our most learned Adversaries,
who freely and unanimously confess, that before Luther made his separation from
the Church of Rome for nine hundred or a thousand years together the whole
world was Catholic, and in obedience to the Pope of Rome, there being no
Protestants any where to be found, or heard of. Let therefore our Enemies be
our Judges, Calvin, Hospinian, White, Norton, Bancroft, Jewel, Chamier,
Brochard, Whitaker, Bucer, Perkins, Bale, Voyon, Bibliander.

Answ. IT has not been proved, that every true Church of God has had a
continued Succession from Christ to this time: many true Churches have had no
Predecessors, and so no Succession, the Primitive Churches certainly had not
Succession, there being none before them, they had not been primitive if there
had been precedent, and sundry Churches have been true Churches, who have had
none after them in the same place, when their Candlestick has been removed.
And therefore it is most false, which he here vainly says he has proved, that
the true Church of God (meaning every true Church of God, without which his
Major is not universal, and so his Syllogism naught) has had a continued
succession; (meaning without interruption of persons, which may be named in the
same place, professing the same Faith with the now Roman Church in every point,
which is his meaning and is only for his purpose) from Christ to this time* he
has not proved it, no not in the Roman Church, nor in those that are in
communion with it under the Pope. Nor has he proved at all that every true
visible Church on earth shall have such a continued Succession from hence to
the end of the world. The prophecies he alleged are showed not to speak what he
averres. And for his Minor, though it is granted, that the Protestant Church
under that name, as so termed, has not been ancient, yet the Protestant Church
in respect of that Faith they hold has been from the beginning, and has
continued as the Church of God in persecution sometimes more, sometimes less
pure, sometimes larger, sometimes smaller, sometimes more obscure, sometimes
more conspicuous, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another, and in respect
of their Protestation against popish Doctrines, the Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, half-communion, propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass, prayer
in an unknown Tongue, Worship and Invocation of Saints, and other popish
Errors, it has had Churches and persons who have, as they have been urged on
them, opposed them, sometime more, sometime fewer, sometimes in a more open,
sometimes in a more secret way, as persecution permitted, and God stirred up
their spirits. It is most false, that the most learned Adversaries of the
Romanists do freely and unanimously confess, that before Luther made his
Separation from the Church of Rome, for nine hundred or a thousand years
together, the whole World was Catholic, and in obedience to the Pope of Rome,
there being no Protestants any where to be found or heard of. Sure the Grecians
were part of the World, and H. T. himself confesses here page 48. there was a
Revolt of them from the Roman Church after seven or eight hundred years, and
they were united again to the Church of Rome in the Council of Florence, Sess.
last, which himself says, p. 34 was in the year 1439. so that by his own
account their Revolt was six hundred years at least, besides what is manifest
of the Arminians and others. And sure the Hussites, Wicklevists, Waldenses, and
those who went before them (whom Rainerius says, Some counted to have been
from Pope Sylvester 's time, some from the Apostles) were a part of the whole
World, and many Protestants: Illyricus, Fox, White, with others, deny to have
obeyed the Pope of Rome before Luther, and aver that they were, though not in
name, yet in truth Protestants in some at least of the chief points against the
now popish Doctrine. And therefore that which H. T. has recited in this Speech
is manifest untruth. Yea Dr. Richard Field a learned man, in his Appendix to
his third Book of the Church, has proved it notwithstanding Brerely his
wonderment, that the Western Churches before Luther were Protestant, and the
maintainers of the now Roman Faith only a Faction in it. And Mr. Perkins has
demonstrated in his Demonstration of the Problem this Position, No Apostle, no
holy Father, no sound Catholic for twelve hundred years after Christ did ever
hold or profess that Doctrine of all the Principles and Grounds of Religion,
that is now taught by the Church of Rome, and authorized by the Council of
Trent. Nor do the Speeches of the Protestant Writers amount to that which he
produces them for. He himself allegeth p. 41. out of Augustine Epist. 48. that
even the Canonical Scriptures have this custom, that the word seems to be
addressed to all, when it reaches home only to some few, and thereby he would
interpret the complaints that were made of the whole world becoming Arian, when
Athanasius, and others were not. And he might have so interpreted the Speeches
he allegeth of Hospinian and the rest. I have not all the Books he cites; but
some of their words I find not as this Author would have them. Bishop Jewel
having said, page 208. And to be short, all the World this day cries and
groaneth after the Gospel, adds, And all these things are come to pass at such
time as to any man's reason it might seem impossible: when all the World, the
People, Priests, and Princes were overwhelmed with ignorance: when all Schools,
Priests, Bishops, and Kings of the World were sworn to him, that whatsoever he
took in hand they would uphold it. Which Speeches are to be understood only of
the Western Empire, as when it is said Luke 2. 1. A Decree went out that all
the World should be taxed, it is meant only of the Roman Empire; and when John
12. 19. The World is gone after him, it is meant by an Hyperbole, of a great
part, so the words of Bishop Jewel are to be understood as is usual in such
rhetorical expressions, though the words are not as this Author sets them
down, that the whole World, Princes, Priests, and People were bound by Oath to
the Pope, Jewel Sermon. on Luke 11. In like manner when Calvin says, lib. 4.
instit. c. 18. sect. 18. that the abominations of the Mass presented to drink
in a golden Cup has so made drunk all the Kings and People of the Earth, from
the first to the last, he alluding to the words Revel. 18. 3. is to be
conceived, as in that Scripture and many more, to be understood by an excess of
Speech a great part, in comparison of whom the rest are as if they were not. To
the same purpose were the words of Perkins Exposition of the Creed, vol. 1.
page 260. col. 2. c. as the whole period recited shows, which is this, And
during the space of nine hundred years from the time of Boniface, the Popish
Heresy, to wit, of the Popes Supremacy, spread it self over the whole Earth,
and the faithful Servants of God were but as an Handful of Wheat in a
Mountain of Chaff, which can scarce be discerned. The next words of Dr. White
himself in the same period shows his meaning to be of freedom wholly, and of
appearing conspicuously, and to the World visibly to be seen by all, and
separated from the rest. For thus it follows, And whether any company at all,
known or unknown, were free from it wholly or not, I neither determine nor
greatly care. Nor do I question but that the same is the meaning of the rest,
if their words were rightly cited, and the Reader might perceive how they are
wrested by H. T. against their meaning: and they wrote those expressions in
like meaning with those passages of holy Scripture which complain of corruption
as universal, when the greatest or most conspicuous part are so, as Psalm 12.
1. Micah 7. 2. Phil. 2. 21.

SECT. II.
The Argument of H. T. to prove the nullity of the Protestant Churches for want
of Succession is turned against the Roman Church.

H. T. further argues thus, Without a continued number of Bishops, Priests, and
Laics succeeding one another in the profession of the same Faith from Christ
and his Apostles to this time, a continued Succession cannot be had. But
Protestants have no continued number of Bishops, Priests, and Laics,
succeeding one another from Christ and his Apostles to this time in the
profession of the same Faith or Tenets, the nine and thirty Articles, or any
other set number of Tenets expressly holding and denying all the same points.
Therefore Protestants have no continued Succession from Christ and his Apostles
to this time. The Major is manifest, because it proceeds from the Definition to
the thing defined. The Minor is proved, because Protestants have never yet been
able, nor ever will, to assign any such number of men whom they have succeeded
in their nine and thirty Articles, or Luther in his Augustan Confession, when
he revolted from the Catholic Church, no nor yet any one single Diocese or
Biscop.

Answ. 1. THis Argument is thus justly retorted; Without a continued number of
Bishops, Priests, and Laics, succeeding one another in the profession of the
same Faith from Christ and his Apostles to this time a continued Succession
cannot be had. But Papists have no continued number of Bishops, Priests, and
Laics, succeeding one another from Christ and his Apostles to this time in the
profession of the same Faith or Tenets, the Canons of the Trent Council, the
Articles in the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, or any other set number of Tenets
expressly holding and denying all the same points: therefore Papists have no
continued Succession from Christ and his Apostles to this time. The Major is
manifest, because it proceeds from the Definition to the thing defined. The
Minor is proved, because Papists have never yet been able, nor ever will, to
assign any such number of men, whom they have succeeded in their Trent Canons,
and the Articles of the Creed enjoined to be professed and sworn to in the Bull
of Pope Pius the fourth. If any man pretend to such a Catalogue, let him name
none but such as held explicitly the Doctrine of the Tridentin Canons, the
Roman Catechism, the Articles of the Creed enjoined by Pope Pius the fourth his
Bull, all granting and denying the same points, that the late Faction of
Romanists or Italian popish Sectaries granted and denied, or that our new
Reformers the Jesuits deny and grant; for if they differ from them in any one
material point they cannot be esteemed Catholics. Let him not name Christ, John
Baptist, Peter, Paul, or any the Apostles, or the Roman Church in their days.
For they did not admit and embrace the now called Apostolic Ecclesiastic
traditions unwritten, and other observances and constitutions of the Roman
Church, nor held it the right of the Roman Church to define the true sense and
interpretation of holy Scripture to be received by all, nor truly and properly
seven Sacraments of the new Law instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ; and
necessary to the salvation of mankind, nor allowed the received Rites of the
Roman Church used in solemn administration of all the Sacraments, nor all the
things which concerning original sin and justification were defined and
declared in the Council of Trent, nor did acknowledge that in the Mass is
offered to God a true proper and propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and the
dead: and that in the holy Eucharist is truly, really, and substantially, the
body and blood with the soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ; and that
there is made a conversion of the whole substance of the bread into his body,
and of the whole substance of the wine into his blood, which conversion the
Roman Church calls Transubstantiation, nor that under one kind only all and
whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is received, nor that there is a
Purgatory, and the souls detained there are holp by the Suffrages of the
faithful, nor that the Saints reigning with Christ are to be worshipped and
prayed unto, nor their Relics to be worshipped, nor that the Images of Christ
and the Mother of God, always a Virgin, and other Saints are to be had and
retained, and that to them honor and veneration is to be given, nor that the
power of Indulgences (such as the Pope grants) was left by Christ in the
Church, nor that the use thereof is most wholesome to Christ's people, nor that
the Roman Church is the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, nor the Mother
and Mistress of all Churches, nor that true obedience is to be vowed and sworn
to the Bishop of Rome, nor that he is the Successor of Peter, nor that Peter is
the Prince of the Apostles, and Vicar of Jesus Christ. Neither let them name
the Popes Councils or Fathers for the first five hundred years, for they held
not these points. Papists pretense to the Fathers of the first five hundred
years is very idle, because were it true, as it is most false, that those
Fathers were Papists, yet could not that suffice to prove them a continued
Succession of sixteen hundred years. Secondly, because those of the sixth Age
must needs know better what was the Religions and Tenets of them who lived in
the fifth Age by whom they were instructed, and with whom they daily conversed,
then our modern Papists can now do, and they have not protested on their
salvation that it was the very same with the now popish Doctrine, nor that they
received it from them by word of mouth, and so from age to age: and finally,
because if our Tenets in which we differ from Papists, and are opposed by them,
be taught and approved by the Fathers of the first five hundred years, then it
is wholly impossible they should be for Papists and against us. But our
Doctrines (in which we differ from Papists, and are opposed by them) are taught
and approved by the Fathers of the first five hundred years. Therefore it is
impossible that the Fathers of the first five hundred years should be for
Papists and against us. The Major is manifest of it self. The Minor is proved
1. By what has been already cited out of those Fathers, as also by what shall
be cited out of them in the following dispute. 2. By the ingenuous confessions
of our Adversaries. Cardinal Cusanus in his second Book of Catholic Concord,
cap. 13. says, The Pope is not the universal Bishop, but the first above or
among others. Cardinal Bessarion of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, We read
that these two only Sacraments were delivered plainly in the Gospel. Cardinal
Cajetan, tract. de Indulg. cap. 1. There can be no certainty found touching the
beginning of Indulgences: there is no authority of the Scripture, or ancient
Fathers, Greek or Latin, that brings it to our knowledge. Durand. in lib. 4.
sent. did. 20. qu 3. Of Indulgences few things can be said of certainty,
because the Scripture speaks not expressly of them. Cardinal Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, Assert. Luth. confess. art. 18. page 86. Touching Purgatory there was
very little mention or none at all, among the ancient, as the Greeks to this
day believe it not: which words are cited by Polyd. Virgil. lib. 8. de invent.
rerum, cap. 1. Cardinal Bellarmine, lib. 5. de Just. cap 7. For the uncertainty
of our own righteousness, and for avoiding of vainglory it is most sure and
safe to repose our whole confidence in the alone mercy and goodness of God.
Cardinal Cajetan in 3. part. 2. Th. qu. 80. art. 12. qu 3. The custom of the
peoples receiving the Wine endured long in the Church. Georg. Cass in his
Defense of his Book entitled [De officio pii viri] says, The use of the Blood
of our Lord together with his Body in the ministering of this Sacrament, is both
of the institution of Christ, and observed by the custom of the whole Church
for above a thousand years, and unto this day of the Eastern Churches. And
although the use of one kind came up about the year 1200. yet the most learned
of those times never taught that it was necessary so to be observed. Tonstal
Bishop of Durhom, de verit. corp. and sanguinis, p. 46. till the Council of
Lateran it was free for all men to follow their own conjecture concerning the
manner of Christ's presence in the Eucharist. Polydor Virgil. de invent. rer. l.
6. 13. before the Index Expurgatorius put them out, had these words, By the
testimony of Hierom it appears how in a manner all the ancient holy Fathers
condemned the worship of images for fear of Idolatry. Cassand. consult. tit. de
imag. It is verily manifest out of Augustine, writing on Psalm. 113. that in his
age the use of Images in Churches was not. Claudius Espencaeus a Bishop in Tit.
c. 1. many hundred years after the Apostles by reason of the want of others,
Priests were married, Greg. de Val. tom. 4. disp. 9. punct. 5. sect. 9. with
others confesses, that in the most ancient times of the Church, and after the
Apostles death Priests had their wives. Harding in his answer to Jewel on the
third Article; Verily in the primitive Church this was necessary, when the
faith was in learning. And therefore the prayers were made then in a common
known tongue to the people, for cause of their further instruction, who being
of late converted to the faith, and of Painims made Christians had need in all
things to be taught. John Heart in his Epistle to the Reader before the
conference with Dr. Rainold in the Tower; In truth I think, that although the
spiritual power be more excellent than the temporal, yet they are both of God,
neither does the one depend of the other. Whereupon I gather as a certain
conclusion, that the opinion of them who hold the Pope to be a temporal Lord
over Kings and Princes, is unreasonable and improbable altogether. For he has
not to meddle with them or theirs civilly, much less to depose them, or give
away their Kingdoms: that is no part of his commission. He has in my judgment
the Fatherhood of the Church, not a Princehood of the world: Christ himself
taking no such title on him, nor giving it to Peter or any other of his
Disciples. Bishop Jewels challenge and performance is known, Bishop Mortons
Catholic Apology and Appeal, besides many other books are extant; by which it
may be plainly discerned, that Papists have not the Fathers of the first five
hundred years for them, and that even the learned writers of the Popish party
have vented so much in their writings, as yields an apology for Protestants in
all or many of the points in difference between Protestants and Papists.

SECT. III.
Protestants have had a sufficient succession to aver their doctrine in the
Latin Churches.

BUt I shall add a direct answer to H. T. his argument. 1. By denying his
syllogism to be right, as having these words added in the minor [or tenets,
etc.] which were not in the Major, whereby there is a fourth term, which makes
a syllogism naught. 2. By denying his Major, and as a reason of that denial I
say, agreement of doctrine with Christ and his Apostles in the main points of
faith and worship, though there be no Bishops nor Priests is sufficient to a
true Church; and such succession as H. T. requires is not necessary. 3. To the
Minor, though Protestants have not a continued number of Bishops, Priests and
Laics succeeding one another from Christ and his Apostles to this time in the
profession of the same faith or tenets, the thirty nine Articles or any other
set number of tenets expressly holding and denying all the same points; yet they
do agree with Christ and his Apostles in the doctrine of the Christian faith,
and the Christian worship; and there has been a succession in all ages
hitherto of Christian professors holding the same points of faith in the
fundamentals, although sometimes more purely and conspicuously than at other
times; and they have opposed, though not with the like success, agreement, or
largeness in every age, the Popish errors now avouched in Pope Pius the fourth
his Creed and the Trent Canons. And for answer to the proofs of the Major: I
deny, that the Major proceeds from the definition to the thing defined, [a
continued number of Bishops, Pri^sts and Laics succeeding one another in the
profession of the same faith from Christ and his Apostles to this time] being
not the definition of the continued succession necessary to the being of the
true Church of God; as has been proved before in the answer to the former
Article, Sect, 4. 5. And to the proof of the Minor: I answer, that Protestants
may have true succession from Christ and his Apostles, and may be esteemed
Christians and Catholics, though they differ in many material points, as long
as they hold the same fundamental points, and Protestants, opposing all or some
of the chief points of Popery as they arose and were discovered to them, though
they did not discern all their errors, nor relinquish all their practices, or
the communion of the Churches subject to the Bishop of Romes rule; but they
were truly Protestants, however otherwise named, while they did hold the same
fundamental truths we hold, and opposed, as they appeared to them, all or some
of the Popish corrupt worship and errors, which the Protestants now do. And for
proof of this we rightly name the Waldenses, Hussites, Wicklevists, Albigenses,
Puritan Waldenses, Beringarians, Grecians, of whom writers testify they
excepted against the Popes supremacy, purgatory, half communion,
transubstantiation, setting up and worship of Images, propitiatory sacrifice of
the Mass for quick and dead, invocation and worship of Angels and Saints
deceased, seven Sacraments, with other errors of the now Romanists; and yet in
the chief points of Christian faith and worship did agree with the now
Protestants, as may be gathered from the confessions, and writings of their
own, either extant or acknowledged in the histories and writings of their
adversaries, such as were Rainerius, Aeneas Sylvius, Cochlaeus, and others. See
Samuel Morlands history of the Evangelical Churches in Piedmont the first book,
by which their confessions and treatises are brought to light agreeing with
Protestants. What H. T. brings against this is either falsely ascribed to them
by the calumnies of their adversaries, whose recitals of their opinions to the
worst sense no man has reason to believe, especially considering their works
extant do refute them, and it has been often complained of, that they have
been misinterpreted and misreported; or else, if true, is insufficient to
invalidate our allegation of them.

H. T. tells us the Waldenses held the real presence, that the Apostles were
lay men, that all Magistrates fell from their dignity by any mortal sin, that
it is not lawful to swear in any case, etc. Illiricus in Catalog. Waldens.
Confess. Bohem. a. 1. and Waldo an unlearned Merchant of Lions lived but in the
year 1160.

Answ. Sure he was not altogether unlearned, of whom it is said by some that
have seen his doings yet remaining in old parchment monuments, that it
appears he was both able to declare and to translate the books of Scripture,
also did collect the Doctors minas upon the same. Yet were he unlearned, sure
he had store of companions among the Romanists, Friars, Bishops and Popes of
those times, by one of whom a Bishop was condemned as an heretic, for holding
that there are Antipodes; and Paul the second says, Platina pronounced them
heretics, who should from thence forth mention the name of the Academy, either
in earnest or in jest. The very decrees and Epistles of the Popes in their
Canon law show, that few of them had any skill in the Scriptures or the
original languages competent to divines, and who so reads their writings
observingly, shall find that the ablest of their schoolmen in those days were
very ignorant of the Scripture sense and language. Nor do I think the Popes and
generality of Bishops and Priests, and Preachers among the Romanists at this
day are men of much learning in the holy Scriptures. So that I presume Waldus,
as unlearned as he was, was comparable to the Roman Clergy at that time in
learning, and for holiness of life, by the relation even of Popish writers,
exceeding them as much as gold exceeds lead, and therefore as likely to know
the mind of God as any Pope, or Bishop, or Friar at that time. Now clear it is
by an ancient manuscript alleged by the Magdeburg. cent. 12. c. 8. that the
Waldenses held, that the Scripture is the only rale in the Articles of faith,
fathers and councils no otherwise to be received then as they agree with the
Scriptures, that the Scriptures are to be read by all sorts of men, that there
are two Sacraments of the Church, that the Lords supper is appointed by Christ,
and to be received by all sorts in both kinds, that Masses were impious, and
that it was a madness to say Masses for the dead, purgatory to be a figment,
the invocation and worship of dead Saints to be idolatry, the Roman Church to
be the whore of Babylon, that the Pope has not the supremacy of all the
Churches of Christ, marriage of Priests to be lawful: with sundry more, which
are agreeable to Protestant tenets against Papists: which is confirmed, because
much to the same purpose Aeneas Sylvius in his Bohemian history writes of their
opinions. Nor is it likely they held what they are said by H. T. to have held.
For it appears by the dispute between them and one Dr. Austin, set down by Mr.
Fox Acts and Monuments at the year 1179. out of Orthuinus de gratiis, that
their opinion was, that Christ is one and the same with his natural body in the
Sacrament, which he is at the right hand of his Father: but not after the same
existence of his body. For the existence of his body in heaven is personal and
local: there to be apprehended by the faith and spirit of men. In the Sacrament
the existence of his body is not personal or local to be apprehended or
received of our bodies, after a personal or corporal manner, but after a
Sacramental manner: that is, where our bodies receive the sign, and our spirit
the thing signified. And Illyric. cat. test. verit. tells us, that it is said
to be their opinion, that the transubstantiation is not made in the hand of the
conficient, but in the mouth of him that receives it worthily. And though he
sets down the words of Rainerius as they were, yet he conceives the things
objected were calumnies. As for what is brought out of the B^hemian confession,
Anno 1535 it speaks of their tenet then, but not what those in Gallia held in
and about the time of Waldus, who from him were termed Waldenses. It is
probable they might say the Apostles were lay men not ordained, or tradesmen,
as Peter was a fisher, Paul a tentmaker, not thereby derogating from the
Apostles function, when they were made Apostles, but endeavoring to abate the
arrogance of the Bishops and Priests, who appropriated to themselves the title
of the clergy (which Peter, 1 Pet. 5. 3. gave to all the flock of Christ) and
the power only to translate, read, expound and preach the Scriptures, which the
Waldenses held to be free to all men. By Magistrates falling from their dignity
by mortal sin, its likely they meant Ecclesiastical, whom they held God did
suspend from the exercise of their function, when they lived wickedly, they
being not to receive, and so not to consecrate, as I find it in, Illyric.
catal. or perhaps they meant it, that Magistrates were not to be obeyed in
their wicked commands, or (as it is most probable they meant it) it was just
with God they should fall from their dignity; and that he by his providence did
so order it, not that men might depose them, as Papists have taught, nor that
ipso facto they cease to be Magistrates. The same thing also H. T. says of the
Wiclesians out of the council of Constance, and imputes to them and to the
Hussites from the council of Constance, that all things came to pass by fatal
necessity, misunderstanding necessity of event by reason of Gods decree for
fatal stoic necessity, and that all the works of the predestinate are virtues,
which arose from their doctrine, that they could not fall from the faith, as if
thereby they must hold, that then they could not sin. That the Waldenses held
it not lawful to swear at all, is not so likely, as that they held the
frequency of swearing unlawful, which is made the occasion of their denying
swearing to be lawful, by Rainerias himself in Illyr. catal. or perhaps they
rejected monkish vows and oaths of canonical obedience, and many other oaths
imposed on men, together with swearing by the Mass, Cross, Rod, on a Book. But
if they held all swearing unlawful, they held what Sixtus Sene^si^, lib. 6.
Biblioth. Annot. 26. says is conceived to have been held by many Fathers.
Origin, Athanasius, Epiphanius, Hilarious, Ambrosius, Chromatius, Hieronimus,
Chrysostomus, Theophylactus, Oecumenius, Euthymius, whom he excuses and
endeavors to acquit from error, and so do others the Waldenses, Wiclevists,
etc. as Birkbck in cent. 14. does Wicleff out of his Latin exposition of the
second Commandment.

That the Hussites held Mass, transubstantiation and seven Sacraments with the
now Romanists, I find not in Mr. Fox, nor does H. T. tell me where I may find
it in him; that the Hussites or Wicleff held all the works of the predestinate
to be virtues, or that all things come to pass by fatal necessity (meaning of a
concatenation of two causes antecedent to Gods decree, and binding him) is no
more to be believed, because the council of Constance condemned them, then that
Wicleff held that God was to obey the Devil, because it was so charged on him,
from which his learned works yet remaining do free him. And it is found that
the clamorous Jesuits endeavor to fasten the like odious inferences on the
doctrine of predestination taught by Calvin and other Protestants, which being
rightly understood infers them not.

What Bernard says, and Roger Hoveden of the Albigenses, and Rainerius of the
Catharists might be true of some of those that went under their name, as the
Gnostics did of Christians, and perhaps some Ranters or Quakers may do under
the name of Protestants. But the errors are contrary to the Waldenses,
Wiclevists, Hussites confessions and writings yet remaining, and Rainerius his
own words, that the Waldenses or Leonists did believe all things well of God,
and all the Articles which are contained in the Creed, do acquit them: and they
seem to be the errors of some remnant of the Manichees. But perhaps Bernard was
mistaken in the charge on them, as he was in the accusation of Petrus
Abailardus and others The tenets that the universal Church (meaning the
Catholic Church which we believe in the Creed) consists only of the
predestinate, that they cannot fall from the faith meaning totally or finally,
are the opinions of many learned Protestants, and therefore the Hussites
holding them, may notwithstanding those opinions be reckoned for Protestants.
Nevertheless were it true, that the Hussites and Wiclevists and Waldenses
taught what H. T. says of them, yet we might allege them as witnesses against
the now Popish errors, which they then declared against, and a catalogue of
Protestant successors continued from the Apostles in the naming them, rightly
formed.

SECT. IV.
The succession in the Greek Churches may be alleged for Protestants,
notwithstanding H. T. his exceptions.

A Catalogue of Bishops, Priests and Laics in the Greek churches continued in
the profession of the same faith with the Protestants against Popish errors is
alleged by some learned Protestants. Against which H. T. excepts. 1. That they
rejected the communion of the Protestants, censur. eccles. orientalis. Answ.
This does not prove they professed not the same faith with Protestants against
Papists. For they might upon some differences, upon which perhaps they disagree
with the Romanists, reject the communion of the Protestants, and yet profess
with Protestants the same faith, and oppose the same Popish errors.

2. Says he, they were at least seven or eight hundred years in the communion
of the Roman Church, as witness the first eight general councils all held in
Greece, and approved by the Popes of Rome. Answ. To speak exactly, a general
council is a black Swan, there having never been any council so general, but
that there have wanted messengers from many Christian Churches in the world.
The four first councils of the Bishops of the Empire have gotten a great repute
in the Christian Churches, and have been accounted as the four Evangelists,
though the canons extant even of the first Nicene council have no such
excellency in them, as to deserve so great an opinion. Of the four later,
surely the two last less deserve the name; the later Nicene council being
affronted by the Carolin council about Images at Frankford, and the eighth by
another of the same place of better note, by Michael the Emperor and Photius
the learned Parriarch of Constantinople, who sure acknowledged not the Popes
Monarchy, but lived and died in contest against them. But neither the four
first, nor the four last did ever ascribe to the Pope of Rome the monarchy and
supremacy, which are now arrogated, nor did they ever receive what they
professed, because they professed it, nor does the desire or acceptance, much
less the having the Popes approbation at all prove any authority over them in
him, it being a thing usual to seek approbation of men, who have no authority
over the seekers, by reason of their esteem for prudence, learning and other
qualities, and for the more ready receipt of what they seek to have approved.
But the councils determinations, and that with Anathema to the gainsayers,
showed that they judged themselves to have decisive power without the Pope,
though his consent also were added as useful for some purposes.

3. Says H. T. The first revolt was made by the Grecians denying the
procession of the holy Ghost from God the Son, they were united again to the
Church of Rome in the council of Florence sess. last.

Answ. 1. The denying of the procession of the Holy Ghost from God the Son, is
showed to be an error only in manner of speaking, by Sir Richard Field of the
Church, third book, chapter 1. and other learned men. 2. The revolt so long shows
the Protestants had predecessors for many hundred years together in opposing
the usurpations and errors of the Roman Popes and Churches. 3. The
reconciliation at Florence was but an imperfect thing, by persons whose acts
were not avowed afterward, nor did the union hold, but was quickly dissolved.
4. The council of Florence was a council not allowed by that at Basil as being
only of a faction to avoid the questioning of Pope Eugenius. See Platina in
vita Eugenii. 4.

4. Says H. T. they held transubstantiation, seven Sacraments, unbloody
sacrifice, prayer to Saints and for the dead, cens. eccles. orientalis, c. 7,
10, 12, 13, 21.

Answ. The Grecians hold not any such transubstantiation as whereby the
elements are abolished, and cease to be that they were, but whereby they become
what they were not, and the transubstantiation they hold is a change of the
communicants into the being of Christ, that is partakers of the divine nature,
as the Apostle means when he says they are the body of Christ, as Dr. Field
proves out of Dam. scen, Cyril and others in his third book of the Church, chapter
1. Bishop Jewel reply to Hardings answer, art. 10. Nor are the speeches of
transubstantiation, transelementation and such like terms, used by the Greeks,
any other than lofty hyperbolical speeches, such as the Apostle uses when he
says, Christ was crucified among the Galatians, Gal. 3. 1. which abound in
Chrysostom, Pseudo, Dionysius Areopagita etc. insomuch, that Chrysostom
sometimes expresses the presence of Christ in the eucharist, as if it were
sensible, the communicants touching Christ's body, seeing his blood, having
their mouths made red by it, sucking his blood, receiving him into our house,
with more of the like, as may be seen in Chamier. Panstr. cath. tom. 4. lib.
11. c. 9. As for seven Sacraments, the Greeks do not teach them to be so many,
and no more, nor the unbloody sacrifice any otherwise, then by it to mean a
commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ, as Chrysostom in his hom. on the
tenth to the Hebrew expresses it. It cannot be proved that the Greeks use such
prayer to Saints as the Papists do, directing their prayers to them as hearers,
and by virtue of their merits helpers to them that call on them. Neither do
they pray for the dead shut up in purgatory (which as I alleged out of
Roffensis, the Greeks do this day deny) and there enduring punishment of sense,
for deliverance thence, but commemorate the dead, even the most holy martyrs
and confessors, and pray for their happy resurrection and acquittal in the last
judgment. As for the Egyptian Christians and Armenians, what they hold is not
so easy to know by reason of their remoteness from Europe, nor what Succession
they have had. But this is manifest enough, that they did never submit to the
Bishop of Rome as their Head, except what was done at Florence (for which
Michael Paleologus the Greek Emperor was abhorred by the Greeks, and denied
Burial, and Isidor Archbishop of Kio^ia in Russta deposed and put to death) or
by some obscure persons, whose acts the Churches never owned, and yet there
does not appear sufficient reason to exclude them out of the Catholic Church,
notwithstanding such Errors as are imputed to them, nor to question their
Succession. Nor is the Protestants pretense to the Fathers of the first five
hundred years idle, (it being not false, but most true, and so proved by Jewel
and others, and the Answers of Harding and other Romanists proved insufficient)
that they were in the most material points Protestants, that is held otherwise
than the Romanists now do. And though it prove not a Succession of sixteen
hundred years continued, yet it proves a Succession of so long continuance as
will make void the popish claim of Succession as peculiar to them, and with any
considerate person so far take place as to justify the Protestants opposition
against the modern Papist's Errors and Innovations. It Is true, those of the
sixth Age must needs know better what was the Religions and Tenets of them who
lived in the fifth Age by whom they were instructed, and with whom they daily
conversed, than Protestants can now do, in those things which they delivered by
word of mouth to them, if they were heedfull, intelligent, and mindful of
what they heard. But what they left in writing we may know as well as they. And
experience shows that often times upon mistakes, and sometimes voluntarily the
sayings of men spoken, yea sometimes their very Writings, either by
unskilfulness, or negligence, or fraud, are mis-reported, and therefore
notwithstanding this reason of the acquaintance of those of the sixth Age with
those of the fifth, yet it may be that Protestants may know the mind of the
Fathers in the fifth Age as well as those that lived in the sixth. But that
those of the sixth Age have protested on their salvation that the Doctrine
taught by the Fathers in the fifth Age was the very same with their, in every
point, or the Doctrine now taught by the Romanists was received from them by
word of mouth, and so from Age to Age is not true; yet if they should, we have
no more cause to credit them, than the Church had to believe the Millenaries
and Quartodesimans, because of Papias and others their report of John, with
whom they conversed.

SECT. V.
The Romanists Doctrine as it is now was not the Doctrine of the Fathers of the
first five hundred years, nor is acknowledged to be so by the learned
Protestants.

H. T adds a third Argument to prove, that his with other Romanists Doctrines,
(in which they differ from Protestants and are opposed by them) are taught and
approved by the Fathers of the first five hundred years, which he thinks to
prove by that he has cited, and shall cite out of the Fathers, and the
confessions of his Adversaries, and to that end cites some Speeches of Fulk,
Kemnitius, Whitgrft, Calvin, Whitaker, Peter Martyr, Duditius, Rainolds, Jewel:
and then infers triumphantly, therefore the Father of the first five hundred
years are not for Protestants, but for us; therefore Protestants are utterly at
a loss in the point of continued Succession.

Answ. 1. WHat is before cited has been showed to be insufficient, and so will
what is after, if God vouchsafe me time and strength to that end. 2. Of the
passages cited, the two last are not to the purpose, and they are maimedly, and
corruptly cited. The Speeches, as they are cited, say not any thing of the
popish Doctrine taught and approved by the Fathers of the first five hundred
years, but the uncertainty of finding out the truth by their sayings without
the Scriptures. And that the dealing of this Author may appear, I shall set
down the words as I find them in Jewel's Apology, part. 4. cap. 22. divis. 3.
For where these men bid the holy Scriptures away as dumb and fruitless, and
procure us to come to God himself, who speaks in the Church and in their
Councils, that is to say, to believe their fancies and opinions this way,
finding out the truth is very uncertain, and exceeding dangerous, and in a
manner a fantastical and mad way, and by no means allowed of the holy Fathers.
Which Speech is a most true and savoury Speech, yet not in the least intimating
a diffidence of the Fathers of the first five hundred years being for the
Papists (the contrary to which Bishop Jewel showed in his famous Challenge at
Paul's Cross, and his making it good against Harding) but only vindicating the
holy Scriptures from the foul Speeches of Hosius, Pighius, and other Romanists,
and asserting the authority of the holy Scriptures. The other passage which is
cited out of Dr. Rainold's Conference (in H. T. it is printed Confess.) cap. 5.
divis. 1. is as corruptly and maimedly cited, the words being thus at large,
Indeed Vincentius Lirinensis prefers this mark (of truth the consent of the
Fathers) before the rest, as having held when they failed. Nevertheless he
speaks not of it neither, as that it may serve for trial and decision of
questions between us. For what does he acknowledge to be a point approved, and
such as we are bound to believe by this mark? even that which the Fathers all
with one consent have held, written, taught, plainly, commonly, continually.
And who can avouch of any point in question, that not one or two but all the
Fathers held it, nor only held it, but also wrote it; nor only wrote it, but
alotaught it; not darkly, but plainly; not seldom, but commonly; not for a
short season, but continually: which so great consent is partly so rare, and so
hard to be found, partly so unsure, though it might be found, that himself (to
fashion it to some use and certainty) is fain to limit and restrain it. Which
words were sound, and are necessary, but not spoken out of any distrust of his
cause or imagination, as if the Fathers of the first five hundred years were
for the Papists. For in that very conference he largely proves, that not only
the Fathers of the first five hundred years, but also the succeeding Councils
and Fathers till the sixteenth Century, did only yield the Pope a Primacy
among other Patriarchs, but not a Supremacy over the whole Church, and that
Primacy that was given him was by custom of the Church for the honor of the
Imperial City (which was auserible) not because of any grant of Christ, which
was irrevocable. Duditius was one whom by Thranus his description of him, Hist
l. 96. toward the end, I know not whether I may reckon among Protestants,
though he were an ingenuous and learned man, yet there is no reason his words
should be alleged as the confession of Protestants. Peter Martyr's Speech
respects only the point of vows, which is not a point of says. Whitaker's
Speech is not of the Fathers of the first 500. years, but of the ancient
Church, which might be after, or only in some part of that time. The words of
Calvin, lib 3. instit. cap. 5. parag 10. are not rightly alleged, being not
together as H. T. cites them, but injuriously pieced out of Speeches, that are
distant one from another He does not deny, nor yet expressly say, that it was a
custom thirteen hundred years ago to pray for the dead: but whereas it was
objected by the Adversaries, he urges, that if it were so, it was without
Scripture, that it came out of carnal affection, that what we read in the
Ancients done therein was yielded to the common manner and ignorance of the
vulgar, he confesses they were carried away into error, but faith not, they
were all of that time carried away into error, that same testimonies of the
Ancients might be brought which overthrow all those prayers for the dead, that
their prayers for the dead were not without hesitancy, that they were different
from the popish in diverse things. The words of Whitgifts Defense, page 473. are
mis-cited, being not as H. T. cites them, All the Bishops and learned Writers
of the Greek and Latin Church too, for the most part, were spotted with the
Doctrines of Free will, Merit, Invocation of Saints, but thus, How greatly were
almost all the Bishops and learned Writers of the Greek Church, yea and the
Latins also for the most part spotted with the Doctrines of Free Will, of
Merits, Invocation of Saints, and such like? Surely you are not able to reckon
in any Age since the Apostles time any company of Bishops that taught and held
so sound and perfect Doctrine in all points as the Bishops of England do at
this time. The words of Kemnitius I find not, perhaps because the Edition is
not named with the Page. But this I find in the third part of his Examen, page
628. Francos. Edit. 1609. that he not only asserted, but also proved, that in
the Primitive Church unto two hundred years after Christ born, the Doctrine of
the Suffrages, Patronages, Intercessions, Merits, Aid, Help, and Invocation of
Saints in Heaven, was altogether unknown, and the reason or account of the
veneration of Saints was then far other, as we have showed, than that which was
brought in. I have not Fulk's Retentives against Bristow's Motives by me, which
I imagine is the Book which H. T. cites under the Title of Riot Briston: but
his citing with an etc. and so small a shred of the Author makes me conceive
that he wronged Fulk by that maimed citation, however since the confession is
but of three Fathers, and the Saints whether living or dead, and their
invocation of what sort he meant being not expressed, it serves not the turn to
prove his confession of the Fathers of the first five hundred years, holding
Popish Invocation of Saints deceased.

SECT. VI.
The Answers of H. T. to the Objections of Protestants concerning their
Succession are showed to be vain, and the Apostasy of the Roman Church proved.

AFter the rest of his scribbling H. T. under the Title of Objection solved,
says thus, Object. In all the Ages before Luther Protestants had a Church
though it were invisible. Answ. This is a mere Mid-summer nights Dream, that a
Church (which is a congregation of visible men, preaching, baptizing, and
converting Nations) should be extant for a thousand years, and yet be all this
while invisible, neither to be seen or heard of in the World.

I reply, who frames the Objection as this Author sets it down I know not,
sure I am that many of the Protestants do frame it otherwise, that the
Protestants had Churches before Luther, who did oppose popish innovations, and
that these were visible, though not to their Enemies, nor in so conspicuous a
manner as the Roman Senate or Commonwealth of Venice, and this is no
Mid-summer nights Dream any more than that Papists have a Church in England in
communion with the Sea of Rome, and that they have Masses, Baptizing, etc.
although it be not known to Protestants, nor so conspicuous as that we know
where to go to them. And these Churches have been seen and known in the World,
partly separate from the Roman Church, partly continuing within the Roman
Church, but yet opposing the p^pal usurpations and corruptions. As for H. T.
his Definition of a Church, it is to me more like a Mid-Summer nights Dream.
For is the Church a congregation of visible men preaching, baptizing, and
converting Nations? Are all the visible men in the congregation, which is the
Church, men preaching, baptizing, and converting Nations? May not a Church be a
congregation of men that convert not any Nation if themselves be converted,
that baptize not others if themselves be baptized, that preach not if they have
heard, received and profess the Word preached? Are not Women part of the
congregation, which is the Church? Do they preach and baptize? However it is
well this Author sets down Preaching and Baptizing as acts whereby the men who
are of the congregation, which is the Church, are visible; which is all one
with the marks of the visible Church given by the Protestants, to wit,
preaching the Word and administering the Sacraments.

H. T. adds, Object. The Church in communion with the Sea of Rome was the true
Church till she apostatized and fell from the faith.

Answ. If she were once the true Church, she is and shall be so for ever; she
cannot fail, as has been proved, nor err in faith, as shall be proved
hereafter.

I reply. It is, true Protestants yield that the Churches in communion with the
Bishops of Rome were true Churches while they held the faith of Christ entire,
and did not by their innovations subvert it, which was in process of time done
by altering of the rule of faith, the Apostolical tradition of the holy
Scripture into unwritten tradition, the Popes determinations and canons of
councils as the sense of the Scripture, or the revelations of the Spirit of
God, and by bringing in the invocation and worship of the Virgin Mary and other
Saints, altering the Sacrament of the Lords Supper instituted for a
commemoration of his death into a propitiatory sacrifice for quick and dead,
asserting transubstantiation, and adoring of the bread, worshipping images and
relics, perverting the Gospel by bringing in the doctrines of humane
satisfactions for sin, power to fulfill the law, justification by works, and
meriting eternal life, instead of free remission of sins to the penitent
believer only through the blood of Christ, and justification by faith in Christ
without the works of the law. In which points that the Churches now in
communion with the Sea of Rome have apostatized, is apparent by this argument.
Those Churches have apostatized, who have left the faith once delivered to the
Saints by the Apostles of Christ. But the Churches now in communion with the Sea of Rome, have left the faith once delivered to the Saints by the Apostles
of Christ: therefore the Churches now in communion with the Sea of Rome have
apostatized. The Major is evident from the terms, apostasy being no other
thing than leaving the faith once delivered to the Saints by the Apostles of
Christ. The minor is manifest by comparing the doctrine of the council of
Trent, and Pope Pius the fourth his Creed with the Apostles writings,
especially the Epistle to the Romans by Paul, which shows what once the church
of Rome believed. For instance it is said, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things
were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. And that
from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. All Scripture is
given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Ephesians. 2. 20. And are built upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief cornerstone, which plainly prove the Scriptures use for all sorts,
sufficiency, and divinity, and the needlesness of unwritten traditions to guide
us to salvation. Romans 12. 5. We being many are one body in Christ, and every
one members one of another. 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the body is one and has many
members, and all the members of that one body being many are one body: so also
is Christ. Ver. 13. For by one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, ver. 27. Now ye are
the body of Christ and members in particular, ver. 28. And God has set some in
the Church, first Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 1. 22. and gave him to be head over all
things to the Church which is his body, which prove the Catholic Church to
have extended to all believers of Jews and Gentiles, and that they (and not the
Roman only, or those that are in communion with it) are that one body or
Catholic Church, and that there is no other head of the whole Church but
Christ, nor any Apostle above another; and consequently the Roman Church and
Pope have no supremacy over the rest of the Churches. Romans 10 14. How shall
they call on him in whom they have not believed. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one God
and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, which prove they
then received not the invocation of Saints, nor made the Virgin Mary or any
other deceased Saint, Mediators between God and men. 1 Cor. 11. 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28. after his blaming them for disorder about the Lords supper, he says
thus, For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you,
that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which he was betrayed took bread: and
when he had given thanks he brake it and said, take, eat, this is my body,
which is broken for you: this do in remembrance of me. After the same manner
also he took the cup when he had supped saying, this cup is the New Testament
in my blood: this do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. For as often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup ye do show the Lords death till he
come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of
the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the
body of Christ? for we being many are one bread and one body: for we are all
partakers of that one bread. Which texts plainly show, that what is eaten in
the Eucharist is bread, and therefore not flesh, and consequently no
transubstantiation, that the actions are commemorate signs of Christ's death;
therefore no propitiatory sacrifice: that bread was to be broken and eaten,
therefore not to be whole and swallowed down. Heb. 9. 26. But now once in the
end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
Heb. 10. 10. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all, which show there is no more sacrifice or
offering of Christ in the church of Christ to be continued by a Priest. Romans 1.
25. who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped the creature
besides, or more than the Creator. 1 These. 1. 9. ye turned to God from Idols to
serve the living and the true God, therefore they worshipped not bread, nor
crosses, nor relics as Papists do. Romans 3. 28. Therefore we conclude that a
man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. Romans 4. 5. But to him
that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith
is counted to him for righteousness. Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by
faith we have peace with God. Romans 8. 1. There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus. ver. 3, 4. For what the law could not do in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us. ver. 18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in us. Romans 9. 11. For the children being not yet born, neither having
done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might
stand, not of works, but of him that calls. 16. So then it is not in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Romans 10. 3, 4,
5, 10. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to
establish their own righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes. For Moses describes the righteousness which is of
the law, that the man which does them shall live in them. For with the heart
man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Romans 11. 6. And if by grace, then is it no more of work, otherwise
grace is no more grace: but if it be of work, then it is no more grace,
otherwise work is no more work. 1 Cor. 1. 30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am
I not thereby justified. ver. 7. who makes thee to differ from another? and
what have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory as if thou had not received it? Gal. 2. 16, 17, 21. knowing
that a man is not justified by the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: we
seek to be justified by Christ. I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if
righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain: to which may be
added, Gal. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and 5. 4, 5. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 8, 9.
Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. 1 John 1. 7. which overthrow forgiveness of sins for our
satisfaction, merit of glory by any Saints works, righteousness by works and
such other tenets as whereby Papists extol man, and debase the grace of God,
which will more fully appear by refuting the shifts of the Romanists in the
discussing of the following articles.

As for what H. T. says here, if the Church in communion with the Sea of Rome
were once the true Church, she is and shall be so for ever, if meant of the
visible Church militant (of which alone is the question) it must rest either on
this proposition, every true visible Church militant is and shall be a true
Church for ever, which is proved false by the instances of the Hierosolymitan,
Antiochian, Alexandrian, Ephesian, Corinthian and other Churches. Where there
are not now churches of Christ, but Mahometans, at least by this authors own
doctrine, they were not true churches while the Greek churches revolted from
the communion of the Roman which he mentions, p. 47. and it is manifest by
Christ's threatening, that he would remove the candlestick from them except they
did repent, Revel. 2. 5. Or else it rests on this, that every church in
communion with the Sea of Rome is, and ever shall be a true church: but there
is no privilege in Scripture to the church of Rome more than to other
churches, much less to every church that is in communion with the Sea of Rome;
yea it is said to the Roman church as well as other churches, Romans 11. 20, 21,
22. well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith.
Be not high minded but fear. For if God spared not the natural branches, take
heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of
God: on them which fell severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue
in his goodness, otherwise thou (even the Roman church to whom he then wrote)
also shall be cut off. However if it be proved that the church catholic
invisible of the elect and true believers cannot fail, and that a church
visible indefinite shall not fail, but be in some place or other more or less
conspicuous, in greater or smaller numbers; yet it is not proved that the
church militant definite of this or that place shall not fail, nor is there a
word in Scripture to prove this the privilege of the Roman church, or those
that are in communion with the Sea of Rome that they cannot fail nor err in
faith: nor do the words of Fathers rightly understood prove it. But Scripture
and experience do plainly refute it. What has been alleged is examined, the
rest will be in its place. I proceed to that which remains in this Article.

Object. The Catholic succession was one succession for the first five
centuries.

Answ. You may as well tell me of a white blackmore: a Catholic is not a
Protestant, nor a Catholic succession a Protestant succession. Who ever heard
of a Protestant Pope? The Catholic church was always governed by a Pope in the
first five centuries, as now it is, and has defined our tenets and condemned
yours, as you have seen. It is the very essence of a Protestant (as a
Protestant) to protest against the Catholic church, as Lutherans and you have
done.

To this I reply, To an objection of such moment as this is the answer, is but
mere trifling. For he knows, that we mean by catholic succession, not that
which he calls catholic succession, to wit of Popes of Rome, but that the
teachers, who are reputed catholic, whether of the Greek or Latin churches,
who have succeeded one after another in the five first centuries of years from
Christ's incarnation according to the account now used, taught not the doctrine
now professed in the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, or in the Tridentin canons,
but that in all or most of the points in difference between Protestants and
Papists they taught the doctrine, which Protestants now hold, which has been
proved by Jewel and many other Protestant writers. And in this sense it is no
more absurdity to call a Protestant a catholic, then to call a spade a sapde,
a straw a straw. Protestants are truly Catholics, Papists are but falsely
called Catholics affecting the name, as some that were of the Synagogue of
Satan said they were Jews, and were not, but did lie, Revel. 3. 9. and
impudently claiming that which they have no right to, that they may be it as a
stalking horse catch ignorant people, who are taken with shows and confident
talk, being unable to sift out truth and discern it from pretenses. A Catholic
succession is in true construction a Protestant succession, and the Popes of
Rome it self Protestant Popes, teaching in such writings as remain not the now
Papal doctrine, but in the main the Protestant, though by some of them
excessively magnifying their See, and promoting rites of men's invention way was
made for the after corruptions of the Papacy. The term Pope was in former times
given to other Bishops, Presbyters, yea and Deacons too besides the Bishop of
Rome, though now the title is appropriated to him, who deserves not the name of
Papa or Father, as it was heretofore used as an honorable title of the
reverend and godly teachers and officers in the church of God, nor any other
way I know, except it be in the sense in which an Italian said of Innocent the
eighth, Octo nocens pueros genuit totidemque puellas:
Hunc merito poteris dicere Roma patrem:
Many of whose predecessors and successors have made it their work to advance
their bastards, rather then beget children to God by preaching the Gospel. It
is a notorious falsehood, that the catholic church was always governed by a
Pope in the first five centuries, if he mean by Pope a Bishop of Rome. Its
manifest by many instances, that the African and Asian churches were not
governed by him in the second, third, fourth and fifth centuries, since they did
oppose him, as appears by the contentions between Victor and Polycrates and
others. That which we have seen in H. T. or Bellarmin or any other writer of
the Popish party, has not yet made it so much as probable, that the Catholic
church has now defined the now Roman tenets, or condemned the Protestants, nor
is it of the essence of a Protestant, as such, to Protest against the Catholic
church, but against the errors and abominations of the now Roman party. Nor
has H. T. or any other proved, that the Protestant teachers protest against
manifest revealed verities, and the very fundamentals of the Christian faith,
however they do protest against the fundamentals of the new Popish faith, the
Popes monarchy, transubstantiation, etc.

H. T. adds, St. Augustine, St. Hierom and many others are divided in their
opinions, whether Linus or Clement immediately succeeded Peter. Answ. Be it so,
yet they all agreed in this, that the succession was morally continued, to
which it is a thing indifferent whether Clement immediately succeeded him, as
he well might being his scholar, or first Linus, then Cletus, and then Clement,
which is now the more common opinion of the church.

I reply, what he means by [morally continued] I understand not, nor know I any
sense of that speech, which serves to take away the force of the objection,
which is, that if it be uncertain who succeeded Peter immediately, then the
tradition of the church unwritten, or not written in the Bible is uncertain,
and that too in a main point which is fundamental with the Romanists, the
succession of their chief Pastors, upon which the truth of their church and the
rule of their faith depends, and consequently the rule of the Romanists whereby
to know what we are to believe has a mere sandy foundation, not being
sufficient to build a divine and firm faith upon; and the Protestants are no
more to be blamed than the Romanists, if they do not so exactly set down and
prove their succession of Bishops as the Papists require, since the Papists
themselves are deficient in their own catalogue, and if the Protestants can
prove their faith out of Scripture, though they prove not such a succession as
is demanded, they may as well be concluded a true church as the Roman, which
answers the two first Articles of H. T. his Manual of controversies. Besides
the most ancient tradition they have, to wit Irenaeus l. 3. adver. haeres. c.
3. says that Peter and Paul founded the church in Rome, and then delivered the
Episcopacy of the church to be administered to Linus, which was done in their
life time, and so Linus did not succeed Peter as Bishop of Rome, for he was
Bishop while Peter lived, and so if Peter died Bishop of Rome there were more
Bishops together, and Irenaeus makes them successors of Paul as well as Peter;
nor were they successors to them as having the same office with them. For they
could not be Bishops of particular places fixed there as now the term is used,
it stood not with their commission, which enjoined them to go into all the
world, and to preach the Gospel to every creature, nor were they successors to
them in their Apostleship, for that particular office ceased with the first
Apostles. So that the truth is, this conceit of succession is but a vain
conceit, though it be much magnified by H. T. and other Romanists for want of
solid proof of their several doctrins out of Scripture or primitive antiquity.
I go on to the next Article.

ARTIC. III.
Popish Church visibility not necessary.
Such visibility of Succession, as the Romanists require, is not proved to be
necessary to the being of a true Church.

SECT. 1.
Exterior Consecration and Ordination of Ministers is not necessary to the
being of a visible Church: what H. T. requires of Ministers preaching and
administering Sacraments is most defective in the Roman Church.

Our Tenet, says H. T. is, that the Catholic and Apostolic Church of God
has had not only a continued, but also a visible Succession from Christ to
this time, etc. which we prove thus, 1. A Society of men which has always in
it exterior Consecration and Ordination of Ministers, preaching, baptizing,
and administering Sacraments must of necessity be always visible. But the Church
of Christ is a society of men which has always in it exterior Consecration
and Ordination of Ministere. Therefore the Church of Christ must of necessity
be always visible. The Major is proved by evident reason, because those are all
outward and sensible actions, which are inconsistent with an invisible society
of actors. The Minor is proved by Scripture, Go ye, teaching all Nations,
baptizing them, etc. And, Behold, I am with you all days, etc. St. Matthew. 28.
v. 20. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, and other some
Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.

Answ. THe Tenet and the Conclusion of the Argument differ, the Tenet asserting
what has been, the Conclusion what of necessity must be; the Tenet having for
its Subject the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of God, the Conclusion the
Church of Christ indefinite, and both Tenet and Conclusion is granted, but not
in this Author's and other Romanists sense. It is granted, there has been a
Succession, but not a continued number of Bishops, Priests, and Laics,
succeeding one another in the profession of the same Faith, (meaning the now
Roman) from Christ and his Apostles to this time, which H. T. in the former
Article makes the Definition of Succession. And visibility of each particular
Church is granted, but not of the Catholic as Catholic, which as such is to
be believed, not seen. And this visibility it is granted to be of some at some
times, not in the same splendour or conspicuity at all times, nor to all
persons. But Protestants deny it visible always to all in so glorious and
conspicuous an estate, as Bellarmine asserts, when he says in his Book de
Eccles. Milit. cap. 2. That the Church is an Assembly of men so visible and
palpable as is the Assembly of the People of Rome, or the Kingdom of France, or
the Commonwealth of the Venetians: so that we might grant his Tenet and
Conclusion, were it not that fraudulently there is more intended than is
expressed, which is needful to be discovered. For answer to it as it is the
Major is granted, if it be understood of visibility simply, but if meant of
such a conspicuous visibility as the Romanists assert, it is to be denied. In
the Minor it is to be observed, 1. That a distinction is made between exterior
Consecration and Ordination, which I judge to be done, that thereby may be
implied the distinction of Bishops (who are consecrated, not ordained) from
Presbyters, (whom they ordain, not consecrate) to have been always in the
Church of Christ, which is not right. 2. That it is asserted that the Church of
Christ is a society of men, which has always in it exterior Consecration and
Ordination of Ministers, which is, because he holds a true Church has always
such Ministers. But as I said before, that is not true, no not in the Church of
Rome in the vacancy of the Sea, which has been sometimes long, and therefore
it is not necessary to the being of a true Church, that always the exterior
Consecration and Ordination be continued, and if it may be intermitted, one,
two, or ten years, and yet the Church a true Church, it may be an hundred; and
therefore the Minor is not to be granted, if meant of exterior Consecration and
Ordination of Bishops distinct from Presbyters, and such a perpetuity as is
without the least intermission, nor do any of the Texts prove it. For the
Precept Matthew. 28. 19, 20. proves only it ought to be, not that it shall be;
and the Promise, if it do prove that a Succession shall be, yet it does not
prove such a Succession as shall have exterior Consecration and Ordination, but
such assistance in Preaching and Baptizing as shall uphold and prosper them in
that Work: nor is this assured to any one place, but indefinitely to any
persons in any place where this Work shall be continued. And the other place
Ephesians 4. 11, 12. proves not a certainty of the event, which is asserted in the
Minor, but if the Gift be meant of Institution of what ou^ht to be, it notes
only a certainty of Duty, if of Donation of Abilities it notes not an exterior
Consecration and Ordination, but an act to be immediately from Christ himself,
or by his Spirit, and so does not prove a futurity of such Succession by
outward Consecration and Ordination as H. T. brings it for.

Nevertheless this Author does disadvantage his own party by this arg^ing. For,
1. by this arguing he plainly makes the marks of the Church by which it is
visible, Preaching, Baptizing, and administering Sacraments, which does by good
consequence infer that the Protestants do rightly make the Preaching of the
Word, and the administering of the Sacraments the notes of the visible Church;
which will make well for the Protestants, by whom these are observed; but ill
for the Ministers of the Roman Church, chiefly the Bishops of Rome, who neither
preach, nor baptize, nor administer Sacraments, but do other acts of other
kinds. Nor, to speak truth, is almost any of their Preaching the Preaching of
the Gospel, but the Rites of the Roman Church, extolling the Virgin Mary, and
other Saints excellency, little of the Gospel, or if any part of it, it is
likely the History of the Gospel in an historical fashion, little of the
mystery; but in stead thereof such Doctrines of humane satisfactions, for sin,
merit, of good works, are preached, as do overthrow the Gospel. And for
Baptizing, though Bellarmine tells us, lib. 2. de bonis oper. in partic. cap.
17. that at Rome the old Custom is not abolished of Baptizing the Catechumeni
at Easter, but among the Papists chiefly in the City of Rome there is no year
in which many catechized persons are not baptized at Easter: yet the truth is,
there is no right Baptism almost throughout the Churches under the Papacy,
there being nothing but watering of Infants with some frivolous Ceremonies, no
immersion or plunging into the Water after Profession of Faith, as was in the
primitive times, and is the only Baptism Christ appointed, Infant-sprinkling,
perfusion, or dipping, being mere Innovations begun after the Apostles ages,
and being only by unwritten tradition (as their own learned men confess)
conveyed to the Church, not instituted by Christ himself. And for administering
the Lords Supper, he that reads their Missals or Sees, their Mass, may easily
discern, there is not that done by them which Christ appointed, but such a
change there is in it from Christ's institution, as that it cannot be termed* a
Sacrament of Christ, but a mere ridiculous or abominable device of men, more
like a Play than a religious service. 2. When they say that the Church has
always exterior Consecration and Ordination of Ministers, they necessarily put
themselves upon it, to prove that it has been so in the Roman Church, which
they can never prove to have been always in the Roman Bishops, much less in
their Priests, the Records of their Consecrations and Ordinations being in many
respects either none or very doubtful, at best but humane testimony which is
fallible, and if these were certain, yet their own Canons make many things
necessary to their Sacraments, specially that sottish conceit of the Trent
Council, that the Minister of Sacraments must intend to do what the Church
does, without which there is a nullity in what is done; and yet it is
impossible to be proved; and so many things according to their Canons nullify
their Ordinations, as Simony, and other irregularities, of which nevertheless
their own Writers accuse a great number of their Bishops and Priests, and
sometimes one Pope has made void the Acts of another, and in despite has cut
off his fingers which did ordain Priests, as Platina relates in the life of
Stephan the sixth concerning the usage of Pope Formosus; besides this the
Ordination of their Priests is to sacrifice for quick and dead, which is no
part of the Ministerial Office which Christ required, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. which
being considered, if this be the note whereby the true Church must be proved,
no Church in the World has less proof for its truth than the Roman; but the
Exceptions will be so many against their exterior Ordination and Consecration,
as will by their own Canons and arguings prove the Roman Church to be no true
visible Church at all; and so this Argument will be retorted on H. T. Let us go
on to his second Argument, only taking notice that he uses the term
[Ministers] which other Papists do deride in the Protestants.

SECT. II.
Isai 2. 2. Matthew. 5, 14. Psalm. 18. (with us 19.) 4. prove not such a
Church-visibility as H. T. asserts, nor the words of Ireneus, Origin, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Augustine.

A Light, says H. T. always shining to the World, and a City so seated on a
Hill that it cannot be hid, must needs be always visible. But the Church of
Christ is a Light always shining to the World, and a City so seated on a Hill,
that it cannot be hid, therefore the Church must needs be always visible. The
Major is manifest by the very terms. The Minor is proved by Scripture; The
Mountain of the House of our Lord shall be prepared on the top of Mountains,
Isai 2. 2. You are the Light of the World, a City seated on a Hill cannot be
hid, St Matthew. 5. 14. He has put his Tabernacle (his Church) in the Sun, Psalm.
18. 4.

Answ. THough the Conclusion might be granted in some sense, yet in the sense
meant by the Romanists it is denied, and in the Argument the Minor is to be
denied, and to the proof of it, it is denied that the Texts produced prove it.
Not the first. For though the Prophecies, Is. 2. 2, 3. be meant of Christ and
the times of the Messiah, yet, whether by the Mountain be meant Mount Sion
properly, or the Church, or Christ, or the Apostles; it is certain, that it is
meant of that time, wherein the Gospel was at first preached, to which sense
Hierome expounds it, and the exaltation of the mountain of the Lords house is
in respect of the first promulging of the Gospel, (in respect of which, neither
at first, nor now is Rome exalted above the Hills) and therefore it is not
meant of every particular Church visible, nor of such conspicuity in government
and outward appearance as the Romanists maintain. The second Text Matthew. 5. 14.
is particularly meant of the Apostles, and such Preachers of the Gospel as
continued that Work with them, or after them, and does not foretell what shall
be, but declares what they were in existence or duty rather, and their
conspiracy is in respect of the Preaching of the Gospel. But this is not spoken
of every particular, or the whole Church militant at all times, as if it were
so visible, as that every Christian might know where to address themselves to
them, and have resolution from them in their doubts. The other Text is less to
the purpose, speaking of a Tabernacle for the Sun, not a Tabernacle in the Sun,
the Suns Tabernacle, not Gods, put in the Heavens, (not on earth) as Hierom
reads according to the Hebrew, although the Septuagint and Vulgar read, as H.
T. and Augustine in his allegorical way expound it of the Church. But it is
frivolous upon Augustin's conceit in his Enarration on the Psalms to infer a
Tenet from a place that has quite another grammatical sense, which is only
argumentative.

As for the sayings of Fathers, the words of Irenaeus lib. 4. advers. Hoeres.
cap. 45. are not, that every true Church of Christ has such a continued
Succession, and so visible, as that every Christian may discern where to repair
to it, but only in opposition to heretical Teachers tells us, God has set
other Teachers in the Church, than those he there opposes.

Origen's words Hom. 3. on Matthew, show what was in his time, not what must of
necessity be, and are meant of brightness of doctrine or truth, not of outward
glory in a conspicuous rule and state like some flourishing Empire.

Cyprian's words de unit. Eccles. are less to the purpose, being not concerning
the visibility, but the unity of the Church, but in neither for the Romanists
purpose. The words are thus, Cut off the River from the Fountain, and being cut
off it will be dry; so also the Church clothed with the light of the Lord
spreads its beams through the whole World, yet it is one light, which is every
where diffused, and yet the unity of the body not separated.

Chrysostom's words Hom. 3. on Isai 6. are, that the Church is more rooted than
the Heaven, and then adds, let the Greeks learn the power of truth, how it is
easier that the Sun should be extinguished, than that the Church should (...),
that is not as H. T. renders it be obscured, but vanish away, as the words
following show, which are, Who had these things? He that preaches has
founded, the Heaven and the Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away. Whence it is manifest, that he there speaks not of the Churches
visibility, but permanency as the Sun.

Augustine lib, 3. cont. Parmen. cap. 5. tom. 7. against the Donatists says
thus, Who therefore would not sit in the assembly of van^^y, let him not become
vain in the type of pride, seeking the Conventicls separate from the unity of
the just of the whole world, which he cannot find. But the just are through
the whole City, which cannot be hid, because it is seated on a Mountain, that
Mountain I say of Daniel, in whom that stone cut out without hands grew and
filled the whole earth. And after, There is no security of unity but in the
Church, declared by the promises of God, which being seated, as was said, on a
Mountain, cannot be hid: and therefore it is necessary that it be known to all
parts of the earth. By which it is manifest, that in opposition to the
Donatists, appropriating the Church to their party, he asserts it to be
manifest, not by its outward splendor, but its extension to all parts. The
words l. 2. cont. Petilian. c. 104 are thus: Ye are not in the Mountains of
Sion, because ye are not in the City seated on the Mountain, which has this
certain sign that it cannot be hid, therefore it is known to all Nations, but
the part of Donatus is unknown to many Nations; therefore it is not that
Church. It is evident he spoke of the Church at that time, which was known or
manifestly visible to all Nations, not from a potent Monarchy in one City, but
its diffusion through all parts of the world.

SECT. III.
H. T. has not solved the Protestants Objections against the visibility of the
Church.

H. T. adds, Objections solved. Object. The Church is believed, therefore not
seen. Answ. She is believed in the sense of her Doctrines, and to be guided to
all truths by the Holy Ghost, but seen in her Pastors, Government, and
Preaching; wherefore I deny the Consequence.

I Reply, Though Protestants deny not the Church militant to be visible in the
outward Government and Preaching of the Pastors, yet they deny that it is
always so conspicuous as that it may be known to every Christian, as an
Assembly of the People of Rome, or Commonwealth of Venice, to which all may
resort for direction. Nor by this Argument do they prove that the Church
militant is not visible, but that the Church in the Creeds Apostolical and
Nicene, which is one Catholic and Apostolic, as such, is not visible, but
invisible, being the Object of Faith, not of Sight: nevertheless the Answer
takes not away the force of the Objection, if it had been alleged against the
visibility of the Church militant. For the Church is believed, not as teaching,
but as being, it is the existence of the Church, not the Doctrine of it that is
believed, as even the Trent Catechism expounds it: now that being Catholic,
that is according to the Catechism, consisting of all believers from Adam till
now in all Nations, cannot be the object of sense, but of faith; and therefore
the Catholic Church in the Creeds is the invisible of true Believers, not the
mere visible now militant.

H. T. adds, Object. The Woman (the Church) fled into the Wilderness, Apoc. 12*
6. Answ. But is followed and persecuted by the Dragon, v. 17. therefore visible.

I reply, this Answer is ridiculous. For whereas Protestants hence prove, that
at some times the Church is hid from men, this Author says, It was not hid
from the Dragon, that is, the Devil, which is not in question. So that it
appears he had nothing to answer this Inference, from the Woman's flying into
the Wilderness, and being hid, that sometimes the Church is so hidden as it
were in a Wilderness, that though it be, yet it is not so visible or
conspicuous as that men can discern it so as to repair to it, howbeit the Devil
knows where they lurk.

Yet once more H. T. Object. The Church of the Predestinate is invisible. Answ.
There is no such thing as a Church of the Predestinate. Christ's Church is the
congregation of all true believers, as well Reprobate as predestinate. There is
in his Floor both Wheat and Chaff, St. Matthew. c. 3. and in his Field both Corn
and Tares, which shall grow together till the Harvest (the Day of Judgment)
St. Matthew. c. 13. The Predestinate are as visible as the Reprobate* It is true
indeed, their Predestination is invisible, and so is also these men's
Reprobation.

I reply, To salve their main Tenet of the Popes being Head of the Church of
Christ, who is often so wicked as that, if the Church of Christ be determined
to be of elect persons only, many Popes cannot be termed Members, much less
Heads of the Church, is this audacious Assertion invented, that there is no
such thing as a Church of the Predestinate, contrary to express Scripture,
which mentions the Church of the firstborn written in Heaven, Heb. 12. 23. and
the Church elected together with Peter, or those he wrote to, 1 Pet. 5. 13. and
says such things of the Church in many places, to wit, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23, etc. as cannot agree to
Reprobates, who cannot be said to be Christ 's body, his fullness, to be loved,
sanctified, whom he nourishes, intends to present without spot, as he says
there of Christ's Church. He that desires more proof may read Dr. John Rainold
his fourth Conclusion, where he proves it fully, both from Scripture and
Fathers, that the holy Catholic Church which we believe is the whole company
of Gods elect and chosen, which has not been yet answered that I know. Nor do
I see how the fourth Lateran Council could mean otherwise, which determined, as
H. T. says here, art. 1. page 30. that the universal Church of the faithful
is one out of which no man can be saved, which can be true only of the Church
of the Predestinate. As for what H. T. says here, The Church of Christ is the
congregation of all true believers as well Reprobate as Predestinate, it
supposes true believers may be reprobate: but this is false, meaning it of the
truth of being opposite to feigned, counterfeit, or in show only. For our Lord
Christ has said, John 5. 24. and John 3. 15, 16, 18, 36. that such as believe
on him shall not perish, come not to condemnation, are passed from death to
life, have everlasting life. Nor do the Texts Matthew. 3. 12. where the Floor is
not Christ's Church, but the Jewish people, or Matthew. 13. 30. where the Field
is expressly interpreted verse 38. to be the World, not the Church, speak to the
contrary. It is true, The Predestinate are as visible as the Reprobate, but
they are not merely visible believers as some Reprobates are, who profess
faith, which they have not. But the true Church of Christ against which the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail, Matthew. 16. 18. contains only such believers
as have that faith which is true, and that Election of God, which with their
faith are invisible, and so are rightly denominated the invisible Church from
that which is more excellent, and the Reprobate have not.

ARTIC. IV.
One Catholic Church not the Roman The Church of Rome is not that one
Catholic Church, which in the Apostolic and Nicene Creeds is made the Object
of Christian Faith.
SECT. I.
Unity in non-fundamentals of Faith and Discipline is not essentially
presupposed to the Universality of the Church Militant.

H. T. to his fourth Article gives this Title, The true Church demonstrated by
her Unity and Universality; and then says, Unity being essentially presupposed
to Universality, I thought it not improper to join these two in one Article.

Answ. IF this Author had meant to deal plainly, he should have told us what
Unity is essentially presupposed to Universality, and how the true Church is
demonstrated by her Unity and Universality. Unity in general is so far from
being essentially presupposed to Universality in general, that the contrary
seems more true, that one is not universal, Unity not consistent with
Universality, it being in effect as if i^ were said, One is many or all; yet I
deny not some unity in special may be essentially presupposed to some
universality in special. There are many sorts of unity which Logicians and
Writers of Metaphysics reckon up, in respect of which it is certain, that the
true Church of Christ cannot be said to be one, as it cannot be said to be one
with generical or specifical unity; for that is not essentially presupposed to
universality of time and place, but is abstracted from it. But he seems to mean
unity in Doctrine, Discipline, and Faith, by the words following. Universality
likewise is manifold, as Logicians and Writers of Metaphysics show, as there
is an universality of predication, of essence, and existence. Now this Author
seems to mean universality of existence for time and place, and his meaning is
this, that unity of Doctrine, Discipline, and Faith, is essentially presupposed
to universality of existence for time and place: that is, that Church which
has not the same Doctrine, Faith, and Discipline, which all Churches of Christ
in all times and places have had, is not the true Church of Christ, and that
which has is the true Church of Christ. Now these Propositions I grant, if
meant of Doctrine, and Faith in the Fundamentals, but not if meant of mere
outward Church Discipline, or Doctrine, and Faith in points not fundamental,
having learned from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. that some may build
Hay and Stubble, that is, some errors upon the foundation Christ, who yet may
be saved: which they could not be, if they were not of the true Church of
Christ, or, that is no true Church of Christ, which consists of such. In like
manner, the Apostle Romans 14. 2. expressly tells us in the Church of Rome, one
did believe he might eat all things, and another did eat herbs, one esteemed
one day above another, others esteemed every day alike, and yet God received
them both, and they were Gods servants, v. 3, 4, 5. And that in Discipline
there may be disagreement, yea, Schism, and disorder, is apparent from the
Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1. 11, 12. and 51. and 6. 7. and 11. 17, etc. and 14.
26. and 15. 12. who are termed the Church of God, 1 Cor. 1. 2. And therefore
without distinction and due limitation (which this Author omits) his Position
is not true. But let us view what he writes.

SECT. II.
The antiquity of H. T. his saying of the Roman Church its unity and
universality is showed.

Now, says H. T. that the church of Rome is both perfectly one, and also
universal for time and place is thus demonstrated.

Answ. HEre again this Author deals sophistically, putting the Roman church
for the true church, as if they were the same, and not explaining what he means
by the Roman church, which may either^ signify the church that is in Rome,
which is the expression of the Apostle, Romans 1. 7. or the Church where ever it
be, which holds the Roman faith. And this Roman faith may be either the faith
in all points which now at this day the Bishop, and Priests, and People,
dwelling at Rome hold, or which the Christians at Rome held in the days of
Paul, and some Ages after. If it be meant in this this last sense, the true
Church is no more the Roman church than Corinthian, nor so much as the
Hierosolymitan, whence all churches received the faith: if in the former sense,
the term is not according to the ancient use either in Scripture or ancient
Ecclesiastic Writers, though I conceive it so meant by this Author. To be
perfectly one is also ambiguous: it may be meant either that they have not the
least disagreement in Doctrine, Discipline, and Faith, or they hold the same
Faith and Doctrine in the main, or points fundamental. To be universal for time
and place, may be either meant thus, that the persons now termed the Roman
church are universal for time and place. But this is contrary to sense, it
being known by it, that they were born within a certain definite time, at
certain definite places, not in all times, and every place existent: or that
the faith which now the Romanists hold, is that which in all times and places
the true church of God has held. And this we deny if it be meant of the
Articles in Pope Pius the fourth his Creed, and are willing to put all our
controversies to this issue. But H. T. looks quite awry from this, as will
appear by viewing his dispute, which is thus.

SECT. III.
Unity under one visible bead without division in lesser points and discipline,
is not proved from 1 Cor. 10. 17. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. John 10. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 10.
Act. 4. 32. John 17. 11. and the Nicene Creed.

H. T. says The argument for unity. The church of Christ is one body, one fold
or flock (of which he himself is the supreme invisible head, and the Pope his
deputy on earth the visible or ministerial) But the Roman Catholic church and
no other is this one body, one sold or flock; therefore the Roman Catholic
church and no other is the church of Christ. The Major is proved, We are one
bread and one body as many as participate of one bread. 1 Cor. 10. 18. He has
made him (Christ) head over all the Church which is his body. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
There shall be made one fold and one Pastor. John 10. 16. I beseech you, that
you all speak one thing, and that there be no Schisms among you, but that ye be
perfect in one sense and one judgment. 1 Cor. 1. 10 The multitude of believers
had one heart, one soul. Act. 4. 32. Christ prayed that his Disciples might be
one. St. John 17. 11. I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic church. The
Nicene Creed.

Ans. 1. THe thing pretended to be demonstrated by her unity, was the true
church, after he changes it into this, that the church of Rome is both
perfectly one, and also universal for time and place is thus demonstrated, here
the conclusion is the Roman Catholic church and no other is the church of
Christ. By comparing of which it is apparent, that this Author supposes the
true church, the church of Rome, and the Roman Catholic church to be
synonymous or diverse names of the same thing, which is supposed but not
proved, nor yielded, nor can be true, as shall be showed after. 2. This Author
pretends to demonstrate by this argument, the church of Rome to be perfectly
one, which should have been his conclusion, whereas not heeding his words he
makes it the Minor. 3. He puts in by a parenthesis in the Major many words
which are not in the Minor, though they belong to the middle term, which should
be the same in both premises: nor is any proof brought for them here; to wit,
that the Pope is Christ's deputy on earth, the visible or ministerial head of
that church, which is one body, one fold or flock. 4. That the Major might be
for his purpose it should have been thus; that church which is one body, one
fold or flock (of which he himself is the supreme invisible head, and the Pope
his deputy on earth the visible or ministerial) and no other is the church of
Christ, but such is the church of Rome, ergo. But as it is now framed it is in
the second figure of all affirmatives, which is against Logic rules, and makes
the syllogism naught, as the very freshmen know. But to it as it is now framed
I answer. If the words [and the Pope his deputy on earth the visible or
ministerial] be left out, the Major is granted in this sense, that the
universal church of Christ are one body by unity of one spirit and faith of the
fundamentals, and one flock by unity of one head, and supreme Pastor. But in H.
T. his sense it is most false, that it is one by the same faith in every point
without any difference in lesser points, or without any divisions in rites and
discipline, and in subjection to one universal Bishop on earth, as Christ's
deputy and the churches visible head. Nor do any of the texts prove it in this
sense. For the first does not express what all Christians were in respect of
their state; but profession, and the unity is not derived from either
subjection to one universal Bishop on earth, or agreement in all points, but
from participating of one bread in the Lords Supper. For it is not to be read
as this Author after the vulgar translation reads it [as many as participate of
one bread] but [for we all partake of one bread] it being in Greek (...) and in
some copies of the vulgar [nam omnes] as in the Plantin edition by the Lovain
Divines 1574. I find it in the margin: so that the meaning is this, we do show
our selves one body, one bread, forasmuch as we all partake of one bread in the
Lords Supper.

The next text, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. proves only that the church is one body by
unity of one head, to wit Christ, as H. T. rightly interprets it. And the third
text, John 10. 16. also makes the whole church one flock (as it should be read)
not one fold, in respect of one Pastor, which the very words, ver. 11. 14, 15,
16. do show plainly to be Christ himself, who gave his life for them, and no
other; and therefore none of these texts derive the unity of the church from
subjection to the Bishop of Rome as visible head or chief Pastor. The next
text, 1 Cor. 1. 10. does only prove that the church ought to be of one mind and
one judgment without Schisms, not that they are, or must be, if they be the
true church, but the text proves the contrary, that they may be a true church
though there be Schisms, and difference of judgment among them. The fifth,
Acts 4. 32. only proves that the church at Jerusalem once were so (at which
time they had also all things common, which doubtless H. T. will not say must
or does agree to the whole church at all times) but not that the whole church
shall be so still. The last, John 17. 11. is a prayer of Christ that it may be
so, and so will be accomplished, but by the words, ver. 21, 22, 23. it seems
most likely not to be till they be consummate in glory; or if before, yet
certainly the unity cannot be meant of unity in every thing; for so Peter and
Paul did not agree, as Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. it appears, but of such unity in
communion with God, and aiming at his glory, as is only in the elect by virtue
of Christ's indwelling by his Spirit: which is nothing to the unity which H. T.
here requires as peculiar to the Roman church. The passage of the Nicene creed
proves only an unity of the church, but not an unity by agreement in all points
and subjection to one Catholic Bishop on earth. So that H. T. after his
fashion cites many texts, but not one for his purpose.

SECT. IV.
It is notoriously false that the Romanists are perfectly one, or have better
unity, or means of unity than Protestants, and H. T. his argument for the truth
of the Roman church from its unity proves the contrary.

H. T. adds. The minor is made evident (even to the weakest understanding) by
the present manifold Schisms and divisions, which are now among Protestants and
all other Sectaries, as well in doctrine as government, whereas Catholics are
perfectly one both in discipline and doctrine, all the world over, even to the
least Article or point of faith, being all united to one supreme invisible
head, Christ Jesus, and all subordinate to one visible and ministerial head,
the Pope his Vicar on earth; we all resolve our selves in points of faith into
one safe and most unchangeable principle, I believe the holy Catholic church,
we look on her as the immediate and authorized proponent of all revealed
verities, and the infallible Judge of controversies; God himself being the
prime Author, and his authority the formal motive and object of our faith.

Answ. 1. The Protestants are not Sectaries nor divided from the Catholic
church, but from the now Roman party, who are really a faction divided from the
Catholic church holding a new faith never established till the Tridentin
council, though with an impudent face H. T. avouch a most palbable falsehood of
the Romanists universality, and arrogates to the Roman the title of Catholic
church. Nor are the now divisions of Protestants in doctrine or government such
as cut them off from the unity of the Catholic church, they own Christ their
head, and faith in him, which is sufficient to save them, and even by this
Authors next argument, enough to make them members of the Catholic church. 2.
The Schisms and divisions of the Papists have been and are as great as the
divisions of the Protestants. In former ages there were many Schisms even in
the church of Rome between the several Popes at one time, and the factions
among the people about Popes and Emperors and other quarrels. Onuphrius
reckons up thirty. Bellarmin himself twenty six Schisms one after another,
sometimes one Pope condemning what another had done, and excommunicating and
persecuting Emperors, Antipapes, and all that have adhered to them. Besides
the contentions about the Virgin Mary's immaculate conception, about the
superiority of a council above the Pope, about Priests marriages, election of
Popes, investiture of Bishops have been so great, and frequent, and of long
continuance, as their own histories show, that they far exceed the Protestants
divisions. The divisions in this last age, and some at this day, to wit, in and
since the council of Trent between Catharinus, Soto, Vega, Andradius about
certainty of salvation; Pighius and others about inherent righteousness, the
Spanish and other Bishops and the Papalins about the divine right of Bishops
and their residence, not deriving their Episcopacy from the Pope; the French
churches not acknowledging the Bishop of Rome above a council, nor yet
receiving the Trent council: the two Popes Sixtus the fifth and Clement the
eighth, about the vulgar translation both enjoining each of their editions and
no other, as the right copy to be received under penalty of a curse, though one
in many places contradict the other (as Dr. James in his Bellum Papale shows,
from which no Papists have or can vindicate the two Popes) the divisions in
England and Ireland between the secular Priests and the Jesuits about Episcopal
jurisdiction and visitations, between Papists in Italy, at Venice, and in
England about the Popes power in temporal things over Princes, in France and
England about the lawfulness of killing Kings excommunicated by the Pope, in
England and France about Jesuitical equivocation, at this day between
Dominicans and Jesuits, Jansenists and Mol^nists about Gods predeterminations,
efficacious and sufficient grace, and man's freewill have been and are at this
day as great or greater in respect of the things in which they differ, the
continuance of them, the parties differing and their bitterness one to another,
then the Protestants divisions, and therefore the brag of H. T. concerning the
Popish unity, that Catholics are perfectly one both in discipline and doctrine
all the world over, even to the least article or point of faith, is a falsehood
apparent to all well read scholars, though the simple English Papists, from
whom the truth of these things is concealed, are made to believe by their
Priests disguises and pretenses as if it were so. Nor does that which H. T.
here says, salve the matter, and if it did, the Protestants have as good a
plea for themselves, notwithstanding their divisions, in respect of means for
unity. For, 1. The Papists all the world over are not so subordinate to the
Pope as to acknowledge his superiority to a council, but that they have and
think they may appeal from the Pope to a general council, which may judge the
Pope an heretic and depose him, yea and take away the Pope altogether if they
see it necessary, nor do the Jansenists acquiesce in the late Pope Innocents
determination at this day, nor do the Sorbonists in France acknowledge the
Popes power in temporals, or the Venetians the Popes power to interdict their
state and meddle with their government in exempting Ecclesiastics from their
jurisdiction. 2. That which he says of the Catholic church as the immediate
and authorized proponent of all revealed verities, and the infallible Judge of
controversies is either nonsense or false, or that which Papists reject in
Protestants. If they mean by the Catholic church the Pope, or the Pope with
his Cardinals, or a council, it is ridiculous nonsense to call any or all of
them the Catholic church, which, according to their own Tridentin Catechism,
contains all believers from Adam to this day, or that shall be hereafter, and
according to this Author, p. 59. is coexistent with all times, and spread or
diffused over all places: or if it be understood according to good sense, it is
most false. For the Catholic church properly so called as it is in the Creed,
is neither mediate nor immediate proponent of all revealed verities, much less
authorized thereto, nor do Papists so look on them. For many of the Papists go
no further than the present Pope or council, or their Priests, (who only are to
most the immediate proponents) but rest in their determinations and adhere to
what they determine with an implicit faith and blind obedience, never
enquiring what all believers have held or done before them. Nor is it possible
they should have resolution from the Catholic church properly understood as in
the Creed it is believed: for it is invisible, they never did together express
their determination in all points of faith, have varied in many, nor could it
be known to others of their own time if they had, much less to the believers of
this age. Nor is the Catholic church fit to be the mediate or immediate
proponent of all revealed verities, nor fit for such an authority as to be
infallible Judge of controversies: for to say the Catholic church is such, is
to say the university of believers is such, of whom a great part are women, a
great part ignorant persons altogether incapable of such an office: yea it is
contrary to the Apostle Paul's resolution, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29. who tells us, that
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, then Prophets, thirdly
Teachers, not the church to be teachers, which is all one with proponents of
revealed verities, but teachers in the church: and these are denied to be all
the church, when he says, ver. 29. Are all teachers? And to make them
infallible is contrary to the Apostle. Romans 3. 4. where he says, let God he
true, and every man a liar, surely then not an infallible Judge of
controversies: yea should this be granted, it would bring all confusion into
the churches of God. Nor can the speech have any good sense, that the Catholic
church is Judge in controversies, but this which Protestants indeed rightly
teach, that every man is to judge for himself, not for others with a judgment
of discerning what doctrine or points of faith he hears, and receives, yet
requiring upon pain of damnation that they be careful in examining what they
embrace, which the Papists do so much inveigh against falsely, as if it were a
leaving every man to his private spirit, though they do in this no otherwise
than Papists must of necessity, yield to each man when the determinations of
Popes and councils are ambiguous, as they were in the council of Trent, and are
often in the Decrees, Breves and other edicts of Popes, as is manifest by the
writers on the Canon law, and disputes about the councils and Popes meaning, in
which are so many ambiguities that there is scarce a point in which there are
not many opposite opinions. If Pappus have overcounted, who reckons out of
Bellarmin alone two hundred thirty seven contradictions in Popish writers; yet
he that reads Bellarmins controversies, shall find very few questions, in
which the Schoolmen and other Papists do not gainsay each other. And as for
their resolution into the principle, I believe the Catholic church. They are
not agreed what the church is from whom they may have resolution, whether the
Pope, who is with them the church virtual, or a general council, which is
either never, or very rare, which they call the church representative, or the
uniform consent of the Fathers, according to which only the profession of faith
of Pope Pius the fourth requires all Papists to receive and expound the holy
Scriptures: and yet this uniform consent of Fathers is either a nullity, it
being scarce found in any point, or it is impossible to be known. H. T. by his
words page 108. resolves his faith into the next precedent age and so upwards,
and here page 30. into the church, and this church is, page 70. not the whole
church (which yet is all one with the Catholic) but a council approved by the
Pope, into whose authority they finally resolve their faith; for though they
pretend to resolve it into the Scripture, yet as it is expounded by the church,
page 109, 113. which is the Pope. So that whatever pretense they make of
resolving their faith into the church as the proponent, or God as the Author;
in conclusion they acquiesce in what the Pope dictates by himself or with a
council approved by him. As for the Scriptures the Papists are not all agreed
which be the Canonical Scriptures, which not: nor can they set down certain
rules to know what are the unwritten traditions of the church, which they are
to admit and embrace with a like affection of piety as the written Word, as the
Trent council decreed, sess. 4. nor can they have any bottom to rest on by
their principles; sometimes one Pope and one council crossing another, some
having been condemned in general councils as heretics: nor can they tell, but
by information of others, as Priests or Carriers, of their Bulls or Breves
(which are many of them not only fallible, but also false, as some of their own
have complained) what the Popes determine, and what fraud is used in procuring
Popes Bulls or Breves sometimes is many ways testified, as that the Bull of
Pius the fifth, wherein Queen Elizabeth was excommunicated and deprived, was
gotten in a fraudulent way by Morton and Webb; Watson quodlib. p. 252, 260, 343.
there is no certainty from the reports of others what the Pope determins,
except a man hear him preach, or pronounce sentence, or see him write and seal,
he must rely on the testimony of those that may* and are like enough to
deceive. Nor if a man see or hear the Pope decree, can he be certain whether he
spoke from Peter's chair, or determine what is to be believed by the whole
church (out of which case they say he is fallible) or give his opinion as a
private Doctor. So that it is most false, that either Papists agree as H. T.
says, or resolve themselves into one safe and most unchangeable principle, or
have any infallible judge of controversies, or have God himself for the prime
Author, and his authority the formal object and motive of their faith: but
their faith in what they differ from us rests only on men's sayings, for the
most part ignorant and wicked (for such have been most of the Popes for a
thousand years) whom they follow against the plain and confessed words of the
Scripture, as in their communion under one kind, worshipping of Images, and
ascribe to them power by their authority to declare new Scriptures and Articles
of faith, and make the Scripture only to be believed because of the churches
determination, that is the Popes, which in respect of us they make of more
authority than the Scripture, and so make the churches, not Gods authority, the
formal motive and object of their faith. So that if unity be a note of the
church, of all others the Popish church can lay least claim to it, and H. T.
his argument may be retorted. The Catholic church is one, the Roman church is
not one, therefore the Roman church is not the Catholic church. On the other
side the Protestants have better unity and means of unity than Papists. For
however they differ in ceremonies and discipline, yet in points of faith they
differ little, as may appear by the harmony of their confessions, which shows
agreement in their churches; however in explication of points private Doctors
differ, and they have a more sure principle and safe in owning one Master even
Christ, and one certain rule to know the mind of God, to wit the holy
Scripture, which the Papists themselves make the object of faith, and the
translation into the English tongue makes plain in the chief points to be
believed, so that every ordinary man may be certain what it delivers concerning
them, and this translation appears to be certain in those things, by comparing
it even with the Papists own English translation at Rhemes and Dow^y, which had
they left out their corrupt Annotations and permitted it to be read (as God
requires) by all sorts of persons, the falsehood and errors of Popish Priests
would soon appear, and be rejected by all that love truth.

SECT. V.
The argument of H. T. from the unity of a natural body, is against him and for
Protestants.

But H. T. adds a second argument for the unity of the Catholic church thus.
As a natural unity and connection of the parts among themselves, and to the head
is necessary for the being and conservation of a natural body: so the spiritual
unity and connection of the members amongst themselves and to the head, is
necessary for the being and conservation of a mystical body. But the church of
Christ (as I have proved) is a mystical body. Therefore a spiritual unity and
connection of the members amongst themselves and to the head, is necessary for
the being and conservation of the church of Christ. The Major is proved by the
parity of reason, which is between a natural and mystical body; for as a
natural body must needs dye, if all it is parts by which it should subsist be
torn and divided one from another; so also a mystical body perishes, if all
it is members be divided from one another, and from the head (whence it has
it is spiritual life) by Schism and heresy.

Answ. THough it be that this argument is only from a similitude, which does
only illustrate not prove, as Logicians say truly, and there be such
disparities between a natural body and a mystical, as are sufficient to show
the weakness of this arguing; as namely, that there are no parts vital in the
mystical body besides the head, as the heart, liver and lungs are in the
natural, that some parts of the head it self may be cut off, as the ears, and
nose, and yet the being, though not the integrity of the body continue, that
there are some parts that have not life, as hair, and nails, (as some
conceive) that the parts receive not life from the head, but the head and the
rest from the soul: yet ^ith the conclusion is true, and the argument with its
proof many ways against the Popish tenets, I grant it, and observe, 1. That
the unity which is proved hence, is not of the universal visible church; the
truth of which Papists and this Author go about to demonstrate by it is unity,
but of the mystical. For in this mystical body the unity is spiritual by faith,
and the members have spiritual life from the head. But in the Catholic church
(of which the disputes are) according to Bellarm. l. 3. de eccl. milit. c. 10
etc. are many dead members, secret infidels: so that this argument proves not
the Catholic visible by it is unity, but the Catholic invisible of true
believers. 2. This argument is not to prove the unity of the church by
subjection to the Roman Bishop, by which H. T. would demonstrate the unity of
the church, but by the unity to that head whence the body has it is spiritual
life and motion, which sure is Christ only and not the Bishop of Rome. 3. This
similitude, if by [head] were meant the Pope, cannot evince the purpose of this
Author. For there have been Schisms in the Roman church of one Pope and his
party against another, and yet the unity of the Catholic church in the
profession of the ^ame faith continued. Whence it follows, that Schism does not
take away the unity of the church Catholic without heresy, but only disorder,
distemper and disquiet it. And therefore though it were granted (as it is not)
that Protestants were Schismatics in dividing from the Sea of Rome, yet they
might be united to the Catholic church, and it is being and conservation
continued as long as the unity of faith is continued, and until it be proved
that Protestants have departed from the unity of faith once delivered to the
Saints (which he can never do) in vain does H. T. go about to prove they are
not united, to the Catholic church.

SECT. VI.
The universality, which Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. Luke 1. 33. John 14.
15, 16. for time, Psalm. 85. 9. Isa. 2. 2. Matthew. 28. 20. for place is meant,
agrees not to the now Roman church, but better to the Protestants.

BUt H. T. proceeds thus. To be universal for time and place is nothing else
but to be coexistent with all time, and to be spread or diffused over all
places. But the church of Christ from the time he has founded it has been
coexistent with all time, and shall be to the worlds end, and has and shall be
spread over all nations, therefore the church of Christ is universal (or
Catholic) for time and place. The Major is proved because the definition and
the thing defined are convertible. The Minor is proved by Scripture for time,
St. Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. St. John 14. 15, 16. St. Luke 1. 33. For
place, Psalm. 85. 9. Isa. 2. 2. St Matthew. 28. 20.

Answ. 1. The conclusion should have been, the Roman Catholic church and no
other is the church of Christ, and the argument thus. That church which is
universal for time and place, and no other is the church of Christ. But the
Roman Catholic church and no other is universal for time and place, therefore
the Roman Catholic church and no other is the church of Christ. But so the
Major had not been true of any church existent in one age, nor the Minor true
of the present Roman church* but it is contrary to all sense and histories
which relate the occurrences of the world, specially in the churches of Christ.
2. As the argument is framed here by H. T. the conclusion is granted being thus
understood, that the church of Christ is not confined to Israel only, but
extended to all Nations indefinitely and aptitudinally, though not definitely
and actually extended to every Nation. For some nations never were actually the
church of Christ, nor any church of Christ among them, though there was no
restraint by Christ's command of preaching to them. But if it be understood of
actual coexistence with all times and all places so the Minor is not true: nor
the Major, as I conceive the meaning of the term [Catholick] in the Article of
the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic church: nor is that the definition of
the church Catholic, that it is actually coexistent with all time, and to be
spread or diffused over all places: but it is termed Catholic, because it is
not confined to one Nation, and comprehends all the believers of any Nation,
Jew or Gentile: nor do the texts he brings prove any other universality. For
Matthew. 28. 20. proves not such an universality, as that there shall be no
interval of time or particular place, wherein the church shall not be existent.
But that Christ would be with them that preach the Gospel all days till the
end of the world, so as that they had liberty to preach the Gospel in every
place, and should find his assistance while they did preach, not that always
in each day there shall be a Church of Christ on earth, much less that there
shall be a church visible conspicuously to all in every Nation of the earth.
The like is the sense of Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. which is, that Christ has given
various gifts till all come to the unity of faith: but this proves not there
shall be a continuance of the Church on earth in every age, much less so
conspicuously visible as that it may be known to all, much more less in every
place. John 14. 15, 16. is yet farther from the purpose as containing a
peculiar promise to the Apostles: if it be meant of any Church it is the
invisible of true believers, not of every or any mere visible Church, wherein
many have not the spirit of Christ at all, much less abiding with them for
ever. The text Luke 1. 33. does not prove that there shall be in every age or
time a Church on earth, but that Christ's dominion shall never end. The texts
Psalm. 85. 9. Isa. 2. 2. are thus meant, that not only the Jews, but also all
Nations, that is, all other people by faith shall be admitted to the Church of
God by faith as well as Jews; now this proves not, that there shall be in every
place on earth a Church of Christ. But H. T. adds.

I resume the Argument and make it thus. 1. That church which is not universal
(or Catholic) for time and place is not the church of Christ. 2. But the
Protestant church (and the like may be said of all other Sectaries) is not
universal (or Catholic) for time and place. 3. Therefore the Protestant church
is not the church of Christ. The Major has been proved before. The Minor is
proved, because before Luther (who lived little above ^ixscore years ago) there
were no Protestants to be found in the whole world, as has been proved by us,
and confessed by our adversaries. To which you may add, they have never yet
been able to convert any one Nation from infidelity to the faith of Christ, nor
ever had communion with all nations, nor indeed any perfect communion among
themselves: therefore they cannot be the Catholic Church.

Answ. The Major, That church which is not universal for time and place is not
the Church of Christ, If meant of actual or aptitudinal universality is not
true. For the church of the Jews before Cornelius was converted by Peter had
been no church of Christ, which was actually, yea and aptitudinally, that is
according to Peter's and other Christians circumcised their opinions and
intentions to be confined to the Jews: and therefore no other church than on
earth were or was believed by Peter and those who contended with him, Act. 11.
2. and yet there was a Church of Christ before, as is manifest from Acts 2. 47.
But if the Major be understood of universality of faith thus, That church which
is not universal for time and place by holding the faith once delivered by the
Apostles to the Saints is not the church of Christ, it is granted: but in that
sense the Minor is false, the Protestants church is universal for time and
place: that is, holds the same faith, which was in all places preached by the
Apostles and Apostolical teachers to believers. And in this sense Protestants
have been in every age before Luther, and have as really converted Nations from
infidelity to the faith of Christ as the Popish church or Teachers, and have
had more perfect communion with all Nations and among themselves then Papists,
as such, have had, and the Papists have not been so, but have held a new faith,
not embraced by a great part of Christians, nor in all places received or
known, nor for many hundreds of years taught in the churches, but lately by the
Italian faction devised to uphold the Popes tyranny and their own gain. And
therefore I retort the argument thus. That church which is not universal (or
Catholic) for the time and place, is not the church of Christ. But the Popish
Roman church is not universal (or Catholic) for time and place, but is of late
standing, therefore it is not the true church of Christ.

SECT. VII.
The words of Irenaeus, Origin, Lactantius, Cyril of Jerusalem, Augustine are
not for the universality of H. T. which he asserts the Catholicism of the Roman
church, but against it.

AS for the words of the Fathers, which H. T. allegeth on this Article, they
are not for H. T. his purpose to prove, that that is the only true church which
is subject to the Bishop of Rome, or that the Roman church is the Catholic
church, but they prove the contrary. For the words of Irenaem l. 4. adv.
haereses c. 43. are these. Wherefore we ought to obey those Presbyters which
are in the church, those which have succession from the Apostles as we have
showed, who with the succession of Bishopric have received the certain gift of
truth according to the pleasure of the Father: but to have the rest suspected
either as heretics and of evil opinion, or as renters and lifted up and
pleasing themselves, or again as hypocrites working for gain and vain glories
sake, who depart from the original succession and are gathered in every place.
For all these fall from the truth. By which it may be perceived. 1. That H. T.
omitted sundry words which would have showed that Presbyters and Bishops were
all one. 2. That Irenaeus requires that those to whom he would have obedience
given, be such as have not only succession of place, but also the certain gift
of truth. Whence it follows. 1. That this speech does not prove that we are to
obey only the Bishop of Rome, or the Roman Church, but any Presbyters. 2. That
the succession required is not confined to Rome, but extended to any place. 3.
That succession to any of the Apostles as well as Peter is termed original
succession. 4. That Presbyters who in any place depart not from the truth are
in the church. And therefore this place is so far from proving the necessity of
unity with the Roman church, or that it is the Catholic church, that it proves
the contrary.

The words of Origin are not for H. T. which require no other doctrine to be
kept, but that which is by order of succession from the Apostles, and remains
in the church to his time. For neither do they say, the church is only the
Roman church, nor that doctrine to be kept which remains in it, or that which
is delivered from Peter only, or by order of succession from his chair, or is
delivered by unwritten tradition: but that which is delivered any way from the
Apostles by succession in any place.

The words of Lactantius are less for H. T. which do not at all call the Roman
the Catholic church, nor say in it only is Gods true worship and service and
hope of life, but in the Catholic church, that is the Church of true believers
all over the world, as the words of Cyril of Jerusalem next alleged do show,
in which is nothing for H. T. or against us.

And for the words of Augustine in his Book de vera religione, cap. 7. We must
hold the communion of that church which is called catholic both by her own and
strangers, they are maimedly recited, Augustine saying, that we are to hold the
Christian Religion and communion of that church, not only which is named
catholic, but which is catholic, and is named catholic; and cap. 6. he
explains what is meant by Catholic church, per totum orbem valide lateque
diffusa, spread over the whole World firmly and largely, and of the Religion
which he terms the History and Prophecy of the temporal dispensation of the
divine Providence for the salvation of mankind to be reformed and repaired
unto eternal life. Whereby it may be perceived, that he neither accounted that
Christian Religion, which is about the Bishop of Rome's power, or any of the
Popish Tenets which Protestants deny, but the Doctrine of Salvation by Christ,
nor the catholic church the Roman only, but the Christian church throughout
the World, which consists of them, who are named Christians, Catholics, or
Orthodox, that is, Keepers of integrity, and followers of the things which are
right, as he speaks cap. 5. And for the words of Augustine, Epist. 152. that
whosoever is divided from the catholic church, how laudable soever he seems to
himself to live, etc. he shall be excluded from life, they are impudently
appropriated to the Roman church. For a few lines before Augustine declares
whom he calls the catholic church, that which is spread over the earth, which
is designed by the divine testimonies of holy Scriptures, which beginning from
Jerusalem increased in places in which the Apostles preached, and have written
the names of the same places in their Epistles and Acts, and was spread over
the other Nations. So that clearly Augustine tells us it was not the Roman
Church only which he meant by the Catholic, but also the Corinthian,
Ephesian, Thessalonian, and all the rest in the world. And therefore it is
apparent that neither this not any other Father understood by the Catholic
Church, the Roman only, and those who acknowledged the Bishop of Rome's
Supremacy, nor did they hold a necessity of union with it.

SECT. VIII.
That it is nonsense or falsehood to term the Roman Church the Catholic
Church, and the shifts of H. T. to avoid this Objection are discovered.

H. T. adds, Object. The Roman Catholic Church is a particular Church,
therefore it is not Catholic or Universal. Answ. I distinguish your
Antecedent, the Roman Church as taken only for the congregation of Rome or
Italy, is a particular Church, I grant: as taken for the whole collection of
Churches holding communion with the Sea of Rome, I deny it. For so it is an
universal Church containing all particular Churches, as all the parts are
contained in the whole, and in this acception also it is called the Roman
church, because the particular Roman church is the mother church, and has a
power of headship and jurisdiction over all the rest. Object. How can a church
of one denomination be universal? Answ. I have told you already by the extent
and latitude of her power, which is over all. So a particular man is called a
General, by reason of his power over all the Army.

I Reply, Protestants do rightly object, that the terming of the Roman church
catholic, is according to the right sense of words, to speak contradictions,
to call that the whole which is not the whole but a part, universal, which is
only particular. The Answer is by a Distinction, which is mere nonsense. The
Church of Rome as taken only for the congregation of Rome or Italy is a
particular Church, as taken for the whole collection of churches holding
communion with the Sea of Rome, so it is universal. But was ever such language
used by any Apostle or Ancient to term the Church of Rome any other than the
believers dwelling or being at Rome? Did ever any of the first Ages term the
congregation of Italy, or the whole collection of churches holding communion
with the Sea of Rome the Roman church? Paul when he wrote to the Church of Rome
wrote to all that were in Rome, Romans 1. 7. and Ignatius the Martyr when he
wrote to the Church of Rome terms it, the Church which is seated in a place of
the Region of Romans, and the old Councils termed the Bishop of Rome, The
Archbishop of old Rome, to distinguish it from new Rome, and a Roman Synod is
always meant of a Synod in the City of Rome. If the new-minted gibberish of
these men be received, then the Church of Millain, of Paris, of Toledo, and the
rest are all one with the Roman Church, and the Bishop of Millain, etc. the
Bishop of Rome. Who would not think that man crazed that should talk or write
so? By this kind of talk the Roman Church should not be one and the Corinthian
another, but the Roman church, the Corinthian, Ephesian, and all, and the
Apostle writing to the Corinthian should write to the Roman Church, charging
the Corinthian with Schisms should charge the Roman. But this new canting
Language is fit for these Juglers, who have by such terms bewitched silly
Papists to receive their new Doctrine.

H. T. says, As the Roman church is the collection of all churches holding
communion with the Sea of Rome, so it is an universal church containing all
particular churches as all the parts are contained in the whole.

I reply, Neither does he show any approved Author for his speech, nor what
sort of parts other particular Churches are as they are contained in the Roman
as the whole. He will not make it an universal whole which is predicate or said
on more churches, in quid, that is, when the question is what the more churches
are? to say they are the Roman. For then it were true to say, the church of
Naples is the Roman, and so of other churches. If any were asked who is in his
wits, What is the church of Naples? Would he say, It is the church of Rome? Nor
are other churches essential parts. For then the Roman church should not be, if
the churches of Naples, etc. were not: if they apostarize the church of Rome
cease to be. Nor will it be said, other churches are integral parts. For then
the church of Rome should be maimed, and be but half a church, if they revolted
from the faith or obedience to the Sea or church of Rome. What other parts he
means I understand not, nor do I think H. T. distinctly knows himself; but that
he is used to this unintelligible Jesuitical nonsense of Roman catholic
church. Sure before he made this the definition of catholic, that it is
nothing else but to be coexistent with all time, and to be spread or diffused
over all places: according to which, by terming the church of Rome catholic,
he should mean that the Roman church has been in all places since Christ built
this church, and in every place of the world: but both these are palpable Lies,
contrary to all Histories and sense: nor in this sense should it be as a whole
that has parts, but be the only and an ubiquetary church.

But he gives two Reasons of this Title, that it is the Mother Church, and has
power of headship and jurisdiction over all the rest. I reply, 1. that both
these are manifestly false. For the Roman Church is not the mother Church in
any true sense. It is a saying indeed, that God is a believers Father, and the
Church his Mother. But however the Ancients have used it, yet the Scripture
says not so, nor is it in any good sense true. For the church is but a
congregation of believers, who are first such a^ore they are a church: now then
the sense must be the church, that is, believers are the mother of believers,
that is, the church, which is ridiculous. It is true, it is said, Gal. 4. 26.
The Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all: but that
is the Evangelical covenant, v. 24. not the church. Nor is there any thing done
by the Church, or upon the church, from which in a meet resemblance the church
may be termed the mother of believers. They are the Preachers of the Gospel not
the church who bring forth souls to Christ. If the term [Mother Church] be from
hence, that from it the Gospel went forth, it can be meant of none but
Jerusalem, from whence the Gospel went into all the world, not from the Roman
church. Nor is it true, that the Roman church has the power of headship over
all the rest, no not according to the Papists own opinion, which is that the
Bishop of Rome has this power, and that it belongs to his pastoral office: now
I suppose they will not say the church has the pastoral office, or that they
are Pastors; if they should, they must make Women, who are of the Church as
well as Men, Pastors, and all the Believers (who are the church) Pastors as
well as the Bishop, and if the church be Pastors or have power of jurisdiction,
who are the Sheep who are to be fed, and over whom this jurisdiction is to be
exercised? But if they mean only by the church universal the Pope of Rome,
then all that is to be enquired is who is the true Pope, when enquiry is made
which is the true church, and when there is no Pope, then there is no church,
and when the Pope is uncertain, it is uncertain which is the church. So
ridiculous is the Papists talk and dispute about the church, that there is no
tolerable sense can be made with truth of the Roman church being catholic, the
mother of churches, having power of Headship and Jurisdiction over all
churches. Nor is it true, that the Pope of Rome has either of right or in
possession such power; not of right, as shall be showed art. 7. where it will
appear that the claim to it is merely impudent, and arrogant, without any
color of right; nor in possession. For besides the Protestant churches, the
Greek churches neither now nor heretofore, when unquestionably orthodox, were
ever subject to the Romish Bishop. Yet were these things granted to H. T. that
the Roman church were Mother and Head, is this a fit reason to term it
catholic? Will any call a mother of twenty children all her twenty children?
Will any man call Julius Caesar, because Dictator of Rome, or the Roman Senate,
because Rulers, all the Roman people, or all the people of that Empire? H. T.
his instance is frivolous: Though men call the Rulers of an Army the Captain
General, yet not a general man, or the universal Army; and sutably, if it were
allowed, that the Bishop of Rome were universal Bishop, yet in no good sense
could he or the Roman church be termed the universal church. But this talk
about the Roman catholic church is manifestly ridiculous nonsense or false.

H. T. adds, Object. You communicate not with us, and many others, therefore
your communion is not catholic or universal. Answ. I grant the Antecedent, but
deny the Consequent: For universal communion requires not communion with all
particular sects or persons, but only with all true believers, no, A man that
is an Heretic after the first and second admonition avoid. Tit. 3. 10, 11.

Answ. To catholic communion is requisite communion with all Christian
churches, though not with all particular sects. And that the Protestant
churches are no Heretics is manifest from their confessions, which agree with
the Scripture Doctrine; although Papists do clamorously term them such, and
destroy them as such, and therein show themselves Successors to Nero, not to
Peter; whereas Papists are the most manifest Schismatics, and greatest
Heretics that ever were. I pass on to the next Article.

ARTIC. V.
The Roman Church is neither proved to be the Catholic Church, nor the highest
visible Judge of Controversies, nor is it proved that she is infallible both in
her Propositions and Definitions of all Points of Faith; nor to have power from
God to oblige all men to believe her under pain of damnation: but all this is a
mere impudent and arrogant claim of Romanists that has no color of proof from
Scripture or Antiquity.
SECT. I.
The deceit of H. T. is showed in asserting an Infallibility and Judicature of
Controversies in the Church, which he means of the Pope*

H. T. entitles his fifth Article thus, The churches infallibility
demonstrated, and says, Our Tenet is, that the Roman catholic church is the
highest visible Judge of controversies, and that she is infallible both in her
Propositions and Definitions of all points of faith; having a power from God to
oblige all men to believe her under pain of damnation. And six pages after p.
70. he says thus, Note here for your better understanding this whole Question,
that when we affirm, the Church is infallible in things of faith, by the word
[Church] we understand not only the Church diffused over all the World,
unanimously teaching, whose Doctrine of Faith we hold to be infallible, but
also the Church represented in a Council perfectly ecumenical, (that is to
say, called out of the whole world, and approved by the Pope) whose Definitions
of Faith we hold to be infallible.

Ans. WE have here a most arrogant proud claim like that of the King of Tyrus,
Ezekiel. 28. 2, 3. I am God, I sit in the seat of God, there is no secret that
they can hide from me. For what is this less which is here ascribed to mere
men, often the worst of men, than the prerogative of the Son of God: surely
it is more than Angels have, Job 4. 18: But though this Author is bold enough in
the title and tenet, yet in his after note he has such subterfuges as show his
despair of making it good, and his deceitful mockage of his unwary reader. For,
1. He deals like a sophister that after his arguments states the question. 2.
He does so shift off this infallibility from one to another, that he knows not
well where to fix it. Fain he would fasten it on the Pope, as he does in a
manner at last; and Heart more plainly confesses with Rainold, chapter 7. divis. 7.
though it behove the Pope to use the advice of his brethren; and therefore I
spoke of Confistories, Courts and Councils; yet whether he follow their advise
or no his decrees are true. But then the arguments from Scripture and Fathers
which speak of the church, not of the Pope, had appeared to be impertinent.
Therefore he does not in plain words disclaim it is infallibility; but says,
When we affirm the church is infallible in things of faith, by the word
[church] we understand not only the church diffused over all the world
unanimously teaching, whose doctrines of faith we hold to be infallible.
Wherein you may perceive. 1. Egregious vanity, in making the Roman church
Catholic. 2. The Church diffused over all the world teaching. 3. Teaching
unanimously, which are all like a sick man's dreams of a golden mountain, there
having never been any such thing as this in the world, nor ever is likely to
be. 2. Egregious deceit in the terming this church infallible, Judge of
controversies, propounding and defining points of faith, having power from God
to oblige all men under pain of damnation to believe her: which is merely to
delude silly Papists speaking of the churches power, which they place in the
Pope and so draw them into his net. For I would ask this H. T. where or when
the Catholic church diffused over the whole world distinct from an ecumenical
council did teach, much less teach unanimously, or how they know it? he will
certainly say, it has been in councils or the Popes determinations. Why then
does not this Author say plainly, the infallibility and judgment of
controversies is not in the Catholic church diffused over the world, according
to the meaning of the words (which were indeed to say all believers were
infallible) but say, he means not only, which is as if he had said, the
Catholic church diffused over the world is infallible, but not it only, when
he means it not to be infallible at all: nor does he deal better in placing it
in a council. For. 1. He supposes such a council perfectly Ecumenical called
out of the whole world, as never was nor is likely ever to be. 2. This council
he will not have to be infallible without the Popes approbation. 3. He places
the words [whose definitions of faith we hold to be infallible] so as that a
reader may conceive either he means the councils or the Popes definitions.
However it is certain he makes the council without the Pope not infallible, so
that the Pope has the negative voice. But indeed this Author or many of his
fellows at least hold, that if the Pope himself without a council define any
point of faith it must be received; yea Bellarmin says l. 4. de Pontifice
Romano. c. 5. if the Pope should err in commanding vices or forbidding
virtues, the church should be bound to believe vices to be good and virtues to
be evil, unless she would sin against conscience. So that however the church be
pretended, it is the Pope who is intended, who is masked under the name of the
church, but sometimes termed the Pastor of the Church, as if the same person
could be relative and correlative too, Pastor and Church both. And this one
person (as if all knowledge lay in his breast) must be the Judge of all
controversies of faith, though perhaps an infidel in heart, one of the greatest
perverters of the faith of Christ in the world, and the greatest offender, and
most justly accused of any in the world, being notoriously and horribly
vicious, and maintain manifest sins, (not only err in doubtful matters, as
Bellarmin would seem to limit his speech in his recognition) even these
monstrous sins, of breaking oaths and leagues, killing Kings, allowing
incestuous marriages, making and worshipping of Images, Yea though he be so
unlearned (as it is said of one) as not to understand Grammar, Pope Gregory the
great himself understood not Greek, Pope Zachary condemned Bishop Vigilius as
an heretic for holding Antipodes, though he be seldom a Divine, for the most
part a mere Canonist, whose very decrees, Breves and Bulls show such gross
ignorance and pervertings of Scripture, as a graduate in the English
Universities would be ashamed of, yet he must be Judge of controversies between
the most learned Divines in the world and in the most weighty points of faith.
Surely were not Papists either very silly or very Atheistical, or very much
bewitched with the Romish sorceries they would never be so sottish as they are
to trust to the Popes definitions in points of faith, but of any other most
suspect them, especially considering how much respect to their own gain and
greatness, how little to the good of men's souls is in all their
determinations. No marvail though different parties appeal to the Pope, yet
neither stand to his sentence, as of old have been seen in sundry points, and
as at this day in the late controversies between Jansenists and Molinists in
France.

SECT. II.
Luke 10. 16. proves not the Roman or Catholic churches infallibility.

BUt let us view the proofs that are brought by H. T. for his monstrous
assertion of the Roman Catholic (as he terms it) churches judicature of
controversies, infallibility in her propositions and definitions of all points
of faith and power from God to oblige all men to believe her under pain of
damnation: where first he brings four arguments for her infallibility. The
first is thus. No man by hearing (or believing) Christ can hear an error in
faith. But every man by hearing the church hears Christ, therefore no man by
hearing the church can hear an error in faith, therefore she is infallible.
The Major must be granted, otherwise you charge Christ to be the Author of
damning lies. The Minor is proved; he that bears you (the church) hears me,
and he that despises you despises me. St. Luke 10 16. The consequences are
both unavoidable.

Answ. 1. The conclusion is not the same with the tenet, which was that the
Roman Catholic church is infallible, but in the conclusion is no mention of
the Roman church more then of any other church, to wit, the Hierosolymitan or
Antiochian, and so that which was to be proved is not proved. 2. The Minor is
denied, and in the proof from Luke 10. 16. is with a shameless fraud foisted
in (the church) it being certain that at that time there was no Catholic
church diffused over the world, much less Roman church at all, to whom those
words of Christ could be directed, but by [you] are meant either the seventy
Disciples, or the twelve Apostles, as comparing, Luke 10. 16. with Matthew. 10.
40. makes it probable. Nor does Christ say, he that hears you hears me, and
he that despises you despises me in any case whatsoever, for then the high
Priests had heard Christ when they heard Judas (who was one of the Apostles)
offer and promise to sell Christ for money, and Peter when ^e denied Christ:
but then when the Apostles or seventy spoke the words and message of Christ. In
which case I grant the church of Rome and Pope, yea and Bishop of Jerusalem,
Corinth or any private Christian, though but a woman, are to be heard and are
infallible. So that this place is grossly abused for proof of the Catholic
Roman Churches, or ecumenical councils, or Popes infallibility in their
definitions of faith, till it be proved that they define what Christ did before
deliver.

SECT. III.
Matthew. 18. 17. or 18. 1 John 4. 6. Mark. 16. 15, 16. make nothing for H. T.
his claim of the Roman church, or Popes or ecumenical councils infallibility.

THe second argument is this. No man can be damned for not believing an error
in faith. But every man shall be damned for not believing the church, therefore
no man can believe an error in faith by believing the church. The Major is
proved, because otherwise God were a tyrant in damning us for not believing a
lie, which contradicts himself. The Minor is as evident; he that will not hear
the church let him be to thee as an heathen and a publican: so Matthew. 18. 18.
He that knows God hears us, and he that hears us not is not of God; in
this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. 1 John 4. 6. Go ye
preaching the Gospel to all creatures, etc. He that believes not shall be
condemned, St. Mark. 16. 16.

Answ. 1. The conclusion is not the same with H. T. his tenet, and so the proof
is in the same manner faulty as in the first argument. 2. The Minor is denied:
nor does any one of the texts alleged prove it or any thing like it, For, 1.
The text Matthew. 18 17, or 18. is not as this Author cites it [be that will not
hear the Church] as if it were an indefinite speech equipollent to this
universal [every man that will not hear the Church] without which H. T. proves
not his Minor, but thus [but and if he hear not the Church] restraining it to
the brother finning against his brother: And first, reproved singly. 2. Before
two or three witnesses. 3. Of whom the Church has been told. 4. And he does
not obey the Church. 2. The text speaks not at all of believing the Church in a
point of faith, but doing right to an injured brother. For the phrase of
sinning against a brother, ver. 15. can neither be meant of heresy, or error
in faith, no nor sinfulness in life, which is termed commonly (though for the
most part mistakingly) a public scandal, or scandalous practice, but only of a
particular injury, such as he, against whom the sin was, might forgive, as is
manifest from, ver. 21. and the parable following: whereas to forgive heresies
or errors in faith or public scandalous practices, is not in the power of a
private brother. 3. That by [the Church] is meant, the Christian Church is not
certain, since it is not as Matthew. 16. 18. [my Church] but [the Church] nor if
it were, can it be understood either of the universal Church diffused over all
the world, since it is impossible for every injured brother to tell his injury
to it, not of a perfectly Ecumenical council called out of the world; for
either there never was such a Church, or if ever there were it has not been in
many ages together. H. T. confesses, p. 7. 25. the second third and tenth ages
produced no councils. Nor if there were in every age or every year, could every
injured brother address their complaints to them. And the same may be said of
the Pope, sometimes there has been none for some years together, sometimes it
has been uncertain which was the true Pope, sometimes by reason of
persecutions and for other causes no access could be to him, sometimes the
wronged brother could not travel to him, nor he hear his cause. Nor is there
any direction to go to his legate, or any assurance that he can commit his
power to another, or that such a legate is infallible. Undoubtedly by [the
Church] Matthew. 18. 17. must be meant such an assembly, whether regularly
formed, or otherwise occasionally convening, which is of near access, and
which is fit to hear the cause and to determine. And I must confess that I
cannot deprehend that by [the Church] is meant the mere Ecclesiastical
authority, nor is here appointed that discipline Ecclesiastical, which is termed
the power of the keys, to excommunicate heretics and scandalous livers in the
Church, but a direction to a wronged brother how to deal in case of particular
injuries, the neglect of which the Apostle Paul blames so much in the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 4. Neither does [let him be to thee
as a heathen and a Publican] import excommunication out of the Church. For it
is said, let him be to thee, not to the Church, as a heathen or a Publican, nor
is any power at all therein given to the Church to excommunicate: all that the
Church is to do, is to enjoin what the injurious brother should do, that
excommunication which is here mentioned is appointed or permitted to the
wronged brother. Nor did the being a Publican exclude out of the Jewish
assembly or service, the Publican went up to the Temple to pray, Luke 18. 10.
Matthew a Publican was a Jew and had the privilege of a Jew though a Publican:
nor was a heathen, as such, damned, there were proselytes, as Corn^lius, who
were heathens, and yet were accepted with God: only the publicans and heathens
were such as the Jews would not have familiar arbitrary converse with, as Luke
15. 2. and 19. 7. Acts 11. 3. appears, and therefore the speech can have no
other sense but this: If thy brother who wrongs thee will neither right thee
after private rebuke, nor after rebuke before two or three witnesses, nor after
the monition of the Church, that is either that particular assembly of
Christians to which ye are joined, or some other competent number of Christian
brethren fit to hear such differences, then may thou shun his society in such
a manner as Jews are wont to shun heathens and publicans, by not going in to
them to eat, or inviting them, or other unnecessary society, that so they may
know how evil their dealing is and be ashamed and amended. Which is nothing to
that Ecclesiastical discipline or juridical excommunication which is at this
day arrogantly claimed by Popes even over Emperors, and by other
Ecclesiastical prelates for breaking their Canons: much less does this text
infer damnation to him that shall not hear the universal Church, or Ecumenical
council, or Roman Pope.

The other text, 1 John 4. 6. is less to H. T. his purpose. For it speaks not
a word of hearing the Catholic Roman Church, or universal, diffused over all
the world, or Ecumenical council or Roman Pop^, but of hearing the Apostles,
and other teachers of the Gospel opposite to false Proph^^s, ver. 1. who denied
Jesus Christ to become in the flesh, and of hearing them, not in every thing,
but in the doctrine of Christ's coming in the flesh.

And in like sort, Mark 16 15, 16. is a plain command to the Apostles, not to
the Bishop of Rome or an Ecumenical council, or the universal Church: for then
the Pope should be ^ound to leave his See, and the Bishops in a council to be
non resident, and go into all the world, and the Apostles are bid preach, not
Popes decrees or councils Canons, but the Gospel of Christ, and the threatening
of damnation is not to him that shall not believe the Popes decrees, or the
determinations of an Ecumenical council or universal Church, but the Gospel of
Christ, which reaches not them who deny the Popish doctrine of
transubstantiation, purgatory, humane merits, worshipping imag^^, not eating
flesh in Lent, Priests single life, and such other innovations as neither
Christ nor his Apostles taught: but such as believe not the doctrine of Jesus
being the Christ, and salvation by him alone. Whence it is apparent to any that
are not resolved to shut their eyes against manifest light, that none of these
texts do prove the infallibility of the Roman Church, or Ecumenical council or
Pope, but are impiously wrested to uphold the most cruel tyranny that ever was
in the world.

SECT. IV.
None of these texts Matthew. 28. 20. 1 Timothy 3. 15. Matthew. 16. 18. John 14. 26.
John 16. 23. Act. 15. 28. do prove the infallibility in points of faith of the
Catholic or Roman Church, or the Pope or a general council approved by him.

H. T. adds a third argument for the Churches infallibil^ty thus: If Christ be
always with his Church, and have made her the pillar and firmament of truth,
against which the gates of hell (heresies) shall not prevail, and given her the
holy Ghost to assist her to all truth, so that her definitions in an approved
general council are the very dictates of the holy Ghost, then is it impossible
the Church should err in faith: But all this Christ has done for his Church,
therefore it is impossible the Church should err in faith. The sequel of the
Major is manifest by the very terms of the supposition: the Minor is proved, go
ye teaching all Nations, etc. And behold I am with you all days (he is with
her teaching) St. Matthew. 28. 20. The house of God, which is the pillar and
firmament of truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. The gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. St. Matthew. 16. 18. He will give you another paraclere that he may abide
with you for ever, ^c. He shall teach you all things, and suggest to you all
things whatsoever I shall say to you (in all points of faith) St. John 14. 26.
He shall ^^ach you all truth (no errors) St. John 16. 13. It has seemed good
(say the Apostles in council) to the holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15. 28.

Answ. This Author still abuses his reader by putting his conclusion otherwise
then his tenet. For whereas his tenet was, that the Roman Catholic Church is
infallible* he puts his conclusion thus, [the Church is infallible] as if [the
Church] and [the Catholic Church] were all one, and [the Catholick] and [the
Roman] were all one, and [the Church of Christ] and [the visible Church
militant] were the same: which are indeed fallacies, which easily take with
silly or prejudiced Papists, that take what is said of the Church to be meant
of the visible militant Church, and what is said of the visible militant to be
said of the Catholic Church, and by the Catholic imagine the Roman meant, and
by the Roman the Pope. But to discover the vanity of this argument. 1. The
sequel of the Major is denied, nor is it manifest by the terms of the
supposition. For Christ's presence is with every believer, and he has made
every believer a pillar and firmament of truth, and against every true believer
the gates of hell (heresies) shall not prevail, and he has given the holy
Ghost to every true believer to assist him to all truth as well as to the
Church, and his definitions are the very dictates of the holy Ghost, when he
defines according to Scripture, and yet it is not impossible he should err in
faith. Christ has made promises of his presence and of his spirit, and his
spirit is said to be in and with every true believer, as well as the Church,
Romans 8. 1, 9, 15. 1 Cor. 6. 19. 2 Cor. 1. 22. and 13. 5. Gal. 4 6. Ephesians. 1.
13. 2 Cor. 6. 16. John 10 16, 27, 28, 29. and yet believers may err in faith,
Romans 14. 2, 3, 5. 1 Cor. 15. 12. Gal. 3. 1. and 4. ^0. 21. And therefore it is
not true, which this Author supposes manifest.

Not is the Minor tr^e or proved by the texts he brings. For the promise,
Matthew. 28 20. is not to the Church, but to the Apostles and other teachers, who
succeed them: nor is the promise made to them that they should teach no error
in faith: but that teaching (as H. T. speaks) or as long as they teach the true
faith, he would be with them by assisting and prospering them in their work.
The words, 1 Timothy 3. 15 may be meant of the mystery of godliness mentioned, v.
16. thus, the Mystery of godliness is the pillar and firmament, ground or seat
of truth, and without controver^ie great, which I do conceive after Cameron and
others to be the truest exposition, as the same Apostle in other places gives
such elogies to the great points of faith, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and 4. 9. and 2 Timothy
2. 11. and the conjunction (...) and ver. 16. does make it very probable. Nor
does Grotius his reason avoid it: For the mystery even according to this
exposition is the subject not the predicate. Others refer it to Timo^hy, but
then it should be in the accusative case. But let it be granted that it is
meant of the Church which is said, that it is the pillar and firmament of
truth, yet it is certain from the very words, that it is meant of that Church
in which Timothy was directed how to behave himself, which was the Church of
Ephesus, as appears 1 Timothy 1. 3. not the Church of Rome, and therefore must be
understood in such a sense as agrees to it: which the Papists themselves will
not say was infallible or could not err in faith. And therefore they must
yield it to be meant either of what they were in duty to be, or what they were
actually, thus they were such, as by profession and practice did hold forth,
and maintain and uphold the truth in those parts: not that they held nothing
but tenets, nor so held forth the truth, but that they might err and decay in
their holding out the truth. For it is certain they did so, Rev. 2. 4 5. Act.
20. 29, 30. The terms [the pillar and firmament, or ground or seat of truth]
are but metaphors, and whereas there are these two things signified by hem. 1.
The upholding of the truth, so as that otherwise it should fall. 2. The fixing
of the truth there, so as that it should abide and be permanent there,
doubtless the former sense cannot be true. For though God should have no
Church on earth or in heaven, no Apostle, Prophet, Bishop, yet his truth would
be upheld; his word is for ever settled in heaven, Psalm. 119. 89. Christ who is
the truth, John 14. 6. abides for ever, and the spirit of truth remains for
ever, and will uphold his truth. If it were as some of the Romanists say, the
Church only abode in the Virgin Mary at Christ's death, or as others say, in the
time of Antichrist there shall be no sacrifice, nor ceremonies, nor religion,
yet the Gospel of Christ shall be everlasting; as the Angel terms it, Revel.
14. 6. therefore of necessity it must be understood in that sense in which it
notes stability, permanency, fixednesse or abiding, and the sense is, the
Church is the company among whom the truth abides unshaken, in which sense
Revel. 3. 12. it is said, him that overcomes will I make a pillar in the
Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out. And so (...) is used, 1 Cor. 7.
37. for steadfast, and 1 Cor. 15. 58. (...), steadfast, unmovable are made
synonymous, and Col. 1. 13. (...), grounded and settled in the faith, (...) not
moved away from the hope. So that the meaning is no more but this, the Church
of the living God is not a tile which is often shaken and blown down with the
wind, but a pillar that abides unshaken, and the seat or ground or basis of
truth, where it abides being received and embraced by it. Which is to be
understood of the invisible Church of true believers; and though not of every
truth, yet of the main truth of the Gospel, as it is termed, Gal. 1. 5. the
Word of truth, James 1. 18. the truth, John 17. 17. which is expressed in the
next words, 1 Timothy 3. 16. from which he foretells an Apostasy, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and
cannot be meant of any truth whatsoever which may be in controversy. For it is
certain no mere mortal man, nor all men, were ever so infallible. Which being
rightly understood makes nothing for infallibility in all points which the
Catholic Roman Church, Ecumenical council, or Pope, or all together shall
define, as H. T. would have it. The next text, Matthew. 16. 18. is as little to
his purpose. For it is not said against the Roman Church, much less it is said
against an Ecumenical council or the Pope of Rome, the gates of hell shall not
prevail, but against my Church, that is, Christ's wheresoever. 2. Nor is it
proved, that by the gates of hell are meant heresies as this Author supposes.
The truth is, however by the modern use the term [hell] is appropriated almost
to the place of the damned and the tormented there, yet the word [(...)]
translated [hell] is either never or not many times used in the bible for that
place or those persons, nor was of old the word [hell] appropriated to that
place of torment, but meant of the grave or the state of the dead, in which
sense it was meant of old that Christ went into hell, that is for a time to
abide among the dead, as the learned Usher proves in his answer to the Jesuits
challenge, chapter 8. and the gates of hell are no more than the gates of death or
the grave, as Isa. 38. 10* Psalm. 9. 13. etc. is meant. So that the meaning of
Matthew. 16. 18. is no more but this, the gates of hell, or the grave, that is
death, shall not so prevail against my Church, but that I will raise it up at
the last day to life eternal, as our Lord Christ speaks, John 6. 39. Which
being the genuine meaning, it is true only of the church of the elect, not of
the mere visible, nor of that is such a prevalency denied, but that they may
err in faith, however it be assured that it shall not err in faith finally to
perdition.

The next Text John 14. 26. is ill translated, [shall suggest to you all things
whatsoever I shall say to you] the words being (...), that is, he shall mind
you of all things which I have said to you: nor is this meant only in points
of faith, as this Author adds, without any reason in the Text, that he might
restrain it to them, in which he would have the church to be accounted
infallible, but also in matters of practice; and this is meant only of the
Apostles, as the words [which I have said to you] and particularities expressed
verse. 25, 28, 29. chap. 15. 27. chap. 16 4, 6, 12, 13. show. And in like manner
is the next Text, John 16. 13. appropriate to the Apostles, to whom the words
were spoken. Nor are the words restrained to matters of faith, but extended
also to points of practice, and there is a promise of showing them also things
to come. Which argues plainly, that it is not a promise to the whole Church, or
Pope, or Council, or every particular believer, since it is certain that to none
of these it is verified, they have not things to come showed to them according
to that promise, and therefore it must needs be impertinently alleged by H. T.
to prove his Minor.

The last Text Acts 15. 28. H. T. himself confesses was said by the Apostles
in council, not by Peter only, nor by a council without the Apostles, much
less by any Bishop of one City as Rome is, and therefore proves not any
unerringness in any but the Apostles, nor in them at all times in all points of
faith, but only their not erring in their determination at that time. So that
his Texts do none of them prove his Minor.

SECT. V.
There may be good assurance of the Word of God and its meaning, and of our
salvation without supposing the churches infallibility.

H. T. adds, The consequence is confirmed, because were not the Church
infallible in things of faith, we could have no infallible assurance at this
distance, what were the Word of God, what not, or what is the true sense and
meaning of any one Book, or Chapter in the whole Bible, nor consequently of our
salvation, since without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.

Answ. H. T. Has here vented a most poisonous and impious speech, which tends
to ruin the Foundation of Christian Faith, and to promote Atheism, yea in
seeking to promote the arrogant claim of the Roman Bishop he does by his
arguing quite pull it down. For if there be no infallible assurance without the
churches infallibility in things of faith, what is the Word of God, what not,
nor what is the meaning of one Book or Chapter in the whole Bible, then there
is no certainty but from the Churches testimony of the truth of Christian
Religion, and that being questioned we have no way to convince an Atheist, or
Jew, or Ma^om^tan, who deny such in^allibility: nor has the Pope any way to
prove his Supremacy or Transubstantiation to be certain points of Faith, but by
the Churches infallibility, that is indeed his own saying, in which he that
believes him upon no better ground is departed from faith in God to faith in a
confes^edly sinful, and often times notoriously wicked man, and so makes not
God's authority the formal mo^ive and object of his faith, as H. T. said page
58. falsely the Romanists do. Besides how injurious is it to God to make him to
have delivered his mind so as none can understand it without the Pope or a
Council approved by him, of whom, according to H. T. his Doctrine, who says,
page 202. that sense cannot judge at all of substance though it be under
sensible accidents, there is no certainty, whether they be men or not, if we
cannot judge of substance by sense. Surely Christ did very ill to direct
Infidels to search the Scriptures, John 5. 39 and never to repair to the Church
to be resolved in points of faith, if H. T. say true. How much does he abase
the credit of the Scripture, who makes it to depend on men's (for such is the
Churches pretended infallibility) report, and ascribes it to Popes and
Councils, who do often contradict themselves and one another, which is only to
be had from God and his Word? What is this but as in another case Tertullian
said of the Roman Senates decreeing who should be worshipped as God, God shall
not be God unless man will, so Gods Word shall not be his Word unless man will.
Which is so much the worse in H. T. who Art. 8. ascribes that assurance to
unwritten tradition (of which there is no assurance but from men confessedly
fallible, as shall be showed Art. 8.) which he denies to be from Scripture, as
if the obscure tradition of unknown persons from Age to Age were more certain
than the great written tradition received from Apostles by the whole Church.
Besides, how does he reckon of all other besides Popes and Councils, as if they
were all idiots and fools, that they can understand no Chapter of the Bible
without the Pope, who has been sometimes altogether unlearned? What Blockheads
would he have men think themselves after all their study of Languages, and
Arts, and of the Scripture, that yet they cannot be certain what is the true
sense and meaning of Matthew. 4. Acts 8. or any other Chapter in the Bible,
unless the Church, that is the Pope, tell them? Why do not all their
Commentators, and Preachers first ask the Pope of the me^ning of the Scripture
before they by writing or preaching take on them to expound it? Why does not the
Pope forbid them to expound till they have consulted him? Will ^e permi^ them
to teach that of which they have no infallible assurance? Why does he tie men
to follow the consent of Fathers, as Pope Pius the fourth in his Bull did, if
the Fathers yield no infallible assurance of the true meaning of any Chapter in
the Bible without the Churches, that is, the Popes or his Counsels
infallibility? How did it come to pass that the Fathers Chrysostom, Hi^rome,
etc. did so well expound the Scriptures as that their consent must be the Rule
of modern Exposition? Did they first consult the Church, or the Church them?
Pope Damasus I believe had more help from Hierome to expound Scripture by, than
Hierome from D^m^sus? Have the Popes any better means to expound Scripture by
than the Fathers? or the Fathers than other learned men in these days? Wherein
did any of the Fathers exceed Cajetan, Arias Monta^us, and such learned
Romanists or any of all the Popes after the Apostles days in ability to open
Scripture? Would not such men as these secretly disdain and smile in scorn, if
any should prefer any of the best Expo^itions of Popes before their own? Will
the Jansenians or Molini^^s think either the late Pope Innocent or the present
Pope Alexander more infallible in their E^positions than themselves? I trow
not; so little is the pretended infallibility of the Church esteemed, when it
touches themselves, however they make a great noise of it against Protestants,
yea some Papists have well preferred the Expositions of later Writers before
the Fathers, and Councils, and Popes, giving this for a Reason, that later
Writers have had more help in that they have had their own abilities and
diligence to boot for finding the meaning of Scripture, besides the Fathers
Writings, and may see farther than they did, as a Child set on a Giants
shoulder, as Banner did fitly express it Do not at this day the learned
Expositors reject the Expositions of Fathers, and Popes, and Councils? Does not
Maldonat the Jesuit expressly reject in his Comment^ry on John 6. 53. the
Exposition of that Verse by which Pope Innocent, Augustine and many of the
Fathers following, held the giving the Eucharist to Infants necessary to their
salvation, which the Council of Tren^ it self does condemn? So sottish a
conceit has H. T. here vented, that doubtless none but the ignorant sort of
Popish Proselytes can believe him in, if they do not resolve not to seem to see
what they do see.

But were it granted that the Church were infallible, I would fain know how H.
T. can demonstrate who or which is that Church which is infallible, or give
assurance at this distance from Rome, that this or that point of faith is thus
determined by that infallible Church. Will he make every Priest, or Legate, or
Register of the Pope to be infallible? If not, let him tell me how he is
infallibly assured that Pope Innocent the third, or the Lat^ran Council did
define Transubstantiation, or Pope Leo the tenth and the last Lateran Council
the Popes Supremacy. If he say by universal tradition, or the Records which are
kept and are to be seen, and the agreement of opposite parties, (though in the
points named there are none of these means which do give such assurance of
those determinations as is given by them of the Scriptures) sure me thinks H.
T. (who makes such determinations to be assuredly theirs upon such or the like
Reasons of their credibility) should yield that there is more assurance from
these (without the infallibility of the Church) of the holy Scriptures, being
Gods Word, and the true sense and meaning of it. Will H. T. be more unbelieving
than a Jew who acknowledges the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and Prophets, to
be Gods Word? Will he not allow that to a Christian which the Jew had, to wit,
assur^nce infallible, from Micah 5. 2. that the Messiah should be born at
Be^hlehem, without the Churches infallibility? Will H. T. think he can make
such men as Arias Montanus, or Cardinal Caj^tan, and other learned Romanists
believe that they are not certain of the Gospel of Matthew to be Gods Word, or
of the true sense and meaning of the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh
Chapters thereof, without the Churches declaration? Did they gather their
Expositions out of Popes Decrees, Canons of Councils, or examine them by them?
Does not he know that in many places those and other learned men have
interpreted Texts otherwise than Popes and Councils approved by him have
expounded them? Do not they know that such an attempt would be but an exposing
of Popes and Councils to contempt, and make their Canon Law appear ^idiculous?
What unmercifulness and carelessness of men's souls is there in Popes, Councils,
Churches, if they are infallible, that in the space of sixteen hundred years
they have not given us such a Commentary on the Bible as may take away all
doubts from inquiring Christians about the true meaning of the Scripture, and
determine all controversies in points of faith? Sure it is fitter work than to
enrich their kindred, advance base sons, give audience to Ambassadors* over-aw
Princes and Emperors, subdue the holy Land. About which Popes and Councils
have wasted a world of blood and treasure, when perhaps one Protestant or
Popish commentator has profitably illustrated the whole Bible. Why does H. T.
with his colleagues, if they believe what he says of the infallibility of the
church to be true, petition the Pope to do this, or call a council, and at last
together do it? To what purpose should any else but Popes and councils study
the Scripture, compare copies, revise Translations, examine Interpretation, if
there be no assurance in points of faith of the meaning of the Scripture,
without the churches infallibility? But alas! how far from infallibility Popes
are, and of all men the unfittest to do any thing in this kind, the shameful
disagreement between Pope Sixtus the fifth and Clement the eighth their
Editions of the vulgar Latin Bible does abundantly declare, as may be seen in
Dr. James his Bellum Papale; whereby it may be perceived how miserably and
perpetually the souls of Christians must fluctuate and be tossed up and down,
and at last drowned, if they have no assurance of the meaning of Scripture, but
from this pretended infallibility of the church, which is no better to stay a
Soul than an anchor of cork to stay a ship. I abhor therefore justly this
blasphemous speech of H. T. whereby the souls of men must be brought to waver
in faith, if they receive it, and not only sinful, but also the weakest and
worst of men (for such they confess many of the Popes have been) idolized by
ascribing that to them which is proper only to him who cannot be deceived, nor
deceive. And I protest, that should the Pope and his Consistory, or general
Council, and all the Churches of the World conspire together to say, that the
Books of Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms, of the four Evangelists, Paul, James,
Peter, Jude, and John, are not the Word of God, yet I am assured not only by
tradition of the Jews and Christians, but also by the very confessions of
Adversaries, and chiefly by the matter of them, which shows it self to come
from God, the Spirit of God giving me a discerning understanding thereof, that
they are the Word of God, and that the meaning of them is in the main points of
faith, as the Articles of the Creed express concerning one God and one Lord,
his Incarnation, Preaching, Crucifying, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, coming
to Judgment, the holy Spirit, the Church of God, forgiveness of sins by faith
in Christ, Resurrection of the body, and life eternal: which I know by
understanding the meaning of the words, and thereby am assured that neither is
the Popes Supremacy, nor his and his Councils infallibility, nor his power of
granting Absolutions, and Indulgences by his Bull, nor the Transubstantiation
of Bread into Christ's Flesh, nor the worshipping of Images, nor a Purgatory
fire after Death in a part of Hell, nor communion under one kind, nor
Invocation of dead Saints and holy Angels, nor Prayer in an unknown Tongue, nor
Justification by Works, nor good Works meriting eternal life, of condignity
taught in them. And if I did think I were to doubt of any of these Assertions I
should turn Sceptick, and doubt whether there were a Moses, or David, or
Solomon, or Mahomet, whether I knew the meaning of their words, yea whether
there be such a City as Rome or Trent, such a man as the Pope, such a Council
as the Tridentin, such Canons as are said to be theirs, or such a Creed as is
said to be by Pope Pius the fourth required to be confessed by Romanists, or
that the meaning were as H. T. conceives; in a word, I should begin to doubt
whether I hear what I hear, should affirm any thing, make any Confession of
Faith, but think my self to be in a Dream when I write, talk, eat, drink, hear,
or do any acts of a living waking man.

As for assurance of our salvation, the denial of which H. T. counts an
absurdity, I am glad to read it, and that thereby he gives some occasion to
question whether he believes the Doctrine of the Trent Council, Sess 6. chap.
9. That no man can know by certainty of Faith, which cannot be false, that he
has obtained the grace of God. But for my part, as I know that the Doctrine of
the Romanists is inconsistent with it self, when they teach that the Priests
Absolution and ministering Sacraments does give infallibly Grace and Remission
of Sins, and yet that a man cannot be certain with certainty of faith that he
hat^ obtained Grace. So I am inf^llibly assured without any Popes, or Councils,
or Churches determination of my salvation through faith in Christ Jesus by the
Spirit of adoption, and hope to please God by faith in Christ, though I reject
Popes, Councils, Churches, Decrees, or Canons, which are not from the holy
Scripture, but unwritten tradition or invention of men, many of them being most
foolish and ridiculous toys and abuses of Scripture, more like Mahome^'s
Alcoran, than the Oracles of God.

SECT. VI.
Neither can the Church oblige men under pain of damnation to believe her
Definitions of Faith, nor is there any such judicature as H. T. asserts to be
ascribed to her: nor do any of the Fathers cited by H. T. say it is, but the
words of Irenaeus, Cyprian, lib. 1. epist. 3. August. con^. Epist. Fund. cap.
5. etc. are showed not to be for it, but some of them plainly against it.

H. T. has one more Argument for his Delilah, the Churches infallibility,
which is his fourth and last, thus, The Church has a power from God to oblige
all men under pain of Damnation to believe her in her Proposals and Definitions
of Faith. But she could not have such a Power from God unless she were
infallible in her Proposals and Definitions of Faith. Therefore she is
infallible in her Proposals and Definitions of Faith. The Major is proved by
all those Texts above cited in the first and second Arguments, as also by the
Councils of all Ages, which command all men under pain of Damnation to believe
and subscribe to her Decrees and Definitions of Faith, which has accordingly
been done by the Fathers and all true Believers. The Minor is proved by reason,
because it were not consistent with the justice, mercy or veracity of God to
give a fallible and erring Judge such a power in things of that high
consequence.

Answ. 1. THe conclusion is still different from the tenet. 2. The Major is
denied, and it is denied that the texts cited did prove it, no^ does the
practice of the councils putting anathema to their canons prove it. For, 1. It
is not proved they did well in so doing, except when their definitions agree
with the holy Scriptures, and when they do so, they do not more then every
believer may do, whom they will not say to be infallible. 2. Nor have all the
Fathers or true believers subscribed to the decrees of councils and their
definitions of faith: nor do the Papists themselves subscribe to those they
call general councils; not to the Chalcedon which gave the Patriarch of
Constan^inople equal power with the Roman in his Province, and ascribed the
Popes dignity not to any grant of Christ to Peter, but to custom out of regard
to Rome as the imperial city; not to the council of Basil or Constance, which
made the council above the Pope.

But H. T. adds an argument for the Churches supreme power of judicature. That
is the supreme Judge in every cause, who has an absolute power to oblige all
dissenters to an agreement, and from whom there can be no appeal in such a
cause. But the Catholic Church has an absolute power to oblige all that
disagree in controverted points of faith, nor is there any appeal from her
decision, therefore the Catholic Church is supreme Judge in controverted
points of faith. The Major is manifest by induction in all courts of
judicature; the Minor has been proved above by the first, second, and fourth
arguments.

Answ. It is denied that the Minor has been proved, or that there is any other
Judge besides the sentence of God in holy Scripture, which can so oblige
dissenters in those points. Nor do a great part of Papists themselves at this
day, namely the French Papists make such account of the Roman church o^ Popes
judgment, but that they do conceive they may, and sometimes have appealed from
them to a general council. Occham held that the Pope was haereticabilis, that
is, might be an heretic, some of them being suspected of heresy have been
fain to acquit themselves to Emperors by Apologies, some of them have been
condemned as heretics by general councils, Fathers, universitie of Paris,
Gerson wrote a book de auferibilitate Papae, and the French churches conceive
their churches may be without a Pope and well governed by a Patriarch of their
own. It is but a new and late invented doctrine of Jesuits and other flatterers
of Popes, that the Roman church, or Pope, or a general council approved by him
are infallible, nor is there a word in any of the Fathers cited by H. T. to
that purpose.

The words of Irenaeus l. 3. c. 40. are cited maimedly by H. T. they are
entirely thus. For where the Church is there is also the spirit, and where the
spirit of God is, there is the Church and all grace, but the spirit is truth.
By which it may appear, that truth is ascribed to the Church by reason of the
spirit, and that by the Church he means not only the Roman, but any where the
Spirit of God is: and in the words before he sets down the truth he means, to
wit, that if one God and salvation by Christ, which he terms the constant
preaching of the Church on every side, and equally persevering having testimony
from Prophets, and from Apostles, and from all Disciples. By which it is
manifest that he commends no other preaching of the Church then is in the
Scriptures, not the definitions of any now existent Church, or after Church
without the Scriptures.

The next words of Irenaeus are not (as here H. T. cites them ^. 1. c. 49.
there being not in my book so many chapters) but l. 4. c. 43. and are alleged
by H. T. art. 4. and answered by me before art. 4. sect. 7. The other words of
Irenaeus, The Church shall be under no man's judgment, for to the Church all
things are known, in which is perfect faith of the Father, and of all the
dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the holy Ghost, who teaches all
truth, I find not any where as he cites them. In l. 1. there are not sixty two
chapters, and in l. 4. c. 62. (which I suspect by his former quotation he would
have cited) the words are thus. After he had said, chapter 53. such a Disciple
(meaning who had read diligently the holy Scripture which is with the
Presbyters in the Church, with whom is the Apostolical doctrine) truly
spiritual receiving the Spirit of God, etc. judges indeed all men, but he
himself is judged of none, in several following chapters sets down various
heretics whom he shall judge, and chapter 62. says, he shall judge also all those
who are without the truth, that is the Church, but he himself is judged of
none. For all things constant are known or manifest to him, both the entire
faith in one God omnipotent from whom all things are, and in the Son of God
Christ Jesus our Lord, and the dispositions of him, by which the Son of God was
made man; the firm sentence which is in the spirit of God, who causes the
acknowledging of truth, who has expounded the dispositions of the Father and
Son according to which he was present with mankind as the Father wills. By
which any one may perceive, that H. T. (if these were the words he meant) has
corruptly cited them, mangling them and perverting them to prove an
infallibility and supreme judicature of the Roman Church, or Pope for others;
which are meant of every true spiritual Disciple and his private judgment for
himself, and in the main points of faith, and according to and by means of the
Apostolical doctrine of the Scriptures, which is the very doctrine of
Protestants concerning the judgment, which each Christian may have and has in
points of faith, and the certainty of it according to the Scriptures; which
while he follows he is judged of none, nor needs any ones judgment, Popes or
others, to define what he shall believe.

The words of Origin, That only is to be believed for truth which in nothing
disagreeth from the tradition of the Church. And in our understanding
Scripture, etc. We must not believe otherwise than the Church of God has by
succession delivered to us, prefat. in lib. periarch. Whether they be rightly
cited I know not, having not the book to examine them by, and by his other
citations, as by his citation of Origin, art. 4. where the same words, as I
conceive, are cited somewhat otherwise (which are answered art. 4. sect. 7.
before) the words [from the Apostles] being here left out, and his etc. here I
suspect fraud. Yet if the words be as he cites them they prove not what he
brings them for: there being no restriction to the Roman Church, much less to
the Pope: nor is the tradition of the Church said to be that which is
unwritten, and other then is in the Scriptures, and the faith which by
succession the Church is said to deliver, is not meant of any of those points,
which the Pope would obtrude on the Church of God, and Protestants reject, but
in probability the points of faith which were in the Apostles Creed professed
at baptism, which Irenaeus, Origin, Tertullian, etc. were wont to hold forth
against the heretics of their times, and Protestants do still avouch.

The words of Cyprian de unitate Eccles. are not meant of the Roman Church, but
of the Church throughout the whole world (as the words precedent show) and the
freedom from adultery and the uncorruptednesse, and chastity of the Church
cannot be meant of every visible Church as if it were free from error, but of
the true Spouse of Christ: nor is the true Spouse of Christ free from error of
any sort, but that which is in the main points of faith concerning the Father,
Son and holy Spirit, as the words following show: nor is he said to be
separated from the promises of the Father, or not to have God for his Father,
who divides from the Church of Rome and has not it for his mother: nor are all
other Churches said to be adulteresses, who hold not with the now Roman church,
but he who divides from the Catholic church, nor has it for his mother, of
whom he had said, Illius faetu^nascimur, illius lacte nutrimur, spiritu ^jus
animamur, whence it appears that he meant the church to be his mother, who is
born again with the same birth, baptism or faith, nourished by her milk, that
is the Word of the Gospel, and animated by the same Spirit. And of this it is
granted, that whoever is so severed from the church of Christ; that is the
multitude or number of believers throughout the world, who profess and are
baptized into the common faith, and are nourished by the same Gospel, and
quickened by the same Spirit, they are divided from God, and have not him for
their Father. But this proves not that he that is divided from the now Roman
church is divided from God. But there are other words of Cyprian cited by him
as found Epist. 55. in mine edition at Bafil 1558. l. 1. Epist. 3. as Bellar.
also cites them l. 4. de Romano pontifice c. 4. which are thus set down by H.
T. To Peter's chair and the principal church, infidelity or false faith cannot
have access: in which he would insinuate, 1. That the Roman church is the
principal church. 2. That by reason of Peter's chair there, no error in faith
could come to that church. But the words being rightly and fully set down, and
the Epistle being read throughout, it will appear that Cyprian had no such
meaning as this Author would put upon him. The words are these. After these
things (which he had related before concerning the crimes of some excluded by
him out of the church of Carthage) as yet over and above, a false Bishop being
constituted for themselves by heretics, they dare sail and bring letters from
Schismatics and profane persons to Peter's chair and the principal church, from
whence sacerdotal unity arose, and not think them to be Romans, whose faith the
Apostle declaring is praised, to whom perfidiousness cannot have access. I^
which I grant the Roman church is called the principal church from whence
sacerdotal unity did arise, and the Sea of Rome Peter's chair: the reason of
which speech is plainly set down by Cyprian himself in his book de simplicitate
Pr^latorum, or de unitate Eccle^^ae in these words. The Lord speaks to Peter,
I, says he, say to thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build
my church, and the gates of hell shall not overcome it. I will give to thee the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and what things thou shall bind upon earth
shall be bound also in the heavens, and what things thou shall loose upon earth
shall be also loosed in heaven. And to the same after his resurrection, he
says, Feed my sheep. And although to all the Apostles after his resurrection
he bestowed equal power, and says, As my Father sent me I also send you,
receive the holy Ghost: if ye remit sins to any, they shall be remitted to him,
if ye ^old them to any, they shall be held: yet that he might manifest unity he
has disposed by his authority the rise of the same unity beginning from one.
Verily the other Apostles were also that which Peter was, endued with equal
allotment of honor and power, but the beginning comes from unity, that the
church may be showed to be one. And a little after, which unity we ought firmly
to hold, and vindicate, chiefly Bishops who are President in the church, that
we may prove also Bishopric it self to be one and undivided. Let no man
deceive the fraternity with a lie, let no man corrupt the truth of faith with
perfidious prevarication. Bishopric is one of which by each entirely a part is
held. By which words it is manifest, that Cyprian made the Roman church the
principal church, not because the Bishop of Rome was above any other in honor
and power, or that Peter's chair was more infallible than other Apostles chairs;
or that a supremacy over the whole church did belong to the Pope of Rome (for
he expressly says, that the other Apostles were the same that Peter was, that
they were endued with equal allotment or fellowship of honor and power, and
that in solidum, wholly and entirely (that is as much one as another) each
Bishop held his part in the one Bishopric:) but because he made the unity of
Episcopacy to have its original from Christ's grant to Peter, Matthew. 16. 18.
that all Bishops might be as one, none arrogating more to himself than another.
And that this was Cyprians mind, appears, 1. By the words in his Epistle to
Pope Cornelius presently after the words which H. T. cites: where against the
practice of those that sailed to Rome to bring thither letters of complaint
against Cyprian, he says, But what cause is there of their going and declaring
their making a false Bishop against the Bishops? For either that pleases then
which they have done, and they persevere in their wickedness, or if it
displeases them and they recede, they know whither they should return. For
s^^h it is decreed by all us, and it is ^qual alike and just that every ones
cause should be there heard, where the crime is admitted, and to several
Pastors a portion of the flock is ascribed, which each Pastor should rule and
govern, being to give account to the Lord of his own act; it is meet verily,
that thos^ over whom we are president should not run about, nor break the
cohering concord of Bishops by their subdolous and fallacious rashness, but
there plead their cause where they may have both accusers, and witnesses of
their own crime, unless to a few desperate and w^etched persons the authority
of the Bishops settled in Africa seem less, who have already judged of them, and
by the weight of their judgment have damned their conscience bound with the
many snares of their sins. Which words show that Cyprian denied the authority
of the Bishops of Africa to he less th^n the Bishop of Rome, and that persons
should appeal from them to Rome; but asserts, that they ought to stand to the
judgment of their own Bishops, and that a portion of the flock is given to
each Pastor, which he ought to rule and govern, and thereof must give account
to the Lord, not the whole to any one, no not to the Bishop of Rome; and
therefore he ought not to receive the letters and complaint of the divided
party from Cyprian, nor to take on him to ju^ge their cause, but to remit them
to their own Bishops. 2. It appears by the fact of Cypri^n, who opposed St^phen
Bishop of Rome in the point of rebaptizing the baptized by heretics (as his
Epistle to Pompeius shows) and joined with Firmi^^anus and other Bishops of
Cappadocia, Cilicia and Galatia excommunicated by Pope Stephen, and so involved
in the same censure, in which state he died without repentance for ought is
known, and therefore conceived not the Pope infallible, or his judge or himself
subject to him: but counted Stephen an usurper over his brethren by reason of
his imposing his decree on others, and censure of dissenters. And for the words
in the Epistle to Cornelius they are not as H. T. cites them, To Peter's chair
and the principal Church, infidelity or false faith cannot have access: But to
the Romans, meaning not only the Bishop, but the rest of the church, and by
perfidia there is meant not any infidelity or false faith whatsoever, but those
perfidious persons and their treacherous action in breaking from Cyprian: nor
does he say that perfidiousness could have access at no time, but not at that
time, which he ascribes, not to the privilege of the place, but their
constancy in the faith heretofore praised by Paul, and to the providence of
Cornelius their Bishop, and their own vigilance, as the words in the end of the
Epistle show, Although I know there your fraternity, to wit, being fenced by
your Providence, and also wary enough, by their own vigilance, cannot be taken
with the poisons of heretics, nor deceived, and that so much the magisteries
and divine precepts prevail with them, as the fear of God is in them, yet our
over abundance of carefulness or charity has persuaded us to write these
things to you, being indeed not altogether out of fear of Cornelius, of whom he
takes notice in the beginning of the Epistle. Marvailing enough, when he
observed by his letter that he was somewhat moved by the threats and terrors of
them that came, and therefore does earnestly press him to take courage and to
withstand them. Which being rightly understood, the speeches of Cyprian
concerning the Roman constancy and the inaccessibleness of perfidiousness to
them, appear only expressions of his confidence and good hopes, not of any
certainty that it would be so, much less of any infallibility of their Bishop
or church; and this he did to engage them to withstand the schismatics, it
being a great argument with persons to be constant to those who express their
confiding in them and their expectation thereof. And therefore he would have
his Epistle read to the most flourishing Clergy there presiding with Cornelius,
and the most holy and most ample common people or Laity, that if any contagion
of poisoned speech and pestiferous sowing had crept in, it might be all put off
from the ears and breasts of the brethren, and the entire and sincere love of
good men might be cleansed from all filth of heretical detraction: which shows
that he conceived them liable to such contagion and pollution, and that he was
not certain that they were then altogether free. All these things being
considered, it will appear that these passages of Cyprian are so far from
proving the infallibility and supreme judicature and supremacy of the Pope and
church of Rome, which H. T. asserts, that they prove the contrary.

The words of Lactantius l. 3. c. ult. that it is only the Catholic Church
that has the true worship of God, this is the wellspring of truth, the
dwelling place of faith, etc. are true, but nothing to the purpose, it being a
mere dream that the Rom^n and Catholic church are the same; nor if they were,
do they prove infallibility in all definitions of faith, or supreme judicature
in controversies of faith, but the enjoying for themselves the true worship,
truth and faith. The words of Cyril of Jerusalem, that the Roman faith
commanded by the Apostles cannot be changed, l. 3. c. 4 in apolog. cont.
Ruffinum, we subscribe to, who profess our ready reception of what faith the
Apostles commanded. The words of Vincentius Lyrinensis adv. hares. c. 41. are
thus (not as H. T. cites them) In the antiquity of the Church two things are
vehemently and studiously to be observed, unto which they ought altogether to
stick who will not be heretics; the first if any thing were anciently decreed
by the authority of an universal council from all the Priests of the Catholic
Church: which is nothing to the later councils approved by the Pope, nor does
prove that the ancient councils were infallible, much less that the church or
Pope of Rome are infallible. Nor are the words of Augustine (which I find not
l. 4. de bapt. c. 4) I know by Divine revelation that the spirit of truth
teaches it all truth, if they be as H. T. cites them, for his purpose. For if
by [it] he means the church, it follows not he means the Roman church, and if
the spirit teach it all truth, it cannot be meant of all truth simply, nor at
all times. But I find these words l. 4. de bapt. contra Donat. c. 5. In vain
some, when they are overcome by reason, object to us custom, as if custom
were greater then truth, or that were not to be followed in spirituals which is
to the better revealed by the holy Spirit. This is plainly true that reason and
truth is to be put before custom. The words of Augustine, epist. 118. c. 5. are
not fully set down by H. T. They are thus, If the authority of divine Scripture
prescribe which of these (speaking about offering and fasting) is to be done,
it is not to be doubted that that is to be done which we read. In like manner
also if any of these things the whole Church through the world does frequent.
For to dispute whether we are so to do is of most insolent madness. Where, 1.
He means it of rites not determined in Scripture, not in points of faith. 2.
Neither does he count it madness to dispute against the use of the Roman
church; yea he makes it a rule which he had from Ambrose to fast as they did at
Millan when he was there, and as they did at Rome when he was there, Epist. 86.
ad Casul. no nor to dispute against the whole church of one age, but against
the whole church in every age.

Other words of August. cont. epist. fundam. c. 5. are brought by H. T. and
urged often by Romanists for the asserting the authority of the church above
the Scripture, thus. And I my self would not believe the Gospel, were it not
that the authority of the Church moves me to it. But the words are not thus
rightly alleged. For, 1. The word [Catholick] is left out, which shows he meant
it not of the Roman only, and some words following seem to extend it to the
church comprehending the Apostles, or, if restrained to the church of that age,
it is meant of those that pre^ched the Gospel to him. 2. The words [ego vero
evangelio non crederem nisi me Catholicae Eccles^ae commoveret authoritas] are
not well rendered by H. T. as if they did declare his purpose for the future, or
that he would not believe the Gospel or any other reason, but the Roman* or
present universal churches authority. For this had been an impious speech in
this sense, and unfit for a holy man, much more for a Bishop, and contrary to
many passages of the same Author; as particularly, lib. confess. 9. c. 5. in
which he says, that God would not have given so excellent an authority to the
Scripture through all lands, unless he would that by it God should be believed.
But either he used the Imperfect tense for the Praeterperfect after the African
dialect, as he does in a like speech in his book de beata vita, sic exarsi ut
omnes illas vellem anchoras rumpere, nisi me nonnullorum ^ominum existimatio
commoveret: where commoveret is used for commovisset, which is the same word
here used, and so the sense is, I my self verily had not believed the Gospel
unless the authority of the Catholic Church had moved me, noting thereby the
occasion of his first believing, not the sole Reason or Motive of his present
believing, and to this sense the speeches, Obt^mperavi dicentibus credit
Evangelio, ipsi Evangeli^ catholicis pr^edicantibus credidi, recte credidisti
catholicis laudantibus Evangelium, quibus prae ipientibus Evangelio credidi,
per ^os illi credideram; which express the means by which he believed, and that
was not authority of empire in the Church by reason of their infallible
Function, and right to define what is to be believed, but the credit of their
persons by reason of their holiness, honesty, wisdom, and such other acts of
Gods providence mentioned in the Chapter before, which held him in the Church.

3. Or else he speaks upon supposition that the Gospel is not believed by
reason of its most sincere wisdom, unto the knowledge of which few spiritual
men come in this life, then in that case nothing would move him to believe the
Gospel but the authority of the catholic church, unto which sense the words
chap. 4. and the series of the Dispute seem to lead, and Bellarmine lib. 4. de
notis Eccles. cap. 14. to reconcile Augustine's words in his Dispute against
Donatists, that the Church is not demonstrated by Miracles, but by the
Scriptures; and yet against Manichaeus his Epistle of the Foundation, that the
Church is demonstrated by Miracles, not by the Scriptures, but the Scriptures
by the Church, says, that he speaks upon supposition, because the Manichees
did admit Miracles, but deny the Scriptures, which countenanceth this last
sense. Any of these ways which have their probabilities the speech may be
right, but not for H. T. his purpose. Certainly they ascribe no infallibility
or supreme judicature in controversies of faith to the Roman Pope or Church. If
the speech be not understood in the last sense of not believing the Gospel, but
by the Churches authority on supposition of the excluding the innate evidence
of wisdom and truth therein, or if the second sense hold not, that he speaks
of, what he had not done at first conversion, it it certain the first sense
must be acknowledged, that he means it of the Catholic Church from the
Apostles commending it by the authority of their universal tradition: in other
sense, specially that in which the Papists allege it, it were an impious
speech, and contrary to many other places in his Works. Sure he that reads his
first, second, and third Chapters of his second Book of Baptism against
Donatists, will find him after Cyprian fully against the ascribing to any
Bishop on earth supreme judicature over other Bishops, or making any Church or
Council infallible; but asserting that the former fullest general councils may
be mended by the later, and that there is no determination of any Pope, or
Council, or Church to be rested on as infallible in points of faith, but only
the holy Scripture.

After all this empty scribbling of H. T. he yet adds, I now resume the
pri^cipal Argument, and retort it thus upon our adversaries, The Catholic
Church is infallible in all her Proposals and Definitions of Faith. But the
Protestant Church (and the like of all other Sectaries) is not infallible in
her Proposals or Definitions of Faith, therefore the Protestant Church is not
the Catholic Church. The Major has been fully proved before. The Minor must
be granted by our Adversaries, because they have no other way to excuse
themselves from being Heretick^ in the revolt from our Church, but by falsely
pretending the whole Church errs in Faith, and taught Idolatry and Superstition
for nine or ten hundred years together, till they began their blessed
Reformation: a most blasphemous evasion as has been proved before) by which
they have excluded themselves from all possible assurance of true faith or
salvation; and therefore to arrogate infallibility to themselves, which they
deny to the whole Church, were a most frontless impudence. And then he adds his
Note, whom he means by his infallible Church, which is set down in the first
Section of the Answer to this Article.

Answ. 1. Understanding by [the Protestant Church] that Church which has been
since the year 1517. termed Protestants from the protesting against the Decree
made at Spires, Anno 1529. (as Sleidan lib. 6. Com. reports) the Conclusion is
granted: we yield the Protestant Church or Churches are not the Catholic
Church, but Members of it, conceiving it would be indeed to hold the Error of
Donatists, if they should appropriate the Title of the Catholic Church to
themselves, or count all out of it that are not of that party, as the Romanists
do, who are in this Successors to the Donatists. But if by [the Protestant
Church] be meant the whole number of them, who held the same Faith in the
Fundamentals, which now the Protestants hold, so it is the Catholic Church. 2.
We deny that the Protestants are justly termed Sectaries, meaning by
[Sectaries] a party which has departed from the primitive Christian faith, or
does separate from the universal Church as it is or was at any time in its
integrity. 3. We deny the Major to have been proved, understanding it of the
universal Church of this or any Ages in which the Apostles were not, and did
not concur in the Proposals and Definitions of Faith. 4. We grant the Minor,
but to the proof of it, we say it is utterly false, that we have no other way
to acquit our selves from Heresy, than by pretending the whole Church erred in
Faith, and taught Idolatry and Superstition for nine or ten hundred years
together till the Reformation begun, 1517. yea, we say, that the Errors in
Faith, the Idolatry and Superstition we now accuse the Roman Church of, ^ were
many of them later than the time of Gregory the great, even in the Roman
Church, and were opposed more or less, at least some of them, by a considerable
party of the Church of Christ, who were far better Christians than the Popes or
Roman Clergy, which condemned and persecuted them as Heretics. From which
crime we are able to acquit our selves other ways than H. T. says we can,
chiefly by showing the agreement of our Doctrine with the holy Scripture and
first Churches after Christ's Ascension, and the Orthodox Teachers in them, as
will appear in answer to his ninth Article. It is a mere frontless impudence in
him to charge us with any blasphemous evasion or excluding our selves from all
possible assurance of faith or salvation, and to arrogate to himself as if he
had proved either. The Reformation which was begun 1517. by Luther, and after
by Zuinglius and others continued, has been blessed by God, notwithstanding
the Persecutions of the Papal party, and the Differences among Protestants. And
the Reformation sought in England since 1641. has been blessed,
notwithstanding the Troubles and Differences fomented by the Popish and
Prelatical parties, as the Preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles and first
Preachers was, notwithstanding the Persecutions, Heresies, and Schisms that
followed it. Notwithstanding what H. T. or any other Romanist have said, the
Roman Church and Pope have not proved infallible, but may be proved, and have
been, false and heretical, which is in part proved by the Objections following.

SECT. VII.
The Objections from Scripture and Reason against the infallibility which H. T.
ascribes to the Church are made good against his Answers.

H. T. says thus, Objections from Scripture and Reason solved. Object. All the
Israelites adored the golden ^alf, therefore the whole Church erred. Answ.
Moses and the Levites did not, who were many thousands, Exodus 32. Numb 3. 39.
therefore both those Propositions are false.

TO which I reply, that whereas the Romanists do allege to prove an universal
Bishop over the whole Church, who by himself or with a Council is an infallible
Judge of controversies of faith, Gods ordinance of one high Priest in Israel,
to whose judgment all must stand, Deuteronomy. 17. as Bellarmine lib. 3. de verbo
Dei, cap. 4. etc. does, this Argument is retorted thus, If Aaron and the
People of Israel were not infallible, then if there were such an universal
Bishop over Christians as there was over the Israelites, and such a Council as
the Jewish Synedrium, which were to be Judge of controversies, as Romanists
would have, yet they might be fallible, since the Jewish high Priest and Council
who were to be Judge of controversies were not infallible, though they were as
much privileged by Papists own arguings, who infer their sovereign infallible
Judicature of controversies, which they ascribe to the Pope and his Council
from the Jewish high Priest and his Council. But Aaron and the Jewish Council
and Church were not infallible; for Aaron and the Council and Church of the
Jews did err, as is manifest by the making the golden Calf, and the peoples
motion and concurrence thereto. Now though Moses and the Levites did not err,
yet the high Priest and the People did, from whose privilege, and not from
Moses the civil Magistrate, the infallible judicature of the Pope as universal
Bishop, and the Roman Church Catholic is fetched, and therefore the Answer
avoids not the Objection.

H. T. adds, Object. The Jews Council ^rred in condemning Christ. Answ. No
wonder it was not perfectly ecumenical; for Christ himself was then Head of
the Church on earth, and the highest Authority was in him, not in the Jews
Council; and if the Jews Church could err, it does not follow, that the Church
of Christ can; for it was built (as St. Paul says) on better Promises.

I reply, 1. This Answer which makes that Council not perfectly o^cumenical,
and therefore no wonder it erred, plainly intimates, that if a Council be nor
perfectly ecumenical, though it would be otherwise infallible, yet in that
case it may err. Whence it will follow, unless the Papists can prove their
Councils, which they say are approved by the Pope to be perfectly ecumenical,
that is, called out of the whole World, they are not infallible. Now certain it
is, that neither the Trent, nor the Lateran Councils, nor those of Constance,
Basil, Florence, nor any other Council for a thousand years last past have been
so called: yea, sometimes one party has kept a Council in opposition to
another, and Pope against Pope. And from the Trent Council, to which they
adhere, not only the Greek, and Asiatick, and African Churches were wholly
absent, but also the French for a time, and the Council consisted in effect of
none but Italians, and the Popes Hirelings, some of whom were only titular
Bishops, having never been at the places whereof they carried the Titles, and
these by the plurality of Voices served the Popes ends, but in nothing either
seriously sought the truth, or reformation of corruption, as the History of the
Council of Trent written by that intelligent man Friar Paul of V^nice has
cleared to the World. By which, were it not that Papists are a sort of men that
hood-wink themselves, they might see how mere a cheat that Council was, and how
justly it was refused by the French Papists themselves unto this day. 2 Though
Christ were then Head of the Church, yet he did not exercise Jurisdiction among
the Jews, not act but as Prophet to his Disciples, he did not deny subjection
to the Priests, he was circumcised the eighth day, as subject to the Law of
Moses, presented at the Temple with an Offering, went up to the Feasts, kept
the Passover, denied not the Authority of the high Priest, yea, directed the
Leper to offer to the Priest for his cleansing, as Moses bade him, and John
notes that the high Priest in that he was high Priest that year prophesied of
Christ's death, John 11. 51. which are sufficient proofs, that if there were a
Privilege of Infallibility in the high Priest and Council of the Jews it was
not taken away by Christ's being on earth. But sure then they did err, and
therefore were not at all infallible in their ordinary determinations. 3. It
follows, if the Jews Church could err notwithstanding those passages in the
Old Testament which the Papists bring for the Popes and Roman Churches
infallibility from their infallibility, then the Popes and Roman Churches
infallibility is not well proved thence. 4. St. Paul does not say, The Church
of Christ was built on better Promises, than the Church of the Jews, but that
the second Covenant was made a Law on better Promises than the first, is said,
Heb. 8. 6. But those Promises are set down, verse. 10, 11, 12. of that Chapter,
of which there is none concerning any, much less a greater degree of
infallibility in any chief Bishop on earth, ecumenical Council or Church of
Christians above the Jewish high Priest and Council, and therefore this
allegation does no whit infringe the Objection.

H. T. adds, Object. St. Peter erred in faith when St. Paul contradicted him to
the face. Answ. No, it was only in a matter of fact or conversation, according
to Tertullian, lib. praescript. cap. 23. by withdrawing himself and refusing to
eat with the Gentiles for fear of the Jews, Gal. 2. 12.

I reply, It Is true, Tertullian says, that Peter 's fact was conversationis
vitium non praedicationis, a vice of his conversation not of his Preaching, and
he shows wherein, that he preached not another God, or Christ, or ^ope. But
this does not show that Peter erred not at all in any point of faith, nor that
Tertullian thought so: yea the very words of Paul, Gal. 2. 15. that he did not
walk uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel show, that his practice did
infer an opinion contrary to the truth of the Gospel, and the words [Why
compe^lest thou the Gentiles to Judaize?] which could be no otherwise than by
suggesting to them that opinion that they must do so, show, he taught the
Gentiles an Error in a point of Faith contrary to the Decree of the Council,
Acts 15.

It follows, Object. Christ blamed the incredulity of his Disciples in not
believing his Resurrection, St. Mark 16. 14. Answ. He only blamed their
slowness in believing, not any error in faith, or loss of faith in them,
seeing they had it not before, for they understood not what Christ had said to
them of it as appears St. Luke 18. and 1 St. John 20. they did not know all
points of faith at once, but by degrees.

I reply, the Question now is of Infallibility not of Apostasy, now it is
certain they were not infallible, if they did actually err, and it is certain
they did err, who did not believe Christ to have been risen from the dead,
which was sure an error in a point of faith, and so much the greater in that
it was foretold by Christ himself that it should be, and told by Women, that it
was so, and of this number Peter was one after he was termed Peter, and
according to the Romanist's Doctrine had been made Prince of the Apostles, and
chief Pastor of the universal Church. Now if Peter did err then in faith,
much more may the Popes of Rome, who pretend to be his Successors, and to
derive their Privileges from his grant, and consequently cannot pretend to any
more than he had.

Again, Object. Every man is a Liar. Answ. In his own particular be it so, yet
the holy Ghost can and will teach the Church all truth, he is no friend to
truth that contradicts it: and albeit man of himself may err, yet by the holy
Ghost he may be guided so that ^e err not.

I reply, The words that make every man a Liar do speak this of man in
contradistinction to God's being true, and thereby show that this is made God's
Prerogative to be true without any error, and that no mere man is such, and
therefore not infallible, and consequently neither Roman Bishop, nor Council,
nor Church infallible: nor does the Answer avoid it. For if they be every one a
Liar in his own particular, they must be so in a community or Council, as if
each person in his own particular be blind the whole company must needs be so
too. I grant, the holy Ghost can and will teach the Church of Christ (meaning
the Church of the Elect) all truth necessary to their salvation, and he is no
friend to truth that contradicts it: but that he will teach any or all the
visible Churches, or their Bishops, and Teachers, or any one Bishop, all truth
in any point controverted, so as that they shall be infallible Judges in
determining controversies of faith, is more than yet is proved by H. T. or any
other. And if man may of himself err, though he may by the holy Ghost be
guided so that he err not, then unless it may be known that in this or that
Definition of Faith he is so guided by the holy Ghost, no man can rest upon his
Definition as infallible. But it is not certain that either a Council or Pope,
who are confessedly fallible of themselves, and therefore do implore the holy
Ghost's help, as knowing they may err, are guided by the holy Ghost that they
may not err, but by examining their Definitions by the holy Scripture. For
there is no other way to know they have not erred, and consequently such a not
erring being uncertain their Definitions can at no time without proof from
Scripture (which each person is to try for himself) be a sufficient assurance
to build a firm Faith upon, which is confirmed by the next Objection.

Object. Try all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. Believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits if they be from God, 1 John 4. Answ. Try them
by the Churches authority and Apostolical tradition, that is the Touchstone,
not the dead Letter, humane reason, or the private spirit.

I reply, If Christians are to try all things, then they are to try the
Churches authority, and therefore the Churches authority can be no Rule of
trial. And indeed the Precept had been ridiculous, if he had bid them try the
Churches Definitions whether they were good or no, and the spirits whether of
God by the Churches authority, unless the Churches authority were to be tried
by something else, which were of it self credible. For when the Church defines,
for examples sake Transubstantiation, to try this by the Churches authority is
no more but to enquire whether the Church has defined it, if we must rest on
its authority without examining its proof, which would be all one as to say,
Try not at all what the church propounds, but believe it. But it is a vain Rule
till we know who are the church, by whose authority, and what is their
authority by which we must try: especially considering it is not agreed among
Papists whether a Pope or council jointly or severally be the church: even H.
T. page 70. speaks as if he would fain take in all, but is doubtful on which
to fasten. Nor are they agreed whether the Pope or council be superior, nor
which council is approved, which reprobate, nor how far that which is approved
is so. The Rule is more uncertain when council is against council and Pope
against Pope. The truth is, Papists contrary to the Apostles Precept are not
allowed by their Doctrine to try what their church, that is, their Pope and
Prelates teach them, but they are bound to believe them with an implicit assent
without any trial or explicit knowledge. As for Apostolical tradition, we like
it well to try by it, if it be in truth and not in pretense only Apostolical
tradition: in which case we are to take heed that we be not deceived by such
sayings as pretend to be from the Apostles, but are not. The Apostle Paul 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. tells us there were such pretensions in his days, of which he
warns Christians, and our Lord Christ commands Revel. 2. 2. the Angel of the
Church of Ephesus in that he had tried some that said they were Apostles and
were not, and had found them Liars. As for some of those things which Ancients
have called Apostolical tradition the Papists themselves do reject them, as the
opinion of the Millenaries, the keeping of Easter, as the Quartodeciman held,
the giving the communion to Infants, and many more; and therefore all
Apostolical traditions so termed cannot be the Rule of trial; nor can they give
us any sure Notes by which we may distinguish genuine Apostolical tradition
unwritten from them that are supposititious. It is true, the oral tradition of
the Apostles, while they lived, and there was access to them might be fit to be
a means to try spirits by: but the relation of Irenaeus lib. 2. adv. haeres.
cap. 39. about Christ's age, and the censure given of Papias in Eusebius
plainly show how quickly such traditions came to be mistakes: and the very
reason of John 1 Epist. 4. 1. does take us off from trying by such tradition,
because of the multitude of deceivers, and therefore requires that such spirits
as pretended tradition should be tried by an unerring Rule, which is the holy
Scripture.

But H. T. takes up the blasphemous reproach which some impudent railing
Papists have heretofore given to the holy Scripture, when it bids us not try by
the dead letter, by which he means the Scripture in contradistinction to
unwritten tradition. Which sure is not the language of the holy Ghost, but of
such impure mouths, as in love to their Romish Idols endeavor to disgrace the
holy Scripture. It Is true the Law engraven in stone is termed, 2 Cor. 3. 6. the
killing letter, yet not of it self, for elsewhere, Act. 7. 38. the law of Moses
is termed the living Oracles, but by accident, in that it could not give life,
Gal, 3. 21. in that it was weak through the flesh, Romans 8. 3. it did kill, that
is condemn men as guilty of sin, and so accursed by it, Gal. 3. 10. But on the
contrary the Word of God is termed living, Heb. 4. 12. the word of life, Phil.
2. 16. And our Lord Christ bids the Jews search the Scriptures, because in them
they did think they had eternal life, John 5. 39. and John 20. 31. These things
are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and
believing ye might have life through his name. So that justly may H. T. with
such other as before him have done the like, be charged with impiety in his
disparagingly terming the holy Scriptures, especially of the New Testament, the
dead letter, which Paul calls the word of life.

But it is likely he meant that the Scriptures cannot hear both parties, and so
pronounce sentence in a point of controversy. If this be his meaning he might
term the churches sentence printed or written in parchment, and Apostolical
tradition unwritten the dead letters, as well as the holy Scriptures. For
surely the authority of the church in an Ecumenical council approved by the
Pope, suppose the Trent council approved by Pope Pius the fourth, and the
Apostolical tradition does no more hear or speak then the Scripture. And it
sure discovers an extreme perverseness and malignity of spirit in Papists that
refuse to be tried by Scripture as being dead, and require a living Judge to
end controversies, when the council and Pope and Apostolical tradition they
would try by are as much dead as the Scripture: which there is reason to
conceive they do as foreseeing that if their proselytes would try their
doctrines by the Scripture they could not stand.

As for humane reason no Protestant that I know makes that the rule by which he
is to try the spirits, nor his own private spirit, if by it be meant his own
councils. But we say that every man is to make use of his own reason or
judgment of discretion, and the ability of his own intelligent spirit, as the
instrument or means by which he is to try whether that doctrine which is
propounded to him be according to holy Scripture, and in this he does no more
then Christ requires, Luke 12. 57. yea, and why even of your selves judge ye
not what is right? without the use of which it is impossible for men to make
trial as men. And this the Papists themselves must allow men to do according to
their own principles. For how else can they hear and believe the church, if
they do not use their reason to know the church, and what it says: they must
make men blocks or brutes if they allow them not the use of reason to try by.
When H. T. brings arguments from texts of Scripture, Councils, Fathers, common
sense and experience (as his title page pretends) would he not have men to use
their reason to try whether he do it rightly? would he have us go to a council
approved by the Pope to know whether his arguments be good? what a mere mockery
is this of men to write books, to teach people; and yet not permit people to
use humane reason to try their tenets whether they be according to Scripture,
Council, Fathers, common sense and experience, as if we must not only take an
O^cumenical council approved by the Pope, but also H. T. and every Popish
writer, whose book is licensed to be infallible? If he write, is it not that we
may read, and will he have us read and not judge, and can we judge without
humane reason? But it is the fashion of these men to write and speak in points
of controversy, but not to permit their Disciples, unless they judge them firm
to them whatever they meet with to the contrary, to examine their adversaries
tenants, arguments and answers by reading the Scripture and such impartial
writers as would discover their deceit, but either by some device or plain
prohibition to deter them from searching after the truth, that they may rest on
the Popes and prelates determinations without examining.

H. T. further adds. Obj. The Church may err at least in points not
fundamental. Answ. All that God has revealed is fundamental, at least for the
formal motive of belief, to wit, the Divine authority revealing (though not
always for the matter) and if it be once sufficiently proposed to us by the
Church, as so revealed, we are then bound to believe it, so that their
distinction of fundamentals and not fundamentals is idle: Besides if the Church
be infallible in fundamentals, then Protestants are Schismatics at least in
revelting from her in points not fundamental, or necessary to salvation, and
sin against charity by accusing us of Idolatry.

I reply 1. Sure this exception is idle to argue the distinction of fundamental
and not fundamental points of faith, which the users of it take from the
matter, according to which he confesses all is not fundamental that God
reveals to be idle, because all is fundamental which God reveals at least
for the formal motive of belief; to wit, the divine authority revealing, in
respect of which the Authors, who use the distinction, acknowledge all
fundamental likewise, as Dr. Potter, Chillingworth and others, who make those
articles of faith fundamental, which in respect of the matter are necessary to
salvation to be explicitly known and believed by all: nor is it by them denied,
but if it be sufficiently proposed to us by the church as so revealed, all that
is revealed by God we are then bound to believe, otherwise we should deny Gods
infallibility and veracity. But we deny the bare determination of the church,
that is a Pope, O^cumenical council, or prelates to be a sufficient proposal
without proof from Scripture or other demonstration, that the revelation is
divine. 2. It is an idle inference which he makes, that because Protestants
grant the church does not err in fundamentals; therefore the Roman church does
not err or is infallible in fundamentals. For that which we grant of the
church is meant of other churches besides the Roman. 3. It is idle that he
charge Protestants with schism at least in revolting from the church for
points not fundamental. For he cannot prove the Protestants did or do revolt
from the church, but from the Roman court fashion, nor that they revolted till
they were driven out by excommunication and cruel persecution, and could not
enjoy communion without yiedling to sin, nor that they revolted at all for
those errors, which are about points not fundamental; but for the errors about
points fundamental, to wit, one Mediator, salvation by faith in him, not by our
own works, etc. 4. It is idle that he imputes to the Protestants
uncharitableness for accusing Papists of Idolatry, when their profession and
worship is openly Idolatrous in their adoration of bread, Images, wooden
crosses, invocation of Saints deceased, of Angels with other innumerable
practices used and maintained by them about crosses, relics, feasts of
Saints, Temples dedicated to them, vows, swearing, Priests of them, of which
their own Liturgies, Canons, writers are undoubted witnesses. 5. The framing of
the Protestants objection by H. T. against the infallibility of the Pope or his
council is idle, since it is urged by Protestants against them by showing its
errors even in fundamentals, that Popes and councils approved by them have been
heretical. 6. His answer is much more idle, in that it is not at all to the
argument by him brought, which in form is this. That church which may err in
non-^^ndamentals is no infallible judge of controversies. But the Roman church,
whether Pope or council by him approved may err in non-fundamentals, Ergo the
Roman church is no infallible Judge of controversies. Now in his answer, there
is neither denial of Major, Minor, nor conclusion, but only a denial of the fit
use of one term in the premises against which his own exception is but idle, as
has been showed, yea and if there be no such distinction of fundamentals and
non-fundamentals in points of faith the objection is more strong against them.
For then if it be proved that the Roman church errs in points of faith, it errs
in fundamentals, if all points of faith be fundamental, which will prove not
only the fallibility, but also the nullity of the Roman church: and so H. T.
will pull down what he endeavors to build up.

But H. T. goes on thus. Ob. Those things only are fundamental which are
absolutely necessary to salvation, and every man is bound explici^ly to know
and believe. Answ. If this were true, the Bible or written Word (which you will
have to be the only rule of faith and Judge of controversies) were not a
fundamental; for faith depends not essentially on writing, but on hearing: many
were good Christians and saved before any of the new Scripture was written or
received among them, the first Gospel being not written till seven or eight
years after the death of Christ.

I reply, 1. This scribbling is idle also, in which that is brought in as
Protestants objection against the infallible and supreme judicature of the
Roman church in controversies of faith, which is only an explication of one
term they use in their dispute against the assertors of it. 2. It is idle that
he says they will have the Bible or written Word to be the only Judge of
controversies, when some of them, as Chillingworth whom he after names, Answ.
to Char. Maint. part. 1. chapter 2. p. 114. deny it properly to be the Judge of
controversies, but make it only the rule of faith, or the rule to judge by, yea
p. 75. H. T. himself charge this on Chillingworth (as if he had forgotten
what he said, p. 73.) that right reason is the only Judge of controversies, and
others, who term the Bible the Judge of controversies do not make it the only
Judge, but the Spirit of God by it, and the teachers of the church and each
believer for himself by it. 3* It is idle again that he makes that an absurdity
which they will not own, when Chillingworth Answ. to Char. Maint. part. 1. chapter
2. p. 114. and some others do grant that the Bible or written Word is not a
fundamental point of faith in their sense, because if the matter of the Bible
should be believed by one that never saw or heard of a Bible, yet he should
have a true faith to salvation: And yet they make it necessary to be believed
by all to whom it is made known. 4. It is yet more idle, that he gives that for
a reason why it should be absurd to say the written Word is not fundamental; to
wit, for faith depends not essentially on writing, but on hearing, which
concludes it is not absurd. For if faith depend not essentially on writing, but
on hearing, which concludes it is not absurd. For if faith depend not
essentially on writing, then is the written Word not fundamental, for that is
not fundamental without which faith may be. 5. It is idle which he says in
opposing writing to hearing, whereas faith may be by both, and if he had spoken
accurately, he should have said, not by seeing, but by hearing, or not by
writing, but by speaking. 6. It is idle also and false, that faith depends
essentially on hearing. For then it could never be that deaf men should believe
for want of hearing. 7. That which he adds to confirm it is as idle. For though
there were good Christians before the Gospel was written, yet it being written
upon supposition there were no other means but writing to beget faith, it would
depend essentially on writing. 8. This discourse of H. T. overthrows himself
and his party, For if faith depend essentially on hearing, not on writing, then
they have not faith who read, except they hear the infallible Judge, whether
Pope or council approved by him, nor is the point of faith sufficiently
proposed, unless it be delivered viva voce, and if so, there is no Papist has
faith, but he only who hears the Pope speak by word of mouth from his chair,
or a council approved by him speak with audible voice, the reading of the Trent
canons, or the Popes Bull is not sufficient to beget faith, much less the
hearing a Priest or Prelate tell us their determination. By which it may
appear, that if H. T. his dictates hold, then there is neither church nor faith
among the greatest part of Papists. 9. All this discourse is idle, because
Papists themselves do grant in effect the distinction he excepts against; and
his own words do in a manner confess it is right, as the objectors explain it,
and therefore in this is but a mere humor of quarrelling, as having a mind to
say somewhat against Mr. Chillingworth and Dr. Potter, the Lord Falkland and
Dr. Hammond, who have fully beaten them out of this their last hold of the
infallibility of the Roman church, which they would fain have fortified, being
unable to keep the field in the several points of controversy between us and
them.

H. T. goes on thus Ob. In Gregory the greats time the discipline and doctrine
of the Church was altered and corrupted. Ans. That cannot be, for from Gregory
the greats time to this day even the least substantial part of either has not
been lost, or changed as is visible in all the councils, liturgies, and
constitutions of the Church.

I reply, this is so notoriouslly false, and the contrary so fully demonstrated
even out of the confessions of Popish writers themselves, and in the points of
the Popes supremacy, out of Gregory himself, l. 4. Epist. 32, 34, 38, 39. in
the point of worshipping of Images in his Epistle to Serenus, and in other
points by Bishop Morton in his first book of the Protestants appeal against
Brerely his Apology, that were not this Author resolved to outface the most
manifest verities against the now Roman tenants, he would never have vented so
gross a falsehood. The very confessions of Popes, the decrees of reformation
even in the Trent council prove the contrary to what H. T. says. Claudius
Espentaeus com. in 2 Timothy c. 4. digres. 21. confesses that toys and lies were
in almost all their portesses. And if there were no more to prove this Author
an egregious liar; yet this is enough (which is apparent to all the world) that
they have had councils opposing councils about the superiority of a Pope above
a council since the time of Gregory the great, and even in their Miffals and
Bibles many things have been changed and purged, Clemens the eighth has
altered many things in Sixtus the fifth his Bible, and thereby showed how
corruptions have crept into their own authentic translation.

H. T. adds. Object. That which may happen to any one particular man or Church
may happen to all: but it may happen to any one particular man or Church to
err in faith, therefore to all. Answ. I distinguish the first proposition,
that which may happen to one may happen to all in a divisive sense I grant, in
a collective I deny, and granting the second proposition I deny the
consequence; for it proceeds from a divided to a compound sense, and is as
equivocal as this. That which may happen to any one egg in the Parish may
happen to all. But it may happen to any one egg in the Parish to go into your
mouth at once, therefore it may happen to all the eggs in the Parish to go into
your mouth at once.

I reply, I know not whose argument this is: Dr. Rainold in his Thesis says
thus, but it may happen to every Church which may happen to any; certainly what
happened to the Church of Jerusalem, which had much more ample promises, then
ever the Church of any City. As it is formed by this Author I think the Major
is not universally true: but being formed thus, that error which may be in each
man and church singly, and it is not assured shall be removed from them met
together, may happen to them so met. But error in faith may be in each man and
Church singly, and it is not assured to be removed from them met together,
therefore error in faith may happen to them so met. The Major is I conceive
without question. The Minor consists of two parts. 1. That all men and Churches
singly or severally may err in faith, I think will not be denied. That the
Popes as private Doctors may err in faith it is not denied, by the stiffest
assertors of the Popes infallibility. That any particular Church also, even the
Roman, may err it is not denied, the infallibility, which H. T. would have to
belong to it, is as Catholic, and this must be when the whole Church diffused
over the world unanimously teach a point of faith, or it is representative in a
perfectly Ecumenical council called out of the whole world and approved by the
Pope 2. That to none of these is such infallibility assured, which is proved in
that there is no promise of such infallibility to any of them. The texts urged
by H. T. in this article yield not that promise: nor that text Mat. 18. 20.
For, 1. Christ may be in the midst of men, and yet they not infallible. He
walks in the midst of the Churches, Revel. 2. 1. yet they might and did err in
faith. So God has promised inhabitation to every true believer, and walking
with them, 2 Cor. 6. 16. and yet they were not infallible. 2. If infallibility
were there promised, it was promised to two or three gathered in Christ's name,
and so to a Church neither collectively nor representatively Catholic. 3. The
promise is but conditional upon supposition of being gathered together in
Christ's name, which whether any council be, it is uncertain to us. As for H. T.
his distinction and application they seem to me to savor of unskilfulnesse in
the meaning of Logic terms. A proposition is true in a divided sense which is
not true in a compound, when the predicate agrees to the subject considered as
at different times upon an alteration; as when it is said, the blind see, the
deaf hear, the dumb speak, this is not true in a compound sense, that at the
same time that persons are blind, deaf, dumb, they see, hear, speak, but in a
divided sense. But the Major proposition as set down in the objection, is
understood of the same time without alteration. And so it is not true, that it
proceeds from a divided to a compound sense. Nor is there any consequence in
the proposition, as he unskilfully speaks, but the proposition is a simple or
categorical proposition. As for his similitude of eating eggs they may be kept
for his breakfast as now being unseasonable.

But he proceeds. Object. The Apostles were not each of them to depend on the
decrees of the Church. Answ. True, the Church was to depend on them as on the
first masters and proposers of faith, who had each of them a peculiar
prerogative of divine assistance and infallibility in matters of faith, yet
were they each consonant to other in all their doctrines of faith, and whatever
was taught by any of them was steadfastly believed by all.

I reply, H. T. says in his Epistle to the reader, that it is agreed by all
parties that Christ our Lord has founded and built a Church in his own blood,
which was the only M^stris of divine faith, and sole repository of all
revealed truths at least for an age or two; which if true, then the Apostles
were in that age to depend on their decrees. But here he eats his words, in the
Epistle the Church was the sole Mistress of divine faith, here the Church was to
depend on the Apostles, as on the first masters and proposers of faith. How
these hang together I understand not. That which he says here of the Apostles
is very true understanding by masters, not Lords but teachers. The Church
neither now nor in any age was Mistress of faith, it is not the Church in right
sense, that is the teacher or propounder of divine truths, but the learner. It
is the mere sophistry of Papists to term the Pope and Prelates the Church, and
to call a hundred or two of Bishops, some of them mere titulars without any
Diocese, such as never knew what the office of a Bishop was, nor ever preached
the Gospel to any people, the Catholic Church. The concession that the
Apostles had each of them a peculiar prerogative of divine assistance and
infallibility in matters of faith proves, that this was not Peter's prerogative,
and if it were a peculiar prerogative to each Apostle, then it descends not to
any successors, and so by this Authors own words the infallibility of the Pope
or council is a mere figment. Nor is infallibility to be sought from any, but
Christ and his Apostles doctrine, who do still propound matters of divine faith
to us in the holy Scriptures. Nor has the Church of Rome any more privilege
of keeping or conveying to us the truths revealed by the Apostles then that at
Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Alexandria or any other which the Apostles
founded, and therefore Ireneus, Tertullian and such of the Fathers as direct us
to repair to the Apostolic Churches for establishment against heretics direct
us to other Churches, where the Apostles preached, besides the Roman.

It is further objected, the Church has now no new revelations, nor can ^he
make now any new points of faith, therefore we are not bound to believe her
definitions. H. T. Answers, I grant the antecedent, but deny the consequence,
for though she can make no new points, yet she can explicate the old, and
render that clear, which was before obscure, and can define against new
herefies.

I reply, The grant of the antecedent is sufficient to prove, that if the
Church, as it is termed, teach any other points of faith then were revealed to
the Apostles, we are not bound to believe her definitions, and consequently she
must prove her definitions by Apostolical tradition, and not only say they are
Apostolical, ere we are bound to believe them, it being still to be heeded,
which Paul says, Gal. 1. 8. If he or an Angel from heaven, or any man preach
(I may add or believe) any other Gospel then what was preached by Paul, and
received by the Galatians he is accursed, and consequently each person is to
examine and judge for himself whether that which is preached or defined for him
to believe by Pope or council agree with the Apostles Gospel or no, and if the
Church can only explicate the old, then an heresy cannot be made by a
council, which was not before; and if Pope John the two and twenteth his tenet
condemned in the council of Constance were heresy after the council condemned
it, it was so before, contrary to what Bellarmin says, l. 4. de Rom* pontif.
c. 14. and it follows he that can best explicate the old and render it clear
which was before obscure, has the best title to infallibility, and if the
Church or Pope have no new revelations, then he must explicate by study, and so
not by prerogative of his chair, but by ability in languages, arts, and other
knowledge, in which if he have less knowledge (as certainly some if not all
the Popes for a thousand years have had, one of them, as Alp^onsus a Castro
says, not understanding Grammar, and one of them being necessitated to
substitute another to do divine offices for him, by reason of his ignorance in
literature) there is less reason to adhere to their explications then to
others who have more skill therein* Arias Montanus, Vatablus and such other
learned men are to be relied more upon for explications and definitions in
points of faith then the Pope or Bishops, if they be such as were in the Trent
council, of whom it is manifest by Friar Paul's history of that council, that
there were scarce any of them learned in the Scriptures, especially in the main
point of the Gospel concerning justification by faith, then it is unjust to tie
men to follow the Fathers, who had less skill then others in interpreting
Scripture, as the learned of the Roman party do often show in their writings,
then did Innocent the third ill to make a new point of faith in defining
transubstantiation, which was but an opinion before, as Scotus and T^nstal have
asserted, then it is monstrous tyranny beyond all that ever any tyrants before
practiced to burn to death men, women, children, old and young, Bishops and
Noblemen for not holding it, then are the Pop^s and Popish party guilty of
shedding a sea of blood in England, France, Belgia, Germany, Italy, Spain,
Poland and elsewhere, for denying transubstantiation, the Popes supremacy, and
such other new tenets as Popes have thrust on the Christian Churches, then has
Pope Pius the fourth done wickedly in imposing on men a new Creed, and Popish
Doctors do ill in justifying it, and not opposing it. But is not this a mockery
to say the Church may not do it, and yet they do it, and H. T. avoucheth it?
what else are their tenants of receiving the eucharist under one kind, of
worshipping images, of purgatory, invocation of Saints, indulgences, service in
an unknown tongue, monastic vows with many more but new points of faith? and
is it not all one to make new points of faith, as by authority only without
any agreeableness to the meaning of the words, so to explicate the Scriptures,
as that they shall be wrested to maintain that which is not there taught, and
that condemned as heresy which is not contrary to them? Rightly said
Chillingworth Answ. to Char. Maint. part. 1. chapter 2. number. 1. Tyranny may be
established as well by a power of interpreting laws as by making them: and so
does the power of Rome set up the greatest tyranny that ever was in the world
by usurping this vast power of being an infallible interpreter of Gods laws
(though in their Prefaces to their corrected editions of their missals, and the
vulgar Latin translations of the Bible they confess they used the help of
learned men, and one Pope alter what a former did) and Judge of controversies
from whom none may appeal, and all are bound in conscience to stand to his
definitions.

H. T. says further. Object. The spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.
15. Answ. By the Rule of Apostolical tradition I grant, by humane reason or the
private spirit I deny, and such a spiritual man is in the Church as a part in
the whole, not out of it, with Sectaries.

I reply, It is true, the spiritual man judges all things by the Rule of
Apostolical tradition, I mean that which is truly and confessedly Apostolical
in the holy Scriptures, not by that unwritten tradition which Papists falsely
call Apostolical. And it is true also that the spiritual man judges all things
by humane reason not as the rule of faith, but as the Organ or means of
discerning, as the buyer judges whether he has measure by the Ell as the
rule, and by the eye as the Organ by which he compares the thing bought and
the Ell together. And if by private spirit be meant nothing but his own ability
to discern, the spiritual man judges by his private spirit, and so does a
Papist, that judges by the rule of the Councils definition, and Popes
approbation, judge what his Priest suggests to him to be such by humane reason,
and his private spirit. Nor can it be otherwise, if the judging be his act, but
it should be by humane reason, unless we imagine a man as a man to act without
reason. However this is clear by his confession, that a spiritual man is not
only the Pope, or the Catholic Church, but a part in the whole, and that he
not only receives all that the Church propounds, but judges, and therefore
does not rest on the judgment of the Church with a blind assent, and that he
is in the Church nevertheless, and this supposes that a spiritual man is not
to presuppose the Church, or Pope, or Prelate, or Priest, infallible, but to
examine what they say, and to judge for himself whether they speak right or not.

H. T. proceeds thus. Object. Right reason is the only Judge of controversies,
therefore every man's private reason must be Judge for himself. Answ. The
Antecedent I have sufficiently refuted, and I also deny the Consequence, as the
most gross and unreasonable Assertion of all others, (though Mr.
Chillingsworth's chief ground) which appears thus.

I reply, No Protestant that I know says, Right reason is the only Judge of
controversies, and therefore there was no need of refuting it. Nevertheless in
what he has said before about this point, he has refuted nothing, except it
be a sufficient Refutation to say without any reason or proof for it, that we
must not try all things by humane reason or the private spirit, which is a way
of re^uting, fit enough for this Scribler, though unfit for a Disputer. 2. Nor
do I think any Protestant makes that consequence, which is here set down;
whereas he a^cribes it to Master Chillingworth he had dealt honestly if he had
quoted the place, that we might without reading a whole Book have found it. If
I mistake not, Master Chillingworth, chap. 2. part. 1. Sect. 104. of his Answer
to Charity maintained against Knot, asserting a necessity of a personal Judge
in points of controversy concerning the Christian faith, that the Scripture
was not, and therefore the church must be it, says, Scripture is not a Judge
of controversies, but a Rule to judge them by, being understood of all those
that are possible to be judged by Scripture, and of those that arise among such
as believe the Scripture, that it is not necessary that all controversies
should be decided, that in doubtful things there is no necessity they should
be determined, but that each should bear with other, and he is safe that uses
means to find the truth though he miss it, that fundamentals are plainly
delivered in Scripture, that the m^st unlearned may understand these by the
translations of places on no side gainsaid, that each man's own reason is Judge
for himself, that there is no such personal Judge appointed by God, as Knot
would have, that his Reasons from the necessity of a personal Judge in civil
controversies hold not in this matter, that every man's particular reason is
that by which he is to judge whether this or that Doctrine be agreeable to
Scripture, that even according to the way of the Papists the giving of the
Office of Judicature to the Church comes to confer it upon every particular
man. For, 1. Before any man believes the Church infallible he must have reason
to induce him to believe it so, else why do they set down Arguments to prove
it. 2. Supposing they are to be guided by the Church they must use their own
particular reason to find out which is the Church, and to that end Popish
Doctors give notes and marks whereby to discern it, which are to no end, if a
Christian must not use his reason to judge whether they be right or no. So that
in effect this is Mr. Chillingworth 's Argument, as I conceive it, There is
neither a necessity of an infallible personal Judge among men to determine all
controversies in Religion among Christians, nor is any such appointed by God,
but each is to try for himself what is taught, and even by Popish Writers own
way he must use his particular reason to discern the validity of their proofs
for the Churches infallibility, and which is the Church, which must be his
guide by the marks of i^* therefore it must of necessity be yielded, that every
man's particular reason must be Judge for himself. Now this which H. T.
unskilfully calls the consequence, it being the consequent only, is no
unreasonable much less gross Assertion, and may very well be Mr. Chillingworth
's ground in answering Knot, notwithstanding that which here H. T. produces to
the contrary.

First, says H. T. As contradicting the Word of God, wherein we are taught,
that the things which are of God, no man knows but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.
11. No man can say Our Lord Jesus (with true faith) but in the holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 12. 3. By which grace we are saved through faith, and that not of our
selves, for it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2. 8. We are not sufficient to think
any good thing our selves as of selves, but our sufficiency is from God, 2 Cor.
3. 5. We must captivate our understanding to the obedience of faith.

I reply, Mr. Chillingworth's tenet being rightly understood contradicts none
of these Texts. For, 1. when he says, Every man's private reason is to judge
for himself, he means whether this or that be the meaning of the Scriptures,
and whether that which some say is revealed in Scripture be so or not, so that
the judging which he asserts is of things revealed by the words wherein it is
revealed, not a finding out what is not revealed. But 1 Cor. 2 11. speaks of a
knowledge of invention by search into the things without revelation, a
knowledge of invention, not of discretion, as the words verse. 10. show, But God
has revealed them to us by his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things,
even the deep things of God. Now Mr. Chillingworth (so far as I discern) did
never assert, that every man's private reason by its own search could ever find
out the mystery of the Gospel, had not the Spirit revealed them to the
Apostles, and they to us, but that each man's private reason since the Apostles
have revealed them in their Writings may judge whether that which one Teacher
says is the Apostles meaning, be truer than what another says, he makes
Reason not the Judge of the Spirits revelation, but of men's interpretation and
inference. 2 When Mr. Chillingworth makes each particular man's reason or his
private spirit, the Judge for himself, he means right reason, not every fancy
which has no proof, and that reason which he calls right reason must be
rectified by the Spirit of God and his influx upon the understanding, and so
the Text 1 Cor. 12. 3. is not against Mr. Chillingworth. 3. When he means that
every private man's reason or private spirit is a Judge to each man, he
conceives (as the matter of his discourse lead him to speak) this judgment to
be only of the meaning of the speech, wherein the things revealed are made
known, whence comes a a speculative notional knowledge, upon which a bare
dogmatical faith follows, but he asserted not right reason rectified by common
influx of the spirit, which understands only the true meaning of such a Text
or the truth of such a Proposition, to be sufficient without a special work of
the Spirit of God enabling a man to see the beauty, worth, goodness of the
things thus believed above any other thing propounded to be chosen, to beget an
affective practical knowledge, which begets faith of adherence, of which 1 Cor.
12. 3. Ephesians 2. 8. 2 Cor. 3. 5. and 10. 5. are to be understood. So that Mr.
Chillingworth's Assertion rightly understood does well consist with these
Scriptures, it being no whit contradictory to these speeches, that no man can
know by his invention the mystery hid in God but by the revelation of the
Spirit, and yet when it is revealed each man's private reason may judge of the
meaning of the Scriptures in which it is revealed, and whose Doctrine is most
agreeable to those Scriptures, and though no man can fiducially and electively
say, Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, yet without the sanctifying and
renewing or indwelling of God's Spirit a person may by his private reason
understand the meaning of this speech, Jesus is the Lord, and assent to it upon
credible motives with a bare dogmatical faith. And though saving faith be the
spetial gift of God to his Elect, yet in working faith God uses man's reason to
understand what he is to believe, and to judge it to be true, and as H. T.
says here, p. 77. The discourse and approbation of reason is always a previous
and necessary condition to our deliberate and rational acts of faith, and the
very acts themselves, are acts of reason. And though we are not of our selves
sufficient to think any good thing, yet our selves do think good things, and by
reason rectified by God's Spirit do judge them to be good. And though we are to
captivate our understanding to the obedience of faith, yet that obedience of
faith to which our understanding is captivated is by the assent of the
understanding upon the apprehensions which our reason has of the good of that
we assent to, and that which we obey.

But says H. T. Secondly, because divine revelations are not to be admitted or
rejected for their seeming consonancy or repugnance to every man's private
reason, but for the authority of the Church proposing as the immediate motive,
and the Authority of God revealing as the highest Motive of our Faith into
which it is ultimately resolved, nor can any thing be more rational than to
captivate and even renounce private reason, where God the Author of Reason
commands it.

I reply, I doubt not but Mr. Chillingworth would have said so too, and have
counted it an injury done to him to suggest it (as H. T. seems to do) to any as
if he meant otherwise, provided that by the authority of the Church proposing
be meant, not the pretended infallible authority of the Church or Prelates of
it, but either the infallible authority of the Primitive Church comprehending
the Apostles, or the probable and credible authority of the present Church or
Teachers in it. But it is likely H. T. meant it of the infallible authority of
the present Church or Prelates of it, which is not yet proved, and till it be
Mr. Chillingworth's Assertion is not overthrown.

H. T. adds, Thirdly, because if every man's private reason is to judge for
himself in matters of Religion, then all the Heresies that ever yet were in the
World were good and sound Doctrines; for there was never any Sect of Heretics
who did not pretend both to Reason and Scripture for their Tenets (how damnable
soever) and some of them such as were unaswerable by humane reason, setting
aside the Churches authority and Apostolical tradition: for who can prove by
private reason or by all the reason of man against the Arians, that a spiritual
and indivisible substance (such as God is) could beget a natural Son of himself
without a Mother? or against the Sabellians and Trinitarians that the same
indivisible essence or divine nature can be at once in three distinct persons,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? or against Nestor and Eutiches, that
one person can subsist in two different natures, the Divine and Humane in
Christ, which notwithstanding are high Fundamentals in Christianity. In all
these and many others private reason must either bend the knee and be captivate
to faith, or become Atheism.

I reply, I conceive Mr. Chillingworth would have said so too, to wit, that
private reason must bend the knee, and be captivate to faith in points
revealed, though it cannot comprehend how thing revealed should be so, and yet
his Assertion hold, that each ones private reason is to judge these to be
matters of faith; and it will judge them to be so by the evidence it has, that
these are divine revelations, which right reason knows to be so from the
agreement with the Scriptures without the present or late Churches authority or
unwritten traditions, though termed Apostolical. And those Tenants which a
private man's reason finds to be agreeable to holy Scripture, though the whole
Church of this or former Ages since the Apostles days should judge them
Heresy, and the Nicene or any other Council condemn them, yet is that person
to hold them as truth, provided he do use his reason aright to discover the
truth. And though it be that Councils may be and have been useful, when good
choice has been made of persons and undue practices to mis-lead and over-aw
them have been removed, yet as Nazianzen in his five and fiftieth Epistle ad
Procopium complained, that he knew no good issue of them, so he that shall
examine the carriage of things in Councils, even the best of them since the
Apostles days will find reason not to take any thing from them on trust merely
by reason of their authority, and for the Councils which have been above a
thousand years by reason of the activity and prevalency of Factions, and the
unlearnedness of most of the Bishops in them will find more reason to be
jealous of what Councils have determined, them to acquiesce in them. Nor will
it follow, that if this judgment be allowed to every private man, then all or
any Heresies whatsoever have been good and sound Doctrine, but that those who
have pretended Reason and Scripture have abused both. Nor is H. T. his Reason
of force, because Heretics pretend to reason and Scripture, therefore every
one is not to judge for himself, and all Heresies were sound Doctrine, any more
than than this, cavillers pretend Law and Reason, therefore Judges that use
their knowledge in the Law, and their Reason in passing Sentence do justify
cavillers, or determine no better then cavillers. Were the Churches authority
infallible, heretics might and did pretend to it is authority, and Apostolic
tradition, and therefore notwithstanding these, yet heresy may be taken for
sound doctrine as well as if private reason be made a Judge for each ones self:
yea many heresies have alleged unwritten tradition, and have had some council
or other perhaps more and more numerous to patronize them then the Orthodox: so
that I may say, setting aside the holy Scripture (which is now the rule by
which to determine what is error, what not) neither the Churches authority, nor
unwritten tradition can prove a point to be heresy or extirpate it, but rather
propagate and establish error, as by experience is manifest, there being never
more heresies established and propagated by any one, or more private men's
following their reason, then have been by the Popes and Councils supposed to be
Ecumenical and infallible, nor is there any greater cause of erring then the
confidence of infallibility, nor any error so fast rooted as that which is
decreed by men that will confess no error. As for those heresies which he
reckons as unanswerable by humane reason, if he mean they are unanswerable by
humane reason, how or in what manner the things opposed by them are, it is
granted; but of this Mr. Chillingworth does not make humane reason Judge: if
any humane reason cannot comprehend how a thing should be, nor can answer all
objections, yet if it judge that God has revealed it is so, it is to believe
it, even as Mary was to believe her having a son though she knew not how, Luke
1. 34. That which each man's reason is to judge, is not how a thing can be which
God has revealed is or shall be, but whether it be so revealed, and this he is
to do not by a blind assent to what the Church or his teachers say, but by
searching (as the Beraeans did Act. 17. 11. with Gods approbation even when
Paul preached to them) the Scriptures whether they say right. And if the
Scripture say the contrary to what those named heretics say, then are their
tenants to be rejected, of which each persons reason is to judge for himself he
being to be saved or damned according to his own faith: if not, the
determination of councils against it is not to be received. And this manner of
judging by reason, will neither promote herefie, nor Atheism, but on the
contrary, if the Popes, Councils, Churches determination be counted infallible,
it will perpetuate an error if once received, as too much woeful experience
shows in the Roman Papacy, wherein the error of transubstantiation though it be
such as is so contrary to Scripture, reason, sense, Fathers, that a man
unprejudiced would think them mere mad men, or phrenetick persons who hold it,
yet it is by Papists maintained (I dare hardly say, by the learned believed)
most obstinately and furiously to this day.

Finally, says H. T. because if private reason were the only Judge of
controversies, it would evidently follow the general councils of all former
ages (which have commanded all persons under pain of damnation to obey their
definitions and submit to their decrees) were the most tyrannical and unjust
assemblies that ever were, in usurping such a power over men's consciences, and
consequently, that there neither is nor ever was any such thing on earth as a
Church (or obliging guide in matters of faith) and Church Government,

I reply, though Mr. Chillingworth say not private reason to be the only Judge
of controversies, nor denies the Church or Council to be Judge of
controversies, but only the infallibility of them; yet, if he did say either,
neither of these things would follow which H. T. makes consequent thereon. For
notwithstanding such saying he might deem councils to have followed Scripture,
and therefore not unjust in those commands, and that there was a Church and
Church government obliging men in matters of faith though not by virtue of
their own authority, yet by virtue of Gods revelation in the holy Scriptures.
Nevertheless (if I may be allowed to speak my judgment freely) I do think
that if not all, yet most of the Councils termed general have been for more
then one hundred years too unjust and tyrannical in their commands, usurping
the words of the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15. 28. too arrogantly, as if their
authority were equal to the Apostles, and imposing on men's consciences burdens
too intolerable, and that this has been a most pernicious engine of Satan to
cause divisions and mischiefs in the Church of Christ. And certainly if any
have followed humane reason and a private spirit in deciding controversies of
faith, and judging matters of religion they have been Popes, and the Councils
approved by Popes, who do almost in every thing, in some things expressly,
forsake the Scripture, and adhere to their own reason in their Canons and
Decrees: and Papists who receive their determinations do forsake the guidance
of Gods Spirit and follow humane reason and a private spirit.

H. T, says further. Ob. Your therefore believe the Church to be infallible*
and whatever else you believe, because you judge it reasonable to believe it,
and your very act of faith it self is an act of reason: therefore reason is the
only Judge of controversies. Answ. The discourse and approbation of reason is
always a previous and necessary condition to our deliberate and rational acts
of faith, and the very acts themselves are acts of reason, not discoursing but
simply assenting: All this I grant, yes I deny your consequence, because our
acts of faith are not ultimately resolved into private reason (which faith
often is enforced to captivate) but into the authority of God revealing, and
the Church proposing. I believe it (says Tertullian) because it is impossible
(viz. to humane reason.)

I reply, 1. Chillingworth makes not reason the only Judge of controversies,
nor any Protestant, therefore the conclusion is ill fathered on them. 2. The
reason of H. T. his denial of the consequence is insufficient. For it supposes
the consequence to imply, that our acts of faith are ultimately resolved into
private reason, and this private reason judging that only to be true, of which
it conceives how it is possible. But the truth is, they that make reason the
Judge of controversies neither resolve ultimately their acts of faith into
private reason, neither do they conceive they have reason to believe only what
they conceive how it is possible to humane reason, but resolve their faith into
Gods authority as the formal and ultimate reason of their believing, and make
their reason only the means or instrument by which they find that God has
revealed that which they believe, not excluding their teachers credit, and
Churches example as a fit motive to hearken to it as a thing credible. Which
opinion is confirmed by this authors own words, making faith an act of reason,
and discourse and approbation of reason always a previous and necessary
condition to it, and therefore in all acts of faith, even when it rests on the
Churches Authority, yet eachmans private reason is the Judge for himself
discerning in controversies why he is to believe one and not another; all the
difference is, the Papist thinks he has reason to believe transubstantiation,
Popes supremacy, etc. because he takes the Church of Rome or Pope to be
infallible. The Protestant does not believe them, because the Scripture does
not say thus, which alone he takes for an infallible rule to judge by in such
controversies. Whether Papists faith be ultimately resolved into the Authority
of God revealing has been before considered a little and will more in that
which follows. To Tertullians words I can return no answer till I know where to
find them. As they are here cited they seem nor right.

Yet again says H. T. Ob. There is no Apostolical tradition for the Churches
infallibility. Answ. Yes a more universal one, then for the Canon of the
Scripture it self: (which notwithstanding you believe on that score if at all)
For there is not any one book either of the old or new Testament, which has
not been rejected by some heretic or other: if therefore it be a sufficient
proof of an universal tradition for the whole Canon of Scripture, that some one
or two general Councils have set down the number and names of all the books of
Scripture, though not without some variety, and that the Fathers have given
testimony to them, some to some books, some to others, but few to all; and that
the Church in after ages has accepted them for such, how much more universal
is the tradition for the Churches infallibility, which is virtually decided and
attested by the Anathema's and definitions of all the general Councils that
ever were, condemning all who did not humbly obey, and subscribe to them, every
decision being attested by all the Fathers (no one contradicting or condemning
the style) and most unanimously accepted by the whole Church of after ages.

I reply, the speech of H. T. here, that there is a more universal Apostolical
tradition for the Churches, that is not only the Church diffused over all the
world unanimously teaching, but also the Church represented in a Council
perfectly Ecumenical (that is to say, called out of the whole world and
approved by the Pope) it is infallibility in definitions of faith then for the
Canon of the Scriptures it self, is so monstrously false, and so pernicious, as
tending to the undermining of the fabric of Christian Religion, that it shows
an impudent face and an impious heart in the assertor. For, 1. The tradition of
the Canon of the old Testament is by the whole Nation of the Jews from Moses to
Christ, and from Christ and his Apostles, who have testified that to them were
committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 1, 2. and this witnessed by the Jews unto
the death, and by the complement and events verifying it. And though it be,
that some heretics have been adversaries to the Law and Prophets, yet scarce
any but such as have been little better then phrenetick, have denied it to be
divine, however they have conceived them not binding. And for the Canon of the
new Testament, though some parts have been a little while somewhat doubted of
in the second and third ages by some few, yet the rest have had universal and
undoubted tradition from the Apostles and Evangelists, and primitive teachers,
who witnessed the truth of the doctrine by many evident undeniable divine
miracles, and by their martyrdom, by which also in after ages many of the
Fathers and other Christians gave testimony to it, and since the Churches Greek
and Latin, Protestant and Popish Heretical and Orthodox in Asia, Africa, Europe
have attested it as divine. But for the Churches infalibility in that sense, in
which this Author means it, how little has been brought appears by the answer
here made, and that much may be said against it will appear by that which
follows. Yea I dare bodly say, that (as H. T. holds it) no one Council or
Father of esteem held the Churches infallibility in the first thousand years
from Christ's incarnation, and I think I may say for half a thousand more, but
many not only of those who are reckoned for heretics by Romanists, but also
such as have been judged Catholics have opposed it in the second and third
ages, yea whole Nations, Emperors, Kings, and states have opposed the
definitions, which the so termed Generals Councils approved by the Pope have
made, and many learned men have written against it, none died for it in that
time, nor were any miracles wrought to confirm it. Nor has the questioning of
some few of the books of Scripture, either by some heretics or a few Fathers
for a while abated the credit of those parcels questioned in the Churches of
Christ throughout the world. So that if it were true, that we believed the
Canon (as I know nothing but uncharitableness can make this Author question
whether we do) only on that score (as we do not) yet we have far more abundant
tradition for it then is for the Churches imagined infallibility. 2. I say the
Anathema's and definitions are neither formal nor virtual proofs of an
universal tradition or attestation to the Churches infallibility. For, 1. p. 7.
He confesses in the second and third ages were no councils, nor in the tenth,
in which any controversies of moment were decided, p. 25. and therefore here
this universal tradition fails. 2. Those that were not approved by the Popes,
but rejected by them, and those which were not Ecumenical have not used such
Anathema's, and yet H. T. thinks not his infallibility proved thereby. 3. That
they did well in using such Anathema's, or the Church in submitting to them may
be doubted. 4. But if that be yielded that they did well, yet surely they did
not set their Anathema's to their decisions, because they took themselves to be
infallible either by their own authority or the Popes approbation; yea it is
certain the Councils did set to their Anathema's, when they opposed the Popes
and deposed them, and defined themselves above him. And even the Council of
Trent put their Anathema's to their definitions before they were tendered to the
Pope, or Pius the fourth had approved them: but they took it they might set
their Anathema to their definitions, because they thought them right, though
not themselves infallible in them. And thus may any particular person pronounce
Anathema, as Paul did, Gal. 1. 8, 9. and yet not be thereby demonstrated
infallible. So vain is this no better then blasphemous speech of H. T. which
will further appear by examining what follows.

SECT. VIII.
The objections of Protestants against the Churches infallibility from Fathers
and Councils are vindicated from the answers of H. T.

He says. Objections from Fathers and Councils resolved. Ob. The Council of
Fanckford condemned the second Nicene Council for giving sovereign honor to
images, as you may see in the Preface to the Carolin books. Answ. The second
Nicene Council allows no such honor to images, but only a salutation or
honorary worship, not true Latria (or sovereign honor) which it defines to be
due to God only, Act. 1. 7. The Carolin books are of no authority, they say
that Council was not approved by the Pope, which is false, and that it was held
at Constantinople in Bythinia, whereas Constantinople is in Thracia.

I Reply, That honor to Images, which Papists will not have to be termed
Latria or sovereign honor proper to God; the Scripture makes sovereign honor
to be given to God only in a religious respect; to wit, bowing down the body
to them, kissing, burning incense, offering gifts, holding up the hands,
lifting up the eyes, praying to them, which the Scripture appropriates to God,
and denies to images, Matthew. 4. 10. Revel. 19. 10. 1 Kings 19. 18. Exodus 20. 4,
5. Nor does the Scripture make such distinction of Latria and Dulia, but that
it forbids such worship to be given to any image of an invisible being, which
shows subjection to them, or dependence on them; for such worship is religious,
and is an acknowledgement of a Deity in them. The Scripture does no where
appropriate Latriam or the sovereign honor or worship due to God only to
offering of sacrifice, but that it also condemns as idolatrous the other acts
named, if they be not given to Magistrates or superiors out of civil respects,
but to Images, Angels, or Saints alive or deceased in a religious respect as
superiors to us to whom we are subject and on whom we depend for help and
succor. And therefore this plaster of H. T. is too narrow to cover the foul
ulcer that came from the false Synod called the second Nicene. For what is that
salutation or honorary worship, H. T. says the second council of Nice allows
to Images? Is it not bowing down to them, which Papists themselves call
adoration, and difference from veneration, which consists only in a decent
usage without defiling, defacing, or such usage as shows hatred and contempt of
the thing or person represented, such as is done to monuments or treasure laid
up to be kept, but not as things set up higher then our selves to be
worshipped, for that is plain Idolatry, and the very same with the Gentiles
adoration of their Idols? now this did the second Nicene Council require to be
given to Images, ut erigerentur and adorarentur, etc. yea if Bellarm. lib. 2.
de Imagine, Sanct. c. 21. say true, that Council would have them adored not only
by accident, that is because joined with the thing adored, but also of
themselves as that, in which is the reason of veneration, nor only improperly
that is in the place of another, so as that the proper term of the adoration
should not be the Image, but Christ himself, but properly so as that the Image
be honored ratione sui ipsius in respect of it self, as he explains his
distinctions, chapter 20. And this adoration it was conceived by Charles the Great,
and the Synod of Francfurt that Nicene Council intended to give to Images, and
was refuted by the four books set forth by Charles the Greats authority yet to
be seen, and condemned by the authority of the Synod of Francfurt, Anno 794. at
which were present the Popes legates and did approve of the Synods
determination, or dissembled the Popes opinion. I find not that the Carolin
books say, that the second Nicene Council was not approved by the Pope; if they
did, and that they were deprived, it makes the more against the infallibility
of Councils approved by the Pope, which those three hundred Fathers
acknowledged not, who met at Francfurt. The mistake of the Country wherein Nice
was, is not such, as Bellarmin or Baronius conceive derogates from the truth of
the thing, testified by so many authors of credit, all the ancient historians
nearest that time, besides Hin^marus Agobardus, and after some English writers
as Hoveden etc. Bellarmin himself, l. 2. de council. auth. c. 7. confesses it
condemned the seventh Synod: and Platina in the life of Hadrian the first
says, that two worthy Bishops Theophylact and Stephan held a Synod in the name
of Hadrian of German and French Bishops in which the Synod, which the Greeks
call the seventh, was abrogated.

H. T. adds, Ob. The Lateran Council under Pope Leo the tenth Sess. 11. defined
a Pope to be above a Council, and the Council of Constance, Sess. 4. defined a
Council to be above a Pope. Answ. Neither part was ever yet owned by the Church
for an Ecumenical decree or definition, and if it were, it would be answered
that the Lateran Council defined only a Pope to be above a Council taken
without a Pope, or not approved; and that the Council of Constance only
defined a Council approved by a Pope to be above a Pope without a Council,
which definitions are not contradictory, no more than to say, one part of any
thing is bigger then another, and the whole bigger then both; so that from
hence it cannot be inferred that either Council erred: nor was either decree
approved by the Pope.

I reply, this is impudent outfacing with shifts the truth in things manifest
to all that enquire into them. He cannot deny that these contrary definitions
were of two Councils which he himself, p. 33, 36. terms general Councils, and
makes Popes president in both, and both he sets down in his Catalogue made to
prove a succession in the Church of Rome, and yet here he denies their
definitions to be Ecumenical, what is an Ecumenical definition if that an
Ecumenical Council be not? How is it an Ecumenical definition when it
determins against John Hus, or against Christ's own express command for
communion under one kind, and nor Ecumenical, when it decrees the supremacy
of the Council above the Pope? This is mere juggling of h^^us pocus, which shows
that when it likes them the Council shall be approved, when not, rejected, and
thereby take upon them to be above Pope and Council. But if this be the fashion
of their Councils who can tell when one decree is contrary to another if these
were not? or who can tell when a decree is approved by a Pope if neither of
these were? where is the agreement? where is the infallibility they so vainly
arrogate to their Church? Martin the fifth expressly confirmed the acts of the
Council of Constance in the 45. Session, of which one was in the fourth
Session, that every one though of Papal dignity was bound to obey a general
Council in the things pertaining to faith. That which Bellarm. l. 2. de Council.
aut. c. 19. says that he only approved some things not others, because he
said, sic conciliariter facta is but a shift; for that expression is not set
down by way of limitation and distinction, but explication, noting the reason
of approving all because they were done conciliariter, as the word sic shows,
which implies his acknowledgment that they were all so done. Besides he not
excepting it expressly could not be interpreted to except that from his
confirmation more then any thing else there acted, it might as well be said he
excepted the decree about half communion; yea if he had excepted that decree of
the Councils being above the Pope he had merely deluded the Council, that
decree being their principal decree, and for which it was called. Add hereto
that the words of his Bull thereupon do more fully manifest that he did not
except it; and the decree of the Council of Basil called after by virtue of his
Bull shows, that they understood it to confirm that decree proceeding against
Pope Eugenius conformably to it. And for the other Council that Pope Leo the
tenth did not confirm the decree of the Popes being above a Council is contrary
to Bellarmin l. 2. de Council. aut. c. 18. who recites the decree as a proof,
and c. 5. reckons it among the general Councils approved by the Pope, as
appears, says he, in that he was president in person. And for the other answer
of H. T. it is ridiculous, since the Councils words are express that any person
though of Papal dignity was to obey the general Council, and the decree was
made of purpose to justify their fact in putting down a Pope. And there was no
question nor need be, who is above other when both join, but all the question
is and so the definition must be construed, when they are severed. Yea it would
be trifling to say the Pope should obey the Council, when the Pope concurred,
for it is all one as to say be should obey himself: and to say the Council is
above the Pope when the Council and Pope are one is frivolous, for in all such
comparisons the words express what each is severally as they stand in
competition according to their several authorities, and therefore the
similitude of H. T. is frivolous as being not to the purpose. Lastly, with what
face can this man say that neither Council erred, when Bellarmin says c. 7.
that in the Florentin and last Lateran the Council of Constance was rejected in
respect of the first Sessions, wherein it defined a Council to be above a Pope?
so that all the wit of man is not able to avoid this objection, but that
according to the suppositions of Popish Doctors either a general Council
approved by a Pope may err in a point of faith, or else there is no error in a
main point of their faith, when one general Council approved by a Pope
contradicts a former general Council approved by a former Pope of greater
freedom and celebrity by reason of the Emperors presence and for other
causes, which was seconded by another Council not long after, as appears by the
next objection, which is thus set down by H. T.

Ob. The Council of Basil defined, that a Council was above a Pope. Answ. The
decree was not approved, nor any other of that Council, but only such as
concerned Church benefices. See Eugenius with Terrecremata l. 2. c. 100.

I reply, I find no such distinction in Pope Nicolas the fifth his Bull, but
that it is confirmed altogether. But it seems when it pleases these men the
Council shall be approved, when not rejected. So that it is not either the
calling of a Council by a Pope, or the universality of the Fathers, or the
approbation of the Pope can confirm it, if another Pope reject it, which they
will do when it is against their power and profit. And hereby is proved that
Popes are vertiginous, that Popery is as mutable as the weathercock, that there
is so little show of agreement, unity and infallibility in Popes and Councils
approved by him, that scarce any states are more full of changes in matters
civil then they are in matters Ecclesiastical and of faith, nor in any part of
the world more disagreement then among Papists.

Further says H. T. Ob. The Council of Ariminum defined Arianism. Answ. It did
not, and that equivocal decree that was there made was never approved by the
Pope; and the Fathers themselves (who were deluded by the Arians with words
that bare a double sense when they perceived the fraud) lamented and renounced
the fact.

I reply, H. T. his own words confirm the objection. For, 1. If the Fathers
were deluded by the Arians then they were not infallible; and so a general
Council approved by the Pope may err in a main point of faith. 2. If that
Council did not define Arianism, how were they deluded? wherein was the fraud
but in that the words being of double sense, yet indeed decreed Arian doctrine?
what need they lament or renounce the fact if it were not so? why does Austin
l. 3. contra Maximinum c. 14. oppose that council to that of Nice, and
Maximinus allege it for himself if it did not decree Arianism? why did
Ruffinus, Socrates, Basil cited by Bellarm, l. 1. de council. c. 6. reject it,
and Bellarmin reckon it among the reprobate councils, if it were not Arian? and
that Pope Liberius did subscribe to, it is related by Hierom in his catalogue
of writers in Fortunatianus, in his Chronicle, by Hillary sundry times and
others.

Yet says H. T. Ob. The council of Trent erred by adding to the Canon of
Scripture. Answ. It did not: the third council of Carthage approved all the
same books by name excepting Baruch whom they compared with the Prophet
Hieremy, whose Secretary he was, and this twelve hundred years ago.

I reply, if the council of Trent did not err, Pope Gregory the great did, who
expressly denied the books of Maccabees to be canonical, l. 19. Moral. c. 17.
As for the third Synod of Carthage it was not an Ecumenical Synod, and it is
over balanced by the Synod of Laodicea before it, who omitted them. And if the
ancients termed the Apocryphal books canonical or divine, they are to be
understood according to Ruffinus his explication in his Exposition on the
Creed, and others, that they were canonical in a sort as being read in the
Churches by reason of some histories or moral sentences, but not so as that
they were brought to confirm the authority of faith by them.

H. T. further says. Ob. The Fathers erred some in one thing some in another.
Answ. A part I grant, all together (speaking of any one age) I deny, and they
all submitted to the Church and so do likewise our Schoolmen, who differ only
in opinion concerning School points undefined, not in faith.

I reply. 1. That the Fathers of some ages did generally hold errors is
apparent in many particulars. Augustine held it an Apostolical tradition that
the Sacrament of the Eucharist was necessary for infants, as appears l. 1. de
pec. merito and remiss. c. 24. and elsewhere, and Maldonat on John 6. v. 53.
says that it was the opinion of Augustine and Pope Innocent the first, and that
it prevailed. in the Church for six hundred years, and yet the council of
Trent, sess. 21. c. 4. can. 4. says, If any say the communion of the Eucharist
to be necessary for little ones before they come to years of discretion, let him
be Anathema. The like might be said of sundry other points, as that of the
Millenary opinion, the souls not seeing God till the day of judgment, etc. 2.
That all the Fathers did not submit to the Church of Rome, is manifest by the
Asian Bishops opposition to Victor about Easter, to Stephen about rebaptization
by Cyprian and others, to Boniface, Zozimus and Celestin about appeals from
Africa to Rome by Aurelius Augustinus and a whole council. 3. That the
Schoolmen differ in points of faith defined is manifest in Peter Lumbard l. 1.
sent. did. 17. who held the holy Ghost to be the charity whereby we love God,
and the dissent from him in that point, the differences about the Popes
authority above a council, power to absolve subjects from the oath of
allegiance, certainty of faith concerning a man's own justification, Gods
predetermination of man's will, and many more yet controverted between
Dominicans and Jesuits, Jansenists and Molinists. 4. All submit not to the
Pope, but some appeal from him to a council, others by withstanding in disputes
and otherwise decline his sentence in their cause, of which the opposition
against Pope Paul the fifth his interdict by the republic of Venice about
their power over Ecclesiastics is a famous instance, evidently showing that
all that live in communion with the Sea of Rome acknowledge not such a
supremacy and infallibility to it as the modern Jesuits ascribe to it.

Yet again, says H. T. Ob. St. Augustine tells St. Hierom that he esteems none
but the writers of the Canonical books to have been infallible in all they
write, and not to err in any thing. Answ. Neither do we, we esteem not the
writers of councils infallible in all they write, nor yet councils themselves,
but only in the Ecumenical decrees or definitions of faith.

I reply, Augustine Epist. 19. to Hierom does not only say thus, I confess to
thy charity, that I have learned to give this reverence and honor only to
those books of Scriptures, which are now called canonical, that I do most
firmly believe no author of them to have erred any thing in writing; but he
adds also, But I so read others, that how much soever they excel in holiness
and doctrine, I do not think it true because they have so thought, but because
they could persuade me either by those Canonical authors or by probable reason
that it abhors not from that which is true. Which plainly shows. 1. That he
counted only the writers of Canonical Scriptures and those books infallible. 2.
That the sentence of others however excellent in sanctity and doctrine, is not
to be believed because they so thought. 3. That their sentence prevailed with
him so far as it is proof did persuade. 4. That this proof must be by the
Canonical Scriptures or probable reason.

H. T. adds. Ob. St. Augustine Epist. 112. says we are only bound to believe
the Canonical Scriptures without dubitation, but for other witnesses we may
believe or not believe them according to the weight of their authority. Answ.
He speaks in a particular case in which nothing had been defined by the Church,
namely whether God could be seen with corporal eyes? But the decrees of general
councils are of divine authority, as we have proved; and therefore according to
St. Augustine to be believed without dubitation.

I reply, though he speaks upon occasion of one particular case, yet the speech
is universal [but for other witnesses or testimonies (besides the Canonical
Scriptures) by which any thing is persuaded to be believed, it is lawful for
thee to believe or not to believe, as thou shall weigh how much moment those
things have or not have to beget faith:] There Is not a word of exception
concerning a thing defined by the Church; yea the opinion of Augustine is full
and plain in his second book of baptism against the Donatists, chapter 3. to take
away infallibility from any Bishops or councils Ecumenical, which I think fit
to translate to show how contrary it is to Austin to make any councils after
the Apostles infallible. Who knows not, says he, the holy Canonical Scripture
as well of the old as of the new Testament to be contained in it is certain
bounds, and that it is so to be preferred before all the later letters of
Bishops that a man may not doubt or dispute of it at all, whether that which it
is manifest to be written in it be true or right, but for the letters of
Bishops which have been or are written after the Canon confirmed, it is lawful
that they be reprehended, if perhaps in them any thing have deviated (or gone
out of the way) from truth, both perhaps by the wiser speech of any man more
skilful in that thing, and by the more grave authority of other Bishops, and
the prudence of the learned, and by councils. And those councils which are held
in single Regions or Provinces are to give place without any windings to the
authority of more full councils, which are gathered out of the whole Christian
world, and often times those former fuller councils may be mended by later, when
by some trial of things that is open which was shut up and known which did lie
hid, without any smoke of sacrilegious pride, without any swollen neck of
arrogance, without any contention of wan envy, with holy humility, with
Catholic peace, with Christian charity.

Yet once more, says H. T. Ob. St. Athanasius (in his Epistle to the Bishops
of Africa) tells the Arians they in vain ran about to seek councils, since the
Scripture is more powerful then all councils. Answ. He says it was vain for
them who had rejected the general council of Nice, nor doubt we but the
Scripture has in many respects a pre-eminence above the definitions of general
councils, and a higher degree of infallibility, yet these also are infallible
in points of faith.

I reply, the reason of Athanasius shows it was in vain for Arians to seek to
councils, because the Scripture was against them, not because the council of
Nice was against them, as the very words recited by H. T. show, who does well
to acknowledge the Scriptures pre-eminence, which justifies Protestants who
stick to the Scriptures against councils, which do often swerve from them and
sometimes oppose them. As for the degree of infallibility (if there be any
degrees of infallibility, which perhaps a Logician will deny, infallibility
being a mere negation of liableness to error or being deceived) H. T. ascribes
to them, it is so uncertain what it is, and so weakly proved, that none that
loves his soul should rest on it, and not try, what they hold, by the
Scriptures confessedly more infallible. As for the speech of the council of
Basil there is no reason why Protestants or others should rest on it, when
Papists themselves, even H. T. p. 79. rejects it, and says it was not approved
in any decree, but such as concern Church benefices; and yet this man concludes
with it is speech about the authority of a general council, as if it were
certain. So vertiginous is this Author.

ARTIC. VI.
Sanctity and Miracles prove not the Roman Church true.
The Roman Church is not demonstrated to be the true Church by her Sanctity and
Miracles.

SECT. I.
The Texts brought by H. T. to prove that the true Church is known by Sanctity
and Miracles are showed to be impertinent.

H. T. proceeds thus, Article 6. The true Church demonstrated by her Sanctity
and Miracles. Our Tenet is, that the Roman Catholic Church is known and
evidently distinguished from all false Churches, not only by the marks and
properties by us premised, but also by her sanctity and power of doing
Miracles, and is proved thus, That is the true Church and lawful Spouse of
Christ which is eminent for Sanctity of Discipline, and Doctrine, and for
Miracles. But the Roman Catholic Church and no other is eminent for Sanctity
of Discipline and Doctrine, and for Miracles; therefore the Roman Catholic
Church and no other is the true Church and lawful Spouse of Christ. The Major
for Sanctity is proved by that Article of the Apostles Creed, I believe the
holy Catholic Church, as also by these Texts of holy Scripture; Christ gave
himself for his Church, cleansing her by the Laver of Water (Baptism) in the
Word, that he might present her to himself a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle, but that she might be holy and unspotted, Ephesians. 5. 27. These
things ye were (says St. Paul) but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but
ye are justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of our
God, 1 Cor. 6. 10. A good Tree brings forth good Fruit, by their Fruit ye
shall know them, St. Matthew. 7 17, 20. Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way
which leads to Life, etc. If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou have,
and give to the poor, etc. and come and follow me, St. Matthew. 19. 21. There be
Eunuchs who have gelded themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven, he that can take
let him take, St. Matthew. 10. 12. Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them,
etc. Heb. 13. 17.

Answ. 1. THe Syllogism is not good, the words [and no other] being wanting in
the Major Proposition, and, if they be put in, the Major is false. That which
is eminent for Sanctity of Discipline and Doctrine, and for Miracles, and no
other, is the true Church and lawful Spouse of Christ. For a Chnrch may be
true and a lawful Spouse of Christ which is not eminent for Miracles. Else it
would go ill with all the Churches since Miracles have ceased, and with the
Church consisting of John Baptist and his Disciples. But as it is now expressed
by H. T. I grant the Major, though except the words of Christ, Matthew 7. 17, 20.
the Texts are all impertinent. The Article of the Creed is not meant of the
mere visible church, but of the church which is also the invisible of the elect
persons, nor is it meant of holiness of outward Discipline and Doctrine, but of
inward real holiness, and so are Ephesians. 5. 27. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. yea the former
is meant of that holiness, which is perfect without spot or wrinkle, when the
Church is presented to himself at his appearing, and the other of that
sanctifying which is by the Spirit of God, and not only by Baptism. The Texts
Matthew. 7. 13, 14. and 19. 11, 12. and Mark 10. 21. Heb. 13. 17. are not
expressions of properties, which are marks of the church, but Precepts, and
signify what duty some did or ought to do. Now the doing of some duties is not
a mark of the church, as v. g. doing justice, giving to the poor, relieving the
Saints, selling all we have, which may be in Infidels; and those duties which
are in the three later Texts are special duties of some, and therefore not
marks which agree to the whole church, but such as all members are not tied to,
every member (not a woman) is not to geld himself, but he that can take it, nor
to sell all (Papists make these Evangelical counsels of more perfection than is
ordinary) nor to obey Prelates, and therefore in such they are no parts of
Sanctity, much less marks of a true church.

SECT. II.
The Sanctity of men in former Ages proves not the holiness of the present
Roman Church.

BUt it is the Minor which is to be denied, of which H. T. says thus, Now that
the Roman Catholic Church has abounded with, and brought forth Saints in all
Ages (which is a pregnant and convincing proof of our second Proposition) is
manifest by the Chronicles and Martyrologies of the whole Christian World.

Answ. 1. To talk of the Roman catholic church is nonsense as is showed
before. 2. It is scarce good sense to say, The Church brings forth Saints, when
the church is no other than the Saints or a company of Saints, 3. Were it
yielded that the Church did abound with and bring forth Saints in all Ages, yet
this proves not the sanctity of the church, but of those Saints in it, nor does
it at all prove the sanctity of the Discipline or Doctrine, but of the persons,
much less the power of Miracles, the sanctity of the church, persons being
often Saints, as John Baptist, who have not power of doing Miracles, and unholy
persons have it sometimes, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. and if it did prove any thing it
would prove the privilege of the person, not the sanctity of the church. 4. The
sanctity of the now Roman Church is not proved by the holiness of persons in
former Ages, whereof many never were of Rome, nor is it likely ever heard of
it, some of them opposed the Roman Church, and some lived and died in a state
of disclaiming of it, and some kind of excommunication from it, and had they
lived to see its pride and wickedness, as now it is, would no doubt have
abhorred it with greatest detestation; much less is it proved by the holiness
of men dead one thousand or four hundred years, especially when the holiness of
those few is obscured by the almost universal ungodliness of their chief
Bishops (whom they account their visible Heads, and essential parts of their
Church) and Clergy and Laity in Rome it self for a thousand years past, which
has been so notorious, as almost all their Historians, and Preachers, and
Poets have described it so, as that it may be conceived justly, that Rome is
and has been a sink of all uncleanness: There are verily, says Bellarm. lib.
4. de notis Eccles. cap. 13. in the Catholic Church very many evil persons:
and some of their own Popes, as Adrian the sixth, have confessed by Cheregatus
his Legate, that abominations were committed in that holy See, the inf^^^ity
passed from the Head to the Members, from the Popes to the inferior Prelates,
in so much that there has been none that has done good, no not one.
Innumerable have been the complaints made by all sorts, and sometimes by the
Princes of the German Empire of their Grievances by the Popes and Court of
Rome. Nor do Travelers tell us of any Reformation considerable since the Trent
Council: their own Writers tell us, there is no Excommunication for the common
vices, but only some Penance, which effects no change; in the apprehension of
Sir Edwin Sandys, if it were not for a little formal abstinence in Lent there
would be an universal Deluge of vice in Italy; so that he who denies the Roman
Clergy and Church to be a most unholy and filthy People has gotten a Whores
forehead that cannot blush. There are sins among Protestants, but I never yet
met with Writer or Traveller, but would prefer London and other Protestant
Towns as more free from impurity of body, blasphemy, cruelty, treachery,
injustice, Atheism, and such other sins as are not to be named, than Rome is,
where has been permission of Whore-houses for Money by the Pope, and the
Whores and Bastards of Popes and Cardinals so notoriously domineer.

SECT. III.
The imagined holiness of Benedict, Augustine, Francis, Dominick, proves not
the verity of the now Roman Church.

BUt let us see what H. T. says for their Holiness, St. Augustine and his
fellows who converted England, when they were received into Canterbury, (says
Hollingshead, part. 1. page 100.) began to follow the trade of the Apostles,
exercising themselves in continual prayer, fasting, watching, and preaching,
despising all worldly things, and living in all points according to the
Doctrine which they taught. St. Francis, St. Benet, and St. Dominick, were all
eminent for sanctity of life, as the Magdeburgian Centurists, confess. cent. 13.
Col. 11. 79. But I never yet heard of any Protestant Saints in the World.

Answ. What a foolish proof is this of his Minor, that the Roman Church and no
other is eminent for sanctity of life, because Benedict and Austin the Monk a
thousand years since, Francis and Dominick five hundred years ago were such in
his esteem, and he has heard of no Saints among Protestants? As if there might
be no Saints in the Greek church, though he hear of no Protestant Saints, or as
if the Greek church now judged schismatic might not be as well proved or
rather better to be eminent for sanctity of life for the holiness of
Chrysostom, Basil, Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, as the now Roman, for the
reputed holiness of Austin, Benet, Francis, and Dominick. But might there not
be Protestant Saints which he hears not of? Protestants are the same with
Primitive Christians in their Religion or Articles of Faith and Worship, and as
such all the holy Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, which have been true
Christians have been Protestant Saints, as protesting against the Popish
corruptions in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship; so all the holy men who have
protested against them in all Ages have been Protestant Saints. Thus Cyprian
and Augustine who protested against the Popes usurpation about receiving Appeals
from Africa; Gregory the Great who protested against the usurpation of the
Title and Power of an universal Bishop, the Synod of Frankford which protested
against Image Worship were Protestant Saints. And for Waldus, and the Waldenses
that they were Protestants is manifest, and Saints too, their own Works showed.
(See Morland's History of the Evangelical Churches in Piedmont) even Rainerius
their Adversary being Judge. And for Wickliff, Reginald Peacock, Robert
Grosthead, Richardus Armachanus, and many more their Lives were so exemplary as
shamed their Adversaries, and yet they were Protestants more or less against
Popish Errors and Abuses. It is true, Protestants are not canonized Saints by
Popes, who use to canonize for Money or other respects some ignorant
superstitious persons, or else active Instruments for their party: but the
holiness of Protestants since Luther began the Reformation has been such as
has caused even their Enemies to ascribe much excellency to their eminent
Leaders. Notwithstanding Bolse^k's Lie (of which the wiser Papists are ashamed)
yet Florimundus Raymundus, Papyrius Massonius, and others, acknowledged Calvin
to have been a man eminent for strictness of life, and industry in his pastoral
work beyond any Papist they could name. Melancthon is commended even by Papists
for his holy, peaceable, and painful conversation in the work of the Lord. The
Lives of the chief Reformers showed them to be such as had the Spirit of God
dwelling in them, Hooper and Bradford in England, Patrick Hammilton and George
Wiseheart in Scotland were men of exemplary godliness; that I name not late
men, such as John Fox, John Dod, Richard Grenham, and many more whose Lives and
Works showed them to have been men of holy conversation, and of much
acquaintance with God, whom this Scribler and such like superstitious Papists,
who place holiness in observance of humane inventions rather than in Gods
commands, obeying the Pope rather than Christ, and believing the lying Legends
of Friars before the true reports of godly Preachers of the Gospel, having
prejudice against them, condemn as Heretics. Yethet they that place holiness
in following the Rules of Christ, and not humane traditions, do judge them to
have been holy and blessed men, such as have had not only a form, but also the
power of godliness. As for what H. T. says out of Hollingshead of Austin and
his followers, it speaks only what they did at the beginning, but it is certain
that Austin did not so persevere, but that he showed much pride toward the
British Bishops, and so much malice to the Banchor Monks, men of more reputed
holiness than himself, that he was suspected at least to have been Instigator
of a cruel Massacre of two thousand of them for not submitting to him, and
receiving the Roman Rites. And for his converting of England, though I am
willing to let him have his due commendation, yet neither is it true that he
converted all England, and those he did convert he did also pervert by his
obtruding the Romish Orders, which Christ never appointed, whence a great
Deluge of Superstition spread over Britain, and much discord and misery
followed thereupon, as may be seen in the Writers of the English Histories. As
for Benedict who was before Austin the Monk, and Francis and Dominick after,
that which I find in the Relation of their Lives by Villegas, translated by
Heigham, gives me no such cause as to judge them to have been men of such
holiness as the Popes and Friars have judged them to be, but at the best
deluded persons with the Error of those times, in which holiness was placed in
monastical profession, and austere Discipline, which the Apostle counts to be
no better than will worship, Col. 2. 23. and their talk of their Miracles and
Visions are no better than old wives tales, upon the report of which Popes as
ignorant as themselves, or otherwise corrupt, have canonized them for their own
ends; and the preaching of Dominick was against the truth professed by the
Albigenses, whom Rainerius confesses to have been men otherwise holy in Life
and Doctrine, but that they spoke against the church of Rome, of whose
idolatry, pride, cruelty, avarice, uncleanness of body, there is so much in all
the Writers of those times as is sufficient to show, that those men had cause
to abhor them, and to fear the yielding subjection to them, who had departed
from Christ, by their setting up other Mediators besides him, and changed pure
Christian Religion into a corrupt mixture of Paganism, Judaism, and
Christianity: the shedding of whose Blood was in a great measure caused by
Dominick's Sermons, who may be therefore judged a wicked Murderer rather than
an holy Saint. That which the century Writers say of these men is but a
Relation out of the Writers of the Romanists, that they were by them accounted
eminent for sanctity according to the opinion of those times: but that they any
where ascribed to them real holiness I find not.

SECT. IV.
The Roman Church is not proved to be the true Church by the holness of their
Doctrine, but the contrary is true.

H. T. proceeds thus, Add hereunto what the Catholic Church teaches, that the
Commandments are possible, nay, must be kept, she teaches the necessity of
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction, with many other practices of
self-denial; she teaches obedience to Priests and spiritual Pastors, in things
belonging to the soul and the government of the Church; she teaches much
fasting, prayer, and mortification; she exhorts to good works, voluntary
poverty, chastity, and obedience. The contrary to all which Doctrines are
taught by Protestants and other Sectaries.

Answ. THe Papists teach not only that the Commandments of God are possible,
and that they must be kept (which Protestants teach also) but they also teach,
that in this life a person in the state of grace may perfectly keep the whole
Law of God, so as not to sin, (except venially, which is with them not a sin
properly, as being besides, not against the Law) and thereby be justified, and
that many things, which are horrid evils, are venial sins, and that a person
may satisfy for them, by Works of Penance, which are for the most part easy
things, yea, they teach that a man may by his good works merit of condignity
(either by virtue of Gods promise, or the worth of the work) eternal life, yea,
that he may do Works of Supererogation, and merit for others, and that thereby
is made up a Treasury in the Church, which with the redundance of Christ's
sufferings may by Indulgences be laid out for others, for the relaxation of
their punishment in Purgatory. But this Doctrine Protestants abhor, as being so
far from being holy* that they detest it as anti-evangelical, proudly
evacuating the grace of the Gospel, and they teach that most blessed, holy, and
precious Doctrine of the Gospel, that the most holy mee^ man is unable in this
life, though regenerate according to the measure of renewing grace, he has to
keep the Law of God perfectly, so as to fail in no point, or so as to be
justified before God by pleading any Works of his own before, or after
Regeneration, or can merit of condignity in proper acception any thing at Gods
hands, much lesseternal life, but all that are justified are justified by faith
in Christ freely by the grace of God through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, and that eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
and this we are sure as far exceeds in holiness Popish Doctrine as Christ
exceeds Moses, the Gospel the Law, the new covenant the old. Protestants teach
the necessity of contrition of spirit for sin, and confession of sin to God,
and satisfaction to men whom we have injured, if able: but the necessity of
confession to a Priest, and such power of absolution and enjoining Penance, as
Papists ascribe to a Priest, and such satisfaction to God for sin, as they
teach and practice, we deny, as being injurious to the Blood of Christ, an
arrogant usurpation of what Christ never conferred, but a fruit of ignorance of
the nature of repentance, and of the mystery of the Gospel, and a mere Engine
to rob the people, and to hold them in slavish subjection to their Priests. We
say, that it is true self-denial when Christ requires it, and either the glory
of God, the truth of Christ, and obedience to him must be forsaken, or our
goods, liberties and lives, than to deny our selves by not retaining them: but
that it is no part of that self-denial which Christ requires, nor any part of
Christian mortification for a man unnecessarily to leave his estate and
employment, to whip himself, creep to a cross, go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem,
and such other things as Christ never required, but are mere superstition and
hypocrisy. Protestants teach obedience to spiritual Pastors in things
belonging to the soul, and the government of the Church, when they teach them
to observe what Christ commanded: but they justly refuse to subject their
consciences to such commands of Prelates and Priests as Christ never appointed,
but judge it necessary to stand fast in the liberty they have by Christ, and
not be entangled with the yoke of bondage, which Popes, and Prelates, and
Priests, under pretense of the Church (of which they are the least part) about
difference of Meats, Marriage, Holy Days, Temples, and such like things
endeavor to impose on their consciences and practice, as being injurious to
their Christian freedom and an heavy burden. Protestants teach much fasting
when God calls for it in time of affliction, and for more advantage in prayer,
but they reject Popish set fasts, and their mock-fasts, in forbearing flesh of
beasts, eggs, milk, butter, yet eating and drinking other food, and drink
perhaps more delicious in fullness, as a mere delusion. Protestants teach
praying much in spirit with understanding of what they ask with faith, and
trust to be heard through the Name of Christ for such good things as God has
promised: but they deride justly Popish praying in Latin by those who
understand not what they say, their saying Ave Mary's and the Creed for
Prayers, their superstitious saying Prayers with Beads by tale, their tying
themselves to canonical hours, as more holy than other times, their Prayers for
Souls in Purgatory, which is a mere figment, serving only to affright silly
people that they may draw money from them for saying Masses, they detest that
most abominable invocating of the Virgin Mary, wherein she is extolled as
Author of Grace, Mother of Mercy, having authority over or upon Christ, with
abundance of wicked Superstitions which are used in Popish devotion to
canonized Saints, Crucifixes, a piece of Bread, imagined Relics of Saints.
Protestants press on men true mortification of the sins of the flesh or deeds
of the body by the spirit working hatred of the inward lusts, and forsaking the
evil practices of them; but they reject the foolish practices of whipping
themselves, tearing the flesh with lying on Briars, as they say Benedict did,
tumbling in the Snow, as they say Francis of Assisium did, girding the body
with Iron, and lying on the ground, as they say Dominick did, which neither
subdue lust, nor the Devils temptations, but are like the acts of Bedlams, and
may be, and perhaps are done out of vainglory and proud conceit of meriting by
them. Protestants exhort to good works, but deny the building of Monasteries to
be such, for idle Monks, that in stead of working with their hands that they
might give to him that needs eat the bread to the full, which belongs to the
needy poor, under pretense of praying, which is no special function.
Protestants teach men to be poor in spirit, to bear patiently poverty, when
Gods providence allots it; but the voluntary poverty of Monks and Friars they
reject as being a curse, or else a mere hypocritical counterfeiting of poverty,
when they enjoy greatest plenty, and live in fullness, as Monks and Friars
usually do, or else a mere madness, as in Anchorites and E^^mites. Protestants
teach true chastity in Marriage and single life, but they detest Popish vows of
single life in Priests, Friars, and Nuns, as superstitious snares, when few of
them have the power of continence, and they abhor the terming of the use of the
Marriage Bed in Presbyters unchaste and unholy, and most of all the hellish
Doctrine of those that teach it to be better for Priests to use Concubines than
Wives, and tolerate fornication and other unclean lusts when they forbid
Marriage, and excommunicate, and deprive, and imprison, and persecute Priests
and Bishops for it. We Protestants teach obedience to Parents and Magistrates,
and all that are over us in the Lord: but abhor the Vow of blind obedience to
Superiors never appointed by God, as slavish, and oft-times mischievous and
destructive of the necessary obedience due to Parents, and Governors, whom God
has established. All which things being considered, we are fully assured that
the Protestants Doctrine in these things is most holy, and the Popish impure,
though to men that know not the Scripture it have a show of wisdom and
holiness. Yea, we avouch that there is scarce a Church in the World that is
more unholy than the Roman in their maintaining the Worship of Images, which
hardens the Jews from Christianity, in their adoration of the Bread they eat as
their Maker, which moved Averroes a Mohammedan to prefer Philosophers before
Christians, the infallible Power of the Pope, though a most wicked man by
himself, or in a Council of his liking to set down what is to be held in point
of Faith, to dissolve Leagues, and break Oaths upbraided by Amurath the great
Turk to Christians, to dispense with incestuous Marriages, deny Marriage to
Priests, which Pius the second a Pope thought fitter to be restored, forbidding
some Meats as unclean at some times, the Cup at the Eucharist, and the ordinary
reading of the Bible in their own Language to the Lay People, directing men to
invocate Saints, teaching them to ascribe salvation to their own Merits, making
the man of sin the Vicar of Christ, besides what some have taught about
deposing and destroying Princes, giving equivocating Answers to Magistrates
upon Oath, exempting Priests from subjection to Princes, allowing the breach of
faith to those they judge Heretics, making cursing Parents in passion, and
other horrid evils venial sins, allowing great crimes upon the probable opinion
of one Doctor, killing a man to vindicate honor, and such other most odious
resolutions of cases of conscience of the late Jesuits, which the more sober
and honest Jansenist in his late Book of the Mystery of Jesuitisme, has
discovered; in which there may be found such a Nest of most stinking Doctrines
vented by Jesuits, as honest moral Infidels by the light of nature did detest,
and from their Doctrines we may truly infer, that Rome as now it is, is indeed
the Mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. On the other side, though
Protestants are not without Errors, yet in the main matters, especially in the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and holiness and righteousness of life their Doctrine
shines more bright than ever it did in any Church since the Age following the
Apostles unto this day.

SECT. V.
The devotion of Romanists shows not the holiness of the Roman Church, it being
for the most part will worship and pharisaical hypocrisy.

H. T. goes on thus, Her Churches are open and Divine Service said not only on
all Sundays and Holy Days, but every day in the week, and that the greatest
part in the forenoon. There is five times more preaching and catechizing, and
ten times more fasting and praying in the Catholic Church than in the
Protestant; her Sacraments are more, and more frequented, and in stead of an
innumerable multitude of religious men and women that are in the Catholic
Church, who have freely forsaken all things to follow Christ, and totally
relinquished the riches, pleasures, and preferments of this life to serve him
in the remainder of their days in vows and practices of holy poverty,
obedience, and chastity, Protestants have an innumerable company of Sects and
Sect-masters that daily spring out of their stock, such as are continually
broaching new Heresies, and always at defiance one with another.

Answ THe Popish devotion is so far from proving the holiness of the Roman
Church falsely and most impudently termed the Catholic Church, that it rather
proves them a Synagogue of Satan than a Church of Christ. Their Churches as
they term them, stand open, but that which is to be seen or heard in them is
more like the Temples of Pagan gods than Christian Assemblies. In the primitive
times Christians had no Images in their places of meeting, but Popish Temples
are full of Images and Pictures, and the service to them like the Pagans to
their Idols, bowing down to them, burning Incense before them, offering gifts
to them, lifting up and adoring a piece of Bread, with a great deal of outward
pomp of Lights, Garments, garnishing of the house, attendance of Officers,
suiting better to womanish and childish persons than holy spiritual Christians.
Their Mass, which is that they glory in, is nothing like the Institution of
Christ, nor used to that end for which he appointed his last Supper to be
continued, but a mere show with many ridiculous gestures, motions, actions,
with Lamps burning in the day, Copes and Garments in imitation of the Jews,
which make it unlike the primitive simplicity of Christians, which was without
them many hundreds of years. Their many Holy days were justly heretofore
complained of as a great grievance to people, and it is a great happiness to be
freed from them all, as begetting idleness, luxury, and penury, the Lord's Day
excepted, which is no where among them observed as a Day set apart for God, and
spent in Prayer, Hearing, Reading the Word of God to the edification of the
people, and such other Duties of Religion as God has prescribed, but after
some time spent in hearing Mass, and Even-song, the rest of the day is spent in
feasting, sporting, and in many places in such worldly affairs, as show little
minding of God or any heavenly affections. Their Churches are open in the week
days upon an ignorant and superstitious conceit, as if God would hear them
there by reason of the consecration of the place, or the Relics of some Saint,
or some other fond imagination which their Priests, or ancestors instill into
them, and therefore they say there their Ave-Maries and Pater-nosters by tale,
without understanding or attention to what they say or do, or to God, but
observing only their gestures after their manner, stay out their time without
learning any thing which may improve them in Christian knowledge, but in their
houses in the mean time calling upon God with understanding and feeling of
their wants, the reading of holy Scriptures is neglected, and many other Duties
which should be done are omitted, and which is worst of all much wantonness and
other evils occasioned (if credible persons say true) and cloked by the often
repair of persons to their Churches. That there is more Preaching and
Catechizing among Papists than among Protestants is strange news to me, nor do
I think any London Merchant or other person who has traveled into Italy or
Spain will believe it. What now is done I cannot speak of mine own knowledge,
as having not traveled into those Countries; but what I find in Authors whom
I have great cause to believe, makes me, who have known London, Oxford,
Bristol, Worcester, and other parts of England, and their Preaching and
Catechizing, conceive, that H. T. tells here a manifest untruth. However it is
easy to discern by reading the Sermons and Catechisms of both, which are
printed, that their preaching and catechizing, how often soever it be in
respect of Gospel doctrine, spiritual truths and holy directions comes as short
of the English Protestant Preachers Sermons and Catechizing as Lead or Dross
does of Gold. When Drury preached at Black-Frier^ his Sermons were of Popish
Penance, and such like superstitious points of Popery. The History of the
Quarrels between Pope Paul the fifth and the Commonwealth of Venice by Friar
Paul tells us, that it was found in the Rules of the Jesuits when they were
expelled out of Venice, that this was out of their Instructions to be very
^paring in preaching of the free grace of God, and the relation of their
Doctines in the Book of the Mystery of Jesuitism published by a Jansenist,
shows what kind of Doctrine the Jesuits now the popular Preachers instill
into the people of France. Their fasting and praying, if it be such as their
Casuists describe, is a nullity or a mockery, that which they call fasting
being only a change of food, sometimes such as a Glutton would choose to
please his appetite, and differring a Meal for some hours, which is no fasting,
and their praying no ascending of the mind to God, or making known their
requests to him, but saying words many of them that contain no Petitions, like
Parrots without understanding, and in a great part calling upon deceased Saints
and Angels. The multitude of their Sacraments shows the grosness of their
ignorance and greatness of their Superstition, Matrimony being no Sacrament of
the new Law given to Christians for the sanctifying of them, but an Institution
of God before the Fal^ of Adam, common to all mankind for the lawful
propagating thereof, Unction being no ordinary Rite for sanctification, but a
sign of a special gift of healing, Penance is no special Sacrament, but the
common Duty of all men, Auricular Confession is an unjust Imposition, Priests
authoritative judicial Absolution is a mere Delusion, Confirmation is either a
fond imitation of the Apostles act in giving the holy Ghost, or else is in its
genuine use an Appendix to Baptism. Orders is a Rite proper to the Clergy, as
it is termed. The Eucharist and Baptism are indeed holy Ordinances of Christ,
not to give grace by the work done, but by the one to testify our profession,
the other our remembrance of his Death: neither name nor thing of Sacrament, as
Papists define it is from Scripture, nor is any thing almost right in Papists
doctrine or use of these rites, but their use of them is almost quite changed
into another thing then what Christ instituted, and therefore the more they are
frequented, the less is there of true Religion and the more of vain
superstition. There Is far better administration of the Lords Supper among the
Protestants, who use it after Christ's institution to remember his death: not as
Papists for a propitiatory sacrifice for quick and dead with addition of many
histrionical mimical inventions of men, and mangling it by the half in keeping
the cup from the laity, and making a private Mass of a communion. Baptism is
better administered without addition of oil, cream, and spittle, and Ephphatha,
and such toys as Papists use. Ordination is better used by Protestants who
ordain Preachers of the Gospel, not sacrificing Priests. And yet in these and
in other matters some things may be bettered, which through the great
aberration from the primitive institution remain yet to be amended. As for the
multitude of religious men and women as he calls them, not only the relations
of Protestants, but also of Popish writers give us cause to think there is
little of religion or morality in them except gluttony, idleness, whoredom,
and other lewdness be religion. The common proverb makes a Friar a liar. If
they freely forsake any thing it is not to follow Christ, but Bennet, Francis,
Dominick, Bruno, Ignatius and such like hypocrites, by following whom there is
more reason to judge they forsake Christ, then by adhering to their rules to
adhere to Christ, there being none more malicious and bitter and cruel enemies
to the sincere preaching and profession of the Gospel then Friars, Monks,
Nuns, and especially the damned crew of Jesuits, who have been within one
hundred years and somewhat more authors of more bloody wars, massacres, cruel
persecutions, treasons, murders and other hellish villainies then ever such a
number of men besides were guilty of since the world stood. Is any man of such
a sottish spirit as to believe that these men have relinquished the riches,
pleasures and preferments of this life to serve Christ the remainder of their
lives, who knows what goodly structures they live in, what full tables they
have, what great revenues they are enriched with? will any man that views the
very ruins of Abbys, Nunneries, Priories and other houses, which they termed
religious here in England, that reads the catalogue of their revenues at the
end of Speeds Chronicle judge these relinquished the riches of this life? Are
the Monastery of St. Laurence in Castile, the College of La Flech in France,
with innumerable more in those countries, and in Germany, Italy, etc. Cottages
for poor Almesmen? what an arrant gullery and cheat is this of this frontlesse
scribler to persuade English people, that their votaries have relinquished all
riches when they possess revenues in some countries equal to Kings and
Princes, fair Palaces, full tables, good clothing, great attendance, large
command of tenants with furniture and provision of all sorts of things
commodious for this life in their convents? And to say they serve Christ when
all the world knows the Monks serve none but their own bellies, and the Jesuits
are true to none but the Catholic Bishop and Catholic King, who may perhaps
in time find them as pernicious to themselves as they are to other Princes and
States, what a monstrous fiction is it? their vows and practices are not of
true but counterfeit poverty, and if it were voluntary poverty indeed which
they make show of, it would be the more sinful, God no where directing men to
cast away their estates, but to use them (...) John 10 41. Yea Christ himself
at some time was restrained from doing miracles, Matthew. 13* 58. and the
Disciples were defective therein, Luke 9. 40, 41. 6. That there are some
wonders which are lying wonders. 7 That these are so like true miracles, that
they are very apt to deceive a great part of men. 8. That the Lord permits
these to be for trial of men. 9. That he keeps his elect from being seduced by
them. 10. That they are bound to heed whereto these miracles tend, and not to
follow them that make show of them if they tend to Idolatry, and to draw us
away from Gods express commands and truths revealed in the Scripture. Out of
all which I infer, that without examination of the doctrine by the Scripture we
are not merely upon the pretense of miracles to judge men to be true teachers
and true Churches, (except they should be so many, great, frequent, open, as
Christ and his Apostles were, for I count that speech of Bellarm. lib. 4. de
notis Eccles. c. 14. impious that before the approbation of the Church it is
not certain with the certainty of faith whether any miracle be true, which if
true till the Church approved them there had been no certainty of faith that
Christ's or his Apostles miracles were true) and therefore miracles are not a
sufficient note of a true Church.

SECT. VII.
The Popish pretended miracles prove not the truth of their Church, nor the
miracles related by some of the Fathers.

But H. T. taking his Major, as to the power of miracles, sufficiently proved
proceeds thus. The Minor is proved by these ensuing undeniable testimonies.
First, Protestants and other Sectaries pretend that miracles have ceased ever
since Christ and his Apostles time, because they and their Sectmasters have
never yet been able to do any, a sure conviction that they want this mark.

Answ. 1. PRotestants do not pretend that all working of miracles is ceased
since the Apostles time, but such frequent working of miracles as was in the
Apostles time. 2. That they do not for the reason which this author allegeth
say so, but because the truth is so, and if they have not been able to do any,
no more have the Papists; if they could they would do them to convince the
Sectaries (as he terms us) since signs are not for them to believe, but for them
that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. And therefore if Papists could do any
miracles, surely they would do them openly to convince the heretics who deny
their Popes and Churches infallibility, of which surely we are all such
infidels, as that without miracles done by Popes and the Preachers of his
vicarship we shall never be brought to believe it. But they choose rather to
cheat foolish Papists with counterfeit tricks, as of the boy of Bilson, Garnets
straw and such like devices, then to let any understanding Protestants have any
sight of them, who would discover their knavery.

But H. T. tells us. Secondly, histories (as well of enemies as friends) have
recorded many famous miracles in all ages wrought by the Catholic Church. The
Magdeburgian Centurists, although Protestants (such is evidence and force of
truth) have recorded many great miracles done by Catholics in their 13. c. of
every century for one thousand three hundred years together after Christ. St.
Francis of Assisium fifteen days before his death had wounds freshly bleeding
in his hands, feet and side, such as Christ had on the Cross, and this by
miracle, Mat. Paris p. 319. One Paul Form having stolen two cons^crated hosts
out of a Church sold one of them to the Jews, who out of malice and contempt
stabbed it, saying; If thou be the God of Christians manifest thy self,
whereupon blood issued out of the host, for which fact thirty eight of them
were burnt at Knoblock in Brandenburg, and all the rest of the Jews were
banished out of that Marquisate. This is recorded by Pontianus in his fifth
book of memorable things, and by John Mandevil a Protestant in his book de
locis communibus p. 87. as also by Osiander Epist. 116. p. 28.

Answ. 1. The Magdeburgian Centurists have indeed in their several centuries
one chapter of mavelous things, but many of them are such as were wrought
immediately by divine providence and are liable to various constructions, few
of them, done by men in testimony of the truth of any religion, doctrine or
Church, and fewer yet of any certain credit. 2. There Is no relation of any of
them that are said to be done as wrought by the Catholic Church, either Roman
or properly so called, however there be some related as done by persons of the
Catholic Church, who are more justly to be accounted Protestants in respect of
the doctrine they taught then Papists, whom they falsely call Catholics. 3. It
is not denied that Socrates l. 7. hist. c. 17. mentions a miracle of Paul a
Novatian Bishop, and Augustine. tract. 13. on John, and de unit. Eccles. c. 16.
denies not, that the Donatists alleged miracles, and he calls them by contempt
Mirabiliarios, and judged that the Church was to be judged by Scripture and the
miracles by the Church, as Bellarm* confesses de notis Eccl. l. 4. c. 14. 4.
Those that are said to be done by persons of the Catholic Church for the first
five hundred years, were not done by persons that held the now Romish doctrine
or in confirmation of it or the verity of the now Roman Church. 5. All the rest
in all the ages following are of none or very small credit. Gregory the great
is himself judged by Romanists to have been too credulous of tales, those
Dialogues which are said to be his (in which are related some of the miracles
which the Papists rely on) being either none of his or showing too much
credulity in him: the rest of the miracles in the legends are so ridiculous
fopperies, as even discreet Papists themselves have discredited. Dr. Rainold
Conf. with Heart chapter 8. divis. 2. allegeth Canus as in general excepting against
the reports of miracles even by grave, ancient, learned holy Fathers, loc.
Theol. l. 11. c. 6. and particularly against Gregory's Dialogues, and Bedes
history, and the very Portesse as having uncertain, forged, false and frivolous
things in them about Francis and Dominick, and he shows that Pope Gelasius and
a council of seventy Bishops with him condemned many false stories which were
rehearsed in the Roman Portesses, if Espencaeus Comment. in 2. Epist. ad Tim.
c. 4. digress. 21. be to be believed. The two pretended miracles which this
Author has chosen for instance have nothing like divine miracles or truth. The
miracles of Christ and his Apostles were such as were done openly in the sight
of all so as they could not be denied, but even adversaries confessed them,
these were things only in private, so as that there might be some device used
to delude the sight, or might be fancied to be so by some doting persons, or
might be by the illusion of Satan, which is not improbable to have been used in
them, there being great cause to conceive, that in those days of darkness by
seeming wonders, apparitions, visions, prophecies, Satan promoted the worship
of Saints, especially of the Virgin Mary, the opinion of purgatory, prayer for
the dead, worship of relics, by which Idolatry and superstition grew among
Christians about and after the time of the second Nicen^ Synod. Nor is there
any likelihood that the wounds of Francis should appear fifteen days before
death, in which time he was likely covered, and not after his death, in which
his body being naked they might have been more visible, were not the time before
death more convenient for the imposture. And the like may be said of the other
tale. What likelihood is there that a man should venture his life to steal two
pieces of bread, or little water cakes, or that a Jew should buy one, or do
such an act before witnesses, which would bring so much evil on him? the thing
seems more likely to have been a devised tale to pick a quarrel with the Jews,
as it was in those days usual for a pretense to get their goods as it had been
done to the Templars. Sure there was no justice to burn thirty eight for the
fact of one, much less to banish all Jews thence. And why was nothing done to
Paul Form? either it was therefore a mee^ fiction, like one of those in Sir
John Mandevils travailes, or else a device to sti^ up rage against the Jews,
that they might prey on their goods. 6. Were it yielded (as it is not) that
there was truth in these relations, yet the most that can be collected is, that
God would vindicate Francis from some ill opinions or reports of him, not that
he might be extolled, as Horatius Turselin in his blasphemous Epigram did, as
if he were comparable with Christ, or that either the Popes supremacy or the
order of Friars, or the verity of the doctrine of the Roman Church then, much
less the truth of the present Roman Church should be confirmed. Nor, if the
other accident were true, does it follow, that God would thereby confirm the
opinion of transubstantiation, but the verity of Christ's being the Son of God,
and we may more justly answer concerning i^, then Bellarmin does concerning the
miracle of the Novatian Bishop, that it was done, not to confirm the Novatian
faith, but Catholic baptism, so the other was done, not to confirm the Popish
opinion of transubstantiation, but the Christian doctrine of the man Christ his
being the Son of God.

H. T. adds, notwithstanding this confession of adversaries, I will also all
some Fathers, of whose relations of miracles it is not worth while to consider
whether they were true or not, there being not one of them that proves this
point, that the Church which wants miracles is not the true Church, or that the
present Roman doctrine or Church are the true doctrine or Church. That which
Cyprian and Optatus relate, if true, did only vindicate the Lords Supper from
contempt, that of Gregory Thaumaturgus, whether it were so or only a report
(of which good men were sometimes too credulous) it proves not the truth of the
Roman Church, but rather, if any, of the Greek Church which owned not the Popes
supremacy, nor their doctrines in that age. Much less is that which he brings
out of Chrysostom concerning the relics of Babylas for his purpose, since it
is expressly said to have proved against infidels that Christ was the Son of
God, and the Idols of the Gentiles were vain things, which no more proves the
truth of the Roman then of the Protestant Churches, nor so much as of the Greek
Churches who hold the same. That of Ambrose concerning his brother Satyrus
proves not transubstantiation, but rather the contrary, since Satyrus adored not
the Eucharist, when he kept it, and that he did keep him from drowning was but
a conjecture, nor is it proved that God by that accident approved his
superstition, though he might reward his faith and love, of which that was a
sign. What Augustine l. 22. de civit. Dei c. 8. writes of things done in his
time are not undoubted, since some of them are related upon the report of one or
more not very judicious, who might enlarge things beyond truth, esp^cially when
the custom was of reading the relations to the people, and they were pressed
in conscience to divulge them, as there Augustine says was done by him, and it
seemed so much for advantage of Christian Religion; some of them might be by
medicines working beyond expectation though attributed, as the fashion is, to
that which was last used; some of them perhaps fell out according to the course
of such diseases, as are said to be cured; that of the healing of two
Cappadocians has too much suspicion of counterfeiting, and Augustine himself,
though he relates somethings of his own knowledge, yet makes none of them like
the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, which were more frequent and open and
manifest in the presence of the adversaries, as the raising of Lazarus and many
more were, and therefore he allegeth them for the stopping of their mouths, who
called for miracles, rather then for any evident proof of religion, using this
very preface in the beginning of the Chapter, Why, say they, are not those
miracles now done which ye say have been done? I may say indeed they were
necessary before the world should believe for this that the world might
believe. Whosoever as yet seeks after prodigies, that he may believe, is
himself a great prodigy, who the world believing, believes not. But whatever be
to be thought of the relations of Augustine in that place, certain it is that
Augustine, chapter 9, 10. uses them not to give testimony to the confirmation
either of the truth of the Roman Church or any of their doctrines, nor for the
worshipping of Stephen the Martyr, or any other of the Saints, but only to
prove the resurrection of Christ, to which they in their death gave testimony,
and therefore are all impertinent to the purpose of H. T. to prove the verity
of the Roman Church by them.

SECT. VIII.
The objections against the proof of the verity of the Roman Church from the
power of miracles are not solved by H. T.

But H. T. takes on him to answer objections thus. Ob. Miracles have ceased
ever since Christ and his Apostles. Answ. You contradict the plain promises of
Christ made to his Church without limitation, as also the histories and records
of all Christendom.

I Reply, 1. The objection is not as H. T. frames it, but that so frequent and
manifest working of miracles as was in the days of Christ and his Apostles, and
which may be a note of the true Church or doctrine without consonancy to the
Scripture has ceased, and therefore by this mark of it self the Roman Church
is not proved to be the true Church. 2. The contradictory to this is not proved
by Christ's promises or the Churches records For, 1. The Promises, John 14. 10.
Mark. 16. 17. are indefinite in respect of persons and time, and an indefinite
proposition is true in a contingent matter, if verified but of some at some
times, and therefore these promises may be true of some believers only, and of
the time wherein the Apostles lived, and consequently by the promises it cannot
be proved that there must be a power of working miracles in the Church in every
age. 2. That they cannot be understood of any age after the Apostles unto this
day is manifest, because they are not true of any age after that. For however
some miracles have been done, yet not greater then Christ did, which is
promised, John 14. 10. nor was the speaking with new tongues which is promised
Mark. 16. 17. in any age, but that in which the Apostles lived. 3. These
promises are as much made to believers in other Churches as the Roman, but now
they grant there is no power of Miracles in any other Church, and therefore they
must yield to understand the words with such a limitation as may make the
Proposition true, though there be no power of Miracles in the Roman Church. 4.
There Is no promise of the power of Miracles to confirm the truth of the Roman
Church, nor of any other point but the Christian faith, and therefore none of
the Miracles done by virtue of those promises prove the truth of the now Roman
Church or Doctrine, but only the true faith, which is believed by Protestants,
who believe the Creed as well as Papists. As for the Records, there are very
few of them of any certainty after the Apostles days, and Popish Writers
themselves do confess, that not only in their Legends, but also in their
Liturgies, fabulous things have crept; so that by saying Miracles are
altogether now ceased, or else are very rare, and are unfit to demonstrate the
verity of any present Church, is no contradicting Christ's promises, or any
good Records of Christendom.

H. T. adds. Object. Signs and Miracles were given to Unbelievers not to
Believers, therefore they are now unnecessary. Answ. No, they are not, for they
very much confirm the immediate care and providence of God over his Church,
they excellently demonstrate his omnipotence, and there be many disbelievers
still, the more is the pity.

I reply, that Tongues are for a sign to them that believe not, is the Apostles
saying, 1 Cor. 14. 22. not for them that believe; and there is the same reason
of other Miracles; and therefore is this justly urged by Protestants, that to
believers to prove the truth of Christian Doctrine or of the Christian Church
Miracles are unnecessary. Now the Answer of H. T. is quite from the point, when
he tells us that they are necessary for other ends. And yet it is not true,
that Signs and Miracles are necessary to confirm the immediate care and
providence of God over his Church, since God does by his ordinary provision
either of Teachers, or Christian Princes show his immediate care and providence
over his Church, and by his daily works of the motion of the Sun, and other
acts of governing the World demonstrates his omnipotence: nor by his Miracles
and Signs has he showed so much his immediate care and providence over his
Church for the guiding and protecting of them, as his care of unbelievers by
bringing them into his Church. And it is true, that there are many
dis-believers still, the more's the pity, and if God did see it good it would
be a blessed hing if he did vouchsafe the gift of doing Miracles to convert the
Indians Moors, Tartars, to the faith of Christ, and we wish it were true which
the Jesuits boast of Francis Xavier his Miracles in the East Indies, though
Franciscus a victoria relect. 5. Sect. 2. and Josephus Acosta lib. 4. de
Indorum salute cap. 4. 12, Blab out that which gives us cause to think that the
Relations are but feigned things tending to magnify the Pope and the Jesuits,
there being no such evidence of those things from any persons of credit, who
have traded or traveled into those parts. But be they what they will, it is
certain God never intended Miracles to prove the Popes Supremacy or the verity
of the Roman Church, but the Christian faith, and therefore till both or either
of them be proved from Scripture, if we be disbelievers we must be disbelievers
still, knowing this, that if there should be never so great Miracles in show
done by Popes or Friars, yet we are bound not to believe them without proof of
their Doctrine from Scripture, and that if any though an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel than that which is written, he is to be held accursed,
Gal. 1. 8, 9. And that Miracles are not necessary for proving our calling while
we preach the Scripture-doctrine, as Bellarmine scribles lib. 4. de not is
Eccles. cap. 14. But on the other side, if Papists do not stick only to
Scripture, nor will be tried by it, it is necessary they should produce
Miracles of their Popes and Prelates to verify their claim or new Gospel, of
which they are altogether desti^^te, and have nothing to allege but a company
of Fables concerning some foolish Friars, such as Francis, Dominick, etc. upon
the report of silly superstitious Women and doting companions of them, or some
juggling tricks in corners done by cheating Priests and Jesuits, which serve for
no other purpose but to prove the Priests to be Knaves, and their Popish
Proselytes that believe them to be fools. And we have cause to press them as in
the next Objection, Why do not then your Priests do Miracles? we would be glad
to see some of their doing. To which H. T. says, Answ. Because of your
incredulity as our Savior told she Jews, St. Matthew. 17. 19 Yet they do many in
Gods appointed time and place (as the Records of the Church will testify)
though not to satisfy your sinful curiosity. See Francis a Sancta Clara in
his Paralipomena, who recounts many great and evident Miracles. I reply, if our
incredulity be the only reason of their not doing them among us, yet me thinks
they should do them in Italy and Spain where men have ^aith in them: But except
of a few tales of Philip Nerius, Ignatius Loyala, Francisca Teresa, Isidore of
Madrid an Husbandman, and some other late canonized Saints long after their
death sworn by some admirers of them, or credulous receivers of reports
concerning things of them not openly done and commonly known as the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles were, I hear of none. The Paralipomena of Franciscus a
Sancta Clara or Davenport, who endeavored to reconcile the nine and thirty
Articles of the Church of England with the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, that
is, Light with Darkness, a little before these Wars, I never saw, nor do I
expect to find any thing from such a man but fraud and falsehood, who had the
face to endeavor to draw the Articles purposely framed against the Popish
Doctrine to a sense consistent with it. What Justus Lipsius writ of the
Miracles done by the Idol at Halles, and Zichem, Turselin of the Chapel at
Lauretto, and such like Relations, there is no man that heeds the Scripture
will give any credit to them, but take them either as fictions or illusions of
Satan to confirm men in the idolatrous Worship of the Virgin Mary, and to
promote the Priests gain, which is a great part of the Roman Religion. But the
frequent Impostures of Papists in this kind, as of the Blood of Christ at the
Abbey of Hales, that of Boxley Abbey, and the holy Maid of Kent, related by Speed
in his Chronicle of Henry the eighth, at Orleans by Gray Friars related by
Sleidan, Com. lib. 9. at Bruxels related by Meteran, lib. 10. hist. Belg. that
of the Boy of Bilson near Wolverhampton in Staffordshire which is related in a
Book of that thing and persons yet alive can testify of the Priests deceit in
it, with many more, give just cause to discredit all such Narrations as mere
juggling tricks. Nor have the Legends of Saints, which this man calls the
Records of the Church any better credit with the more ingenuous of their own
Church, of whom though some mince the matter, calling them Pious Frauds, as if
Piety might be upheld by Lies, yet Ludovicus Vives freely censured those that
made them to have had a Brazen forehead, and those that believed them a Leaden
heart. And therefore it is the more necessary for their Priests to let us see
their Miracles, not to satisfy our curiosity, but our consciences, if they
will have us converted from disbelief in their Lord God the Pope, (as in the
Canon Law be is termed) there being nothing in the Scripture to prove the Roman
Churches verity or infallibility, or the Popes Supremacy, as will appear by
examining the seventh Article, to which I now hasten, which is entitled, The
Popes Supremacy asserted.

ARTIC. VII.
The Popes Supremacy is an Innovation.
The Pope or Bishop of Rome's Supremacy or Headship of the whole Church of God
is not proved by H. T.

SECT. I.
Neither is it proved nor probable that Peter was Bishop of Rome, or that he
was to have a Successor.

Our Tenet, says H. T. is that the Pope or Bishop of Rome is the true
Successor of St. Peter and Head of the whole Church of God, which has in part
been proved already by our Catalogue of chief Pastors (who were all Popes of
Rome) and by the Councils of all Ages, approved by them, and owning them for
such, and is yet farther proved thus.

Answ. THat Peter was Pope of Rome has been said, but never yet proved but by
the tradition of the Ancients, who might be as easily deceived in that as they
were about Christ's age, the keeping of Easter, and many other things. Those
very men who relate Peter's sitting at Rome as Bishop do not agree about his
immediate Successor, whether Linus, or Clemens, or Cletus, as H. T. confesses
here page 52. And the relation it self is so inconsistent with that which Paul
says, that by consent he and Peter agreed that Peter should go to the Jews,
and had the Gospel of the Circumcision committed to him, his not saluting Peter
in his Epistle to the Romans, his being at Antioch, and according to Luke, and
Paul in other places so long a time as they mention in the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Epistle to the Galatians, makes it altogether improbable that
he should be Bishop at Rome such a time as they say he was, and be put to death
in Nero's time as the tradition insisted on bears in hand. Nor was it agreeable
to Peter's Office appointed by Christ to be as a fixed Pastor in one Place.
And if he were settled in any place it is more probable it was at Antioch,
where Paul mentions him to have been, than at Rome, nor of his translation of
his Seat from Antioch to Rome is there any proof, but what is by such
tradition, as in this and other things appears to be very uncertain and
unlikely. Yet were it yielded that Peter was Bishop or chief Pastor, how will
it be proved that he was to have a Successor? Paul it is certain was at Rome,
and did while he was there, undoubtedly execute the Office of a Pastor, yet
Popes do not challenge themselves to be Paul's but Peter's Successors, however
they put Paul's Sword in their Arms with Peter's Keys, and in their Writings
say the Church of Rome was founded by Peter and Paul, and use Paul's name with
Peter's in their Sentences. Nor can indeed in any true sense the Pope of Rome
be termed Peter's Successor. For if he be his Successor, he is Successor in
his Work or in his Power. The Work of the Apostle Peter was by preaching the
Gospel to found Churches to Christ, and to that end was to go to several
places; but the Pope of Rome succeeds not in this, he neither goes up and down
unless in a pompous Procession, or to a worse end, nor preaches the Gospel,
nor founds any Churches thereby, nor does think it his business, but to stay at
Rome, and there to live in pomp, and wealth, and luxury, and to lord it
tyrannously over the Flock of God. Nor is he Successor in his power. Peter had
power to give the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. to strike Ananias and Sapphira dead, Acts
5. But the Pope cannot do these things. Nor in the Government of the whole
Church. For this Peter only had not, nor above other Apostles, but together
with the rest. Nor was Peter's or the Apostles power any such visible Monarchy
as the Pope claims, to receive Appeals from all Churches, to appoint Legates to
hear parties in all controversies of faith, to be an infallible Judge of such
controversies, an infallible Expounder of the Scriptures, determining what is
Heresy, and what of Faith, calling general Councils, crowning Emperors,
deposing Princes, dispensing with Oaths, Marriages of persons in near degrees,
otherwise prohibited, impose Laws about Fasting, and many other things which
God never appointed. Such an Headship of the whole Church as the Pope claims
Peter never had. Nor is any such thing proved or so much as offered to be
proved by H. T. his Catalogue, which how insufficient it is has been alread
showed. I go on to his Arguments here.

SECT. II.
From being the Foundation, Matthew 16. 18. and feeding the Sheep of Christ, John
21. 15, 16, 17. neither Peter's nor Popes Supremacy is proved.

The first Argument, says H. T. is this, The foundation has a pre-eminence of
firmitude and stability before the rest of the building which is founded on it,
and the Shepherd is Head of his Flock, and above his Sheep. But St. Peter next
after Christ himself was the Foundation of the whole Church, and Pastor of the
whole Flock: therefore St. Peter next after Christ had a pre-eminence over the
whole Church, and was Head of the whole Flock, and above all the other Sheep,
of which number were the rest of the Apostles.

Answ. THe Headship and pastoral power which H. T. would prove to be due to the
Pope is not a guidance only by teaching, but a princely dominion, so as that
all may appeal to him, none from him, his sentence must be obeyed by all under
pain of damnation in matters of faith, and must be judged infallible, and it is
likely he holds with Bellarmine, lib. 4. de Romans pont. cap. 5. that if the Pope
should err by commanding vices, or forbidding virtues, the Church should be
bound to believe vices to be good and virtues to be evil, unless it would sin
against conscience; and if he dissent herein from Bellarmine, yet in the Canon
Law distinct. 40. such an absolute dominion is given him, that though he should
draw innumerable souls with him to Hell, no man must say to him, Why do thou
so? and some Flatterers of the Pope have given him all power in Heaven and
Earth, yea, and more than Christ had, in Purgatory also, allowing no Appeal
from the Pope to God, as having one Consistory with God, calling him our Lord
God the Pope; nor did I ever read or hear that any Pope has by any Censure
corrected such blasphemous Titles, but they have by their commands contrary to
Gods, dispensing with his Laws, deposing Emperors, and innumerable other
practices showed that they owned such power as theirs. Now sure this power was
never given to Peter, nor any such like power under the term of a Foundation,
which is for the ruin, not for the establishing of the Church, nor under the
charge of feeding, especially of another Sheep, of whom he is no Owner or
Lord. Is this to feed Christ's Sheep, to do what he will with them, appoint
what Penance he will, put what Laws he please on the Sheep, to excommunicate,
deprive of Civil and Ecclesiastical Dignity and Office at pleasure? such a
Supremacy is indeed so like that which Paul foretold concerning the man of sin,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 4. that he opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God; that till I meet with some more likely than the
Popes to be there meant, I shall take it be a part of my Creed, that the Pope
of Rome is the very Man of sin there meant. And for this H. T. who gives such a
supreme Headship to Peter and the Pope over the other Apostles, so as to make
him a Shepherd, to rule, excommunicate, deprive, John, James, Paul, as his
Sheep, it is so monstrously false an Assertion as none but he that has sold
himself to teach Lies would ever assert it. As for his Syllogism it is most
grossly naught, as having four terms at least. The term [hath a pre-eminence of
firmitude and stability before the rest of the building which is founded on it]
being different from this in the Conclusion, [had a pre-eminence over the whole
Church] and so likewise are these [the Foundation] and [the Foundation of the
whole Church] and therefore the Major should have been [the Foundation of the
whole Church has a pre-eminence over the whole Church] the Minor thus, [Peter
next after Christ is the Foundation of the whole Church] and the Conclusion
thus, [Peter next after Christ had a pre-eminence over the whole Church] or
else thus, [The Foundation has a pre-eminence of firmitude and stability
before the whole Church. But Peter next after Christ is the Foundation,
therefore Peter had a pre-eminence of firmitude and stability before the whole
Church] now neither of these Conclusions had been the point to be proved, but
might have been granted, and the Assertion not gained. And in the other
Metaphor the Syllogism has the same fault. For in the Major it is [Head of his
Flock, and above his Sheep] in the Minor it is [Pastour of the whole Flock] and
in the Conclusion not [Head of his Flock and above his Sheep] but [Head of the
whole Flock, and above all the other Sheep] and there is added too this tail of
which there is no offer of proof [of which number were the rest of the
Apostles.] Now to discover besides the fallacy in the form the deceit in the
matter of this Argument, it is to be considered, 1. That the Metaphor of a
Foundation does not at all import Rule or Government, but inchoation and
support, and therefore is unfit to prove that Rule and Power of Government
which H. T. derives from it. 2. That he that is a Shepherd is Head or Lord of
his own Sheep, but a Shepherd is not Lord or Head of another Sheep of which he
is no Owner; and therefore though he is to rule and feed them, yet he is not to
rule them after his own will, but the Owners, nor is he to take the profit of
the Sheep, but the Owner is to have it, the Shepherd is not to look, but for
his pay and encouragement according to the will or contract of the Owner. Now
the Flock of Christ were none of Peter's Sheep, nor were all the Sheep of
Christ universally taken to be fed by Peter, for then he should feed, that is,
rule himself, who was one of the Flock, and so excommunicate himself, absolve
himself* and since the Pope has Peter's power, if he be one of the Sheep of
Christ, by this Doctrine he is to rule, that is, to excommunicate, absolve, and
deprive himself. And for the other Metaphor of a Foundation it has the like
absurdity: For if Peter be the Foundation of the whole Church, and the term
[Foundation] imports the ruling of the whole Church, Peter, who is a part of
the Church, is the Foundation of himself, and the Pope of himself, and since he
is the Vicar of Christ, he is in stead of Christ to himself, and so has
pre-eminence over himself, and the Pope in like manner; yea, unless they deny
the blessed Virgin Mary to have been one of Christ's Sheep, they must assert
Peter, and after him the Pope to have been the Foundation and Shepherd of the
blessed Virgin Mary, to have had a power to rule, excommunicate and absolve
her. The truth is this, the pressing of a Metaphor beyond that for what it is
used draws with it many absurdities; and therefore the Metaphors of
Foundation and Building, Shepherd and Sheep can infer no more than that use of
these which the Author of the Speech intended by them, which what it is will
be considered by examining the Texts brought for proof. And for the Arguments,
if they did conclude the thing in question they should be thus framed, or to
this purpose. He that is the Foundation or Builder of the whole Church of
Christ, has supreme unerring dominion or rule of the whole Church of Christ.
But such was Peter, and by consequence the Pope of Rome. Ergo. Again, He that
is to feed all the Sheep of Christ has dominion or rule as aforesaid. But that
was Peter, and consequently the Pope of Rome is to do. Ergo. In both I should
deny the Major understood of the under Foundation, Builder, and Shepherd,
though it should be yielded by concession of an impossibility, yet he should
not have such a supreme unerring Rule thereby: and I deny the Minor also, and
in both as they stand or should stand, there are many Propositions in these and
his forms expressed or implied, which are apparently false* As, 1. That every
Foundation of the Church has pre-eminence of firmitude above every Building
founded on it. There were some as firm in the Faith as the Apostles, and of the
Apostles some as firm or more firm than Peter. 2. That every Foundation or
Builder of the Church has rule over it. 3. That the Metaphor of a Foundation
or Builder do note Rule or Dominion. 4. That as applied to Peter, they note in
him supreme unerring Rule or Dominion. 5. That he that is a Shepherd is Head of
his Flock. 6. That he is above his Flock. 7. That the person that is bid to
feed Christ's Sheep is bid to feed, the whole Flock of Christ universally
taken. 8. That the charge of feeding them is as much, as have supreme dominion,
be a visible Monarch over them. 9. That the Bishop of Rome is Peter's
Successor in that charge and power which Christ committed to him over his
whole Church. 10. That what is said of Peter in this point is true of every
Bishop of Rome be he never so unlearned and vicious. All which I have
distinctly noted, that it may appear upon how many suppositions the Popes
Supremacy hangs, and yet how loose, and empty of proof from Scripture or Reason
the Disputes of Papists are about this which is with them a fundamental point
of their Religion, in so much that were it not for the heavy curse, that is
befallen Papists, that since they receive not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, they should believe Lies, that they might be damned, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 10, 11, 12. it could not be that understanding persons among them should
ever assent to the claimed Supremacy of the Pope over the whole Church upon
these Reasons.

But let us view what is said here. The Major is proved, because the Foundation
supporteth the rest of the Building (we are built on the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians.
2. 20.) and the Shepherd has a power to govern his whole Flock.

Answ. The Argument framed hence must be this, That which supporteth the
Building has a pre-eminence of firmitude and stability before the rest of the
Building which is founded on it. But so does every Foundation. Ergo. But the
Major is not true of personal Metaphorical Foundations, of which we now speak,
not of material proper Foundations. A man may be a Foundation of a
Commonwealth, and support it by his wisdom, and example, and authority, and
yet not have a pre-eminence of firmitude and stability above that Commonwealth
founded on him or it; and so in the founding of the Church, a man that founds
it may fall away, and yet the Church stand firm. Neither is the Minor true of
every personal metaphorical Foundation, he may be said to be a Foundation, that
is, begin a Church or Common-weath who does not after support it. The Text
Ephesians. 2. 20. proves neither of the Propositions, nor do I know to what purpose
it is produced, except to prove Peter to have been a Foundation: But then it
proves not Peter alone, but the rest of the Apostles and Prophets to have been
Foundations, and so proves no pre-eminence to Peter above them, which is the
Assertion of this Author. But to me it is doubtful whether the Apostles are
termed Foundations. 1. Because this seems to be appropriated to Christ, 1 Cor.
3. 11. 2. Because it is not said, Ye are built on the Foundations, but the
Foundation, and therefore seems to have this sense, ye are built on that
Foundation which the Apostles and Prophets have laid, not, which they are, and
so the genitives are of the efficient, not of the subject, and the Foundation
must be that Doctrine or truth they declared, of which Christ, that is, the
Doctrine or Faith of Christ is the chief Cornerstone. Nor is this against that
which is Revel. 21. 14. that the names of the twelve Apostles are written in
the twelve Foundations of the Wall of the new Jerusalem. For that may be said,
because they were chief workmen in the laying of the Foundation, as Paul says
of himself, 1 Cor. 3. 10. according to the custom of master builders, whose
names are written in their work, not because they were themselves the
Foundations, as the twelve Tribes, verse. 12. in the twelve gates, because by
them entrance was in the Old Testament, they being prime beginners of the
people of Israel. Yet if they be said to be Foundations, they were Foundations
as the Prophets were, to wit, by their preaching: nor does their being
Foundations prove their Rule or Dominion any more than the Prophets being
Foundations; and certainly Peter is here made no more a Foundation than the
rest. The other proof seems to be this. He that has power to feed and govern
his whole Flock is Head of his Flock, and above his Sheep. But every Shepherd
has such such power. Ergo. The Major is denied. A Parish Priest has power to
feed and govern his whole Flock, of which a King may be a part, and yet he is
not Head of the King, nor above him in dignity or authority, nor perhaps in
knowledge. And the like may be said of his Physician.

SECT. III.
The Text Matthew. 16. 18. proves not any Rule or Dominion in Peter over the
Apostles, but a promise of special success in his preaching.

H. T. adds, The Minor is proved, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, St. Matthew. 16. 18. (the whole was built on him.)

Answ. THe Argument seems to be this. He who is the Rock on which Christ would
build his Church he was next after Christ the Foundation of the whole Church.
But Peter was the Rock on which Christ would build his Church. Ergo. In which
there are these things supposed. 1. That the term [Rock] is as much as a
Foundation, and so it is not the absolute quality of firmness only, but also
the relative use of a stone or a rock in building, which is imported by it. 2.
That the term [Rock] notes Peter's person. 3. That it notes Peter's person
alone. 4. That it notes Peter's person as being a Rock so as no other, but
Christ, was a Rock as he was. 5. That the Building upon this Rock notes Peter's
person in respect of his singular Rule not given to other Apostles. 6. That he
was the Foundation next after Christ. 7. That the Church comprehends the
militant Church visible. 8. That it notes the whole Church of Christ even the
Apostles themselves: each of these is to be examined. 1. The term [(...)] here
used, whether it be translated [Rock or stone] I deny not to denote not so much
the absolute property of stability, as the relative use of a foundation in a
Building. 2. Though some of the Ancients make Christ the Rock, others the
confession of Christ, or the faith in him, which Peter had professed, yet by
reason of the occasion of the speech, and the Preface [I say unto thee] and the
commemoration of his Name [Thou art Peter] and the allusion to that Name in the
choice of the word [(...), or Cephas in Syriack] I deny not that by [this Rock
or stone] is meant Peter's person, nor thirdly, that it notes his person alone,
nor fourthly, that it notes Peter's person in a singular manner, so as that
there is something peculiar to Peter intimated thereby. But I deny, 1. That it
notes Peter's singular Rule or Dominion not given to other Apostles. 2. That he
was so a Foundation next after Christ as that the other Apostles were laid on
him as a stone supporting them, as is the conceit of some of the Romanists. 3.
That the term [Church] notes the visible Church as visible. 4. That it notes
the whole visible Church universally taken. And each of these I prove thus.

1. If the term [Rock or Stone] note Peter's person as becoming a Foundation or
Foundation-stone by such an act as notes not any Rule or Dominion, and was
common to other Apostles with Peter, then it does not note Peter's singular
Rule or Dominion not given to other Apostles: but the term [Rock or Stone]
notes Peter's person, as becoming a Foundation or Foundation-stone by such an
act as notes not any Rule or Dominion, and was common to other Apostles with
Peter. Ergo. The Major is of it self evident. The Minor is thus proved. That
act whereby Peter's person became a Foundation or Foundation-stone was Christ's
building his Church on him. But that act notes not any Rule or Dominion, and
was common to other Apostles with Peter. Ergo. The Major is of it self evident.
The Minor is proved thus* The act whereby Christ built his Church on Peter was
Peter's preaching of the same Doctrine which he professed. But that act notes
not any Rule or Dominion, and was common to other Apostles with Peter. Ergo.
The Minor I take for granted: Papists do not ascribe Rule or Dominion to Friars
that preach, and other Apostles preached Christ as well as Peter. Now that
Christ builded his Church on Peter by his preaching is proved thus. That act by
which and no other the Church of Christ is said to be built, is that act
whereby Christ built his Church on Peter. But it is the preaching of the
Doctrine that Peter professed and no other act by which the Church of Christ is
said to be built. The Major is evident of it self. The Minor is proved, 1. By
those places which speak of building the Church, they still import teaching not
rule, as appears by an induction, Acts 9. 31. Rom 15. 20. 1 Cor. 8. 1, 10. and
10. 23. and 14 4. 17. Gal. 2. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 5. and the compound
Verb used Acts 20. 30. 1 Cor. 3. 10, 12. Ephesians. 2. 20, 22. Col. 2. 7. Jude 20.
and the Noun Romans 14. 19. and 15. 2. 1 Cor. 3. 9. and 14. 3, 5, 12. 2 Cor. 10.
8. and 12. 19. and 13. 10. Ephesians. 4. 12, 16, 29. do all show that the Building
of the Church or Saints is by instruction, not by rule, the work being
sometimes mutual, as 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. Ephesians. 4. 10. Jude 20. and sometimes the
matter by which the building is, being for informing and teaching, as Ephesians. 4.
29. and sometimes the Builders are termed Teachers, as Ephesians 4. 11, 12. and
that Text Ephesians. 2. 20. (which H. T. allegeth) the Building being by Prophets
as well as Apostles can be understood of no other Building than by teaching,
therefore so also must be understood Matthew. 16. 18.

2. It is further proved from 1 Cor. 3. 10. where the Apostle tells the
Corinthians, that as a wise Master Builder he had laid the Foundation, and that
Foundation which he laid was Jesus Christ, verse. 11* and verse. 5. he shows how
that was, to wit, in that he was a Minister by whom with Apollos the
Corinthians believed, and that thereby they were God's Building, and God's
Husbandry, verse. 9. to wit, by his planting, Apollos watering, and God's
increase, verse. 6. which can be referred to no other acts but teaching or
preaching of the faith of Christ, in which Paul counts himself a
Master Builder, that built not on Peter 's foundation, or any others, Romans 15.
20. and his edifying is there the effect of his Evangelizing or Preaching the
Gospel, and consequently the building of the Church, Matthew. 16. 18. must be
interpreted to be by preaching the Gospel.

3. It is further proved by those places which make the Foundation of the
Building special Doctrine, such as are Heb. 6. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 11. Romans 15. 20.
whence it follows, that the building of the Church is by Doctrine, and Matthew.
16. 18. must be understood of it, not of Rule or Dominion. Yea, the Council of
Trent it self, Sess. 3. terms the Creed the firm and only Foundation, against
which the Gates of Hell shall not prevail; and thereby intimates the
Foundation, Matthew. 16. 18. to be chief points of Christian Doctrine.

4. By the appositeness of the Phrase to signify planting and increasing of
knowledge and strengthening by teaching, not imposing commands by way of Rule
or Empire. No where is a Prince said to edify, but Prophets, Apostles, and
other Teachers; nor is Excommunication, Ordination, calling of Councils, and
such acts as show Dominion termed Edification, but teaching and reproving, 2
Cor. 13. 10. therefore such princely power as the Popes claim cannot be meant
by building Christ's Church, Matthew. 16. 18.

5. The same may be proved from the matter of the Promise, Matthew. 16. 18. which
is not of what power Christ would give to Peter, but of what Christ would do by
him, and consequently cannot be understood of supreme power, but of singular
work.

6. The end of the power, which the Pope claims, is for the exalting of
himself, and his visible Monarchy, but the thing promised Matthew. 16. 18. is not
the advancement of Peter, but the use of him for setting up his Church. The
Popes power is (as all experience witnesses) for the destruction of the
Church, not for edification; and therefore is not meant Matthew. 16. 18.

If any say, How then has Peter something singular ascribed to him? I answer,
in that he did first begin to lay the Foundation of the Churches after Christ's
Ascension by his preaching, as Acts 2. and 3. and 4. and 10. appears: and seems
to be observed by Peter, as the accomplishment of Christ's Promise, Acts 15. 7.
who used Peter at the first more eminently than any other, though afterward he
chose Paul, who did labor more abundantly than the rest, 1 Cor. 15. 10.

2. The second thing that Peter was not so a Foundation next after Christ, as
that the other Apostles were laid on him, as a stone supporting them, is proved
1. From Ephesians. 2. 20. where the building of the Church is said to be on the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
Cornerstone, in whom the whole Building compacted together grows to an holy
Temple in the Lord; therefore the Apostles and Prophets have equal place in the
Building, and it is Christ, and not Peter, in whom all the Building is fitly
framed together. 2. From Revel. 21. 14. where the Wall of the City of new
Jerusalem is said to have twelve Foundations, and not one singular one
supporting the rest, but the Foundations are as many as the Apostles, none of
whom is the Foundation of the rest.

3. That the term [Church] Mat. 16. 18. notes not the visible Church as
visible, is proved, 1. In that it is termed Christ's Church, but the visible as
visible is not termed Christ's Church, but as it is invisible by faith and
Christ's Spirit dwelling in it. 2. In that Christ promised, that the Gates of
Hell should not prevail against it. But they have and do prevail against the
visible Church as visible, many visible Churches have been corrupted and perish.

4. That [my Church, Matthew. 16. 18.] is not the whole Church universally taken
is proved in that 1. Then the whole Church universally taken should be built by
or on Peter, but that cannot be true, since a great part of the Church specially
of the Gentiles was built by Paul, and he denies he built on another
Foundation, Romans 15. 20. 1 Cor. 3. 10. 2. Then Peter should be built on
himself, since Peter was part of the universal Church, and the Virgin Mary
should be built on Peter, which are absurd.

Which things being evinced it appears, 1. That this was a Promise to the
singular person of Peter of a singular success of his preaching which no other
had, and so belongs not to any Successor. 2. That it is not a Promise of
Government and Jurisdiction, (in which H. T. places Peter's Headship, page
75.) for that Christ expressly forbade, but of singular honor to Peter in his
happy success in preaching the Gospel, recompensing his readiness to
acknowledge Christ. And this Christ had elsewhere promised, Luke 5. 10. under
the Promise of being a Fisher of m^n. Now this is nothing to the Dominion
claimed by the Pope. As for being a Rock on which the Church of Christ might be
built; we would most gladly it were true, that the Pope were such, we should
then honor him and kiss his Toe: but as he is and has been for many hundreds
of years, he is to be judged the Butcher who has slain the Saints of God, and
a tyrannical Antichrist domineering over the Church of Christ.

I marvel that H. T. says nothing here of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
which the Pope is painted with, as having them in his hands, and by which he
was wont to claim his power. But perhaps he finds it too short for the proof
of that peerless power which the Pope claims, since even in the Council of Trent
and the Roman Catechism in handling the Priests and Bishops power of
Absolution, the Keys are in their hands, and so it is no more than others have
beside the Pope: therefore I need not insist on that here, since H. T. has
thought fit to omit it.

SECT. IV.
John 21. 16, 17, 18. proves not Peter's Supremacy over the whole Church.

But he adds, And for a Reward of Peter's special dilection (for he loved
Christ more than all the rest of the Apostles) he said to him, Feed my Lambs,
Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep, St. John 21. 17, 18. (a Commission to feed all
without exception.)

Answ. THe Argument seems to be this, He to whom, as a Reward of his special
dilection, by which he loved Christ more tha^ all the rest of the Apostles;
Christ said, Feed my Lambs, Feed my Lambs, Feed my Sheep, St. John 21. 17, 18.
and thereby gave him a Commission to feed all without exception was Pastor of
the whole Flock. But this was Peter. Ergo. Here four things are supposed,
whereof not one is true. 1. That Peter loved Christ more than all the rest of
the Apostles. For neither were all the rest of the Apostles there, nor does
Christ or Peter say, he did love Christ more than they did, but only puts a
question, which may either have this sense, Love thou me more than thou
love them? or more than they love me? And this probably was put to him to
mind him of his former forward Profession, and shameful denial. 2. That
Christ made Peter a Head, or gave him a supreme Dominion under the term of
Feeding. But, 1. The words are (...) and (...); now (...) signifies not to
rule, but only to provide pasture, or to eat, as (...) also does, Jude 12.
being intransitive: both of them where they are enjoined to Apostles, Bishops,
or Presbyters, note teaching, not imposing Laws on persons, excommunicating,
depriving, and such like acts, as Popes claim as belonging to them as Pastors,
as may appear by viewing the places Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. 1 Pet. 5.
1, 2, 3. Acts 20. 28, 29, 30, 31. Mark 6. 34. 1 Pet. 2. 25. and therefore if it
prove Supremacy of Power, Jurisdiction, and Government in Peter, it proves
every Bishop, and Presbyter to be also a supreme Head, and Governor over the
Church of God. 2. That Peter had no such Headship of Government, and
Jurisdiction given him in those words John 21. 17, 18. is proved by the
description of the persons to whom these acts of feeding were to done, they are
the little Lambs and Sheep of Christ, not Goats, now to the Lambs and Sheep of
Christ no act of lordly rule, such as imposing Laws, excommunicating,
depriving, or the like acts, in which the Pope places his power of
Jurisdiction could be lawfully done, nor did Peter any such acts: but teaching
them, being guides to them, directing, exhorting and comforting them, (which
the Pope regards not to do) were to be done to them. Wherefore it is plain,
that lordly rule was not appointed by Christ, but fatherly care and tenderness
in that injunction, and that which Christ enjoined in his Commission to Peter
is that which the Pope neither regards to do, no^ thinks it his work; but
another thing, to wit, princely dominion, which Christ forbade. 3. The third
thing supposed is, that because the terms are indefinite, [my Lambs, my Sheep]
therefore he meant all his Lambs and Sheep, even the whole Catholic Church;
which if true, then it is false which Paul says, Gal. 2 7. that the Gospel of
the uncircumcision was committed to him, and the Gospel of the circumcisiou
unto Peter, and verse. 9. James, and Cephas, and John, did sin against Christ's
command in giving to Paul and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that Paul
and Barnabas should go to the Heathen, and James, Cephas, and John to the
Circumcision, and Paul did ill to style himself the Teacher of the Gentiles, 1 Timothy 2. 6. and he should have boasted in another man's line or rule, 2 Cor. 10.
15. since all places had been within Peter's line or rule, and he did ill to
say, Romans 15. 15. that the grace of God was given to him that he should be the
Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, and never mention Peter's Supremacy,
no not in that very Epistle which he wrote to the Church of Rome so much as
once naming him, who was (if Papists say true) the Universal Bishop and Bishop
of Rome, and sat there at that time, when he wrote that Epistle: nor does Paul
salute him, when he salutes many of less note. As for that which H. T. infers
from the not exempting of any, therefore he comprehends all the Sheep and Lambs
of Christ, it is very frivolous. For an indefinite term is not all one with an
universal, unless the matter so require it, but in such kind of speeche^ as
these it notes only indefinite particulars, as Gal. 2. 10. they agreed that we
should remember the poor, that is, so many as we could; and when Christ bids,
Matthew. 10. 8. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead; it is meant
without exceeption of any, yet not an injunction to heal every individual, or
to raise every dead person, but such as there was occasion of healing and
raising. And when Mark 16. 15. the Apostles are bid to preach the Gospel to
every creature; the Command is to preach to any one without exception, yet not
to every individual, which had been impossible; so here Peter is bid to feed
any indefinitely, yet not all universally; which had been an impossible task.
4. It is supposed that John 21. 16, 17. was a Commission conferring power,
authority, rule, and that over the very Apostles themselves, and that as a
privilege conferred on Peter for his special dilection of Christ. Whereas the
thing enjoined him is work requiring skill and care, not dignity or authority
of empire, and has nothing in it of jurisdiction, as a Judge or Commander, but
of faithfulness and diligence as a servant and guide. And in this the Apostles
were equal to him. H. T. himself confesses here, page 97. The Apostles were
equal in their calling to the Apostleship; to which this of feeding the Sheep
of Christ belonged; and therefore Peter reckons himself but a fellow Elder, and
requires other Elders to feed as well as himself, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2. and Acts 20.
28. the Elders of Ephesus are appointed (...), to feed the Church of God,
(which is as large an exppression as is John 21. 16, 17. and therefore does
infer as much Headship in them as in Peter) And Paul counted himself not
behind the very chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 12. 11. and Peter added to ^im
nothing, Gal. 2. 6. and therefore Paul derived nothing from him, but was equal
to him. And to bid Peter to feed the Apostles had been to bid him feed the
Shepherds. The Doctrine of the Gospel is not termed the Doctrine of Peter, but
of the Apostles in common, Acts 2. 41. even when Peter had converted persons,
and they were together, nor did they go to preach with Peter as their Shepherd,
or by his direction, but by agreement, Gal. 2. 9. yea, they sent Peter to
Samaria, Acts 8. 14. nor was this work of Feeding, John 21. 16. 17. a privilege
conferred on Peter for his special dilection, but a task enjoined to him
because of his more open denial, three times charged on him, as he thrice
denied Christ, and used as a stay of Peter's weakness, rather than a mark of
his worthiness, much less a proof of his Supremacy.

SECT. V.
Peter's charge to confirm his Brethren, and his priority of nomination, prove
not his Supremacy.

THe second Argument of H. T. is this, He that is by Gods appointment to
confirm others in the faith, and is generally set before others in the
Scripture, must needs be greater than those others in power and dignity. But
St. Peter by our Savior's own appointment was to confirm the Apostles in the
faith, and is generally preferred before them all in the holy Scriptures,
therefore St. Peter was above the rest of the Apostles in power and dignity,
and therefore the Head and Primate of the rest.

Answ. The Conclusion it self might be granted, and yet the supreme Headship
not proved. The power (said Heart Conf. with Rainold, chap. 1. divis. 2.) which
we mean to the Pope by this Title of Supreme Head is, that the Government of
the whole Church throughout the World does depend of him: in him does lie the
power of judging and determining all Causes of Faith, of ruling Councils as
President, and ratifying their D^crees; of ordering and confirming Bishops and
Pastors; of deciding Causes brought him by Appeals from all the coasts of the
Earth, of reconciling any that are excommunicate, of excommunicating,
suspending, or inflicting other Censures and Penalties on any that offend, yea,
on Princes and Nations; finally, of all things of the like sort for governing
of the Church, even whatsoever touches either preaching of Doctrine or
practicing of Discipline in the Church of Christ. Now a person may be above
others in power and dignity, yea, the Head and Primate of them, and yet not
have this power. The Lord Chief Justice of one of the Benches, the Speaker of
the Parliament, Chairman of a Committee, Duke of Venice, President in a
Council of Bishops, the Head of a College, the Dean of a Cathedral, may have
power and dignity above other Justices of the same Bench, over Counselors in
the same Council, over Knights and Burgesses in the same Parliament, Prelates
in the same Council, Fellows in the same College, Canons in the same Chapter,
and in a sort Primates and Heads of the rest, yet not such supreme Heads over
the rest, as the Popes claim to be. Yea, notwithstanding such power, he may be
limited so as that he cannot act without them in making any Laws, or passing
any Sentence binding, but they may act without him, and legally proceed against
him. So that the Conclusion might be yielded; and yet the Popes Supremacy not
proved. The truth is, the Pope claims such a vast and monstrous power in
Heaven, and Earth, and Hell, as exceeds the abilities of any mere mortal man to
discharge, and is, as experience shows, the Introduction to a world of miseries
and oppresons. But let us view his proof of the power of Peter, which H. T.
ascribes to him.

The Major, says he, is proved, because the stronger is not confirmed by the
weaker, nor the less worthy to be set before the more worthy, generally
speaking.

Answ. This does not prove his Major, for a person may be weaker and less
worthy, and yet above others in power and dignity. Queen Elizabeth was a Woman,
and so weaker in respect of her Sex, and perhaps less worthy in respect of
parts than some of her great Commanders and Privy Counselors. Will H. T. say
she was below them in power and dignity? Many a Father and Master may be weaker
and less worthy, and yet superior in power and dignity. Many a Prelate is
stronger in knowledge and wisdom, and more worthy in respect of holy life, than
many Popes, I will not only say, than Pope Joan and Bennet the Boy, but also
than Pius the second or any other of the best of their Popes; and yet H. T.
will not yield such Prelates to be above Popes in power and dignity. Me thinks
he should yield Athanasius to be stronger and of more worth than Liberius,
Hi^rom than Damasus, Bernard than Eugenius, and yet he would be loath to
ascribe more power and dignity to them than to the Pope. Nor is it true, that
the stronger is not confirmed by the weaker, whether we mean it of moral or
natural strength or weakness and confirmation. Apollos was confirmed by
Priscilla, David by Ab^gail, Naaman by his servant. Nor if by [generally
speaking] be meant very frequently, is the speech true, that the more worthy is
set before the less worthy. I think in the Acts of the Apostles Barnabas is
more often before Paul than after, as Acts 11. 30. and 12. 25. and 13. 7. and
14. 12, 14. and 15. 12. I am sure in the Holy Ghost's Precept, Acts 13. 2.
whereupon they were ordained, and in the Decree of the Apostles, Acts 15. 25.
Barnabas is first. Will H. T. say Barnabas was more worthy than Paul? Me thinks
a man should be ashamed to utter such frivolous toys in so weighty a matter,
and fear to ascribe to a sinful man so great and immense a Dominion on such
slight pretenses.

But how does he prove his Minor? The Minor, says he, is proved, I have prayed
for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not, and then being at length converted,
confirm thy Brethren, St. Luke 22. 31. The names of the twelve Apostles are
these, the first Simon who is called Peter, etc. St. Matthew. 10. 2. St. Mark 3.
St. Luke 2. and Acts the 1.

Answ. The Text does not say, Confirm the Apostles in the faith, nor do we
find that they did, but that he doubted as well as they, Mark 16. 14. yea,
there is mention of another Disciples believing the Resurrection before Peter,
John 20. 8, 9. yea, Paul seems to have confirmed Peter in the faith, when he
walked not with a right foot according to the truth of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 14.
and Acts 14. 22. Paul and Barnabas are said to confirm the souls of the
Disciples, and Judas and Silas did the same Acts 15. 32. So that this Act
shows no Headship in Peter, nor any privilege at all, much less such a supreme
Headship over the Apostles, as H. T. allegeth it for, but a common duty of
charity, which not only may but must be done by an equal or inferior, to an
equal or superior. Sure, if Paul had known of this as a Privilege in Peter he
would not have said, that he went not up to the Apostles before him, nor
conferred with flesh and blood, Gal. 16. 17. and that Peter added nothing to
him, Gal. 2. 6. As for his being preferred generally before the rest, it is not
proved by his being named before the rest: he may be named after, who is
preferred before, as Paul is after Barnabas: nor do the four Texts express a
general or frequent priority of nomination, three expressing but one and the
same act of Christ, and the Catalogue being varied in the order of the rest,
some Evangelists reckoning Andrew next Peter, sometimes James, and in like
manner the order altered in some others, shows, that the order of nomination
imported no Privilege: yea, s^metimes Peter is named after Andrew, John 1. 44.
who had this Privilege to bring Peter to Christ, verse 41 sometimes after Paul
and A^ollos, 1 Cor. 1. 12. and 3. 22. and other Apostles, 1 Cor. 9. 5. Gal. 2.
9. which shows that John and Paul understood not, that any such Primacy or
Prerogative was given to Peter by his nomination first, as Papists assert
thence; for if they had they would not at any time have inverted the order. And
therefore however a Primacy of order may be given to Peter, yet 1. There is no
necessity we should yield the acknowledgement of it to be a Duty imposed, much
less a perpetual Privilege of Right belonging to him. 2. That such Primacy
proves not any Superiority of Power above the Apostles, no more than that the
senior Fellow of a College is superior in power above the rest, because he is
first written in the College Book, or the Foreman in a ^ury is superior,
because he is first called.

SECT. VI.
The late Popes of Rome are not Successors of Peter.

H. T. adds, What has been said to prove St. Peter's Primacy proves also the
Primacy of his Successor the Pope of Rome.

Answ. THe proof of a Primacy is short of the proof a Supremacy, which was the
thing H. T. undertook; there is a Primacy of order, where there is not a
Supremacy of power. And the ancient Churches which gave the Bishop of Rome the
primacy of order before the Patriarchs of Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, and
Constantinople, that is, to sit in a general Council highest, and to have some
other Privileges, yet did never acknowledge the Bishop of Rome their supreme
Head, but resisted this claim, when it began to be usurped. That Primacy which
was given to the Bishop of Rome was given him chiefly because of the dignity
and power of the City: Peter's name was after by ambitious Popes used to serve
their Design in lifting up the Roman Bishop. But the Ancients did look to the
eminence of the City, as being the Seat of the Empire in their preferring of
the Roman Bishops: from whence when the Seat of the Empire was translated to
Constantinople, the Bishop of it was made a Patriarch, equal to the Bishop of
Rome, and for a time contended for pre-eminence above him. It was not at first
by reason of Peter's imagined Headship, or any succession to him, that the
Bishop of Rome was preferred before other Patriarchs: but by reason of the
amplitude and eminency of Rome, as the third Canon of the second
Constantinopolitan, and the eight and twentieth of Chalcedon Councils show. As
for Succession to Peter it is contrary to Scripture, that the Apostles should
have Successors as Apostles, since they were only to be Apostles, who were
Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, which neither the Roman Bishops, nor any
after the Age in which the Apostles lived, could be. That they were either
fixed Bishops of certain places, or did appoint any to succeed in their
Apostleship is false. All Apostles were by special election of Christ, those
that came after were by election of men, and succeeded the Apostles in
preaching the Gospel, but not in Apostleship, nor did the Apostles make Bishops
of certain places their Successors, but every Pastor, who preached the faith
aright, was their Successor, and so are all Gospel Preachers at this day. John
Calvin at Geneva did succeed Peter more truly than Pope Aldobrandin, or
Barberin, or Ghisi, or any other of the Popes for many hundred of years. Till
the Popes prove themselves Preachers of the Gospel as Peter was, they vainly
talk of Succession to him As of late they have been they have been Successors
to Simon Magus rather than to Simon Peter.

SECT. VII.
The Sayings of Fathers and Councils prove not Peter's or the Popes Supremacy.

OF the Fathers which H. T. cites for the Popes Supremacy the first is out of
Damascen a late corrupt Writer, and he cites it out of Pseudo Dionysius the
Areopagite's tale proved to be such by Dr. John Rainold Conf. with Heart, chap.
8. divis. 2. and from that place, in which the contrary, to what it is alleged
for, to wit, Peter's Supremacy, may be evinced, in that the Author, who ever
he were, makes the power of binding and loosing to be given to all the
Apostles, There says H. T. Peter is styled the supreme and most ancient top of
Divines: which though it have no credit there, being too much known of the
forgeries and dreams in the Writings of Damascen, and that countefeit
Dionysius: yet were it granted, that Dionysius the Arcopagite should have so
written, as he says he did, terming Peter, the supreme and most ancient top of
Divines, this would not infer that he was the universal Pastor of the Church
with such a power of jurisdiction, as this Author asserts he had over the
whole Church, even the Apostles themselves. For this does not express supremacy
of power, but of knowledge, and asserts his eminency for understanding
Theology, to which me thinks H. T. should not annex the supremacy of
jurisdiction and power, lest that some such as Aquinas, Andradius, or some
other challenge the Popedom, which is seldom conferred on any for his eminence
in Divinity, but rather the most learned Divines are thought unfit for the
Papacy: even Cicarella relates in the Life of Sixtus the fifth, that Cardinal
Sirlet, though he were a man of great learning, was rejected, as not fit to be
chosen Pope; such as Bellarmine, Tolet, Baronius, are not chosen to be Popes,
but such crafty men as Paul the third, or such stout spirits as Paul the
fourth, or such as are great Canonists and Politicians, that know the arts of
the Papacy better than the Doctrine of Christ, are chosen for Popes, yea, men
so ignorant in Divinity, and so unfit to take the charge of Souls have been
chosen for Popes, that of all the Popes for many hundreds of years past there
are but a very few who had knowledge in the Mystery of the Gospel, or any
measure of godliness competent for a Parish Priest. Yea, Bellarmine lib. de
notis Eccles. cap. 9. is feigned to assert that there may be members of the
body of Christ, who are no parts of it as a living body, but only as
instruments, lest otherwise the Pope being proved evil should be incapable of
being Head of the Church in that he is no member of Christ's body, thereby
making a dead equivocal member an univocal Head of the universal Church, being
conscious that without that shift the Popes would all or most of them be
cashiered out of the Church of Christ as not so much as parts of Christ's body,
much less Heads, by reason of their notorious pride, luxury, cruelty,
perfidiousness, covetousness, blasphemy, deceit, and whatsoever vice might show
them to be children of the Devil. Nor do the words of Irenaeus lib. 3. advers.
haeres. cap. 3. in the second Age, in which it is said, All Churches round
about ought to resort to the Roman Church by reason of her more powerful
Principality, and that it was the greatest and most ancient, founded by Peter
and Paul. For whether the word convenire be to be translated resort, or agree
to, or go together with, (which is somewhat uncertain) it cannot be understood
of all Churches round about in all parts of the World, for that had been an
impossible thing, and contrary to the intent of Irenaeus in the same place who
directs them that were in Asia to Ephesus and Smyrna for the same end, but he
means of the parts of the Western Empire, such as Lions was in France where he
was Bishop, and such parts as were nearer Rome; and it is manifest that he
makes Ro^^ no more infallible than the Church at Smyrna or Ephesus, referring
the Inquisitor into the tradition Apostolical to apply himself to these, as
well as it for information; nor does he make the resort to be to the Church of
Rome always, but because at that time there was a succession of men that knew
the Apostles, or had the Doctrine of Christ delivered from them, among whom he
reckons Linus as made Bishop by Peter while he lived, and so no Successor to
Peter; but if Peter were a Bishop of Rome, (which Papist say, but we deny)
there were two Bishops of Rome together, yea, he makes the Church of Rome to
have been founded by Peter and Paul, not by Peter only, by reason of which
tradition, though either false or uncertain, he judged there was the best
assurance to be had of the Apostles Doctrine about God the Creator against
Valentinus, and the rather, because he was acquainted with the Teachers there
as he had been with Polycarpus of Smyrna, who was an acquaintance of John the
Evangelist, for which reason he directs also to him. As for the more potent
Principality, which Irenaus speaks of, whether it be meant of the Church or the
State Ecclesiastical or Civil it is uncertain; if of the Civil Principality,
because then it was the Seat of the Empire, the necessity of resort thither
must be because civil affairs would enforce them to go thither upon other
occasions, and then they might inform themselves being there most commodiously;
if of Ecclesiastical Principality, yet there is nothing that shows it meant of
universal jurisdiction and power over all Churches, but of a more powerful
Principality it had in clearing Doctrines and ordering Church Affairs in those
parts by reason of the eminency of their Founders, and succeeding Teachers who
were in those times of great note for purity of Doctrine and constancy in the
Faith for which they were Martyrs. And indeed were the question now between us
and any such as Valentinus or Marcion concerning the Doctrine which the
Apostles taught about another God besides the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Church of Rome had such Bishops as then they had who had acquaintance
with the Apostles, or received their tradition from them so near to the
Apostles days as the Roman Bishops did then, we should also think it meet in
such a point wherein we knew they were right to refer it to them to determine.
But in so doing we should not acknowledge a perpetual Prerogative of infallible
Supremacy over all the Churches in the World annexed to that See, nor did ever
Irenaeus intend it, who is known to have opposed Victor Bishop of Rome, when he
excommunicated the Asian Bishops for varying from him in the keeping of Easter,
as Eusebius reports, Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 22, 23, 24.

The words of Origin in cap. 6. Epist ad Roman. (waving other Exceptions
against Citations out of that Commentary, as being so altered by Ruffinus that
we can hardly know what is Origen's, what not) were they as H. T. sets them
down (which I cannot examine now for want of the Book) yet they prove not
Peter's supremacy of power over the Apostles. He might have the chief charge of
feeding Christ 's Sheep, and the Church be founded on him, yet have no
jurisdiction over the Apostles, and the Church be founded on the other Apostles
as well as on him, as has been showed before in this Article, Sect 4.

As for Cyprian's words, calling Peter the Head and Root of the Church, cited
by H. T. as in an Epist. ad Julian: I find no such Epistle in Cyprian's Works,
but in an Epistle ad Jubian^m concerning Baptism of Heretics, I find these
words about the beginning of the Epistle, Nos autem qui Ecclesiae unius caput
and radicem tenemus, that is, But we who hold the Head and Root of one Church,
etc. in which Peter is not named, nor do I find any thing that should infer
that by the Head and Root of one Church, he means Peter but Christ, whom in his
Book of the Unity of the Church he makes the only Head of his Church, and
having alleged immediately before one Baptism, as it is Ephesians. 4. 5. it is
likely he meant by one Head the one Lord, mentioned verse. 5. as after also he
mentions one Faith, or else the meaning is this, we have remained in the unity
of the Church which is one, and the Head and Root of the faithful: of which
several particular Churches are members and branches. Nor, did he call Peter
the Head and Root of the Church, would it be for H. T. his purpose, unless he
meant it in respect of universal Jurisdiction and Supremacy over the whole
Church belonging to him and his Successors Bishops of Rome, which is not
proved, and there may be another reason given of such a Title given to Peter's
person only, because of his eminent confession, Matthew. 16. 16. and his
preaching, Acts 2. and 10, etc. And though he term the Church of Rome Peter's
Chair, or rather the Bishopric of Rome or Peter's Doctrine and teaching there,
yet that proves not he held the Popes Supremacy, but that Peter's Doctrine was
then held there. Yea, it is certain out of his Treatise of the Unity of the
Church, and his Epistle to Cornelius mentioned before, and his opposition to
Pope Stephanus, that Cyprian did account all Bishops equal, and the Bishops of
Africa equal in Jurisdiction to the Roman Bishop, and the Pope of Rome to be
but his Colleague, from whom he dissents, and to whom he denied Appeals, and
whom he reproved of ambition and pride, when he sought to impose his Judgment
on others, contrary to what Cyprian and a whole Synod of African Bishops
besides Asiaticks held, and therein opposed the Bishop of Rome. And therefore
it is certain that Cyprian never acknowledged the Supremacy of the Pope now
asserted.

Of those which H. T. allegeth in the fourth Age, not one of them gives Peter
that Supremacy of Jurisdiction over the Apostles and Christians, which the
Romanists claim as belonging to the Pope over all Bishops and Churches, but
either a primacy of order, or pre-eminence of gifts, or zeal, or esteem, or use
in moderating in Assemblies. The words which seem to be most for it are falsely
ascribed to Chrysostom. For however Trapezuntius have translated them, yet in
the four and fiftieth Homily (as it is in Eaton Print) the words are not as H.
T. cites them, The Pastor and Head of the Church was once a poor Fisherman.
But on Matthew. 16. 18. he has these words, And I say unto thee, Thou art Peter,
and upon this Stone or Rock I will build my Church, that is, on the faith of
confession or confessed. There he shows that many should believe, and raises
up his mind, and makes him Pastor. And after on verse 19. These things he
promises to give him, to show a Fisherman stronger than any Stone or Rock, all
the World oppugning.

If Optatus call Peter the Head of the Apostles, it is meant, as is frequent in
Scripture and other Writers, to call the forwardest, and leader, or first in
order the Head of the rest. But the words Apostolorum Caput Petrus inde Cephas
appellatus, gives occasion to conceive these words inserted in Optatus, who it
is likely would not have given so inept a derivation of the word Cephas, as if
it were from the Greek (...) a Head.

The words in Augustine Sermon. 124. de tempore (not as H. T. 12. de 4.
temporibus, which shows that he cites this passage without reading it, and it
is likely he did so in the rest) have no likelihood to be Augustine's, those
Sermons being nothing like Augustine's Writings, nor is it likely that
Augustine would have called Peter the Foundation of unmovable Faith, or have
made the sin of denying Christ, exiguae culpae, a small fault. The words in the
eighty sixth Epistle ad Casulanum are either deceitfully or ignorantly alleged,
they being not the words of Augustine, but of Urbicus, whom he refutes. For so
the words are, Peter also (says he, that is, Urbicus) the Head of Apostles,
the Doorkeeper of Heaven, and Foundation of the Church, Simon being extinct,
who had been a Figure of the Devil, not to be overcome but by Fasting, taught
the Romans that thing, whose Faith is declared to the whole World of Lands.

The words of Augustine, of whom Peter the Apostle by reason of the Primacy of
his Apostleship bore the person, etc. tract. ultimo in Joannem, being recited
at large are so far from proving the Supremacy which Romanists ascribe to him,
that they are against the principal grounds, by which they endeavor to prove
it, and therefore I will recite them at large. This (following Christ) the
Church does, blessed by hope in this sorrowful life, of which Church Peter the
Apostle by reason of the Primacy of his Apostleship bare the person by a
figured generality. For so much as pertains to him properly he was one man by
nature, by grace one Christian, by more abundant grace one and the same first
Apostle. But when it was said to him, To thee will I give the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heavens, and whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth shall be bound
also in Heavens, and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be loosed also
in the Heavens: he signified the whole Church, which in this World is shaken
with diverse temptations, as it were showers, floods, and tempests, and falls
not, because it is founded upon the Rock, from whence Peter also took his name:
For the Rock is not called from Peter, but Peter from the Rock, Petrus a Petra,
as Christ is not called from a Christian, but a Christian from Christ. For
therefore, says the Lord, upon this Rock will I build my Church, because Peter
had said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. Therefore he says, Upon
this Rock which thou have confessed will I build my Church. For Christ was the
Rock upon which Foundation Peter himself also was built. For no man can lay
other Foundation besides that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. The Church
therefore which is founded on Christ received from him the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heavens in Peter, that is, the power of binding and loosing sins. For what
the Church is by propriety in Christ, that is, by signification, Peter in the
Rock: by which signification Christ is understood to be the Rock, Peter the
Church. In which passage though there are conceits not right, yet clear it is
that Peter's primacy is here asserted to be only in this that he represented
the whole Church, that the Rock on which it is built is Christ, that he had his
first Apostleship by more abundant grace in that he was made a figure of the
whole Church to signify, its unity, that in him the whole Church had the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heavens, that is, the power of binding and loosing sins:
which points I presume, the Romanists now will not avow.

That which he cites out of the council of Nice, Can. 39. Arab. is but a late
devised thing those Arabic canons being forged, there having been but twenty
in all in that council, in the fifth of which number the Pope is equalled with
other Patriarchs. And the council of Chalcedon Act. 16. is falsely alleged, as
if it ascribed all primacy and chief honor of the Pope of Rome, since it makes
the Pope and other Patriarchs, equal in Jurisdiction within their circuit or
Province, notwithstanding the reluctance of the Popes Legates, and the flattery
of some there, and that pre-eminence which the Pope had was of order or place,
not of power, nor that by divine institution for Peter's sake, but by humane
allowance, by reason of the dignity of the City of Rome:

SECT. VIII.
The holy Scriptures John 19. 11. Acts 25. 10, 11. Luke 22. 25. 1 Cor. 3. 11.
overthrow the Popes Supremacy.

H. T. adds after his fashion, Objections solved. Object. Pilate had power over
Christ himself. Thou should not (says he) have any power against me, unless
it were given thee from above, John 19. 11. therefore temporal Princes are
above the Pope. Which is strengthened by Christ's disclaiming a worldly
Kingdom, John 18. 36. saying, Who made me a Judge over you? Luke 12. 14.
declining the being made a King, John 6. 15.

Answ. I Distinguish your Antecedent: he had a power of permission over Christ
I grant; a power of Jurisdiction I deny, and so do all good Christians. Nor is
your Consequence less to be denied, speaking of spiritual things, and things
belonging to Church Government, in which we only defend the Popes Supremacy,
and that without all prejudice to Princes and chief Magistrates in their
Supremacy of temporal affairs.

I reply, this Objection is most directly against the Popes Supremacy in
temporal things, which this Author after Heart, and sundry others, seem not to
allow the Pope, though Carerius, Baronius, Bellarmine, and others defend it,
(...) places it is (...), in the third of Lu. 22. 25. upon another occasion the
strife of the Disciples at Christ's last Supper who of the Apostles should be
the greater, our Lord Christ does expressly determine, the Kings of the Nations,
(...), that is have dominion over them, and they that rule over them are called
Benefactours, but you not so, and in all these places in the vulgar Latin
(which the Papists are bound to follow) it is, Dominantur little, or eis, and
potestatem exercent in eos, or potestatem habent ipsorum, or super eos, in none
of the places does that Translation express the words, as importing tyrannical
rule according to their own will without respect to the good of the persons
ruled; and the translating of it by H. T. [over-rule] and noting that it is
(...), as importing a forbidding only to lord it over Inferiors, is not
right, it being in Luke 22. 25. only (...), they have rule over them. And that
where it is (...), it does not forbid only tyrannical dominion, but also any
dominion at all over one another is apparent from many Arguments in the Text.
1. From the occasion, which was the petition and contention, in opposition to
which this answer being made Christ must be conceived to forbid what they
sought for, else it had not been apposite to the business: but they sought not
tyrannical dominion, but the higher seat and chief dignity and power, or as
Christ's answer, Luke 22. 26. (...), intimates, they strove for seniority or
priority of order, and (...), verse. 24. and Matthew. 20. 27. Mark 10. 44. (...),
shows, that the thing they sought was not Supremacy, but only priority;
therefore our Lord Christ forbids not only tyrannical dominion, but the higher
seat, chief dignity and power, and the affecting seniority or priority over or
before one another. 2. From the subjects whose dominion is forbidden, who are
termed not Tyrants, but Kings of the Nations, (...), that have authority, Luke
22. 25. in Matthew. 20. 25. (...), the Princes, or Rulers, or Leaders of the
Gentiles, (...), and the great ones, in Mark 10 42. yet more diminutively,
(...), those that seem or are accounted to rule or lead the Nations, (...),
their great ones. Which terms do plainly show that these, whose dominion was
forbidden to the Apostles, were the Rulers which were esteemed and accepted by
those to whom they were Rulers, and had lawful authority; and therefore such
rule is forbidden, as the best Rulers used among the Nations, and not only
tyrannical, and mere lording it over one another after their own will. 3. The
word (...), however it may be sometimes meant of mere lordly forcible rule
against the will and good of the person ruled, yet here it cannot be meant so,
since (...) to use dominion at all, and to have power at all over one another is
forbidden, Luke 22. 25. as well as (...), to have absolute, lordly, arbitrary,
forcible dominion. 4. This is further confirmed in that (...), is as well
forbidden as (...), to have authority or power, as well as to have dominion,
and that which is expressed by the compound in Matthew and Mark is (...), the
simple, in Luke, which is used still of rule without abuse. 5. In Luke it is
forbidden to be called (...), which is a word that signifies Benefactours, and
though to be Benefactours is not forbidden, yet it is forbidden to be so
called, that is, to affect that Title, which implies one to be under another,
and to be beholden one to another, as persons that could gratify one another
in bestowing favors, granting petitions one to another, bestowing preferments
or refuse, which does imply superiority in some sort, and such a dependence one
on another as the Apostles were not to have. 6. The additional speech of Christ
commanding in stead of dominion Matthew. 20. 26. 27. Rather Ministry and service
shows he would have none among them superior, but all equal. 7. Christ's
propounding his own Example, Matthew. 20 28. Mark 10. 45. Luke 22. 27. as that
which they were to follow evinceth the same. And though it is true he was their
Master and Lord, John 13. 13. yet both there verse 14, 15. and here he propounds
himself an Example only in service. 8. He expresses that which he would have
them to be so emphatically, that he not only forbids that which all counted
unlawful, to wit, tyrannical rule, but also requires in those places such a
mutual debasement, voluntary subjection, condescension, Ministry yielding to
each other as takes away all assuming of so much as was lawful in others, even
the taking to themselves priority of order or place, precedence, seniority
affected, empire or rule over one another, as the words Matthew. 20. 26, 27. Mark
10. 43, 44. Luke 22. 26. do plainly show. 9 This is confirmed by other places
upon a like occasion, Matthew. 18. 1. 2 3 4. Mark 9. 33, 34, 35. Luke 9. 46, 47.
in which places Christ resolves them that they should be as a little child,
that assumes not empire, but is humble and accounts others as equal to him. 10.
It is further evident from Luke 22. 28, 29. 30. that Christ having forbidden
Supremacy or superiority in any of them among themselves does promise them a
Kingdom afterward, and that then they should be in his Kingdom, and eat and
drink at his Table, and sit upon twelve Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel in recompense of their abiding with him in his temptations. And in very
truth, if there were no more than the consideration of the present state of
Peter and the Apostles their despised and persecuted condition and the future
accidents that Christ foretold should befall Peter in particular, John 21. 28.
and the rest of the Apostles, Matthew. 24 9. no man could reasonably imagine that
Christ should make Peter a visible Monarch to rule the Apostles and the Church
scattered over the World, he himself being in prison and they also, and in so
remote places, he unknown to them, and they to him, they having no access or
means of access to him, nor knowing where to find him, but all judicious men
must conceive that this device of Peter's Supremacy over the Apostles and whole
Church given by Christ is a mere impudent forgery, as was after Constantine's
donation to the Bishop of Rome, by which wicked means the Popes have usurped
the greatest tyranny that ever was in the World.

Out of all this I gather, that Christ intended, 1. That there should be no
Kingdom, Monarchy, or Empire in any of the Apostles over the rest, or any part
of the Church till he came; but that their state should be a state of service
in preaching the Gospel, and laying the foundation of Christianity till his
coming. 2. That then he only would be King, and they all equals, sitting upon
twelve Thrones with him; and therefore that he would make none of them supreme
Monarch over the rest, nor Vicar to himself, as the Pope does blasphemously and
arrogantly challenge.

And for that which H. T. says, that Christ expressly mentions a greater and a
lesser, a superior and inferior among them, it is frivolously added, since it
is plain that what in Luke is verse. 26. he that is greater, he that is chief,
is in Matthew 20. 26, 27. Mark 10. 43. He that would be great among you, he
that would be first, and that which is in Matthew. 20. 26, 27. let him be in Mark
10. 43, 44. shall be your Minister, your servant, is in Luke 22. 26. Let him be
as the younger, as the Minister; which shows the meaning to be this, If any
affect to be as the elder, greater or superior to the rest, be so far from
ascribing or yielding to him such precedence, greatness, or superiority, that
my will is, that you should account of him as the younger, Servant and Minister
to the rest, and so it shall be, ye shall be all equal, none above another.
This is the very drift and purport of Christ's determination, that there should
be no superiority or inferiority among them, but an equality; and that which H.
T. speaks of the mention of superiority and inferiority is meant of superiority
that might be affected, but not of any superiority allowed by Christ, it being
plainly forbidden.

And for what Bellarmine urges from the term (...), as if Christ had appointed
one Ruler or Prince in the College of the Apostles, though the term (...), a
Leader, is not the same with (...), a Prince, or Ruler, yet if it did note
Princedom, it is manifested, that Christ speaks of a Prince among them not by
due constitution, but by inordinate usurpation; and therefore to infer from
thence, as if Christ would have one superior over the rest, when he determines
there should be equality, is the act of a man that is resolved to be lustily
impudent. By this whole discourse the Objection is fully vindicated against the
shifts of H. T. and other Romanists, and stands thus. That Supremacy is not to
be yielded to have been granted to Peter which Christ forbade to every one of
the Apostles. But to be a supreme Ruler over the rest Christ forbad to every
one of the Apostles; therefore Christ forbad Peter to be a supreme Ruler over
the rest of the Apostles.

I yet add, that were it granted, that Christ did only forbid spiritual
Superiors to lord it over Inferiors, this very grant would prove the Papal
Supremacy, which Popes claim and exercise, to be certainly forbidden. For if
ever there were a Superior, that did lord it over Inferiors, the Pope is such
a one, yea, I may aver and easily prove it, that let all the tyranny and
lording, which any Tyrants or Princes have exercised from the beginning of the
World to this day be considered, they will be found incomparable to the Papal
tyranny and lording over the Church of God. If this be not the highest lording
to impose on men's consciences such Laws as Christ never imposed, to enjoin the
holy, as they term it, inquisition with rigor, to excommunicate, deprive, burn
men and women old and young who yield not to the Popes Laws, though contrary to
Christ's, to take on him to dispense with Gods Laws, to challenge the defining
of all controversies, supremacy over all Councils, power to depose and destroy
Emperors and Kings, if they acknowledge not his immense power, yea, if they be
not his Butchers to kill their best and most peaceable Subjects, if he once
term them Heretics, to interdict a whole State for limiting by Law Donations
to Ecclesiastics, and imprisoning notorious malefactors, who were
Ecclesiastics, the use of divine service, to subject a King to whipping on the
Bare for the death of an Ecclesiastic not by him killed, to depose Emperors
for investing Bishops, to canonize Saints, whom he will, to be invocated even
such an one whose holiness was disobedience to his lawful Prince, and to have
a Feast proper to him, besides innumerable other acts done against the Laws of
God and Man I do utterly despair ever to know what it is to lord or tyrannize
over others. Surely it is easier to praise Busiris, or to justify Dionysius of
Syracuse, or Nero of Rome, and to acquit them from lording, than the Bishop of
Rome for many hundreds years last past, if we stand to the Relations of Writers
of their own Church, who speak too favorably of them.

H. T. proceeds. Object. Christ is the foundation (of the church) and other
foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Answ. Other principal foundation can
no man lay, I grant, other subordinate, I deny: for that he himself has laid,
Peter, thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my church, St. Matthew.
16. 18. and the rest of the Apostles were built on the foundation of them all,
although not equally, Ephesians. 2. 20.

I reply, when it is said, Christ is the Foundation of the Church, and other
Foundation can no man lay, it is meant of a principal Foundation not excluding
a subordinate. But since the term [Foundation] as has been proved before in
this Article, Sect. 2, 3. as applied to the Apostles does not note settling or
upholding by rule or dominion, but by teaching, the Papists who ascribe to the
Pope such a Supremacy and Infallibility in teaching, as is proper to Christ, do
lay another principal Foundation besides Jesus Christ, not subordinate, but
coordinate to him. Which that they do is proved by two things, which are
ascribed by them to the Pope either by himself or with his Council.

1. That they can alter the plain express precepts of Christ, as namely in
determining, that it is not necessary that other faithful people besides the
sacrificing Priest should drink the Wine in the Eucharist, though the precept
of Christ is as express for all the faithful drinking of it, as it is for
their eating of the Bread, and that it is not lawful for a Priest to marry,
though the Scripture expressly says, Marriage is honorable in all men, Heb.
13. 4.

2. In enjoining under pain of Heresy, Excommunication, and Damnation things
to be believed, and practiced, which Christ never enjoined to be believed or
practiced, as namely, Transubstantiation, the unbloody Propitiatory Sacrifice,
properly so called in the Mass, Purgatory Fire, confession of all a persons
known sins into the ears of a Priest, the keeping of the Vow of a Monastic
profession, when the person cannot contain, and to live an idle begging life,
when the person is able to work, and has no other employment, nor pretends to
any, which is useful to men, besides praying, which is the common duty of all
Christians. Now surely he that takes on him to alter Christ's commands, and to
put his own in stead thereof does make himself the principal Foundation equal
to Christ, which is contrary to Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and to Christ, Matthew. 23.
8, 11. and so makes himself a Foundation coordinate, as indeed more than
Christ, however he pretend himself the Vicar of Christ, or the authority of the
Church for his Warrant. As for that which is said of Peter here, it was
answered before, Sect. 2, 3. that it does not import any Rule or Dominion, but
some peculiar success in his preaching, besides what others had, which was but
a personal pre-eminence derivable to no Successor, much less to the rank of
Roman Bishops in these last Ages, who never build the Church by preaching, but
pull down Princes, and oppress those that would build up Christ's Church. Yet
it is observable, that he allegeth Ephesians. 2. 20. to prove that the rest of the
Apostles were built on the foundation of them all though not equally, when the
Text does not at all mention the Apostles being built on the Foundation, but
the Ephesian believers, nor are the Ephesian believers said to be built on them
unequally, on Peter as the supreme, on others after him, but on them all
without any difference, and not only on them, but also on the Foundation of
the Prophets, Christ alone being the chief cornerstone.

SECT. IX.
Cyprian, Hierome, Gregory, the councils of Constantinople, Chalcedon, Nice,
are against the Popes Supremacy.

It is added thus by H. T. Object. St. Cyprian (de unit. Eccles.) says, The
Apostles were equal in dignity. And St. Hierome affirms the church was equally
founded on them all, lib. cont. Jovin. Answ. They were equal in their calling
to the Apostleship I grant, in their power of Government and Jurisdiction I
deny: And the church was equally founded on them all before a Head was
constituted, I grant; after a Head was constituted, I deny, and so do the
Fathers, St. Cyprian saying in the same place, that Christ disposed the origin
of unity beginning from one (Peter) And St. Hierome tells us, He chose one of
the Twelve, that a Head being constituted, the occasion of Schism might be
taken away.

I Reply, Cyprian's words in his Book de unitate Ecclesia, are recited above
Art. 5. Sect. 6. in which he expressly says thus, Hoc erant utique and caeteri
Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, pari consortio praditi and honoris and potestatis,
sell exordium ab unitate proficiscitur, ut Ecclesia una monstretur: that is,
That verily were also all the rest of the Apostles which Peter was, endued with
equal allotment of honor and power, but the beginning proceeds from unity,
that the church might be showed to be one. So that the very words are express,
that all the Apostles were not only equal in their calling to the Apostleship,
but also in power and honor, and that Peter was made a Representative of all,
ye^ had no more power and honor than other Apostles; and for Bishops he says
presently after, Episcopatus unus est cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur,
that is, Bishopric is but one, of which wholly or entirely a part is held by
each. Which words plainly show this to be his meaning, 1. That the Episcopacy
or charge of looking to the Church of Christ is but one and the same in all the
World, even as the Church Catholic is but one and the same. 2. That each
Bishop has but his part, none the whole, none is an universal Bishop over the
whole Church. 3. That each Bishop, who has his part, holds it in solidum, that
is, wholely or entirely, the power and charge is as much in one as another. 4.
That Episcopacy was first invested in Peter for all, that Episcopacy might be
one, and undivided, and the Church one, so as that no Church break from
another, nor any Bishop be above another.

As for the words of Hierome, lib. 1. advers. Jovin. they are thus. At dick,
super Petrum fundatur Ecclesia, licet idipsum in alio loco super omnes
Apostolos fiat, and cuncti claves regni coelorum accipiant, and ex aequo super
eos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur: tamen propterea inter duodecim unus
eligitur; ut capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio: that is, But thou
say (who arguest for Marriage) upon Peter (a married man) the church is
founded, although that thing in another place is done upon all the Apostles,
and all receive the Keys of the Kingdom of Heavens, and equally upon them the
strength of the church is established: yet therefore among twelve one is
chosen, that a Head being constituted the occasion of Schism might be taken
away. In which words it is manifest that he makes the other Apostles equally
Foundations of the Church with Peter, and to have the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heavens, and terms Peter not a Head in respect of Power or Jurisdiction over
the rest, but in respect of Order, that for want of it no occasion of Schism
might be. Which to have been the mind of Hierome appears fully in his Epistle
to Euagrius, in which he determines that in the Scripture Bishops and Elders
were the same, that Peter calls himself a fellow-elder, and John an Elder, but
after one was chosen who might be set before the rest, that was done for a
Remedy of Schism, lest each one drawing to himself the church of Christ might
break it. And then he makes the Church and Bishop of Rome equal with other
Churches and Bishops.

If, says he, Authority be sought, the World is greater than a City.
Wheresoever there is any Bishop either at Rome, or at Eugubium, or at
Constantinople, or at Rhegium, or at Alexandria, or at Tanis, he is of the same
merit, and of the same Priesthood. Power of riches, and humility of poverty,
makes a Bishop neither higher nor lower. But all are Successors of the
Apostles. Whence these things may be inferred, 1. That Bishops are not above
Elders originally. 2. That their superiority is by positive order. 3. That the
Apostles were Elders. 4. That all Bishops are their Successors. 5. That the
Bishop of Rome is not above another Bishop. 6. That the Authority of Rome is
less than of the World.

Yet further says H. T. Object. One Body with two Heads is monstrous. Answ.
Not if one be principal, and the other subordinate or ministerial only, as in
our present case: so Christ is the Head of the Man, and the Man of the Woman, 1
Cor. 11. without any monstrosity.

I reply, to make a thousand metaphorical subordinate ministerial Heads of the
Church of Christ may be without monstrosity. But to make a supreme visible Head
over the whole Church, ascribing to him such a power as agrees to none but
Christ, nor can be exercised by any but Christ for the good of his body, has
monstrosity in it, or rather treason against Christ. But such a Head is the
Pope made by H. T. therefore this conceit of him and other Papists induces
monstrosity. The Minor is partly showed before, and may be fully proved by
instancing in the acts of power the Pope takes to him, in defining what the
whole Church is to believe, what is the sense of Scripture, receiving Appeals
from all places, judging causes, setting up and putting down Kings and Bishops,
and many more, wherein he arrogateth and usurpeth that power to himself, which
does only agree to Christ, and can be exercised by none but him.

Again says H. T. Object. St. Gregory rejects the name of Universal
Archbishop as Antichristian, lib. 7. indict. 2. Epist. 96. Answ. He rejects it
as it excludes all others from being Bishops, I grant; as it only signifies
one to be supreme and above all others, I deny, and so does he himself, saying
in the same Book (Epist 62.) if there be any crime found in Bishops, I know no
Bishop but is subject to the Sea Apostolic. And lib 4. Indict. 13. Epist. 32.
The care and principality of the church has been committed to the holy Apostle
and Prince of the Apostles St. Peter, yet is not he called Universal Apostle,
as if there were no other Apostles but he. You see in what sense he rejects the
word (Universal.)

I reply, Gregory not only rejected the Title of Universal Archbishop or
Patriarch, but also rejected it as proud, wicked, perverse, profane,
blasphemous, and the Usurper of it as a Forerunner of Antichrist, and not
only as not agreeing to the Bishop of Constantinople, but also as not agreeing
to him or any of his Predecessors, lib. 6. Epist. 24. and lib. 4. Epist. 32.
and 36. None of my Predecessors consented to use this profane name of
Universal Bishop: none of my Predecessors ever took upon him this name of
singularity, neither consented to use it. We (the Bishops of Rome) do not seek
nor yet accept this glorious Title being offered unto us. Nor in the sense
only as H. T. denies it due to the Pope, as if it excluded all others from
being Bishops, but even in the sense in which the Pope now usurps it. For, 1.
He rejects it in the sense in which John of Constantinople did affect it. But
he did not affect it as thereby assuming to himself to be the only Bishop, but
the supreme, which appears, 1. In that a Synod of the Greek Bishops did agree
to give it him, Habita Synodo seipsum Patriarcham universalem creasset, that
is, Holding a Synod he had created himself universal Patriarch, Platina in the
Life of Pope Gregory. But doubtless the Synod would not give him the Title as
importing him the only Bishop, for then they should have unbishopt themselves,
which neither he nor they did. 2. Gregory when he charge him with his
arrogating that Title to himself tells John himself, lib. 4. Epist 38. that he
sought this Title that he might seem to be under none, and he alone before all,
that be endeavored that by the appellation of universal Bishop he might put
under himself all the members of Christ, that he desired to be called in the
World not only the Father, but also the general Father, that he desired by
that word of elation to put himself before Bishops, and to hold them under him,
which shows he affected not to be accounted the only Bishop, but the supreme.
3. He affected no more than what after Boniface the third of Rome obtained of
Phocas, as appears by the words of Platina in the Life of Boniface the third,
who speaks thus. Boniface the third a Roman by country obtained from Phocas
the Emperor, yet with great contention, that the Sea of blessed Peter the
Apostle, which is the Head of all churches should be both so called and
accounted by all: which place indeed the Church of Constantinople endeavored
to challenge to it, sometimes evil Princes favoring, and affirming that in
that place should be the first See where the Head of the Empire was. And
Baronius Annal. Eccles. at the year 606. relates the Decree of Phocas thus,
that the Roman Bishop alone should be called ecumenical or universal, but not
the Constantinopolitan. And Bellarmine lib. 2. de Pontif. Romans cap. 31. says,
They would equal the Sea of Constantinople to the Roman, and make it universal,
speaking of the Greeks in the business of John of Constantinople; whence it may
be plainly gathered, that the thing which the Patriarchs of Constantinople
affected, was not to be accounted the only Bishop, so as that none but he
should be accounted a bishop, but that he should be the Head or Supreme of all
Bishops by reason of the Seat of the Empire there, and that this Gregory
disclaimed as proud. 4. That was affected by John, which he and Cyriacus his
Successor used for twenty years, but neither of them used it so by word or
deed, as to exclude others from being Bishops as well as themselves (for in
John's own writing to them extant in the body of the Romam Greek Law, he terms
them fellow servants, Metropolitans, and Bishops, to whom he writes, and others
in their Writings to the Patriarch of Constantinople, when they term him
ecumenical Archbishop, yet style themselves Bishops and fellow-priests) but
they would be accounted supreme or prime Bishops of the whole Church, so as to
be under none, but above all.

2. It is proved that Gregory rejected the Title of Universal Bishop in the
sense of the supreme Bishop, in that he, Regist. lib. 11. Epist. 54. resolves
thus If any man accuse a Bishop for whatsoever cause, let the cause b^ judged
by his Metropolitan. If any man gainsay the Metropolitan's judgment, let it be
referred to the Archbishop and Patriarch of that Diocese, and let him end it
according to the Canons and Laws. And for what he adds, that if a Bishop have
no Metropolitan nor Patriarch at all, then is his cause to be heard and
determined by the Sea Apostolic, which is the Head of all Churches, it is
added beyond the Canons of Councils and Laws of Emperors, and though it prove
that he claimed a reference of causes in difference between Bishops within his
Patriarchate, yet not where there were other Patriarchs to which the Bishops
were subject, much less through the whole World. And that he terms the Sea of
Rome the Head of all Chuches, does not prove a Supremacy of Government by any
institution of Christ, but a pre-eminence of order and some Ecclesiastical
Privileges, by reason of that Cities being the Seat of the Empire. And hereby
is understood what H. T. cites out of the seventh Book Epist. 62. of Greg.
Epistles, Indict. 2. that it is not meant of all Bishops universally, but of
the Bishops within that Patriarchate, but this was in case of fault only; for
it follows, But when no fault requires it, all according to reason of humility
are equals: So that Gregory does not by that speech show that he had an
universal supreme Jurisdiction and power over all Churches, so as that they
were subject to his commands and deteminations in points of faith, but that he
accounted the African Churches subject to his reproof, as he had a common care
of the Church every where, in which Gregory himself and all other Bishops and
Churches are subject to any Bishop wheresoever. Certainly Gregory had most
absurdly argued against the arrogance of John of Constantinople, calling the
Title of universal Bishop new, profane, proud, blasphemous, foolish, perverse,
and him a Forerunner of Antichrist whosoever should use it, if he had imagined
it belonged to himself, or any Bishop of Rome.

And for what H. T. allegeth, that John claimed to be universal Bishop, as
excluding all others, it is but an absurdity which Gregory pressed him with, as
following upon it, not acknowledged by John, but rather denied, as when we urge
men with absurdities following their tenets which they do not own; and how he
urges, it appears from his words, lib. 4. Epist. 38. when he says to John,
Thou desire to tread under the name of Bishops in comparison of thy self,
which show that he charged him not to have affected the Title of Universal
Bishop, as if he would be the only Bishop absolutely, but comparatively to
himself, in that sense as he which is singular in some thing is said to be
alone, and as he who is not what he was, is said not to be; and so Gregory
charge him as if by consequence he would exclude all others, and unbishop
them in comparison. And yet if Gregorie's words were understood to condemn no
more than this, that any should arrogate to himself the Title of Universal
Bishop, as if he were the only Bishop and others but as his Vicars or
Substitutes, all that Gregory imputes to the use of that Title in this sense
falls on the late Roman Bishops, who deny that any Bishop has power of
Jurisdiction but from them, that Bishops are not immediately by divine right,
but mediately from the Pope, concerning which what passed in the Council of
Trent may be seen in the History of Friar Paul in the seventh and eighth Book,
in which may be seen how stiffly the Italians and Jesuits held it, and the Pope
eluded the Spanish Bishops.

Lastly, that Gregory did disclain such a Supremacy as Popes now usurp is
manifest from the obedience which Gregory, lib. 1. Epist. 32 lib. 2. Epist. 61.
31. lib. 7. Epist. 1. and elsewhere acknowledged, he did ow to Mauritius the
Emperor as his sovereign Lord, and in that Epistle in which he writes to
Mauritius about John's usurpation by Sabinian Pope next after him petitions
that the most pious Lord Mauritius would vouchsafe to judge that very business
which was in controversy between John of Constantinople and himself about the
Title of universal Bishop, which he denied to Jo^n or to himself: nor was
Gregorie's own election to the Popedom counted valid without the confirmation
of Mauritius the Emperor, as by the relation of his Life in Platina appears:
which things are inconsistent with that Doctrine which the Papists now hold
about the Popes Supremacy.

H. T. adds. Object. The first Constantinopolitan Council and the Council of
Chalcedon decreed the Constantinopolitan See to be equal with that of Rome.
Answ. In certain Privileges I grant, in original Authority or Jurisdiction I
deny, and so does the said Council of Chalcedon, saying, We thoroughly consider
truly, that all Primacy and chief Honor is to be kept for the Archbishop of
old Rome, Action 16. Nor was that Canon of the Council of Constantinople ever
approved by the Pope, though it owned the Church of Rome to be the Sea
Apostolic, and sought but Primacy in the second place and after it.

I reply, 1. Though it had been gainsaid by the Bishop of Rome, yet there was
no reason the opposition of one Bishop should weigh down the common consent of
the rest. 2. It is apparent that the Popes approbation was not then judged
necessary, but that the Synod could determine without him. 3. That Canon of the
first Council of Constantinople was not gainsaid by the Pope that then was, nor
many years after. 4. Gregory the Great esteemed the four first general Councils
as the four Gospels without exempting that Canon. And it is manifest that the
Council gave Prerogatives of Honor to the Bishop of Constantinople next after
the Roman, because it was new Rome. And the Council of Chalcedon expressly
determined that the Bishop of Constantinople should have (...) equal Privileges
with the Roman, which Privileges were the same that old Rome had, which could
not be the first place in the Council, but was Power and Jurisdiction, and this
they determined notwithstanding the regret of the Popes Legates, who could not
obtain any more than what was allotted the Bishop of Rome in the sixth Canon of
the Nicene Council, of which H. T. says.

Object. The Council of Nice says, Let the ancient custom be kept in Egypt,
Lybia, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop of Alexandria has power over all these,
because the Bishop of Rome also has such a custom. Answ. The Bishop of Rome
had a custom to permit such a power to the Bishop of Alexandria; the Greek
Text says, Because to the Bishop of Rome also this is accustomed, which argues
him to be above the other.

I reply, this Answer is frivolous, or rather impudent. For the same thing is
allowed to the Bishop of Alexandria, which was accustomed to the Bishop of
Rome, but that was not a power to permit any thing to the bishops of Egypt,
Lybia, and Pentapolis, but to take care of the Churches therein as their
Metropolitan, namely, to look to the Ordination of bishops and composing of
Differences. And the meaning is, that each of those bishops of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioch, should, according to the custom of the bishop of Rome
in his, look to the ordering of the Churches each in his Province, as Ruffinus
expresses the Canon, and the Arrbick and other Interpreters, and Paschasinus
the Popes Legate in the Council of Chalcedon alleged it thus, that the Bishop
of Alexendria should have (...) power over all, because so it was accustomed to
the Bishop of Rome. Which cannot be meant of all simply; For then it should
have been thus meant, the bishop of Alexandria is to have power of all, because
the bishop of Rome has power of all, and so the bishop of Alexandria should be
supreme bishop as the Pope, and so in stead of one visible supreme Head there
should be more, which Romanists brook not, but it must be meant of equal power
and charge given to the bishop of Alexandria in his Province with that which by
custom the Roman had in his. And for the inference from the words [Because to
the Bishop of Rome also this is accustomed] that it argues him to be above the
other, it is vain, it proving only the bishop of Rome's power to have been the
Pattern of the bishop of Alexandria his power, but not greater, yea, it proves
an equality between them, since it ascribes the same to the one which was
accustomed to the other.

SECT. X.
Of the Emperor's calling Councils, Pope Joan, Papists killing Princes
excommunicate, not keeping Faith with Heretics.

H. T. proceeds. Obj. The Emperors heretofore called and presided in General
Councils. Answ. They called them instrumentally I grant, by way of spiritual
Jurisdiction I deny. And they presided also in them for peace and ornament
true; for definition or judgment it is most false: that always was reserved to
the Popes. I will not sit among them as Emperor (says Constantine in his
Epistle to Pope Leo about the sixth Ge^^ral Council) I will not speak
imperiously with them, but (...) one of them, and what the Fathers shall ordain
I will execute. Emperors subscribed Councils, (...) cons^itution, but
execution. God (says Constantine to the Nicene Council) has made you Priests,
and given you power to judge us, but you may not be judged of men. In Ruffino.

I Reply, that the Emperors called the first General Councils, it is so
manifest out of the Writings of the Councils extant, that H. T. could not deny
it; that they called them instrumentally, (meaning doubtless as the Popes
instruments) is so far from truth, that the Popes sought to the Emperors to
call them, as Leo Epist. 24. 26. 23. and in the sixth General Council at
Constantinople (of which H. T. speaks) Pope Agatho says, that he took care
that they should go to the Council according to the command of the Emperor,
pro obedientia quam debuit, out of obedience he did ow to the Emperor. It is
true, the Emperor did not call them by way of spiritual Jurisdiction. We
conceive not, that the calling of persons to meet to consult of matters of
Religion to be a point of spiritual Jurisdiction, who ever he be that calls
them, whether Pope or Emperor: calling an Assembly is no part of Jurisdiction
at all, it may be lawfully done by a brotherly invitation in many cases, and
the Assembly may be by agreement without any superiority. Nor is there any
spirituality in it, except in reference to the end, which does not make it an
act of spiritual Jurisdiction any more, than a Fathers, or Mothers, or Masters,
causing servants or children to meet to pray or learn a Catechism, or when King
Lemuel's Mother made him learn holy Lessons, Prove. 31. 1. H. T. here says, The
Emperors subscribed to Councils in order to execution: and he mentions it as
allowable, which has as much of spiritual Jurisdiction as the calling of the
Council, and yet he will not say, it was an act of spiritual Jurisdiction. And
for presiding it is certain, that Constantine the great did not only for
ornament or peace, but also for direction or moderating their actions preside
in the Nicene Council, and that the Emperors Subscriptions were for
definitions, judgment, and constitution. it is apparent from the form of their
Subscriptions; nor were the Councils Determinations counted binding Laws
without the Emperors confirmation, nor did the first Christian Emperors
execute what the Pope or Council would have them, but the Councils and Popes
did supplicate the Emperor to execute their Decrees, and sometimes did at the
Emperors command execute his Decrees, though it is true also that the best
Emperors did in their presiding and calling of Councils decline magisterial
Impositions on the consciences of Bishops, and Determinations of Faith, but
were willing to learn from them the truth, and in such matters did refer the
trial of Bishops to other Bishops, whom they chose, as in the cause of
Athanasius, and sometimes to others, as in the cause of the Donatists.

H. T. adds. Object. What think you of Pope Joan? Was she an universal Bishop
also? Answ. I think him rather a particular Fool who can believe so gross a
Fable: It was the credulous Relation of one Martinus Polonus a silly man (the
only Author for it, though Protestant Writers have falsely cited others) who
has sufficiently discredited his own Narration; For he tells you, she was born
at Mountes in England; (there having never been any such place ^eard of) and
that she was bred up at Athens, an University not then in being, but destroyed
many years before, a pretty likely tale.

I reply, that it was the Relation of more than one appears by Platina his
words, which are, Fere plerique omnes affirmant, etc. almost all affirm it.
Protestant Writers have produced rightly particularly Mr. Alexander Cook in his
Dialogue of Pope Joan, a full Jury of Writers relating it, and those some of
them before Martinus Polonus, and as credible Historians, as those times
yielded, besides the signs of the truth of the Relation, which are vindicated
by him and others from the shifts by which Onuphrius and such like Dawbers have
endeavored to evade their testimony. And me thinks H. T. writes too grossly in
conceiving him a particular Fool that can believe it, when Platina, Sabellicus,
Antoninus, Leonicus Chalcondyla, Marianus Scotus, Sigibertus Gemblacen^is,
Matthaeus Palmerius, Volateranus, Nauclerus, Christianus Massaeus, Joannes
Parifiensis, Theodoricus Niem, Ravisius Textor, and others could believe it. As
for the Exceptions here made, it is not true, that Martinus Polonus says, that
Pope Joan was born at Mountes (he would say M^ntz) in England, the words are
Jo^nnes Anglicus natione Moguntinus, that is, John English by nation of Mentz,
which may be true, that she had the name of English by descent, yet born at
Mentz in Germany, as many a man born in England has the name of Irish, Scot,
French, and I think Turbervile is a Norman name, yet presume Henry Turbervile
was born in England. And for Athens, that it was then destroyed, and no
University is affirmed by him, not proved, but the contrary is showed to have
been probable out of the Subscription of the sixth Council, by the seventh
Council, out of Paulus Acmylius, and others by bishop Jewel Defense of the
Apol. part. 4. chapter 1. divis. 1.

H. T. adds. Object. You Roman Catholics, as I have heard, (if the Pope
excommunicate a Tyrant or heretical Prince) hold it lawful for his own
Subjects to kill him. Answ. You have heard a loud slander, we abominate and
detest the Doctrine. It is defined by the Council of Constance, and therefore
of faith with us, that it is heretical to affirm it lawful for a Subject to
kill his Prince upon any pretense whatsoever. Sess. 15.

I reply, What you now hold I know not, there are causes of jealousy of you,
that having found it disadvantageous to you, you disguise your selves and
conceal your opinions till it may be for your advantage. But sure heretofore
the many Attempts against Queen Elizabeth by Popish Priests, especially of the
Jesuits Order, some whereof were with the privity or instigation of Cardinals,
if not Popes of Rome, the seditious Writing of William Allen, who was therefore
thought fit by the Pope to be made a Cardinal, with Parsons, Creswell, and such
like, the Bull of Pope Pius the fifth, the Gunpowder Treason against King
James, and the Parliament 1605. with the acts and speeches of Faux, Garnet,
Greenwell, Hall, and others, and Pope Paul the fifth his Breves against taking
the Oath of Allegiance with Bellarmine's Letter, and the Writings thereupon did
make it appear then, that, how loud soever it might be, yet it was no slander
to charge Roman Catholics with that Doctrine. The praising of James Clement's
fact in killing Henry the third of France by Pope Six^us the fifth, the attempt
of Peter Barrier, of John Chastel a Novice of the Jesuits, and the execrable
Murder of Henry the fourth by Ravillac confessed to have been by the
instigation of Jesuits, and Mariana's book, with many other things caused the
University and Parliament of Paris to charge some Roman Catholics with that
Doctrine: which it is not likely they would have done, and the King a while
banish the Jesuits had there not been sufficient Proof. Yea since that time the
books of Bellarmine, and Santarellus have been condemned by the University and
Parliament of Paris, as teaching that Doctrine, and yet more books have been
vented tending to the same, as in the Writings of Suarez and other Jesuits may
be found. Nor did I ever hear, that the Pope did by punishing the Traitors in
England when they fled to Rome, or by condemning the Jesuits Doctrine of
killing Kings acquit Roman Catholics from this accusation. Yea whereas King
James toward the end of his Reign propounded nine Questions to be answered by
John Fisher the Jesuit, it is observed by Dr. Francis White, that he does
decline to answer directly the ninth Question about deposing Kings and giving
away their Kingdoms, alleging that it touched a controversy between the Pope
and Princes, in which he makes show of loathness to interpose, having a Letter
dated, Aug. 1. 1614. from the general of his order not to write any thing
thereof, having found it an unhappy course, but never declared against it, nor
took the Oath of Allegiance, though the State knew it was easy for their
general to alter the order, or to make an other order in private, and whatever
order their general give, yet they are tied to do what the Pope requires of
them. And the answers of the Jesuits about Santarellus his book approved by
their general, that they in France then disavowed the Book, yet withal
acknowledged, if they had been at Rome they would have done as their general
did, showed that they had disavowed that Doctrine out of fear, and that at Rome
it was held for cu^^e^t. What they still hold may be seen in the mystery of
Jesuitism, and other Writings.

As for what H. T. allegeth out of the Council of Constance it satisfies not,
since all Roman Catholics allow not that Council, which deposed the Pope and
chose another, and determined the Council to be above the Pope, yea, Mariana de
rege, etc. lib. 1. cap. 6. answers thus, But that Decree I find not approved
by Martin the fifth the Roman Pope. Nor indeed can Papists hold that which H.
T. sets down as the Council of Constance's definition, but that they must
gainsay what the fourth Lateran Council under Innocent the third determined
concerning the rooting out of Heretics. Nor are Princes secured by the
determination of the Council of Constance, or H. T. his avouching it to be of
faith, since perhaps it is but one Doctor's opinion, or if it be the faith of
more or all, yet they can hold King killing, and yet hold that Doctrine,
alleging that a Priest is no Subject, nor a person excommunicate his Prince,
and that however he may not kill him upon any pretense whatsoever, yet he may
do it upon the Popes Excommunication as a just Sentence of a superior Judge;
the words in that Council, Sess. 15. (left out here by H. T. whether
fraudulently or no, his own conscience can tell best) being, non expectata
sententia, vel mandato judicis cujuscunque, The Sentence or Mandate of any
Judge whatsoever being not expected, which have a show of limiting their other
words, and intimate their allowing the killing of a Prince, when there is a
Mandate or Sentence of a Judge, such as they conceive the Pope to be. Nor have
we any cause of confidence in H. T. as free from such devices, if we mark what
follows.

Object. Mariana the Jesuit printed the opinion. Answ. True, by way of Problem
he did, but his Book was condemned and publicly burnt by a Provincial Council
of his own Order.

I reply, Does H. T. think the Book is not now to be seen to detect his
falsity? Or that the Memorials of these things are lost, who goes about to
excuse Mariana or the Order of Jesuits in this manner? Mariana did in his first
Book of the Institution of a King, chap. 6. write that James Clement by killing
Henry the third King of France with a poisoned Knife had gotten himself ingens
nomen, a great name, that we consider from all memory that they were greatly
praised who attempted to kill Tyrants, and that it is a wholesome cogitation,
that Princes be persuaded if they oppress the Commonwealth, if they be
intolerable in vices and filthiness, that they live in such a condition that
not only of right, but with praise and glory they may be killed. Which that
they were more than a Problem appears from his own words, This our Sentence
certainly comes from a sincere mind. And the sad event of Ravillac's killing
Henry the fourth of France by the inducement of that Book, and the Edict of the
Parliament of Paris the eighth of the Ides of June, 1610. set down in the
Continuation of Thuanus his History, Tom. 4. lib. 3. upon which his Book was
adjudged to be burnt: but that his Book was burned by a Provincial Council
appears not, nor is it set down by H. T. when nor where, nor is it likely to
have been burnt by a Provincial Council till after the Sentence of the
Parliament of Paris, that thereby they might salve the credit of their Order.

But it is added. Object. At least you hold the Pope can dispense with your
Allegiance to Princes, and if ^e dispense you are not bound to keep any faith
with them or any Heretics. Answ. We hold that our Allegiance to Princes is not
dispensable by any Authority on earth; and are as ready to defend our Prince or
civil Magistrate with the hazard of our lives and fortunes even against the
Pope himself if he invade them, as against any other Enemy. We esteem our
selves obliged to keep faith even with Infidels: And the Council of Trent has
declared, that to violate any least point of public faith given to Heretics
is a thing punishable by the Law of God and Man, Sess. 15 18. What this or that
particular Doctor may hold, or the Popes flatterers, if he have any, adds
nothing to the Creed of Catholics, nor is it justly chargeable on the whole
Church.

I reply, I am glad to read this passage, if this Author mean plainly, as his
words seem to import: yet see not sufficient security to Princes given thereby,
though this Author should mean so. For other Romanists may say as this Author
does of others, What this or that particular Doctor holds adds nothing to the
Creed of Catholics, nor is it justly chargeable on the whole Church. Nor is
this Protestation so full as to leave no starting hole from it, if it be for
advantage. It may mean, they will defend their Prince who is their Prince, yet
not acknowledge Allegiance to their Prince, as being exempt from his
Jurisdiction as Clergymen, or their Prince ceasing to be their Prince being an
Heretic, or excommunicate, or worthy to be excommunicate, or they will defend
their Prince against the invasion of the Pope, but not against the Sentence of
Deposition, or they will defend him till they judge him an Enemy to the Faith
or Catholic Church, but not any longer. And this Author may, as some in case
of Marriage conceive he is obliged to keep faith with In^idels, and yet not
with Heretics. And for the determination of the Council of Trent, Sess. 15.
18. neither durst Protestants then trust to the safe conduct then given, and
before and since sad instances of Papists perfidiousness have given too much
occasion to Protestants to suspect the lurking of a Snake under the grass, I
mean some hidden deceit under a covert of fair words, especially when we
consider this Author a little before counted the definition of the Council of
Constance to be of faith, Sess. 15. 18. In which Sess. 19. that Council (as it
is in Binius) has these words, The present holy Synod does declare, that no
prejudice to the Catholic faith, or to Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction is
generated, or impediment can be, or ought to be made by any safe conduct
granted by the Emperor, Kings, and other secular Princes to Heretics, or
defamed of Here^ie, thinking so to recall the same from their Errors, with
whatsoever Bond they have bound themselves, but that, the said safe conduct
notwithstanding, it may be lawful for a competent Judge, and Ecclesiastic to
inquire of the Errors of such persons, and otherwise duly to proceed against
them, and to punish them, as much as justice shall persuade, if they shall
refuse stiffly to revoke their Errors, although trusting to their safe conduct
they have come to the place of judgment, who otherwise would not have come:
nor does he that so promises, when he has done what lies in him remain
obliged by this in any thing. Which surely amounted then to as much as this
(and has been thousands of times objected by Princes and others) that public
faith is not to be kept with Heretics. And how little reason Protestants have
to trust Papists not only the actions of former Papists for a thousand years
past, but also of late their actings in Ireland, Poland, Piedmont, show.

Whom he means by the Popes flatterers, or particular Doctors, I do not well
understand: should he call Bellarmine, Baronius, or such like men so, perhaps
he may be served as Francis a St. Clara and others were. I judge H. T. to be a
gross Flatterer in maintaining the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility, there
being in this tenet no better than blasphemous Antichristian flattery,
ascribing to some of the worst and oftentimes most ignorant men that which is
due to the Son of God. And for his Corollary, I deny the Major and Minor both,
since that may be a true Church which has neither local personal Succession,
nor conspicuous Visibility, nor such Unity, Universality, Infallibility,
Sanctity, Power of Miracles, Universal Bishop as H. T. requires as necessary to
a true Church, nor has he made it plain, that these marks do agree to the
present Roman Church or Bishop, and no other, but his mistakes in these are
showed. I follow him in the rest.

ARTIC. VIII.
Unwritten Tradition now no Rule of Faith.
The unwritten Tradition, which H. T. terms Apostolical, is not the true Rule
of Christian Faith.

SECT. I.
The Argument for Apostolical Tradition unwritten as the Rule of Faith from the
means of planting and conserving Faith at first is answered.

H. T. intitles his eighth Article of Apostolical Tradition, and says, Our
Tenet is, That the true Rule of Christian Faith is Apostolical Tradition, or a
delivery of Doctrine from father to son, by hand to hand, from Christ and his
Apostles, and nothing ought to be received as Faith, but what is proved to have
been so delivered, which we prove thus.

The first Argument. That is now the true Rule of Faith which was the essential
means of planting and conserving it at first: But oral and Apostolical
Tradition, not written Books, was the essential means of planting and
conserving it at first; therefore oral and Apostolical Tradition not written
Books is the true Rule of Faith. The Major is proved, because the Rule of Faith
must be immutable, and the same in all Ages, as the Faith it self is. The Minor
is proved, because the first Gospel was not written till eight years after the
Death of Christ or thereabouts; in which space the Apostles had preached and
planted the Faith of Christ in many Nations over almost all the World. Add to
this that many Ages were passed before all the Books of Scripture were
dispersed and accepted for Canonical by the whole Church; so that when any
difference arose in points of Faith among the Christians of the first Age they
were not to inquire what had been written, but whether the Apostles so taught.

Answ THis Doctor, whether it be by reason of his ignorance, or heedlesness, or
malignity to the holy Scriptures, determines worse than his fellows, yea,
against the Doctrine of the Trent Council and Pope Pius the fourths Bull. For
whereas in the Trent Council, Sess. 4. it is said, that the truth and
Discipline of Christ and his Apostles is contained in written Books and
Traditions without writing, and would have both to be received with equal
affection and reverence of piety; and Pope Pius the fourth his Bull requires
the admission of the sacred Scripture and Apostolical Tradition. H. T.
concludes, that written Books are not the true Rule of Faith, but oral and
Apostolical Tradition. If he had said, they had not been the entire Rule of
Faith he had agreed with the Trent Council, and the Popes Bull; but now he
contradicts them as well as the Protestants, and his Argument does as well
conclude, that the holy Scripture is no part of the Rule of Faith, as that it
is not the whole. But leaving him to be corrected by his fellows, let us view
his Dispute.

Setting aside his nonsense speech of being received as Faith, in stead of
being received as the object of Faith, and taking Apostolical Tradition to be
meant of that which is truly so called, I grant his Tenet, and say with him
that the true Rule of Christian Faith is Apostolical Tradition, that is, the
Doctrine which the Apostles delivered, or that delivery of Doctrine from father
to son, by hand to hand, from Christ and his Apostles, and that nothing ought
to be received as Faith, that is, a thing to be believed with a Christian
divine Faith, which all Christians are bound to believe, but what is proved to
have been so delivered. For though in general any divine revelation is to be
the object of Christian Faith by whom or what way soever it be delivered, and
God has delivered diverse revelations in the Books of the Old Testament, which
are objects of Faith, yet since now Christ and his Apostles have delivered those
divine revelations as the oracles of God, and what the Apostles preached and
thought needful for us to know, and believe to salvation is written, and these
Writings are conveyed from father to son by hand to hand, we grant the Tenet
being meant of them, and yield further, that if they can prove there are
Traditions truly Apostolical besides those which are written, and this
Tradition, that those Books which we call holy Scripture are divine Writings,
we will embrace them as things to be believed. But then, 1. We say it is
manifest that in the Apostles days there were Traditions put on the Apostles
which were not theirs, 2 Thessalonians 2. 1. 2. That the Apostolical Tradition written
is sufficient for faith to salvation. 3. That unwritten Traditions are
uncertain, and much corrupted. 4. That there is no certain Rule to know which
are Apostolical Traditions but by the Scripture or Apostolical Writings. 5.
That neither the Popes nor Church of Rome nor general Councils determination is
a sufficient assurance of Apostolical Tradition unwritten. 6. That therefore to
us now the holy Scripture is the only Rule of Christian faith and life. And to
the Argument of H. T. I answer, 1. By denying the Major, giving this as a
Reason, because the means of planting and conserving faith, though it were the
essential means, yet is not the rule of faith necessarily, there being great
difference between these two. The means of faith is any way God uses to beget
it, as by dreams, visions, the speech of Balaam's Ass, his Prophecy, Caiaphas
Prophecy, the Star which guided the Wisemen, Matthew. 2. the Wives good
conversation, 1 Pet. 3. 1. yet these are not the Rule of Faith, but the divine
revelation it self. And if it were supposed any one of these, or any other,
were the essential means of Faith, that is, that means by which Faith is, and
without which it were not, yet it were not therefore the Rule of Faith, but the
divine revelation or truth delivered by that means. And to the proof of the
Major which seems to be thus formed, That is the true Rule of Faith which is
immutable, and the same in all Ages, as the Faith it self is. But the essential
means of planting and conserving it at first is immutable, and the same in all
Ages, as the Faith it self is. Ergo. I answer, 1. By denying the Major, there
are many things immutable, and the same in all Ages, as the Faith it self is,
and yet are not the true Rule of Faith, as namely, Gods Decrees and purposes,
the being of the Heavens, the obedience of the Angels, etc. 2. By denying the
Minor. For whether the immediate Declaration of God to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. or
Christ's preaching by himself were the essential means of planting and
conserving Faith at first, or any other, yet it is not immutable, and the same
in all Ages, as Faith it self. God's Declaration immediately, or Christ's
preaching by himself are not the same in all Ages; yea, Heb. 1. 1. it is said,
that God has spoken to us in diverse manners, ways and times by the Prophets,
and in these last days only has spoken to us by his Son, verse 2. and chap. 2.
3. The salvation was at first begun to be speken by the Lord, and since was
confirmed by them that heard him: which shows the means to be variable, by
which Faith is planted and conserved. The Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 3. 1. that
without the Word those that believe not the Word may be won by the conversation
of the Wives: so that their good conversation was at first a means of
converting them, and yet that was not to be the Rule of their Faith. Whence it
may appear that this Argument goes upon these false Suppositions.

1. That there is some means essential to the planting and conserving of Faith
at first. 2. That the same means is essential to the planting and conserving of
Faith at first. 3. That this means is immutable and the same in all Ages as
Faith it self. 4. That what is the means of planting and conserving Faith at
first must be the true Rule of Faith.

2. I deny the Minor, that oral and Apostolical Tradition, not written Books,
was the essential means of planting and conserving Faith at first. And to his
proof I answer, that by oral and Apostolical Tradition, in his Tenet he means,
a delivery of Doctrine from father to son, by hand to hand, from Christ and his
Apostles: now if it be granted, there was no Gospel written till eight years
after the death of Christ, or thereabouts, it must be granted also, that there
was no delivery of Doctrine from father to son, by hand to hand, from Christ
and his Apostles, but only their preaching viva voce, with living speech, in
their own persons, and therefore if that which was according to H. T. the
essential means of planting and conserving Faith at first must be the true Rule
of Faith still, and no other, then that Rule must neither be unwritten nor
written delivery of Doctrine from father to son, by hand to hand, from Christ
and his Apostles, but their own personal Tradition viva voce, which now ceasing
there is no Rule of Faith at all left; but the Quakers device of each man's
light within him to be his Rule must take place. But to me the Rule of Faith is
divine revelation, by what means soever it be delivered: be it the Law written
in the heart or in the Book, by the signer of God in Tables of stone, or
delivered by an Angel in a Dream, Vision, Apparition, by Christ, or his
Apostles, or any other. But since God has been pleased to order it, be it
sooner or later, that what Christ and his Apostles taught should be written, we
are assured God would have us to take it for the Rule of our Faith, and if
Scripture be not the Rule of our Faith Christ and his Apostles did not well to
commend it to us, Luke 16. 31. Joh. 5. 39. and to commend them that searched
the Scriptures, Act. 17. 11. nor the Apostles to direct us to them, 1 Pet. 1.
19, 20. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Romans 15. 4. nor to allege them, Act. 3. 22. and 13. 33,
34, 35. nor Christ to have used them against the Tempter, Matthew. 4. 4. 7. 10.
nor to have imputed error to the ignorance of them, Matthew. 22 29. nor to have
sent the Revelation of John to the seven Churches of Asia, with declaration of
blessedness to the observers of it, and denunciation of a curse to the
corrupters and infringers of it, Revel. 1. 1, 3. and 22. 18, 19. nor the
Apostles to write a Letter to the Churches, Act. 15. 23. nor the Apostles to
write several Epistles to several Churches. And if many Ages (though I think H.
T. therein does exceed) were passed before all the Books of Scripture were
dispersed and accepted for Canonical by the whole Church; yet it is certain
some were, and they must be the Rule of Faith which were accepted. And when any
difference arose in points of Faith among the Christians of the first Age,
though they were to inquire of the Apostles what they taught, yet when they
could not speak with them, they made use of their Letters written, as Acts 15.
31. 1 Cor. 7. etc. And if we are not to do so still, why does this Author
allege Scripture for the Churches Infallibility, the Popes Supremacy, etc. and
tells us here, page 113. There is no better way to decide Controversies than by
the Scripture expounded by the Church, and according to the Rule of Apostolical
Tradition? But this is an evidence of Gods infatuating these Romanists, that
though they have no show of proof for Peter's Supremacy, and consequently the
Popes, without the Scripture, and therefore allege it, yet determine it not to
be the Rule of Faith, and so make void their own proof, and the very Rule of
Faith, which they would fain establish.

SECT. II.
Unwritten Traditions are not proved to be the true Rule of Faith from the
assurance thereby of the Doctrine and Books of Christ and his Apostles.

But let us view what he adds. A second Argument is, That is the true Rule of
Faith by which we may be infallibly assured both what Doctrines Christ and his
Apostles taught, and what Books they wrote, and without which we can never be
infallibly assured of these things. But by Apostolical Tradition we may
infallibly be assured both what Doctrines Christ and his Apostles taught, and
what Books they wrote, and by no other means. Therefore Apostolical Tradition
is the true Rule of Faith. The Major is manifest, because in the Doctrine which
Christ and his Apostles taught, and the Books which they wrote are contained
all things that are of Faith; therefore the infallible means of knowing them is
the infallible and true Rule of Faith. The Minor is proved, because a full
report from whole worlds of fathers to whole worlds of sons of what they heard
and saw is altogether infallible, since sensible evidence in a world of
Witnesses unanimously concurring is altogether infallible, how fallible soever
men may be in their particulars; and such a report, such an evidence is
Apostolical Tradition, for all the Doctrinos Christ and his Apostles taught and
all the Books they wrote therefore infallible.

Answ. THe Popish Tenet is, that unwritten Traditions of other points than what
are in the written Books are the Rule of Faith, that so what they cannot prove
out of Scripture of Peter's being at Rome, being Bishop there, Purgatory-fire,
Invocation of Saints, Adoration of the Host, mixing Water with Wine in the
Eucharist, and many more, which Popes and Popish Councils obtrude on the Church
of God as Apostolical Traditions, may be received as Objects of Faith. But here
H. T. concludes Apostolical Tradition is the true Rule of Faith, and proves it
of no other Apostolical Tradition but that whereby the Books written are known
to be the Apostles, which I might grant, and yet H. T. gain nothing for his
purpose, since Apostolical Tradition may be the true Rule of Faith, and yet not
Apostolical Tradition unwritten, much less that which Popes and Councils call
Apostolical Tradition, which is every corruption that has been any long time
received in the Roman Church: and this Apostolical Tradition infallible [that
the Books of holy Scripture were written by the holy men whose names they bear,
and that the things in them related are certain] and yet other Traditions of
other things not so. But to his Argument, I say, the Major is not true, nor is
it proved by his reason, which in form is this, That is the true Rule of Faith
in which are contained all things that are of Faith. But in the Doctrines which
Christ and his Apostles taught, and the Books which they wrote, are contained
all things that are of Faith. The Conclusion which follows from these
premises is not his Major, [that is the true Rule of Faith, by which we may be
infallibly assured both what Doctrines Christ and his Apostles taught, and what
Books they wrote, and without which we can never be infallibly assured of those
things] nor the Conclusion set down, [therefore the infallible means of knowing
them is the infallible and true Rule of Faith] for these terms, [that by which
we may be assured of the Doctrines or Books, the infallible means of knowing
them] are not the same with [the Books or Doctrines in which are contained all
things that are of Faith] and therefore the Major is not proved, but indeed the
very Protestant Doctrine which he gainsays is proved unawares thus. That in
which are contained all things that are of Faith is the true Rule of Faith. But
in the Doctrines which Christ and his Apostles taught, and the Books which they
wrote, are contained all things that are of Faith; therefore the Doctrines
which Christ and his Apostles taught, and the Books which they wrote, are the
true Rule of Faith. Which proves directly what H. T. denies, that the Scripture
is the true Rule of Faith, and shows, that he mistook the means of Faith for
the Rule of Faith, between which there is manifest difference, the means of
Faith being any outward or inward efficient, principal or instrumental, by
which a person comes to believe, the Rule is that by which we know what we are
to believe: the same means may be the means of believing contrary things:
Caiaphas and Balaam may prophecy right things of Israel, and be a means of
expectation of the Messiab, and yet also be a means of laying a stumbling block
to overthrow them. A messenger, that brings a grant, wherein a Prince grants a
thing, is the means of belief, and so is the Seal, but the Rule of believing is
the words of the grant: Thomas his seeing and feeling were the means of his
believing Christ's Resurrection, but the Rule was Christ's words.

2. I deny his Minor. For though I grant such a full report, as he speaks of,
is infallible, nor do I deny, that there is such a a report, or such an
evidence for all the Doctrines Christ and his Apostles taught, and all the
Books they wrote, yet I say, 1. That this is not the Apostolical Tradition,
which Papists assert; for with them any thing used in their Church a long time,
and approved by a Pope, or a Council confirmed by him is an Apostolical
Tradition, though it have not such report, or evidence. 2. That there are other
means by which we may be assured, what Doctrines Christ and his Apostles
taught, and what Books they wrote, besides this full report, as, 1. The inward
testimony of the holy Spirit. 2. The innate characters of the Doctrine, and
Books themselves foretelling things to come, opening the Mysteries of God,
advancing Gods glory, enlightening and converting the soul, with many more which
show whose the Doctrine and Books were. Yet by the way I observe, 1. That
notwithstanding he makes here such an Infallibility in the report and evidence
of sense, yet page 205. he denies evidence of sense infallible in the
Sacrament, and thereby overthrows his Position here. 2. From his words here I
argue against his opinion of Transubstantiation thus, A full report from whole
worlds of fathers to whole worlds of sons of what they heard and saw is
altogether infallible, since sensible evidence in a world of ey-witnesses
unanimously concurring is altogether infallible, how fallible soever men may be
in their particulars. But there are worlds of ey-witnesses, and hand-witnesses,
and tongue-witnesses, and nose-witnesses, and ear-witnesses of fathers and sons
who all unanimously concurring discern, and say of what they have seen, felt,
heard, tasted, smelled, that there is no flesh nor blood, but Bread and Wine in
the consecrated Host, therefore the report that there is no flesh and blood but
Bread and Wine in the Eucharist after Consecration or consecrated Host, and
consequently no Transubstantiation is altogether infallible. So inconsistent
are this Authors sayings in one place with that he says in another, as indeed
Popish Doctrine being a Lie must of necessity be self-repugnant.

SECT. III.
The obligation of the Church not to deliver any thing as a point of Faith, but
what they received, proves not unwritten Traditions a Rule of Faith.

H. T. proceeds thus. A third Argument. If Christ and his Apostles have given
to the Church of the first Age [together with all points of Faith] this for the
Rule of Faith, that nothing on pain of Damnation ought to be delivered for
Faith, but what they had received from them as such, then is was impossible
that they should deliver any thing for Faith to the second Age, but what they
had received from them as such, and so from Age to Age to this time. But Christ
and his Apostles did give to the Church of the first Age, [together with all
points of Faith] this for the Rule of Faith, that nothing on pain of Damnation
ought to be delivered for Faith, but what they received from them as such.
Therefore it was impossible that the Church of the first Age should deliver any
thing to the Church of the second Age for Faith, but what they had received as
such from Christ and his Apostles, or consequently that they should err in
Faith. The Major is proved, because to make her deliver more for Faith than she
had received, in this supposition the whole Church must either have forgotten
what she had been taught from her infancy in matters of Salvation and
Damnation, which is impossible in a world of ear and ey-witnesses, as has been
showed; or else the whole Church must have so far broken with Reason, which is
the very nature of man, as to conspire in a notorious Lie to damn her self and
posterity by saying she has received such or such a point for Faith, which in
her own conscience she knew she had not received; and this is more impossible
than the former, even as impossible as for men not to be men; as shall be
showed in the next Argument. The Minor is proved by these positive Texts of
Scripture, Therefore brethren stand ye fast, and hold the Traditions which ye
have learned, whether by word or our Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15. Those things
which ye have been taught, and heard, and seen in me, these do ye, Phil. 4. So
we have preached, and so ye have believed, 1 Cor. 14. 15. How shall they
believe in whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? Romans 10. 17. The things that thou have heard of me before many
witnesses, the same commend thou to faithful men, which shall be fit to teach
others also, 2 Timothy 2. 2. If any man shall preach otherwise than ye have
received, let him be Anathema, Gal. 1. 9. Although we or an Angel from Heaven
preach to you besides that which we have preached to you, be he Anathema, Gal.
1. 8.

Answ. 1. THe Conclusion, were it granted, is not the Position to be proved,
that the true Rule of Christian Faith is Apostolical oral Tradition, not Books;
nor is it included in it, since some in the Church, although not the whole
Church of the first Age, might deliver to the Church of the second Age, and so
from father to son that for Faith, which was not received from Christ or his
Apostles, and it be after received as from the Apostles, as is manifest in the
reports of keeping Easter on the fourteenth of the Moon, of the Millenary
opinion, as from John, and in points of Faith the whole Church might mistake or
forget, not deliver all truth, yea, might err, and so not be fit to be a Rule
of Faith. 2. Were it granted that unwritten Traditions of the whole Church of
the first Age to the second were a Rule of Faith, yet are not the Romanists
Traditions unwritten proved Rules of Faith, unless they be proved to be
delivered by the whole Church of the first Age to the Church of the second Age,
and so from father to son without alteration, which they cannot prove.
Nevertheless, since this Argument tends to the asserting of an Infallibility in
the Church of the first Age distinctly taken from the Apostles and their
Writings; I grant the Minor, and omit the examining of the Texts brought to
prove it, though some of them yield a good Argument against unwritten
Tradition: But I deny the Major, as being contrary to experience both in the
Jewish Church, to whom it was forbidden to add to, or diminish from Gods
commands, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. and yet they did, Mark 7. 8. 9. and in the Christian
Church, as is most evident in the Traditions of the Chiliasts, about Easter,
and sundry other things. And though the whole Church of the first Age did not
deliver points of Faith to the second Age, yet in the second and after-ages
corruptions did come in, which were taken for universal Traditions, as in
giving Infants the Eucharist, which Augustine and Pope Innocentius took for an
Apostolical Tradition, though the Trent Council condemn it. And many things
there are now taken for Apostolical Traditions, as Worship of Images, praying
to Saints, not allowing the Wine to be drunk by all the Communicants, which yet
are manifestly repugnant to the Apostles Doctrine.

As for the proof of H. T. I say, 1. The eye and ear-witnesses of all the
points of Faith are not a whole World. 2. Errors may be traduced as from the
whole Church of the first Age, and from the Apostles which were not from them.
3. The Church delivers not Doctrines, but the Teachers in them, whereof many
sometimes are Hypocrites, sometimes weak in understanding, all of them being
men are liable to mistakes, passion, forgetfulness, inadvertency, and those
that are not sincere may against their conscience deliver errors. Sure if
Polycarpus an Auditour of John the Evangelist, and Anicetus Bishop of Rome in
the second Age, Polycrates and Pope Victor in the same Age, Cyprian and Pope
Stephanus in the next contradicted each other about Traditions, no marvel later
and inferior Teachers, such as Papias a credulous man, and others mistook
about them, and the after Churches follow them in their mistakes. 4. The
Churches were in the Apostles days easily drawn away from the Doctrine, which
Paul had evidently taught them by hearkening to Seducers, as the Galatians,
Gal. 3. 1. though the Apostle warned them Gal. 1. 8, 9. neither therefore the
warning given them, nor any state of the Church in this life yields sufficient
security of not being deceived, nor deceiving others. The Church and Teachers
thereof may not only be men, and have reason, but also good men and
conscionable, and warned not to deliver any thing but Christ's and his
Apostle's Doctrine to be believed under pain of Damnation, and yet may build
Hay and Stubble, and be saved as through fire, though their Building suffer
loss, keeping the Foundation, and repenting of all sins and errors, though
some be secret and unknown to them. Let us see what is in the next Argument,
which he terms the last Argument for Traditions.

SECT. IV.
Counterfeits might and did come into the Church under the name of Apostolic
Tradition without such a force as H. T. imagines necessary thereto even in
points of Faith.

To make, says H. T. a whole world of wise and disinterested men break so far
with their own nature as to conspire in a notorio^n Lie to damn themselves and
their posterity (which is the only means to make an Apostolical Tradition
fallible) such a force of hopes or fears must fall upon them all at once, as
may be stronger than nature in them. But such a force of hopes or fears can
never fall on the whole World or Church at once, which is dispersed over all
Nations, therefore it is impossible for the whole World or Church at once to
conspire in such a Lie, or consequently to err in Faith.

Answ. THis Argument concludes for the Churches Infallibility, which was the
fifth Article, not for Traditions, as is pretended in this Article. But that
the Church militant and all their Teachers setting aside the Apostles, are
fallible is proved before, and how the whole Church of later ages may be not
only fallible, but also deceived and deceive others without breaking with
their own nature so far as to conspire in a notorious Lie to damn themselves
and their posterity, and without such a force of fears or hopes falling upon
them all at once as may be stronger than nature to them, has been showed
before both by reason and experience, and our Lord Christ has told us it would
be, that while men sleep the Enemy would come and sow Tares, Matthew. 13. 25. and
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 11. 19. that there must be Heresies by Gods
permission, that they which are approved may be made manifest: Jude 4. there
were certain men crept in unawares ordained of old to this condemnation: 2 Pet.
2. 1. 1 John 4. 1. And accordingly it fell out in the Christian Church, as
Eusebius notes out of Egesippus lib. 3. hist. cap. 29. The Church of Christ
remained a pure and incorrupt Virgin unto the times of the Apostles, but after
their decease, and those that heard them, there was a conspiracy of corrupters,
which did lurk before that boldly vented knowledge, falsely so called, much of
which was published under the name of Apostolical Tradition. Irenaeus lib. 2.
advers. haeret. cap. 39. says, In his days it was reported as from John, that
Christ lived to the fiftieth year of his Age by all the Elders of Asia, which
met with John the Disciple of the Lord, that John delivered it to them. Nor is
this to imagine men to break with their nature, but to follow their nature,
which is in all corrupt, in the best imperfect. As for what H. T. tells us of a
whole World of wise and disinterested men, it is an Utopia in a country called
no where, but in H. T. his brain. Surely the wisest and disinterested men of
Fathers and other Preachers have still stood to the Scriptures, and have
disowned unwritten Traditions, as not being a true Rule of Faith. Popes and
Popish Councils who have been the sticklers for Traditions unwritten, as they
have been none of the wisest with any holy wisdom, but serpentine craft, so
have they bent all their endeavors to uphold Traditions for their interest of
greatness and gain, being necessitated to (...) unwritten Traditions, because
their Doctrines cannot be maintained out of Scripture. He that shall read the
History of the Council of Trent written by Friar Paul of Venice (in which
Council Traditions unwritten were first equalled to Scripture) may perceive,
that if ever there were a pack of deceivers and deceived men it was at Trent,
the Bishops generally being unlearned in the Scriptures, many of them mere
Canonists, and such as understood not the Disputes in the Congregations, and
the Divines a company of wrangling Sophisters inured only to School-principles
and arguings without skill in the Scriptures, and the Popes Legates and Italian
Bishops depending on the Court of Rome, never applying themselves to search out
truth, but to hinder any the least breaking forth of it, if it opposed any
profit or advantage of the Popes and Court of Rome, and any thing that tended
to justify the Protestants, whom they would never permit to speak for
themselves: nor were they willing any thing should be concluded, but what the
Pope (of all that ever were in the World the most notorious corrupter and
Tyrant in the Church of God) liked. And he that shall read the Book not long
since published, entitled the Mystery of Jesuitism, will find, that the
chiefest Leaders now in the Popish Churches, the Jesuits, who are for the
Traditions of the Church of Rome, are wholly bent, though against Scripture and
Fathers, to carry on their own interest by any devices whatsoever without
regard either to Rules of Scripture or of Morality delivered by infidel
Philosophers. So that the talk of H. T. concerning a World of wise and
disinterested men among Popish Teachers is like the talk of a company of honest
Women in a society of notorious Whores, or of just men in a Band of Robbers.

H. T. adds. It is the assurance of this impossibility that moves the Church of
the present Age to resolve her Faith and Doctrines into the precedent Age, and
so from Age to Age, from sons to fathers up to the mouth of Christ and his
Apostles teaching it, saying, We believe it because we have received it.

Answ. 1. This resolution of Faith not into the Scriptures testimony, but the
testimony of the next age, and so upwards, and thereby judging what Christ and
his Apostles taught, can beget no other than a humane Faith, since in this way
Christ and his Apostles are supposed to teach what the succeeding ages have
taught: nor is it any better than an uncertain way, since in some ages it cannot
be known what was taught in many points of controversy, for as much as this
Author confesses, page 25. There was no general or provincial Council that
decided any Controversies of moment in the tenth Age, which and the next before
it are by Genebrard and Bellarmine counted unhappy for want of learned men: nor
can this be any other than a fraudulent device to draw men from immediate
searching into the Scriptures for their Faith, and prepossessing them with the
Doctrines of the present age, which once received, very few, except men very
learned and impartial inquisitours into the truth, will be able to examine, and
in effect that which the Pope and his Council have or shall determine must be
taken for unquestionable: nor is this reasonable, but against all right way of
understanding, that we should apply our selves to know what Christ and his
Apostles taught sixteen hundred years ago, rather by the present and precedent
ages after the times wherein they lived, than by their own Wri^ings; as if a
man might better know what Legacy his great grandfather ^ave an hundred years
ago by the testimony of men now living, than by his ^wn Will upon record. 2.
The pretense for this resolution is but imaginary and fictitious, and refuted
by experience. Surely if there were such an impossibility as this Author
speaks of, the whole World had not been corrupted as it was in Noa^'s and
Abraham's days, nor the Church of Israel as it was in the days of the Judges,
of Elias, Manasseh, our Lord Christ at his coming in the flesh, in the time of
Athanasius, when as Hierom said, The whole world groaned that it was become
Arian, there would not be such a falling away, as the Apostle foretold, 1 Timothy
4. 1. 2 Thessalonians. 2 4 at which time the Rhemists grant in their note on that
place, that even the service of Christ shall be suppressed. And therefore the
impossibility here supposed by H. T. is but imaginary out of inadverteney of
what the Scripture has related and foretold, and ignorance of the great
corruption of man and the power of the old Serpent called the Devil and Satan,
which deceives the whole World, Revel. 12. 9.

3. But what Church is there that so resolves her Faith? none that I know of
besides the Roman, or rather the Court of Rome. For I do not yet think that
either the Greek, Asiatick, or African Churches do so resolve their Faith, no
nor yet some of those Churches who do hold communion with the Roman See; nay, I
hardly think the Church or Court of Rome it self does resolve it is Faith (such
as it is) as H. T. here speaks: I instance in one main point, that the Pope is
above a Council. For sure if that be their resolution they will be cast, since
the precedent age, I mean the fifteenth century did deliver by hand to hand
from father to son that a general Council is above the Pope, as the two so
termed general Councils of Basil and Constance did expressly determine. And in
other points in difference between Protestants and Papists, if they go from age
to age upwards, Papists would find themselves destitute of Tradition unwritten
as well as written, in the half communion, Papal indulgences, worship of
Images, and many more besides. So that however this Author pretend Tradition
of a world of fathers to a world of sons, when he and his party are put to it
they have not any ancient universal Tradition elder than the sixteenth century
for the chief point of the Papacy the Popes Supremacy and Infallibility, and
therein the Pope and his packed Council of Trent are the great World, he means
at which were at some determinations of great moment about fifty Bishops such
as they were, and some of them but titular, and in other points there has been
no Tradition, but what has been gainsaid; and therefore in fine, the Papists
faith is resolved into the Popes and Council of Trents determination, which is
the Catholic Church with Papists, as is manifest by the words of this Author
here, p. 70. where he makes the Church which he counts infallible, A Council
called out of the whole World, and approved by the Pope, which he judges the
Trent Council to be, page 76. and if the Catholic Church do resolve its faith
into the catholic churches tradition, what is this but to resolve its faith
into its own tradition? at least the catholic church represented in an
ecumenical council approved by the Pope must resolve its faith into it self,
Pius the fourth and the Trent Bishops must resolve their faith into their own
tradition, and so must believe what they believe in points of Christian Faith,
because they hold so, and judge themselves infallible; and if so, it would be
known whether they did believe the same things before they did determine them
in a council; if not, they defined what they did not believe; if they did, then
it would be known upon what tradition they did believe them, if they name the
tradition of the foregoing age, the same questions will be put, and the answer
must be either at last to resolve it into Scripture, or some fallible men, or
the process will be endless, or it must rest in the determination of the
present church catholic, properly so called, or general council, or Pope, or
else the questions will return, and the arguing will be circular. Yet there are
these Reasons why Papists make show of this way of resolving their faith into
the churches tradition unwritten, 1. Because they would not have their
Doctrines and Faith tried by the holy Scriptures alone, nor in the first place,
nor by the Doctors of the first five hundred years. 2. Because they know that
few either of the learned or unlearned can track them in this way, it being
impossible for any but men of very great reading and very accurate critics to
discern truth in this way by reason of the multitude of Nations in which the
Church has been, whereof some are unknown to some other Churches, the
impossibility to know what each church throughout the World held in every age,
the difficulty of travel, the variety of Languages, the multitude and
uncertainty of Authors, especially since they have been gelded and altered by
the Indices expurgatorii, and practices of Monks and other Scribes, the
foisting in bastard treatises under the names of approved Authors. For which
reason it is that they decline as much as they can trial of their Doctrine by
Scripture, pretending difficulties where there are either none, or such as
might be removed, though by their course they cast men into insuperable
difficulties, and when they are necessitated to let people have the Scripture
in the vulgar Language by reason of importunity of adversaries, yet they so
pervert it by corrupt Translations and notes (as in the Rhemist's Testament is
manifest) that people have much ado without much diligence to find out their
deceits.

SECT. V.
The Romanists can never gain their cause by referring the whole trial of Faith
to the arbitrament of Scripture, but will be proved by it to have revolted from
Christianity.

Yet H. T. has the face to say, But if we refer the whole trial of faith to
the arbitrament of Scripture, I see nothing more evident, than that this one
Argument ad hominem, gives the cause into our hands, since it clearly proves
either many controverted Catholic Doctrines are sufficiently contained in
Scripture, or many Protestant ones are not; and thus I frame my discourse. All
Protestant Tenets (say you) are sufficiently contained in Scripture; but many
Catholic Doctrines (say I) denied by Protestants are as evident in Scripture,
as diverse Protestant Tenets; therefore many Catholic Doctrines denied by
Protestants are sufficiently contained in Scripture. He that has hardiness
enough to deny this Conclusion let him compare the Texts that recommend the
Churches authority in deciding controversies, and expounding Articles of Faith
with these that support the Protestant private spirit, or particular judgment
of discretion; let him compare the places that favor priestly Absolution with
those on which they ground their necessity (not to stand upon the lawfulness)
of Infant Baptism, let him compare the passages of the Bible for the real
presence of our Saviors body in the Eucharist, for the primacy of St. Peter,
for the authority of Apostolical Traditions, though unwritten, with what ever
he can cite, to prove the three distinct persons in the blessed Trinity, the
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, the procession of the holy Ghost
from both, the obligation of the Sunday in stead of the Sabbath, so expressly
commanded in the Moral Law; and when he has turned over all his Bible as often
as he pleases, I shall offer him only this request, either to admit the
Argument or teach me to answer it.

Answ. H. T. sure has a singular eyesight, which sees such an evidence in this
Argument, as that he sees nothing more evident. What? is not this more evident,
that the whole is bigger than a part, that God made the World, that the Word
was made Flesh (Sure an Argument ad hominem is no demonstration, specially when
what the man holds at one time upon second and better thoughts he
relinquisheth: nor is an argument ad hominem fit to establish any truth, but
somewhat to lessen the opinion of the man who is thereby convinced of holding
inconsistencies; and therefore the cause is not given into H. T. and his
fellows hands, that unwritten traditions are a Rule of Faith, or that Popish
Doctrine is grounded on Scripture, because some Protestant tenets have no
better proof thence than some Popish tenets denied to be contained in the
Scripture.

But that I may gratify H. T. (as much as in me lies) in his request, I tell
him, The Syllogism is in no Mood or Figure that I know, nor (if I would examine
the form of it) do I doubt, but that I should find four terms in it at least,
and then H. T. it is likely knows his Sy^logism is naught. Nor do I know how to
form it better, unless it be formed dis-junctively: but it belongs not to me to
form his Weapons for him. To it as I find it I say, that if he mean, that all
Protestant tenets simply are sufficiently contained in Scripture, who ever he
be that says so, yet I dare not say so: But this I think, that all, or most of
the tenets which the Protestants hold against the Papists in the points of
Faith and Worship, which are controverted between them, are sufficiently
contained in the Scripture, and all of them ought to be, or else they may be
rejected. And for his Minor I deny it, if he mean it of those Protestant tenets
in points of Faith, which are held by all, or those that are avouched by common
consent in the harmony of their confessions, excepting some about Discipline,
Ceremonies, and Sacraments. And for his instances, to the first I say, I am
willing any Reader, who reads what is written on both sides in the fifth
Article here, should judge whether has more evidence in Scripture, the
Churches imagined infallible authority in deciding controversies, or that each
person is to use his own understanding to try what is propounded to be believed
without relying on any authority of Pope, general Council, or Prelates, who are
never called the Church in Scripture. And for the second, I do not take it to
be a Protestant tenet, that Infant Baptism is necessary; and for the
lawfulness, I grant, there is as much evidence in Scripture for Priests
judiciary sacramental authoritative Absolution as for it, that is none at all
for either. And for the third, there are Protestants, that grant a real
presence of our Savior's body in the Eucharist, as the Lutherans, and some
Calvinists grant also a real presence to the worthy receiver, but not bodily,
but for the real presence by Transubstantion there is not the least in
Scripture of it self, as Scotus long ago resolved. And for the Primacy of St.
Peter, it has been told this Author, that a Primacy of order, of zeal, and
some other endowments, is yielded by Protestants, but Supremacy of Jurisdiction
over the Apostles is denied, and it is proved before, Article 7. to have no
evidence in Scripture. And for the authority of Apostolical traditions, though
unwritten, (if there were any such truly so called) I should not deny it, but
that there are any such which are a rule of faith now to us, he has not proved
in this Article, nor brought one Text for it, but some far-fetcht Reasons of no
validity. But I presume his brethren will give him little thanks for gratifying
so much the Antitrinitarians, Arians, Socinians, as to yield, that those points
which are in the Nicene and Athanasius his Creed, and were determined in the
first general Councils are no better proved from Scripture than
Transubstantiation, the Popes Supremacy and unwritten Traditions being a Rule
of Faith. Are not these Texts Matthew. 28. 19. 1 John 5. 7. John 1. 1. 1 John 5.
20. and many more which Bellarmine lib. 1. de Christo brings to prove the
Trinity of persons, the Sons consubstantiality, the Spirits procession more
evident than, this is my Body, for Transubstantiation, Thou art Peter, for the
Popes Supremacy; and H. T. his Scriptureless reasoning for unwritten
Traditions? Bellarmine lib. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 11. and elsewhere
acknowledges the tenets about Gods nature, and the union of natures in Christ
to be plainly in Scripture.

As for Sunday being in stead of the Sabbath, he should me thinks allow
somewhat in Scripture for it, Col. 2. 16. Acts 20 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Revel. 1.
10. more evident than for his real presence, Peter's Supremacy, unwritten
Traditions. But I see prejudice does much to sway men, and make them see what
others cannot. The Crow thinks her own Bird fairest.

Yet again, says H. T. The same Syllogism may with equal evidence be applied
to the negative, as well as positive Doctrines on either side. All Catholic
points denied by Protestants are sufficiently (say you) condemned in Scripture.
But many points embraced by Protestants are as clearly (say I) condemned in
Scripture, as diverse they deny in opposition to Catholics; therefore many
points embraced by Protestants are sufficiently condemned in Scripture. Where
does the Bible so plainly forbid Prayer for the Dead, as this darling Error
and fundamental Principle of Protestancy, that any one however ignorant,
however unstable, ought to read the holy Scriptures, and unappealably judge of
their sense by his private interpretation? Where is it so plainly forbidden to
adore Christ in what place soever we believe him to be really present, as it is
to work upon the Saturday? Thus if the Bible be constituted sole Rule of
Religion, Protestants clearly can neither condemn the Catholic, nor justify
their own.

Answ. The Conclusion may be granted, that many points embraced by Protestants
are sufficiently condemned in Scripture without any detriment to the Protestant
cause: Protestants do not pretend to Infallibility, but that the tenets in
point of Faith, which in opposition to Papists their Harmony of Confessions
avoucheth are sufficiently condemned in Scripture, is more than H. T. or any
other can prove. To his Syllogism I answer, by denying his Minor. And to his
instances I answer, the Prayer for the Dead, which Protestants say is forbidden
plainly in Scripture, is Popish Prayer for the Dead to have them eased or
delivered out of Purgatory: now this we say is condemned plainly in Scripture.
1. Because it supposes a belief of a Purgatory-place in Hell, which is an
Error, and every Error is condemned in Scripture, as contrary to truth. 2.
All Prayer is condemned, which is not agreeable to the Rules of Prayer; now the
Rules of Prayer in Scripture are, that we should pray in Faith, James 1. 6. Ask
the things which are according to the will of God, 1 John 5. 14. Not for him
that sins unto death, verse. 16. But to ask for deliverance out of Purgatory,
when there is no such place, nor God has promised any such thing, is not in
Faith, nor according to Gods will, but is as vain as to ask for him that sins
unto death, it is all one as to pray that the elect Angels or Devils should be
delivered thence, which were a Mockery of God. 3. God forbids Jeremiah to pray
for that which he would not hear him, in Jer. 14. 11. therefore Prayer for the
Dead to be delivered out of Purgatory, in which God will not hear, is by parity
of reason condemned, as if a man should pray that the Reprobate should not be
damned, or the Elect should not be saved.

The Protestants say not, that every one, however ignorant or unstable, ought
unappealably to judge of the sense of all Scriptures by his private
interpretation. There are plain Scriptures and Points fundamental, and of these
they say they may and ought to judge of their sense each one by his own private
interpretation, if by it be meant his own understanding, but not if by it be
meant a peculiar fancy such as no man else conceives, nor the words import: but
they say in difficult places and points not fundamental they ought not to judge
of their sense unappealably, that is, so as not to use the help of the learned,
in which number Fathers and Councils have their place, and especially their own
Teachers, to find out the meaning of them: yet when they have used means, they
may, and must suspend any judgment at all, or stick to that which in their own
understanding seems most probable, or else they must go against their own
conscience, which were sin, or they must be Hypocrites, saying, they judge that
to be so, which they do not, yea, there should be an impossibility in nature
granted, that a man at the same time does judge that to be the sense of the
same thing which he does not: but they deny, that a man ought so to rest on any
Pope, or Councils, or Doctors judgment, as to hold what they hold without any
other proof, though it be in their apprehension against Scripture, since that is
plainly condemned, Matthew. 23. 10. And they hold that every man, that has the
use of natural understanding ought to read the Scripture, John 5. 39. Col. 3.
16. Romans 15. 4. 2. Tim. 3. 15, 16. and to judge their sense in this manner, and
this is no Error, much less a darling Error of Protestancy. Nor can H. T.
prove it any where condemned in Scripture. As for the place 2 Pet. 3. 16. to
which his words seem to allude, it proves not the reading of the Scripture or
judging of the sense to be condemned, yea ver. 3. 15. proves the contrary, that
Christians should read Paul's Epistles, in which those things are which are
hard to be understood. only it condemns the wresting of them to their
perdition by the unlearned and unstable, which Protestants do condemn as well
as Papists.

It is not forbidden to adore Christ in what place soever he is, but 1. It is
an Error contrary to an Article of Faith to conceive Christ in a Wafer-cake on
earth, called the Host by Papists, whom we believe to be in Heaven at the right
hand of God, and of whom it is said, that the Heaven must contain him till the
times of the restitution of all things. Acts 3. 21. and so it is forbidden to
adore that Bread, as if Christ's Body were there, it being a belief of an
Error contrary to an Article of Faith. 2. It is flat Idolatry to adore with
divine Worship a piece of Bread, though taken to be the Body of Christ, it
being forbidden, Matthew. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him
only shall thou serve. Nor can the imagination of a person acquit the person
that does it from Idolatry. For if it could, the Worship of the golden calf,
which the Israelites proclaimed to be the Gods that brought them out of Egypt,
Exodus 32. 8. and worshipped God thereby, verse. 4. 5, 8. Micah's Worship of his
molten Image of the Silver, which he dedicated to the Lord, Judges 17. 2 3 4
and Jeroboam's Worship of the golden Calf, 1 Kings 12. 28. yea, all the
Idolatry of the Heathens who worshipped those things which were no Gods should
be excused, because they thought them Gods, or intended to worship God by them.
As for working upon the Saturday, it is true, it was forbidden to the Jews; but
we conceive it not forbidden to us, because the Jewish Sabbath is abrogated,
Col. 2. 16. And if H. T. do not think so, he does Judaize, and if he hold the
Lord's day and the Saturday Sabbath too, he agrees with the Ebionites,
mentioned by Eusebius, lib. 3. hist. ^ap. 27. so that it is utterly false, that
if the Bible be constituted sole Rule of Religion, Protestants clearly can
neither condemn the Catholic, no justify their own. B^t it is rather true,
which Dr. Carleton in his little Book of the Church avouched, that the now
Roman Church is proved not to be the true Church of Christ, because in the
Trent Council the Romanists have altered the Rule of Faith. And for my part, to
my best understanding I do judge, that the Romanists are not to be reckoned
amongst Christians, though they call themselves so, but that as by their
worshipping of Images, burning Incense to them, praying to a Crucifix, adoring
the Host, and almost all their Worship, and in their invocating of Saints and
Angels as Mediators to God they are departed from the two great points of
Christianity, 1 Timothy 2. 5. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. and thereby are become
Pagans; so by their substituting of another Rule of Religion than the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles in their Writings, to wit, unwritten Traditions,
which are nothing else but the Determinations of Popes and Councils approved by
him, they do prove themselves not to be Disciples of Christ, which is all one
with Christians, Acts 11. 26. and accordingly are not to be judged a church of
Christ, but Papists (which name Bellarmine, lib. de not is Eccles. cap. 4. does
not disown) or the Popes Church truly Antichristian.

SECT. VI.
Sayings of Fathers and Councils prove not unwritten Traditions a Rule of Faith.

H. T. recites the sayings of eight Fathers and two Councils for Tradition. The
first of Irenaus lib. 3. cap. 4. does not at all prove that we have now
unwritten Traditions for a Rule of Faith, but that if the Apostles (in stead of
which fraudulently, as I fear H. T. puts, If the Fathers) had left us no
Scripture at all, ought we not to follow the order of Tradition which they
delivered, to whom they committed the Churches. To understand which it is to be
noted, that Irenaeus having proved Valentinus his Doctrines of Aeones or more
Gods and Lords than one to be false out of the Scriptures, chap. 2. he speaks
thus of the Valentinian Heretics, When they are reproved out of Scriptures
they are turned into accusation of the Scriptures themselves, as if they were
not right, nor from authority; and because they are diversely said, and because
the truth cannot be found out of these by those who know not Tradition. For
that truth was not delivered by Letters, but by living voice, (which is the
very Plea for Traditions, which H. T. here uses) for which cause Paul said, We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect, as they took themselves to be, and
said, They were wiser than either Presbyters or Apostles, and would neither
consent to Scriptures nor Tradition; and then cap. 3. shows the Tradition of
the Apostles by what was preached in the Churches founded by them; and to avoid
prolixity refers to Linus, Anacletus, Clemens at Rome, and to Polycarpus and
his Successors at Smyrna, and after uses the words mentioned chap. 4. which
do not at all mention Tradition in all after ages as a Rule, but the Tradition
from the Apostles to them that knew the Apostles, and that only in the main
point of Faith concerning God the Creator, and only upon supposition there
had been no Scripture, and that after he had alleged the Scripture to stop the
course of Heretics that declined the Scripture. Whence it is apparent, 1. That
Irenaeus counted Scripture the constant Rule of Faith. 2. That he counted
Tradition unwritten a Rule only upon supposition, that the Apostles had not
left us Scripture. 3. No Tradition to be that Rule, but what was from men
acquainted with Apostles. 4. To be used only in case men were so perverse as
to decline Scripture: which is our case in dealing with Papists, which moved
Bishop Jewel in his Sermon at Paul's Cross to offer, that if the Papists could
prove the Articles then enumerated by antiquity of the first five hundred years
after Christ he would subscribe: which neither Harding, nor Bellarmine, nor
Perron, nor any of the Romanists could or can do. The words of Tertullian lib.
de praescript. advers. Haeret. cap. 21. 37. are indeed, that the Doctrine is to
be held which the Church had from the Apostles, the Apostles from Christ,
Christ from God. But he expresses how he means it, when he says in the same
place, But what the Apostles have preached, that is, what Christ has revealed
to them, I will also prescribe that it ought to be no otherwise proved but by
the same Churches, which the Apostles themselves built, they themselves by
preaching to them, as well by living voice (as they say) as by Epistles
afterward. Which plainly shows that Tertullian mentioned no other Doctrine to
be received from the Churches than what the Apostles after wrote, nor from any
other Churches than those which the Apostles by preaching built, by which he
means the Corinthian, Philippick, Thessalonian, Ephesian, as well as Roman,
chap. 36. And though he use against Valentinus, Marcion, and other Heretics,
the Tradition of those Churches, yet chap. 8. he plainly directs to the
Scriptures, as the way to find Christ by using his words to the Jews, John 5.
39. Search the Scriptures in which ye hope for salvation: for they do speak of
me. This will be, Seek and ye shall find. Which being considered, it will
appear, that Tertullian was far from asserting unwritten Traditions of things
not contained in Scripture delivered in these later ages, and called
Apostolical by Popes and Councils, the Rule of Faith. Cyprian's words lib. 2.
Epist. cap. 3. ad Cacilium in some Editions, Epist. 63. show his mistake about
Traditions, as he counted the mingling of Water and Wine in the Eucharist to be
the Lord's tradition, so he did also Rebaptization, in which the Romanists
desert him: neither show he held unwritten tradition a Rule of Faith; yea,
arguing against them that used Water without Wine, he proves the Lord's
tradition out of Scripture, and urges it against them, and though his Reasons
be frivolous, yet these expressions show he adhered to the Scripture as his
Rule. But if it be commanded by Christ, and the same be confirmed and delivered
by his Apostle, that as often as we drink in commemoration of the Lord we do the
same thing, which the Lord also did, we are found that it is not observed of us
which is commanded, unless we also do the same things which the Lord did, and
mingling the Cup in like manner recede not from the divine magistery. Again, I
marvel enough whence this has been used, that against the Evangelical and
Apostolical Discipline in some places Water is offered in the Lord's Cup, which
alone cannot express Christ 's Blood. Whence may be perceived, that even in
Cyprian's days corrupt usages came in by following other Traditions than those
that are written. In the same Epistle Cyprian adds this remarkable speech,
Wherefore if Christ alone be to be heard, we ought not to attend what any one
before us has thought is to be done, but what Christ who is before all;
neither ought we to follow the custom of a man out the truth of God, since God
speaks by the Prophet Esaias, and says, Without reason do they worship me,
teaching Mandates and Doctrines of men.

Origen's words do not prove unwritten Traditions a Rule of Faith, when he
says, In our understanding Scripture we must not depart from the first
Ecclesiastical tradition, Tract. 27. in cap. 23. St. Matthai; nor Athanasius
when he says, This Doctrine we have demonstrated to have been delivered from
hand to hand by fathers to sons, lib. 1. de Decret. Council. Niceni; since that
delivery was according to him by Scripture. Chrysostom on 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
says, The Apostles did not deliver all things by writing, but many things
without, and these are worthy of credit as the others, but does not say, there
remain still in the Church Traditions unwritten in matters of Faith that are
different from the written, and that they are to be the Rule of Faith: yea,
Homily in 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. he determines all is to be learned from Scripture;
and the same answer may serve for the words of Epiphanius, Haeresi 61. The
words of Augustine lib. 5. de Bapt. cap. 23. are about a point in controversy
between Cyprian and Pope Stephanus, in which both sides pretended Tradition,
Cyprian for Rebaptization, and here Augustine pretends Tradition for the
contrary; by which and by Augustine's words lib. 1. de pecc. merit. and remiss.
cap. 24. in which he makes the giving of the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
Infants an ancient and Apostolical tradition, which Pope Innocentius Epist. 93.
among Augustine's Epistles determined to be necessary, yet is now condemned in
the Trent Council, it is apparent how unsafe it is to rely on a Popes
determination, or Austin's opinion of Apostolical tradition, and that gross
Errors have been received under the name of Apostolical traditions. As for the
second Council of Nice, Act 7. Anno Dom. 781. it was a late and an impious
Council condemned by the Synod of Francford and at Paris for their impious
Doctrine of worshipping Images, and therefore we count its speech not worthy to
be answered but with detestation. Nor is there any reason to be moved with the
words of the Council at Sens in France, which was later and but Provincial.

SECT. VII.
Objections from Scripture for its sufficiency without unwritten Traditions are
vindicated from H. T. his Answers.

H. T. proceeds thus. Objections solved. Object. You have made frustrate the
Commandments of God for your Tradition, St. Matthew. cap. 15. v. 4. Beware lest
any man deceive you by vain fallacy according to the Traditions of men, Col. 2.
Answ. These Texts are both against the vain Traditions of private men, not
against Apostolical tradition.

I Reply, they are against the Popish unwritten Traditions, which are falsely
called Apostolical, which are indeed the mere Inventions of men, either devised
by superstitious Prelates, Priests, Monks or people, or upon uncertain report
received by credulous people, as from the Apostles, as the Traditions about
Easter, Lent Fast, Christ's age, and many more show. And in such kind of men's
Inventions does almost all the Popish Worship and Service consist, which
causes breaking the command of God to observe men's Traditions, as is manifest
in Monkish Vows, whereby honoring of Parents is made void, and the keeping of
the Cup from the people, whereby the express command of Christ is evacuated.

Object. There is no better way to decide controversies than by Scripture.
Answ. Than by Scriptures expounded by the Church, and according to the Rule of
Apostolical tradition, I grant: than by Scripture according to the dead Letter,
or expounded by the private spirit, I deny. For so (as Tertullian says) there
is no good got by disputing out of the Texts of Scripture, but either to make a
man sick or mad. De praescript. cap. 19.

I reply, it is well this man will grant, There is no better way to decide
controversies than by the Scriptures expounded by the Church, and according to
the Rule of Apostolical tradition: then Knot's Reasons for a living Judge
against Dr. Potter come to nothing: we desire no other than to have our
controversies decided this way, rejecting any one infallible Judge that shall
take on him, as the Pope does, to prescribe to the Church of God how they shall
understand the Scripture. The Church of God, that is, the company of believers,
who are the Church of God by Papists own definition, having the help of their
godly and learned Guides may expound the Scriptures any where in the World, at
Geneva, London, Dort, and other places as well, and better than the Pope and
his Cardinals at Rome, or a Council of Canonists, titular Bishops, sworn
vassals of the Pope, that never knew what it was to preach the Gospel,
sophistical Schoolmen at Trent. And for the Rule of Apostolical tradition, we
like it well to expound Scripture by it, meaning that which is in the Books of
Scripture, as Austin taught, lib. 1. de doctr. Christ. cap. 2. 35. 37. 40. lib.
2. cap. 8. 9. 11. lib. 3. cap. 2 3. 5. 10. 17. 18. 27. 28. lib 4. cap. 3. as
the words are cited and vindicated from Hart's Replies by Dr. John Rainoll,
Confer. with Heart. chap 2. divis. 2. Nor do I know any other Apostolical
tradition, which is a Rule to expound Scriptures by for deciding controversies
but their Epistles, and other Writings. If H. T. can shows me any such to
expound them by, let him produce them, and I will embrace them. Sure I am Popes
Expositions and Popish Councils, Canons, are so far from being Apostolical
traditions, that they are rather the most ridiculous, profane, and blaphemous
pervertings of Scripture that ever any sober man used, as may appear by their
Canon Law. Yea, the very Council of Trent has absurdly abused Scripture, as
might be made manifest by going over their Canons, and the like may be said of
the Roman Catechism.

What H. T. means by the dead Letter I understand not, unless he mean the
literal sense, which sure Bellarmine and others allow for one sense, and that
most genuine, and if it be not, why did the Trent Council decree the vulgar
Translation not to be refused? Why did Cajetan, Arias Montanus, the R^emists,
and many more translate and expound according to the Letter? Is the Scripture
any more a dead Letter than the Popes Breves or Trent Canons? Are they any more
a living Judge than the Scripture? Pope Pius the fourth ties Papists to expound
the Scriptures according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers, which is,
except in very few things, a mere nullity, and, if it were a reality,
impossible to be done, yet however could it be done the exposition must be by a
dead Letter in H. T. his sense as much as the Scripture. But how intolerable is
it that such a Wretch as H. T. should thus blasphemously call that a dead
Letter, which Stephen calls Living Oracles, Acts 7. 38. Paul the word of life,
Phil. 2. 16. It is true for Popes, of whom some, if Alphonsus a Cast^^ lib. 1.
advers. Haeret. cap. 1. say true, were so unlearned as not to understand
Grammar, it is desirable that the Scripture should not be expounded according
to the Letter, since they are unable to do it, that they may vent their
illiterate fopperies under pretense of Apostolical tradition, of which sort
many of their Decrees are in their Canon Law.

But me thinks all the learned Romanists; even the Jesuits themselves,
specially those that have written large Commentaries according to the literal
sense, as Salmeron, Maldonat, Lorinus, Cornelius a Lapide, Tirinus, and many
more should reject this foolery of H. T. concerning the expounding of
Scripture, not according to the literal sense, which he calls the dead Letter,
or else at once blot out all they have written for finding it as a mere
encumbrance to the World. And the same may be said of not expounding by the
private spirit. For why do these private men take so much pains to publish
Commentaries? Is not their spirit as much private, as Calvin's, Beza's,
Luther's, and others, and these men's spirit as public as theirs? Let any man
assign Reasons if he can why all the Commentaries of the Romanists should not
be cashiered under this pretense as well as the Protestants, who are as
learned, industrious as they, and far more sincere and impartial. Why should
not the Popes expositions be rejected as well as others? Have they any more
than a private spirit? Do not their very Breves, and Monitories, and Decrees,
show that it is a private spirit they act and decide by? Sure the Spirit of God
would not dictate such vain things as they utter, and which sometimes they are
fain to recall, lest their nakedness appear. Do not the Popes by their own
confessions in correcting the vulgar Latin Translation, and other things they
set forth, declare, that they use industry and the help of learned men? If they
have a public spirit, why do not the Popes make us an Exposition of Scripture,
which all must own? Is it not because they are for the most part a race of
ignorant and unlearned men, specially in the Scriptures, and, should they
attempt such a thing, would make themselves appear ridiculous, and show their
asinine ears, though now they seem terrible, and to carry majesty with their
Lions skin? Is there any thing the Popes can do more necessary than this, that
they may end all controversies, and guide all souls aright? But the truth is,
the Popes have been so unhappy in alleging Scripture in their Bulls, and
Breves, and Monitories, in their dicisions of controversies, that no side will
acquiesce in their determinations they are so vain or so partial, but as of old
in the controversies between Dominicans and Franciscans about the Virgin Mary's
immaculate Conception, so of late between the Molinists and Jansenists about
Gods Decrees, each party holds what they held, notwithstanding the Popes
decision, which for the most part is so composed, that each party may think it
makes for him, and he may loose neither. And about the Edition of the vulgar
Translation in Latin of the Bible, how much have the two Popes Sixtus the fifth
and Clemens the eighth discovered their unskilfulness, when after such
profession of diligence and use of learned men as the Popes make, yet they have
published their Editions contrary one to another! The words of Tertullian are
cap. 17. against those Heretics Valentinus, Marcion, and such as agreed not
with Christians in the Rule of Faith set down cap. 13. whom he denies to be
Christians, and such he thinks it would be unfit to dispute with out of
Scripture, but he does not so judge concerning such as agree in the Rule of
Faith, though some term them Heretics. I may more truly say, there is no good
got by Popes interpretations of holy Scripture but to make a man sick or mad:
such Expositions as Alexander the third made of Psalm 91. 13 Thou shall tread
upon the Asp and Basili^k, when he trod on the Emperor Frederick's neck, or
Boniface the eighth, when to prove himself above Emperors and Kings, he
alleged Genesis 7. 16. God made two great Lights, that is, the Pope and the Sun,
and the Emperor as the Moon, with many more of the like sort are no better
than sick men's dreams or mad men's freaks.

It is added. Object. All Scripture divinely inspired is profitable for
teaching, for arguing, for reproving, and for instructing in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, instructed to every good work, 1 Timothy 3.
16, 17. therefore Traditions are not necessary, Answ. St. Paul speaks only
there of the old Scripture, which Timothy had known from his childhood (when
little of any of the new could be written) as is plain by the precedent Verse,
which we acknowledge to be profitable for all those uses, but not sufficient;
neither will any more follow out of that Text, if understood of the new
Scriptures: so that your consequence is vain and of no force.

I reply, that which is profitable to teach, reprove, correct, instruct in
righteousness, so as that the man of God may be entire, fitted, or instructed
for every good work. Sure that is a sufficient Rule for Doctrine of Faith and
good Works, and so to salvation. But such is the Scripture, as the Text tells
us. Ergo. The Major is apparent, since no more is required to a sufficient Rule
of Doctrine, if there be, let it be showed, that it may be known wherein this
is defective. Sure that which is profitable for all uses to which Doctrine
serves is a sufficient Doctrine. The Answer of H. T. here is so far from being
a full Answer to the Objection (as he vainly vaunts in the Title page of his
Book) that indeed it is a confirmation of the Objection. For if the old
Scriptures were so profitable as to make the man of God a Teacher of the
Church, entire, that they were able to make him wise to salvation, and furnish
him with instruction to every good work, much more when the Books of the New
Testament were added, of which one of the Gospels is by H. T. here page 104.
said to have been written eight years after the Death of Christ, and doubtless
Timothy knew it, and however he had the former Epistle to himself before the
Epistle in which this passage is, which is ill printed, 1 Timothy 3. 16, 17. it
being 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17. and therefore the Scripture he had was a sufficient
Rule to him a Bishop without Traditions, much more to others, and so Traditions
unwritten are proved unnecessary and superfluous.

Again says H. T. Object. If any one shall add to these God shall add to him
the Plagues written in this Book, Apoc. 22. 18, 19. Therefore it is not lawful
to add Traditions. Answ. It follows immediately, And if any one shall diminish
from the words of this Prophecy God shall take away his Part out of the Book of
Life, verse. 19. By which St. John evidently restrains that Text to the Book of
his own Prophecies only; which is not the whole Rule of Faith; and therefore
by that you cannot exclude either the rest of the Scriptures or Apostolical
Traditions from that Rule.

I reply, there is no reason why the same thing is not to be understood of the
whole Canon, and each particular Book, since there is the like Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prove.
30. 6. Jer. 7. 31. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1, 2. wherein are general Warnings of not
receiving additions to the Scripture, yea, though the names of Moses and Paul
were pretended, especially when the Traditions do adulterate the written Word
as Popish traditions about Images, Fasting, single life, of the Clergy,
Monastic Vows, and others of their Traditions do.

Yet he adds. Object. We may have a certain knowledge of all things necessary
to salvation by the Bible or written Word only. Answ. No, we cannot; for there
have been, are and will be infinite Disputes about that to the worlds end, as
well what Books are Canonical as what the true sense and meaning is of every
Verse and Chapter. Nor can we ever be infallibly assured of either, but by
means of Apostolical tradition; so that if this be interrupted, and failed for
any one whole Age together (as Protestants defend it for many) the whole Bible,
for ought we know, might in that space be changed and corrupted: nor can the
contrary ever be evinced without new revelation from God: the dead Letter
cannot speak for it self.

I reply, this profane Wretch it seems takes delight in this blasphemous Title
which he gives to the holy Scripture often in reproach terming it the dead
Letter, which he has no Warrant to do. For though it is true that To. 7. 3, 6.
2 Cor. 3. 6. the Law or old Covenant be termed the Letter, and is said to be
dead and killing, yet this is not meant of the holy Scripture of the Law,
because it is written, but because it was abrogated in the Gospel, as killing
by its Sentence Sinners that continued not in all things written in it, Gal. 3.
10. And yet it can speak for it self as well, yea, incomparably better than any
Writings of Popes, Councils, or Fathers from whence he has his Traditions,
which are as dead a Letter as the Scripture. And in this his expression there
is so much the more iniquity, in that he prefers before the holy Scripture the
uncertain reports of credulous superstitious men, and the Decrees of doting
Popes, as more lively than the holy Scripture inspired of God And for this man
who but the next Page before confessed, that the words of the Apostle, which
tell us, that (...), the holy written Letters were able to make Timothy wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy 3 15. to be meant of the old Scripture, and yet here to say,
that we cannot have a certain knowledge of all things necessary to salvation by
the Bible or written Word only, what is it but flatly to gainsay the Apostle?
which is the more impiously and impudently done, in that he ascribes that to
uncertain unwritten Tradition, which neither he nor any of his Fellows are able
to show where it is, or how it may be certainly known, which he denies to holy
Scripture. As for his Reason it is frivolous. For a man may have a certain
knowledge of that of which there will be infinite Disputes to the Worlds end,
else has he no certain knowledge of the Popes Supremacy, Infallibility, power
in Temporals, superiority to a Council, of which yet there have been and are
likely to be infinite Disputes. As there have been Disputes about the Canonical
Books, so there have been about unwritten Traditions, as about the time of
keeping Easter, Rebaptization, etc. Nor is it true that there are infinite
Disputes about the true sense and meaning of every Verse and Chapter of the
Bible. Sure among Christians there is no dispute of many fundamental truths,
which every Christian acknowledges; and yet if there were, it is no other
thing than what is incident not only to Philosophers Writings, but also to the
Popes Decrees, about which there are infinite Disputes among the Canonists, to
the Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent, about which there were Disputes
between Catharinus, Soto, Vega, Andradius, and others, to the Popes Breves, as
to Pope Paul the fifth his Breves about the Oath of Allegiance, which were not
only disputed by King James and other Protestants, but also by Widrington and
other Popish Priests, and to his Monitory and Interdict of Venice disputed by
Friar Paul of Venice and others against Bellarmine, Baronius, and others. And
if we can never be infallibly assured of either the Canonical Books or their
sense but by Apostolical tradition unwritten, then can H. T. never be assured
of the Popes Infallibility, or Supremacy but by it, and if so, then the
Scripture is not his ground of it, and so he cannot demonstrate the truth of
his Catholic Religion by Texts of holy Scripture, as he pretends in his
Title Page, and therefore they are impertinently alleged by him, he should
only allege Tradition: which whether it be Fathers, Councils, or Popes
sayings, it cannot assure better than the Scripture, they being more
controverted than it, and therefore by his reasoning there can be no certainty
in his Faith, and then he is mad if he suffer for it, as he is who suffers for
any man's saying, who may be deceived. But we are assured both of the Books of
Canonical Scripture, not only by Apostolical tradition unwritten, but also by
universal tradition, and the evidence of their author by their matter, and of
the meaning without Popish tradition, not only by common helps of
understanding and arts gotten by study, and the benefit of later and elder
Expositours, but also by the Spirit of God assisting us when we seek it duly.
And for the interruption of this Tradition the Protestants do not pretend it to
have been one whole age or day, though it have been sometimes more full than at
other times: and we have infallible assurance that the whole Bible has not
been changed or corrupted so but that by reason of the multitude of copies, and
special providence of God, the chiefest points are free from change, and what
is corrupted may be amended so far as is necessary for our salvation.

And considering Gods providence for the keeping of the Law, we assure our
selves the Lord will preserve the Scripture, which me thinks to H. T. should
give good assurance, since page 119 he says, The Church is by Christ the
Depository of all divinely revealed verity, necessary to be known by all, and
has the promise of divine assistance to all; whereby and by other arguments it
may be evinced without new revelation from God, that though H. T. his
apostolical tradition unwritten should have failed for any one whole age
together, yet the whole Bible should not in that space be changed or corrupted.
And this is Reply enough to his venomous Answer to that Objection, which tends
to depress the Scriptures authority (which confessedly comes from God) to exalt
the authority of the worst of men, the Popes of Rome, as the stories of their
Lives proves sufficiently

It is further urged. Object. Many other signs also did Jesus in the sight of
his Disciples, which are not written in this Book, but these are written, that
you may believe that Jesus is the Son of God, and that believing you may have
Life in his Name, St. John 20. 30, 31. Therefore St. John's Gospel contains all
things necessary to salvation. Answ. I deny your Consequence; for St. John
omitted many things of great moment, as our Lord's Prayer and his last Supper,
which are both necessary to be believed. And though he say, These things are
written that we may believe and have life, he says not, that these things only
were written, or are sufficient for that purpose, which is the thing in
question, so that he excludes not the rest of the Gospels nor Apostolical
traditions. And it is no unusual thing in Scripture to ascribe the whole effect
to that which is but the cause in part; thus Christ promises beatitude to
every single Christian virtue. St. Matthew 5. and St. Paul, Salvation to every
one that shall call on the Name of our Lord, or confess with his mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe that God has raised him from the dead, Romans 10. 4, 9, 10.
Yet more than this is requisite to salvation.

I reply. He that says, These things are written that you may believe, and
believing have life, does inculcate that these are sufficient so far as writing
or revealing is requisite to these ends, or else he should make a vain attempt.
Frustra sit quod non assequitur finem, That is done in vain which attains not
the end, and that is vainly done even deliberately, which is attempted to be
done by that means which is foreknown to be insufficient. And therefore H. T.
must either yield St. John's Gospel sufficient to beget says and procure life,
or else John to have been imprudent to intend and attempt it by writing it. And
therefore he does ill to deny the Consequence till he can avoid these
absurdities. As for his Reason it is insufficient. For though the Lord's Prayer
and the Lord's Supper omitted by John be necessary to be believed, yet they are
not so necessary but that we may believe, that Jesus is the Son of God, and
have life in his Name without them. And though he say not, that these things
only were written, yet he says, These things only which were written were
for belief and life; and therefore sufficient thereto. And though he excludes
not the rest of the Gospels, nor Apostolical Traditions, yet he determines that
they might believe and have life without them. As for the ascribing beatitude
and salvation to each single Christian virtue, it is either because the
beatitude is meant of a beatitude in part, or in some respect, as Matthew. 5. 5.
the reason does import, or else because all other Christian virtues and duties
necessary to salvation are connex or comprehended in that one which is named.
And thus this Objection is vindicated.

The next is. Object. St. Luke tells us he has written of all those things
which Jesus did and taught, Act. 1. 1. Therefore all things necessary to
salvation are contained in his Gospel. Answ. He writ of all the principal
passages of his Life and Death, I grant, (and that was the whole scope and
intent of the Evangelists) of all absolutely which he did and taught, I deny;
for in the same Chapter he tells us, that during the forty days which Christ
remained with them after his Resurrection, he often appeared to them,
instructing them in the things concerning the Kingdom of God, very few of which
instructions are mentioned by St. Luke, nor does he or any other of the
Evangelists say any thing in their Gospels of the coming of the Holy Ghost, or
of the things by him revealed to the Church, which were great and many
according to that, I have many things to say to you, but you cannot now bear
them, but when the Spirit of Truth comes he shall teach you all Truth, and the
things which are to come he shall show you, St. John 16. 12, 13, 14. Add to
this, that if all things which Jesus taught and did should be written, the
whole World would not contain the Books, St. John cap. 21. verse. last.
Therefore your Consequence is false, and that saying of St. Luke is to be
limited.

I reply, I grant the saying of Luke is to be limited, and yet the consequence
is not false. It is true, that St. Luke did not write all absolutely without
limitation which Jesus did and taught, neither does he say it, nor is the
argument so framed as if he did; but thus, Luke wrote of all the things which
Jesus began to do and teach until the day that he was taken up, and these were
all things necessary to salvation, therefore Luke's Gospel contains all things
necessary to salvation. The Romanists say, that things of mere belief necessary
to salvation are contained in the holy days, Creeds, and Service of their
Church, and H. T. himself in the next leaf, page 118. says, The whole frame of
necessary points of Christian Doctrine was in a manner made sensible and
visible by external and uniform practice of the Church Now these are only the
principal passages of Christ's Life and Death, besides which many more
practical points and all fundamental Gospel Truths are delivered therein,
therefore even by their own grant all necessary points of Christian Doctrine
are taught in the Gospel of Luke. It is certain their intent especially of John
was to write of his divine nature, and such Sermons as tend to rectify the
Errors of the Pharisees and Sadduces, and predictions of his Death,
Resurrection, and state of the Church after his Ascension. It is true, he did
instruct them for forty days after his Resurrection in the things concerning
the Kingdom of God, but whether they are mentioned by Luke or not it is
uncertain; that they are delivered by Tradition oral, unwritten or necessary to
salvation, so as that without an explicit knowledge of then it cannot be had,
is not proved. The same may be said of the things mentioned John 16. 12, 13,
14. and 21. verse. last, and therefore the consequence is not infringed by these
Exceptions. I add that H. T. says not true, that Luke says not any thing in his
Gospel of the coming of the Holy Ghost. For Luke 2. 33. the Prediction of
Christ, of sending the Promise of the Father, which Acts 2. 33. is expressly
termed the Promise of the Holy Ghost, is set down.

SECT. VIII.
H. T. solves not the Objections from Reason for the Scriptures sufficiency
without unwritten Traditions.

H. T. proceeds. Object. At least the whole Bible contains all things necessary
to salvation, either for belief or practice for all sorts of men whatsoever,
and that explicitly and plainly. Therefore the Bible is the Rule of Faith.
Answ. I deny both Antecedent and Consequence. The three Creeds are not there,
the four first Councils are not there; there is nothing expressly prohibiting
Polygamy or Rebaptization, nor expressly affirming three distinct Persons in one
divine nature, or the Sons consubstantiality to the Father, or the Procession
of the Holy Ghost from both, or that the Holy Ghost is God, or for the
necessity of Infant baptism; or for changing the Saturday into Sunday, etc. all
which notwithstanding are necessary to be known by the whole Church, and to be
believed by us in particular (as Protestants will acknowledge) if they be once
sufficiently proposed to us by the Church. Nor is it sufficient we believe all
the Bible, unless we believe it in the true sense, and be able to confute all
Heresies out of it (I speak of the whole Church) which she can never do without
the Rule of Apostolical Tradition in any of the Points forementioned.

I Reply, unless the man had a mind to plead for Arians, Photinians,
Macedorians, and Socinians, I know not why he should so often make the
Doctrines of three distinct Persons in one divine nature, the Sons
consubstantiality to the Father, the Procession of the Holy Ghost from both,
and his Godhead as Apostolical unwritten Tradition. Sure this is the way to
bring into question these Doctrines, which if they be not in Scripture, will
never be believed by intelligent Christians for the Pope and Council of Trent's
sayings, whose proceedings never tended to clear truth, but to juggle with the
World. This is one certain evidence that they never intended to clear truth,
because they condemned the Doctrines of Protestants unheard, nor would ever
permit them to come to plead for themselves in any impartial assembly, till
which be done no man can construe the proceedings of a Council to be any other
than practices to suppress truth. And for their juggling they were so
notorious, that many Papists themselves have observed them, as may be seen in
the History of the Council of Trent, especially about the divine right of
Bishops, of the Laity having the Cup, Priests Marriages, in which Papists
themselves found that they were merely mocked by the Pope and Court of Rome. As
for this man's denying the Antecedent, it seems to me to savor of such an
imputation of a defect in God as tends to Atheism: For sure he is not to be
termed a provident and just God, who declaring his mind in the Scripture, and
promising life to them that observe his Word, and threatening Death and
Damnation to them that do not believe and obey, yet does not set down all
necessary points therein to be believed and obeyed unto life. Yea, does not H.
T. by denying it contradict himself, who says, page 105. In the Doctrines
which Christ and his Apostles taught, and the Books which they wrote are
contained all things that are of Faith. And for the Consequence if it be not
good, The Bible contains all things necessary to salvation, either for belief
or practice for all sorts of men whatsoever, and that explicitly and plainly;
therefore the Bible is the Rule of Faith, neither is his own second argument
good for Tradition, page 105. In the Doctrines which Christ and his Apostles
taught, and the Books which they wrote, are contained all things that are of
Faith, therefore the infallible means of knowing them is the infallible and
true Rule of Faith; in both the Consequence being the same.

As for his Instances, I say, If the three Creeds and four first Councils be
not in the Scripture they are not necessary to be known for the whole Church,
and to be believed by us in particular, though they be sufficiently proposed to
us by the Church, that is, in their nonsense gibberish the Pope or a general
Council approved by him require us to receive them. Neither has the Church (as
he terms it) power to propose any thing as necessary to be known for the whole
Church, and to be believed by us in particular, but what is contained in the
Bible; nor has it such authority as that we are bound to believe them if it do
propound them, though never so sufficiently, but are bound to reject them as
contrary to the duty we ow to Christ of acknowledging him our only Master;
much more reason have we to contend against them, when they are propounded by
the Popes of Rome, who teach not the Doctrine of Christ, but cruelly and
proudly tyrannize over the souls and bodies of the Saints in a most
Antichristian manner, and impose on them as Apostolical traditions things
contrary to Christ and his Apostles in the Bible. Nor is it true, that all
Protestants will acknowledge all thsse Points he mentions as necessary to be
known for the whole Church, and to be believed by us in particular. I grant it
not sufficient for us to believe all the Bible, unless we believe it in the
true sense, but aver we can believe it in the true sense, and be able to
confute all Heresies out of it without the Rule of Apostolical tradition
unwritten in any of those points in which the Error is, as our Lord Christ was
able by it to vanquish Satan, for which reason it is termed the Sword of the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. And for Traditions, or Popes Decrees, they are but a
Leaden Sword without Fire and Faggot, yea, there is so much vanity in them as
makes them ridiculous, and so unfit for refutation, and were it not for the
horrid butchery and cruelty which Princes drunken with the Wine of the Cup of
the Fornication of the Whore of Babylon, make of their best Subjects at the
instigation of Popes and Popish Priests, nothing would appear more contemptible
than their decisions.

Yet more. Object. Doubtless for speculative Points of Christian Doctrine Books
are a safer and more infallible Way or Rule than oral Tradition. Answ. You are
mistaken, Books are infinitely more liable to Casualties and Corruptions than
Traditions, as well by reason of the variety of Languages, into which they are
translated, as the diversity of Translations; scarce any two Editions agreeing,
but all pretending one to mend the other; besides the multiplicity of Copies
and Copists with the Equivocation and uncertainty of dead and written words if
captiously wrested or literally insisted on. Who can prove any one Copy of the
Bible to be infallible or uncorrupted (those that were written by the Apostles
own hands we have not) or who can convince that any one Text of the Bible can
have no other sense and meaning than what is convenient for his purpose,
insisting only on the dead Letter? All which dangers, and difficulties are
avoided by relying on Apostolical tradition, which binds men under pain of
Damnation, to deliver nothing for Faith, but what they have received as such by
hand to hand from Age to Age, and in the same sense in which they have received
it. Think me not foolish (says St. Augustine) for using these terms; for I have
so learned these things by Tradition, neither dare I deliver them to thee any
other way than as I have received them, Lib. de utilit. cred. cap. 3.

I reply, A more impudently and palpably false Discourse than this is a man
shall seldom meet with, it being contrary to all experience and use among men,
and condemns all the customs of the most civil people of folly in Writing and
Printing their Statutes, Records, Deeds, Wills, Histories, that they may be
more certain and safely preserved, as knowing, that oral Traditions are apt to
be lost, and corrupted, persons understandings, memories, reports, lives, and
all their affairs being mutable and liable to innumerable casualties. Yea,
hereby God himself is condemned of imprudence, in causing Moses and all the
sacred Writers to write Books, and our Lord Christ in giving John express
charge to write, Revel. 1. 19. commending the Scripture, Romans 15. 4. 2 Timothy 3.
15, 16, 17. as inspired of God, directing to it, John 5. 39. praising the
searching of it, Acts 17. 11. making it a persons excellency to be mighty in
it, Acts 18. 24. useful to convince in the greatest point of Faith, verse. 28.
Wit not Printing a great Benefit to the World? Was not the finding of the Book
of the Law, 2 Chronicles. 34 15. the reading of it by Ezra, Nehem. 8. the having of
ready Scribes counted a happiness to the Jews? Do not men more credit eyes than
ears? Do not men complain of the Darkness of Times for want of Books? Are not
the ninth and tenth ages since Christ counted unhappy for want of learned
Writers? Was not this the great unhappiness that came into the West by the
Inundations of barbarous Nations in that they spoiled Libraries? Is it not a
thing for which Ptolomaeus Philadelphus was renowned, that he stored the
Library at Alexandria in Egypt with Books? do not we count them great
Benefactours who build and preserve Libraries? Are not therefore Students
encouraged, and they that search Libraries the men that discover truth to the
World? Were the things done before the Flood or since better preserved by oral
Tradition than by Moses Writing? Were the things done before the Wars of Troy
better preserved thereby than these Wars by Homer's Poems? Or the British
Antiquities by the Songs of Bardes than by Julius Caesar's Commentaries,
Tacitus, and other Historians Writings? How quickly are men apt to mistake and
misreport sayings appears by the mistake of Christ's speeches, John 2. 19.
Matthew. 26. 62. John 21 23. That which Eusebius says of Papias, lib. 3. Eccles.
hist. cap. 35. of his delivering diverse fabulous things received by oral
Tradition through his simplicity, Irenaeus of the Elders of Afia lib. 2.
advers. Haeret. cap. 39. and innumerable other instances prove, there is
nothing more uncertain than oral Tradition from hand to hand. A man may easily
perceive this man is resolved to outface plain truth, who is not ashamed thus
to aver that it is a mistake to say that Books are a more safe and infallible
way or Rule than oral Tradition, when his own printing his Books proves the
contrary: For why did he write but for more sure conveying and preser^ing of
his mind? Yea, his own Reason is truly retorted on himself. Oral Reports are
infinitely more liable to casualties and corruptions than Books, as well by
reason of the variety of Languages in which Reports are uttered, as the
diversity of Interpreters, scarce any two Interpreters agreeing, but all
pretending one to mend the others, besides the multiplicity of expressions and
relatours one not agreeing with the other, as Mark 14 56, 59. with the
equivocations and uncertainties or Witnesses words, if captiously wrested or
literally insisted on. Who can prove any one oral Tradition, which is not
universal and written also to be infallible or uncorrupted (those that were
delivered by the Apostles own tongues we have not) or who can convince that any
one oral Tradition can have no other sense or meaning than what is convenient
for his purpose insisting only on the sound of a reporter? All which dangers
and difficulties are avoided as much as is necessary by relying on the written
Word of the Bible, which under pain of Damnation binds men to deliver nothing
for Faith, but what they have received as such from Christ and his Apostles in
their Writings by hand to hand from age to age, and in the same sense in which
they have received it. It is true, Books are subject to casualties and
corruptions, yet not to so many as oral Tradition, and the casualties are
better prevented by Writing, which remains the same, than by Reports which
vary. Fama tam ficti pravique tenax quam nuncia very. And as the Enemies malice
has been great in seeking to deprive the World of Bibles, so the providence of
God has been wonderful in preserving them and their genuine writing and
meaning even by the dispersing of Copies, that what is amiss in one may be
mended in another, by ordering variety of Translations to the same end,
persecutions that they should not be in all places at once, stirring up others
to make Tractates, and Commentaries on them, all Christians (till the late
Faction at Trent, and the late Papal tyranny denied the liberty of translating
and reading of the Bible in the vulgar Tongue without leave, and began to
punish in their Inquisition the having them) reverencing and reading the holy
Scripture, however the Decree of Councils and Popes were neglected, yea
Traditours of the Bible to be burnt were most infamous.

As for the words of Austin lib. de util. cred. cap. 3. they are falsely cited
and merely impertinent to H. T's. purpose. Having said, The Old Testament is
delivered, that is, expounded four ways according to the History, Aetiology,
Analogy, Allegory; he then adds, Think me not a Fool, using Greek names. First,
because I have so received, neither dare I intimate to thee otherwise than I
have received: which is nothing at all about Apostolical traditions unwritten
as the Rule of Faith besides the Scripture, but of certain terms used by
Expositours of Scripture. But that which a little after he adds is justly
charged on the Romanists, and among them on H. T. Nothing seems to me to be
more impudently said by them (the Manichees) or that I may speak more mildely,
more carelessly, and weakly, than that the divine Scriptures are corrupted, when
they cannot convince it by any Copies extant in so fresh a memory.

But H. T. in his sottish vein adds, As to your difficulty of speculative
Points, I answer, that the whole frame of necessary Points of Christian
Doctrine was in a manner made sensible and visible by the external and uniform
practice of the Church. The incarnation and all the Mysteries thereof by the
holy Images of Christ erected in all sacred places, the Passion by the sign of
the Cross used in the Sacraments, and set up in Churches. The Death of Christ
by the unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, which is a lively Commemoration of it.
The Trinity and Unity by doing all thing in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, etc. now who can doubt but that oral Tradition thus
seconded by the outward and uniform practice of the whole World is a much
safer, and more infallible Rule for conserving revealed verities than Books or
dead Letters, which cannot explicate themselves.

I reply, were not this man bewitched, or as the Prophet speaks, Isai 44. 20.
Fed on Ashes, having a deceived heart that turns him aside, so as that he
cannot say, Is there not a Lie in my right hand? he would never have preferred
oral Tradition seconded by erecting and use of Images made by idolatrous Sots,
and termed Teachers of Lies by the Prophet Hab, 2. 18. as a safer and more
infallible Rule of Faith than the holy Scriptures inspired by God, and his
great gift to men, though impiously termed by this Wretch dead Letters.' But it
is the just judgment of God that they that make Images and adore them should
be like them. Psalm 115. 8. that is, as blockish as the Images are. How
uncertain oral Tradition is has been showed, and how impossible it is to be a
true and right Rule since the departure of those who could preach infallibly.
That there is any such uniform and outward practice of the Roman Church, which
can second oral Tradition, and make any Point of Christian Doctrine, much less
the whole frame of necessary Points of Christian Doctrine in a manner visible
and sensible is a Lie with a witness. Christian Doctrine does not consist in
the History of the things sensible to the eye, but in the opening of the true
causes, and ends, and uses of things done, which can only be apprehended by
the understanding, and is brought to it by hearing and reading, whence Faith is
said to come by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10. 14, 15, 17.
It is most false, that the erecting of Images of Christ and of the Cross has
been the uniform practice of the Church. It is certain by many Writers that
Christians had no Images in their Churches for many hundred years, yea, it is
certain that the best Emperors and Bishops of the East and West were against
the having them in Churches, however Gregory the first Bishop of Rome by his
superstitious opposing Serenus his taking them down counting them Lay-men's
Books, opened a Gap to that Deluge of Ignorance and Idolatry, which has since
spread over the Western Churches, which have gone a whoring after them. This
Author calls them holy Image which the Scripture counts abominable, as
defiling places, and making them not sacred but polluted. He says, The
Incarnation and all the Mysteries thereof are made sensible by the Images of
Christ erected in all sacred places, the passion by the sign of the Cross used
in Sacraments, and set up in Churches. But what a notorious falsehood is this?
One Mystery sure is the Holy Ghost's overshadowing the Virgin Mary, another the
Union of the two Natures? Can any Image of Christ teach these? What can the
sign of the Cross teach, but that there was such a kind of punishment to put
men to Death? If Images did teach these Mysteries, then Image-makers would be
Stewards of the Mysteries of God, and Successors of the Apostles, and Michael
Angelo and such like Painters and Carvers more truly Peter's Successors and
Bishops of Rome than Popes, as doing more to teach the Mysteries of God than
Popes do. The unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass is a mere figment of a thing
present, which all the sense of all the men in the World contradicts, full of
apish gestures and toyish fashions, fitter for a Stage Play than a spiritual
Service of the Christian Church, and being in a Tongue not commonly understood,
without teaching, informs not the Hearers or Seers in the Mystery of the Death
of Christ, nor makes any lively Commemoration of his Passion, but pleases
superstitious and womanish or childish spirits, which are taken with such
shows; the Sacrament opens no Mystery thereof without the Word written. Accedat
Verbum ad Elementum and fit Sacramentum, was the old resolution, Put the Word
to the Element then it is made a Sacrament. Nor is it true, that the practice
has been uniform therein, the variety of Missals, and the corruptions purged
out of the Roman Missal, as is confessed in Pope Pius the fifth his Bull
according to the Decree of the Trent Council prove the contrary. The Trinity is
known by the institution and practice of Baptism, but that is learned out of
the written Word, not oral Tradition. None of these practices do at all open
the Mystery of the Gospel, as experience shows, it being manifest by conference
that none of the People in Italy and elsewhere, who go to Mass, and look on
Pictures, and have no other teaching, do understand any thing of the Mystery of
the Gospel, the end, reason, use of Christ's Birth, or Death, but content
themselves with a mere theatrical show without any true understanding of the
grace of God, inward feeling or effectual change in their souls thereupon.
Perhaps it is better with Papists in England, where their Superstitions are not
altogether so gross, and their understanding bettered by neighborhood and
converse with Protestants. But that Images should conserve revealed verities,
or oral Tradition seconded with Images more explicate them than Books, which
this man again impiously terms dead Letters, unless the Images be animated, as
that was that it is said told Thomas Aquinas, Thou have written well of me,
which was fit to be silenced by telling it, that it had no allowance to speak
in the Church, is to me unintelligible. And if these be such a safe and
infallible Rule or means to teach and conserve the whole frame of Christian
Doctrine, then sure Christ did inconsiderately appoint Writers and Preachers to
teach and guide the Church, till we all meet in the unity of the Faith, Ephesians.
4. 11, 12, 13. he should rather for the times after the Apostles have
appointed, Massing Priests and Painters to have taught the People: nor were the
Council of Trent and some of the Popes so advised, as they might have been, in
appointing the unnecessary businesses of framing a Catechism, and amending the
vulgar Latin Edition of the Bible, and much more foolish have been all the
learned Papists, who have in late years and formerly made large Commentaries
and other Treatises to conserve revealed verities, there being a more
compendious way by oral Traditions with the use of Images, and Masses, and some
other things, if this impudent Scribler say true.

Yet H. T. continues thus. Object. If all things necessary to salvation be not
contained in the whole Bible, now shall a man ever come to know what is
necessary to be known, either by the whole Church in general, or himself in
particular? Answ. For the whole Church in general, she is obliged to know all
divinely revealed verities, which are necessary to the salvation of all
mankind, she being made by Christ the Depository of all, and having the
Promise of divine assistance to all. And for each particular man so much only
it necessary to be believed, as is sufficiently proposed to him by the Church
and her Ministers for the Word of God, or would at the least be so proposed, if
he himself were not in fault; all which we may easily come to know by means of
Apostolical tradition, without which we can have no infallible assurance of any
Point of Christian Doctrine.

I reply, neither the Church nor her Ministers can sufficiently propose to any
man for the Word of God any other than the Scripture, by which we may have
infallible assurance of any Point of Christian Doctrine without oral Tradition
unwritten. And to say that the whole Church in general, and not each man in
particular, is obliged to know all divinely revealed verities which are
necessary to the salvation of all mankind, is to speak contradictions.

Yet once more says H. T. Object. You dance in a vicious Circle, proving the
Scripture and the Churches infallibility by Apostolical tradition, and
tradition by the Scripture, and the Churches infallibility. Answ. No, we go on
by a right Rule toward Heaven. We prove indeed the Churches infallibility and
the credibility of the Scriptures by Apostolical tradition, but that is evident
of it self, and admits no other proof. When we bring Scripture for either we
use it only as a secondary testimony or argument ad hominem.

I reply, if this be so, then does H T. in his Title Page pretend demonstration
of his falsely called Catholic Religion by Tents of holy Scripture in the first
place only as a secondary testimony or argument ad hominem, but it is oral
Apostolical tradition which he principally relies on for his demonstration, as
being evident of it self, and admits no other proof; which oral Apostolical
Tradition being no other than what Popes and Councils approved by him have
approved, it follows, that what Papists call Catholic Religion is not what the
Scriptures teach, but what Popes and their Councils define, into which their
Faith is ultimately resolved. No marvel then they decline Scripture, or if they
use it do it only because of Protestants importunity, not because they think
it is to be rested on, and if so, sure H. T. plays the Hypocrite in pretending
to demonstrate his Religion out of Texts of holy Scripture. If other Papists
would stick to this which H. T. here says, we should take it as a thing
confessed, that Popery is not Scripture doctrine, but only unwritten
Tradition, and to have for its bottom foundation the Popes determination, and
so to be embraced upon his credit; which sure can beget no other than a humane
faith, and in fine does make the Pope Lord of their Faith, which is all one as
to make him their Christ, and that is to make him an Antichrist. Therefore I
conceive other Romanists will disown this resolution of H. T. and seek other
ways to get out of this Circle, and herein they go diverse ways. Dr. Holden an
English man and Doctor of Paris, in his Book of the Analysis of divine Faith,
chap. 9. rejects the common way, and sticks to that of universal Tradition,
which by natural reason is evident and firm: But when he has urged this as far
as he can, this must be the evidence, that what all say and was so manifestly
know by so many Miracles as Christ and his Apostles wrought must be infallibly
true. But the being of Christ the Mossiah, and his Doctrine from God, as the
holy Scriptures declare, is avouched by all the Church and manifestly known by
Miracles, therefore it must be true: which is no other than Chillingworth's
universal Tradition, confirming the truth of the Scriptures, and deriving our
Faith from thence, which if Papists do relinquish and adhere to the Popes
resolutions, whether they be with Scripture or without, they do expressly
declare themselves Papists or Disciples of the Pope, not Christians, that is,
Disciples of Christ. I conclude therefore that H. T. and such as hold with him
according to the Principle he here sets down are not Believers in Christ, whose
Doctrine is delivered in the Scripture, but in men whether Popes, or Councils,
or the universal Church, or any other who delivers to him that oral Tradition,
which is his Rule, as being evident of it self, and admits no other proof,
though I have showed it to be uncertain, yea, not so much as probable. I go on
to the next Article.

ARTIC. IX.
Schism and Heresy are ill charged on Protestants.
Protestants in not holding Communion with the Roman Church, as now it is, in
their Worship, in not subjecting themselves to the Pope as their visible Head,
in denying the new Articles of the Tridentin Council and Pope Pius the fourth
his Bull, are neither guilty of Schism nor Heresy. But Papists by rejecting
them for this cause, and seeking to impose on them this Subjection are truly
Schismatics, and in holding the Articles which now they do are Heretics.

SECT. I
H. T. his definitions of Heresy and Schism are not right.

H. T. intitles his ninth Article of Schism and Heresy, and begins thus.
Nothing intrenching more on the Rule of Faith or the Authority of the Church
than Schism or Heresy: we shall here briefly show what they are, and who are
justly chargeable therewith. Our Tenet is, that not only Heresy (which is a
wilful separation from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church) but also Schism
(which is a separation from her government) is damnable and sacrilegious, and
that most Sectaries are guilty of both.

Answ. I Think Infidelity does more entrench on the Rule of Faith than Heresy,
and Heresy may be where there is no intrenching on the Authority of the Church
in this Author's own sense, as when a man living in communion with the Roman
Church, and owning the Pope, or being the Pope himself is an Arian, as Pope
Liberius, or a Monothelite as Pope Honorius. And for his definition of Heresy,
it is in mine apprehension too obscure and imperfect. For it neither shows what
is the Catholic Church, the separation from whose Doctrine makes Heresy, nor
what Doctrines of it the separation from which makes Heresy, nor what
separation in heart or profession, or other act, nor when it is wilful when
not, nor how it may be known to be wilful. Nor does this definition agree with
their own Tenets, who acquit many from Heresy, who wilfully separate from the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church, as they define it, to wit, that which is
defined by a general Council approved by a Pope. As for instance, The Popish
French Church is acquitted from Heresy, yet they hold a Council to be above
the Pope, contrary to the last Lateran Council approved by Pope Leo the tenth.
Nor is this definition at all proved by this Author, but taken as granted,
though it may be justly questioned. And for the use of the terms [Heresie] and
[Hereticks] in the Ancients it is certain, that many are put in the Catalogue
of Heretics by Philastrius, Epiphanius, Augustine, and also by other Writers
elder and later, and those opinions termed Heresies, which were not so. The
like faults are in the definition of Schism, in not setting down which is the
Catholic Church, what is her government, what separation of heart, or outward
profession, or other act it is which makes Schism. Nor is this a definition,
which does agree with their own grants; For the Councils that deposed Popes
separated from the government of the Pope, and the French in their pragmatick
Sanction, and the Venetians that refused to obey Pope Paul the fifth his
Monitory, deny themselves to be Schismatics. Nor is it showed how either is
damnable or sacrilegious, nor how Protestants are Sectaries, or which Sectaries
are guilty of both or either. So that in this Tenet there is nothing but
ambiguity and imperfection: yet since by what follows we may ghess his meaning:
let us view his dispute.

SECT. II.
Protestants are not proved to be Sectaries by the first beginning of
Reformation.

The Argument, says H. T. All such as are wilfully divided both from the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Catholic Church are Schismatics and Heretics,
and consequently in a damnable state. But most Protestants and other Sectaries
are wilfully divided both from the Doctrine and Discipline of the Catholic
Church. Therefore they are Schismatics and Heretics, and consequently in a
damnable state. The Major is manifest out of the very notion and definition of
Schism and Heresy: The sequel of it proved thus by Scriture, Titus 3. 10. 2
Peter 2. 1. Jude 13. Romans 16. 17. Matthew. 18. 7, 17, 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.

Answ. 1. BY denying his Definition to be good, and that any of the Texts prove
it. 2. By granting the Sequel of them that are truly termed Schismatics and
Heretics, but not of such as he calls such, to wit, that do wilfully divide
from the Doctrine and Discipline of the now Roman Church falsely by him called
Catholic. There is no need of examining each Text till they are showed to
prove what is denied.

The Minor, says he, is proved, because Luther and his fellow Protestants
divided themselves from the Communion of all Churches, therefore from the
Communion of the Catholic Church, and that as well in Points of Doctrine as
matters of Government, as plainly appears by all we have said, and is yet
confirmed, because when they began their Separation Luther in Germany, Tyndal
in England, etc. the Catholic Church was in most quiet possession of her
Tenets, in perfect peace and unity, her Doctrine and Government being the same
they had been, not only to the time of Gregory the Great (as Protestants
confess) but to the very time of the Apostles, as is manifest both by the
public Liturgies, Councils, and Records of all Ages, in which no one Doctrine
of Faith, or substantial Point of Discipline, then professed by the Roman
Catholic Church, and opposed by Protestants, had ever been censured and
condemned as heretical or schismatical, but all for the most part actually
defined and established against ancient Heretics, as you have seen in the
Councils.

Answ. 1. The Minor speaks of most Protestants, but mentions none but Luther
and his fellow Protestants, and Tyndal in England: now it is no good proof
against us, that we are Schismatics, because Luther and his fellow Protestants
were so, and Tyndal began Separation in England. It is told them by
C^illingworth c. 5. p 1. against Knot, that there may be an unjust Separation
begun, and so a Schism in the Leaders, and yet no Schism in the Followers in
after Ages; as in a Commonwealth it may be a Sedition and Rebellion to set up
another Government and Governor in the first Authors, and yet none in the
Posterity to continue them, but rather their duty to maintain them in order to
the peace and liberty which was unjustly obtained at first. 2. It is denied
that Luther or Tyndal divided themselves wilfully, that is, without necessity.
It is known in the History of Sleidan, and others, that Luther at first spoke
honorably of the Pope, and was willing to have continued in communion with the
Roman Church till Leo the tenth did by his Bull condemn his Doctrine, before he
had heard him, and he saw plainly (as the World found by experience) that the
Popes and Court of Rome did never by good proofs out of Scripture go about to
refute them, but by Excommunications, Fire, and War, (to which Emperors and
Kings were stirred up by them) endeavor to root them out. And for Tyndal it is
manifest by the Book of Acts and Monuments of the Church written by Mr. Fox in
the Reign of Henry the eighth, that Tyndal was persecuted by the Popish
Bishops, and his body burnt in Brabant. Now sure were the Protestants never so
erroneous, yet the Law of Nature ties them to run away from such cruel Wolves,
as in stead of teaching them with love, endeavor to destroy them with cruelty.
3. It is most false, that Luther and his Fellows divided themselves from the
communion of all Churches: It is certain, that they actually joined with the
remainder of the Hussites in Bohomia, and the Waldenses about the Alps, who
were true Churches of Christ, however the Romanists term them: nor did they
ever renounce communion with the Greek. Eastern or Southern Churches, though by
reason of distance, and the Power they were under, they could not have actual
communion with them. And by their desire of a free Council in Germany not
called by the Pope, but the Emperor and Christian Princes, nor of Bishops
sworn to the Pope, but of men that were equal Judges by whom their Doctrine
might be examined, and by their often Colloquies for Reconciliation they
plainly showed, that they tried all means they could with a good conscience to
have prevented the breach between them, and the Popish party, who were
certainly the cause of the Schism, and truly the Schismatics (as may be
gathered from their own stories, such as Thuanus, Friar Paul's History of the
Trent Council. and others, who relate the proceedings of those times) and not
the Protestants. 4. It is most false, that they separated from the Catholic
Church in point of Doctrine. It is most certain, that the party from whom the
Protestants separated had relinquished the Catholic Doctrine of the Scripture,
and Primitive times for five hundred years at least, and had brought in a new
upstart Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, worshipping Images,
Transubstantiation, half-communion as sufficient, denial of Priest's Marriage,
Popes universal Monarchy, Purgatory-fire, Indulgences, Sacrifice of the Mass,
Justification by Works, and many more, which were unknown to the first
Christians, nor has the contrary appeared by any thing H. T. has said before,
as the Reader of this Answer may perceive. 5. It is most false, that they
separated from the Catholic Church in the point of her Government. The
Government of the whole Church by one universal Bishop was never the Government
of the Catholic Church. It is manifest by the first general Councils that the
Pope of Rome was not acknowledged superior to other Patriarchs, and the Greek
Churches have always resisted his claim of Supremacy, and many, as Nilus
Archbishop of Thessalonica, Barliam and others have written against it as an
unjust claim. 6. It is false, that the Roman Church (falsely by H. T. called
Catholic) was in most quiet possession of her Tenets, when Luther began his
Separation in Germany, Tyndal in England. It is manifest by Cochlaeus his
History of the Hussites, that there were a remnant of them in Bohemia, by
Thuanus and Mr. Morland that there was a remnant of the Waldenses in the
Valleys of the Alps, by Mr. Fox that there was a remnant of Lollards or
Wictevists in England, who did reject the Roman Doctrine then and since taught,
in many, if not all the points, in which Protestants do now oppose it. 7. It is
false, that the Roman Church was in perfect peace and unity when Luther and
Tyndal began their Separation. For the controversies about the Virgin Marie's
immaculate Conception, about the Popes Supremacy above a Council, and sundry
other were rather suppressed than composed, as the event showed, no party
relinquishing the holding their Tenets to this day, but each when occasion is
offered contending for their way. 8. It is false, that the Doctrines and
Government of the Roman Church had been the same from that time Luther and
Tyndal began their Separation to the time of Gregory the Great, or that
Protestants do confess it. It is most certain to the contrary, that since
Gregory the Great his time the Popes universal Episcopacy, the Worship of
Images, Transubstantiation, half-Communion in the Eucharist, and many other
points were brought into the Roman Church, as Bishop Morton in his Appeal from
Brereley 's Apology to King James has proved. 9 It is also most false, that
their Doctrine and Government were the same (...) now they are to the times of
the Apostles. The contrary is proved out of the Epistle to the Romans, by
Bishop Robert Abbot against D^ctor Bishop, and by Bishop Jewel against Harding
out of the Fathers. 10. It is false which H. T. says, It is manifest both by
the public Liturgies, Councils, and Records of all Ages, no one Doctrine of
Faith, or substantial Point of Doctrine professed then when Luther and Tyndal
began their Separation by the Roman Church, and opposed by Protestants had ever
been censured and condemned as heretical or schismatical, but all for the most
part actually defined and established against ancient Heretics, as may be seen
in the Councils. The contrary is most manifest, that the Council of Chalcedon
and of Carthage, in which Augustine was present, opposed the Popes Supremacy as
schismatical, that the Synod of Frankford opposed the worshipping of Images as
heretical, besides many other, as has been showed in answer to what H. T. here
allegeth.

SECT. III.
The Sayings of Fathers prove not Protestants Heretics or Schismatics.

BUt H. T. says, Fathers for this Point, though there is not one of the
Fathers Sayings which he brings that speaks at all to that point of the
Protestants being guilty of Schism or Heresy, or that the Church of Rome is
the Catholic Church, or that her Doctrine and Government have been the same in
all Ages, or that in no case there may be dividing from it, or teaching
contrary to it without Heresy or Schism, yea, it is certain, that Irenaeus,
Cyprian, and Austin, thought the clean contrary, Irenaeus opposing Pope Victor
his Excommunication of the Eastern Bishops for not holding Easter with him,
Cyprian opposing Pope Stephanus about Rebaptization, Augustine opposing Popes
Boniface, Zozimus, and Celestine, about the Appeal of Apiarius. But let us view
their Sayings.

The first is thus cited by H. T. In the second Age Irenaeus; God will judge
those who make the Schisms in the Church, ambitious men, who have not the
honor of God before their eyes, but rather embracing their own interests than
the unity of the Church, for small and light causes divide the great and
glorious body of Christ, etc. for in the end they cannot make any Reformation
so important as the evil of Schism is prejudicious, lib. 4. cap. 62. It is
likely H. T. ignorantly put [prejudicious] for [pernicious] or his Author
whence he had it, for it is in Irenaeus, Quanta est Schismatis pernicies. But
it appears, 1. That he has either not read the place, or not considered it,
because he puts in [God will judge] whereas it is manifest out of the words
following [But he will judge also all those who are out of the truth, that is,
without the Church, but he himself is judged of no man] and from chap. 53. and
following to be meant of every spiritual Disciple of Christ that had received
the Spirit of God, and the Apostolical Doctrine, chap. 52. alluding to Paul's
words, 1 Cor. 2. 15. and he alters [the love of God] into [the honor of God
before their eyes.] 2. That the place makes nothing against Protestants; for it
condemns only them that make Schisms for small and light causes, which was
most true of Victor then Bishop of Rome, in excommunicating the Asian Bishops
for not keeping Easter as he did, reprehended by Irenaeus in his Epistle
recited by Eusebius, hist. 1. lib. 5. cap. 24. but is nothing against
Protestants, who neither make nor continue Schisms, and that Separation which
they make, they do it for very great causes. And he says, No Reformation can
be made so important by them who divide upon light causes, as is the mischief
of the Schism they make, but this hinders not but that the Protestants
Reformation, or correption (which is Irenaeus his word) is so necessary, that
it countervails the evil of the Schism consequent. I add, the words of Irenaeus
[the spiritual man who is a Disciple of Christ will judge all them who are out
of the truth] do justify the Protestants in judging the Popes and Popish
Doctors, and Churches as Schismatics and Heretics, who by their Doctrine of
Popes Supremacy, Invocation of Saints, humane Satisfactions, inherent Justice
justifying, Merit of Condignity, have departed from the Apostolical Faith, and
by their cruel tyranny and hatred of Reformation have the most horrible and
pernicious Schism that ever was in the Church of God, and the Protestants are
warranted thus to judge by the holy Scripture.

The words of Cyprian de unit. Eccles. in the third Age against the Novatians
of the inexpiableness of their crime of Schism, that it could not be purged by
suffering for Christ, nor they be Martyrs, though they died for the Confession
of his Name, is too heavy a censure, yet if it were true is nothing against
Protestants, who are not guilty of that Schism.

The words of Chrysostom hom. 11. in Ephesians. show how grievous an evil Schism
is, but prove not, that they are all Schismatics, that separate from the Roman
Bishop and Church, nor that the Protestants are guilty thereof, or the
Romanists free.

The words of Optatus lib. 2. are not to any of the points now in controversy
except he mean by the unity of the Episcopal Chair holding communion with the
Bishop of Rome, and assert that to be the one Episcopal Chair to which all
other are to be subject: which if so meant, the words are not true; if meant as
Cyprian meant, that there is one Bishopric of which each Bishop holds a part
entirely, in respect of unity of Doctrine, the speech is good, but not against
Protestants, who hold the unity of that Episcopal Chair.

The words of Augustine lib. 4. de Symb. fidei ad Catech. cap. 10. if they were
true, yet are they nothing to the purpose, unless it were said, that by the
holy Church he meant the Church of Rome, or that he who is found out of the
Church of Rome is a stranger from the number of sons, that he has not God for
his Father, nor will have the Church for his Mother, none of which are said by
him. It is true, there are these words in Austin's second Exposition on Psalm
21. with us 22. ver. 18. He who has charity is secure or safe. No man moves
it out of the Catholic Church. But these words are not against Protestants,
but against Papists, who move it out of the Catholic Church, and confine it to
the Roman, and most uncharitably damn them, who are not of their party, therein
following the Donatists, whom Austin there condemns, who confined the Church to
the part of Donatus in Africa. And there is another passage in the same
Exposition which does justify the Protestants and condemn the Papists in the
main point of controversy between us, what shall determine controversies
between us, they say the Church, when the great controvesie is which is the
Church, we say the Scripture, and so does Augustine in these words. The
Testament of our Father (that is, the Scriptures, as the words a little before
show) is come out of any hole, I know not what Thieves would take it away, I
know not what Persecutours would burn it. Whencesoever it is brought let it be
read. Why strivest thou? We are brethren, why do we strive? The Father died not
without a Will, he made his Will and so died, he is dead and risen again. So
long there is contention about the Inheritance of the Dead until the Will be
publicly produced, and when the Will is brought into the public all are
silent, that the Tables may be opened and recited. The Judge hears within, the
Advocates are silent, the Criers make silence, all the People is suspended,
that the words of the Dead not perceiving it in the Tomb may be read. He lies
without sense in the Monument, and his words are in force, Christ sits in
Heaven, and is his Testament contradicted? Open, let us read, we are Brethren,
why do we contend? Let our mind be pacified, our Father has not left us
without a Will. He that made the Will lives for ever, hears our voices,
acknowledges his own. Let us read, why do we contend? Where the Inheritance it
self is found, let us hold it. These words were spoken by Austin against
Donatists, and may rightly be applied to Papists, who are the true canse of all
the horrible Schisms and bloodsheds among Christians, because they will not try
who has the Inheritance of the Church by the Scriptures, which are God's Will,
but usurp the name of the Catholic Church, as the Donatists did, and under
that pretense trample under foot all their Christian Brethren in the World, who
have as great and better Portion in the Inheritance of God their Father and of
the Church than themselves.

The words of Augustine in his Sermon super gestis Emeriti, are not, that out
of the Church an Heretic may have all things but Salvation. For he says, He
may have the Faith, which he would not say of the Heretic, but he speaks it of
the Donatists, which whether it be true or no is nothing to Protestants, who
are and may be in the true Church of Christ, and have salvation, though they be
not in the Roman Church.

The words of Augustine Epist. 48. concerning the Donatists, that they were
with other Christians in Baptism, in the Creed, and in the other Sacraments of
the Lord, but in the spirit of unity, in the bond of peace, and finally in the
Catholic Church you are not with us; do not at all touch Protestants, who are
in the Catholic Church with other Christians, though not with the Roman party,
who are most like the Donatists; and the Protestants hold with Augustine in the
same Epistle, that that kind of Letters (to wit, of Bishops, such as Hilary,
Cyprian, etc.) is to be distinguished from the authority of the Canon of the
Scripture. For they are not so read as if testimony were brought out of them,
that it may not be lawful to think to the contrary, if perhaps they thought
otherwise than the truth requires.

SECT. IV.
H. T. has not solved the Objections acquiting Protestants from Schism and
Heresy, and condemning Papists.

It follows in H. T. Objections solved. Object. We separated only from the
Church of Rome's errors. Answ. Yea, from her Catholic and Apostolical
Doctrines. She does not err in Faith, as has been proved. I answer therefore
with St. Augustine to the Donatists; I object to you the crime of Schism, which
you will deny, and I will presently prove, because you do not communicate with
all Nations, cont. Petil. Add, no nor with any Nation before Luther.

I Reply, that we separate from any other than the Church of Rome 's errors,
and sins, is said, but not proved, and that she, that is, the Bishop of Rome
and his party do not err in Faith is not proved, but impudently said against
plain evidence of Scripture, Councils, and Fathers, and I reply by retorting
Augustine's words. I object to you the crime of Schism, which you will deny,
and I will presently prove, because you do not communicate with all Nations,
particularly you English Recusant Papists H. T. and the rest are manifest
Schismatics, for you separate from the Catholic Church in that you do not
communicate with the Protestant Church of Christ in England. It is false, that
those who held the same truth with Protestants under other names, held no
communion with any Nation before Luther: For as far as they could, and ought,
they held communion with a. called on the Name of the Lord Jesus in France,
Bohemia, England, and elsewhere, under the names of Waldenses, Hussites,
Picards, Wiclevists, Lollards, and such like.

H. T. adds. Object. We refused only the Church of Rome's Innovations and
Superstitions. Answ. You slander. Her Discipline and Doctrines were the same
then that they have been in all precedent Ages. Did the Church perish (says
St. Augustine to the Donatists, or did she not? If she did, what Church brought
forth the Donatists? (or the Protestants?) If she did not, what madness moved
you to separate your selves from her, on pretense of avoiding the communion of
bad men? lib. 1. cont. Gaudent. cap 7. And again, We are certain no man can
justly separate himself from the communion of all Nations (yet Martin Luther
and Mr. Tyndal did it) Epist. 48. And in another place, All Separation made
before the drawing of the Net on the shore (at the Day of Judgment) is
damnable and the Sacrilege of Schism, which surpasses all other crimes, lib.
2. cont. Epist. Parmen.

I reply, it is a Scolds trick to say we slander, and not to prove it. We prove
out of Paul's Epistle to the Romans, that the Roman Church then held
Justification by Faith without Works, that every Soul even Popes were to be
subject to Princes, that the Scriptures are to be the Rule of Faith, that the
Church of Rome might fail, that the Roman church is but a particular Church,
that it is evil to judge Christians for not observing difference of Meats and
Days, that it is Idolatry to do, as Papists now do, worshipping the Creature
with such Worship as belongs to the Creator, that we are not to invocate
Saints in whom we believe not, with sundry more, in which the present Roman
church has swe^ved from the primitive. We prove out of Gregory the Great
himself, that the Doctrine and Discipline of the Roman church is not the same
now as it was in all precedent Ages, for he rejected the Title of Universal
Bishop now usurped by the Pope, and disavowed the Worship of Images, with other
things now received at Rome, and before him Pope Gelasius termed the denying
the Cup to the Lay People sacrilegious. Augustine himself has taught us to
account his words below Scripture-canon: yet his speeches touch not us, who do
not separate our selves from the church of Christ on pretense of avoiding
communion of bad men, but from the Papacy on full proof that the communion of
the Popish church is imposed on conditions of acknowledging such Errors, and
practicing such Idolatry as are damnable. We do not say, that the church
perished, but that it was continued in a remnant of persecuted Saints. We need
not allege any Church for our Mother, but the Jerusalem which is abov^, which
is the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. I judge it no better than an inconsiderate
speech to say, any visible church is the Mother of Christians, it is in my
apprehension all one as to say, the church is the Mother of the church,
Christians or believers being all one with the church, and therefore count such
speeches, whoever Father or Prelate he be that uses them, no better than
ridiculous nonsense, and much more to call Bishops our Fathers in Christ, and
yet to term them the Church also and our Mother. Nor need we allege a Church
that brought us forth, it is sufficient we can prove our Faith to be according
to the Gospel, and allege that we have been begotten by it, which way soever it
be. Were not the ^berians a church of Christians who were converted by ^
captive Maid when there was no church there before, and the Indians by
^rumentius without a Church to bring them forth? May not a man have Faith and
Salvation in a Wilderness where he knows of no church? Neither did Luther nor
Tyndal separate themselves from all Nations, but were expelled and pe^secuted
by the devilish Popes and Popish Clergy of Rome, when they endeavored to
restore the purity of the Gospel to the Germans, English, and other Nations. If
Augustine meant simply, that all Separation made before the Day of Judgment is
damnable, he wrote that which is not true, it being contrary to Paul's
practice, Acts 18. 9. God's command, 2 Cor. 6. 17. 2 Timothy 3 5. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 8.
Revel. 18. 4. He himself acknowledges lib. 2. cont Epist. P^rmen. cap. 21. A
man is not to associate with others when he cannot have society with them but
by doing evil with them. But if he meant it of such Separation as the Donatists
made (as it is likely he does) it touches not us, who separate not from the
Romanists, because some evil men are tolerated, but because Error, Idolatry,
and other evils are urged on us by them, and such is their tyranny, that
without yielding to them there is no communion, but in stead thereof Banishment
or Burning.

Once more says H. T. Object. We did but separate from the particular Church
of Rome. Therefore not from the whole Church. Answ. I told you it the Question
of the Churches universality in what sense the Church of Rome i^ universal or
Catholic, and in what sense she is particular, take it in which acception you
will your Consequence is false, for whosoever separates from an acknowledged
true Member of the Catholic Church (and such the Church of Rome then was in
her particular) he consequently separates from the whole, and is an Heretic or
Schismatic.

I reply, neither as it is taken for the congregation of Rome or Italy, nor as
it notes a collection of all the Churches holding communion with the Sea of
Rome is the Roman Church rightly termed the Catholic Church: the nonsense and
falsehood thereof is showed before Art. 5. Sect. 8. Nor is it true that he that
separates from the Catholic Roman Church, in either sense is an Heretic or
Schismatic. And to his proof I say, 1. That many Protestants deny the Roman
Church a true Member of the Catholic Church when Luther separated, but call it
an Antichristian and malignant Church; and they that acknowledge it a true
Church, in respect of the truth of being, yet not of Doctrine, and they that
say it had the truth of being, say it not of the predominant part, but of the
latent, conceiving it was with them as it was with Israel in the days of
Elijah, that they did not own those Errors and evils which were practiced in
them, or avouched by them, though living among them, or if they did yield to
them, or some of them, they had pardon, as doing it in ignorance, retaining the
old Creed of the Apostles: And they attribute the truth of it to the few
fundamental Articles which they held, who were in it, though very unsoundly by
reason of the errors and corruptions mixed with them, which made the Church
among the Romanists as a leprous man unfit for converse and communion, with
whom though they might continue for a time in expectation of their repentance,
yet they might say to Rome being found u^c^rable, as the Jews to Babylon, Jer.
51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her, and
let us go every one into his own country: for her Judgment reaches unto the
Heaven, and is lifted up unto the Skies. 2. That it is not universally true,
that he who separates from an acknowledged true Member of the Catholic Church
separtes from the whole there may be a Separation partial not total, privative
not positive, out of prejudice and passion, in heat not in heart, as between
Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15. 39. Chrysostom and Epiphanius, temporary not
perpetual, in prudence though not out of absolute necessity, necessary not
voluntary, just and not rash, without revolt from the Faith, or persecution of
those from whom it is made. In many of these sorts there may be a Separation
which may be from an acknowledged true Member of the Catholic Church, and yet
no Separation from the whole. And therefore this Position of H. T. will not be
yielded him without better proof and demonstration, that the Separation from
the Church of Rome which Protestants have made cannot stand with union with the
Catholic Church in Doctrine and Discipline. Which sure he has not yet proved,
nor is it likely he ever will: but as the fashion of these Scriblers is, sing
over again and again their Cuckoes Song of the Catholic Roman Church, and that
Protestants are Heretics and Sectaries, with other Popish gibberish, though
the folly and frivolousness thereof has been a thousand times demonstrated.

I have thus at last examined these nine Articles, being moved thereto out of
hope to do some souls good by recovering them out of the snare in which they
are held by Satan and Romish Emissaries. If they shut their eyes against the
light, their judgment will be of themselves. I shall add prayer for them, that
God would open their eyes, and, if time, health, and other concurrences suit
with my aims, discover the vanity of the rest of H. T. his Manual. In the mean
time, not as some Romanists blasphemously Praise be to the Virgin Mother, in
the end of their Writings, but as Paul concluded his Epistle to the Romans so
do I, To God only wise be glory through JESUS CHRIST for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Contents.
ARTICLE I.
THe Church of Rome is not demonstrated to be the true Church of God by its
succession. Page 1 Sect. 1. Of the Title of H. T. his Manual, in which is
showed to be a vain vaunt of what he has not performed. ibid. 2. Of the
Epistles prefixed, in which he ascribes too much to the Church, and deceitfully
begins with her Authority. 3 3. His Tenet of the falsity of all Churches, not
owning the Pope is showed to be most absurd. 4 4. The Succession required by H.
T. is not necessary to the being of a true Church. 7 5. None of the Texts
alleged by H. T. prove a necessity to the being of a true Church of such
Succession as he imagines. 10 6. The Succession pretended in the Roman Church
proves not the verity of the Roman Church, but the contrary. 11 7. The
Catalogue of H. T. is defective for the proof of his pretended Succession in
the Roman Church in the first three hundred years. 13 8. The Catalogue of H. T.
is defective for the proof of his pretended Succession in the Roman Church in
the fourth and fifth Centuries of years. 18 9. The defect of H. T. his
Catalogue for proof of his Succession in sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, tenth
Centuries is showed. 21 10. The defect of his Catalogue in the eleventh and
twelfth Ages is showed. 25 11. The defect of his Catalogue in the thirteenth
and fourteenth Ages is showed. 28 12. The defect of his Catalogue in the
fifteenth and sixteenth Ages is showed. 32 13. The close of H. T. is retorted.
36 14. H. T. has not solved the Protestants Objections. 38
ARTICLE II.
PRotestants have that Succession which is sufficient to demonstrate them to be
a true Church of God. 42 Sect. 1. Protestant Churches need not prove such a
Succession as Papists demand. ibid. 2. The Argument of H. T. against
Protestants does as well prove the nullity of the Roman Church for want of
Succession as of the Protestants. 44 3. Protestants have had a Succession
sufficient to aver their Doctrine. 47 4. The Succession in the Greek Churches
may be alleged for Protestants, notwithstanding the Exceptions of H. T. 51 5.
The Doctrine of Romanists was not the Doctrine of the Fathers of the first five
hundred years, nor is acknowledged to be so by learned Protestants. 53 6. The
Answers of H. T. to the Objections of Protestants concerning their Succession
are showed to be vain, and the Apostasy of the Roman Church is proved. 56
ARTICLE III.
SUch visibility of Succession as the Romanists require is not proved to be
necessary to the being of a true Church. 62 Sect. 1. Exterior Consecration and
Ordination of Ministers is not necessary to the being of a visible Church: and
what H. T. requires of Ministers preaching and administering Sacraments is most
defective in the Roman Church. ibid. 2. Neither Isai 2. 2. Matthew. 5. 14. Psalm
18. (19) 4. nor the words of Irenaeus, Origin, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Augustine,
prove such a Church visibility as H. T. asserts. 65 3. H. T. has not solved
the Protestants Objections against the visibility of the Church, as it is by H.
T. asserted. 66
ARTICLE IV.
THe Church of Rome is not that one Catholic Church, which in the Apostolic
and Nicene Creeds is made the object of Christian Faith. 69 1. (...) in
non-fundamentals of Faith and in Discipline is not essentially presupposed to
the universality of the Church militant. ibid. 2. The ambiguity of H. T. his
saying of the Roman Church its unity and universality is showed. 70 3. Unity of
Discipline under one visible Head, and of Faith without division in lesser
Points, is not proved from 1 Cor. 10. 17. Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. John 10. 16. 1 Cor.
1. 10. Acts 4. 32. John 17. 11. and the Nicene Creed necessary to the Churches
being. 71 4. It is notoriously false that the Romanists are perfectly one, or
have better unity or means of unity than Protestants, and H. T. his Argument
from the unity of the Church is better against than for the Roman Church. 73 5.
The Argument of H. T. from the unity of a natural body is against him for
Protestants. 77 6. The universality which Matthew. 28. 20. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. John
14. 15, 16. Luke 1. 33. for time, Psalm 85. (86) 9. Isai 2. 2. Matthew. 28. 20.
Psalm 19. 4. for place, agrees not to the now Roman Church, but may be better
said of the Protestants. 78 7. The words of Irenaeus, Origin, Lactantius, Cyril
of Jerusalem, Augustine are not for the universality of H. T. by which he
asserts the Catholicism of the Roman Church but against it. 80 8. It is
nonsense or false to term the Roman Church the Catholic Church, and the
shifts of H. T. to avoid this Objection are discovered. 81
ARTICLE V.
THe Roman Church is neither proved to be the Catholic Church, nor the highest
visible Judge of controversies, nor is it proved that she is infallible both in
her Propositions and Definitions of all Points of Faith, nor to have power from
God to oblige all men to obey her under Pain of Damnation, but all this is a
mere impudent arrogant claim of Romanists that has no color of proof from
Scriptures or Antiquity. 85 Sect. 1. The decit of H. T. in asserting an
Infallibility and Judicature of controversies in the Church, which he means of
the Pope, is showed. ibid. 2. Luke 10. 16. proves not the Roman or Catholic
Churches Infallibility. 87 3. Matthew 18. 17. or 18. 1 John 4. 6. Mark 16. 15,
16. make nothing for the claim of the Roman Church, or Popes, or ecumenical
Councils Infallibility. 88 4. None of these Texts Matthew. 28. 20. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Matthew. 16. 18. John 14 26. John 16. 13. Acts 15. 28. do prove the Infallibility
in Points of Faith of the Catholic or Roman Church, or the Pope, or a general
Council approved by him. 90 5. There may be good assurance of the Word of God
and its meaning, and of our Salvation without supposing the Churches
Infallibility. 93 6. Neither can the Church oblige men under Pain of Damnation
to believe her Definitions of Faith, nor is there any such Judicature as H. T.
asserts to be ascribed to her, nor do any of the Fathers words cited by H. T.
say it is, the words of Irenaeus, Cyprian, lib. 1. Epist. 3. August. contr.
Epist. Fundam. cap. 5. etc. are showed not to be for it, but some of them
plainly against it. 97 7. The Objections from Scripture and Reason against the
Infallibility which H. T. ascribes to the Church are made good against his
Answers. 106 8. The Objections of Protestants against the Churches
Infallibility from Fathers and Councils are vindicated from H. T. his Answers.
124
ARTICLE VI.
THe Roman Church is not demonstrated to be the true Church by her sanctity and
Miracles. 131 Sect. 1. The Texts brought by H. T. to prove that the true Church
is known by sanctity and Miracles are showed to be impertinent. ibid. 2. The
sanctity of men in former Ages proves not the holiness of the present Roman
Church. 132 3. The imagined holiness of Benedict, Augustine, Francis, Dominick,
proves not the verity of the now Roman church. 134 4. The Roman church is not
proved to be the true church by the holiness of its Doctrine, but the contrary
is true. 136 5. The Devotion of the Romanists shows not the holiness of the
Roman church, it being for the most part will worship and Pharisaical
hypocrisy. 139 6. The power of working Miracles is no certain mark of the true
church. 143 7. The Popish pretended Miracles prove not the truth of their
church, nor the Miracles related by some of the Fathers. 144 8. The Objections
against the proof of the verity of the Roman church from the Power of Miracles
are not solved by H. T. 147
ARTICLE VII.
THe Pope's or Bishop of Rome's Supremacy or Headship of the whole church is
not proved by H. T. 151 Sect. 1. Neither is it proved nor probable that Peter
was Bishop of Rome, or that he was to have a Successor. ibid. 2. From being
the Foundation, Matthew. 16. 18. and feeding the Sheep of Christ, John 21. 16,
17. neither Peter's nor the Pope's Supremacy is proved. 152 3. The Text Matthew.
16. 18. proves not any Rule or Dominion in Peter over the Apostles, but a
Promise of special success in his Preaching. 156 4. John 21. 16, 17, 18. proves
not Peter's Supremacy over the whole church. 159 5. Peter's charge to confirm
his Brethren, Luke 22. 31. and his priority of nomination, prove not his
Supremacy. 161 6. The late Popes of Rome are not Successors of Peter. 164 7.
The Sayings of Fathers and Councils prove not Peter's or the Popes Supremacy.
165 8. The holy Scriptures John 19. 11. Acts 25. 10, 11. Luke 22. 25. 1 Cor. 3.
11. overthrow the Pope's Supremacy. 169 9. Cyprian, Hierome, Gregory, the
councils of Constantinople, Chalcedon, Nice, are against the Pope's Supremacy.
176 10. Of the Emperors calling Councils, Pope Joan, Papists killing Princes
excommunicate, not keeping faith with Heretics. 18^
ARTICLE VIII.
THe unwritten Tradition which H. T. terms Apostolical is not the true Rule of
Christian Faith. 187 Sect. 1. The Argument for Apostolical tradition as the
Rule of Faith from the means of planting and conserving Faith at first is
answered. ibid. 2. Unwritten traditions are not proved to be the true Rule of
Faith from the assurance thereby of the Doctrine and Books of Christ and his
Apostles. 190 3. The obligation of the church not to deliver any thing as a
Point of Faith but what they received proves not unwritten Tradition a Rule of
Faith. 191 4. Counterfeits even in Points of Faith might and did come into the
church under the name of Apostolic tradition without such a force as H. T.
imagines necessary thereto. 195 5. The Romanists can never gain their cause by
referring the whole trial of Faith to the arbitrament of Scripture, but will be
proved by it to have revolted from Christianity. 198 6. Sayings of Fathers and
Councils prove not unwritten Traditions a Rule of Faith. 202 7. Objections from
Scripture for its sufficiency without unwritten Traditions are vindicated from
H. T. his Answers. 205 8. H. T. solves not the Objections from Reason for the
Scriptures sufficiency without unwritten Traditions. 212
ARTICLE IX.
PRotestants in not holding communion with the Roman church, as now it is, in
their worship, in not subjecting themselves to the Pope as their visible Head,
in denying the new Articles of the Tridentin Council and Pope Pius the fourth
his Bull, are neither guilty of Schism nor Heresy. But Papists by ejecting
them for this cause, and seeking to impose on them this subjection are truly
Schismatics, and in holding the Articles which now they do are Heretics. 220
Sect. 1. H. T. his Definitions of Schism and Heresy are not right. ibid. 2.
Protestants are not proved to be Sectaries by the first beginning of
Reformation. 221 3. The Sayings of Fathers prove not Protestants Heretics or
Schismatics. 224 4. H. T. has not solved the Objections acquitting
Protestants from Schism and Heresy, and condemning Papists. 226
FINIS.

