To you that are called by the name of Baptists, or the Baptized people that do
what you do by Imitation from JOHN BAPTIST CHRIST and the APOSTLES, who had not
the to run without the power to refo^m; but you have only the form, but wants
the power that does reform.
Also several other things given forth from the Spirit of the Lord, necessary
for all people to take into consideration as they love their souls.
Aug: 18 1654
I. YOu that imitate John in Luke 3. where is your fruits brought forth, where
is the axe laid to the root of the tree? you baptists that were oppressors
before, where is your oppression ceased, you that have two Coats, where do you
give to them that have none; where do you feed the hungry, and cloth the
naked, and let the oppressed go free, and use no violence? Where do you act
according to John's council in that of Luke, chap. 3. ver. 8. to 15.

II. You that imitate a Baptism from Christ, because he went down into the
water, Mat. 3. 16. 7.

When did ever the heavens open to any of you? and when did you after you came
out of the water, at any time see the Spirit of God to descend like a Dove, and
light upon you, as it did upon him? And when did you hear a voice from heaven,
saying to you, Ye are my well-beloved sons, in whom I am well pleased, to
confirm your way of baptizing, as it did then?

For they that are guided by the spirit of God, are the sons of God; and if
sons, then heirs, and joynt-heirs with Christ, as they were who were baptized
into the death of Christ, and buried with him in baptism, that like as Christ
was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the Father, so they to newness of
life, who were owned with the love of God, and were sons, 1 John 3. 1. Rom 8.
14. to 18, and Rom 6. 3, 4. 5. verses

They who baptized then had manifest tokens of the love and power of God, to
confirm that visible and outward baptism of water.

But what power or manifest token have you Baptizers, that do but imitate them
who had the holy Ghost and the power, is not that wanting, and does not
accompany your baptism, and so it is but as a bell without a clapper, and dead
as a body without a spirit; and so a form without power.

III. You baptized people that imitate Philip, that Preached to the Church:
When did the spirit bid you go, as it did him? and when were you caught away
out of sight by the spirit, after you had done, as Philip was? Where is your
confirmation, or fignes, or miracles, to accompany your baptism, as it did
theirs? Are you all Chafe, and no Wheat? What is the form to the power, says
the Lord? Is not my word as a fire and a hammer, to beat down, and to burn up?

IV. You that imitate Peter when he went to the Gentiles to preach the word in
Cornelius's house, and the holy Ghost sell on them, at the preaching of the
word, to show that God would make choice of the Gentiles, as well as the Jews,
and seeing that they received the holy Ghost as well as they of the
circumcision, none ought to forbid them of being partakers of the privilege of
Christ, as well as the Jews; and they were baptized as well as they: But where
is your vision that Peter had before he went to the Gentiles? Where is your
power to give the holy Ghost? are you not sayers, but no doers, having a form,
but want the power? Acts 10. chapt.

V. You that imitate the Apostles way of baptizing with water, but cannot give
the holy Ghost? Where have any of you sold your possessions, and laid the price
down at the Apostles feet, as the baptized people did in Acts 4. and suffer
none to want, but have all things common, as they had? Act. 4. 31, 32, to the
end.

VI. You that are baptized with water, but want the gift of the holy Ghost, How
can you cast out and deliver up to Satan, by what power do you that? Can Satan
cast out Satan? Or a Kingdom divided against it self, how can it stand?

VII. You dippers and sprinklers, why do you differ, one dip, another sprinkle?
And what have you to do to busy your selves to press people to that thing, as
necessary to salvation, and you have not power to establish them? When did any
receive the holy Ghost and power from on high, by laying on of your hands; give
over your dipping, and your sprinkling, you Immitators, that have the form,
but wants the power: And return me your Answer to these few Questions
propounded to you.

For Christ has not sent me to Baptize but to lay open decetps and deceivers:
and to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words least the Cross of Christ
should be of none effect, for the preaching of the Cross is to them that
perish foolishness, but unto us which are saved, it is the power of God 1.
Cor. 1. 17. 18. verse.

Richard Farnworth.

The baptism of Christ we own, which all the Saints were baptized into, which
was, By one Spirit into one Body, as in 1 Cor. 12. 13. and by this baptism we
do witness the washing away of sin, not only the washing away the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God; but sprinkling of
Infants we deny, which there is no Scripture for, And all you, who from your
imaginations do imitate John's baptism, and so go into the water, and say, You
are believers, and have right to the Ordinances of Christ, but you to be
believers we deny, who are not yet come to repentance, and your water baptism,
which is but an imitation from the letter: for the Lord never sent you forth;
nor commanded you neither to preach, nor baptize, as they did whom you go about
to imitate, who are not yet come to repentance, nor to the first Principle of
the doctrine of Christ; nor to own the light of Christ in your consciences; who
should exercise them, and lead you to wait upon God, and lead you to
repentance, and the faith of believers you know not, for the mystery of faith
is held in a pure conscience, 1. Tim. 3. 9, which you cannot witness, which
hates the light of Christ, which should exercise your consciences, and so your
minds and consciences is defiled, and with that mind you talk of faith, and of
the Ordinances of Christ, and of water baptism, which serves unto us for a
figure, as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 3. 21, And Jesus Christ was baptized by
John by water, that he might fulfill all righteousness, Mat. 3. 15, And John
was a Prophet, and Christ is the end of the Prophets; and John's baptism was but
a figure; for he said, he did but baptize with water but Christ is the end of
all figures, types and shaddows, and did fulfill them; for he fulfilled all
righteousness and John's ministry and John's baptism, and he that fulfilled all
righteousness, the same baptizeth, which John did bear witness unto, and all
men came unto him, John. 3. 16. but he baptized none with water: but this is a
mystery to the dark mind, which knows not the baptism of Christ, nor John's
doctrine, nor Jesus Christ the true light which enlighteneth every one that
comes into the world, which John bare witness unto, Job. 1, 9 but goes to hold
up the types and figures which Christ came to fulfill, and so deniest Christ to
be come in the Flesh to fulfill all righteousness; and so thou art an
Antichrist, who holds up the figures which Christ came to fulfill, and so thou
denies the Scriptures and Christ, who said he was to fulfill all righteousness;
and the Saints baptism thou art ignorant of, which is, By one Spirit into one
Body, 1 Cor. 12. 13, And Paul who was a Minister of Christ and Preached the
Gospel, did bring many into this baptism, and he was not sent to baptize with
water, but to preach the Gospel, and all the Churches which he preached unto,
came to witness Christ's baptism with the holy Ghost and with fire, by one
Spirit into one Body, and was baptized into Christ; who was the Head of the
Body, Romans 6, 3. and by this baptism we are thus washed from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit; but your imitated baptism of water we deny, who live in your
filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, whose minds and consciences are defiled; but
the baptism of Christ we own, which purifies our consciences from dead works,
and keeps our minds undefiled by the washing of generation; and renewing of the
Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5.

For the word Sacrament, there is no such Scripture which speaks of a
Sacrament; therefore we do deny you and your Sacrament, and your bread and
wine, which is carnal, and seeds the carnel which must die, and your Communion
is in that which is carnal in the creatures, and drunkards, and swearers have
fellowship together with you in those things, and all liars, covetous ones,
prophain and idolatrous ones eats of the bread, and drinks of the cup, and sits
at the Table, which is the Table of devils, and this is your Sacrament, which
stands without in carnal bread and wine, and feeds the carnal, which oppresses
and murders the seed of God within you, and you say, Christ has left that as
an Ordinance for you to practice: which is false, which we deny; but the supper
of the Lord we own, The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? and the broad which we break is it not the Communion of
Christ? for we being many are one bread, for we are all, partakers of that one
bread 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 21. 22. And this is the bread which came down from
heaven, he that eats thereof shall never die; and this bread we all eat of,
and this cup we all drink of, and this is that which is practiced and commanded
in the Church of Christ, and so we sit at the table of Christ, and cannot sit
nor have fellowship with the table of devils: and they who sit at your table
and your Sacrament, and eats of your bread, and drink of your wine, they die,
for it is not the bread of life, and you who eats and drinks it, does not
discern the Lords body, for it is spiritual, and your Sacrament is carnal, And
so you eat and drink damnation to your selves not discerning the Lords body,
feeding the carnal with the carnal; and so we deny your Sacrament to be an
Ordinance of Christ, or the Supper of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 29.

All who stumbles at the light are without and are not come to repentance, and
so all who stumbles at the light, stumbles at repentance. All who stumbles at
the light, stumbles at the door, the door is known by the light which is come
from Christ: And all who stumbles at the light, stumbles at the way, for Christ
has enlightened every one, that with the light he might see the way (which is
Christ) to the Father: So all who stumbles at the light, stumbles at the
Scriptures, and does no know the meaning of them; for that eye that is turned
from the light is the blind and leads into the ditch; and is to be condemned
with the light from Christ: All who stumbles at the light never knew Hope which
purifies, nor Faith which purifies, nor the belief which overcomes the world;
but he walks in darkness, and does not know whether he goes, and the Children
of light which dwells in the light, to him their condition is unknown for he
hates that which they walk in: So with that he is condemned, and to you all
this is the word of God: And all who stumbles at the light, stumbles at the
Prophets words, and cannot underst and the words of them, spoken from the light
which in them was; And all who stumbles at the light stumbles at the Apostles
words, which were declared from the light which was made manifest in all
Consciences which ministered to the Spirit in Prison: So all who stumbles at the
light, they are to be condemned with the light from the life of the Prophets
and Apostles, which dwelt in the light with the rude wicked world, And here
every one snall witness his condemnation just, and see it just, with the light
which shows him his evil deeds, and Christ's words true, and to his own
condemnation.

To all who denies the teachings of God in spirit, and would keep people in the
teachings of men from the Letter, ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth.
1. Whatand where that new Jerusalem is which came down from heaven, in which
there is no night, neither needs it light of sun, moon, or candle, but the Lord
God is the light thereof: and into which shall in no wise enter any thing that
defiles, works abomination, or makes a lie, but whose names are written in
the book of life?

2. What and where that Sion is, to which all Nations shall Isa. 2. Mich. 4.
flow, where the Lord shall teach of his ways, and from whence the Law of God
and his word shall go forth; after which they shall learn war no more, but
shall say, Come let us walk in the light of the Lord.

3. What and where that Covenant is wherein the Lord will Jer. 31. Heb. 8.!
write his Law in peoples hearts, and put it in their inward parts: and they
shall no more teach every one their neighbor and brother, saying, Know the
Lord, for all shall know him from the least to the greatest; and whether any
may expect to come into that Covenant in these days?

4. What and where that unction and anointing is, by which the Saints knew all
things, and needed not that any should teach them, but as that anointing taught
them of all things which was true, and in it was no lie? and whether it be of
the same effect in these days?

5. What and where that comforter is, which does reprove the John 16.
world of sin, of righteousness and of judgment, and does guide into all
truths, and shows things to come, and shows the things of Christ, and glorifies
him: and whether that comforter may be expected in these days?

6. Whether any of the Saints of God may expect, and wait Jer. 23.
to receive his word from his own mouth immediately, as all the messengers of
God did in all ages: or there must be no word now but the letter taken out of
books and which has been formerly spoken to others?

7. Whether any may wait for that promise fulfilling in these Isa. 54. 13. John
6. 45.
days, that all the children of God shall be taught of God; and whether that
teaching be sufficient to salvation, without any humane help or learning from
man?

8. What and where that word is that people shall hear behind them, saying,
This is the way, walk in it, when they turn to the right hand, or to the left,
and what that teacher in the midst of Isa. 30.
them is, which shall be no more in corners: and whether any may expect that
word and Teacher in these days?

9. What that word of says is, which needs none to say, Who Deuteronomy. 30. 14. Romans
10.
shall ascend up into heaven, or into the depth, to fetch Christ from above, or
below; but which was nigh in the heart, which the Apostles preached to them
which had it in their hearts: and whether the same word be not in the hearts of
people now, though they mind it not?

10. What that voice of Christ is which his sheep knows, and John 10.
how they come to know it from all other voices, and which all that hear it,
will no more hear the voice of a stranger, hireling, or thief, but by that
voice are brought to follow Churist alone; and whether Christ's sheep hear the
same voice now, and know it from all false voices?

11. Whas that way in the wilderness is; which is called the Isa. 35.
way of holiness, which the unclean shall not pass over, but it shall be for
the wayfering man, and fools shall not err therein: in which way the redeemed
shall walk, and the ransomed of the Lord shall come up to Sion; and whether any
may expect to find that way who are strangers and fools in these days?

12. What that Ministration of spirit is which is given to every 1 Cor. 12. 7.
one to profit withal, and whether there can be any profiting without it: and
whether it be not of it self an infallible guide in all the ways of God
according to its manifestation?

13. What and where that worship of God in spirit and truth John 4. 23, 24.
is, which God alone seeks to be worshipped in; and whether any can worship in
spirit, but he who is born of the spirit; and whether he that is born of the
spirit, needs any other guide in that spiritual worship, but that spirit of
which he is born, according to its measure, and whether such worshippers have
not been, and are now different from all other worships, and therefore hated by
them as in all ages?

14. What and where that light is which enlightens every one John 1. 0. John 3.
that comes into the world, and is the condemnation of all that loves darkness,
because of their evil deeds; and whether there be any other condemnation but
this light to all who believe not in it, but hate it?

15. What that Law of the spirit of life is, which after Paul's Romans 8.
warfare did set him free from the law of sin and death; which formerly had
lead him captive into the law of sin and made him wretched; and whether any now
in these days may look to be set free by the same Law of the spirit of life
from the said wretched condition who find themselves in it?

16. What that grace of God is which brings salvation, and has appeared to all
men, and teaches the Saints to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts; and
whether it would not teach all men the same, if they did not turn it into
lasciviousness, and they need no other teacher?

J. N

The light in your conscience the true Teacher.
FRiends, You that look out at Teachers, without you consider what you have bin
doing all this while, and what you have learned, you will see yourselves to be
strangers from the Covenant of promise, by which all com to know the Lord, and
need not teach one another; this Covenant of peace you are strangers from who
own nor the light, which Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the
world withal to teach you, if you have the ight which Christ does enlighten
every one with, which shows you sin, and evil, and the deceits of your hearts,
and how you have spen your time, and how you spend it, and whom you have
served, and whom you do serve, that light is your teacher to teach
righteousness, for it is righteousness that light will be your condemnation
hating it, and you set up such teachers as hate this light, that are called of
men masters, have the chief places in the Assemblies, which Christ cried woe
against, and so does not own that Christ which the Scripture speaks of, but
sets up such as Christ cried woe against: as you may try your spirits, read
Mat. 23. If you will own the Scyiptures, and if ever you will own God you must
own that light in your consciences which Christ has enlightened you with: for it
is the eye, and if ever you see the Church which is in God the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, it must be with this light which Christ has enlightened you
with but hating this light, you run to the teachers of the world, and worships
of this world and so from God and the Church in God, and this light will be
your condemnation that hate it. Now if you love this light it will reach you
when you lie in bed, and show you where your heart is, and what your thoughts
are upon, and all the deceits of your hearts, and bring you to stand in the
council of God, to receive instruction from God, and direction how to walk
before him; and as this light does show you sin, and the deceits of your
hearts, stand still in the light, and Will nothing but wait for the power of
God to stand against that nature which the light of Christ discovers in you,
and here is your first step to peace.

G. F.
And eternally you shall witness what I speak, For to that in your consciences
do I speak.

