To the supreme Authority the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND; Some
Considerations about the Excise of 4 s. 8 d. per Barrel upon SOAP, humbly
offered by the Sope-makers of London, who lately presented their Petition to
your Honors.
I. THat the laying Excise upon Soap, is a requiring Excise for the labor of
their hands, they having paid Excise before for their Potashes, Oil and Tallow,
being the materials whereof they make their Soap, and it has been always
reputed of ill consequence to discourage Labor and industry by taking away the
profit that the Labourer expects.

II. That the Sope-makers pay Excise for a Contingency, a certain profit to the
State out of their probable hopes that they shall make some profit of their
Labor; so that after they have made their Soap, if the price of their
Materials fall (as is ordinary) they then pay Excise only because they have
taken pains; for they lose by their Soap; and besides, they run no small hazard
in their Boiling their Soap, which makes their profit the more uncertain.

III. The Sopemakers have harder measure (in paying Excise both for their
Materials, and their Soap) then most of the Tradesmen of the Commonwealth:
most that pay Excise for their Materials, have the benefit to themselves of
their own Art and Industry, in changing those Materials into other forms: Now
certainly, it is Justice and best Policy to lay the burdens of charge upon the
people, in such a way, that all men may equally bear their proportion

IV. It Is almost impossible to impose the Excise upon Soap equally upon all
Sopemakers, because near half the Soap that is now made is boiled in Holes and
Corners in small Panns, for which no Excise is paid; and so the burden lies
only upon the most visible Traders, whose places of Boiling are known and
always open; and hereby those Sopemakers that bear the greatest share in other
Public payments, have their Trades spoiled by those that pay little or none.
And this was thought a good ground to take off the greatest part of the Excise
of Gold and Silver Wire, for that it was drawn in holes, and little Excise paid
for it by most.

V. The Excise of 4 s. 8 d. per Barrel upon Soap, is a gain so great to those
that can Boil privately, and steal it, that it is worth the cost to erect
private boiling Pans whereby they will be more in use daily, and the Excise be no
considerable advantage to the State, though a destruction to some that have
faithfully served them; and thus it appeared in the Case of the Refiners of
Gold and Silver, that two Thirds of the Excise of Gold and Silver Wire being
taken off, there would be more money advanced by it to the State then was
before.

VI. That since the Excise of Soap was raised from 3 s. per Barrel unto 4 s. 8
d. the Revenue of it has bin less then it was before; for now men will run
more hazard to steal it, and now the Trade of those whose boiling is most
visible is decayed; and if this continue, will come to nothing.

VII. Soap is most necessary for all sorts of people next to Victuals, and must
be used by the poorest people; and it has been thought Justice and Policy to
lay the burden of Excise upon such Commodities as the poor are least
necessitated to use, and not a double burden upon the most necessary
Commodities.

And though we desire to preserve the Trade of the Commonwealth and our
selves, yet we desire not to diminish the Revenue of the Commonwealth in the
Excise, and therefore we humbly propose,

That 12d. per pound may be imposed upon all the imported materials, whereof
Soap is made; whereby all that buy the materials, shall equally bear the
burden, and those whose names are hereunto subscribed will engage, that in case
they or some of them, may be entrusted to collect the Excise of those imported
materials, and have such allowance per pound therefore, as the Commissioners
for Excise confess by their Certificate it costs them, then they will advance
the Revenue of that Excise of the materials, to a value equal to what has bin
advanced these two last years from the Excise, both of Soap and the materials
of it.

Yet they beg not the Office, but humbly leave it to the wisdom of the
Commissioners entrusted therein, to employ such Officers as they think fit to
Collect it, only they propose so to engage to secure the Parliament, that they
shall suffer no prejudice in their Revenue, by condescending to their just
desires in taking off the Excise of Soap, which they humbly crave may be
speedily done for the Reasons offered.

John Hayes Ia. Baker Tho. Howlett William Hester Robert Burfoote Robert
Drinkwater John Hutchest John Hardwicke Tho. Pulteney Roger Pears Caleb
Phinnies Tho. Bromley Edw. Leader John Wolcott. John Lilburne Edw. Whittwell
Simon Weeden Richard Cox Thomas Woodstock Edw. Halley



