A SUPPLEMENT TO THE Serious consideration of the Oath of the KINGS Supremacy;
Published October 1660. IN, First, Some consideration OF THE Oath of
Allegiance. Secondly, Vindicating of the consideration of the Oaths of the
Kings Supremacy and Allegiance, from the exceptions of Richard Hubberthorn,
Samuel Fisher, Samuel Hodgkin, and some others against them, in the points of
swearing in some case, and the matters of those Oaths.

By John Tombs B. D.

Mat. 22. 21. Render therefore to Caesar the things tbat are Caesar's, and to
God the things that are Gods. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, living in
Aldersgate Street next door to the sign of the Peacock.

To the Christian Readers.
I Need not tell you again what may be seen in my Epistle to the Readers before
my book of the serious consideration of the oath of the Kings Supremacy, how I
was induced to compose and publish it, conceiving it to be a work of charity,
to others, and a necessary duty to my self, as circumstances then concurred. I
have found not a little fruit of my labor therein, by satisfying many that I
know, and more (as I am told) whom I know not, of the lawfulness of taking such
oaths, as are therein asserted, and thereby preventing the ruin of themselves
and families; though I find by the opposition of some, that it has proved an
offense to others, insomuch that I was told, that I had thereby given occasion
of the alienation of many hundreds from me, of whose peace and welfare I was,
and still am, very tender. Besides, what exceptions have been made in private
conference, (which I have in such conferences endeavored to remove) Richard
Hubberthorn, Samuel Fisher, and some others, have in print opposed that
writing. Richard Hubberthorn intitles his writing, Antichristianism reproved,
as if my book had contained Antichristianism: which is a term that affrights
many weak Christians, and is therefore by those that craftily endeavor to
uphold, and further divisions put upon those actions, doctrines and writings,
which they would scare less discerning souls from, and so separate them from
others, and fasten them to their party, though it be for the most part but a
frivolous imputation, and a gross calumny. Antichristianism according to the
Apostle John, (who only of all the holy Writers, uses the term Antichrist)
being a greater matter then some errors, or evil in some points of practice, to
wit, a denial of the father and the son, 1 John 2. 22, 23. not confessing Jesus
Christ come in the flesh, 1 John 4. 3, 4. 2 John 7. of which sort my defending
the lawfulness of some swearing is not. And to omit his nonsense, in saying,
the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles is justified against swearing, meaning
my doctrine of swearing, where he says, that it is there proved according to
the Scriptures, that all my six Propositions for the lawfulness of swearing,
are both against Christ and his Apostles doctrine; It must needs be false, since
he has not brought any Scriptures against the three last Propositions. As for
his Epistle to me, that which he insinuates by his expostulations with me, of
dividing my self from mine own people, of teaching people to swear first one
way, and then another; of my being long a hiding my self under so many false
covers, is the foam and froth of his railing spirit; of which he, and others of
the Quakers, seem by their frequent venting reproaches, unjust censurings and
revilings, to have gotten an habit, and are more like Antichristianism, then
any of my doctrines, who preach not up that which Christ and his Apostles deny,
but endeavor to clear their words from mistake. Nor was my writing indigested,
as if God did not brook it, though I confessed, in respect of the composure of
it, there was want of such accurate digesting, that is, framing in respect of
words, method and matter, as the thing required, by reason of my shortness of
time, and yet there was no cause for Samuel Fisher to term it a toy, as he does
in the margin of his Epistle to the Reader, before his impetuous, though
impotent book, entitled the Rusticks alarm to the Rabbis, so terming Dr. Owen,
Mr. Danson, Mr. Richard Baxter, and my self. I confess I had an intention (and
began to draw up a writing to that purpose) to publish a fuller Treatise about
swearing, having in Catechetical Lectures, somewhat largely handled the general
nature of an Oath, the several forms and rites of swearing, the lawfulness of
swearing, the sorts of Oaths, the rules, obligation, urging, dispensation of
Oaths: But my late continual molestations, imprisonment, restraint from my
Ministry in the place where I was seated thirty years before, and the
uncertainty of my dwelling, have hindered me from prosecuting thereof, and other
works, which I hoped to accomplish for public good: nor am I yet secured from
the like molestation and uncertainties, and therefore know not what I shall do,
or resolve to do therein. Wherefore I have, being requested thereto, published
this little Supplement, whereby my aim is to benefit others, though I find (as
I have always done) the clearing of truth in this, to have occasioned many hard
censures of me, and much injury to me, which the Lord forgive. Yet I hope I
shall truly say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 15. And I will very gladly spend
and be spent for you, though the more I love you, the less I be loved. As for
those that find any benefit by my labors in this matter, or any other, I
request them that they would return thanks to God for it; and that all would in
their prayers to God for me, help me, who am

Their brother and servant in Christ, JOHN TOMBS.
London, March 6. 1660.
The Oath of Obedience in the Act for discovery and repressing Popish
Recusants, 30. of Jac. c. 4. commonly called the Oath of ALLEGIANCE.
IAB. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare in my
Conscience before God and the world; that our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, is
lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries; and that the Pope, neither of himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority, to depose the King, or to dispose any of his
Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade
or annoy him, or his Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of their
Allegiance and Obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to any of
them to bear Arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence or hurt to his
Majesty's Royal Person, State or Government, or to any of his Majesty's
subjects within his Majesty's Dominions. Also I do swear from my heart, that
notwithstanding any declaration or sentence of Excommunication or deprivation
made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope or his successors, or by
any authority, derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his See, against
the said King, his heirs or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects
from their obedience: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majesty, his
heirs and successors, and him and them will defend to the uttermost of my
power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made
against his or their persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason or color of
any such sentence or declaration, or otherwise, and will do my best endeavor
to disclose, and make known unto his Majesty, his heirs and successors, all
treasons and traitorous conspiracies, which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him or any of them. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest and abjure as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and
position, That Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do
believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope, nor any person
whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I
acknowledge by good and full authority, to be lawfully ministered unto me, and
do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary. And all these things
I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these express
words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sense, and
understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mental evasion,
or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and
acknowledgement heartily, willingly and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian.

So help me God.
The words of King JAMES in his Apology for the Oath of ALLEGIANCE, p. 46, etc.
in his answer to Cardinal Bellarmine's Letter.
AS the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference between Papists,
and them of our profession: so was this Oath [of Allegiance] which Bellarmine
would seem to impugn, ordained for making a difference between the civilly
obedient Papists, and the perverse disciples of the Powdertreason. In King
Henry the eighths time was the Oath of Supremacy first made: by him were Thomas
Moor and Roffensis put to death, partly for refusing of it. From his time till
now, have all the Princes of this Land, professing this Religion, successively
in effect maintained the same: and in that Oath only is contained the Kings
absolute power to be judge over all persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical;
excluding all foreign powers and Potentates to be Judges within his Dominions:
Whereas this last made Oath contains no such matter, only meddling with the
civil obedience of subjects to their Sovereign in mere temporal causes. And
that the injustice as well as the error of Bellarmine's gross mistaking in
this point, may yet be more clearly discovered; I have also thought good to
insert here immediately after the Oath of Supremacy, the contrary conclusions
to all the Points and Articles, whereof this other late Oath does consist:
whereby it may appear, what unreasonable and rebellious points he would drive
my subjects unto, by refusing the whole body of that Oath, as it is conceived.
For he that shall refuse to take this Oath, must of necessity hold all or some
of these Propositions following.

1. That I King James am not the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of all other
my Dominions.

2. That the Pope by his own authority may depose me. If not by his own
authority, yet by some other authority of the Church, or of the Sea of Rome. If
not by some other authority of the Church and See of Rome, yet by other means
with others help he may depose me.

3. That the Pope may dispose of my Kingdoms and Dominions.

4. That the Pope may give authority to some foreign Prince to invade my
Dominions.

5. That the Pope may discharge my subjects of their obedience and allegiance
to me.

6. That the Pope may give license to one or more of my subjects to bear arms
against me.

7. That the Pope may give leave to my subjects to offer violence to my person,
or to my Government, or to some of my subjects.

8. That if the Pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose me, my subjects
are not to bear faith and allegiance to me.

9. If the Pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose me, my subjects are
not bound to defend with all their power, my Person and Crown.

10. If the Pope shall give out any sentence of excommunication or deprivation
against me, my subjects by reason of that sentence, are not bound to reveal all
conspiracies and treasons against me, which shall come to their hearing and
knowledge.

11. That it is not heretical and detestable to hold, that Princes being
excommunicated by the Pope, may be either deposed or killed by their subjects,
or any other.

12. That the Pope has power to absolve my subjects from this Oath, or from
some part thereof.

13. That this Oath is not administered to my subjects, by a full and lawful
authority.

14. That this Oath is to be taken with equivocation, mental evasion, or secret
reservation; and not with the heart and good will sincerely, in the faith of a
Christian man.

These are the true and natural branches of the body of this Oath.

In the book entitled [ God and the King] imprinted at London, 1615. by King
James his special privilege and command, p. 27. is thus said. The matter or
main subject of this Oath, which is the principal thing whereof I conceive you
desire to have a more distinct and full understanding, may to this purpose be
resolved into these ensuing assertions.

1. Our Sovereign Lord King James, is the lawful King of this Kingdom, and of
all other his Majesty's Dominions and Countries.

2. The Pope neither by his own authority, nor by any other authority of the
Church, or of the Sea of Rome, nor by any other means, with any others help can
depose his Majesty.

3. The Pope cannot dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions.

4. The Pope cannot give authority to any foreign Prince to invade his
Dominions.

5. The Pope cannot discharge his subjects of their allegiance unto his majesty.

6. The Pope cannot give license to one or more of his subjects to bear arms
against him.

7. The Pope cannot give leave to any of his subjects to offer violence unto
his Royal person, or to his Government, or to any of his Majesty's subjects.

8. Although the Pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose his Majesty, or
absolve his subjects from their obedience, notwithstanding they are to bear
faith and true allegiance unto his Majesty.

9. If the Pope shall by sentence excommunicate or depose his Majesty;
nevertheless his subjects are bound to defend his Person and Crown against all
attempts and conspiracies whatsoever.

10. If the Pope shall give out any sentence of excommunication or deprivation
against his Majesty; notwithstanding his subjects are bound to reveal all
conspiracies and treasons against his Majesty, which shall come to their
hearing and knowledge.

11. It is heretical and detestable to hold, That Princes being excommunicate
by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or any other.

12. The Pope has not power to absolve his Majesty's subjects from their oath
of allegiance, or any part thereof.

When Cardinal Bellarmine disguised under the name of Matthaeus Tortus, as his
Chaplain took upon him to reply to King James his Apology for the Oath of
Allegiance, and would have it believed, that by that Oath was intended the
denying the Popes Ecclesiastical power, which he claims, and is with Papists an
Article of their Faith; Lancelot Andrews then Bishop of Chichester, after of
Ely and Winchester, then very eminent for his learning and repute at Court,
answers him in his book entitled Tortura Torti, in words in Latin, which I have
Englished thus.

Art thou well in thy wits who babblest these things? That thou an Italian,
ignorant of our language, should understand the Oath, that the Author who is
skilled in the language, as being his own, native, proper, should not
understand it? Whence art thou to us a new interpreter of Laws? yea whence art
thou an interpreter of our Laws, which thou did not make? It belongs verily
to them to interpret to whom it belongs to make Laws; yet I say not that only,
but this also. Is there for this reason any mortal man that understands the
intention of the Law, and the Lawmakers himself, (for the same person was
author of the Law and of the book, nor wast thou ignorant of this) the
Lawmakers (I say) himself, should not understand his intention concerning his
Law? Thou will never bring it to pass, that he should be ignorant of that which
he himself would to himself, when he made the Law, when he made the Oath. He is
best privy to his own intention. But his intention was that he might be secure
of the fidelity and constancy of his own subjects, yea this was his only
intention, no other man knows this, (for the hearts of men he knows not) only
he who has known the Law, knows what he requires in his Law.

King James in his Catalogue of Tortus lies, at the end of his premonition to
all Christian Princes, says, The Puritans do not decline the Oath of
Supremacy, but do daily take it, neither ever refused it. And the same
Supremacy is defended by Calvin himself, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 20.

Bishop Andrews in the book forenamed, p. 110. The Puritans of their own accord
take the Oath of Supremacy, and have often professed, and that in books
published by themselves, that this is a mere calumny, that they abhor the Oath
of Supremacy, neither did they ever decline that Oath. But if there were at any
time any scraple in them, it was about the term, it was not about the thing.
The head of the Church since it is said of Christ, seemed to them a higher
title, then that it might be given to any mortal man: so for a while they stuck
at the giving that title, now they stick not: Concerning the thing it self,
concerning the Kingly authority they have always fully professed.

Quakers do inveigh against my book, entitled A serious consideration of the
Oath of the Kings Supremacy, because it defends the lawfulness of some
swearing, yet Samuel Fisher in his book, entitled The Rusticks alarm to the
Rabbis, Exercit. 1. chap. 3. p. 48. says, I should (God knows) please my self
much more to sit down in silence. p. 61. I affirm here before God and all men;
and the humble petition of some called Anabaptists, prisoners in Maidstone,
dated January 25. says thus; Yet (God is our witness, who is the searcher of
all hearts) we deny not this Oath, because we would not yield due subjection
and obedience unto thee and thy authority; for this we say, in the presence of
him that shall judge the quick and the dead, we do without any deceit, promise
to live peaceably under thy Government, and in case any thing should be by thee
commanded in spiritual matters, wherein we cannot obey, we shall not then take
up any carnal or temporal weapon against thee or thy authority, but patiently
suffer such punishment as shall be inflicted on us for our consciences. But the
using of these speeches [God knows, I affirm before God, God is our witness,
this we say in the presence of him that shall judge the quick and dead] as an
appeal to Gods contestation, is plain swearing. So that while these men, and
more of the same mind do speak against all swearing, they indeed practice some
swearing. And those of Maidstone, who offer an engagement taken before some
Justice of the Peace in a solemn manner, with calling God to witness of the
truth of what they say, do offer to swear or take an oath. The lawfulness of
which, and particularly the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and my writing
about the former, I shall now endeavor to vindicate from the writings and
sayings against them, which have occurred to me.

Richard Hubberthorn having recited my first Argument for my first Proposition,
thus, That is not wholly evil, about the use of which some directions are given
by God; but God gives directions about the use of swearing, Jer. 4. 2. Ergo:
Answers, By the same argument may it as well be proved, that the Christians and
believers in Christ may be circumcised, offer incense, burnt offerings and
sacrifices, because for the use of it God gave some directions, and therefore
it is lawful. But as circumcision, incense, burnt offerings and sacrifices of
the law, is ended in Christ; so is the oath which was among the Jews, in him
ended also to the believers, and by him forbidden: for as it was said in old
time thou shall swear, and shall perform thy oath to the Lord; but Christ in
the 5. of Mat. making mention of the Jews oath which God gave once direction
for, yet says, Swear not at all. Here Christ puts an end, not only to
frivolous and vain oaths, but to the true oaths, which the Jews was once
commanded of God to swear, for these oaths are they which Christ's words has
relation to, for he came to end the Jews worships and oaths, who is the oath of
God. Christ the truth and righteousness of God says, Swear not at all, which
ends the Jews which was to swear in truth and righteousness.

To which I reply, Had not Samuel Fisher told me in the place forementioned,
that my book is answered by Richard Hubberthorn, I should not have thought it
worth while to reply to it, there being in it so much defect of sense and
reason, as makes it inconsiderable: But since he mentions my book, as scarce
worth any further answer then that of Hubberthorn, it seems he esteems it of
some moment. And therefore I say, that 1. Richard Hubberthorn leaves out of the
proof of my minor [ as in the third Commandment (which is undoubtedly moral)]
which words show that I mean my major proposition of moral actions. 2. He
supposes that swearing allowed by God in the Old Testament, which Christ
corrects, was not only frivolous and vain oaths, but the true oaths which the
Jews were commanded, and Christ was to end, who is Gods oath. But he considers
not that swearing was common to all Nations, as Philistines, Genesis 21. 31. and
26. 28. Syrians, Genesis 31. 53, etc. Nor is Christ any where termed in Scripture,
Gods oath, nor an oath made worship peculiar to the Jews; nor a shadow or
ceremony which might typifie Christ. Now my major proposition being (as the
words show I understood it) thus expressed, [That action belonging to manners,
common to all Nations, and not proper to the Jews, about the use of which God
gives some directions, is not wholly evil] is firm and unshaken by the
instances of R. H. which are not of moral, but ceremonial Rites, which ended in
Christ, but not so the moral commandment, of which sort swearing is, and so may
be lawful.

2. To my second Argument, from Psalm. 63. 11. his answer is, Only that David
was in the old covenant of the law, but Christ in the new Covenant bids; Swear
not at all.

Hereto I reply, This answer presupposes that an oath was appropriated to the
Covenant of the law. But this is false, since it was, in other Nations besides
Israelites, customary to swear even before the law, as the instances in Genesis
and elsewhere show. As for his flings at hireling Priests and hypocrites, I let
them pass as being only reviling, in general terms, in which is commonly guile
and slander. To the instances which I bring for the lawfulness of some
swearing, and urging to swear out of the Old Testament, he says, all these
were under the first Covenant, and in that which Christ called the old time,
Mat. 5. and proves nothing that Christians in the new Covenant should swear. To
which I reply, 1. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, were before the law, and they
took oaths of Nations which were not under the law. 2. In moral things the
commands and examples of the old Testament, are rules to us still, Mat. 7. 12.
Romans 13. 8, 9. Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. James 2. 8, 10. 11.

Nor does he say any thing to the Angels swearing, Rev. 10. 6. but this, that
Christ says, Swear not all, which does not at all avoid the objection, that
the Angel knew Christ's words do not forbid all swearing, otherwise he would not
have sworn at all.

But to the instances of Paul's adjuring and swearing, he writes somewhat more.
To the allegation of 1 These. 5. 27. where the word signifies, I swear you by
the Lord, he says, 1. This is the long and thick mist of darkness, which has
been long kept over the understandings of people, that when the plain Scripture
will not prove their ends and intents, then they tell the people it is
otherwise in the Greek or Hebrew. I reply, 1. It is no darkning of peoples
understandings by latter translations, to mend or to add to former
translations, since as in all other Writings and Arts, Dies diem docet, One day
teaches another; latter Commentators and Interpreters without arrogance,
refine former. Nor does this darken, but inlighten men's understandings, nor
give any occasion to doubt of the faithfulness of former Translators, but only
shows the imperfection of their knowledge. Nor is there any just cause why for
this reason men should waver in their faith, the main doctrines of faith and
manners being by common consent expressed either in the same words, or words of
the same meaning, and if any should deprave them, the variety of Copies and
translations would remedy it.

2. Says Hubberthorn, Did not the Translator of the Bible understand Greek as
well as John Tombs?

Answ. Yes, and as John Tombs understood it, which he told his Reader, that
the Greek word was translated, I charge you by the Lord, or adjure you as it is
in the margin.

3. Says he, Or are we not to believe the Scripture, as it spoaks, till again
it be translated by him?

Answ. Yes no doubt, and this place the rather, because it is translated by him
no otherwise then by the Translators, only the word [ adjure] which is made an
English word out of the Latin, is explained, by, I swear you by the Lord, I
urge, or put an oath on you by the Lord, or as Samuel Fisher says, it
signifies, I bind you by oath.

4. Says he, It is I oblige or charge you in the presence of God, etc. I
reply, it is, I charge or oblige you by oath or swearing, not only in the
presence of God, but also by the Lord.

5. Says he, seeing John Tombs says he swore them, he might have declared in
what manner they were sworn, seeing Paul was at Athens when he wrote to
Thessaloniea.

I reply, He might understand how Paul at Athens could swear them at
Thessalonica, if he understood how Saul charged by oath, or adjured, or bound
by oath the people and Jonathan his son, though absent and ignorant, 1 Samuel 14.
24, 28, 42.

6. Says he, John Tombs makes the like charge to be in 1 Timothy 6. 13. which
according to the Greek he would make an oath; but it is I injoin or command
thee before God, not putting an oath on them, or causing them to swear: And 2 Timothy 4. 1. not that he took him sworn, or put an oath on him, but did charge
him.

I reply, I said not they were the same, but like charges, yet differing, 1. In
that the word (...), 1 These. 5. 27. does expressly include an oath, or swearing,
which I confess (...) I command or injoin does not, yet (...) I witness before
God, 2 Timothy 4. 1. does come near it. 2. That 1 These. 5. 27. (...) in the
accusative case, cannot be understood any otherwise then thus [by the Lord]
which is a form of swearing more plain then that, 2 Timothy 4. 1. though it be
like it. But Samuel Fisher says, nor does John Tombs insisting on the Greek
word (...) 1 These. 5. 27. add a jor to his proof; for howbeit it is ordinarily
used to signify to adjure or bind one by oath, yet (being as some suppose of
(...) to confine, or (as some) of (...) a bound or limit) it originally
signifies to bind, limit, confine, oblige any way by word or promise, as well
as oath. And J. T. confessing Paul's charge in that place, and 1 Timothy 6. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1. to be alike, therein confutes himself however. For the words (...)
and (...) there used, are no more then to engage before some witness (God or
man) or solemnly to command or charge, and not to swear one, and cannot be
taken so strictly as to adjure, though (...) may be taken in the moderate
sense, i. e. any way to oblige, as well as in that rigid way of swearing.

I reply, That the rule of expounding or interpreting words, is not the
derivation of the word, which often is very uncertain, but the use (which is
Vis and norma loquendi, the force and rule of speaking) and there being no
instance given by him of any place, where it is used in any author of obliging,
in his moderate sense, without an oath, and he confessing that, it is
ordinarily used to signify to adjure or bind by oath, and it being I charge or
adjure by the Lord, it can be taken in no other sense then swearing or binding
by oath; nor does my alleging 1 Timothy 6. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1. as like charges,
abate any whit the force of my proof, since I do not call them the same, or the
one as express for charging by oath, as the other.

In my fourth Argument I alleged, 2 Cor. 1. 18, 23. and 11. 31. and 12. 19. 1
Cor. 15. 31. to prove the use of swearing by Paul in Gospel Times. To the first
only Richard Hubberthorn says thus, Now those that minds this Scripture, may
see that Paul does only justify Christ's words in keeping to yea and nay,
saying, that with him it was not yea and nay, for says he, ver. 18. but as God
is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay. And ver. 19. for the son of
God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me and Silvanus,
and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, for all the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him Amen. So that this Scripture is so far from bringing people to oaths
and swearing, that he labors to bring them all to yea and nay in all things,
and so to Christ the substance, in whom all the promises of God are yea; so
that the Apostle might well use these words, that as God was true, etc. so also
were they true to their yea and nay, the end of all oaths.

I reply. 1. Richard Hubberthorn in all this his pretended answer does not
deny, the expressions 2 Cor. 1. 18. As God is true, 2 Cor. 1. 23. I call God
for a record upon (or against) my soul, 2 Cor. 11. 31. The God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not, 2
Cor. 12. 19. we speak before God in Christ, to be forms of swearing. Surely the
expression, 2 Cor. 1. 23. I call God for record, is so plain an appealing to
Gods testimony, which is the definition of an oath by attestation or
contestation of God as true, and upon or against my soul, by pawning or wishing
a curse to himself, if he spoke not true, and so appealing to God, not only as
Tostis or Witness, but also as Vindex, the Avenger or Judge, if he spoke not
true, that I find few or no expressions of swearing, more full then this, and
therefore do thence infer irrefragably, that Paul did swear, and consequently,
that he did not conceive Christ forbade all swearing, and therefore it is but
his conceit, that the prescribing yea and nay, Mat. 5. 37. was to put an end of
all oaths. 2. Whereas he says, That this Scripture labors to bring them to
yea and nay in all things, and that Paul does only justify Christ's words in
keeping to yea and nay, it is so far from being true, that if the expressions
of [ yea and nay] were meant of using those words without swearing, as R. H.
does vainly imagine, the Apostle would be so far from bringing them to yea and
nay in all things, and justifying Christ's words in keeping to yea and nay, that
he should indeed do the contrary, forasmuch as he says, Our word toward you
was not yea and nay, and, the son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among
you by us, was not yea and nay. I know the meaning of the speech, Our word
toward you was not yea and nay, is not about the using of these terms, yea and
nay, but of the constancy of his speech and actions, as I express it in my
Serious Consideration, p. 16. But I only show me silliness of Richard
Hubberthorns talk, since what he alleges, if understood as he seems to
understand it, would make against him.

But Samuel Fisher against my allegation of 1 Cor. 15. 31. says thus, And as
for his saying (...) is a particle of swearing, I say it is not necessarily so,
but often of affirming only as quidem, profecto, truly, verily, etc. And however
where Paul uses it, 1 Cor. 15. 31. he does not swear (as J. T. divines he did)
for since he, and all confess, none are to swear by any but God alone; Paul's
swearing there (had it been an oath) had been unlawful, it being not by God,
but by his and the Corinthians rejoicing.

To which I reply, (...), Grammarians make a particle of sweaning; nor has S.
F. showed any instance, where having an Accusative Case after it, as here, it
is a particle of affirming without swearing, and until he do so, it is
necessarily here a particle of swearing. Nor is it against the Confession, That
none are to swear by any but God only. For in this oath he swears by God, when
he swears by his and the Corinthians rejoicing, it being an oath by
oppignoration, pawning, or execration, in which God is appealed to as Judge, or
avenger, as well as witness, by pawning to him, and wishing the forfeiture of
his rejoicing, or glorying in Christ Jesus, if what he says were not true; as
when we say, On my salvation it is so, as God help me, etc. which I hope to
clear more fully, if ever I finish and publish my fuller Treatise about
swearing, forementioned. Hitherto Samuel Fisher's opposition has confirmed my
Arguments against himself. I return to Richard Hubberthorn.

To my alleging to prove Paul' s swearing, Romans 1. 9. and 9. 1. Gal. 1. 20.
Phil. 1. 8. Richard Hubberthorn thus says, Is this a proof for men to swear
and take oaths for men, or against men? has not the man here lost the
understanding of a man? thus to compare and call this the Apostles oath, when
he takes God to witness, that he prays for the Saints continually; is this an
oath to testify the truth of his writing against lies? Indeed this we desire,
that John Tombs, and the rest of the Priests in this Nation, would write
nothing but what God would witness unto the truth of; and that they would speak
truth, and not lie, then they would not thus abuse the Apostles words, when as
the Apostles intend no such thing in their words here asserted. And whereas it
is again said, that the Apostle took an oath, Phil. 1. 8. Now let all honest
and sober hearted men consider, whether the truth of God and the Apostles that
speak it forth, be not abused, that from a Novice that is lifted up in pride,
and would do or say any thing for his hire, should bring those Scriptures to
plead for swearing, and that lawfulness of oaths; in all which the Apostle took
God to witness his love to the Saints, and labor in the work of his Ministry,
signifying that all understand how that he spoke the truth, and did not lie,
and kept to his yea and nay, according to Christ's doctrine (and did not swear
at all.)

I reply, 1. Those Texts were not brought by me as a proof for men to swear and
take oaths for men or against men, but to prove that some swearing in
Gospel Times may be lawful, since the Apostle Paul, a man moved by the holy
spirit, even in his holy writings and speeches did swear: which is enough
against R. H. and his accomplices, who deny any swearing lawful in any case. 2. I
say, that these speeches [ God is my witness, I speak the truth in Christ, I
lie not, my conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, behold,
before God I lie not, God is my record] are forms of swearing, it being the
definition of an oath, which all Writers that I know of agree in, that an oath
is an appeal to, or invocation of God, as joint witness with us of the truth of
our speeches, and therefore in this I write nothing, but what God will witness
the truth of, I speak truth before God, without abusing the Apostles words in
pleading for the lawfulness of some swearing; and in this I dare stand to the
arbitrament of sober, honest-hearted, intelligent men, not fearing the censure
of R. H. as if I were a Novice, who have been a professor of Christianity above
forty years, and a Preacher of the Gospel above thirty, and wish R. H. do not
accuse me as lifted up with pride, with the like spirit as it is said, that
Diogenes trampled on Plato's pride with greater pride, there being not many
branches of pride greater then this, to take on him to judge the secrets of
another heart, and to foretell what he will do, it being to behave himself as
if he were God. Sure they that know me, and judge of me with a charitable mind,
they that have had experience of my adventures and losses for asserting truth,
will not believe R. H. in what he here suggests, that I would do or say any
thing for hire, Who would thank R. H. if he would show what hire I have taken,
which the words of Christ and his Apostle allow not, Luke 10. 7. 1 Cor. 9. 7,
10, 11, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5. 17, 18. Gal. 6. 6. But if he think his tongue is his
own, that he may accuse and reproach at his pleasure, I think it my duty to
tell him, that his practice is railing and false accusing; and that his tongue
is set on fire of hell, and that without repentance he shall not inherit the
kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. He proceeds in the same vein of reviling,
censuring and false accusing in his speech of my fifth Argument, to which he
makes no answer but this, That to break Christ's command is of no necessary use;
that I might as well have stated my Argument, That to break Christ's command is
of benefit to humane society, therefore to break Christ's command is lawful,
etc. and might thus have proved it, that except we break Christ's command, we
cannot preach for hire, nor sue men at law for tithes, nor live in pride, ease
and vanity, nor keep our places of profit and benefits, which is necessary for
our society of Priests, Ergo. But we whose eyes God has opened, do see that
all his book tends to persuading of people to swear when Christ has said,
Swear not at all, and that which he would now swear for again, would swear
against for the same advantage and profits which he has in his eye, yea, or he
would persuade all men not to swear, and bring scripture to prove it upon the
same account, so that what he does in this kind, is because of advantage: for
two years since he did not preach this doctrine, nor write those arguments.

To which I reply, The Lord rebuke thee: there is none of thy accusations of
divinations here, after thy railing fashion, brought by thee, which thou can
prove by me, and those that know me, know it to be false which thou suggests
concerning my seeking gain, and suiting my actions thereto, and changing my
doctrine. There is no doctrine in that book thou here opposest, or the other of
the insufficiency of light in each man, which has not been my constant
doctrine. What thou would have imagined as if no swearing were of necessary
use to humane society, is contrary to all experience of governors of Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, and the Apostles words alleged by me, Heb. 6. 16. An oath
for confirmation is to men an end of all strife. That which Samuel Fisher
says, That what swearing was then allowed of, (as before a ruler it then was
to end a strife among men, who are yet in strife) is now unlawful among his
Saints, who are redeemed out of strife, and the rest of those fleshly works,
which it is one of, Gal. 5. is a silly shift. For, 1. The Saints are men. 2.
Those of the old Testament were Saints, and yet were to swear. 3. If men, not
Saints, may swear to end strife, then it is not prohibited by Christ to them to
swear in some cases, and, since the precept of not swearing is not limited to
Saints, if others may swear in some cases, notwithstanding that precept, Saints
may swear also. 4. Saints are redeemed from other works of the flesh, yet are
not so redeemed, but that they may have envyings, wrath, emulations. However
Quakers imagine themselves perfect, yet the Scripture does not say, that the
most eminent Saint is so redeemed out of strife, but that he may be tempted to,
and guilty of some unlawful strife, while he is in the body. 5. There was
strife between Paul and Barnabas, Acts 15. 39. Paul and Peter, Gal. 2. 11. the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 11. Who were termed Saints, ver. 2. 6. Quakers are
guilty of strifes in opposing Preachers and reviling dissenters from them, and
therefore if it be necessary to end strifes of men, that there be oaths, it is
also necessary to swear to end strifes with them. Do not they seek to recover
stolen goods, due debts? and if so, oaths are necessary for them. 7. Oftimes
Saints are found so guilty of contentions among themselves, that, were not
Magistrates empowered to compose them, they would be endless and remediless. The
story of the libels brought to Constantine the great at the Nicene Council, of
one Bishop and Confessor against another, and burnt by him, shows, how ill it
would fare with the best Saints, if Magistracy did not quiet them. Our own
times have had too much experience of this. 8. Saints live among men unholy, to
whom they owe duties of love and righteousness, which cannot be done without
testifying the truth in many cases, wherein they differ, to end their strife;
and therefore Saints are bound, when the laws require oaths, and they are the
only witnesses to give in evidence, out of charity and justice to swear for
ending of strife.

Richard Hubberthorn adds something against what I argue in proof of the
fourth Proposition, omitting any show of answer to my sixth Argument for my
first Proposition, and passing over the second and third. I alleged to prove
this Proposition, [ That the King is the only supreme Governor in all his
Dominions] the example and rule of Christ, Mat. 22. 21. 1 Timothy 6. 13. Luke 2.
51. which he says, I bring to prove an oath of Supremacy to King Caesar; which
is not true, it being brought to prove a supremacy over all persons, not an
oath of supremacy, and so all his answer is impertinent. The Argument stands
good. Christ himself did acknowledge subjection to Caesar, and his parents,
therefore no Prelate is exempt from the Kings government.

Richard Hubberthorn adds, John Tombs says, That Paul a Saint was subject to
the judgment of Caesar, and appealed to him, then he acknowledged him supreme,
etc. Ergo. Ans. Paul was a prisoner for the word of God, and testimony of
Jesus, and appealed to Caesar for justice, because he was unjustly accused, and
had not done any thing worthy of bonds or of death; therefore according to
their law he ought to be set free; but Paul did not call Caesar the Supreme
Head of the Church, and chief Ruler in Ecclesiastical things, for if Caesar had
been the supreme Head of the Church, of which Paul was a member, he would but
have needed little appealing unto for setting him at liberty; but in such
Arguments as Tombs has used, is manifest the ignorance of foolish men,
wherein their folly appears to all men, as the Scripture says, 2 Timothy 3. 9.

I reply, It Is true, I alleged Paul's example, Acts 25. 8, 10. to prove the
King Supreme Governor over all persons in his Dominions, and Acts 23. 29. and
24. 5, 6, 8, 10. and 25. 8, 11, 19, 21. and 26. 2, 3. to prove him Governor in
all Causes, or Chief Ruler in Ecclesiastical things, not to prove Caesar
Supreme Head of the Church, as R. H. misrepresents me. Now he shows not any
defect in my proof taken from matter of fact related in the Text, but tells us,
If Caesar had been Supreme Head of the Church, of which Paul was a member, he
would have needed little appealing, which is to alter the conclusion, and to
say nothing to that point which was in question, nor to answer the proof at
all, which all that know the rules of arguing know to be ridiculous, and indeed
very foolish.

Speeding no better in answering my Arguments, R. H. proceeds to his wonted
course of invectives against my person, which I am necessitated to take notice
of, because they are impediments to many, of receiving the truth I teach, and
do so fill people with prejudice, that their ears are stopped from harkening to
the clearest demonstrations, and they are carried away with the vain conceits
of Quakers, and other blind guides. He tells me, That my Ministry if received
would beget men from their holy and harmless state into transgression of
Christ's command, and from the tenderness of conscience into hardness of heart,
and says, When I say the Oath of Supremacy was imposed for excluding of the
Popes jurisdiction, etc. if so, why do thou preach it up to be imposed upon
the holy, harmless, godly Christians, who are redeemed from the Popes power and
jurisdiction, that I am a miserable comforter to tender consciences, that my
end is seen, and therefore cannot deceive many, that those holy persons who are
tender of an oath, ought to be my teachers, who am far from righteousness or
tenderness of conscience, that it is a shame for me to be an imposer of oaths
upon tender consciences, who profess my self a Minister of Christ, that it is
manifest my Ministry is to bring people into condemnation, in which he falsely
accuses me, that I am an imposer of oaths upon tender consciences, that I
preath it up to be imposed upon the holy, harmless, godly Christians, because
to free them from the snare, which the Law of the Land brings them into by
reason of their denying to take the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, I have
endeavored out of compassion to their souls, to prove to them, that such
swearing may be lawful: It is not I that impose the Oaths on them, but the Law
and the Officers that are to execute it; nor did I preach it up to be imposed
on tender consciences, but after it was imposed on them by others, and my
Petition with others to his Majesty for the release thereof without the desired
effect, I did upon advise and importunity, publish the writing about it, to
free them from mistakes, who scrupled the thing, there being then in
appearance, no other way for the liberty and help of many then imprisoned, and
more liable to imprisonment for their refusal to swear, then by showing them
the lawfulness of that, for denying of which they suffered, and therefore they
might without danger to their souls, and much benefit to themselves in their
outward estate, take an expedite course for their peace. Which charity (that
thinks no evil, that hops all things, believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. 5.
7.) if there had been any in R. H. would not have construed to have been done
to any evil end, but out of love and mercy to men for their good, and for the
great advantage of them that are of the same judgment with me in point of
baptism, that it may not be imputed to them as their common tenent, that they
allow no Oaths, no not in judicial proceedings, which is interpreted as tending
to the overthrow of all civil Government, and so the persons counted
intolerable, which has caused, and is yet likely to cause great persecution to
those that hold the truth about baptism. In which thing I bless God I have not
been so miserable a comforter, but that I know my self of many, and am told of
more hundreds, yea thousands, who have had their liberty and their families,
saved from ruin, by reason of the clearing of the point to them in that book;
and, if some after their swearing have been disquieted in spirit because of
their Oath, it is not to be imputed to that book, but their own weakness, or
such affrightments as R. H. and others, do put upon them. I refuse not to be
taught by R. H. or any other, but, sure I am, in this thing R. H. yields me no
light to rectify me, but by his false accusations of me, as far from
righteousness, as bringing men into condemnation by my Ministry, etc. gives me
occasion to fear that he is led by an evil spirit, so venomous a tongue
discovering a malicious poisoned heart.

My answer to the grand objection from Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37. James 5. 12.
was, that there must of necessity be some limitation of Christ's speech, as of
the next speech, ver. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. and many more places, which I then
did not recite, but shall now refer the Reader to some of them, Mat. 5. 29, 30.
Mat. 6. 17, 19. 25. 34. Mat. 7. 1. Mat. 10. 28. Mat. 23. 3, 8, 9. Luke 6. 30.
John 6. 27. which with many more if they were understood without limitation,
would cross other Texts of holy Scripture, and such truths as are undeniable,
and introduce such evils as are intolerable. And that Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37.
is to be limited, I proved it from the Angels and Paul's swearing and adjuring
after that precept, which shows they understood it with limitation, and so are
we to understand it, and that it is to be limited as I there set down, I proved
from the words of the Text, there and elsewhere. Hereto R. H. speaks thus.

Indeed it does plainly appear, that thou must of necessity either disprove
Christ's words, or else deny thy own, seeing they are contrary the one to the
other: so therefore thou say, that it was those oaths above mentioned, that
was forbidden by Christ and the Apostles, and I shall show it plainly, that
thou have no necessity to limit Christ's words to vain and profane swearing;
(but only that thou would have thy words true, and his false) for Christ's
words in Mat. 5. do not intend such oaths, for he speaks of the true oaths
which was used among the Jews, and such oaths as Christ told them they were to
perform; for it was not said in old time, that they should perform vain, light,
profane, unnecessary, customary, and passionate oaths, but such as they were
to perform betwixt the Lord and them, and the solemn Vows and Covenants which
they made in old time to their Kings, and one to another, the Christians now by
the command of Christ was not, to swear these oaths, neither any oath true nor
false.

To which I reply, It Is true, Christ spoke of true oaths to be performed to the
Lord, as the occasion of his precept did lead him to speak: But it is true
also, that our Lord Christ forbids not such oaths universally, nor as they were
used in old time among the Jews, and to their kings, and one unto another; but
as the Pharisees and other teachers interpreted what was said to them of old
time, that what was said to them, did bind no further then not to break their
oaths, but to perform them to the Lord, otherwise they might swear as often as
they would, and in what manner they pleased: But this Christ denied, and
determines they might not swear frequently, unnecessarily, with such oaths as
they used, and conceits of the obligation of some, and not others, as the Text
leads us to conceive; and the reasons by me given, prove the words are to be
limited, to which R. H. has given no answer, and therefore my answer and whole
dispute stands good, notwithstanding the opposition of R. H. and S. F. And for
the insinuations of R. H. that this is preaching of the lawfulness of swearing
(or sinning) against Christ's command, and that such teachers are given to
change with every government, and that they preach as the false prophets did
for handfuls of barley and pieces of bread, they are but a further continuation
of his revilings, it being no teaching against, but expounding of Christ's
command; nor have we changed our doctrine or principles with change of
government, but showed subjection to the powers that be, as Paul injoins, Romans
13. 1, 2. Nor do we look at wages any otherwise, then we are allow nor
conceive we are bound by any law of Christ or his Apostles, to refuse or
neglect more liberal maintenance, be it by tithes or other pay assigned by law,
then that which is by mere alms or voluntary contribution, which in most places
is so scant, that persons of worth are necessitated to live in a sordid manner,
or people are necessitated to take persons of little worth, and thereby the
Ministry is debased, the people untaught or ill taught, such ignorant and
corrupt men, as R. H. seems to be by his writing, creep in among men, and
pervert them.

That which R. H. says, the Jews swear by the living God, but the Apostates by
the book, insinuates, as if such were apostates as swear thus, and that they
swear by the book, and not by the living God. But neither does he prove, that
they who teach the lawfulness of some swearing, are apostates from
Christianity, any more then holy Paul, who has left upon record in holy
Scripture, his oaths, after he was an Apostle; nor is this form of swearing, So
help me God, and by the Contents of this book, any other then swearing by the
living God, made known in that book, and pawning our interest in his help,
according to the doctrine and promises in that book, expressed by laying the
hand on the book, as formerly by coming before the altar, 1 Kings 8. 31. 2 Chronicles. 6. 22. as a sign of our abandoning our interest in Gods help, made known
in that book, if we speak not truth.

I find in an humble petition of some prisoners in Maidston, dated January 25.
that they cannot acknowledge any authority that God has given the King in
spiritual things or causes; and they thus argue: If thou have any power to be a
Lord over our faith, or by outward force to impose any thing in the worship of
God on our consciences, it is given unto thee as thou art a Magistrate, or as
thou art a Christian; but thou have no such power given unto thee of God as
thou art a Magistrate, appears, 1. Because if Magistrates as such, have such an
authority, then all Magistrates in all Nations have the same power: In Turkey I
must be a Mohammedan, in Spain a Papist; and for ever as the authority changes
Religion, I must do the same. 2. Because the Apostles refused to be obedient to
their rulers, when they were commanded to forbear that which they judged part
of the worship of God, Acts 4. 19. Acts 5. 29. 3. All the Scriptures of the new
Testament that injoyns obedience unto Magistrutes, were written when the Romans
had the Empire of the world, whose Emperors were for the most part (if not
all) heathenish idolaters for the first 300 years, until Constantine 's time;
it therefore cannot be supposed, that any of these Texts of Scripture that
calls for obedience to Magistrates, intends an obedience in matters of faith or
worship, for then the Christians that lived under those Emperors, must needs
have denied Christ, and worshipped the Roman gods, as some of the Emperors
commanded.

Answ. Though in my Serious Consideration of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy,
there is that said which might have prevented this objection, yet being willing
to clear the truth more fully, I say, 1. That it is not rightly supposed, That
by outward force any thing in the worship of God, may be imposed on men's
consciences. For though by outward force, things may be imposed on the outward
man, and the actions of some of the members, yet by outward force a thing
cannot be imposed on the conscience. For then only is a thing imposed on the
conscience, when the conscience is convinced, that he ought to do, or not to do
it, which must be done by doctrine, or some other way insinuating into the
conscience the necessity or lawfulness of doing or not doing a thing, which
outward force cannot perform. 2. That it is a greater mistake, That the King in
the Oath of Supremacy, is acknowledged to have power to be a Lord over faith,
or by outward force to impose any thing in the worship of God, on men's
consciences. This mistake might have been rectified, if they had heeded the
Oath, Proviso, Admonition, 37th. Article prefixed before my book, and the
explication of the 5th. and 6th. Propositions, which I gave conformably to the
speeches of learned approved men, by the Princes that have been and are, which
I find not yet any persons in authority have disallowed; and yet I conceive by
their words in the end of their petition, they were not ignorant thereof, since
they cite the proviso of the Statute 5. Eliz. and the admonition, which I
presume they found printed in my book. By which they might have understood,
that Kings are acknowledged Governors in spiritual things, as well, and no
otherwise as in temporal things. Now in temporal things they have not power to
impose any thing on men's consciences by outward force, not is the King a Lord
over our faith in temporal things; so as that if he should tell us we may marry
our brothers wife, or command us to fight a duel for our honor, we may think
we are bound in conscience to do it, or that we may lawfully do it, much less
that he is Lord over our faith in the things of God, so as to impose on our
consciences what we shall believe concerning God, Christ, the Covenant of
grace, the doctrine of salvation, etc. or to form the worship of God by
addition or diminution, otherwise then is appointed by Gods word, but as Dr.
Rainold's Confer. with Heart, chap. 10. cites the words of Augustine, which I
find in the seventh Tome of his works, in the third book against Cresconius the
Grammarian, chap. 51. more fully then in the fiftieth Epistle, For in this
kings, as it is commanded them by God, served God as they are Kings, if in
their Kingdom they command good things, and forbid evil things, not only which
pertain to humane society, but also which pertain to the Religion of God. And
as they are not to govern in temporal things, but according to just Laws of the
Commonwealth, so neither in the things of God, but according to the holy Laws
of God; and although they have more authority in making and executing Laws in
Civil things, then in Religious, yet in neither to make or execute Laws
contrary to Gods Laws, nor to usurp that prerogative which belongs to God to
dispense with his Laws, or to hinder the doing of a duty imposed in the first
or second table of the Law, or to mould or urge doctrines of faith or worship,
otherwise then God in Scripture declares or appoints; nor do we acknowledge by
taking that Oath, that we owe them active obedience, if they urge us by Laws
and Edicts thereto, in things reserved to Gods prerogative, or such as are
contrary to his Laws in force, only we are to yield passive obedience by
suffering, and not resisting the power and authority thus abused. Nor is there
any thing in the words of Q. Elizabeth's Admonition annexed to her injunctions,
contrary to this explication. For the Queen does not say, that She challenged
by that Oath, such a power as was challenged by her Father, King Henry the
eighth, which was, to burn his subjects at the stake for their dissenting from
him in religious matters: But She says, That nothing was, is, or shall be
meant or intended by the same Oath, to have any other duty, allegiance, or bond
required by the same Oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most Noble
Kings of famous memory, King Henry the eighth Her Majesty's Father, or King
Edward the sixth, Her Majesty's Brother. And again: For certainly her Majesty
neither does, ne ever will challenge any other authority, then that was
challenged, and lately used by the said Noble Kings of famous memory, King
Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth, which is, and was of ancient time
due to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have the
soverainty and Rule over all manner of persons, born within these Her Realms,
Dominions and Countries, of what estate, either Ecclesiastical or temporal,
soever they be, so as no other foreign power shall, or ought to have any
superiority over them. Now if She had challenged power to burn at a stake her
subjects, for their dissenting from King Henry the eighth in religious matters,
then she must challenge power to burn all his Protestant subjects at a stake,
and therefore she must be conceived to challenge only authority over all
persons to govern them according to just Laws, excluding foreign power. Whereto
agree both the words of the 37th. Article, set down in my former book, and the
word of King James in this, That in that Oath only is contained the Kings
absolute power to be Judge over all persons, as well Civil as Ecclesiastical,
excluding all foreign powers and Potentates, to be Judges within his Dominions.
Nor is it true, That by King Henry's practice appears, that Q. Elizabeth
challenged power to burn dissenters from King Henry in matters of Religion. For
she did not challenge all the power, which King Henry practiced, for then she
should have challenged a power to behead her mother, which he practiced, and if
the Queen her self exercised the same authority (though it be not to be called
authority or power truly, but an usurpation or abuse of power) in putting some
to death for their conscience in Religion, yet doubtless she challenged no
other power then what before had been or might be lawfully exercised or used,
as the words are in the Statute 1. Eliz. c. 1. a little before the Oath of
Supremacy, nor does the Oath acknowledge the King Governor, or to have any
other power or authority to be assisted, defended or actively obeyed, then as
it is lawful, and used or exercised lawfully, and therefore in answer to the
three Arguments of the Petitioners, I say, 1. That by the acknowledgement of
the Kings Supremacy in spirituals, as a Magistrate neither is a man bound to
change his Religion as the King does, nor to forbear Gods worship which he
forbids, nor to deny Christ, or worship other Gods because he commands it.

It follows in the Maidston prisoners Petition. And now, O King, that no man
as he is a Christian, has power to be a Lord over another faith, or by
outward force to impose any thing in the worship of God, is as clear, 1.
Because the Lord Jesus himself, nor his disciples, would never by any outward
force compel men to receive them or their doctrine; for when the disciples of
Christ (supposing they might use violence as under the law) would have
commanded fire to come from heaven (as Elias did) to consume them that would
not receive them; Christ turned and rebuked, saying, ye know not what spirit ye
are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Answ. To be Governor in things and causes spiritual and Ecclesiastical, is
ascribed to the King as King, and not as a Christian, for a Christian as a
Christian has not the Government of any others besides himself in any causes,
and he is Governor in Ecclesiastical causes, as well as temporal: But he is not
governor in temporal things as a Christian, but as a King; although it is true,
that a Christian is better fitted to govern in both causes, in that he is a
Christian, his Christianity by framing his spirit to wisdom, justice,
clemency, etc. producing more aptitude to govern, though not more authority,
and therefore were there not in this part of the Petition sundry mistakes, by
which those Petitioners incommodate, and harm themselves and others; and there
seems to be some reflection on my book of the Serious consideration of the Oath
of the Kings Supremacy, I should let this pass: But for these reasons I shall a
little examine what is said.

1. The mistake is continued, as if by acknowledging the King supreme Governor
in spiritual things, he had a power given him to be Lord over another faith,
which were indeed to ascribe that to the King, which the Pope takes on him, to
determine what a Christian is to believe, which Heart the Jesuit imagined was
given to the King by that Oath, but was rectified therein by Dr. John Rainold
confer. with Heart, chap. 10.

2. If [ by imposing by outward force, any thing in the worship of God] be
meant of imposing on the conscience, the same mistake is continued, which I
have before discovered: But if [ by outward force imposing any thing in the
worship of God] be meant of [imposing by civil penalties on the outward man,
something in Gods worship] there is need of much caution to determine of their
power. Civil penalties are greater, as death, banishment, mutilation,
imprisonment, spoiling of estate, liberty of trade, etc. Or less, as some small
diminution of privileges, office, etc. The things imposed on men may be either
the commands, or plain institutions of Christ, or some things devised by men,
as Councils, Fathers, Prelates, etc. And these impositions may be either in
circumstances of time, place, order, which are undetermined by Christ, or in
such points of doctrine or worship, as are of greater moment, and determined by
Christ. The impositions may be such, as are termed by the Apostle, hay and
stubble, or such as overthrow the foundation which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12. such as are impositions tending to Idolatry,
Superstition, Profaneness, heresies of perdition, blasphemy. The imposition may
be on Teachers or Learners, stronger or weaker Christians, to be subscribed to,
or taught, or to be conformed to, or professed, and this to be done either by
bare presence, which infers no consent, or by some act which shows consent. It
cannot be denied, but that Kings by reason of their error and rigor, have
very sadly miscarried in their impositions on Christian brethren in matters of
faith and worship, there having been many mistakes in the best Councils,
Fathers, Prelates and learned men, since the Apostles days, who have seldom
been so equal, as to permit those they have been prejudiced against, to debate
freely and fully what they hold; nor are they heard with that equanimity, which
were requisite. And therefore Princes, Parliaments, Republiques, have made many
hard Laws, and done innumerable unrighteous executions, to shedding of much
innocent blood, and most heavy oppressions of men, either guiltless, or not
deserving such severe penalties as they have endured. I think Kings and
Parliaments who see not much with their own eyes, but are fain to use the
judgments of Learned men and Prelates, who are often partial through prejudice
or interest, or not studied in the points about which they advice, do often
stand in a very slippery place; and that Lawmakers and Officers of justice
have need of very much circumspection and tenderness, ere they make penal Laws
in matter; of Religion, that they should not make heresy by the determinations
of any Councils since the Apostles days, nor urge subscriptions and conformity
under civil penalties, but in things plainly set down in holy Scripture, that
so much liberty to dissents and different usages should be given, as may stand
with peace. Yet that Kings should use no civil penalties on men for any
disorders or errors in any matters of says or worship of God, I am not yet
convinced by any thing I have read, much less by the Arguments of these
Petitioners.

Not by the first. For a King may do that which our Lord Christ in his state of
humiliation would not do. He would not divide an inheritance among brethren,
Luke 12. 13, 14. and yet a king may do it. For though Christ was King in right,
yet he refused at that time to take upon him, or to execute the office of a
King, but took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 7. And therefore a King
on his throne is not debarred from doing that which Christ would not do in his
debasement. And yet even then the Lord Christ did whip the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, John 2. 15,
16. Mat. 21. 12. I will not now dispute, whether Christ did this jure
zelotarum, by the right that Zelots of the Law among the Jews, claimed to
themselves; or jure Regio, by the right of a King, under which notion
acclamation was made to him when he rode on an Ass into Jerusalem, Luke 19. 38.
after which he did expel the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, ver. 45. nor
whether this be a good proof for Magistrates, to intermeddle in matters of
Religion, as it has been argued by Mr. Cobbet of New England. It is sufficient
for my present purpose, that the alleging of Christ's example by these
Petitioners, is so far from making against the Kings power in Ecclesiastical
causes, that it rather makes for it. Nor is it against the Kings power in
causes Ecclesiastical that the Lord Jesus himself, nor his disciples, never
would by any outward force compel men to receive them or their doctrine. For,
besides what is already said of Christ's example, there is a great difference to
be made between professed infidels, and disorderly Christians; between planting
of the Gospel at first, and resorming Christians who have in show received it,
there may be reason to do the latter by civil penalties, though not the former,
though men are not to be made Christians by civil penalties, since Religion is
not to be enforced, but persuaded, yet being Christians they may be corrected
by civil penalties. As the Apostle Paul, though he said, what have I to do to
judge them that are without? 1 Cor. 5. 12. yet did not exclude Ecclesiastical
penalties on them that are within; no more are they that are within, freed from
civil penalties in some things Ecclesiastical, because they are within, though
perhaps they that are without, are not to be compelled to come in. And yet it
is not proved, that a King may not use some civil penalties, especially denying
of favors and privileges to them that embrace not the faith, or rather, it is
certain, he ought so to put a difference between Christians and infidels, godly
Christians and profane loose ones, that the former may have that encouragement
and benefit, which others have not, according to David's example, Psalm. 101.
which a King ought to follow.

As for the speech of Christ, Luke 9. 54, 55, 56. it serves much less for the
Petitioners purpose.

For 1. The reason of the disciples desire of calling fire from heaven, was not
their not receiving them or their doctrine as Christian, but as Jews. For the
Samaritans did not receive Christ, because his face was as though he would go
to Jerusalem, ver. 53. which shows, that their not receiving him, was out of
the hatred they bare to him as a Jew, and to the worship which was at
Jerusalem, according to what we read of the Samaritans, Joh. 4. 9, 20. and 8.
48. And therefore this is not to the present purpose of Christ's denying power
to the Civil Magistrate, to inflict civil penalties on the non-receivers of his
doctrine.

2. The fact of the Samaritans was far different from the fact of the Captains
that came to take Elijah, 2 Kings 1. chap. For they came to take Elijah to
destroy him, these only did not receive Christ, those doubtless were
worshippers of Baal, and joined with the King of Israel to uphold idolatry, and
to persecute the Prophets and Worshippers of the true God, which made them more
justly objects of wrath and Divine vengeance then the Samaritans were.

3. That which the disciples would have had fall on the Samaritans, was fire
from heaven to destroy them, which was too great a punishment for that neglect:
But this does not prove that a lesser and proportionable penalty, may not be
inflicted on some disorderly Christians by a Civil Magistrate.

4. The disciples were but private persons, and were carried with a private and
selfish spirit, even the desire of private revenge, and therefore Christ
rebukes them, as not minding with what spirit they were moved; which hinders
not but that a public Magistrate, ex zelo justitiae, with a public spirit
out of zeal of justice, may inflict some proportionable civil penalties on
Christians, who are his subjects for some offenses in spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes.

But, say the Petitioners, 2. If any men under heaven have had any such power
in the days of the Gospel, the Apostles and Elders in the Primitive times must
needs have had it, but this they disowned. The Apostle Paul in 2 Cor. 1. 24.
says thus, Not for that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of
your joy, for by faith you stand; yea the Lord Jesus when they strove for
Domination, forbids it, saying, ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles
exercise dominion over them, and they that are great do exercise authority upon
them, but it shall not be so amongst you, Mat. 20. 25, 26. even so says Peter,
speaking to the Elders, Feed the flock of God which is amongst you, taking the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples
to the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. And in truth the Apostles and disciples were not
to use any external force to carry on their masters work, but only by showing
the terrors of the Lord were to persuade men; and in case of resistance to
shake the dust from their feet, as a witness against their opposers.

Answ. 1. To have dominion over our faith, that is to appoint authoritatively
what we shall believe, what not, so as that if we believe not, we sin against
God, and are liable to his wrath, is peculiar to Christ the great Prophet of
the Church, Acts 3. 22, 23. To the Apostles themselves, Christ said, Mat. 23.
10. Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ. Neither
the Pope, nor any Council of Bishops or Elders, much less Kings and Parliaments
(who take not upon them to be teachers in the Church) can prescribe to us our
Creed, or form of Worship of God, any otherwise then Christ and his Apostles
from him, have delivered them to us. Nor does the Oath of Supremacy ascribe to
them such power and authority, but it has been disclaimed, as is before
showed. Nevertheless Princes may require those under their Dominions, to
worship God in Christ, according to the plain direction of the Scriptures of
the new Testament; and if they set up idols; blaspheme the God of heaven, etc.
may inflict civil punishment, they may forbid and punish the teaching of some
doctrines, tending to the reproach of Religion, destructive of Christianity, of
Civil Government, provided they be very wary, that they do not judge by any
other then the plain declarations of the holy Scripture, and not by the
authority of any Councils or Fathers, since as it is in the 21. Article of the
Church of England, General Councils have erred and may err, in things
pertaining to God, and the punishment be so proportioned and qualified, as may
agree with justice, equity, prudence, clemency, and other virtues requisite in
them that rule over others. Nor (...) that which is here alleged, of validity
to disprove it. For 1. It is not rightly supposed, that Princes have not in the
days of the Gospel, a power in matters of Religion, which the Apostles and
Elders in the Primitive times, had not. The contrary is proved in my Serious
Consideration of the Oath of Supremacy, in the confirmation of the 4th. and
5th. Propositions. The Apostles and Elders, as messengers of Christ, and
Pastors of the Church, had their peculiar authority, which Princes are not to
usurp; and Princes have their peculiar power and authority, to which every soul
is to be subject: neither have dominion over our faith; and, however Popes
claim it, our Princes disclaim it. 2. The Text Mat. 20. 25, 26. is rightly
urged by Protestants against the Popes usurpation, as I show in my Romanism
discussed, Art. 7. Sect. 8. but not rightly urged against Christians, being
civil Magistrates, nor against Princes being governors over all persons in
their dominions, in spiritual things. That which is there forbidden, is rule in
the Apostles over one another, after the manner of the Kings of the Nations. 3.
The Text, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. is much less to the purpose, it being only a precept
to Teachers and Elders of the Church, concerning the exercise of their
Ecclesiastical function, nothing to the restraint of Princes from the exercise
of their office, in things and causes spiritual. 4. The Apostles only
persuading, showing the terrors of the Lord, shaking off the dust of their
feet, are ill alleged to exclude Princes from their power of governing all
persons in all causes. The Apostles and Elders did not bear the sword as
Princes do. It would be of very bad consequence, if in case of resistance they
might do no more then the Apostles were to do in case their doctrine were
received or opposed.

It is added by the Petitioners, thus. 3. It is very plain, that the Lord Jesus
himself in his parable of the tares and wheat, forbids any force to be
exercised upon false worshippers, as such; for by the tares which he forbids
the pulling up, Mat. 13. 29. cannot be intended the transgressors of the second
Table, such as thieves, murderers, etc. because all confess with one consent,
that the Magistrates authority reaches such, but those that Christ Jesus would
have remain amongst his wheat, in the field of the world, are the children of
the wicked one through Idolatry and will worship; this will further appear, if
the 28, 29, 30. ver. be compared with the 38, 39. of the same Chapter; and the
reason the Lord Jesus gives, why both tares and wheat must grow together, (O
King, that it were engraven with the point of a diamond, and often laid before
thee) is, least in gathering up the tares, the wheat also be rooted up with
them.

Answ. Parables are a way of teaching, much used of old in the Eastern
Countries, as appears by Jotham's parable, Judge. 9. Nathans parable, 2 Samuel 12.
and they are narrations of things perhaps never done, yet related as if they
had been so acted as they are told, that by the resemblance, the thing intended
may more easily insinuate it self into the minds of the persons to be
instructed by the parable. Now there are in such parables, two parts, the one
the devised story, the other the intended doctrine to be learnt by it, which is
sometimes opened, as Mat. 13. which we term the application or explication, and
sometimes left to be gathered by the auditors, as Luke 14. 16, etc. Luke 15.
11, etc. and even Mat. 13. 31, 32, 33, 44, 45, 46. In the devised story are
many things inserted, as lace in a garment, or carvings in a building, or
pictures in a Map, which are only for comeliness in the speech, more handsome
dress of the speech, or filling it up, and yet are not doctrinal, nor
argumentative, as from the parable, Luke 16. 23, 24, 25. it would be vain to
teach men, that those in hell may see those in Abraham's bosom, and speak one
to another. And therefore it is a rule in Divinity, that such symbolical
expressions are not argumentative any further then their application,
explication or scope, appears to be. Now the parable, Mat. 13. 24, 25, 26, 27,
28, 29, 30. being distinctly opened by Christ, from ver. 36. to 44. it is
unsafe to conclude any more from it, then Christ has done in his explication.
I know this passage, Mat. 13. 29, 30. has been much urged for the toleration
of men, corrupt in matters of faith and worship by the civil Magistrate,
without civil penalties, specially such as are destructive of men's being. But,
what ever be said of the conclusion, this Text serves not to the purpose. For
1. It is no part of the application or explication, ver. 36. to ver. 44. and
therefore is to be counted only a filling up of the devised story, and
therefore not doctrinal or argumentative. 2. There is no proof, That by the
children of the wicked one, ver. 38. are meant only Idolaters and
wil-worshippers: Yea these reasons seem to prove that others are meant, to wit,
wicked men, who are transgressors of the second Table of the Law, as well as
the first. 1. That the children of the wicked one, are ver. 41. termed all
scandals, or things that do offend, and them that do iniquity, or that which is
not agreeable to Gods Law. 2. John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 10, 12. haters of their
brethren, and murderers and liars, are termed children of the Devil, or wicked
One, as well as Idolaters or will-worshippers. 3. The children of the wicked
One seem to be all sorts of men, who are of Satan's sowing. 4. All those who are
not children of the Kingdom, but are to be cast into a furnace of fire. Ver.
38. 42. are termed tares, and these are not only Idolaters, will-worshippers,
heretics, but all other sorts of sinners, such as are mentioned, 1 Cor. 6. 9,
10. and elsewhere. Nor are the reasons valid, here produced to the contrary.
For 1. It follows not thieves and murderers, and others, whom confessedly the
authority of the Magistrate here reaches, are not here meant, therefore not
other transgressors of the second Table, but Idolaters, will-worshippers,
heretics. 2. Nor does it follow, Christ would not have thieves, murderers,
and other transgressors of the second Table, remain among the wheat, but to be
plucked up; therefore they are not here meant by the tares, but Idolaters and
will-worshippers, as if Christ would have all transgressors of the second Table
plucked up, none of the transgressors of the first, which is all one, as to say
Christ would have all liars, covetous, unrighteous persons, in any kind
destroyed, not any Witch, Atheistical scoffer, Blasphemer, Idolater, profane
person. 3. It is not proved, that by the servants of the householder, are meant
the civil Magistrate, why not the Angels termed reapers? ver. 39. These
Petitioners after make them the Apostles: will they have them to tolerate
Idolaters in the Church? 4. Were it granted, that here were meant only
Idolaters, will-worshippers, heretics, how is it proved that this is a
precept to civil Magistrates. There is no such precept in the application or
explication of the parable, and therefore it seems to me not to note the duty
of the civil Magistrate, but the event of Gods providence, that God would
permit the cohabitation of the wicked in the world, with the just, as is also
taught in the parable of the net, ver. 47, 48, 49, 50. Not that Magistrates or
Ministers should permit them, and not by civil punishment or Ecclesiastical,
remove them out of the Church, or the world. Lastly it follows not, Magistrates
may not destroy Idolaters, will-worshippers, therefore they may not inflict any
civil punishment, from the species to the genus, negatively, an argument
concludes not.

These Petitioners further tell us, How sad it is to remember how in all ages
since Christ, very strange mistakes have been on this account; the Lord of life
himself was put to death for supposed blasphemy and wickedness, and accused
for being an enemy to Caesar, Mat. 26. 65. John 19. 12. and this done unto him
by a people that had the Law of God amongst them, and were famous in the world
for their earthly wisdom and knowledge. Stephen was stoned, and James the
Apostle killed with the sword, supposed to be tares, or the children of the
wicked One, when they were the precious wheat of God, Acts 6. 13, 14. and 12.
2. The Christians that suffered in the ten persecutions, were they not accused
of being pestilent fellows, movers of sedition, turners of the world upside
down, enemies to Caesar, Acts 24. 5, 12. and 17. 6, 7. when the contrary was
most true, and they will be found to be the faithful martyrs of Jesus? So in
latter times many of those that have been put to death for heresy and
blasphemy, are by this age acknowledged to be the Saints of God. O King, that
our words might be acceptable to thee, consider, that neither thy Self nor
Counselors, have the spirit of infallibility; if the Apostles that had an
extraordinary spirit of discerning, must not pluck up the tares, lest they root
up the wheat also: how can any Prince on earth undertake a work so dangerous?
It is possible, many of those that are counted false worshippers and heretics,
in this day, may (at the time when God shall judge the world in righteousness)
be servants of the most high God. Remember, we pray thee, that those that lived
in the days of the Lord Jesus, accused their fathers for being guilty of the
blood of the Prophets, saying, If we had been in the days of our Fathers, we
would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, Mat. 23.
29, 30. yet themselves killed the Lord of life. The Romish Church also says,
if we had lived in the days of the heathen Emperors, we would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Christians, yet puts to death many as
righteous as they were: and now many of thy subjects in this Nation, are ready
to say, If we had lived in the days of Queen Mary, we would not have been
guilty with our Fathers in the blood of those good men that then suffered; yet
such a spirit of persecution is now risen up, as (if not restrained) will
terminate in the blood of many good men, and so bring down the wrath of God
upon this generation, and there will be no remedy.

Answ I could echo out all this after them, were not this alleged as a ground
of their denial of the taking the Oath of the Kings Supremacy. It is a good
wish that the King would deeply consider and remember all this; some acts of
his give cause to think he does, and to hope he will remember it. I said
somewhat to the same effect in my Serious Consideration of the Oath of the
Kings Supremacy, and such things as have lately happened, give still cause to
inculcate this, that his Majesty, his Counsel, and Ministers of justice, have
need of very much circumspection how they imprison, and other ways punish men
for their dissent from that which is established in matters of faith and
worship, since this power of punishing for supposed heresies, errors and
schisms, has been so unhappily and unrighteously managed, as gives cause to
fear, that it neither was, nor will, nor can be well used without destruction
of many innocent persons. God forbid I should justify any abuse, or neglect
according to my power and place, the seeking of reformation. Nevertheless all
this amounts not to a sufficient ground or reason, to deny the Kings Supremacy
in spirituals, since the like abuses happen in temporal things, and yet these
Petitioners deny not the promise, yea and that indeed in words of swearing of
obedience in temporal causes. We might make a Catalogue of Saul's, David's,
Solomon's, and others oppressions in temporal things, shall we therefore deny
their regal power in them? no, but acknowledge the power, and oppose the abuse;
yet not by arms, or other unpeaceable ways, but by Petitions to the Rulers,
prayers to God, patient suffering, which are the weapons whereby Christians
conquer. For which reason, I except not against that which the Petitioners add.

4. To inflict temporal punishmemts upon any of us thy subjects, for not
conforming to thy decrees, that restrain us from the worship that we know to be
of God; Is it not a breach of that royal law, that commands thee, that
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do you even so to them, for this
is the law and the Prophets? Mat. 7. 12. And we would in all humility offer to
thy consideration, if thy soul were in our souls stead, would thou be
satisfied with the same measure, as is now dealt unto us, when neither the God
of heaven, nor our own consciences condemn us of any evil intended against thy
person or authority? Nor can the greatest of our enemies make any due proof of
any combination or plotting with any upon the face of the earth, for the
disturbance of the public peace: And this we can with boldness say, because
we know our own innocence. Yet cannot this be a sufficient ground of denying
the Kings Supremacy in spirituals; nor is the proof of that Supremacy enervated
by what follows.

But whereas it is objected, that the Kings of Israel and Judah, under the old
Testament, had power in spiritual causes, and did punish blasphemy and
Idolatry, which are crimes of the highest nature against God, we confess they
had such power, which was given to them in plain precepts, written in the law
of Moses; but the Gospel that we live under, is another dispensation, in which
the Lord Jesus is the only Lawgiver, who does not (as Moses) proceed against
the transgressors of his precepts, by external force and power, to the
destroying them in their bodies and estates in this life, but in long suffering
waits on men, not willing they should perish, but rather that they should
repent and be saved, 2 These. 1. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Acts 17. 31. and when any
continues in disobedience to the Gospel, his punishment is eternal in the world
to come. The Apostle Paul testifies of himself, that he was a blasphemer and
perescuter, 1 Timothy 1. 20. And if the mind of God had been, that he should have
suffered death in that condition, how should he have had repentance given him,
and been such a glorious instrument in the Church as he was? Furthermore it is
too well known, that the Jews are the greatest blasphemers against our Lord
Jesus Christ, as are on the earth; yet it is not the mind of the Lord they
should be destroyed from the face of the earth, for how then should the
Scripture be fulfilled, wherein God has promised to call them, and to make
them the most glorious Nation of the world? Oh how can they be converted, if
they be not permitted where the Gospel is preached? We speak not this in favor
of any blasphemy, for our souls abhor it; but because we would have the lives
of men as precious in thy eyes, O King, as they are in the eyes of the
righteous and most holy God.

Answ. It is true, that I alleged in my Serious Consideration of the Oath of
the Kings Supremacy, the power of the Kings of Israel in spirituals, to prove
the King to be Governor in spiritual causes; I did not, nor was it necessary I
should assert the same power every way, or the justice of proceeding now by the
same Laws, which were in many things appropriate to the policy of that Nation,
nor am I of opinion, that the judicial laws of Moses, bind us any farther then
their common equity, nor do I think it necessary we should fetch our Laws from
them, they being in many things fitted to the policy of that people, which is
different from ours. Nor do I deny, that there is not the same reason of
punishing some idolatry and blasphemy of professed Christians, as was of
punishing the idolatry and blasphemy of the Israelites, in the worshipping of
the golden Calf, Baal, Ashtaroth, Molech, there being such special warnings
given them before, such great things done by God for them, as made their
engagement greater, and their revolt to other gods, worse, and more detestable
then in other people; and if it be true which Dr. John Burges in his rejoinder
to the reply to Bishop Mortons defense of the three Ceremonies, that the Popish
idolatry is not so bad as the Israelites, then there may be cause why that
idolatry which the Papists use, should not be punished with death, though the
worship of the golden Calf, Baal, Molech, and such Idols were. And for some
blasphemies against Christ, as the Messiah or Son of God, and some errors or
heresies, which under the name of blasphemies have been punished with death,
and perhaps by Laws in force are liable to the same punishments, I dare not say
that they are equally evil, or to be punished as the blasphemy of the mungrel
was, Lev. 24. 14, 15, 16. Nor do I take upon me to justify those Laws by which
death is awarded to heretics, nor to avow the sentences that have been past
against persons, as heretics, because condemned by Canons of Councils. He
that should now enact a law to put men to death for breaking the Sabbath,
because God did so appoint it, Numb. 15. 35. in the case of him that gathered
the sticks on the Sabbath day; or should make a law, that the father and mother
of a stubborn son, should bring him to the Elders of the City to be stoned to
death, as it is Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. should, as it is said of Draco the
Athenian, write his laws in blood. I deny not but that in the New Testament,
punishments are put off to the last judgment, that Christ has told us, Mark
3. 28. that all sins shall be forgiven to the sons of men, and blasphemies
wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme, excepting that against the holy Ghost,
that John 8. 7, 8, 9, 10. Christ (if that story be genuine) would not condemn
the woman taken in adultery, but rather furthered her escape from stoning, that
the Gospel we live under is another dispensation, as the Petitioners speak,
meaning, that it is not so severe and rigid a Covenant, as the Law was, that
the Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.
17. And therefore I count them too severe beyond Christian moderation, that
inflict death, imprisonment, banishment for some errors termed heresies, for
nonconformity to some forms of worship, for some conceived blasphemies: Some
eminent Protestants have been censured as too cruel, even by men of great
understanding for their severity in these things. According to this
determination, a prevention may be made of destroying such a blasphemer as Paul
or the Jews, and yet the Kings Supremacy proved from the example of the Kings
of Israel, even in spirituals, which may be exercised for public peace, and
common good, if good caution be used, without such direful and cruel
persecutions as have been. A fathers power may be proved from the Law, Deuteronomy.
21. 18, 19, 20, 21. though that law stand not in force, and so may the Kings
power in causes Ecclesiastical be proved, from the power of the Kings of
Israel, though it be denied, that he is to punish Idolatry, blasphemy, heresy,
as they did, or some would now have it once more say the Petitioners;

5. As it is no ways lawful from the word of God, for Christian Magistrates to
destroy and root out the contrary minded in religious matters, (although
Idolaters) so such proceedings may many times prove inconsistent with the very
being of nations; for suppose any Nation were wholly heathenish idolaters, and
the word of God coming in amongst them, should convert the chief Magistrates,
and twentieth part of the Nation more; must he with that twentieth part destroy
all the other nineteen, if they will not be converted, but continue in their
heathenish Idolatry? it cannot possibly be supposed warrantable.

Answ. All this may be granted. The Spaniards practice in destroying the
Americans, is condemned by Bartholomew de Casa, a Spanish Bishop, their
practices in their bloody Inquisition are abhorred by all sober people, that
are not made drunk with the wine of the whore of Babylons fornications; few men
of good temper and wisdom, do allow making war to propagate Religion: the zeal
of Princes and Bishops, in persecuting Christians, adjudged heretics by them,
is censured as madness by well composed men. In the multitude of people is the
Kings honor: but in the want of people is the destruction of the Prince, Prove.
14. 28. Thou shall not be joined in burial, because thou have destroyed thy
land, and slain thy people, Isa. 14. 20. Doubtless a Prince ought to be tender
of his subjects, as of his children, and yet he may correct them, and though he
be not to destroy those that remain infidel-idolaters, nor to force them to be
Christians, yet he may have a power to govern in things spiritual. And this if
wisely and uprightly managed, may be of great advantage to the Church of God,
and is not to be denied because he does, much less because he may, or we are
jealous he will abuse it. Thus much be said in answer to those Petitioners.

Before the first sheet of this Supplement was printed off, I met with a little
piece, entitled, A caution to the sons of Zion, by Samuel Hodgkin, in which he
grants assertory oaths in judicial proceedings not to be forbidden by Christ,
Mat. 5. 34. because commanded in the law of Moses, and overthrows the Quakers
plea, that no swearing is lawful, yet denies any promissory oath lawful, and
therefore in that respect opposes the oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
says he is imprisoned for that reason. In that book, he first excepts against
the definition Jeremiah Ives gave of a sacred oath, that it is a bond by which
a man binds his soul to the speaking of that which is in it self true, or the
doing of that which is in it self lawful, unto which the living and true God is
called to witness, Numb. 30. 2. To which Samuel Hodgkin faith, To this I
answer, That every sacred Oath by which God is called to witness to the truth
of a thing, or to the performance of a lawful thing, is a bond whereby the soul
is bound, but every calling God to witness in lawful things, is not an Oath. As
appears thus, if a bare calling God to witness, be swearing by God, then
calling the heaven and earth to witness, is swearing by heaven and earth, for
then Moses had sworn by creatures, Deuteronomy. 4. 26. I call heaven and earth to
witness against you this day; And so likewise God himself, in Deuteronomy. 30. 19. I
call heaven and earth to record against you, chap. 31. 28. But it was ever
unlawful to swear by creatures, therefore I conclude, that a bare calling to
witness; is not swearing.

I reply, The conclusion is granted, and yet the definition of Jeremiah Ives
stands good, who did not say, that a bare calling to witness, is swearing, but
calling God to witness to the speaking of that which is true. And this to be an
oath is granted by Samuel Hodgkin himself, p. 16. when he says, That calling
God to witness is not swearing; but when we read of the servants of the Lord
swearing in Scripture, we find that it was not only a bare calling God to
witness, but they swear by God, that they did speak the truth, or that they
would do such a thing. Now swearing by God at least in assertory oaths, can be
no other then calling God to witness of the truth of that we speak, and in
promissory of the truth of our intention to perform what we say we will do.
That which Samuel Hodgkin says, Now to swear by the Lord, is to say that they
do speak the truth, or will do such a thing by the Lord, as much as if they
should say, that the Lord do help them in what they do, or that they do it by
his assistance: And hence it comes to pass, that it was unlawful for a man to
swear by any creature, because no creature can help him to speak the truth, or
perform what he promised; and hence it is that God took it ill when they did
not speak truth, because they did as much as say, that God did help them to
speak a lie, and so they blasphemed the name of God in the highest nature; and
doubtless, those that made the oath we have in our common Law, did understand
no less, and therefore they charge the witness, By the help of God to speak the
truth, is a manifest mistake of the meaning of the phrase [ to swear by the
Lord] which it seems he understands to signify, not only that he that swears
calls God to be a witness of the truth of what he says in assertory oaths, and
of the truth of his intentions to perform what he says in promissory oaths,
but also, that he calls God to witness, that he speaks truth by his help, or
God helping him to speak truth in assertory oaths, and that his intention is to
perform what he promises, by Gods help or assistance. So that according to
this man's conceits, it is no swearing, unless the person swearing do call God
to be witness, not only of the truth of his words and intentions, but also of
his acknowledging of Gods help in speaking truth in assertory oaths, and his
expectation of Gods help to perform what he says he will do in promissory;
which is a new and wild conceit. New, for none, as far as I know, ever vented
it before; but all Writers that I have met with, have made the calling of God
to witness the truth of our speech in assertory oaths, and of our intentions to
perform, what we say in promissory, without this addition of acknowledging,
that it is by Gods help we speak truth, or of expectation of help from God to
do, what we promise, to be swearing. And it is a wild conceit. For 1. It is
frivolous to call God to witness, that he speaks truth by his help, or that he
expects his help to do what he promises, it being impertinent to the occasion
and end of swearing; the occasion of swearing being some uncertainty of the
truth of his words and intentions, and the end to take away that, there is no
question or controversy to be decided by whose help he speaks truth, nor by
whose help he expects to perform what he promises. Every man knows, that what
is spoken or done, is by Gods help, else it could not be; but whether it be
certainly true which he affirms, and his intentions true and real to perform,
the consideration by whose help he speaks, or expects to do what he promises,
is not at all required or minded by the exactor of the oath, as belonging to
the oath, but the acknowledging that he speaks truth by Gods help, is only a
duty of thankfulness, which is fittest to be done by the person swearing after
the oath is taken, and the expectation of help from God to perform what he
promises, is a duty of trust in God, or dependence on him to be done after the
swearing. 2. If this were necessary to an oath, then he were forsworn or
unsworn, that did not acknowledge, that he spoke truth by Gods help, or did not
depend on Gods help for performance of what he promised, and all infidels,
hypocrites, Saints that neglect their duty herein, let their words or
intentions be never so true, and their performance never so punctual and exact,
should be perjured or unsworn. That which he alleges for this conceit, is
frivolous. For the unlawfulness of swearing by any creature, is not, because no
creature can help him that swears to speak the truth, or perform what he
promised; he that informs him of the truth, may help the swearer to speak
truth, though he be a creature, and he that will aid him with money, etc. may
help him to perform what he promised; but because God only is a witness of
secret truths, and sincerity of intentions, and can only be his judge and
avenger if he speak not truth, and therefore more fully oaths are expressed in
such forms as these, God be my judge, witness, helper, etc. Nor is the reason,
why God takes it ill that men swear falsely by his name, because it is as much
as to say, that God did help them to speak a lie, for then in promissory oaths
when they swearby God, he should take it ill if they do not perform their
promise, because it is as much as to say, that God helps them to neglect their
promise; which is a sense no swearer imagins his words bear, nor any reprover
of perjury, did ever give as the reason of the iniquity of the breaker of his
oath: but because he by false swearing shows he either believes not, or fears
not Gods discovery, or avenging of his deceit. In the form of swearing in our
common Law, So help me God, the words are not in the Indicative Mood, as if it
were God does help me, or will help me, but ita me Deus adiuvet in the
Imperative or Potential, let God help me, may God help me, I pray or wish God
may help me, or not according as I speak, truly or otherwise, nor is the charge
given by the giver of the oath to the witness, by the help of God to speak
truth, but he requires him to speak truth, as he expects help from God in other
things, as his salvation, etc. When the swearer speaks the words, it is his
pawning his help he expects from God, as a voucher that he speaks truth; not an
acknowledging he speaks truth by Gods helping him only in that act of speaking.

As for what he alleges out of Deuteronomy. 4. 26. and 30. 13. and 31. 28. to prove
that all calling to witness is not swearing, it is granted him. I easily yield,
that men and inanimate things may be taken to witness without swearing, as Genesis
31. 48. Josh. 22. 34. But nevertheless calling God to witness that we speak
truth, or intend as we speak is swearing: Even as though such rhetorical
speeches as are used, Isa. 1. 2. Jer. 22. 29, etc. are not prayers; or
invitations to hear, yet the words of Solomon, 1 Kin. 8. 28, 30. are prayer, so
though it be not swearing which is used, Deuteronomy. 30. 19. yet it is swearing which
is used, 2 Cor, 1. 23.

Another thing which Samuel Hodgkin affirms, is, That all promissory oaths are
forbidden by Christ, Mat. 5. 34. Jam. 5. 12. he grants assertory oaths not
forbidden, because they were commanded in the old Testament, Exodus 22. 11. but
denies promissory oaths to be lawful, because they are voluntary, and the
occasion of the precept was about voluntary oaths, ver. 33. and therefore they
are wholly forbidden, but not assertory. Whence he infers, that the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, so far as they are promissory are forbidden.

Concerning this opinion, I deny not, but that there are learned men that
conceive, that promissory oaths of secular matters, especially of small moment,
are forbidden, because of the occasion, ver. 33. of the prohibition, Mat. 5.
34. But if promissory oaths be forbidden universally, then the promissory oaths
to the Lord are forbidden, and not only oaths of secular matters between man
and man. And if all promissory oaths be forbidden, the swearing according to
our common Law, not excepted against by S. H. should be unlawful. For thus
usually is the witness sworn, You shall make true answer to such questions as
shall be demanded of you: You shall speak the truth, the whole truth, nothing
but the truth. The Jury thus, You shall well and truly try, and true
deliverance make; All which are requiring of a promise; and so exacting a
promissory oath. But that promissory oaths are not universally forbidden, I
prove, 1. From 1 These. 5. 27. where the Apostle urges the Thessalonians thus,
I adjure you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read to all the holy brethren.
That this passage contains urging by oath, has been proved before in my
Serious Consideration of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, and in this
Supplement in my Reply to Richard Hubberthorn and Samuel Fisher. But this oath
which he urges on them, was promissory, it being of a thing to be done by
them, to wit, the reading of that Epistle to all the holy brethren. Whence I
argue, That sort of oath by which Paul adjured, bound, or urged the
Thessalonians, was lawful, else the Apostle would not have urged it, or them by
it. But Paul adjured, bound by, or urged the Thessalonians by a promissory
oath, therefore a promissory oath is lawful in the new Testament.

That which Samuel Hodgkin says, That the Text speaks not a word of swearing,
is not true, the word (...) signifies I adjure, or urge you by oath, it is the
same word that is used, Mat. 26. 63. which Samuel Hodgkin himself, p. 5. denies
not to have been a charging Christ to swear by the living God, saving that Mat.
26. 63. it is the compound Verb, but 1 These. 5. 27. the simple.

But says Samuel Hodgkin, were it not more reasonable to think, that if the
Thessalonians did value Paul's charge, they would as soon have read this Epistle
without swearing, as to be sworn to read it? for doubtless, if they had not
valued his charging them to read it, they would not have valued his charging
them to swear to read it.

I reply, Whether the Thessalonians did value Paul's charge or no, cannot be
determined by us, but this we know, that adjuring or urging by oath, being a
stricter bond, then urging to promise, or requiring without an oath, it may
well be conceived, that the Apostle had reason to charge them by oath, and not
barely to charge them without it.

2. I urge that passage, Heb. 6. 16. An oath for confirmation, is to men an end
of all strife, of which Samuel Hodgkin, p. 8. grants, that it contains the end
of oaths commanded, and so cannot in reason deny, that those oaths which are
there meant, having the end of swearing are lawful. But that passage speaks of
the end of promissory oaths, (for such was Gods oath, of which the Apostle
there speaks, ver. 14. 15, 17.) and therefore they have the end of swearing to
take away strife or contradiction, or doubt concerning men's intentions and
purposes one to another, and so are for a necessary use, and consequently,
lawful.

3. The Angels swearing, Rev. 10. 6. that there should be time no longer, was
of a thing future, and therefore to be reduced to promissory oaths, if the
division of oaths into assertory and promissory be full, it cannot be reduced
to assertory oaths, therefore it must be reduced to promissory, and therefore
promissory oaths are not wholly forbidden.

4. That which the Psalmist makes a property of one that was to dwell in Gods
holy hill, Psalm. 15. was moral, and so not unlawful, as abrogated in the new
Testament, but when he says, a person making a promissory oath is not to
change, that is, not to neglect to keep it, though it be to his own hurt, he
allows a promissory oath, as in some cases lawful.

5. Add hereto, that a promissory oath if unlawful, is so, either because it is
swearing, and then all swearing should be unlawful, contrary to the grant
concerning assertory oaths, by Samuel Hodgkin, if as promissory, then all
promises should be unlawful, and so all civil contracts unlawful, marriage,
covenants, etc.

6. If no promissory oaths be lawful to a Christian, then a Christian Prince
may not confirm a league with another Prince or State, nor any Magistrates,
Officers of Justice, take promissory oaths, no Soldiers, no Trustees,
Secretaries, etc. are to make promissory oaths of faithfulness, which would
expose all affairs of government and trust, to such hazard and uncertainty, as
would take away, as things and men are, much of that security men have in their
affairs, and hasten the ruin of States.

That which Samuel Hodgkin says, that there is no command for promissory
oaths, is said without proof. For the precepts, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Deuteronomy. 10. 20. Jer.
4. 2. do include promissory oaths, as well as assertory. As there is no
difference made in the Text, so there is as much if not more likelihood, that
promissory oaths should be chiefly meant, because the oaths of which we have
examples in the old Testament, are most of them promissory.

It Is true, Mat. 5. 33. speaks of promissory oaths, but that the prohibition,
ver. 34. is limited to promissory, as forbidding them only, and not assertory,
or forbidding promissory oaths universally, so as to allow none of that sort,
is said without proof, and there is this in the text to show, that it is meant
not of those promissory oaths, which are meant, ver. 33. to wit, special vows
to God; but of other oaths, whether promissory or assertory, which are in our
ordinary speech, 1. That the forms of oaths, by the heaven, by the earth, by
Jerusalem, by the head, there expressed, are not used in special vows, but in
common speech of one man with another, and most likely in customary, light,
needless, passionate swearing. 2. The expression [ let your communication or
speech] notes their conference one with another. 3. And so do the terms, yea
and nay, which are used most fitly in colloquies or speeches, wherein one
answers another.

FINIS.

