INNOVATIONS OF POPERY IN THE CHURCH of ROME, CALLING For Repentance and
Reformation; being as a Wall of Separation between Christians and Christians.

Wherein is showed,

That the Mystery of Iniquity, Sodom and Egypt Spiritual, Babylon the Great,
and the Mother of Harlots and Great Whore, are all founded in Innovations.

Given forth partly to stir up our Thankfulness to God for his former Mercies
to this Nation in delivering it from the Horrid Popish Thraldom and Ignorance;
and for his preserving it at this time from the impending Storm that threatened
us: partly also to help to establish those that are wavering in their minds
toward it: and to encourage those that are under it, who truly fear God, in
expectation of deliverance from under it.

By one that Loves all that fear the Lord, and love Truth and Righteousness in
their Hearts, wheresoever they are found.

W. T.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in Lumbard-Street, 1689.

INNOVATIONS OF Popery IN THE CHURCH OF ROME, CALLING For Repentance and
Reformation, etc.
HHving some things lying fair before me concerning the Church of Rome and
Popery; and having a desire to express the same with as much clearness and
plainness as I can; it will be needful for me, in the first place to
distinguish both between Persons and Persons; and also between Things and
Things; being prompted thereunto by the manner of our Lord and Masters writing
to the several Churches in Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. He owns the Good, and disowns
the Evil, in the same Church, and in the same Persons. He does not own all for
good, because some things were good: Nor does he disown and reject all as evil,
because some things were evil. His example I desire to follow.

Now therefore concerning Persons, they are thus distinguished. The Church of
Rome, taken in a general sense, consists of these three Parts.

1. The Hierarchy, or Ruling Priesthood, who are as the Leaders and Teachers,
and Rulers of the People, from the Pope downwards, in Subordination to him.

2. Inhabitants of the Earth; that is, such as have their minds and hearts on
the Earth, and have no power of Truth in them: but all their Religion stands
only in their outward Form: whose life is in that, and Zeal for that only.

3. Such as in sincerity of Heart seek after the Lord, and pursue (according to
their understanding) things that are spiritual or heavenly: who Hunger and
Thirst after Righteousness; whose hearts are drawn after the Lord, and who love
Truth in the inward parts, and hate Lying, and Deceit. These, although they may be
under many mistakes in judgment or knowledge, by reason of education or outward
teaching yet I look upon them as people; whom God will own; saying to them,
Come out of her my people.

And concerning things, I distinguish between those ancient Truths, which the
Church of Rome had, and lived in at first, and still retain; and those
Innovations brought in among them afterward.

And therefore I call nothing Popery but Innovations introduced, or upheld by
some Pope or Popes, wherewith the Church of Rome is infested. I do not
comprehend those ancient Truths, which they lived in at first in the Apostles
days, and which they still retain, under the name of Popery: but as I said,
only their Innovations; such as these which follow, and which I shall endeavor
to detect by evidence of Scripture, and to manifest the Truth obscured by them,
as there is need.

1. The Popes Exaltation, or his being made Universal Bishop. This is an
Innovation directly repugnant to the Doctrine of Christ, and of his Holy
Apostles; and practice of the primitive times. Its contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, plainly expressed in the Concurring Testimony, both of Matthew, Mark and
Luke. Read Matthew. 20.25, 26. Mar. 10.42, 43. Luke 22.25, 26, 27. Its in all
these places flatly forbidden the Servants of Christ, to exercise Dominion or
Authority over their Fellow Disciples: and they are commanded, not to be like
the Princes of the Nations, or Gentiles herein. The words in Matthew are these,
Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles (or Nations) exercise Dominion over
them, and they that are great, exercise Authority upon them: But it shall not
be so among you. What can be spoke more plainly and fully than this? But it
shall not be so among you. The words in Mark, and in Luke are to the same
purpose, prohibiting this Exaltation and Dominion. And the Apostles of Christ
they kept to this Doctrine: Paul denied such Dominion, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we
have Dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy. And Peter excludes
this Lordship likewise, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods Heritage,
but being ensamples to the Flock.

Again, if we look at the practical State of the Churches; and take notice of
the several Epistles of Christ to the Seven Churches of Asia, we see no
Superiority given therein to one Angel of the Churches above onother. But they
are distinctly writ unto, as having no precedence one above another, but every
one standing distinct in his own Sphere or Charge. So that this Exaltation of
the Popes is dissonant to the purity of the Gospel, and crept in through
impurity and corruption in after Ages, as by and by I shall make appear.

Only first take notice, that this Exaltation of the Popes is an Innovation
very fitly suiting or agreeing with the Mystery of Iniquity. For Paul speaks
plainly of such an exalted one in the Mystery of Iniquity, Who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is Worshipped (that is,
above all Magistrates and Rulers who are called Gods. Psalm. 82.1, 6.) Who has
his Seat in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. So the Pope he has his Exaltation
in the Church or Temple of God.

Now let us take notice how this Innovation of the Popes great Exaltation over
all his Fellow Bishops came in. It had its rise from Pride and Ambition: and
from the Gift of a wicked Man. Pride and Ambition working in him that was
Bishop of Rome, and seeking to have the pre-eminence, he obtained of Phocas,
then Emperor, that the Church of Rome should be, and should be called, Caput
omnium Ecclesiarum, The Head of all the Churches. And so consequently, that he
should be the Head of all the Bishops. This was the rise of the Transcendent
Exaltation of the Popes, or Bishops of Rome. It was the Gift of wicked Phocas;
a Man of whom it is recorded, That he was (Tyrannus, patriaque calamitas, sub
quo omnis generis mala exundaverunt) a Tyrant, the Calamity of his Country,
under whom all manner of wickedness abounded. Thus you see what manner of
Original this Innovation had: and what the Foundation of it was. And the Popes
came not to this height till about six Hundred Years or more after the Birth of
Christ, as History informs. Bucholcer punctually sets down the Year 607. when
Boniface 3. obtained this of Phocas.

But tho the Pope was thus exalted among men: yet hereby he received the
greater fall in the Kingdom of Christ, where he that humbles himself as a
little Child is greatest: But he that exalts himself shall be abased, Matthew.
18.4. and Chapter 23.12. So that his Exaltation is his fall, his earthly Exaltation
was his fall in heavenly things: here he fell from the humble and heavenly
Station, in which Christ stated his Church. And therefore its not unworthy the
Consideration; whether that exaltation of his was not that falling of a Star
from Heaven to the Earth spoken of, Rev. 9. Especially if we consider the
Concomitants or Consequences of the fall. The Pope now having none to control
him, but being thus exalted above all, he had power to bring in what
innovations he would. As the Star fallen from Heaven to the Earth had power
given him to open the bottomless Pit; which comes all to one. For what is that
Pit? We cannot imagine it to be a Pit in the Earth, that had a Lock and Key
upon it: but man's Heart is as a deep Pit, without a Bottom or Foundation: and
the imaginations thereof is as a Smoke issuing out of that Pit. Innovations are
the imaginations of man's Heart; and like Smoke they darken the Sunshine of the
Gospel, and fill the Air (that spiritual Air that men's Spirits should breath
in) with darkness, and unwholesome Mists. And this the Pope had power to do
when he was exalted; and the Star had power to do when he was fallen. And
therefore this his Exaltation was his fall. And if he was a Star as the Angels
of the Churches were called; this his exaltation seems plainly to be the
falling of that Star.

Now therefore, if the Church of Rome would reform it self from its
Innovations, it must begin here, and bring down its Bishop to his first
Station; and divest him of that power to bring in or uphold any Innovations
contrary to the primitive simplicity of the Gospel. For while he stands in this
exaltation, they can never reform themselves farther than he pleases: And
especially while they look upon him as Infallible. For who can pretend to
rectify any thing that proceeds from Infallibility.

2. Therefore another Innovation is, The Popes Infallibility. This is a device
which backs and supports his Exaltation, and subjects the Thoughts and Spirits
of men under him without contradiction. For who dare mutter against an
infallible Judge? But it might suffice one would think, to overturn the
Infallibility of Popes, to see one Pope Excommunicating another; as Alexander
Tertius and Victor Quartus did; who were both chosen Popes by the Cardinals at
the same time: and had both the same Authority given them. This was in the Year
of our Lord, 1159. says Buchol: And again in the Year 1439. Pope Eugenius was
deposed by the Council of Basil, and Amadeus created Pope in his stead; and
hence great Seditions arose. Now if you will have the Council here to be
Infallible, then the Pope was Fallible: Or if you will have the Pope to be
infallible, then the Council was Fallible: So choose here whose Infallibility
you will subvert, whether the Popes or the Councils. Take notice also of the
acts of one Pope more, for I would not ennumerate many) Pope Alexander VI. for
the enriching of his Son Borgias, prepared a splendid Banquet, to which he
invited certain principal great men; of which number Cardinal Adrian his
familiar Friend was one. He ordered his Servants to set before them Wine that
was poisoned; and to set before him and his Son pure Wine. But Providence so
ordered it, that the Wine that was poisoned was set before himself and his Son;
so they drank the poisoned Wine, and the Guests drank pure Wine, Here was a
great want of the Apostolic privilege whom no deadly drink should hurt: and
so also of the Spirit of Infallibility, as to the preservation of himself, and
his Son. But that is not all I aim at. This wicked Murderer had a little before
that poisoned another, a Cardinal of Rome John Michael. Now shall we say, that
so wicked a wretch was endowed with the Spirit of God, which only is the Spirit
of Infallibility? Does that teach such Treachery and Wickedness? Surely every
sober man will abhor to think so.

But I need not stand upon such particular instances to show the Fallibility of
Popes: this will more generally appear as we go along discovering other
Innovations. For their Innovations contradicting and clashing against the
Doctrine of Christ and his Holy Apostles plainly manifest the fallibility and
erring Spirit of the Popes.

3. Another Innovation is the Selling of Pardons and Indulgences. And this is
another device helping to support the Popes in their greatness, for it brings
in much treasure into the Popes Coffers. And here I shall take notice of these
three things. 1. That Pardons are Sold. 2. That they are a great support to the
Popes Exaltation. 3. That this Innovation absolutely destroys the Popes
Infallibility, and transplants him out of Peter into Simon Magus.

1. I shall prove that Pardons and Indulgences are Sold by the Popes: for some
will deny any thing, though never so manifestly known; although the modester
sort of men under the Popes will not deny it. I shall pass by their annual and
more frequent selling of Pardons; and manifest their greater Fairs for the sale
of them. For they have invented certain great Fairs or Marts when men are to
flock to Rome, to buy them. And these Fairs they call their Jubilees. They put
the name Jubilee upon them, but they are plainly Faits for Pardons and
Indulgences. In the Jubilees Men went out free without Money: but here they are
to pay their Money; therefore it is a Fair not a Jubilee. The first that
invented these was Boniface VIII. in the year of our Lord 1300. And he ordained
this great Fair (or mercenary Jubilee) to be kept every hundred year. After him
(but not next) Clemens VI. impatient of so long a stay for a Fair (because his
Life was not likely to reach to it) he reduced this their pecuniary Jubilee to
every fiftieth year: So in the year 1350. he kept his great Fair. Then in the
year 1400. Boniface IX. kept his great Fair. Another was kept in the year 1450.
But now they began to think fifty years was too long between Fair and Fair, so
Xystus contracted them to twenty five years distance: and he kept his great
Fair, Anno 1475. Chronologers have punctually expressed the years; which puts
the sale of Pardons out of doubt, if any should question it.

2. Take notice that these are a great support to the Popes Exaltation: such
multitudes of men flocking from all parts to Rome, to buy their Pardons, that
they could scarce walk one for another in that great City. In one of their
Jubilees about two hundred men, its said, were killed by the great Crowd at the
Bridge Sancti Angeli, as they hasted for Pardons; some trod under foot, and
some pressed to death by the crowd, and others thrust into the River. And yet
such great Fairs or Marts would not satisfy the avarice of some of the Popes:
but they sent afterward their pardons to remote places to be sold. Alexander
VI. the year after his Jubilee, sent his Indulgences far off to be sold. In
Germaniam (says my Author) atque alias longinquas Provincias Diplomata cum
amplissimis Jubilei Indulgentiis misit, passimque vendidit, propter eos qui
Romam venire neglexerunt, vel venire non potuerunt. This was pretended to be
for the sakes of those that neglected, or could not come to Rome at the
Jubilee: By his Legates he sold them Pardons every where, passim vendidit
Buchol. a Volater, anno 1500. This Simony has greatly helped to enrich the
Popes, and to bear them up in their high Exaltation in the World. Are these
likely to be Successors of the Apostles? and to sit in the Apostolic Seat? Who
said, Love not the World, neither the things that are in the World. If any Man
love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John 2.15.

3. This Innovation or inventition of Selling Pardons of Sins absolutely
destroys the Popes infallibility, transplanting him out of Peter into Simon
Magus: that is, out of that Spirit that was in Peter, into that Spirit that was
in Simon Magus. So that although the Pope pretend to be Peter's Successor: Yet
he is fallen from Peter to Simon Magus. The Spirit that was in Peter abhorred
the very thought of Selling the Spiritual gifts of God for Money. But the
Spirit that Simon Magus was of, and so the Popes are of, has thought that the
Spiritual gifts of God may be purchased with Money. This is a great fall, to
fall from one to whom the Key of the Kingdom of Heaven was committed, to one
whom he Excluded out of the Kingdom, and turned the Key against him: Saying.
Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter: Thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of Iniquity. And what was the ground of all this great
Severity? only this; Because (says Peter) thou have thought, that the gift of
God may be purchased with money. Act. 8.18. to 24. And is not this very thought
the Popes thought?

Now I entreat you, weigh these things. Is not the pardon of Sins one of the
greatest gifts of God? And does not the Pope think that it may be purchased
with Money, seeing he sells it? Is not here the same thought that was in Simon
Magus, for which he was so severely sentenced by Peter, and Excluded by him
from all right in dispensing the Spiritual Gifts of God? Will you say that
Peter condemned this thought in Simon Magus but is of another mind now, and
approves of it in the Pope? If so, then you will condemn Peter as one fallen from
his own Stedfastness, and not the Pope. If you say, the Pope does not think as
Simon did; he does not think that the Spiritual Gift of God may be purchased
with Money; then I say, He is still the worse, to sell that Spiritual Gift, the
Pardon of Sins for Money, which he thinks cannot be purchased for Money, For in
so doing, he both robs them of their Money; and deceives their Souls, making
them believe a Lie. And if the Case be so with the Pope, as it was with Simon
Magus, who thought that the Gift of God might be purchased with Money, where is
his Infallibility? yea, where is his power to pardon Sin? Do you think that
Simon Magus had power to pardon Sin? Or that one in his Sin has power so to
do? Seeing he that was guilty of that Sinful, Carnal Thought, is excluded with
him from having any part or lot in dispensing the Spiritual Gifts of God,
except you will make Peter partial, in excluding one and not another, who is in
the same fault. Again, does not this also help to confirm that the Pope, being
fallen from Peter to Simon Magus, is that fallen Star mentioned before?

4. Another Innovation was that called Annatae. An Invention very near of Kin
to the selling of Pardons: for this is a kind of selling of Benefices. For they
were not to enjoy Benefices, but under this Condition, that they should pay
half of the yearly profit into the Popes Treasury. This, and the selling of
Pardons hugely increased the Popes Treasure. Quae res Blondo and Platina
testibus, Pontifices Romanos Bonifacii Successores, non minus Christiani Orbis
quam Vrbis Dominos reddidit. These things made him Lord, as well of the whole
Christian World, as of the City. You may see more of this in the Year 1400 from
the Nativity of Christ, quoted by Bucholcer. Where he says, This Custom all
submitted to, except in England, where the same was yielded to concerning the
Bishops, but not in other Benefices. Now if we may not call this Symony, what
other name shall we give it? Seeing it is a kind of selling and buying of
Spiritual Benefices, as they are called. And judge Ye whether Peter, or Paul,
or any other of the Apostles made filthy Lucre the Door, by which they let men
into the Ministry, as the Popes do. And yet the Pope called this Treasury, into
which this is paid, The Apostolic Treasury: As if the Apostles had set up, or
used such an Earthly Treasury. I mention this invention, because it was one
thing that greatly strengthened the Popes in their high Exaltation: And also
because it impairs the Popes Infallibility, to see them act so contrary to the
Spirit of the Holy Apostles of Christ; and yet giving it some Title to the
Apostles, by calling this the Apostolic Treasury.

5. Another Innovation, is the Popes Usurpation of a Power over Emperors,
Kings, Princes and People, in their Temporal concerns: So as, with a Word he
can dethrone one, and have another set up, at his pleasure, under his Dominion.
Was there any thing that tended to this in any of the Apostles Practices, or
Doctrine? Or for many Ages and Generations after them? Were not the Bishops in
Subjection, as to temporal affairs, under the Princes of the World? And not one
of them authoritatively above another, until wicked Phocas gave the Precedence
to ambitious Boniface 3. And yet then, he did not give him power over himself,
or over any secular Princes. So that this was an Usurpation and Innovation of
the Popes afterward: and was practiced by some of them; and they got it
decreed in some of their Councils. And Boniface 8. (who first instituted the
Mercenary Jubilees, the same Year that he celebrated the first Jubilee,) Writ,
That he was Lord in Temporals and Spirituals, in the whole World. Of whom it is
recorded by Platina thus: Qui Imporatoribus, Regibus, Principibus, Nationibus,
populis terrorem potius quam Religionem injicere conabatur: quique dare regna
and auferre, pellere homines ac reducere pro arbitrio animi conabatur, etc. His
endeavor was to be a Terror to Emperors and Kings, Princes and People: To give
Kingdoms, and take them away at his pleasure.

Now here take notice, that as the Popes Exaltation of himself was foreshewed,
2 Thessalonians. 3, 4. So this Power and Dominion of the Popedom over Kings and Princes
was foreshewed, Rev. 17. ult. under the representation of a Woman, there
expounded to be a great City reigning over the Kings of the Earth. And the
Woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns over the Kings of
the Earth. Or nearer the Greek thus, Which has a Kingdom above the Kings of
the Earth. Which Kingdom, if it be not the Popedom reigning over the Kings of
the Earth, deposing them at pleasure, and Surrogating others in their stead,
then I confess I know not what it is. But if other Circumstances in that
Chapter be considered with this, I think it will put this out of doubt: which
here I cannot stand upon, without too great a diversion and interruption; but
in its proper place, following where the Hierarchy of Rome comes to be spoken
of, by Gods assistance, I shall demonstrate.

Another innovation is, The Exercising Dominion over men's Faith. It may be
something of this kind might begin before the Popes were so named: But however
its upheld and practiced by the Popes; and was not owned by the Apostles
Doctrine; but is an Innovation contrary to the simplicity and purity of the
Gospel, wheresoever it is found. That it is a piece of Popery, and upheld by
them, is manifest by their punishing and cruel handling of those that in
Conscience toward God, and faithfulness to his Truth, cannot submit to those
their humane Innovations, which they see to be so. But the Popes who have
arrogated to themselves Power and Dominion over the Persons and Thrones of
Kings and Princes, are not satisfied without the like dominion also over the
Throne of God, the Conscience; and except they model men's Faith, and cast them
all into one Mould: which thing the Apostles durst not do. The Apostle Paul
disclaims this Dominion over men's Faith, 2 Cor. 1.24. And he durst not judge
the Faith or Conscience of the different believing Romans, when some of them
kept a Day, and others kept it not; and when some of them did Eat Herbs, and
others did Eat Flesh; and both to the Lord as he judged: and therefore he
defends them both, one against the other; and judged nothing but their judging
of one another in so doing, Romans 14.4, 5, 6. And then he puts them in mind of
Christ's Prerogative in this case, ver. 10. Saying, But why do thou judge thy
Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? We shall all stand before
the Judgment Seat of Christ. But the Popes are not of Paul's mind; they will
have men believe as they believe, or else Burn them alive. if this be not to
exercise Dominion over men's Faith, and Conscience, what is; And if this be not
an innovation contrary to the simplicity, purity, mercy and meekness of the
Gospel, nothing is; which says In meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, 2 Timothy 2.25. not burning them, as is done under the Tyrannical
Popedom.

7. But to back this their cruel Dominion over the Faith and Consciences of
men, and to palliate it, and make it take place, and go down with their people,
they put the Name Heretic upon those who cannot conform to their Innovations;
that they may incense people against them. And this is another Innovation. And
so they heap Innovation upon Innovation. Whereas indeed and in truth, nothing
is Heresy but that which opposes the Truth of the Gospel, delivered by Christ
and his Holy Apostles. To oppose false Doctrine, and innovations of men is no
Heresy: But to bring in Innovations contrary to the Truth of the Gospel, and
to require subjection thereto, this is certainly Heresy. Therefore let them
that call, or count men Heretics look to it, that they be not found the
greatest Heretics, devouring innocent Lambs of Christ under that false notion.
And indeed here is a notable Stratagem of Satan, whereby to make them that fear
God, and abhor men's inventions, as Sheep fit for the Slaughter, even to fix
opprobtious Terms upon them. For this begets an Odium in the minds of
Blindfolded people against them: and makes them through hatred ready for
Butchers, and to execute Massacres and all manner of mischief against the
Faithful Servants of Christ, under that notion of being Heretics. It must be
under some such disguise, that the Great Whore makes her self drunk with the
Blood of Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; such as bear
witness to him and his Truth against the Innovations of men.

8. And so that is another Innovation, namely, To rid men out of the Earth whom
they call Heretics. It Is no sin to destroy them, say they: Yea further, they
have made it a Law, to Burn them. And this has not been a dead Law: or like a
Sword kept in a Scabbard; but has been cruelly executed where the power of the
Popedom has prevailed. I am sure this cruelty is an Innovation: for there is
no such Doctrine from Christ, or any of his Apostles; but positive Doctrine
against it. Therefore that Law and such other destructive Laws, and the
execution of them, must needs be Innovations of men. Christ Jesus our Lord
said, He came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9.54, 55, 56.
But this Spirit that has got into the Popedom comes to destroy men's lives,
therefore is a Spirit contrary to the Spirit of Christ. It Is another Spirit
crept in under the profession of the Gospel, not his. Christ Jesus our Lord
said also concerning the Tares which his Servants would have been plucking up,
Let them alone. How long were they to let them alone? Even till the end of the
World. And then the Angels must do that work, Mat. 13.29, 39. Men are not
infallible, they may mistake; Therefore the Lord said to his own Servants, Let
them alone, lest ye pluck up Wheat with Tares: He will not have them do that
rooting Work; but he will set those to do that work that can more certainly
distinguish between Tares and Wheat, even the Angels; and they shall not do it
neither, till his appointed time, even the end of the World. This therefore
must needs be an Innovation contrary to the command and will of Christ, to be
doing this work, under any pretense, namely, to be rooting out Tares (if they
really be so) out of the Field of the World, before Christ's appointed time.
Again, it is against that Golden Rule of Christ, As ye would that men should do
to you, so do ye to them, Mat. 7.12. Now would any man have others to burn him
because he cannot believe as they believe? Would those burning Popes have any
of the Reformed Churches to burn them, or their People, because they believe
not as those Reformed Churches believe? I think not. And yet it were but Lex
talionis, like for like, if they did so. But I never heard of any called a
Reformed Church, that ever did so: nor I hope ever will: although they may have
retained too much Popish Cruelty still unreformed of.

9. Another Innovation is, The Forbidding Marriage to their Glergy (so called.)
This is an Innovation also wherein they exercise Dominion over the Faith and
Consciences of others; and is directly contrary to the Scriptures. Have we not
power, says the Apostle, to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as other
Apostles, and as the Brethren of the Lord and Cephas, 1 Cor. 9.5. And again, 1 Timothy 3.2. A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, etc. And verse.
11. The Deacons Wives must be grave, etc. And verse. 12. Let the Deacons be the
Husbands of one Wife. Hence you see its clear that they that are in the
Ministry have power to Marry. But the Spirit of God dictating this liberty to
Paul, immediately in the beginning of the next Chapter (which was a
continuation of his discourse about Marriage) he shows him an Innovation that
should arise contrary to this liberty, and he says thus: Now the Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils; speaking lies in
Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron; forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, etc. Here the Spirit of God seems
to point at this very thing, even at the Popes prohibition of Marriage to
Bishops and Deacons, and such as were to be admitted into the Ministry; because
it follows so quickly after that liberty of Bishops and Deacons to be Married.
And the words that accompany this prohibition of Marriage are worthy to be
taken notice on. It shall be by persons that are fallen, or departed from the
pure Faith of the Gospel (who shall have power over Bishops, and are fallen)
giving heed to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils; Speaking lies in
Hypocrisy, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron (as hardened in
their Consciences as a thing seared with an hot Iron.) Then as a visible
Character of such persons he gives these two open Marks, that every one that
runs may read them. They shall forbid Marriage, that is one: And command to
abstain from Meats, that is another: both which are found in the Popedom. They
have power over Bishops, to forbid their Marriage: and they are fallen very low
from the purity of the Faith or Gospel, as has been showed before: And these
also impose it upon their People as a matter of Conscience, to abstain from
Meats. And the words Forbid and Command, show that these things came in by
force and power; not by a voluntary taking up. The Prohibition of Marriage was
very stiffly withstood by the Clergy: but the power of the Pope prevailed
against them. The Contest about this Innovation Bucholcer expresses very
plainly, in the words of Schaffnaburgensis, showing it to be an imposition of
Hiltebrand called Gregory 7. Anno Christi 1074. The Popes had need to keep the
Scriptures from their People: for otherwise which of them could read this first
Epistle of Paul to Timothy, and not see the Error of the Popes in this matter,
expressed so plainly, chap. 3.2, 4, 11, 12. and chap. 4.1, 2, 3.

10. Their setting up Images and Pictures, and bowing to them, or before them
in reverence to them, is another Innovation. And this is imputed to them for
Idolatry. For what is Idolatry, but bowing with reverence to an Idol? or
worshipping an Idol? And this is flatly contrary to the Second Commandment, the
words whereof are thus, Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in
the Water under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them: for I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me: and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. What man reading this Commandment, and seeing or beholding their
Images, and their bowing toward them, could think otherwise, but that they
worshipped them? Or who could think, but that this practice is a breach of this
Commandment? Yea, they themselves that have patronized this Idolatry, have been
so sensible of their contradiction of this Commandment hereby, that they durst
not let it stand: but have turned it out: because it looks their Image Worship
so full in the face: and is so plain that it would set the heart of every
single-hearted man against it. And this turning of the Second Commandment out
of doors, is a plain demonstration against them of their consciousness that
they are guilty of the breach of it. For if they did not know that it were
against their Idolatry, what need they turn it out of doors? And to deceive the
Simple, they have made up the number of ten, by dividing the last into two.
Thus they dare tamper with the Commands of God! Durst any man whose Conscience
is not seared, expunge a Command of God, which was writ with his own finger,
and given with so great solemnity, as this was as well as the rest, at Mount
Sinai? I know the Sophistry of those that would palliate this their Idolatry by
frivolous distinctions of Worship. But the Lord has expressed himself so fully
against all appearance of Worship in this point, that he has laid all their
vain distinctions of Worship void. For whereas he has in this Commandment
declared himself to be a jealous God; does not this warn every man to flee from
every appearance of the breach of it, lest he by tampering with Images provoke
the eyes of his Jealousy? And doubtless this was spoken not only in respect of
his own Jealousy, who sees the purposes and intents of every heart; but also
of the jealousy of his faithful People, who would be offended thereby: and in
offending them thereby, he is offended. Now let any judge; Is not here an
appearance of Worship done to Images, when they bow before them, and toward
them with reverence? If a jealous man should see so much respect and reverence
between his. Wife and another Man, and see her so Idolize him, as they do their
Images, would it not beget Jeal^usie in him? Appearances of great respect beget
Jealousy. Now I say, why has the Lord declared himself to be a Jealous God in
this Comman^ment, but to admonish us thereby to shun all appearance of the
Breach of it? according to the Exhortation of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Abstain from
all appearance of Evil.

For the Breach of this Commandment, the Jews severely smarted many times: and
shall not such as are called Christians take warning thereby? Nothing provoked
the Lord so much against his people Israel, as Idolatry, and shedding innocent
Blood: and shall we think that such things do not provoke his holy Spirit now?
And a pretense of honoring God thereby will not excuse men to him. The Jews
when they had made a Calf in the Wilderness, and Sacrificed to it, and Feasted
with those Sacrifices, this was done in pretense to the Lord, who had brought
them out of Egypt. Therefore when Aaron proclaimed a Day to do Sacrifice to the
Calf, he proclaimed it thus, To morrow is a Feast to the Lord, Exodus 32.5. You
see this was pretended to be done to the Lord, and the people came upon that
Proclamation, as keeping a Feast to the Lord, and did Eat and Drink, and make
merry; and in their Sacrifice c^lebrated their deliverance out of Egypt. But
they would have that Calf to represent their Deliverer, and therefore
attributed that Title to the thing repesenting; which was due only to the Lord,
whom they would represent. For we cannot imagine that they, who so lately had
seen the wonders of the Lord, in bringing them out with a high hand, and went
before them in a Pillar of a Cloud and Fire, could believe that Calf to be
their Deliverer; both because it was made after they were delivered; and also
because it was made of their own Earrings, and Gold which they gave to Aaron
to make it of: but they put Signum pro re significata; the sign for the thing
signified; which the Lord will not approve of in such case. And therefore in
this place and to this Innovation I may here add their Idolatry used in their
Sacrifice of the Mass, worshipping the Sign for the thing signified. Namely,
their worshipping of that which their own hands have made; which was always
counted Idolatry in Scripture. Their Land (says the Prophet Isaiah) is full of
Idols: they worship the Work of their own hands, that which their own Fingers
have made. And the mean Man boweth down, and the Great Man humbles himself;
therefore forgive them not, Isa. 2.8, 9. And again in the New Testament its
said, The rest of men which were not killed with these Plagues, yet repented
not of the Works of their Hands, that they should not worship Devils and Idols
of Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Stone, and Wood, which neither can see, nor
hear, nor walk, Rev. 9.20. Now consider, is not this the Work of their own
hands, that which their own Fingers have made? Is it not a God of their own
making? Do they not first make the Bread or Wasers, and then make it a God by
speaking a few words? And is it not such a God as can neither see, nor hear,
nor walk, nor speak? By which Characters Idols are frequently described: and
will you have Christ Jesus to come under the description of Idols, and make him
like them? The Idols of the Heathen have Mouths, but they speak not, Eyes but
they see not, Ears but they hear not. They are known to be Idols, because they
can neither speak, nor see, nor hear: and will you make him like one of them?
Read and consider, Psalm. 135.15, 16. and Psalm. 115.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Where you may
plainly see, not to hear, not to speak, not to see, not to smell, not to
handle, not to walk are made notes of an Idol to know them by. And will you now
make our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World was made, like a Dumb Idol? Will
you make that to be he, which was only left for a Memorial of him? Do this as
often as ye do it in remembrance of me, says he. He makes it but a Sign, for a
Memorial of him.

I do believe that many may be verily persuaded, that the Bread and Wine are
really the Body and Blood of Christ: and so use it with great reverence, as if
it were he; and that they think they do honor him thereby. But it is great
dishonor done to him, if you well consider the thing. For first it brings him
under the Circumstances of the Idols of the Heathen, as has been showed. 2. To
offer him up again, invalidates that one Sacrifice of himself upon the Cross,
once for all, by which he has for ever perfected them that are sanctified.

But I know you stand upon the literal words of Christ, This is my Body. And
therein I can bear with you a little, because many may think, that they verily
obey Christ therein. But if you well weigh it, you will find that those words
are not to be taken literally, but figuratively, as many other of his
expressions were: as for instance, I am the Door, I am the true Vine, my Father
is the Husbandman: Take one more, which comes near to that saying, This is my
Body, namely this, Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. Some took that in a literal sense, as
you do those words, This is my Body. But let us mind his own exposition of
them; for that comes near to the Case in hand. The words that I speak unto you;
they are Spirit, and they are Life. (What do you talk of the Flesh) The Flesh
profits nothing: Its the Spirit that quickens, John 6.63. Whereby he shows
plainly, that this Eating of his Flesh he spoke of, was the receiving and
nourishing of his Spirit in our Hearts, which gives us life; a Spiritual Life
in him. A like expression to this he used to the Woman of Samaria, John 4.14.
where he compares the receiving and embracing of his Spirit to drinking of
Water: the words are these, But whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall
give him, shall never Thirst: but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a Well of Water, springing up into everlasting. Life. You see by Water, he
understood Spirit, and by Flesh and Blood he understood Spirit: which were
Metaphorical expressions. And so here in these words, This is my Body, he spoke
after the same manner: For when as he says, The Flesh profits nothing, to
what end should we imagine, that he left his Flesh to be eaten.

But then as for the Offering of him up by a Priest. This is an intrusion into
the Mediatorship of Christ, who only could offer up himself to God: He being
both the Sacrifice, and the Priest set apart by God for that work, whom all the
Priests under the Law typifyed. And he did this himself, Once for all. And
there remains no more Sacrifice for Sin. For by one Offering he has perfected
for ever them that are Sanctified. You may read that word Once expressed many
times in the 9th. and 10th. Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews, whereby is
showed the Difference between the Sacrifices of the Law, which were types, and
that one Sacrifice of Christ, which was the substance: How they were offered
often, because they could not make the Comers thereunto perfect as pertaining
to the Conscience: but this Sacrifice of Christ was offered but Once, because
it is of Efficacy at once offering, to make the comers to it perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, that is, to clear their conscience, that they may
draw near to God, in full assurance of Faith, having their Hearts sprinkled
from an evil Conscience, Heb. 10.22. Many things might further be spoken upon
this point; but it being much controverted by others, I hasten to other things.
Only give me leave to commend one thing worthy to be read by all that are in
doubt upon this Subject. And that is the Epistle of the Prophet Jeremy sent to
the Captives in Babylon. You may find it in the Apocripha; its the last Chapter
of Baruch, the whole Chapter. Where, setting aside the Matter that their Idols
were made of, their description by their impotency to do any thing, or help
themselves, beside many other circumstances, may as well be applied to that
which is called the Host, as it was to them; whereby they are known to be no
Gods. They cannot speak, they cannot feel if they be gnawed upon by Worms, they
cannot save themselves from Thieves or Robbers, but stand in need to be kept
with Locks and Bars from Robbers, if you set many Candles before them, they
cannot see one, there is no Breath in them, they are born by men, having no
feet to go with, whereby they declare unto men, that they are nothing worth, if
they fall to the Ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of themselves:
nor can they move themselves. By these things ye may know that they are no
Gods. Many things of like sort you may read of them in that Chapter, whereby,
says the Prophet Jeremy, you may know that they are no Gods; therefore fear
them not. ver. 16. Now I pray you consider what dishonor you do to our Lord
Jesus Christ, to exhibit him to the world in such a Dress; so fully agreeing
with the description of the Heathen Idols. May not the Heathen say, What is
your God better than our God? Miserable are they, says Solomon, And in dead
things is there hope, who called them Gods which are the Works of men's Hands.
Wisdom of Solomon, Chap. 13.10.

11. Another dismal Innovation is depriving people of the free use of the Holy
Scriptures in their purity.

In the first place, this shows the Popedom to be a Dominion, point blank
opposite to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. For his Kingdom is a Kingdom
of light: but the Popedom is a Kingdom of darkness. Christ was given for a
light to us: but the Pope brings darkness. I will give thee for a Light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the end of the Earth, Isa. 49.6.
The Light is in order to Salvation not darkness. And the same Prophet Isaiah
personates Christ speaking thus, Chap. 51.4. Hearken unto me my people, and
give Ear unto me O my Nation: for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will make
my judgment to rest for a Light of the People. But the Popedom will not let
his Law and his Judgment to rest for a Light of the People, but hides it from
them; and as Thieves and Robbers they rob them of that which is for Salvation
unto the end of the Earth. Therefore the true Apostles were sent forth to turn
men from darkness to the Light; and by that means, from the Power of Satan
(which is in the Darkness) unto God; that so they might receive forgiveness of
Sins, and an inheritance (in that Light) among them that are Sanctified by
Faith in Christ, Acts 26.18. And therefore the happy State of Believers is
called an inheritance in the Light, Col. 1.12. Ephesians. 5.8.

But Popery gives an inheritance in the Darkness. It matters not how dark
people be kept, if they have but Money enough, they may obtain an inheritance in
the Darkness therewith, such as it is. Is it not manifest to all, that here is
a Kingdom of darkness set up under the Popedom, working quite contrary to the
Kingdom of Christ, which stands in the Light?

And as by this Innovation, they most clearly show their Kingdom to be contrary
to the Kingdom of Christ: So also hereby they manifest themselves to be Evil
Workers, departed from the Truth of the Gospel. For why do they deprive people
of the free use of the Scripture, but because it discovers their evil Deeds;
their deeds of darkness? And therefore lest people should see their works of
darkness which it discovers, they put out that Candle: or hide the light of it
from them, by clothing the Scriptures with the Hairy Sackcloth of their own
Comments, for the saving of their innovations from the sharp Edge thereof.
Christ Jesus our Lord, the Truth and the Life, has told us plainly, That he
that does Truth comes to the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God. But (on the other hand) every one that does evil
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, John 3.20, 21. Its a plain demonstration of an evil doer, to hate the
Light.

I know some are so seared, that they have confidence (I may say impudence) to
defend this restraint of the Scriptures from the people: because say they, The
liberty of having and reading the Scriptures is a means to beget and foment
Errors and Heresies in the Church. To this I answer, First, This judgment is
directly contrary to the Judgment of Christ: therefore its a false and forged
Opinion. For Christ says, Ye err not knowing the Scriptures: but Popery says,
Ye will Err if ye know the Scriptures, therefore ye shall be debarred of them.
Thus directly opposite to Christ, is that work, and he that defends it, Mat.
22.29. Secondly, I give this answer, The cause of this false assertion or
shift, in saying, That the Scritures are a means or cause of Errors among the
people, is this. They that are trained up under the Popish innovations, take
those innovations for Truth, and the Truth it self for Error. So they call that
Error and Heresy, which is contrary to those innovations. And herein they fall
under the Prophet Isaiah's Woe, Isa. 5.20. Woe to them that call evil good, and
good evil: that put darkness for light, and light for darkness.

And now to go on with this Innovated Darkness. They hereby not only show their
opposition to Christ and his Kingdom; and make themselves known to be evil
Doers: but also herein they show themselves most cruel Tyrants against their
own people, keeping them, as it were in a Dungeon and Chains of Darkness, where
they must not make use of their own Eyes, nor have the Benefit of the
comfortable light of the Sun: but they must see only with others Eyes; and by
the light of those dim Candle-lights, which burn blew through the Damp of their
Pit, which they hand to them in dark Lanthrons. To speak plainly, they must
have little or no light, but such as is obfuscated and dimmed with their
poisonous innovations; and that must be held forth to them by persons
sufficiently leavened with their corrupt inventions. They must not make use of
their own Eyes, to see with their own Eyes and understandings, the comfortable
Sunshine of those pure Truths which shine forth in the plain and uncorrupted
words of the Gospel, left upon record. This is Tyranny upon the Souls of
people; to which the Bondage of Egypt, and Captivity of Old Babylon was but a
small matter; seeing that chiefly was upon the Body, but this is upon the Soul.
So that their enthralled people cannot say, Their Soul is their own. But they
are the Slaves and Souls of men, fulfilling that very expression of them, Rev.
18.3. For how can a Man say, that his Soul is his own, when he cannot make use
of the Faculties of it? But must be wholly in things Spiritual restrained to
the Sense and Will of another.

This is an Innovation of great consequence: for it is as a Lock and Key upon
all their other Innovations, to keep them safe from being assaulted. So that
hereby they Establish themselves in their Kingdom of Darkness? even as Satan
holds his Kingdom in men, as long as he can keep them in darkness: but where
light comes, Satan falls like Lightning: and even so where the free use of the
Scriptures comes in their purity, their Innovations must needs fall. But what
wickedness is this, that for the upholding an earthly Kingdom, they care not
what becomes of Millions of Souls, but let them perish in the darkness by their
will. For Children of darkness they must be kept; and not be suffered to become
Children of the Light, if they can help it. The Holy Apostles of Christ gave
this Testimony of the Scriptures, That they are able to make one wise unto
Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus; and that they are given forth by
inspiration of God; and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. What Is
the reason then that men should be envied, the comfortable use and benefit of
them? Is there any true reason can be given for the restraint of them, but
this? That men would by them be instructed and furnished against the
Innovations of the Popedom; and so run into that which they call Heresy? But
what desperate wickedness, and scared Consciences has God given people up
unto, that dare thus in opposition to the inspirations of the Spirit of God,
and benefit of the Souls of People, deprive them of so great helps, and
furtherance of their Salvation! This is a Robbery far greater than any earthly
Robbery. And yet they must be called Holy Fathers, who have been the greatest
Robbers in the World.

May we not here greatly suspect, that the Mystery of Iniquity does here lurk,
where such care is taken to keep out the light of the Scriptures from men, lest
thereby they should discover it? Yea, may we not rather detect that Mystery of
Iniquity to be here, where so many Innovations contrary to the Holy Scriptures
are found? and such innovations as turn the profession of Christianity into a
Stream quite contrary to its own nature? To work wickedly and contrary to the
Spirit of God, and yet pretend therein holiness and serving of God: What Is this
but Iniquity under a Mystery; wickedness veiled with pious pretenses? And what
is the Mystery of Iniquity, but Iniquity in a Mystery? Iniquity under pious
pretenses, which makes it a Mystery? But those pretenses cannot alter the
nature of Wickedness; but only put a fair Gloss upon it: for wickedness is
wickedness wheresoever it is found; and the fair pretenses put upon it cannot
change its nature, but only dazzle the Eyes, and Minds of men, and make it
mysterious to them. The shedding of so much innocent Blood, as has been shed
in Massacres, and Fires, and by other ways, does not change the nature of that
wickedness, by putting the name of Heretics upon those who were so destroyed:
only that ignominious Title may cover it to the ignorant, and make that cruelty
seem to them, a pious thing; and so make that Iniquity a Mystery. And in like
manner Idolatry or bowing to Images may be made a Mystery, by pretending it to
be a reverencing God, and thanking him for such or such a Saint, or such like
considerations: when as the action it self is directly opposite to his command,
and bears no other appearance, but of an idolatrous worship, contrary to the
second Commandment; which they dare not let stand in the common sight of their
people, for fear of its discovering their Idolatry. Now (not to name the rest
of these their innovations here) what greater wickedness is there, then these
three, namely, shedding innocent Blood; worshipping Images, or Gods of their
own making; and robbing people of so great a Benefit to their Souls, as the
Holy Scriptures in their purity might be? And all the pretenses they can put
upon these Evils, can but disguise them, and make them a Mystery, but they
cannot change the nature of them.

12. Another Innovation is that invention of putting their people upon the
pattering over so many Pater Nosters, and Ave Mary's, that they need a String
of Beads to number them by. And here we may stand still and wonder that men
that pretend themselves so profound Doctors and Fathers in the Church of
Christ, should show themselves to be so blind or wicked. So blind, as to think
that God is well pleased with Lip-labor; or so wicked as to make people
believe that he is so. Surely they know that Christ Jesus our great Doctor or
Teacher has said, When ye pray use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do:
for they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye
therefore like unto them, Mat. 6.7, 8. But these Doctors make their people like
the Heathen herein. The Lord requires such worship as is done in Spirit and in
Truth, John 4.23.24. Its not vain Lip-labor that is acceptable to him: but my
Son, give me thy Heart, says he. He hates drawing near him with the Lips, and
the Heart far from him. Its praying with the Spirit, and with the understanding
also that he requires. If these great Doctors know not these things, they are
not fit to be Teachers or Guides in the Church of Christ: and if they do know
them, the greater is their wickedness to teach people to do things that are so
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ, and thereby to make them like the Heathen,
thinking to be heard for much babbling.

But to what end should they repeat so many Ave Mary's, with their Pater
Nosters every day? Is Mary at hand every Hour to be saluted by them? Is she
present continually all over the large Dominion of the Popedom, to be saluted
by them all, that patter that Salutation so often over? Or do they hereby
worship her as a God, thinking her to be Omnipresent? Its hard to know for what
good end this Custom was invented. For my part I can see no other end in it but
this; namely, to keep People busy; and so to divert them from more serious
thoughts, lest their Consciences should be set at work to ponder the Path of
Life; and whether they were in it or no: and so should enter into more serious
and deep consideration of their Spiritual condition. Or is it because they have
led them out of the Road of peace by their superstitious innovations, and must
give them some thing to do to pacify the requirings of their Conscience? For
there is even in the Heathens a Conscience that must be satisfied, or diverted
by some manner of worship or other: and therefore they satisfy their conscience
as well as they can, by worshipping something, what they think to be a God. And
is this the Case here? How like then do they make their people to the Heathen.
But I consider there may be another end in it to keep people thus busy, and
that is, lest they should grow too wise for their Teachers, by improving their
spare time, in searching into Truth; and acquainting themselves with the Ground
of those things they practice, and walk in: and so should come to see the
rotten Foundation, upon which all their superstitious and idle inventions are
grounded. Filling their Hands full is a way to divert them from such scrutiny
or search; that so they themselves may sit at rest and ease in their dominion
of innovations over the People. For find them work enough, and that will keep
them busy, and divert them from prying into the Mysteries of their
Innovations, and so keep them off from turning against them for imposing such
groundless imaginations upon them. For the Minds of Man must have something to
busy it self withal, being of a restless inquiring prying temper.

13. Another Innovation is that of Cardinals: of which there is no mention at
all in Scripture: not one word of such a Conclave or Combination. These are as
it were the very Hinges upon which the Popedom does hang, and turn it self; and
therefore are they rightly called Cardinals, as much as to say Hinges from
Cardo a Door-hinge. These being Popes Creatures bear up the Pope after they
have set him up. And one with another as one Head, they cherish and enforce the
Popish Innovations, wherein his Kingdom stands: and they therein as the chief
Princes of that Kingdom. These having no Foundation in Scripture must needs be
an Innovation: And when the overflowing Scourge comes to sweep away all refuges
of Lies; these, being one chief false refuge of the Popedom, and main Pillars
thereof, must tumble with it. The Pope, he is the Door through which the
Popedom of Innovations has come in: And the Cardinals, they are the Hinges
upon which he turns, bearing up him, and his Kingdom of Innovations: and
together they will fall, when the Mystery of Iniquity shall be dissolved. These
are of the number of those Merchants of the Earth, which shall lament the fall
of the Babylon of Innovations, when men's Eyes shall be opened, and no man shall
buy their Merchandise any more, understanding them to be but the vain
Inventions of men which profit them not. For so has our Lord Jesus Christ
taught us, saying, In vain do ye worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Precepts of men.

These are some of those Innovations, which are introduced and upheld by Popes,
besides many others, which it would be too tedious here to recite. It may be
the Lord may stir up the Spirits of some others to pursue them further. But
these here mentioned, are sufficient to let any understand what it is I call
Popery, namely, these and such other Innovations upheld under the Popedom. For
I would not have any to think (as I have signified before) that I do by Popery
understand whatsoever is found among the Papists: for I do not by Popery
comprehend those ancient and good Truths, which the Church of Rome was at first
established in; and many of which they may yet retain: as namely, all those
wholesome and sound Doctrines that are agreeable to the uncorrupted Scriptures;
and which nourish a pious and good Life; and which teach to walk humbly with
God, and faithfulness to his precepts; and equity and just dealing among men,
to do to others as we would have them to do to us; and which teach charity and
mercy and good works; and which lead to an inward walking with God: and to an
innocent life among men; and such like. I call nothing of this kind, popery:
but only, as I say, Innovations contrary to the precious Truths of the Gospel.
I own that there are precious Truths among them, but much entangled and clouded
with abundance of innovations mixed therewith. Therefore it was needful for me,
for Peoples better understanding, thus to distinguish, between the one and
other: between the good and primitive Truths; and the inventions of men crept
in afterward.

That in the inventions of men or Innovations, we may find the Apostasy of the
Romish Church: which comprehends these things, viz.

In their Innovations we shall find,

1. The Mystery of Iniquity.

2. Sodom and Egypt Spiritual.

3. Babylon the Great.

4. The great Whore, that sits upon many Waters, which is the Mother of
Harlots. Which things call for Repentance.

First, I say, in their Innovations we shall find the Mystery of Iniquity. And
that may easily be found out by the plain and full description of him that is
head in it, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. First, take notice that there must be a falling
away from the purity of the Gospel; which implys that the Mystery of inquity
was to arise where the purity and truth of the Gospel had been professed, and
lived in, but was fallen from, and in the same place the Mystery of iniquity
should arise, in which Mystery there should be one thus described. (1.) He
should be a Son of Perdition: or a Son of Destruction, a destroyer, and so to
be destroyed. And so the Angel of the bottomless Pit, which is a fallen Star,
has the same name, both in the Hebrew and Greek Tongue, Rev. 9.11. being
called Abaddon, and Apollyon, which signify a Destroyer. For they belong both
to one and the same destroying Mystery, as head therein, and so have the same
name. (2.) He should be one that opposes, and exalts himself above all that
is called God, or that is Worshipped. (3.) He sits in the Temple of GOD, (the
Church) Showing himself that he is God. Now who is there that Answers this
Description so much as he that is head in the Popedom? Whether it be a
particular man, or a conjoined power, or combination of more together. First,
he or they that sit in that power, are fallen from the purity, simplicity, and
innocence of the Gospel of Christ into the destructive inventions and
innovations of men: by reason of which Millions of Men and Women professing
Christ, have been destroyed by Massacres and otherways: therefore Secondly, the
Title of the Son of Perdition: a Destroyer, Abaddon, and Apollyon, does aptly
fit that Power or them in it. Thirdly, he is an Opposer, exalting himself above
all that is called God. What is called God in Scripture? First, God Almighty
himself, He opposes him, and exalts himself above him, in overruling and
controuling his command, leaving out what he pleases, or finds to be against
his earthly Kingdom: one thing is the Second Commandment, which is so strongly
enforced with arguments, even by God himself, to be inviolabsy observed,
without any show of the breach thereof, for fear of exasperating his jealousy,
and incurring of punishment upon their posterity, that he that controuls it,
must needs be an opposer of God. Secondly, He opposes Christ, and his Kingdom;
bringing in an earthly Kingdom of darkness, in opposition to Christ's Spiritual
Kingdom of Light. Thirdly, He opposes and exalts himself above all Magistrates
(called Gods in Scripture, Psalm. 82.1, 6. John 10.34, 35.) putting down and
setting up as he pleases. He has a Kingdom above them all. The Popedom is a
Kingdom above Kings of the Earth. Therefore he and they that bear the Power in
that Kingdom, are this exalted one. Fourthly, He has his Seat in the Temple of
God the Church. The Church is called the Temple of God in the New Testament, 2
Cor. 6.16. What agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For Ye are the
Temple of the living God. Here this man of Sin, this Son of Perdition has his
Seat, He sits in the Temple of God, which clearly distinguishes him from all
other Potentates, which have their Seed in the Civil Government. Read 2 Thessalonians.
2. Where, under this exalted one you will find, The Mystery of Iniquity
subjoyned and entailed, as patronized by him. So finding out that exalted
Opposer, finds out the Mystery of iniquity; which consists in Innovations and
Inventions of men, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ Jesus, and his Holy
Apostles.

I know some good people take this Mystery of Iniquity to be that natural
sinful State, wherein generally all men live.

But for the better information of their understandings, I desire those that
think so, to take notice, That this Mystery of Iniquity here spoken of, is a
Circumscribed Mystery, which had its rise since the publication of the Gospel;
and shall have its period again in due time before inqiuity have an end. It
began indeed to work in some men's Spirits in the Apostles days; but was let
that it could not break forth, and come to its height. It does already work,
says the Apostle, Only he who now lets will let until he be taken out of
the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. An Enemy let it until he was taken out of the way.
The persecuting Emperors while they stood, they kept down the profession of
Christianity very much, by frequent persecutions, so that there was more power
of Christianity preserved, while Persecution lasted. But when Constantine the
Great got the Dominion, and gave full Scope to the profession of Christianity,
and drew in Nations into an outward conformity thereto, by his noble and
courteous usage of those he conquered; then that which let was taken out of
the way: and then by degrees sprang up the magnifying of the outward form, and
imagined pious additions were made thereto, under which by little and little
the Mystery crept up, till it came to its height, For it rose under pious
pretenses; and that was it that blinded people so, that they could not perceive
it. But as the Mystery of Iniquity had a Beginning and growth in this wise,
since the Apostles times, so it shall have a period. The Lord will bring no
naught this Mystery again, and consume it with the Spirit of his mouth, and
destroy it with the brightness of his coming. It shall fall with the desolation
of the great Whore, upon whose Forehead it is writ, being upheld by her: and
she shall fall before Iniquity have an end, as will appear afterward. And
therefore I say, this Mystery of Iniquity, is not the common sinful state of
wickedness, that men have lived in, in all Ages of the World, which have born
the open Face of wickedness; but it is a circumscribed and veiled Mystery;
having a beginning and an ending in this latter age of the World, since Christ.
It is a Mystery of wickedness wrapped up in an outward Mantle of pretended
Christianity. And when the Lord opens the Eyes of Princes, that have given
their power to it, to see it; they shall hate the Whore, and Eat her Flesh, and
burn her with Fire, Rev. 17.16. And this they shall do before the common State
of wickedness have an end.

Secondly, as the Mystery of iniquity is couched under the Innovations of men:
So in them we shall find that which is called Sodom and Egypt Spiritually.
Sodom literal was a place of great Violence and Uncleanness: How violently did
they beset Lots House, only for the fulfilling of their Brutal uncleanness? And
has not as great violence been used upon the account of Innovations, for the
fulfilling of their spiritual uncleanness in going a Whoring after the
inventions or innovations of men? Are not the Streets or ways of these
innovations as full of danger and violence, where all are rooted out that stand
against them; or at least violently handled? What has been the Ground of all
that violence of late done in France, but innovations of men, to turn them to
embrace men's inventions? That great word (if I may not say Boast) of converting
about two Millions of people into the Bosom of the Church of Rome (for which
might be expected a grateful acknowledgment from the Pope) what is it more then
a converting of them to their Innovations by their violence? For they were
Christians before: they did not convert them to Christianity, but only to the
Popish Innovations. I name this because it is so fresh in every ones mind: But
violence has all along attended the Innovations of the Popes. And beside the
spiritual uncleanness of going a Whoring after men's inventions; How great a
Provocation to brutal uncleanness is made, by that one Innovation of
prohibiting Marriage to their Clergy; and otherwise by Licencing Stews, and
making people believe they have pardon for their Sins, for a little money,
especially if they be Venial, as they count some. None I think are accounted so
Mortal, as opposing their Innovations. That Is made Heresy with them, and
worthy of death, and damnable.

Again, in these Innovations, Egypt spiritually so called is found. Egypt was a
House of Bondage to the natural Israelite: So these Innovations are a House of
Bondage to the Spiritual Israelite. The true Seed that desires to follow Christ
fully, finds Bondage in all Innovations or Inventions of men. And they that
impose humane Traditions and Inventions upon peoples Consciences, are like the
Taskmasters of Egypt, to the truly spiritual Seed. For the true Seed, the
Chaste Virgin, hates subjection of Spirit to any other in things Spiritual,
save to her own Lord Christ Jesus. His Wisdom and Council she delights to lie
under. But the hard task of the imposition of man's wisdom upon her Spirit is
grievous Bondage to her, and causes her Spirit to groan for deliverance. And in
time the Lord will work deliverance for the spiritual Israelite; as he did for
the literal.

Thirdly, In Innovations we find Babylon the Great. Many words used in former
times both before and under the Law, are transferred, or brought over, and put
upon things under the Gospel, or New Covenant: either because they are under
the like Circumstances, or were prefigured by things aforegoing. As to give one
Example or two; the Tabernacle and Temple which were made by men, and made of
Wood, and Stone, and Gold, and Silver, and Brass, and Iron, These were places
for the presence of God to appear in, and to dwell in. But in the fullness of
time those were laid aside again, and yet the names of them retained and put
upon other things, where the presence of God was to reside. As namely, Christ's
Body, Destroy this Temple, says he, and in three days I will raise it up
again. This spoke he of his Body, putting the name Temple upon it. Again the
same word Temple is put upon his Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. Rev. 2.1. And also upon
the Bodies of his Disciples, 1 Cor. 6.19. What, know ye not that your Body is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you. And again says the Apostle, If
any man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God
is holy, which Temple ye are, 1 Cor. 3.17. So Tabernacle is used in like
manner, 2 Pet. 1.14. Shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle. I might
instance in many things, but I would not digress too much from my present scope
and business, which is to show that the name Babylon is also put upon something
under the Gospel, which Babylon of old resembled, or did prefigure. And that
is, that Dominion that stands in Innovations or Inventions of men. This is
called, Babylon the Great, Rev. 17.5.

Now why the name Babylon should be put upon that Power and Dominion that
stands in Innovations under the Gospel times, consider the like circumstances
of both Old Babylon and New, and the like expressions given forth of both, and
I think you may easily be persuaded thereof.

Old Babylon was called, The glory of Kingdoms, Isa. 13.19. and the Lady of
Kingdoms, Isa. 47.5, 7. And Babylon the Great is counted no less, seeing she
reigns over Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.18.

There was the same exalted security of heart in both: for Old Babylon, said in
her heart, I am, and none else besides me, I shall not sit as a Widow, neither
shall I see the loss of Children, Isa. 47.8. Babylon the Great, says in her
heart, I sit a Queen and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, Rev. 18.7.

Old Babylon was a place of Captivity to the Israelites: and New Babylon, or
Babylon the Great, has been a place of far greater Captivity to the true
spiritual Israelite. That was but for a few years, only for Seventy. But this
has lasted long, even many Generations, namely ever since Innovations got
head. That was a Captivity far less cruel than this latter Captivity has been.
They both of them have exercised force upon the Consciences of People.

As the People of God were bid to flee out of Babylon of old, And deliver every
man his own Soul, Jer. 51.6. So in like manner concerning the Great Babylon,
it is said, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4.

The words of the Prophets both Isaiah and Jeremiah concerning Babylon of Old,
seem to reach even to this Babylon the Great: So that the Old Babylon seems to
typisie this very much: as they that read Isa. 47. and Jer. 50, and 51
Chapters, may perceive. And also that they both have a like destruction, Jer.
51.63, 64. compared with Rev. 18.21. Both are to sink and not rise again. This
shall be the fall of Innovations, and of that power and Dominion that stands in
them, in the Lord's time. They shall sink in the Waters: in the minds of
People, as things born down with great weight. Oh then rejoicing! Joy and
gladness attends the fall of this Great Babylon. Rejoice over her thou Heaven
and the holy Apostles, and Prophets for God has avenged you on her, Rev.
18.20. What is it that has done so much mischief to Apostles and Prophets, and
Saints that God will avenge them thereof, as Inventions and Innovations of men?
and therefore they are bid to rejoice when these are thrown down like a great
Millstone into the bottom of the deep.

That Babylon the Great stands in the Inventions and Innovations of men is
manifest; because it cannot stand in any pure Dispensation of God: for then it
could not be called Babylon nor Confusion. Therefore it must needs stand in the
Inventions and Innovations of men, deviating from the pure Dispensation of God,
or purity of his Truth: and in them Babylon the Great will be found. And this
will more appear by that which follows. For where the Great Whore is found,
there Babylon the Great must be found; it being the Inscription upon her
Forehead, Rev. 17.5. Upon her Forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
Great, etc.

Therefore now I come to that thing expressed a little before, namely, That here
( viz. in Innovations) we shall find the Great Whore also.

What was that, that was so much charged upon Israel of Old by the Prophets for
Whoredom; but that they being a People standing related to God under the first
Covenant (or Law) went a whoring after their own Inventions? Psalm. 106.39. They
did not keep to the Institutions and Counsels of God, but did like the Heathen,
or other Nations: they worshipped Idols, set up Groves and Altars of their own
Invention, and such like: and this was called Whoredom: because it was a breach
of their Faithfulness, and Loyalty, and Chastity to God who had married them to
himself under a Covenant, Jer. 3.14. Psalm. 106.35, 39. Levit. 17.7. Ezekiel.
23.30, 37.

So likewise under the Second or New Covenant, if we profess our selves married
to God in Christ Jesus, to walk with him (whom we are commanded to hear and
obey) according to his Counsels and Doctrine; and then follow inventions of our
own, and bring in Innovations contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his holy
Apostles, this is Spiritual Whoredom against Christ. As the Inventions of the
Israelites was whoredom against the Marriage Covenant of God given by Moses: So
Innovations of Christians is Whoredom against the New Covenant given by Christ:
the Mediator thereof. These two things must concur to the making up of the
great Whoredom. 1. A Profession of a Marriage Covenant to Christ: take him to
be our Head, our Guide, and Counselor, and Ruler. And then, 2. Great
disloyalty to him herein; in rejecting his Counsels, and Spirit; and
entertaining and embracing a Stranger, viz. A Spirit quite contrary to him, and
an Enemy to his Counsels; although professing him, yet introducing and setting up
Innovations of its own. And whosoever do outstrip or excel others therein, they
are the Great Whore. And the Spirit of Whoredom will manifest it self most
among them, by abusing the Chaste and Faithful Servants of Christ, who love his
Precepts, and dare not subject themselves to the Innovations of men. For the
Whorish Spirit is a cruel Spirit, hating Chastity: because Chastity is a check
to its Whoredom. I speak of Spiritual Chastity and Whoredom.

Thus you may see what is couched under the Innovations of men. viz. The
Mystery of Iniquity, Sodom and Egypt Spiritual, Babylon the Great, and the
Great Whore. Which Innovations most abound in the Church of Rome, tho others as
yet may not be altogether clear of some of them.

But now that I may speak clearly, and be rightly understood concerning
persons, I must resume my former distinction of persons: for I now come to
speak of persons chiefly. But as I could not well speak of things in an
abstracted sense without relation to persons: so now I cannot speak of Persons
without relation to things.

I look upon the Church of Rome consisting of these three Parts.

1. The Hierarchy, or Ruling Chergy, so called.

2. The Inhabitants of the Earth.

3. Such as in sincerity of heart seek after the Lord.

The First of these, viz. the Hierarchy as they stand in Innovations in the
Popedom, or usurped Dominion and Exaltation, I take to be the Great Whore: And
I shall give my reasons for it, which are these two following.

First, Because the Description of the great Whore, given by the Angel to John,
does so aptly fit this part of Rome. Those Characters that are given of her,
whereby to know her, are found on them.

Secondly, Mystery standing upon the great Whores forehead, relates her to the
Mystery of Iniquity, These. 2. And that has such an exalted one in it as we
find only in Rome, and no where else.

Concerning the first of these two Reasons, that the Great Whores Description
and Characters are found in Rome, that is, in the Hierarchy thereof the very
reading of Revel. 17. may give light to any unbyassed and indifferent Capacity.
I shall point out several of those Characters.

First, Come hither (says the Angel to John) I will show thee the Judgment of
the Great Whore that sits upon many Waters, Revel. 17.1. Here we have one
Character of the Great Whore, and that is She sits upon many Waters. What
those Waters are, the Angel expounds to John ver. 15. The Waters which thou
saw, where the Whore sits, are Peoples and Multitudes, and Nations, and
Tongues. She has a large Dominion, over Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and
Tongues: a kind of Universality; which Universality they of Rome boast of, and
glory in the Title of Catholic, which signifies Universal; But they are no
further Universal than to fulfill this Prophecy. Therefore they glory in that
which helps to discover their shame, giving them one Character of the Great
Whore.

The next ver. 2. gives us two more Characters of her. One is, That the Kings
of the Earth have committed fornication with her. They have been drawn in by
her, to go a whoring with her after her Innovations or Inventions. The other is
this: And the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made Drunk with the Wine of her
fornication. So that here you see, there is some distinction made between the
Great Whore, and those that commit Fornication with her, or are made drunk by
her wine. Which helps to clear my attributing of the Title of the Great Whore,
only to their Ruling Hierarchy. For its they that draw others into the
Fornication of their Innovations: others are deluded by them, and made drunk by
them. Here be two or three work stand need of being opened (...) 1. Who are
those Inhabite^s of the Earth. To that (...) (...) ^^ey are not the Saints
(...) ^ersation is in Heaven, (...) expression is Phil^^ (...) are such as have
(...) the Earth: The Inventions and Innovations of men, are not Heavenly
things, but Earthly, springing from the carnal and earthly Wisdom of man's
heart: now these having the chief Foundation of their Religion standing in the
Innovations of men which are earthly, they are the Inhabiters of the Earth.
They dwell in the earthly things of man's Wisdom, not in the heavenly things of
Gods Wisdom, grounded in him, and his truth. And therefore, 2ly. These are fit
Subjects to be made Drunk with those Innovations, that is, to be inflamed in
their Spirits with a furious zeal for them: for their Religion stands in them:
And therefore no marvel if they be violent like Drunken men, against all that
speak against those Innovations: Yea a (...) ready with greediness to destroy
those that will not embrace them. And that especially because, 3ly. Those
Innovations are made like wine to them, and therefore called the Wine of her
Fornication. They so agree with the carnal heart of man, that they are as Wine
to them: for they nurse them up in a good conceit of their Condition, indulging
their carnal hearts with outward observations, and giving them rest therein,
while they are Strangers to God, and to the operations of his Spirit. This
repose in outward things, giving ease to, and lulling asleep their Conscience
is sweet as Wine to them; and the more, being sweetened with the words of
heavenly things put upon them. By the Artifices used about their Innovations,
they are so taken, that they become raging Drunk, or mad upon them: not more
humble, more meek and gentle, and tenderhearted, as the mystery of Godliness
makes men: But these become cruelly Drunk, first with the Wine of the
Fornication of the Great Whore, and then together with her, drunk with blood,
being made hands fit for her to destroy with. Which shows what Spirit is at
work under these Innovations.

But before I proceed any further, I would here advertise the Reader, that I do
not look upon all that are counted of their Hierarchy to be equally concerned,
or have an equal share in this great Whoredom; tho I cannot excuse them. For
some may be more passive, and carried along with the stream and strength of the
active part, who are fierce and violent, and are the chief enforcers of their
Innovations. As when the Prohibition of Marriage was imposed upon their Clergy,
many of them did greatly withstand it to their power; but were forced to it by
the greater power of the overruling part, and made to submit to it against
their minds. Such I look upon rather as Captives than otherwise. And so the
case may be with many in other Innovations.

But to proceed in the Description and Characters of the great Whore: the Angel
took John into the Wilderness, in the Spirit, that there he might see her more
fully. Not that the great Whore is in the Wilderness, who sits upon many
Waters, Peoples multitudes Tongues: but that intimates that such as are led out
from her by the Spirit into a solitary Wilderness condition, shall best see
her. And indeed they shall best see the Innovations of lesser Whores, who are
not in the Whoredom, or involved in the Innovations.

Now what did John see? I saw (says he) a Woman sit upon a scarlet colored
Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, having seven heads and ten Horns. Here she
is described by that which supports her, and over which she rules, as one
rules over the Beast they sit upon. The Great Whore is a pompous Whore, and
sits upon a pompous Beast, a scarlet colored Beast: that is, an earthly
pompous Power; not upon the power of the Spirit, by which the Apostles of
Christ were supported, but upon an earthly power, full of blasphemous names
against the true power, and the faithful servants of Christ, who abhor the
Innovations of men. This is a Beast suitable to the great Whore, and of one
Spirit with her; and fortified to uphold her in her large Dominion over
Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues: having seven Heads, and ten Horns,
and what those are the Angel unfolds afterward.

To go on with the Characters of the Woman, verse. 4. And the Woman was arrayed
in Purple, and scarlet color, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and
Pearls; having a Golded Cup in her hand, full of abominations and filthiness of
her Fornication. Here she is described by her Ornaments, and by her Cup which
contains her Fornication. Her Ornaments are such as are used by Kings and
Potentates of the World, Purple and Scarlet, and Gold, and precious Stones, not
such Ornaments as the Apostles were adorned with, and approved of in the
Saints; such as Humility, Meekness, Quietness, Sincerity, Truth, and such as
the Gospel approves of: but such Ornaments as might make her of equal Splendor
with the Princes of the World, if not above them. Does not the Hierarchy of
Rome answer this magnificence?

And then she is described by her Cup in her hand which contains the filthiness
of her Fornication. This demonstrates that her Fornication is Spiritual: being
contained in a Cup carried in the hand: and that is, the model of her Worship,
or composure of her Service, which contains her spiritual Fornication: and
going a whoring after her own inventions. This Cup is a very remarkable
Character. 1. It Is called a Cup, because it contains her Fornication: and also
because out of it she pours forth the Wine of her Fornication to the inhabiters
of the Earth, wherewith she makes them drunk: It contains their Inventions
after which they go a whoring. 2. This Cup is a Golden Cup. It Is golden to
outward appearance. Their Outward appearances of Worship are not only glorious
to the outward eye, being performed with great Ceremony, cost and splendor:
but also the minds and ears of carnal earthly spirits are dazed with the
seraphical expressions, and golden words used therein. 3. This Cup is in her
hand. In whose hand? In the great Whores hand: This shows that they that hand
this Cup to the People, they are the great Whore. It Is in the Woman's hand, the
great Whores hand. It Is framed already, and beautified with all the art they
can, and carried in the hand. It Is already formed, to be put into the hand of
every Servitor that is devoted to their Innovations. Their Worship is not
carried in the heart, and springing from the Spirit of God, administered from
his Gift, to the comfort and edification of people, as their Worship did in the
Apostles days: but this is in the hand, and any wicked person can administer
it, or hand it forth. 4 It Is full of abominations and filthiness of her
Fornication. It Is full of Innovations and Inventions of men: which are an
abomination to God. And to go after them, is to go a whoring from the Spirit of
God, as the Israelites did. They went a Whoring after their own Inventions,
Psalm. 106.39.

Next, we come to the Inscription upon the Forehead of the great Whore, verse.
5. which Couples all these together, viz. The great Whore, The Mystery of
Iniquity, and Babylon the Great. So that, find one, and you find them all. The
Inscription is this, Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and
abominations of the Earth. This being writ upon the forehead of the great
Whore, shows that she is all this, in her all this is found: this being as her
Crime writ upon her Forehead: or a proper name extant to know her by. Now if
you can find out the Mystery of Iniquity by him that Heads it, that sits in the
Temple of God (the Church) exalted above all Magistrates; then you have the
great Whore also. Or if you can find the great Whore by the Characters given of
her, then you have the Mystery of Iniquity, and Babylon the Great: for they are
all co-incident, being concatinated in one Chain, as the inscription on the
great Whores Forehead shows plainly.

As for the Words Mystery, and Babylon the Great; seeing I have spoken of them
before, I refer to that; and so pass on to the next Character of the great
Whore, verse. 6. And I saw the Woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with
the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with great
admiration.

Here Is a mark of a bloody die, which the great Whore can never wipe off. But
the more she endeavors to blot it out, by destroying those that see her
guiltiness, the deeper she sets it, and the larger she makes it. Here every one
may see, that the great Whore is a bloody Whore. She Is drunken with Blood:
which significantly expresses her great thirst after the blood of those she
kills: so that she swallows down their blood greedily, without remorse, and
without all reason, saving that they withstand her Innovations. Where shall we
find this bloody drunkenness, so much, as in the bloody raging Massacres,
Burnings, and Cruelties which have been acted under the dominion and power of
Rome; and of those who have been infected with her innovations? None like
those. And that which heightens this wickedness, is, that she is drunk with the
Blood of Saints (...), that is of holy men, innocent persons, who are of a
Righteous life, and good conversation, and truly fear the Lord. Who are also
called Martyrs or witnesses of Jesus (...), that is, such as bear witness to
Jesus, acknowledging and owning him and his Doctrine, and willing to lose their
lives; rather than to deny the truth delivered to us by him, and his Servants.
Such as these she kills, because they see her innovations, and cannot stoop to
them. That Is greatly remarkable also, that her bloody drunkenness is such, as
put John to admiration. John lived in times of Persecution, and saw cruelty
enough no doubt, being banished into the Isle of Patmos at that time: But that
was not it that put John to an astonishment (as some would have it.) But it was
something that was to come to pass afterward, as the Angel said, Rev. 4.2. I
will show the things which must be hereafter. To show John a Church (under the
similitude of a Woman) so far to go a Whoring from Christ after her own
inventions, that she did not spare his most precious Servants, nor any that
adhered to them? but shed their Blood in abundance for the sake of her
inventions, and innovations, and yet professed her self to be the Spouse, yea,
the only Spouse and Church of Christ: I say, to see one so highly professing
Christ, and yet acting so highly contrary to hisnature, and destroying his
Servants, this might indeed make John greatly to wonder with great admiration.
But the tyranny of those present times that John lived in, under the
persecuting heathen Emperors, could be no such admiration to him. For its no
great admiration to see a known Enemy shed the blood of those he is against.
But to profess the highest Loyalty to Christ, and commit the greatest Cruelty
against his Children and People, this might put one to astonishment. O Rome!
Rome! O backsliding Rome! Who could make John astonished but thee! Who once was
a pure Church: but to see thee profess the same Jesus or Savior as formerly,
and be so cruelly hard-hearted as to devour the tender Lambs of Jesus, who will
rather dye than betray his Doctrine; and also to devour them so abundantly; who
would not be astonished at such a degeneracy! O repent, repent, before misery
come upon thee.

Another Character of the great Whore follows Rev. 17.7. and 18. verses. And
the Angel said unto me, wherefore did thou marvel? I will tell the Mystery of
the Woman, and of the beast that carries her, ver. 18. The Woman which thou
saw is that great City which Reigns over the Kings of the Earth. Or nearer
the Greek words thus, which has a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth: for
the words of the Greek are these, (...) These words being the interpretation of
the Mystery of the Woman; make it plain, that by Woman is understood, That
great City which has a Kingdom above the Kings of the Earth. Now where shall
we find such a City besides Rome, that has in it such a Dominion, in which all
these Characters of the great Whore are found? Rome has a Kingdom above the
Kings of the Earth. And the Mystery of iniquity may say the same? she has one
in it, exalted above all, called God, above all Magistrates. So that you may
clearly see That this great Whore, and the Mystery of iniquity fall in one with
the other: find the one, and you may find the other.

This great Whore, this Woman, this great City, is terrible to the Kings of the
Earth, having a Kingdom above them. For She can strike them with her thunder
bolts at her pleasure, and unthrone them, by moving the Waves of the Sea
against them, against which there is no withstanding. To speak plainer, She can
make them an execration with her Anathema; and then raise the Waves of the
people against them which they cannot withstand: and then Surrogate others to
take their Throne. Is not this to have a Kingdom above them? Yea so great a
Dominion she has over them, that she can make them buckle to her pleasure, and
wait at her gates, to humble themselves at her Feet, as not worthy to kiss her
hands. This is to bring them lower, then a King brings his Subjects. For he
admits his Subjects to kiss his hand: But the distance between this great Whore
and Emperors is so great, that its enough for them to kiss her Feet.

Such power has this great Whore had as to cause the Son to rise against his
Father, to turn him out of his Throne. Henry the fifth, the Son of Henry the
fourth, when his Father was struck with the Thunderbolt of Excommunication by
Pope Paschalis 2. and ejected from being Emperor; he rose up against his
Father, and put him in Prison, where with grief of mind he died. And this Henry
the fifth his Son declared, that he did not thus persecute his Father out of a
desire to Reign; but (Studio obedientia erga sedem Apostolicam) out of a
zealous obedience to the Apostolic Seat, (for such titles the great Whore has
arrogated to her self.) This was done about the beginning of the 12th. Century.
And in the 13th. Century Pope Innocent the third. Othonem Anathemate ferit,
Imperium ei abrogat, omnesque ab ejus obedientia and fide absolvit. He
Anathematized Otho, deprived him of the Empire, and absolved all persons from
their obedience and fidelity to him. And in Century 14. History tells us of
Boniface 8. that he writ, se effe Dominum in temporalibus and Spiritualibus in
univer so mundo, that is, that he was Lord both in Temporals and Spirituals in
the whole World. And after his Death it was said of him, Hoc modo (sc. more rore
animi) mortuus est Bonifacius ille qui Imperatoribus, Regibus, Principibus,
Nationibus, Populis terrorem potius quam religionem injicere conabatur: quique
dare regna and auferre, pellere homines ac reducere pro arbitrio animi
conabatur. Platin. Thus (that is, with grief of mind) dyed that Boniface who
made it his business to imprint terror upon the hearts of Emperors and Kings,
etc. Rather than Religion: and who endeavored to give and take away Kingdoms,
to banish and call home, at his pleasure. But the height and Dominion of this
great Whore or Popedom is so notorious, that I need not insist further upon it.

Thus you see what a one the great Whore is: and how like to her the Popedom
is, sitting upon many Waters, i.e. Peoples, Multitudes, Tongues, Nations;
drawing Kings of the Earth to commit Fornication with her, prostrating
themselves to her Innovations, or Whoredoms; making also the Inhabiters of the
earth Drunk with the pleasantness of her Inventions or Innovations; born up
with great power; living in great pomp; carrying the filthiness of her
Fornication in her hand, in a golden Cup, very taking to the carnal mind; and
bearing upon her Forehead Mystery, that's her name in part, showing her affinity
with the Mystery of Iniquity; one also that makes her self drunk with the
plenty of blood of innocent people; and one that has a Kingdom above the Kings
of the Earth. These are enough to know her by.

But the Angel still goes further, to make her more fully known by other things
appertaining to the Beast that carries her, which is described by his seven
Heads, and ten Horns. His Heads were seven Hills, and also seven Kings or
Governments. His Horns were ten Kings.

I shall only take notice of that here which is easy for any ordinary Capacity
to understand; and add that to the foregoing marks of the great Whore. And by
this we may understand the very place where she is chiefly to be found.

The seven Heads (said the Angel) are seven Mountains on which the Woman
sits: This is one interpretation of the seven Heads, She sits upon seven
Hills. Now it is well known that Rome is situated on seven Hills or Mountains.
And therefore was known by the name Vrbs septicollis, and Septiceps, and (...),
which words signifi^ seven Hills, or seven Heads. That Is one Interpretation or
unfolding of the seven Heads of the Beast that carries the great Whore. The
Angel also gives another interpretation of those seven Heads: that both meeting
together, they might make the more certain discovery of her. That second
interpretation was not then at that time wholly fulfilled, when the Angel gave
it: And that still adds more clearness and certainty to the applying of it to
Rome. The interpretaton is this, And there are seven Kings, five are fallen,
and one is, and the other is not yet come (...) and when he comes he must
continue a while. These seven Kings are: rightly taken by prudent understanding
men, to be the seven Governments that Rome has had, viz. First, Kings,
secondly, Consuls; thirdly, Dictators; fourthly, Decemviri; fifthly, Tribunes
Which five were fallen in John's time: then One is, said the Angel to John, and
that was the Emperors, which made the Sixth, and was standing in John's time.
But the other, the Seventh, which was the Popes, is not yet come said he. And
when he is come, he must continue a while.

How aptly do these things fit Rome, even as a garment fitted to ones back. So
that finding all these Characters of the great Whore so apparently in Rome, how
can she clear her self from being that very great Whore?

Only this I would have the Reader to mind, that by Rome here I do not
understand every individual person in her; but the Ruling Hierarchical power of
Rome, which makes the carnal and earthly people drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, and holds the People of God in Captivity under her. As Jerusalem
and Israel was charged with Whoredom in like case of following their own
inventions, whenas all in it were not guilty: but God had a precious people in
it, who were grieved therewith. So it may be with Rome. And so by Pope, I do
not so much understand every individual Pope, as the Mystery and the power of
the Popedom in which they stand.

I now pass on from the Hierarchy of Rome to the Inhabiters of the Earth, who
are a People set on mischief by the Whoredoms o^ the great Whore. These are a
People so intoxicated with the Wine of her Fornication (that is with the
Innovations of the great Whore) that like drunken men they are full of quarrel,
heady bold out-facers of Truth, haters of all that stands in the way of their
Innovations, and ready with eager minds to embrew their hands in the blood of
righteous people, if their Masters do but call them Heretics, and set them on;
although they have no other provocation, or reason to do it, but only because they
are against their Innovations. These are very numerous, so that the great Whore
wants not hands to execute her fury upon the innocent Servants of Christ, when
she sees a fit time to employ them: And this they are ready to do in loyalty to
her Usurped Authority. And therefore although they are not guiltless, yet she is
chiefly charged with being drunk with the blood of the Servants of Jesus. As
David was charged with the blood of Vriah, because it proceeded from him: So
the great Whore standsguilty of all the blood shed in obedience and loyalty to
her Innovations. But in a dangerous thing to be (...) in the hand of there that
sight against God, and against'd ^ simplicity and pusity of his wares, and
innocence and fidelity of his Servants. It may go easier with those that are
drunk with the Wine of the great. Whores Fornication, than which her that is
drunk with blood but I think none that understands the danger, would be in
Sodoms use, because it shall be more toletable for them, than for some other
Cities at the day of Judgment.

There is a third sort of People under the Dominion of the great. Whore, whom
my Soul longs after; whose Spirits are drawn after the Lord, and who truly fear
him; although their understandings may be captivated under many of her
Innovations. These when they come to see their liberty in the Lord, may say
with the Israelites, O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had
dominion, over us: but by thee only will we made mention of thy name, Isa. 26,
(...) Other Lord have had dominion over ye, to cause (...) to make mention of
thy Name in their superstations ways: but by thee only, even by thy self, and
thy direction and assistance will we now henceforth make mention of thy Name.
They that have been in bondage under enforced Worship, when they are made
rightly sensible of it, will see the dominion that other Lords have had over
them, will not satisfy; but there will be a cry in their hearts, that ^he Lord
alone may rule over their Conscience^ and that all their profession of him, or
making mention of his name, may proceed from himself: and so shall they worship
him in Spirit and in truth. These may say also with Israel of old, By the
Rivers of Babylon there we sat down, yea we wept when we remembered Zion, Psalm.
137.1. I know whose case that has been under lesser Innovations. The heart
that truly fears the Lord, and pants after him, longs after the purity of his
ways: and when it gets a glimpse thereof, sits down weeping under all other
bondages of humane traditions and Innovations, finding it self as it were in a
Captivity, or banishment from its own Land, which it longs to be at; and that
is the enjoyment of the prefence of the Lord, in the purity and simplicity of
his ways.

Now my Soul and Spirit simpathizes with such as these, breathing to the Lord
for their deliverance, wheresoever they are, having had a fellow-feeling of
their Bondage; and I hope deliverance draws nigh to many. For what is their
Captivity, but their Thraldom and Bondage under the Innovations of men? And
what shall be their deliverance, but the falling of those Innovations which
hold them Captive, and their being set in the liberty of the Spirit. Though men
have built a Tower of their own Inventions, whose top may reach to Heaven, and
upon the top of which they pretend to set men into Heaven; yet down again this
must tumble. This Babel, this Great Whore, this Mystery of Iniquity, this
Mother of Harlots must have a fall: and then that Voice will call to them from
Heaven. Come out of her my People that ye be not pertakers of her Sins, and
that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. Now what shall be this great
fall of Babylon? I answer, if we consider what was the fall of the Jews, we may
partly understand thereby what shall be the fall of Babylon. The Jews fall was
their continuing in that which God by Christ Jesus came to put an end to. They
fell short of the Grace and Glory that was revealed and came by Jesus Christ,
although they continue a People still. So Babylon the House of Captivity shall
fall: Innovations or Inventions of men after which they have gone a Whoring,
and under which the Seed of God has been held in great bondage, these shall
have their (...) the hearts of men; they shall understandingly see them (...)
hated of the Lord, and to (...) to the Spirit of God, (...) the Truth revealed
by (...), and witnessed by (...) A^^stles and Prophet (...) so they shall (...)
in the (...) being seen and fallen (...), they shall strongly be called out of
them them by the Spirit of God. For observe, after it is said Babylon the Great
is fallen, is fallen, that Voice is uttered, Come out of her my People. For
after the great fall of Babylon, there shall yet be a Continuing in or
upholding of her Innovations by some. But Gods people are called out: they that
fear God and love his truth shall be called out; and so the rest that remain in
them, shall be captiva^ed themselves thereby, as a Bird in a Cage. For those
Inventions and Innovations of men shall become a Habitation of Devils, and a
hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful ^^^d, and
that after Babylons great (...) Rev. 18.2.

This fall of Baylon the Great that is, the fall of men's Innovations shall be
no small matter: for it will carry along with it Plagues and Death, and Famine,
and Mourning. The Scarlet colored Whore, that has been decked with Gold, and
precious Stones, and Pearls, anp lived deliciously, and Reigned in great Pomp,
by by the Merchandise of her Innovations, she shall have torment and sorrow,
and be pinched of her Deliciousness, when men begin to see the cheat of her
Merchandise, and will buy it no more, when they begin to see the Vanity and
wickedness of her Innovations, and will no more buy any of them; then comes her
Plagues and Torment, and Sorrow, and Famine, and Mourning. For what is it that
has upheld the Great Whore, but the Merchandise of her Innovations? And these
things men shall come to see, and Kings shall see. And when they see it, they
shall hate the Whore, and make her Desolate and Naked, and shall Eat her Flesh,
and burn her with Fire. Her Innovations are as her very Flesh and Blood, which
give her Comeliness and Vigor: if you consume them you put her to torment, and
even eat her Flesh, as it were, and burn her with Fire: and this even those
Kings shall do who have given their power unto the Beast that carries her, and
whom she has drawn in to commit Fornication with her, Rev. 17.16, 17.

And blessed be God who has put it into the hearts of some Rulers of the
Earth, to make void one great Innovation of the Mystery of Iniquity, for the
deliverance of Gods people, that is, to oppose that persecuting of one another
for Conscience sake, or worshipping God according to their Conscience. This is
a great step of Reformation; and the King of Kings make them successful
therein, and bless their good Endeavors: and open their eyes yet further, and
the eyes of all that are honest hearted, to see still further and further into
the Mysteries of his Kingdom, and to embrace them; and also into the Mysteries
of Iniquity, to turn from them.

Oh! What rejoicing will there be in the Earth, among all that fear God and
love his truth, when the Inventions and Innovations of men are cast out, and
the simplicity of the Gospel shall be free for all men to walk in! When those
Innovations of men that have caused so much bloodshed, shall come to an end,
and like a great Millstone shall be cast into the Sea, and be found no more,
then will follow the Marriage of the Bride, the Lambs Wife; and Al^elu^^. For
the Lord God omnipotent signeth, Rev. 19.6, 7.

A POSTSCRIPT, to those that are Members or Vpholders of the Great Whore.
THE Lord seeks not the Destruction of people, but that they should repent of
the evil of their ways and be preserved: and that is the desire of him who has
writ these things. Therefore his advice to them that find themselves included
in humane Innovations is this, to humble themselves under the mighty hand of
God, and lay down what they find to be contrary to his Counsels; left they
suffer in upholding that which God will consume and destroy. For tho single
persons cannot reform the degenerated State of things, yet they may reform
themselves. The Pope may reform himself; a Cardinal may reform himself, by
withdrawing himself from that he sees evil, and in humility of Spirit
submitting himself to the Counsels of God, and simplicity of the Gospel, laying
aside the Innovations of men. The Lords pleasure is, that man should rather be
preserved than destroyed. I wrold have healed Babylon, (says he:) Then if she
be not healed, where lies the fault? Is not her Destruction of her self? Oh!
that you could see the evils that are introduced into the profession of
Christianity by the Wisdom of men, and despise the World and the Glory thereof,
and exaltation in the Earth, in comparison of an immortal Crown of Glory which
fades not as Earthly glory does! How much better a purchase would you obtain,
than the earthly fading transitory momentany glory of this world! And no man
has run himself so far from the Lord, but that there may be a returning,
except he deny the Lord that bought him. They that were the greatest
Transgressors in the Churches of Asia were advised to repent; and threatened if
they did not: which implies that the mercies of God were ready to receive them,
if they did repent. O return, return to the purity and simplicity of the
Gospel, as it was in the Primitive times of the Apostles: and lay aside all
these separating Inventions and Innovations of men, which divide between
Christians and Christians; that we may come into Unity as at the first. What!
is Christ divided? No certainly, he is One, and his Doctrine is One. Its the
Device and Doctrines of men that divi^e. O what Acclamati^^s of J^w will there
be among all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in truth, when the separating
Inventions and traditions of man are cast forth! This is the great fall of
Babylon over which the Saints and Servants of God shall sing Alelujah. But the
Spirit of God seems to speak prophetically of Babylon, that she will not be
healed, saying of Babylon of old, we would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed. And I think there is little ground to expect that so great a Society of
men, so strongly conjoined in a Mystery of Innovations, can make a public
Reformation of themselves together; because its most likely that the greater
number of them will be for maintaining their earthly Interest, and worldly
Glory, that they have in their Kingdom of Innovations: therefore the Lord calls
to particular persons to withdraw, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye
be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev.
18.4. For let her be as strong as she can, yet she has to deal with one that
is stronger. Strong is the Lord God who judges her; so that she cannot avoid
his Stroke. Therefore let all that fear the Lord come out of her; come out of
the Inventions, Innovations, or Traditions of men, into the simplicity and
sincerity of truth, where you shall find the Comfortable presence and power of
the Lord going before you, and as a Lamp enlightening your paths, that you may
follow him in safety, and satisfaction to your Souls, as he leads and goes
before you.

(...).

FINIS,
Books Printed and Sold by Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lumbard-street.
Folio.
ISaac Penington's works, price 12. s. Samuel Fisher's Works, price 12 s.
Francis Howgil's Works, price 10 s.
Quarto.
Robert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as the same is held
forth and Preached by the People called in scorn Quakers, price 4 s. George
Foxe's New England Firebrand quenched, price 4 s. Hugh Cloaks Call from Sin to
^^liness of Life, pric. ^ d. An Account of the Suff^rings of Thomas Briggs. 4
d.. George ^oex's Testimony to Mastere of Ships and Seamen, 1 d.. Thomas
Laythes Excreise of the Spirit in Spiritual things, James Parke's Epi^^^^^ to
Friends, 1 d. ^. Robert Sand^^and's ^^pistles of Love, 2 d. ^. A Journal of the
Travels of William Caton, 6 d.
Octavo.
William Pen's no Cross no Crown, 2 s. George Keith's Immediate Revelation, 2
s. 8 d. -- His Divine immediate Revelation, 1 s. 2. d. -- His way to the City
of God described, 1 s. -- His Fundamental Truths of Christianity, 8 d. -- His
Trow Christ owned, 4 d. -- His Rector Corrected, 8 d. -- His Truths Defense, 10
d. E. Bathurst's Vindication of Truth, 8 d. William Shewen's True Christians
Faith and Experience, 1 s. Steghen Crisp's Epistle to Friends concerning
presentand succeeding Times, 2 d. Robert Barclay's Epistle of Love, 2 d. -- His
Possibility and necessity of inward and immediate Revalation, 3 d. -- His
Carechism and Conseffion of Faith, 9 d. John Field's, and Richard Scoarver's
Friendly Advice in the Spirit of Love, etc. 1 d.
Twelves.
George Foxe's Instructions for Reading, Writing of true English 6 d.
Gramatista, or the young Gramarian, being a very useful Spelling Book for
Children, to which is added the form of Bills, Bonds and Indentures, 6 d. Also
Bibles of several sorts, and Testaments, and many other sorts of Books.

