TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY, THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
humble Petition of diverse well-affected People, inhabiting the City of London
and places adjacent; in behalf of the Commonwealth.
Shows,
THat although our hearts were enlarged with joy and thankfulness, for your
late Voting the Law and all its Proceedings to be in English, and for
constituting the Honorable Committee for Regulating the Courts of Justice; yet
remembering that the first Remonstrance of this Parliament, took notice of the
tedious, chargeable, and corrupt practifes in Law, as one of the greatest
Grievances of the Nation, promising speedy and effectual relief therein; And
that nevertheless the Corruptions are still increased, and the Burden become
more intolerable: We trust it will admit a favorable construction at this time
to give you to understand, that our doubts and fears begin to abound in us,
that the same cause which has hitherto frustrated the first good intentions of
Parliament in this great work, will also render your present Resolutions (if
not altogether fruitless, yet) very imperfect, and not answerable to the
necessities of the Commonwealth.

Of which our fears we cannot acquit our selves, whilst so many Members of this
Supreme Authority) professing the Law) are possessed of so great places,
amounting to one, two, or 3000l per annum, and the several places of one, to
6000l per annum, all arising from corrupt or unnecessary Practices and
Proceedings, in Law; and whilst others of them pursue their pleadings for
unreasonable Fees, in every Court; And now appear daily at the Honorable
Committee, for no other end (as we humbly conceive) but either to obstruct,
weaken, or pervert the Work.

Pardon us, we beseech you, that we cannot choose but judge this worthy our
Fear, for unto this cause only, we ascribe the continuance and increase of
those corruptions, during all the time of this Parliament, which otherwise (as
we conceive) would never have continued.

And that these may appear no vain or groundless imaginations, diverse well
meaning Clerks have been already threatened and otherways discouraged, for
giving in their Informations and Propositions, and from attending the
Honorable Committee in order to a Regulation, by some Lawyers now Members of
Parliament; And as for those that are not Members, their numbers are so great,
and their influence so powerful, by their monopolizing all Pleadings to
themselves, excluding all others though never so able; That except this Supreme
Authority do by some extraordinary means restrain their Operations, it will be
almost impossible to bring this great Work to a happy and desirable issue.

But what ever means shall appear necessary to your wisdoms, ye have this to
strengthen you; That it is a work most acceptable to God: For if there ^e a
generation of men yet remaining amongst us, that turn judgment into Gall, and
the fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock, that oppress the Widow and
Fatherless, and turn aside the Stranger from his Right, that feed upon
afflicted Prisoners, and nourish the cruelty of Goalers, Lawyers are the men.
It is then a Work for Gods glory, to reduce them to a (...) condition, which is
to be done thoroughly, and with all your might; And when in so doing your ways
shall be well pleasing to the Lord, he will make even your enemies to be at
peace with you,

Nor can any Work (as we humbly conceive) be more acceptable to the people, as
freeing them not only from innummerable vexations, but from an excessive
charge; their unnecessary Fees drawing from amongst them yearly, almost as much
as the necessary charges of the Commonwealth.

In all which respects we are exceedingly encouraged (as the most effectual
means to remove all obstacles hindering so good and necessary a Work, and of so
great ease and advantage to the People) in most humble manner to entreat;

1 That no practicing Lawyer (while such) may continue a Member of this Supreme
Authority, nor be permitted to Sit or Vote in the Honorable Committee for
Regulation.

2 That no person whatsoever, possessing any place of profit belonging to the
Law, or to any Court of Justice, may (whilst he is so possessed) be continued
a Member either of the Parliament, or of that Honorable Committee. But yet in
due respect to the honor of the Parliament, that the Honorable Mr Speaker may
be provided of an allowance suitable to the Honor of his place.

3 That all people may be at liberty either to plead their own Causes, or to
retain either Lawyers or other their Friends, and that they may have equal
Freedom and respect, in all Courts and places whatsoever.

4 That the Honorable Committee for Regulation, may be Ordered to take special
care in clearing the passages and proceedings in all Causes, in such manner, as
that they may come speedily and with small charge to the Juries: Which (as we
humbly conceive) is the most just and speedy way of Trial of Causes, that the
World affords, or we can desire; were the passage to them quit of those many
Lab'rinths that have been devised by Lawyers: And that an affixt time, as four
or six Months at the most, may be expressly set; wherein every Cause shall, from
its beginning be finally ended.

5 That those Clerks, and all other persons whatsoever, may have easy and free
admittance to the Honorable Committee for Regulation, and receive
encouragement from this Honorable Parliament, in their tender of such
Proposals, as they desire to offer for the furtherance of so just and necessary
a Work.

All which we humbly submit to the wisdom of this Supreme Authority; And as in
duty bound -- Shall ever pray, etc.

