A Short WORK, But of Greatest CONCERN.

By William Tomlinson.

Romans IX. 28. For he will finish the Work, and cut it short in Righteousness;
because a short Work will the Lord make upon the Earth. London, Printed and
Sold by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Gracious-Street. 1696.

A Short Work, but of Greatest Concern.
The Lord will cut his Work short in Righteousness.
TIme has been wherein there have been many Precepts; Precept upon Precept,
Line upon Line, under the Ministration of the Law, Isa. 28.13. But under the
Gospel the Lord does contract them, and bring them under one Head; and that is
the Spirit of God, to be led and guided thereby. And he shall lead into all
Righteousness and Truth, John 16.13. and out of the Lusts of the Flesh, Gal.
5.16. This I say then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the Lust of
the Flesh. And this Guide and Leader is promised to abide with the true
Servants of God for ever, John 14.16, 17. So that if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8.9.

The time comes, and draws near at hand, wherein People shall not be looked
upon as the People of God, because they are of such or such an Opinion; or
because they are in such or such a Society; or belong to such a sort of People,
and walk with them, let it be under whatsoever Name is extant, whether Papist,
or Protestant, or any other Name.

Nor shall Eminent Gifts and Parts shelter any Man. Many will say, Lord, Lord,
have we not prophesied in thy Name? And in thy Name have cast out Devils? And
in thy Name done many wonderful works? But what is the Answer to them that can
plead thus, from the Ability of Gifts, and live not Righteously? The Answer is
this, I never knew you, depart from me, ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23.
Iniquity dashes all Excellent Abilities, and puts one out of God's
Acknowledgment of their Persons.

Whereby we may observe, That it is not Eminent Gifts and Parts that states a
Man in a happy Condition, although these are good, and to be prized.

Query, Some may say then, perhaps, What is it then that makes us happy, if
such Eminent Gifts and Parts do not?

Answer. I answer, It is humble walking with the Lord, as a Child in his holy
Spirit, Mat. 18.3. Verily I say unto you, Except ye be Converted, and become as
little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. This is also
plainly expressed in other words, (before-named) where the Apostle says
expressly, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans
8.9. But on the contraty, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God.

So then it is plain, That our Sonship is established in the Spirit. If we be
led by the Spirit of God we are in the Sonship; but if we be not in some
measure led by that, we are not in the Sonship, but remain Strangers to God in
our Spirits. But if we be led by the Spirit of God, the Spirit it self will
bear witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16. And
here now is the Work cut short in Righteousness.

And hereby it is plainly manifest, That our Happiness lies herein, namely, in
being led by the Spirit of God, and walking humbly with him therein.

And this is the chief tendency, and the very substance of the New Covenant,
and of the New Testament which testifies of it, to bring us to this, and build
us up in this; namely, to bring us into subjection to the Spirit of God, and to
build us up therein, that so we may come to walk in Fellowship with our God. 1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye may
have Fellowship with us; and truly our Fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ. And the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ are
very agreeable hereunto, John 14.23. where he says, If a Man love me, he will
keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make
our abode with him.

O happy State and Condition, to have Fellowship with our God! This makes happy
both here and hereafter. And this the true Sons of God enjoy, who walk humbly
with him in Spirit.

And in this short work now, in walking with him in the Spirit, and having
Fellowship with him in the Spirit, all Iniquity is cut off, and all
Righteousness is comprehended and established; for he leads into all Truth.

I say, all Iniquity is cut off: So that he that walks in the Spirit, gives no
real occasion of stumbling. Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfill the
Lusts of the Flesh, Gal. 5.16. And so hereby that which gives real offense is
cut off.

It Is possible some may take offense where none is given, as the Jews did
against Christ. So some may do now in these Days, who are wedded to Tradition:
They may take offense at the Truth, when their Traditions in which they are
rooted, and grounded, are discovered, reproved or contradicted thereby. But
this is not Truth that gives the offense; but their Error, that take offense
where none is really given; as the Jews did take offense against Christ without
just cause.

And as walking in the Spirit of Truth cuts off all Iniquity, and all corrupt
Lusts of the Flesh, so it establishes the Obedient in all Righteousness. For
the Spirit leads into all Righteousness where he is faithfully followed and
obeyed. He will guide you (or lead you) into all Truth, John 16.13. That is, by
degrees, as he is obeyed.

There be many false Spirits gone forth into the World, but the Spirit of Truth
will discover them; and by their Fruits they shall be discovered. For says
Christ Jesus, By their Fruits ye shall know them, Mat. 7.16, to Ver. 20. A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good
Fruit; therefore their Fruits shall discover them; for God has so appointed it.

Now then what are the Fruits of the true Spirit, that thereby in some measure
we may be able to discover false Spirits, and may discern a difference? For
Christ Jesus tells us, By their Fruits ye shall know them.

I answer with the Apostle's words, Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance;
against such (says he) there is no Law. The Affections and Lusts of the Flesh
they are hereby cut off, as the next Verse expresses, viz. Ver. 24. in these
words, And they that are Christ's, have Crucified the Flesh, with the
Affections and Lusts.

This is the happy state of the true Children of God, who walk humbly with him
in his Holy Spirit, and grow up therein to the stature of a perfect Man in
Christ Jesus. They are led by the Spirit of God in these true Fruits of the
Spirit. And they have the Testimony of the Spirit of God witnessing with their
Spirits that they are his.

And here now is the Kingdom of God set up; God ruling by his holy Spirit in
our Hearts, and Man obeying, and walking humbly with him in Obedience; and so
enjoying his Comfortable Presence, and Witness of his Holy Spirit, as it was
promised, 2 Cor. 6.16. That he would dwellin his holy People, and walk in them.
And thus the Kingdom of God is set up in his People: For says Christ Jesus,
The Kingdom of God is within you, Luke 17.21.

Now the way to this Kingdom is to be minded and entered into, if Men would come
into it. For strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to it, and so
to Life, and few find it, says Christ Jesus. And on the other hand, Broad is
the Way, and wide is the Gate that leads to Destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat. And here many fall short of the Kingdom, because they take
the broad and easy way, and forsake the strait and narrow way that leads to
Life, Mat. 7.13, 14.

But they that do humble themselves before the Lord, and seek with their whole
Heart to enter into the Kingdom of God, to them God will open a way for them to
find what their Souls long for. For says Christ Jesus, Ask, and ye shall
receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you, Mat.
7.7.

There be many that mind not their future Condition, what will become of them?
They mind not another World to come; and therefore they run on as it were
hoodwinkt, and mind not the way that leads to Eternal Happiness; and so remain
Strangers to God in their Spirits; not considering the true state of
Christianity now under the Gospel, which is this, namely, To know the Lord, and
to walk in Fellowship with him in Spirit, Heb. 8.11. and 1 John 1.3, 6. But
they think if they keep on in their Form, all shall be well with them; not
condering, that a Form of Godliness, without the Life and Power of Godliness,
(which consists in Living in the Spirit and Fruits thereof) will not be
sufficient. For some had a Form of Godliness in the Apostles Days, but yet
without the Spirit and Power of Godliness; from such (says he) turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5.

Now lest any tender Spirits should be discouraged, and think with themselves,
that they are far from this happy state of being the Children of God, because
they find themselves laden and burdened with Corruption, and with many
Frailties and Infirmities which they are often overtaken with; let them
consider how low the Lord has condescended to Mankind, in order to bring us to
Happiness. He has not spared his Beloved Son, but has freely given him up to
become a Sacrifice for us, that we might have boldness through him to draw near
unto God. And so far does the Lord condescend to Mankind, that he despises not
the least faithful Drawings of Man's Heart toward him. He will not quench the
smoking Flax, nor break the bruised Reed. The least true motions that are in
the Heart of Man toward him he does not despise, but nourishes them, and
cherishes them, that Men may grow up in his Holy Spirit, which begets those
holy Motions, and Inclinations in them, and Breathings after the Lord.
Therefore let none think the Lord a hard Master to serve. For he has said and
affirmed, that he delights not in the Death of a Sinner, but that he should
turn from his Iniquities and live.

But the great difficulty lies here, Men are so glewed to their sinful Courses,
that they will not be separated from them, and so put the Lord from them afar
off. For he will have no Fellowship with Iniquity. For what Communion can Light
have with Darkness? Or Righteousness with Unrighteousness? But he will draw
near to them that draw near to him, Jam. 4.8. And he will acquaint them with
the true Paths, and Teachings, and Leadings of his Holy Spirit; and will give
them a Discerning to see a difference between the true Spirit and false
Spirits. And without all doubt, this was one reason of giving forth the several
parts of the New Testament, that false and Erroneous Doctrines and Spirits
might thereby (with the Spirit of Christ opening them) be detected and made
known. And therefore they that judge aright of Doctrines and Practices, they
judge according to the Holy Scriptures, and not by Tradition, or common
Practice, as too many do.

I may safely say, That the Holy Spirit is the Standard of the Gospel, and new
Covenant; and to that we must repair, if we would come under the protection of
the New Covenant. For therein (namely in the Spirit of Christ) is the Sonship
or Adoption established, as is manifest from Romans 8.9, 14, 15.

For further Confirmation of this, that our Happiness lies in having Fellowship
with God in our Spirits, and in being led by his Spirit, let these Scriptures
following be well minded.

Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. This Chapter ought
carefully to be minded, especially the former part of it, which speaks of being
led by the Spirit of God, unto Ver. 18. to which you may add Ver. 26, 27.
whereby you may see that the truly happy state of a Christian lies in being led
by the Spirit of God, and in having Fellowship with God therein.

Another Scripture to this purpose is this, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not that
ye are the Temple of God? And that the Spirit of God dwells in you? If any
Man defile the Temple of God, him shall God destroy: for the Temple of God is
holy, which Temple ye are.

Add to this the 19th and 20th Verses of the sixth Chapter, where the words are
these, What, know ye not that your Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, (or
Holy Spirit) which is in you, which ye have of God? And ye are not your own,
For ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your Body, and in
your Spirit, which are God's.

Again, 2 Cor. 1.22. and Chap. 5. Ver. 5. It Is there expressed, that the Spirit
is the Seal and the Earnest of our Inheritance; that is, of our Heavenly
Inheritance. Now an Earnest is the ensuring of a thing to one; and so is a
Seal. And Men are very careful to keep their Seal entire and safe, though it be
but for an Earthly Inheritance; how much more ought we to be very careful to
keep abiding in the Spirit, which is our Seal and Earnest for an Eternal
Inheritance.

Again, let these words be well minded, Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

And again, Gal. 6.8. it is there said, He that sows to the Flesh, shall of
the Flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap Life Everlasting. So then our Everlasting Life must spring from the
Spirit; how careful then ought we to be, to be acquainted with the Spirit of
God, and to walk humbly with him in the Holy Spirit!

And therefore Ephesians. 4.30. the Apostle admonishes us, saying, Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. And in 1
These. 5.19. we are admonished not to quench the Spirit. And therefore again I
say, how careful ought we to be, that we do not grieve or quench the Spirit of
God, which is the Seal of our Heavenly Inheritance.

Lastly, I shall add to these but one Scripture more, which is, 1 John 4.13.
Hereby know we that we dwell in him, (that is, in God) and he in us, because he
has given us of his Spirit.

Thus you may see, that the Spirit of God is the great thing that we are to
labor for, and submit unto; and to seek of the Lord to be endowed therewith,
that we may be led thereby now under the Gospel, which if any Man have not, he
is none of Christ's, says the Apostle plainly, Romans 8.9.

But Christ Jesus has promised for them that love him, and keep his Commands,
That he will pray the Father for them, and says he. He will give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spirit of Truth, whom
the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him; but ye
know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you, John 14.15, 16, 17.
Here he makes a clear distinction between the World and his People who love
him, and keep his Commands. The World sees not, neither knows the Spirit of
Truth; but ye know him, (says he) for he dwells with you, and shall be in
you. Here Is a comfortable Promise to the true Servants of Christ. And happy is
that Person that submits to such a Companion, which will be a continual Guide
to him; and which will check him when he turns to the Right Hand, or to the
Left, out of the way.

Thus we are in those times wherein the Spirit of God is made the Guide and
Leader of his People who know him.

And therefore so many false Spirits are come forth to divert Man from
following the true Spirit. For Satan has bestirred himself to withstand Man's
Happiness.

I say we are in the times of the Ministration of the Spirit, (which gives Life
to them that obey him) as you may read plainly expressed in the third Chapter
of the second Book to the Corinthians. The whole Chapter is worthy to be
minded; for it speaks manifestly of the change of the Ministration or Covenant.
And there the first Covenant is called the Ministration of Death written and
engraven in Stones, Ver. 7. And the New Covenant (which we are or ought to be
under) is called the Ministration of the Spirit, Ver. 8. And again, the first
Covenant, (that is the Law) is called the Ministration of Condemnation: and the
New Covenant (that is the Spirit) is called the Ministration of Righteousness,
Ver. 9. of that Chapter in these words, For if the Ministration of Condemnation
be glorious, much more does the Ministration of Righteousness exceed in Glory.
And Ver. 11. it said thus concerning these two Ministrations; For if that which
is done away was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious.

Thus you may see it very plain, that there is a change of the Covenant; and
that we are under the times of the New Covenant; which is the Spirit. And
further, That none are actually in the Sonship or Adoption, and reputed the
Sons or Children of God under the New Covenant, but those who are led by the
Spirit of God; or hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, which the Spirit
is the Author and Nourisher of.

And this is the true state of Christianity; in the which God has a number who
walk with him therein, though little discerned by the World. He has also others
who are pressing forward, striving to overcome; and them he carries as Lambs in
his Arms, Isa. 40.11. And these are as little Children whose Sins are forgiven,
1 John 2.12.

And others there are who did run well, but faint and flag before they come to
their Journeys end. And some turn back with the Dog to his Vomit, and with the
Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. And some
content themselves with a Form of Godliness, without the Life and Power thereof.

The Law had many Precepts, but the Gospel has contracted all good Precepts
under one Head; and that is, (as has been showed) under the guidance of the
Spirit of God. And this was their Rule they were guided by and led by, in the
Primitive Time; as it is plainly expressed, Gal. 6.15, 16, Verses, in these
words, For in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a New Creature, (or New Creation, as the words (...) do
properly bear, Mark 10.6.) And as many as walk according to this Rule, (viz.
this of the New Creation) Peace be on them, and Mercy; or Peace is upon them,
and Mercy; for so the words do as well bear; and they do enjoy Peace and Mercy,
who walk according to that New Creation of the Spirit of God in the Heart; and
they are now the true Israel of God, Romans 2.28, 29. I say, this was their Rule
they were guided by in the Primitive Time: For the Scriptures of the New
Testament were not fully writ until a many Years after Christ's Ascension; but
the Spirit was their Guide and Leader; and then from that Holy Spirit they gave
forth the Writings of the New Testament; not to divert Men from following the
Spirit, but to guide Men in Obedience to the true Spirit, and to avoid those
false Spirits that were then come forth into the World. For that is the chief
tendency of the New Testament, to direct and guide us in our Obedience to the
true Spirit of God, and to avoid all false Spirits.

In the time of the Law they were under the Letter; but when Christ the
Minister of the New Covenant came, he brought them on by degrees to the
Ministration of the Spirit; giving forth, first of all Precepts suitable to the
Spirit, while he was here in Person upon Earth. And then after his Ascension,
he ministered to them by the Spirit, as he had promised while he was with them,
John 14.15, 16, 17, 18. and Chap. 16.13, 14. and Chap. 15.26.

This is the great condescension of the Lord to Mankind, to lead gradually
those that love him, as they are able to bear.

For as there is a gradual going forward of his public Dispensations, so also
in his leading of particular Persons, from step to step.

When he had chosen a People out from the rest of Mankind, namely the
Israelites, the Seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; he gave them Carnal
Ordinances suitable to their Condition, Heb. 9.10. and after that he raised up
Prophets among them, to raise their Minds and Hearts a little higher, after a
more Spiritual Walking with him. Then after that he sent John the Baptist to
prepare the way for greater things which were to follow. For the Kingdom of
Heaven was then at hand. And thus way was made gradually for the coming of
Christ Jesus, that Men might believe on him when he came.

Thus the Lord carried on his public Work gradually; and thus also he
frequently carries on his Work in particular Persons, from step to step. And it
is well for them that follow him in his Leadings and Drawings, and take not up
their Rest, or stop in the Way, but hold on to follow the Lord. For he does not
usually communicate all at once to his People, although he may give much Comfort
sometimes at the first turning of Man's Heart faithfully to him. But he
communicates by degrees to them that truly follow him, and as they are capable
to receive, and able to bear. To his Disciples Christ said, I have many things
to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, John 16.12. so he communicated
to them as they could bear. And so he did to Paul, Acts 26.16. he did not make
him a Minister and a Witness of all at once, but appeared to him, to make him a
Minister and a Witness of those things which he had seen, and of those things
in the which he would afterward appear to him. Thus the Lord does condescend
to take us by the Hand, as it were, to lead us on from one degree to another,
where there is a willing Heart to follow him. And there may be still a going
forward, and growing up in the Lord while we are in this Life. Paul, that
Eminent Servant of the Lord, after all his Visions, and great Seize, and
Perfections, still says, I press forward, Phil. 3.14, 15.

And thus the Ministry of Christ was and is to lead us forward by degrees: Not
only to bring us on thorough the Ministration of the Law, or of the Letter, (as
it is called) but to bring us under the Ministration of the Spirit, so as to be
led thereby, and to grow up therein; and so to establish us in the Sonship or
Adoption.

Thus under the Ministration of the Gospel, the Work is cut short in
Righteousness; namely, in subjecting the Heart of Man to the Spirit of God,
which works all Righteousness in us gradually, if we be faithful thereunto. And
it will admit of no Iniquity, if we faithfully follow the guidance thereof. For
God has comprehended all Righteousness in the Spirit, and in the Fruits
thereof. It is the Spirit that leads into all Truth.

This is the great Dispensation of the Lord under the Gospel. This Satan knows,
and therefore was he, and yet is so busy to suggest other Spirits, whereby to
divert Men, and turn them aside from the true Spirit, by appearances of other
Spirits, and with some resemblance of the true: This he did very early in the
Apostles Days, as we may observe by the Writings or Epistles of the Apostle
Paul, in which we may see how he was constrained to vindicate himself, and his
Ministry, against those false Teachers, who desired occasion against him, 2
Cor. 11.12. False Apostles may despise and vilify them that are in the Truth,
and may transform themselves as the Apostles of Christ: Satan himself can
transform himself into an Angel of Light; therefore it is no great thing if his
Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 11.12,
13, 14, 15.

I do not speak this to vilify any faithful Ministers; but to show the great
subtilty of Satan: And for this end, that we may be all careful to keep close
to our true Guide, the Spirit of God, which leads into all Righteousness, and
out of all false Appearances, and gives the comfortable Testimony of his
presence in the Hearts of those that faithfully obey him, and walk humbly with
him.

But some perhaps may say, How shall we know these deceitful Workers, these
false Spirits?

I Answer, I write not this so much to discover any such, but that every one
may be careful to examine themselves, and be stirred up to beware of Satan's
Wiles. It is a hard matter to know deceitful Workers by their good Words, or
fair Speeches, or Ministerial Gifts and Parts, which they once had given them.
It Is said, That Gifts shall be given also, even to the Rebellious, Psalm. 68.18.
Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity Captive, thou have received
Gifts for Men; yea, for the Rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell
among them. And some will so rest upon their Ministerial Gifts, and not upon
the Giver, that they will make them a plea for themselves when the Lord comes
to judge, as has been showed before, from Mat. 7.22. But the Excellency of
Ministerial Gifts will not shelter Workers of Iniquity; although such Gifts be
very serviceable, and worthy to be desired. And it is the Apostle's
Exhortation. 1 Cor. 12.31. to covet earnestly the best Gifts. But yet (says
he) I show unto you a more excellent way; and that more excellent way he
expresses at large in the whole Chapter following, that is, in Chap. 13. where
he says thus, Though I speak with the Tongue of Men, and of Angels, and have
not love (for so it may and ought to be Translated from the Greek words (...)
and have not Love) I am become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal. [That
that word (...) ought to be Translated Love in this Chapter, I shall show by
and by, with Reasons for it.]

If any insist still upon that Query before mentioned, and say, How shall we
know these false Spirits, these deceitful Workers that have been spoken of? We
would fain know them.

I Answer still, Where it may be a hard matter for us to distinguish aright of
others, Our best course is to approve our own Hearts to the Lord; and to walk
so that we may have the Testimony of a good Conscience in our selves, that we
are approved of the Lord: Then shall we have rejoicing in our own Bosoms from
the comfortable Witness of the Spirit of God. For the Spirit will witness with
our Spirits, (if we walk in Obedience) that we are the Children of God, Romans
8.16. As for others, it will be a hard matter to distinguish aright between
Tares and Wheat: They may take Tares for good Wheat, or good Wheat for Tares,
if they keep not to the Holy Spirit.

True it is, that some Men's Sins are open beforehand, and go before unto
Judgment, and some Men's they follow after, 1 Timothy 5.24. Some are so openly and
manifestly wicked, that they are judged of all Men; but others, they follow
after.

I come now to show, that the words (...) mentioned before, ought to be
Translated thus, in my Judgment, viz. And have not love.

And in the first place, I shall show that the word (...) is most frequently
Translated Love, which is the first great Fruit of the Spirit, of which we have
been speaking, and springs immediately from the true Spirit of God, as an
inseparable Fruit thereof, Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, etc. (...) etc. And so you may find the word (...) Translated Love in
all these places following, besides others, Mat. 24.12. John 13.34, 35. and
Chap. 15.13. And again, Chap. 17.26. Romans 8.35. and Chap. 12.9. and Chap.
13.10. 2 Cor. 2.4, 8. and Chap. 5.14. and Chap. 6.6. and Chap. 8.7, 8, 24. and
Chap. 13.11. Gal. 5.6, 13, 22. Ephesians. 1.15. and Chap. 2.4. and Chap. 3.19. and
Chap. 6.23. Phil. 1.9, 17. and Chap. 2.1, 2. Col. 1.4, 8. 1 These. 1.3. and
Chap. 4.9. and Chap. 5.8. 2 These. 2.10. 1 Timothy 1.14. and Chap. 6.11. 2 Timothy
1.7. Heb. 6.10. and Chap. 10.24. 1 John 2.15. and Chap. 3.1. and Chapter 4.7, 8,
10, 16, 17. 2 John 6. Jude 2. Rev. 2.4. In all these places, besides more, the
word (...) is Translated Love.

And why it should be Translated Charity, as it is rendered, 1 Cor. 13.
throughout the whole Chapter, I see no reason. But I shall show what reason I
have to the Contrary.

We take Charity sometimes in this Case, to have a good Opinion of one; or to
have a good Affection to one; and so to have a Kind, Civil Society with them,
and this is good in its place. And sometimes it is taken for a Natural Love, as
among Relations, which is also good. Sometimes also it is taken for an
Affection of Pity to such as are in Distress; and not only to pity them, but to
distribute to them; and this is also called Charity; and this is very good
also, and very acceptable with the Lord, and agreeable with that Precept, Heb.
13.16. To do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God
is well pleased.

But still there is something above these, which is of a more uniting Property;
and that is the Love of God shed abroad in the Hearts of them that truly fear
and love him. And hence arises a more Spiritual Love, and therein, union of
Spirit, not only with the Lord, but also with all those that love and fear him,
and walk in Obedience with him. And this Love is not restrained to any one
distinct Society only, but extends it self to all that fear him, and walk
humbly with him in every Society of People.

True Spiritual Love is an Affection of Complacency arising from union of
Spirit in true Spiritual Obedience. Or to speak more fully, True Spiritual Love
(which is here spoken of in this 13th Chapter of 1 Cor.) is a Reflection of
God's Love shed abroad upon the Heart, and springing up in our Hearts. And it
arises from Faith, and is a true Fruit of Faith, For true Faith works by Love,
Gal. 5.6. Neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but
Faith which works by Love. And we love God, because he first loved us, 1 John
4.19. He gives some sense, (or understanding) of his Love, into our Hearts; or
sheds abroad his Love into the Hearts of them that truly fear him; and thence
springs our right, true Spiritual Love to him, and to all Men.

And this is that more excellent way which the Apostle said he would show in
the last Verse of the 12th Chapter immediately going before this 13th Chapter,
where he speaks so much of Love, which he prefers before the best Gifts. For,
says he, Covet earnestly the best Gifts, and yet show I unto you a more
excellent way. Observe! A more excellent way than the best Gifts; and that is
Love. For it follows immediately, Though I speak with the Tongues of Men, and
of Angels, and have not Love, ((...)) I am become as sounding Brass, or a
tinkling Cymbal. And so it is Love that is the more excellent way above the best
Gifts and Parts, viz. pure Spiritual Love. It Is above the Gift of Prophecy,
(though that be very desirable and profitable) it is above the Knowledge of all
Mysteries: It Is above Faith. Oh! the high Value that is set upon pure Spiritual
Love by the Apostle Paul; and so also by the Beloved Disciple John: For, faith
he, He that loves not, knows not God; for God is Love, 1 John 4.8. And
again, Ver. 16. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and
God in him. This pure Love is a Reflexeth of the Love of God shed abroad upon
the Hearts of them that truly fear, and love, and obey him, as has been said.
As the Sun in the Firmament shining upon the Water, gives a Reflection of it
self in the Water, so the Love of God shed abroad upon the Hearts of them that
truly fear him, begets a Resemblance of it self in some measure, where Clouds
of Sin or Unbelief hinder not. And so our true Love of God arises hence, even
from his Love in some measure made known to us, and shed abroad in our Hearts;
that is, in the Hearts of those that walk in Obedience and Faith before him.

Now this Love is a higher thing than Charity, and is more extensive than
Charity. For Charity reaches but to Man, but true Spiritual Love reaches forth
to God, as well as to Man. He is the Object of the purest and highest Love; and
he is the Fountain from whence such Love flows. We love him, because he loved
us first, (1 John 4.19.) and gave his Son Christ Jesus our Lord for our
Redemption.

This Love that is so much spoken of in the 13th Chapter of the First of
Corinthians, is above Faith, and above Hope. Now abides Faith, Hope, Love,
these three, but the greatest of these is Love, Ver. 13.

Again, the word (...) being Translated Charity in this place, seems to bear a
Contradiction in it to Ver. 3. of the same Chapter, 1 Cor. 3. where it is said,
Though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor (what is this but Charity? And yet
says the Translation) and have not Charity; but it were better expressed (I
think) and have not Love, according as the word (...) frequently signifies, and
is for the most part so rendered, as has been showed.

And so that word Love would better agree with all the other Expressions
following, in Verses 4, 5, 6, etc. than the word Charity; and might be Read
thus, Love suffers long, and is kind, Love envyeth not, Love vauneth not it
self, is not puffed up, does not beh^ve it self unseemly, seeks no her own,
is not easily provoked, th^nketh no evil, rejoiceth not in Iniquity: but
rejoiceth in the Truth, bears all things, beliveth all things, hops all
things, endures all things: And then, ver. 8. its said, Love never fails (or
ends) (...) But Prophecies they shall fail, Tongues they shall cease,
knowledge it shall vanish away. But Love shall never fail. Therefore this
(...), this Love here spoken of, shall remain for ever, even to all Eternity
when all Objects of Charity shall cease, and not be found.

This Love here spoken of is greater than Faith, or Hope; for Faith and Hope
cease, when the things believed and hoped for the enjoyed; but Love shall never
cease. And therefore I say, this Love here spoken of is a higher, and more
continuing thing, than that which is commonly called Charity: And so therefore
I say the word (...) in this place ought to be Translated Love.

I would not have any one to think that I speak against Charity, because I
speak against that Interpretation of the word (...) in this place; I wish
Charity were more abounding than it is, among all Persons. And that there were
more tenderness in the Hearts of People toward the Poor, and toward them that
are in Distress, than usually they meet withal. For they that are open-hearted
and open-handed toward such, they will not lose their Reward, if in singleness
of Heart they supply their Necessities. I shall only set down two or three
places of Scripture to encourage People thereunto, and so proceed, Mat. 6.1, 2,
3, 4. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. Heb. 6.10, 11. which places of Scripture those that
have a mind may see at their leisure.

But to return to the Subject I was speaking of, which was pure Love; it is of
that power that it produces unity, and so makes one: As we commonly say of
Persons that entirely love one another, They are all one. And so our Lord Jesus
Christ prayed to his Father for those that believe on him, That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
John 17.21. And again, Ver. 22. he says, And the Glory which thou have given
me, I have given them; that they may be one, even as we are one. And again
still further, Ver. 23. he goes on in his Prayer for those that believe on him,
saying thus, I in them and thou in me; that they may be made perfect in one;
and that the World may know that thou have s^nt me, and have loved them, as
thou have loved me.

Thus we may see how Love bends or inclines toward Unity, and brings into
Unity. And so herein it is greater than Charity, and muchabove Charity: For
there may be Charity to a Person, or for a Person, with whom we cannot have
Unity. Charity does not make one, as Love does. And therefore the word Charity
does not so fully agree with the Expressions here used by Christ Jesus as Love
does; neither does it so fully agree with the Expressions used by the Apostle,
1 Cor. 13. as Love does.

Now this true and pure Spiritual Love springs from hence, even from God's Love
in some measure shed abroad in the Heart, as has been showed before; or which
comes all to one, from being made Partakers of the same Spirit of God. And so
thereby we are taught of God to Love one another, 1 These. 4.9. and not only so,
but to Love all Men, yea, even our very Enemies.

Oh! what an excellent Spirit and Temper does the Spirit of God form in the
Hearts of those who are brought down into Subjection to him; as we may observe
to have been in the Apostles of Christ Jesus, after they were brought fully
under Subjection to the Holy Spirit.

Now where this Foundation (of the true Spirit) is laid, many sweet and
precious Fruits thereof will follow besides Love; as namely, the comfortable
sweet Dictates of the Spirit, with many Openings of Truth, and Enlightenings,
and Enlivenings of the Spirits of his Servants that walk with him in
Faithfulness, so as to make their Lives comfortable, though they meet with
outward Distresses and Troubles; as we may see in the Apostle Paul's Example,
who though he met with great Troubles, yet was born up in them all, and above
them. And therefore this ought to have a deep impression upon our Spirits, to
beget a carefulness in us to walk faithfully and humbly with the Lord, who is
able to carry through all Difficulties with Comfort.

After the Lord has Convinced the Heart of Man of Sin, and turned it against
it in Truth (which indeed is true Repentance) there is a fear and a care
begotten in the Heart, not to offend the Lord again, together with a Sorrow for
their former negligent and offensive Life. And this fear of offending the Lord
is the beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 9.10. And this fear of the Lord is to hate
Evil, Chap. 8.13. And so it keeps the Heart of Man abiding with the Lord, as
it is said, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear in their Hearts, and they shall not
depart from me.

Now this true fear of the Lord mortifies and deads the Heart to Sin, and
awakens it to Righteousness; and till then Men are said to be dead in Sins and
Trespasses, even while they live; and are as Strangers to God, although they can
talk of him, and of the Holy Scriptures.

But they that come really and effectually into Obedience, the Fruits of the
Spirit (Love, Joy, Peace, and such like) will spring up in their Hearts by
degrees, as the Lord sees good to nourish them up therein. And thus the Kingdom
of God, (which is within us) begins in little beginnings many times, but it is
of a growing Nature; it is like a Grain of Mustard Seed at first, but it grows
to a great Tree, Mat. 13.31. And thus by degrees usually we come to enjoy the
comfortable presence of the Lord with us, or (which is all one) the sweet
presence of the true Comforter in our Hearts, that is the Spirit of God. For
true Comfort springs up from the Spirit, in Obedience to him. And this is that
which makes the Lives of the true Servants of the Lord Comfortable, whatsoever
Adversity or Contradiction they meet withal from the World.

For our Happiness and Consolation does not depend upon an Opinion, but upon
our Union and Fellowship with the Lord, which is enjoyed in Obedience and
Faith, which the Spirit of God works in the Hearts of the truly humble. And
this is agreeable to that which the Apostle says, 2 These. 2.13. that we are
chosen to Salvation through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the
Truth; which in effect is the same with Obedience and Faith. For the Holy
Spirit sanctifies in Obedience, not in Disobedience; and Faith, and Belief of
the Truth, or true Belief is one, above such Belief as the Devils have, who
though they believe and tremble, yet still unsanctified; but such Faith as works
by Love, and has Love springing up in it: Such Faith with Obedience, is that
which accompanies (or is a ground of) our Justification, Sanctification, and
Salvation.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce this was writ, I have seen in the Hands of a Neighbor a Bible Printed
in the Year 1^87. wherein the word (...) is altogether Translated Love in this
1 Cor. 13. as I have rendered i^: Therefore I hope my rendering it so will not be
looked upon as a Novel Conceit.

And let this be noted, that I do not impute any blame to the Translators, who
have in our Bibles rendered the word (...) by the word Charity. For the word
(...) comprehends Charity; and it may be they might see that at that time there
was need to read it so, to stir People up to so good a Work. But that word
Charity does not fully reach to all the Expressions or Significations of the
word (...) here in this Chapter as Love does; for Charity re^ches but to Man,
but Love r^aches ^o God as well as to Man, 1 John 4.19. Charity cease when
the Objects of Charity c^ase; but Love shall never cease or fail, 1 Cor. 13.8.
For so it may truly b^ read, Love never fails or cease.

William Tomlinson.

FINIS.

