An Epistle of tender Love to all Friends that are tender hearted, who are
tender of the Honor of God, and seek the Glory of his worthy Name, and the
Prosperity of his precious Truth, and the Peace and Unity of the Church of
Christ in this his blessed Day.
Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters,
TO you is the Salutation of my Love in the Lord, who are called and chosen of
the Lord to be faithful Witnesses to his Name, and Truth in this his glorious
Day; wherein he is appeared in the Brightness of his Glory through his blessed
Son Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and Savior, to bring many home to himself
that were a far off from him, that they may know a Habitation of Safety and a
quiet dwelling Place, and be established upon that sure lasting Rock, that the
Gates of Hell cannot prevail against my tender Friends; you that are come to
the sure Foundation stand fast, and keep to Christ your Rock, he that was the
Rock of the Righteous in all Ages, and in every Generation since the World
began, and he will remain the same forever; therefore dear Friends, hold fast
your hope in him, that he may establish your Goings in the Path of Holiness,
and blessed way of Life, that he has cast up by the word of his pure Power in
this his glorious Day; wherein he has blessed you with a true and certain
knowledge of the Mysteries of his Kingdom, the way of Life and Salvation, and
made you partakers of his heavenly Treasure; you that were poor in Spirit has
he made rich in Faith, and you that were weak has he made strong in the Lord,
and in the Power of his might; that you may be able to stand in the Dominion of
that bright shining Light, Life and Power of Immanuel, God with us, as a
faithful Warrior against the man of sin, both within and without: Oh my dear
Friends, be bold and valiant, for the Lord and his Truth, and as the Valiants
of Israel be diligent, and fervent in your Zeal and Courage, to persevere in
the Work of the Lord, and keep your (...) Name and power, and be faithful in
your Testiimony for his blessed Truth, even unto the End, against all
Opposition whatsoever, and let nothing take place in your Hearts, to discourage
or weaken you in your Testimony against that Spirit of Division and Separation,
that opposes the good Order and Discipline of the Church of Christ, that is
established amongst you by the Power of God: Those that are crying out against
Orders and Forms; but Wisdom is justified of her Children, and their Folly is
made manifest, and their Fruits declare them to be some of the wandering Stars,
that have lost their light; notwithstanding their specious Pretenses the least
Child of Light, whose Understanding is kept open and clear, may see that
blindness and darkness is over them, so that they do not see their own Works of
what sort they are; who are prescribing Orders for friends, and a Form for them
to walk by, and how they shall keep their Men and Women's Meetings, and in what
Method and Form; and yet are opposing the Form of Godliness that is attended by
the Power, as you that have been faithful in the Lord's Work and Service, are
Members of those Meetings which they despise, and are made living Witnesses of,
and have had large Experience of his Power and Presence to attend you from day
to day, in your Works of Piety and Charity; and feel his Blessings showred down
upon you to your great Comfort, and living Refreshment; pure Praises to the
Lord our God over all forever, who is the Rock of our Safety, as our Eye is to
him; therefore have we no cause to be discouraged, though Men despise and
revile us, for God is with us of a truth; so we have good cause to believe that
he will fight the Battle for us, and be too hard for them, and overturn them
all in his own appointed Time and Season, that rise up against us; therefore in
patience possess your Soul, and cast your Care upon the Lord, who cares for
you, and will stand by you, and uphold you by his Power, and make way for you
through all these things, that you shall be able to hold out to the End, and
never grow weary of well-doing, as you follow Christ in the daily Cross; it is
you that God will crown, but it is grievous to some that come forth with us to
go from us, and turn against us Demas like, and prove disturbers of the
Church's Peace, by their oppositon and vain jangling against Orders and
Discipline, and pretend they stand for their own, and others liberties in
Christ, and yet would deny liberty to others, (viz.) to young People who have a
desire to come to Men and Women's Meetings, and Friends of other Counties, if
they are with us, they are also denied by them their liberty to come into their
Meeting; so are not these in confusion that pretend one thing and practice
another at the same Time, who have published their own weakness to the Nation,
by their Endeavors to reproach Friends, thinking thereby to cover themselves;
because they say, they have not caused these Rents and Divisions, and
Differences among Friends, by bringing in any new Doctrine or unscriptural
Discipline, but have made it out how and which way they were the cause of it
very plain, that it is easier to be understood, (viz.) by opposing the good
Order and Discipline, settled and established among Friends, as it is to be seen
in a printed Paper, the Title A Memorial for the present Generation, and also
for that which is to come; wherein they declare their dislike, and what
opposition, they still stood in against Friends, and still do stand in the
same, and resolved as I understand to continue in the Separation, except
Friends will make a bargain with them, and give it under their hands in
writing, to (...) and so deny them Liberty of Conscience, which they seem to
conted for in words, but in work they deny it to others; they having lost the
Power which should make way for their Testimonies; now they would come in upon
Terms to be accepted as Ministers of Christ* but his Ministers are attended
with his Power, which makes way for them in the Hearts of all People, where the
Ground is good, whose Minds are well inclined, that they receive their
Testimony with gladness of heart, as you are right sensible Blessed be the Name
of the Lord forever, so need not complain for want of acceptance as they do:
But my dear Friends, let none of these things discourage you in the Work and
Service of the Lord, and stand over their Spirit, and touch not with them; but
go on and do the work of your day with cheerfulness of heart, and readiness of
mind, and fear not to stand in that Power, that will give you to see over the
Devil and his Instruments; that have that Power of God in derision, and also
that inward Sense as not sufficient to try Spirits by; but you that are Members
of that Body of which Christ is Head, are seasoned with his Grace, and know the
Inspiration of the Almighty, to give you an understanding; and you have an
inward Sense by that Spirit which searches all things, yea the deep things of
God; and by this inward Sense you are able to try Spirits whether they are of
God or not; and this gives you to see over the Devil, and his Instruments and
Authority to judge them, and deny them, as moved so to do; so dear Children,
and chosen of the Lord, keep your Dominion in the Truth, and hold fast that
which you have received of God, that none take your Crown, which the Lord your
God has laid up in store for all his Saints, and sanctified in Christ Jesus,
that are faithful unto the death; they shall have a Crown of Life, and as one
said in his day to the Primitive Christians, so say I to you, take heed that
none spoil you with Philosophy and vain Deceit, or sensual Wisdom and fair
Pretenses from false Brethren, which may have a show of Humility in
Will Worship, not holding Christ the Head, unto which every Member is jointly
knit; from such turn away, and cleave to the Lord with your whole Heart, and
hold fast the hope of the Gospel unto the End, that your Bow may abide in
strength, and the Lord fill your Quivers with pollished Arrows, that you may
shoot at Babylon the Mother of Confusion, and wound her to the Heart, and spare
not her Merchants, for they must weep and mourn, for the Day of the Lord will
overtake them; therefore put on Strength and Courage, and stand in that Power,
that will make you victorious over all Zion's Enemies, both within and without;
then shall Zion's Children rejoice in the Lord the God of all our Mercies, and
sing high Praises with Glory and Hononour to his Honorable Name, and glorious
Power; because of his goodness and matchless Mercies unto us: for he is a
showring down of his spiritual Blessings, and living Mercies to the gladding of
the Hearts of his People, for this is the Portion of the Righteous; therefore
lift up your Heads the chosen of the Lord, and rejoice in the God of your
Salvation, who has promised to create Jerusalem a Rejoycer, and her People a
Joy, and he is fulfilling the same in the Hearts of Zion's Children; pure
Praise to his worthy Name for evermore; so let none of these Contenders trouble
you with their printing this unsavory Memorial; for if they have no better
Fruits to publish to the World than this, Viz. their Contention with their
Brethren, and Dislike and Opposition to the good Order and Discipline of the
Church of Christ; their Memorial will not be blessed of the Lord, for the hand
of the Lord is against it, and the Spirit that gave it forth; for such a
Memorial to be left to future Ages, will never give them cause to call them
blessed, that are the Authors thereof; for it is not the Gladtidings of good
things, but sad Tidings to the upright in Heart, to hear that such as were once
enlightened should so far lose their understanding, as to say, the way of
Convincement is almost stopped, and should be so covered with Darkness, as to
publish themselves to the World; so in oppos^^^^^ (...) their Brethren, as to
give them cause to judge and deny them, and turn from them; what shall I say?
the Lord will bring distress upon them, and upon all that join with them, if
they repent not; for their unsavory Memorial cannot cover them from the
All-seeing Eye of the Lord; for he beholds all their doings, and takes notice
of it, and will plead with them, but thanks be to God a Remnant the Lord has
kept open and tender; they see that Christ the Light, Life, and who is the way
of convincing; he is not stopped in the tender hearted, neither can their
jangling stop the Work of the Lord, for Truth prospers in the Earth, and gets
ground; and many are convinced of late up and down by the Light and Spirit of
Truth: Praises to the Lord our God over all, who is adding to his Church daily,
such as shall be saved; therefore ye Children of the Light and of the Day of
God's Love, keep your Lamps trimmed, and furnished with the heavenly Oil, that
you may enter in with the Bridegroom into the marriage Chamber, when the
foolish are shut out; then will you be filled with the heavenly Treasure, and
the Wellspring of Eternal Life, will sweetly flow into your tender Bosoms; for
the Lord is the Portion of your Cup, and the Lot of your Inheritance, and will
be forever as your Eye is unto him; to whom I commit you, and recommend you
with true Breathings to the God of my Life, that he will preserve and keep you
in a holy and harmless Life, low in his fear, that preserves you out of the
Snares of Death for ever; that so to the Praise of his Grace, and to the Glory
of his Power who is over all, God blessed forever; you may live and outlive
all Contentions in the Sense of that Life, that was before Death and Contention
was so as you abide in the Light, Life and Power of God, and walk in the way of
Holiness; this is the way to keep all in the Unity of the true Faith, and holy
Spirit of Truth which is the Bond of true Peace, and watch over one another for
good, and live in love one with another; for by this shall all Men know that
you are my Disciples, said Christ, if you love one another, and keep down all
Sperfluity, I entreat you for the Lord's sake, in your Families; and train up
your Chidren in the fear of the Lord, as becomes the Truth, in that which is
comely and commendable; and be you such good Patterns unto them, that they
following your Example of Holiness, may prevent such as watch over you for
evil, and rejoices to see it, that they may spread it abroad to the Dishonor
of Truth, and cause the uncircumcised to rejoice; as you may see, how false
Brethren print and publish things to the Nation to defame the Truth, and those
that profess it, as in their printed memorial may be seen what reviling and
reproachful bitter words they have vented against Friends, and are complaining
of reflections from them, and are judging Friends for that which they are in
the Practice of, and so condemn themselves, and yet pretend they seek for Peace
and Reconciliation, and bring forth such Fruits to maintain Contention, at the
same time all in one sheet of Paper, so their Works contradict their Pretenses;
but dear Friends, do you study to be quiet, and mind the Lord's Business in
your Men and Women's Meetings, and do your endeavors to discharge your
Consciences in all things toward God and Man, and take heed of giving place to
any thing that would make the Offense of the Cross to cease, but stand as
Pillars in the House of God, and go no more forth, and help to bear the
Burdens of the weak, and take them by the hand, and encourage young People to
come to their Meetings, such as are tender and of a good Life, that they may
learn, so that your Offspring may succeed you in the Work and Service of the
Lord, and may act for God when you are in your Graves, notwithstanding they
deny them that Liberty, and heed not the blind Comparison of Gehazi; you that
are Members of those Meetings, run not for covetous Ends as he did, but are
willing to succor and relieve such as are in distress, which proves their
Comparison frivolous and vain like the rest of their Works, who pretend they
have been greatly concerned, and striving to make up the breach, but they do
not strive lawfully, and so are disappointed of their expectation, and are like
so to be, till they repent and turn to the Lord, and cease from Contention and
Opposition, and be reconciled to their Brethren: If they do in reality desire
to make up the breach, this is the way for them to come into Unity and
Fellowship again with their Brethren, and then they may offer their Gift, and
find acceptance with the Lord and his People, as in Times past; but if they
will not return but still stand in Opposition, the fault is in themselves, and
they must bear their own Burden; but be not you disquieted at them but pity
them, and be ready to do them goo if you can; but do you stand fast, and keep
your Habitation in the precious Truth unto the End, that God over all may have
the Honor, and the Glory, and the Praise, for he alone is worthy both now and
forever more, says your true Friend and Sister in the Fellowship of the
Gospel, in which I conclude, desiring you not to strive with them, but keep to
the peaceable Truth,

Theophila Townsend:
Cirencester, the 12 th. of the 3 d. Month, 1690.
ISAIAH LII. 7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of him, that
brings Glad-tidings of good things, and publishes Peace and Salvation, and
says to Zion, thy God Reigns.


Let this Epistle be read among Friends in their Meetings, as they in the
Wisdom of God shall see a Service for it.



London, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lombard Street, 1690.


