A Transient View of a CURATS LETTER Sent to a Pretended PRESBYTERIAN MINISTER.
Dated 4. March 1689.
ASSES ride with Golden Bridles, when Princes walk on Foot: And thunder out
their ille dixit, (so I say; and so ye shall believe) yet the Bible teaches us,
to set assunder Linsey Woolsey work, mingled Seed, the Plough of an Ox and an
Ass: Yea, the Old worm eaten Garment of Bishop Lightons Accommodation, under
the pretext of Indifferency. And if so, Presbytry be Indifferent, what bloody
Butchers are you? To shed the Blood of 2000 Innocent: Upon this head only, a
GOD daring, and Heaven provoking Generation. But GODS Remnant knew better the
Word of GODS Patience. You cry Union, why not, but with whom? with Laymen, or
an Organized Church of Ministers, and People? The Latter you cannot be: Since
you are no lawful Succession of Ministers: having neither Immediate, Mediate,
nor Mixed Call. The Application of the Authority to the Person, being from GOD?
and of the Person to the Authority from the Presbytries in Clastical Appeals.
Now your Commission is only from Saul, and if he may Commissionate to Preach
and Baptize, so may a Soldier, and he himself more Virtually? Thus you are an
Hotch Potch, of a Homogenions Civil Body: over whom the Mediator is neither
Head, Lord, nor Savior. Had you the Spirit of the XC. Priests, who shut Vzziah
from the House of the Lord, and GOD smot him with Leprosy; but GOD Fetches a
Fo^raign Prince to do his Work; Mic. 5. 5. Thus you are neither true Ministers,
not truly Ministers: For the Scribes and Pharisees, be a Lawful Succession,
though sinned the very sin against the Holy Ghost. You vainly assert the ends of
the Covenant: Do not bind to root out your Herarchy: When the Nation has
abjured Popery, Prelacy, Toleration, betraying the Mediatory Glory of Christ
into the hands of Tyrrany, and lawless Liberty: Yet are they 44 Ministers who
did not accept it. As to the sourse and rise of your Prelacy from the Old Pagan
Priests? The Testimony of the Church of Scotland fully relates. Printed in the
79. And Conveyance of Presbytry for 1600 years in the 81. To what, and how far
the Covenant is Obligatory. Peruse a Sheet Entitled, Noah's Dove printed in
March 1689. If ye will open your Windows with the visible Judgment of GOD, on
six Foreign Kings for Perjury, but I follow you? Where do you hide your
Serpents Eggs? Is it under Jupiters Wings: GOD is of Purer Eyes then to behold
Perjury in Ministry and Magistracy. Sin is the Soul sickness, Confession the
Souls vomit. Confess and forsake your Paganism and Arminianism. Had not the
Dust of Defection blown out your Eyes, ye had not denied the Divine Right of
Presbytry; Tim. 4. 4. And your bloody and sinful Imposition of Oaths, and bands
occasioned a Lawful Separation. As to your Assisting Presbyters to whom of old,
the hallowed Bread was sent, from the Deanery Churches, its mere Popish. And as
to the Petitions of the Ministers of England? I heard Baxter confess his
Precipitancy and others also. The Conference betwixt Henderson and the Royal
Martyr confute your vain Conjuncture, of a 1000 years Reformation; in a Curats
Noddle? who worse than Judas, made a Covenant, and yet betrayed his Lord, and
Master. Jer. 15. 19. Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them!
You boast of your external Privileges, so had the Philistinss the Ark and
Bible, and all in captivity, 1 Samuel 6. and the heavy curse of GOD with them,
5000 died of the Emmerhods: true Faith is quick sighted, knows Christ lying in
a manger; Yea, the object of a Believers faith, tho with poor fisher Men at His
back; no lazy Drons were they riding in coaches.

FINIS.

