The Cry of a Stone: OR A RELATION OF Something spoken in Whitehall, by Anna
Trapnel, being in the Visions of GOD.

RELATING To the Governors, Army, Churches, Ministry, Universities: And the
whole NATION.

UTTERED In Prayers and Spiritual Songs, by an Inspiration extraordinary, and
full of wonder.

In the eleventh month, called January. 1653.

London Printed. 1654.

To all the wise Virgins in Sion, who are for the work of the day, and wait for
the Bride-grooms coming.
IT is hoped in this day, a day of the Power of God, a day of wonders, of
shaking the heavens and the earth, and of general expectation of the
approachings of the Lord to his Temple, that any thing that pretends to be a
Witness, a Voice, or a Message from God to this Nation, shall not be held
unworthy the hearing and consideration of any, because it is administered by a
simple and unlikely hand; far be that from us, who have soon the foolish things
of the world to confound the wise, babes and children to bring to nothing the
Scribes and Disputers of this world, the first to be last, and the last first:
far be it from us, who are and shall yet be named the Valley of Vision, to bind
up the goings forth of the most free and Eternal Spirit at any time, especially
in these last days, Within any Law, custom, order, or qualification of man,
how ancient or accustomed soever; or within any compass narrower then the
Promise it self, Joh. 7.37. who may bind where God has loosed? can thou
bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? he
opens, and no man shuts; and let it be considered, if upon this stumbling
stone of the Spirits freedom, the wise and learned Ones, both in the days of
Christ and of the Apostles, and in our days, have not stumbled and fallen, and
been broken to pieces?

Two things are foretold by all the Prophets, shall be brought to pass, which
seal up the Prophesies and finish the mystery of God; The Lords appearing in
his Glory upon Mount Sion, and the darkning of Sun and Moon, that is, the
shaming, confounding and casting out of all wisdom and power, and whatsoever is
but the excellency and glory of man; now if we see these high and precious
effects beginning to put forth either in sons or daughters, in handmaids or
servants, let us rejoyee and be glad, for the summer is nigh at hand: It was
the desire of this Maid to present this her Testimony to you, though it is not
for you only, but for all.

If any may be offended at her Songs; of such it is demanded, If they know What
it is to be filled with the Spirit, to be in the Mount with God, to be gathered
up into the visions of God, then may they judge her; until then, let them wait
in silence, and not judge in a matter that is above them.

There being various reports gone abroad concerning this Maid, too many being
such as were not according to truth, Whereby it comes to pass that the things
shespake, do not appear to men as they came from her, but as deformed and
disguised with the pervertings and depravings of the Reporters; therefore it
was upon the heart of some that heard her, (as judging it might be a service
done to many, hurt to none but such as fear the Light) to present to public
view a true and faithful Relation of so much as for some 7 or 8 days could be
taken from her by a very slow and unready hand; whereby a fair opportunity is
laid before offended and unsatisfied spirits to examine, try and judge, and
happily to correct their Censures; and also the things herein related may come
to the knowledge, and reach the hand of them whom they especially concern, if
so be they will in meekness search and enquire, whether it be the Lord that
has spoken to them in it.

Upon the seventh day of the eleventh month, called January. 1654 being the
sixth day of the week, Mr. Powel Preacher of the Gospel in Wales, being
according to Order from the Council now sitting in Whitehall, come thither to
give an account before them of some things by him delivered in his public
Exercises in London, among other friends who came thither to see what would be
done with him, there came a maid, Mrs. Anna Trapnel by name, who waiting in a
little room near the Council, where was a fire, for Mr. Powells coming forth,
then with a purpose to return home: She was beyond and besides her thoughts or
intentions, having much trouble in her heart, and being seized upon by the
Lord: She was carried forth in a spirit of Prayer and Singing, from noon till
night, and went down into Mr. Roberts lodging, who keeps the Ordinary in
Whitehall; And finding her natural strength going from her, she took her bed at
eleven a clock in the night, where she lay from that day, being the seventh day
of the month, to the nineteenth day of the same month, in all twelve days
together; The first five days neither eating nor drinking any thing more or
less, and the rest of the time once in 24. hours, sometimes eat a very little
toast in small Bear, sometimes only chewed it, and took down the moisture only,
sometimes drank of the small Bear, and sometimes only washed her mouth
therewith, and cast it out, lying in bed with her eyes shut, her hands fixed,
seldom seen to move, she delivered in that time many and various things;
speaking every day, sometimes two, three, four and five-hours together; and
that sometimes once a day, and sometimes oftener, sometimes in the day only, and
sometimes both in the day and night. She uttered all in Prayer and Spiritual
Songs for the most part, in the ears of very many persons of all sorts and
degrees, who hearing the Report came where she lay; among others that came,
were Colonel Sidenham, a member of the Council, Colonel West, Mr. Chittwood,
Colonel Bennet, with his wife, Colonel Bingham, Captain Langdon, Members of the
late Parliament; Mr. Courtney, Mr. Berconhead, and Captain Bawtrey, Mr. Lee,
Mr. Feak the Minister, Lady Darcy, and Lady Vermuden, with many more who might
be named: The things she delivered during this time were many; of the four
first days no account can be given, there being none that noted down what was
spoken. For the rest of the time, from the fifth day to the last, some taste is
herein presented of the things that were spoken, as they could be taken by a
slow and imperfect hand.

And to hold out all just and full satisfaction to those Questions, Scruples or
Demands, which a Relation of this nature is apt to beget; touching the
condition of the Party, where? or what she is? to whom is she known? is she
under Ordinances? what has been her conversation formerly? etc. Before you
come to the Relation it self; Here is first offered to you an account of the
Parties condition in her Relations, her acquaintance, her conversation, the
dispensations of the Lord to her in Clouds and bitter storms of Temptations, in
Manifestations of light and love, in Visions and Revelations of things to come;
all this is presented to you in the following Narration, taken from her own
mouth.

I Am Anna Trapnel, the daughter of William Trapnel, Shipwright, who lived in
Poplar, in Stepney Parish; my father and mother living and dying in the
profession of the Lord Jesus; my mother died nine years ago, the last words she
uttered upon her deathbed, were these to the Lord for her daughter. Lord I
Double thy spirit upon my child; These words she uttered with much eagerness
three times, and spoke no more; I was trained up to my book and writing, I have
walked in fellowship with the Church meeting as All-hallows, (whereof Mr. John
Simpson is a Member) for the space of about four years; I am well known to him
and that whole Society, also to Mr. Greenhil Preacher at Stepney, and most of
that society, to Mr. Henry Jesse, and most of his society, to Mr. Venning
Preacher at Olaves in Southwark, and most of his society, to Mr. Knollis, and
most of his society, who have knowledge of me, and of my conversation; If any
desire to be satisfied of it, they can give testimony of me, and of my walking
in times past.

Seven years ago I being visited with a fever, given over by all for dead, the
Lord then gave me faith to believe from that Scripture. After two days I will
revive thee, the third day I will raise thee up, and thou shale live in my
sight: which two days were two weeks that I should lie in that fever, and that
very time that it took me, that very hour it should leave me, and I should rise
and walk, which was accordingly: From this time, for a whole year after, the
Lord made use of me for the refreshing of afflicted and tempted ones, inwardly
and outwardly. And when that time was ended; I being in my Chamber, desired of
the Lord to tell me whether I had done that which was of and from himself.
Reply was, thou shall approve thy heart to God, and in that thou have been
faithful in a little, I will make thee an Instrument of much more; for
particular souls shall not only have benefit by thee, but the universality of
Saints shall have discoveries of God through thee: So upon this I prayed that I
might be led by the still waters, and honor God secretly, being conscious to my
self of my own evil heart, looking upon my self as the worst of all Gods flock;
the Lord upon it told me, that he would out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
perfect his praise; then I remained silent, waiting with prayer and fasting,
with many tears before the Lord for whole Sion: And upon that day called
Whitson-monday, which was suddenly after, I finding my heart in a very low dead
frame, much contention and crookedness working in my Spirit; I asked of God
what was the matter, he answered me thus; I let thee see what thou art in thy
self to keep thee humble, I am about to show thee great things and visions
which thou have been Ignorant of: I being thus drawn into my Chamber: after
this there was a day of thanks giving that I kept with the Church of
All-hallows in Limestreet, for the Army that was then drawing up toward the
City, in which I had a little discovery of the presence of the Lord with them,
in which day I had a glorious Vision of the New Jerusalem, which melted me into
rivers of tears, that I shrunk down in the room; and cried out in my heart,
Lord, what is this? it was answered me, A discovery of the glorious state of
whole Sion, in the reign of the Lord Jesus, in the midst of them, and of it
thou shall have more visions hereafter; So then when the day was ended. I
retired to my Chamber, at that time living in the Mineries in Aldgate Parish,
where I conversed with God by prayer, and reading of the Scriptures, which were
excellently opened to me touching the Proceedings of the Army.

It was first said to me that they were drawing up toward the City (I not
knowing any thing of it before) and that there was a great hubbub in the City,
the shops commanded to be shut up; Upon this I went down, and enquired of the
maid of the house, whether there was any stir in the City; She answered me, you
confine your self to your Chamber, and take no notice of what is done abroad;
We are commanded, said she, to shut up our shops, and there are great fears
amongst the Citizens; what will be the issue, they know not; With that I
answered, blessed be the Lord that has made it known to so low a servant as I;
Then repairing to my Chamber again, I looked out at the window, where I saw a
flag at the end of the street; this word I had presently upon it, thou see
that flag, the flag of defiance is with the Army, the King of Salem is on their
side, he marches before them, he is the Captain of their Salvation; At the
other end of the street, I looking, saw a hill (it was Black Heath) it was said
to me, thou see that hill, not one but many hills rising up against
Hermonhill, They shall fall down and become Valleys before it: It was then said
unto me, Go into the City, and see what is done there: where I saw various
things from the Lord in Order to his appearance with the Army; as I was going,
hearing of a Trumpeter say to a Citizen these words, we have many Consultations
about our coming up, but nothing yet goes on; presently it was said to me, the
Councels of men shall fall, but the Council of the Lord stands sure, and his
works shall prosper: So repairing home, I had many Visions, that the Lord was
doing great things for this Nation.

And having fasted nine days, nothing coming within my lips, I had upon the
ninth day this Vision of horns; first I saw in the Vision the Army coming in
Southwark-way, marching through the City with a great deal of silence and
quietness, and that there should be little or no blood spilt; this was some
weeks before their coming in.

Then broke forth another Vision as to the horns; I saw four horns, which were
four Powers, the first was that of the Bishops, that I saw was broken in two
and thrown aside; the second horn more white had joined to it an head,
endeavoring to get up a Mount, and suddenly it was pushed down and broken to
pieces; the third horn had many splinters joined to it, like to the scales upon
the back of a fish, and this was presented to be a Power or a Representative,
consisting of many Men, having fair pretenses of love to all under all forms;
this I saw broken and scattered, that not as much as any bit of it was lest. As
to the fourth horn, that was short but full of variety of Colors, sparkling,
red and white; it was said to me, this is different from the three other,
because great swelling words and great offers of kindness should go forth to
all people from it; like unto that of Abfalom, speaking good words to the
people in the Gate to draw them from honest David.

I was judged by diverse friends to be under a temptation, as H. I. and Io. S.
to be under a temptation for not eating; I took that Scripture, neglect not the
body, and went to the Lord and enquired whether I had been so, or had any self
end in it to be singular beyond what was meet; it was answered me, no, for thou
shall every way be supplied in body and spirit, and I found a continual fullness
in my stomach, and the taste of diverse sweet meats and delicious food therein,
which satisfied me, that I waited to see the issue, which was exceedingly to be
admired; I remaining ever since in much health.

Some years after, when the Army was designing a war with Scotland, I was
dissatisfied, judging many that were godly in those parts might be cut off
ignorantly; and upon this I sought the Lord, and the Lord after prayer directed
me to the 9th of Zecharich verse 11. The eyes of the Lord shall be seen over
them, and his Arrow shall go forth as the Lightning, the Lord God shall blow
the trumpet, and shall go through with the whirlewinds of the South; The Lord
said, that his eye, not only his al-seeing eye, which runs to and fro through
the Earth, but an eye of Grace and Love to them as his peculiar treasure, was
over them of the Army, and not only so, but they should see it; and as to his
Arrow, it was that sharp dealing of his with the enemy; as to the Lightning, it
was those burning devourings of those several places that should be ruinated by
the Army in those Parts; and as to the Trumpet, that the Lord would show forth
a mighty alarm to his people, before whom many high and great ones of the Scots
should tumble down, and that he had raised up a Gideon, bringing that of Judges
7. to me, to prove Oliver Cromwell, then Lord General, was as that Gideon,
going before Israel, blowing the trumpet of courage and valor, the rest with
him sounding forth their Courage also; that as sure as the Enemy fell when
Gideon and his Army blew their trumpets, so surely should the Scots throughout
Scotland be ruinated: Upon this I praised for some hours together, that God had
provided a Gideon, and this I saw both by Vision, and Faith, and Prayer and
Praises, that God had appointed him for the work of that present day to serve
this Nation; and told me that great things should be done, and that he should
take his circuit through Scotland, and the Enemy should draw near to us, even
to the gates of the City, and there be defeated.

So I remained praying, keeping many fasting days in my Chamber, till six weeks
before Dunbar fight; and then I had Visions given me concerning that first
overthrow of the Scots, where I saw my self in the fields, and beheld our Army,
and their General, and hearing this Voice, saying, Behold Gideon and the
lapping ones with him! with that I was much taken, that they were likened unto
that old Gideon and his Company; and then I saw them in a very ill posture for
war, and much dismayed, looking with pale countenances, as if affrighted at the
multitude of the Scots that were come out against them; whom I saw at a little
distance from them, the light of the sky being over their heads, which prompted
them the more to the Battle, seeing our Army with darkness over them and much
disheartened, and they thinking that our Army was running away, they marched up
with very great fury against them, and suddenly as our Army turned, who seemed
but a little while to stand before them, the light of the Sky being drawn from
the Scots to our Army, they were encouraged, and immediately I saw the Scots
fall down before them, and a marvelous voice of praise I heard in our Army:
then was I taken weak in my outward man, keeping my bed fourteen days, neither
drinking nor eating but a draught of small Beer, and a bit of toast once in
twenty four hours; and as soon as this Vision was over, I broke forth to the
singing of their deliverance in Scotland; in which time many resorted to me of
them that were for the Presbyterian Government, viz. Dr. French's Wife, Mrs.
Bond, who was then Mrs. Kendal, Mrs. Smith, who all lived in Hackney, and Mrs.
Sansom of Tower Hill, and they related this Vision to Mr. Ash the Minister, who
waited till they saw it accomplished, and then admired.

Upon the fifth of November last save one, 1652. The Lord brought that
Scripture to me, Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in
Praises, working Wonders? from which the Lord showed me, that his Glory, and
Praise, and Wonders he was bringing forth as upon the Land, so now upon the
Seas; and the Lord again showed me in a Vision, that many men of account should
be taken away in the first great Battle; and I lay in this Vision from the
first day of the week at night, until the second day at night, and stirred
not, nor spoke, but sometimes sang of a great Victory that I saw upon the Seas,
Ships burning, bones and flesh sticking upon the sides of the Ships, the Sails
battered, and the Masts broken, and many such dreadful things as to the
Hollander; seeing many godly friends also dropping into the Sea, and their
bodies beaten in pieces, it remained a long while to my view, but the Victory
that I saw in the Conclusion, produced many Songs, crying out, oh, Who is a God
like unto thee? according as thou said thou would be, so Lord I see thee:
At this time, I keeping of my bed seven whole days and eight nights in
Mark-lane, at widow Smiths, Glasier, where were many Spectators of account,
both sea-Captains and others; Mr. Allen a Common-Councel-man, Mr. Smith, Mr.
Radcliffe, Captain Palmer, Mr. Knollys, and several other men of account in the
City; at this time for seventeen days I eat nothing but two broyled Herrings,
and drunk Water and small Beer.

Two months after this, in the twelfth month, called February, 1653. The Lord
suffered Satan to buffet me, yet I questioned not the truth of any of my
Visions and Revelations, but said, if I shall be thrown into hell, yet they
were the truths of the Lord God, and should certainly come to pass: but I
remained in grievous bitterness, being hurried by Satan, and he prevailing
over me in a very high nature, moving me to blaspheme; but the Lord kept me
from uttering any such thing, though I was tortured in my body, as if he had
the full possession thereof, and being persuaded that he had power over my
body, and natural life to make an end of it, though I believed from the seal
that I had had eight years before, that I should be saved through the fire:
This temptation remained with me from the first of the twelfth month, 1653.
till the latter end of the second month, called April, lying in the Mineries
seven days, in which time I had two Godly men, and a Godly woman watched with
me every night; temptations of all sorts were so violent upon me: And at the
end of those seven days, my body was freed from that torture caused by Satan,
and I repaired home to Hackney, to my Kinsmans house, Mr. With, and there I
remained till the latter end of April under very bitter storms, being forced by
Satan to walk up and down the fields, attempting to throw my self into a Well,
saying, God shall not be dishonored; For it shall be thought, said Satan, some
put thee in, and so thou shall be in happiness presently; For what can pluck
thee out of thy Fathers hand, he has made an everlasting Covenant with thee,
Ordered in all things, and sure, and this is all thy desire, and all thy
Salvation, which thou have made mention of to many; and I was forced to lie in
ditches frequently, till it was dark night, that some found me, and led me
home; And again frequently I took Knives to bed with me, to destroy my self,
and still they were snached out of my hand, I know not how, not by any
Creature: I durst not eat nor drink for four days together, because it was said
to me, If thou do, thou worshippest the Devil; For in every thing give
thanks, whether thou eatest or drinkest, do it all to the glory of God: but
thou can do nothing to the glory of God, therefore thou gratifiest Satan;
And do not add sin to sin by so doing; In this time still Satan came as an
Angel of light, though I was so full of terror, he still affrighted me in every
thing; If I did so and so, I should sin, that I durst not speak to any that
feared the Lord, nor I durst not have any prayer, because he said, I sinned if
I prayed, or suffered any to pray for me; and I was exceeding afraid to sin,
though he drew me abundantly by his false pretenses to vow against coming ever
among the Saints, or into institutions more; and said to me also, That if I
did, I were the most notorious liar that ever spoke; and that made me afraid,
because of that dreadful Scripture in the last of the Revelations, where the
fearful are ranked with those that shall have their portion in the Lake. Many
other dreadful assaults I had, and casting my self at length down on the
ground, said, Lord there is no recovery, I shall surely go out like a snuff;
presently there shone a light round about me, and this saying, Arise, why lie
thou upon thy face, pray and eat, this day is Salvation come to thy house,
behold this is the day of Salvation, this is the acceptable time; Ask now what
thou will in the height or in the depth, and see whether God will not give thee
the desire of thy soul; I replied and said, I would not tempt the Lord; he
answered me, it is not a tempting of God, when he requires this of thee; I
said, then Lord, give me an humble, broken, melting frame of Spirit, pour upon
me a Spirit of prayer and supplication, which immediately the Lord did in
abundant measure, and many singings concerning the excellent nature of faith:
And now having procured a very terrible ague and fever upon my body, in
locking my self up in such bitter cold weather, coming at no fire, not among
any, lest they should speak to me of my former experiences, which I found did
aggravate my sorrow very much; But the Lord as he had cured me in my spirit, so
by faith he restored my body; and as to that Temptation mentioned, never to
come among the Saints again, which was that grand temptation that drew in the
other; It being first settled in my heart, I desired that the Lord would give me
a Scripture to enform me that this was slain, and should no more have the least
puttings forth in me: at which time, opening my Bible, this was given to me in
Job, Thou have been tied in Fetters, and holden in Chains of Affliction, and it
is that the Lord might show thee thy work, and thy transgression which has
exceeded in this time of thy Assaults; Now he opens thine ear to discipline,
and he commands that thou return from iniquity; Lord said I! what is my work?
Reply was, to go forth to the tempted, and whatever their temptations were, I
should have to speak forth to them; And also he having opened mine ear to
Discipline, I should go among the Saints, and that company that I walked in
fellowship with, and there I should manifest a departing from that iniquity
that Satan had led me into, in drawing me from all institutions, making me
believe that I should find the presence of God in reading and praying, and in
the book of the Creature, and that should satisfy me; But I found him a liar
to purpose; though he told me that God had dealt all along singularly with me;
and though I were not to forsake the Assemblies of the Saints, yet if God would
deal in a singular way with me, it should not go upon my account, but the Lord
might do what he pleased; And so he endeavored to bring me into those
Familistical ranting Tenants, that I had almost spent my lungs in pleading
against: the Lord having thus freed me, he has kept this upon my heart to beg
the life of faith, and self denial, to hold forth these his dispensations
toward me, both in Gath and Ashkelon, whom he bid me tell them unto.

After my storms, I went down into the Country, to Hillington, near to
Vxbridge, and so soon as I came thither, at one Mr. William Atcrosts house, the
Lord filled me with many spiritual Hymns, as to my temptations, promising me
that my joy should abundantly outpass my sorrow: And while I was thus singing
and triumphing over Satan, challenging now a battle, and seeing the Lord so
glorious before me; I was drawn into my Visions, as the calling in of the Jews,
the over-throwing and shaking all Nations; And a Vision I had concerning the
Dissolution of the Parliament about four days before it was, not knowing any
thing of that nature was intended, which I sung; the manner of it, that
suddenly Gideon (as I called him) and M. G. Harrison came into the
Parliament House and desired removal of them; desiring Mr. Speaker to deliver
up his Commission, and so I saw suddenly a departure of them, though they were
very loath thereunto; And this many in the Country can witness: the Minister of
Hillington, Mr. Taverner by name, whose wise sent me word of it within four
days after I had the Vision of it: In these Visions I lay seven days, and then
arose, having strength as formerly.

Nine weeks after this, coming up to London, Mr. Smith a Linnen-draper in
Newgate-Market, at the golden Anchor, asked me what I thought of this New
Representative that was then in choice? I answered, that I had faith to believe
that little good should be done to the Nation by their sitting.

So after this I had diverse Visions at times; wherein I saw their breaking up;
I lying frequently, sometimes ten days together, sometimes seven, sometimes
eight days or thereabouts; The time I lay ten days was at Hackney, at my
Kinsmans habitation, where the Lord gave me Visions of their breaking up, and
of the deadness of Gideons spirit toward the work of the Lord showing me that
he was laid aside, as to any great matters, the Lord having finished the
greatest business that he would employ him in; And I singing forth their
breaking up, Colonel Bingham, which was one of them, being present, hearing
what I spoke, as to Gideon, and to the rest of the Representative, he was
pleased (as I was told) to call it a Prophecy; saying, that he was glad of
that Prophecy of their breaking up, for he thought little good would be done
by them; This Vision I had the third of the seventh month, called September,
at Hackney, 1653.

Then again, within one month after I had at Mr. Barrats house at Dowgate,
more visions concerning the breaking of the same Representative, and many other
Visions I had concerning the Nation.

And then again, about fourteen days before the breaking up of them, I had
clear discoveries of the departure of those from the house, whom I had called
the Linsey-wolsey-Party, which the Lord said, he would not have in his
Tabernacle-work; But if those whose hearts were upright sat for Temple-work,
and for the building of that latter house; which Christ says, shall be more
glorious then that of the former, if they come from among them, the Lord will
make them glorious instruments for himself in those great concernments that he
had spoken forth in his word; And upon it I saw their coming from them, and I
sung the Passing Bell between them: singing forth another Passing Bell to those
that are in present power now; Nominating him that was the Chairman, Mr.
Rowse, the Lord showing me that his heart was very hypocritical, and that he
was not for the work of the Lord; So that I had many songs and discoveries from
the Scripture against him, not hearing the least word, but that he was a very
Godly man, as Creatures said; But what I had against him, it was from the Lord,
which I spoke then in the hearing of many; saying, though he and the rest of
them (which are now a Council) said, let us separate from that factious Part,
casting them out with the prayers of Christ's poor flock; Reporting that God
thereby should be glorified, according to that Scripture in the last Chapter of
Isa. But I said, God will appear to your comfort, and they shall be ashamed;
This Vision I had at Mr. Marsh's house at Dowgate.

After this I went home to Hackney, and the first week I came home, not knowing
any thing of the dissolution which was then drawing near, I had these Visions:
First I saw a great Tower, and the rooms thereof were like to the Counsel-rooms
at Whitehall, which I saw strawed thick with Gunpowder; And at a little
distance I saw a white Tower, for whiteness and sparkling glory, I never saw
any thing to parallel with it; and looking into it, I beheld many very precious
Saints with their eyes fixed toward Heaven, their countenances shining as the
Sun; and near to them, between that white Tower and the other Tower, were a
great many of the Colonels and Chief of the Army, with their Pistols cocked,
and lighted Match in their hands, beating the fire upon the gunpowder,
endeavoring to drive it up toward the white Tower, but they could not, for the
fire would not take; presently upon this, it was said to me, whereas thou see
this high Tower whereon the gunpowder is, it is a great many of men of the wise
and politic, grave and judicious so called, that are drawing up together, and
their Wisdom, Power and policy is that gunpowder that thou see, and the match
and Army-men, or the chifest part of the Army that shall assent and join with
that Tower, and gunpowder against the white Tower, saying, it was not to
destroy the white Tower that they were come forth, but the factious ones that
sat therein; Presently this Scripture likened them to those of the Old World,
that said, let us build a Babel that may reach to heaven, and God came down and
confounded their language; so he will do by these that were rising up against
the white Tower, as it is written in the Proverbs, The Name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, wherein those factious ones, as they called them, sat in safety,
and shall be preserved all their days.

Another Vision I had at the same time, of many Oaks, with spreading branches
full of leaves, very great limmed; I looking to the root, which lay but very
little in the ground, and looked dry, as if it were crumbling to dust, and
above the ground was only a little dry bark, on which limmed and spreading Oaks
were set; a few shrubs which being by, were very lovely and green, these great
Oaks fell suddenly down, and covered the other; presently I saw a very lovely
tree for stature and compleatness every way not to be paralleld by any thing
that ever I saw, and before which the great Oaks crumbled to dust, and the
little shrubs were raised up, growing and thriving exceedingly; then I desired
Scripture to this Vision; Reply was, in the first of Isaiah it is said, They
shall be confounded in the Oaks that they have desired: And as to that lovely
Tree, it was declared to me to be the Lord Jesus, which I had sometimes seen in
the new Jerusalem, which is spoken of in the Rev. ult. That that Tree was the
very same that is there mentioned whose fruit should be very many and
beautiful, held forth to the Shrubs, which they feeding upon, should
immediately grow up to a lovely Stature; which said the Lord to me, thou here
feast, that no sooner does this Tree appear, which represents my Son, but
immediately those despised Shrubs that the great Oaks endeavored to scatter and
hide in their holes, they shall come forth, and all the Oaks shall crumble into
dust; this is not by Might, nor by Power, or Arms, but brought in through the
pourings out of my Spirit.

Two nights before the Protector was established, I had a glorious sight of a
Throne, Angels winged flying before the Throne, crying, Holy, holy, holy unto
the Lord; The great One is coming down with terror to the Enemies, and Glory
and Deliverance to the sincere, and them that walk uprightly; hearing of this,
I broke forth with much Melody, singing also Halleluiah, Praise and Honor unto
thee O Lord, will I render with them that thus cry holy.

Then another Vision followed, A great company of Children walking on the
Earth, a Light shining round about them, a glorious Person in the midst of
them, speaking these words; these will I honor with my reigning presence in
the midst of them; others shall dye in the Wilderness, which Wilderness I will
show thee by and by; So that departed.

A third vision followed, wherein I saw great darkness in the Earth, and a
mavelous dust, like a thick smoke ascending upward from the Earth; and I
beheld at a little distance a great company of Cattle, some like Bulls, and
others like Oxen, and so lesser, their faces and heads like men, having each of
them a horn on either side their heads; For the foremost, his Countenance was
perfectly like unto Oliver Cromwels; and on a sudden there was a great shout
of those that followed him, he being singled out alone, and the foremost; and
he looking back, they bowed unto him, and suddenly gave a shout, and leaped up
from the Earth, with a great kind of joy, that he was their Supreme; and
immediately they prompting him and fawning upon him, he run at me, and as he
was near with his horn to my breast, an arm and an hand clasped me round, a
Voice said, I will be thy safety; he run at many precious Saints that stood in
the way of him, that looked boldly in his face; he gave them many pushes,
scratching them with his horn, and driving them into several houses, he ran
still along, till at length there was a great silence, and suddenly there broke
forth in the Earth great fury coming from the Clouds, and they presently were
scattered, and their horns broken, and they tumbled into Graves; with that I
broke forth, and sang praise, and the Lord said, mark that Scripture, Three
horns shall arise, a fourth shall come out different from the former, which
shall be more Terror to the Saints then the others that went before; though
like a Lamb, as is spoken of in the Revelation, in appearance a Lamb, but
pushing like a beast, being not only one, but many and much strength joined
together.

Thus far it was conceived meet and requisie to represent the spirit and
condition of the party; Not from thence to borrow the more esteem, or belief to
the Relation following, let that adventure forth upon its own score, and stand
or fall in that spirit that gave it being; But that the truth may shine forth,
as to the particular state and condition of the Party, through that cloud of
unchristian condemnings, odious censures, and black defamations of unsatisfied,
interested, envious, and unbelieving persons which are gone forth; whereby,
that in this dispensation, which to many that were witnesses of it seems to be
the Glory and Beauty of it, may be confounded and darkened, and the eyes of them
that would see, be blinded in judgment.

Now concerning her speaking in Whitehall, this account we have to Offer of the
state and condition of her spirit in that work; which was received from her own
lips in the hearing of some then present, in answer to the Questions which the
Relator moved unto her; One Question was asked her some weeks after she left
Whitehal, and was this. What frame of spirit was upon you in uttering those
things in Whitehall, was it only a spirit of faith that was upon you, or was it
Vision wrapping up your outward senses in trances, so that you had not your
senses free to see, nor hear, nor take notice of the People present? She
answered, I neither saw, nor heard, nor perceived the noise and distractions of
the people, but was as one that heard only the voice of God sounding forth unto
me; besides her own word, the effects of a spirit caught up in the Visions of
God, did abundantly appear in the fixedness, and immoveableness of her speech
in prayer, but more especially in her songs: notwithstanding the distractions
among the people occasioned by rude spirits, that unawares crept in, which was
observed by many who heard her, who seemed to us to be as one whose ears and
eyes were locked up, that all was to her as a perfect silence.

Another Question was, what moved you to silence at any time when you ceased
from speaking? was it with you as with other good men, Ministers, etc. who
cease at discretion, either having no more to say, or having spent their
strength of body, or having wearied the people? She answered in these words, It
was as if the Clouds did open and receive me into them: and I was as swallowed
up of the Glory of the Lord, and could speak no more. To give you the Relators
observation for the further persuading him of the truth of this; He took notice
twice in her ceasing from speaking; Once she ended with prayer, wherein being
sweetly and highly raised in her admirings of the glory that she saw, she
uttered these, or like words: Oh what brightness! what glory! what sweetness!
what splendour! which last word she hardly expressed in a full sound, and said
no more; Another time ending with a Song, in three or four of the last words,
in the last verse, her voice sunk into her breast, that they could not be
understood, like the words of a man falling asleep.

Now follows the Relation of so much of her Prayers and Songs, as by a very
slow hand could be taken for eight days.

Upon the Tenth day of the Eleventh Month, 1653. The Relator coming into the
Chamber where she lay, heard her first making Melody with a spiritual Song,
which he could not take but in part, and that too with such imperfection, as he
cannot present any account of it to the understanding of others: After her
Song, she without intermission uttered forth her Spirit in prayer, wherein
among many other, she expressed the passages following.

What is mavelous or can be in the eyes of the Lord? the resurrection of Jesus
was mavelous in our eyes, but not with the Lord, for nothing could keep down
a Jesus; thy people could never have come out of their graves, had it not been
for the Resurrection of Jesus; as thou risedst, so should they, as thou dyedst,
so should they, thou will make all things death before them; what endeavourings
were there to have kept thee in the Grave? oh, but what fastness, what locks,
what bolts that could keep in a Jesus? oh, but they thought that the Lord Jesus
was but a man, they understood not that the Divine Nature was wrapped up in him
in the Humane Nature; when thy time came the Sepulcher was open, and the Lord
Jesus came forth with great Power and Majesty; oh blessed be the Lord that
brought forth the Son, the Heir, him that was victorious over his enemies; so
shall there be a Declaration against all things that would keep thine down;
faith is that Victory; how so? because faith brings into the bosom, and it
draws forth the Death and Resurrection of Jesus upon us: thou art a bringing
forth a great Resurrection: Jesus Christ is upon his appearing; there are some
do think so, but they say it is not yet begun, God will bring it about another
way, and another time; but the Lord says, he will cut short his work in
Righteousness; thou know who are the Babylonians that are now about thine;
as thou did to thy people of Old, thou will come forth speedily, -- thy
thoughts are so exceeding high and glorious that none is able to reach them;
Man cannot bring forth his own thoughts, they are so tumultuous, and run unto
the ends of the Earth; oh then what are thy thoughts O Lord, -- though the
Enemy begin to jeer them concerning those blessed songs; well says God, are my
people jeered concerning their Excellencies, their Songs, their Hallelujahs
that are of my own making, that are before my Throne? the Lord cannot endure
that these Excellencies of his Saints should be trampled upon, which are so
perfect, so pure; how pleasant are the songs of thine, when they are brought
forth out of the Churches of thine Enemies: -- It Is not all the force in the
world that can strike one stroke against thine, but thou suffer them to come
forth to try thine; oh that thine could believe thee for thy breakings of them,
as well as for thy bindings up; all things under the Sun, all things before
you, in you, shall work for your good; when they come to understand more of the
Mystery, and of the entrals of Scripture, how will they praise thy Highness?
The Enemies are strong, Satan is strong, Instruments are strong, Temptations
they are strong, what Strengths are against thy flock! They cannot be without
the Lion, and Lyon-like creatures: Oh if thy Servants suffer, let them not
suffer for passion or rash words, but as Lambs; there is a zeal which is but
from Nature, a man's own spirit may prompt him to, but the zeal of God is
accompanied with meekness, humility, grief for Christ. -- Since thy Handmaid is
taken up to walk with thee, thy Handmaid always desired that she might be swift
to hear, slow to speak; but now that thou have taken her up into thy Mount, who
can keep in the rushing wind? who can bind the influences of the Heavenly
Orion, who can stop thy Spirit? It is good to be in the Territories, in the
Regions, where thou walk before thy Servant; oh how glittering, and how
glorious are they, what Sparklings are there! -- Thou have a great gust to come
upon the Earth, a great wind that shall shake the trees that now appear upon
the Earth, that are full of leaves of Profession; but they have nothing but
outward beauty, an outward flourish; but thy trees O Lord, they are full of
Sap: A great number of people said, oh let our Oaks stand, let them not be cut
down: oh but says the Lord, I will make you ashamed in the Oaks that you have
chosen; and because you will have these Oaks, I will now give you other Oaks,
and what are they? A first, a second and a * third Power, and thou breakest
them one after another; oh thine own have had a great hand in these things;
thine have said, we will have Oaks and Gardens, how have they run too and fro!
says the Lord now, I will give you Gardens, but they shall have no springs in
them, they shall be as dry chapt ground, they shall be as the falllow ground:
what loveliness is there to walk upon fallow ground? you shall have stumbling
walkings upon them, you shall have no green grass in these Gardens; what have
all the Gardens of the Earth been? they have been to thine places of stumbling:
O thou will by these thy strange ways, draw up thine into thy upper and nether
springs: thou have deceived thy Saints once again about these Gardens: let them
now run after them no more, but be ashamed and abashed: we have hankered from
mountain to hill, we have said salvation is in this hill and in that, but let
us say so no longer: when we shall thus be drawn up to thee, then we shall
prosper, and thou will give us Vineyards, and Gardens, and Trees of thine own,
which shall abide. -- Thou calledst thy servant to come sometimes near this
place, to witness against some, who said that the Kingdom was already given up
to the Father, and contemned the Man Christ: but now have thou sent thy Servant
again to witness for thee, for the Kingdom of thy Son.

Having uttered much more in Prayer, which the Relator, because of the press of
people in the Chamber, could not take; She delivered the further enlargements
of her heart in a Song, so much whereof as could be taken, is presented to you
as follows.

WHen Babylon within, the great and tall,
With tumults shall come down:
Then that which is without shall fall,
And be laid flat on ground.
Oh King Jesus thou art longed for,
Oh take thy power and reign,
And let thy children see thy face,
Which with them shall remain.
Thy lovely looks will be so bright,
They will make them to sing,
They shall bring offerings unto thee,
And myrrh unto their King.
For they know that thou do delight
To hear their panting soul;
They do rejoice in thy Marrow,
And esteem it more then gold.
Therefore thou hearing their hearts cry,
Thou say, Oh wait a while!
And suddenly thou will draw near,
The worlds glory to spoil.
Oh you shall have great Rols of writ
Concerning Babylons fall,
And the destruction of the whore,
Which now seems spiritual.
Come write down how that Antichrist,
That is so rigid here,
Shall fall down quite, when Christ comes forth,
Who suddenly will appear.
Come write down how those sparkling ones,
Which Antichrist are too:
Those Notioners, Oh do write down,
How he will make them rue.
Come write also that great Powers shall,
From off their thrones be cast:
Oh the Lord he will batter them,
Though they mount up so fast.
Oh write that those great Counselors,
That now against Christ agree,
How Christ will never own at all,
Nor give them any fee.
Write how that Protectors shall go,
And into graves there lie:
Let pens make known what is said, that,
They shall expire and die.
Oh write also that Colonels
And Captains they shall down,
Be not afraid to pen also,
That Christ will them cast down.
Because they have not honored God,
They have not paid their Vows:
But only blustering Oaks have been,
Great tall branches and boughs.
Which have no spirit nor moisture, then,
How can they longer stand,
Though a while they have active been:
Yet they must out of the Land.
The Lord will reckon with them all,
And set their words before:
They have not brought forth Righteousness,
Nor relief to the poor.
Which they said they would chiefly eye,
But their words do not speak:
But all unto their own Nets, they
Do stretch themselves and creep.
Pen down how all their Gallantry,
Shall crumble into dust:
For the Lord he has spoken, that
To dust they vanish must.
Come Sergeants, what will then you do;
When your Masters are cast,
What will become then of your pay,
Which you run for so fast?
Oh Sergeants, some of you I have,
Looked on to be such which
Would not have taken such a place,
Your hands forth for to reach.
Poor Sergeants that were honest men
Oh how are you fallen,
Oh how are you now taken with
The vanity of men?
Oh Sergeants leave off this your work,
And get some other thing,
Your pay'l be sweet to follow him,
Who is your Lord and King.
Oh bread and water is more sweet,
Then Reastmeat of this sort,
Oh meat of herbs betters for you,
And of better Report.
You come and crave pardon of them,
While you dissemble in heart,
Oh call for pardon from a Christ,
When to his bar you come.
And leave those other ways, which will
Prove injurious to you;
The Lord does hate such practices,
And he will out them spue.
Oh keep thy poor Saints, that they may
Not run away from their Lord,
Oh let them be contented with
The morsells thou do afford.
Oh that they may not now set hands
To engagements that come,
But rather engage for the Lord,
Who is the only Son.
Oh mind the Saints, how engagements
Have become to them a snare,
That others they may not them take,
But up to thee repair.
Let them know it is but a short time,
That men thus shall abide,
It Is but a while that these stormy winds,
Shall bring forth such great tide.
Though winds and waves they boistrous are,
Yet Christ them will rebuke,
He will speak to them to abate,
And they will go at his look.
After she had breathed forth this Song with more enlargement then could be
noted by the Relator; She proceeded in Prayer, which for the press of people
crowding and darkning the Chamber, could not be taken; She continued that day
in prayer and singing four or five hours together, and was then silent.

The next day, being the eleventh day of the month, the Relator came in and
heard her in prayer, wherein she delivered many things: some whereof being of
public nature were taken: And are presented in the account following.

Must thy Servant that now is upon the Throne, must he now die and go out like
a candel? Oh that thy servant could mourn day and night for him! Oh that he
might be recovered out of that vain glorious Counsel, out of their Traps and
Gins! Oh his soul is in bondage, he will not hear New Jerusalems Sermons if
thou convince him not! Oh that he might be laid in thy bosom, that he might
not refuse to come among thy people! Oh that he might hearken to a praying
people, rather then to a wicked Counsel, rather then to a Politic crew about
him! Father, that he might Lord God come out of those Fetters and Chains; And
then do thou show him his work, and his transgression wherein he has exceeded,
and open his eyes to receive instruction; He is in Chains by reason of that
outward-glory and pomp that is round about him: Oh he thinks he is taught by
thee thus to go and to act! Oh, but blessed Lord, let thy handmaid entreat thee
to persuade him; For thy persuasions are more then the persuasions of all the
great Doctors and Rabbis that are about him! Oh that they also might consider
what they do, they have been Preachers of free Grace to thy people: Let them
not now come forth with the voice of Haman, but with the voice of Mordecai; let
them be faithful, and say unto him, thou art but a man that does thus; let them
not join with that that thou art breaking in pieces, Thou will not have thine
to sit upon thrones now, till all thine shall sit together upon those twelve
Thrones; Is it not better that he shall pry into the Laws of King Jesus, then
of those that are about him? he little thinks that they would bring him into
jeopardie; Let him not entertain any upon the account that they are grave,
wise, judicious men; But let him look whether Godliness be in them: Oh, but he
will say, they are Godly too! Oh, but let him look at actions, whether these
actions do speak them Godly! Oh, this is a day of Jacobs trouble, thine looked
for refreshment, and behold greater trouble, they looked for a birth, and
behold it is yet in travel; Many of thy children are put to a stand, and know
not what to do; though he does repulse them, yet let them tell him of his sins,
and tell him with humility, and with tears; not as those deluded spirits, that
go running about the streets, and say, we have such Visions and Revelations,
who come out with their great speeches of vengeance, and judgment, and
plagues: Oh, but thine that come from thee, thou give them Humility,
Meekness, Bowels and Tears. Pluck out those of the Counsel that are thy
Children, tell them that thou do not love linsey wolsey garments, linen and
woollen mixed together, neither in the thrones, nor in any building, or Temple,
or Concernment of thine. It is true, Authorities and Powers are by the
permission of the most high; He gave Commission to the Assyrian to be a rod to
Israel, till he had accomplished his work upon Mount Sion; But here is the
difference, that was an enemy, whom God would destroy with eternal fire, and
perpetual burning; But these come forth as brethren, as thy children; and
therefore thine do not know how to bear it from them: Oh, it is a grief to the
heart that they should smite and grieve thy Saints; Besides, the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus is at hand, all the Monarchies of this world are going down the
hill: Now is a time that thine should look off from these things, and lift up
their head, for their Redemption draws near; Now thou requirest a greater going
forth of the Spirit; What manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation? we are not to be for our selves but for Christ; Now the treasury
is open, and every one is to cast into it; now all is spread open, for all to
come, to cast in something: Oh come forth thou great Builder in thy glory! Oh
what sheddings of blood have there been in order to this work! Let there be
days of Glory; Hear the voice of thine, yea, thou do hear them, though thou
would have them to wait, they shall not be ashamed; they that tarry and rest
upon thee, thou will come and lead them with thy sweet spices: Oh that the
soldiery might now come forth out of their bravery, and say, shall there be
some that shall come up to that glorious building, shall they reign in that
day, and shall we that have gone forth for the Lord thus far come short
thereof, and be laid aside! Oh help them to entreat thee that thou would not
spue them out of thy mouth as lukewarm ones, nor let them not be cast out of
thy Temple; Now is a measuring time that thou art measuring thy own Temple, not
the world, but thine own Saints, there is a little silence from Trumpets and
Battles, and now is a time of silence: Oh but there is a time of the shooting
of bullets, and they will come forth again! Oh that thy Temple might not fall
to pieces, the stones that are joined to the Corner stone, that they may not
have the hammer come upon them; no, nor any Iron tool come into thy work.

Oh let him be willing to part with such things as may hinder the prosperity of
his soul; make him out of love with the wine and feasts below, and bring him in
love with thy liquors and flagons from heaven! Oh but their vains are so full
of blood before, that they have no room, but do thou cast the overflowing
blood, and then what can hinder thy work! Oh but can these dry bones live? give
thy handmaid leave to tell thee that thy children are like dead bones now in
the Valley; But thine say Lord, thou can make them live, thou can bring
nerves and bones, and knit them together again; Let thy servant never be silent
till they be brought out of the Valley, out of the slimy pit! Oh do thou fill
their pools, thou causest rain to come and fill the pools! Oh fill all places,
all things with water from above, that thine may drink thereof; bring forth
that water, that may make them Warriors for thee, and not any longer for
themselves, and let them know that thy servant does abundantly tender them! Oh
let all that thy servant has go for Sion; First, Second and last breath; Were
it not for thine, thou would send the Nations into this Nation; thou have a
people in this Nation, who have thy name upon them, therefore thou will not let
out the boars, and the wild beasts against them, for they would spare none;
Thou have a few names that are clothed in white, whom thou do abundantly
delight in, and they delight in thee; they commit their way unto thee, and thou will not destroy them, though they live in Sodom; thou have many precious
lights in this Nation, in this City, or it would be suddenly burnt with fire:
Oh how beholding is this tumultuous City to thine inheritance!

OH sing for Sion Songs my soul,
And magnify that Grace,
Which will bring Sion back again
Into the glorious place.
Oh I will pray while that he does
Appear here on the Earth,
The sparkling glory of those that
Are thy most lovely flock.
I will rejoice while I do breath,
Because I do believe,
Thou will some of the Soldiery
Again to thee receive.
Oh Lord when that thou come forth,
Scales shall fall off their eyes,
And then they will look unto thee,
And still they more shall rise.
When the have brought them into thy sweet ways,
And Paths of pleasure too,
Where they may recreate their Souls,
And behold ioys most new.
Oh Lord it is delight to me
To hear thy pleasant voice,
Concerning some of the Soldiery
That their Pikes up shall toss;
And go forth shall fully against
All foes they have within,
As well as against those without,
And Canons they shall bring.
Their Armor shall most lovely look,
In those thou do appear,
Thou art their Colonel indeed,
Every troop for to cheer.
Oh every Regiment of thine
Thou sweetly wilt them speak,
And oh all eyes shall then run down,
They shall eke mourn and weep.
That they have disobeyed the Lord
In bravery so rich,
And in their dainty dishes that
They have with them enriched.
When others would have been glad of
Crumbs that fall from their board,
Many do say still they must have,
Oh these thine will record
Against themselves, and mourn for it,
The Lord will then pass by,
And he will draw them forth again
And speak them graciously.
Oh when thou comes, with shamefastness,
Oh ye Colonels great,
And Captains too, do ye fall down
Before the Mercy seat.
Then he will welcome all of you,
And say, oh here is that,
Which is more costly food for thee,
And far more delicate
Then all thou have of that thou stol'st
From the Commonweal-poor,
For to feast thy carcass withal,
Which is to be no more.
Oh Soldiers shall I tell you of
Great Victories indeed!
Oh come and hearken unto it,
For it will supply all need!
You shall no great alarms then,
Nor drums hear from your soes,
You shall not see their spears nor bullets fly,
At all you to oppose.
If you will hearken to the Lord,
Which calls for your hearts,
If you will say, oh take them, then
You shall not feel foes darts.
Oh when Christ speaks to you, as well,
If soon you do reply,
Not with a flattering speech, but with
Sound words to his Glory.
Then oh he will give unto you
That which will be much more;
Oh the pay that shall come from a Christ,
It will throughout thee store.
It will weigh down all flesh surely,
It is heavier then you think,
It is more precious then your Oar,
Then do not from it shrink.
O Soldiers all, that now you were
Upon the Mount with me,
That so your Songs they may be heard,
When that you come to see.
Oh it will be well worth your time
To follow the sweet Lamb
Wherever he goes, oh after him say,
Oh Lord we come, we come.
Oh here is a Genervl, and he
Is a King of them too,
A Protector, Conservator,
Oh draw near him up to.
He will be all things to Soldiery
That their hearts can desire,
Oh he will be weapons to them,
He will be their match and fire.
Oh he will be also Cannons great,
Granado-pieces too,
O muskets he himself brings forth,
To put your hands into.
Oh he will be Pikes for you, to
Go after enemies strong;
Oh he will be a Sword for you
Against such would you wrong.
O he will beat your drums for you,
And your Alarms sound,
He will give watchword unto you,
That none shall you confound.
Oh he will also trumpet out
An harmony so sweet,
Which shall make you on geldings mount,
And walk upon your feet.
He will be for Soldiers that stand
And cleave to Israel,
With the horsemen he will go forth,
And open wide their breach.
It is better to side with him
Which is a King for ever,
Then to the earthly Kings below,
Whom pale Death shall soon sever.
A Soldier he will remain
Till all Nations are cast,
And til the Remnant does come in,
Which soon shall draw full fast.
When he calls them then they shall run,
And draw near unto him,
He speaks the word, oh come you forth,
Then do you answer; when?
His voice it is most powerful,
They cannot it gainsay,
But must reply, oh we come forth
To thee our brightest Day.
Oh Soldiers do you love always
Him which will go before,
And slaie all Giants in the world,
And make them roll in their gore.
You have not only to Scotland gone,
But to Holland also,
He sounded forth his voice so high,
And whirlwinds made to blow.
And on the Seat oh there he has
Most gallantly appeared,
When you were struck with sorrows great,
He then your heart upbear'd.
For he then undertook the stroke,
And smote those foes so high,
Though they did brag, and boast, and say,
They were great Almighties.
But oh the Mighty which is true
Did their might then confound,
He sunk their ships and slew their men,
Much treasury he drowned.
Oh it was the great God on that Land
A General was, before
The same Highness did go on seas,
And did appear much more.
A Pilot he went in the Ships,
Still did remain and stay,
And turn the^ about for this Land,
Much kindness to convey.
O he it was that drew them on,
And fought for us before,
Oh he it was that broke their masts,
And humbled the great ships all.
O he it was that made them run,
And made them hide their head,
It was thy strokes, oh thou great God
That laid their bodies dead.
Oh it was the Lord himself I Am sure,
That stopped the Holland's ships,
That did maintain our Land-ships, when
Those Hollanders he split.
And is not these things for to be
Declared, and writ down.
When the have on our Nation so shone,
And them how have thou crowned?
With mercy and deliverance,
Which is exceeding great:
The loss of many precious ones,
And splitting of great ships.
Oh but the loss of thy dear ones,
Oh is not that to be
Thought on by you that are great ones,
And of the Soulderie.
Oh think! oh remember these things,
Oh, again call them to mind,
That you may fresh have Gods goodness,
And feel his rushing wind.
That so more of you may be wise,
Here in this Nation great,
That so you may no longer stretch
Your selves, and lie and sleep.
Our Father, will thou bring to mind,
And fasten it on their hearts,
That they may not themselves, that they
Harden not to thy smarts.
Who have been brought along the work,
By thee the Lord of Glory,
That they may get up to the Lord,
And to his territory.
Oh thou dear General also,
I would fain have thee to hear,
The Lord Jesus does speak to thee,
Oh come therefore and hear.
Oh hearken unto Christ and hear,
Let not his sound go forth:
But oh do thou gently receive
What he will thee counsel.
Do not hearken to vain Spirits,
Nor to Counselors great,
Which wicked are and false ones, which
Did drive thee to thy seat.
But hearken to sound words which come,
From him that is so rich;
Oh listen what the Lord holds forth,
And what he thee does teach.
That thou should not assume to thee
Higher Power then Christ does give:
But thou should say unto all Saints,
Oh come let us here live
In honor and great Dignity,
Which Christ here does afford;
Oh let us have one only King,
Always t'write our Record.
Oh do not thou aspire, for to
So high a title have;
As King, or Protector: But oh
Unto Christ that do leave.
Oh let him be advanced, and
You he will then up raise;
Oh he will give unto thy soul
Most comfortable days.
THerefore Father teach him, let him know that he may reign as one of thine:
Oh, is it not a sweet thing to be crowned by thee? and that is sweeter then to
be crowned by man: Oh says Gideon! I will not be your King, the Lord shall
reign over you: Oh, it is enough for him to be one of thy Kings! Oh let him now
deny, and cast it down, and say; Without these Dignities, and great Titles, I
will serve the People and Commonalty; and then will thou say to him, thou art
my Gideon; Let him consider that thine shall rule over all Nations; and let him
say, why may not this be the time that it does draw near? Let not him say as
they said of old, who put the day far from them, that the Vision was for many
days; for a time yet afar off; But let them accept of the day and time that
thou have put into their hand; The Lord is building his Temple, it is no time
now for them to build Tabernacles; Now thou art upon thy Temple-work, shall
they be building great Palaces for themselves? The Soldiers slight thy
handmaid, but she matters not, they shall and must consider in time; they say
these are Convulsion-fits, and Sickness, and diseases that make thy handmaid to
be in weakness; But oh they know not the pouring forth of thy Spirit, for that
makes the body to crumble, and weakens nature; In these extraordinary workings
thou intendest to show what is coming forth hereafter; something is a coming
forth, there is so Lord; and oh how does thy handmaid bless thee!

Having Prayed for, and made much mention of the Merchants, she Sings the
following Hymn to them.

OH merchants! oh turn to the Lord!
What he to you reports,
Look into the written word so sure,
And see what he brings forth.
Oh do not grieve at losses great,
Though all your ships do split,
Oh look to that bottom wherein
Cannot come any leak.
Oh take up now your time for that
Which is precious and most sweet,
And shall be given forth to you,
That will receive meat.
Oh Merchants! I fain would that you
Might have true gold indeed:
Oh I desire sweet preserves, which
Christ unto you does leave.
The sweet preserves come from the Seas,
And from those foreign parts,
Which are made up by those Indians
That are so full of Arts.
You have your Canded Ginger, and
Your Preserved Nutmegs too:
That so you may delight therein,
And your mouths overflow.
But! oh there is canded things indeed,
Which is covered with Gold,
There is not such preserves as they
Which shall be turned to mould.
But these preserves continue shall,
No moldy skins shall be
At all of them; But the longer
You keep them, you shall see
They are as fresh and lovely as
They were when first he brought,
They do not loose their taste at all,
Oh that you would have sought.
These things indeed as pleasant, all
That you would feed upon
Them which will streng then you always
And lead you to mount Sion.
Oh Merchants cloth your selves with robes,
Which will never be wore
Not that which will to rags be turned,
Nor that which can be tore.
But here is Clothing substantial;
Oh it is costly too!
Oh it is white! Oh it is that
Which Christ's blood bought to you!
That you might be clothed herewith,
And herein still may go,
No nail nor splinter can these tear,
Nor can remove the show.
It Is glorrious and substantial too,
And it abides for ever,
No enemy can rent it from,
Oh none can it you sever.
Oh merchants the^ lift up your heads
Though losses you may have;
Oh the more of Christ do you now beg
Which will make you most brave.
Oh you that are proud, and with stout necks,
And mincingly do go,
With your black spots and powdered locks,
Thinking to make a show.
And so you go unto those which
Are carnal hearts with you,
But oh the spiritual do see,
They do hate it, and spue.
They cannot endure your company,
Oh cover then your skins:
Remember when that Adam fell,
He covered was leaves in.
His nakedness with leavy skins,
At length must be his clothes;
Oh therefore all you naked ones,
Oh do not Scripture oppose.
Oh you that sport it forth with that
Which is jesting most vile,
The Lord himself does to you say,
That he will you rob and spoil.
Oh you that think to do that which
Is injury to Saints:
Oh the Lord he draws them more unto
His lovely open gates.
Where he takes them into himself,
When others are shut out,
Then Mordecai must be called in,
Haman must hang without.
Oh thou dear Lord, they chains would do
Thine injury therein,
They cannot, for the Lord their God
He is their only King.
Oh sing! oh soul! that I am fain,
And do lift up my heart,
Unto thy beloved so high,
Which is exceeding great.
Hallelujah unto Jehovah,
I will without fear sing,
Unto him which creatures al brings forth,
Oh! thou art the great King.
That store and plenty art to thine,
Rivers and streams are there,
Oh thou do so much love unfold,
That does the heart so cheer.
While it sings songs to others, and
At the mentioning
Of the perfumes and costly things,
Which are esteemed dear.
They must esteem; and count them dear
That receive from a Christ:
For it cost his most precious blood,
To bring forth interest.
Into these Royalties it was,
A Savior led therein,
Thy going to the grave oh Lord,
And rising up a King.
Oh he was willing for to be
Crowned with a thorny one,
That crowns unto his children might
Be brighter then the Sun.
Oh he was willing to drink gall
And vinegar so sharp,
That so his Saints might drink sweet wine,
For to revive their heart.
He willing was, that they should with
Their spears that then were sharp,
Run into his own sides, that so
His children might not feel smart.
But that water and blood might come,
For to cleanse, and throw out
All their defilemets that came when
Man he was driven out
Of that old Paradise, before
A Christ a new one brings,
Which shall abide for evermore,
Where thine shall in it sing.
Oh how greatly then are those Saints
Established by thee,
That have a rest brought forth to them,
Where they shall always be.
Oh it is much more better, sure
Then Adams state before;
Oh here is one that is so strong,
None can it rend nor tore.
Oh Saints, love Christ, love him dearly,
That has for you thus shown
Great dignity, and his power,
Which set you on his Throne.
Oh Saints rejoice! Oh take your harps
Down from your willows now:
And play your tunes unto the Lord,
For none shall make you bow.
Great Babylon it shall not mock,
Nor injure your sweet songs,
In the enjoyment of a King,
That cast out has those throngs.
Oh you Saints that Christ tarry on,
When he has taught you play,
His melody shall you sound forth,
In the sun-shiny day.
Therefore desire, and wrestle too
By faith and prayer, while
The Lord has brought you forth from all That endeavor you to spoil.
Oh fear not! do not tremble, but
Go on courageously.
Let Prayer, let Faith, let Zeal go out,
And through your tongues let fly.
Oh Prophets all, do you speak out,
With bold courage for him,
For unto you he shall draw near,
And appear even when
That the rotten walls are thrown down,
And the great Chaos falls,
A fabric then that you shall have,
That by faith on him calls.
Oh he will not be slack, though men
They shift and put you off,
Yet he will suddenly relieve,
And let his Cannons of,
That shall all forts and bulwarks here,
All foes that do upstand,
Shall be laid flat upon the ground,
And thine shall enter the land.
O, Canaan, Saints you are gone into Oh
that is the pleasant Land,
Where you shall eat his grapes most sweet,
and that in his due time.
Oh they are fruit that are most sweet,
they are not rot within
They have no blemish, in them all,
he will fill you to the brim.
You are my Joshua's, and are
my Calebs, that I love,
And you also do show to me
that you climb up above,
Oh unto you I now do speak
they shall go on apace,
And enter into Canaans Land,
and dwell in those sweet rays.
Therefore take heed oh Israelites,
how you do speak and pray
Unto the feeb lest of the flock,
to keep them from the way,
Wherein they shall green things behold,
and milk and honey eat,
Oh therefore awaken them not
do not the sickly beat.
But like true Calebs do go forth
with courage bold and stout,
And speak well of Gods Canaan
which other seek to rent.
Oh do go tell the goodness of
the place, and might therein,
The fortifications thereof
which are made by our King,
Oh speak well of your Canaan,
and of its Bulwarks there,
Oh tell of its most glistering walls,
and tell what can compare.
What rooms, what walls, what hangings can
set forth of what is there,
What meat and drink can be to that
which is so sweet and clear?
I tell you, God will take it well,
when well you do report,
Concerning his sweet Canaan,
and his salvation cups.
Another Hymn.

OH blessed Lord be thy great Name,
that Prisoners shall go free,
Out of the prisonhouse thou brings
redemption comes from thee.
Oh those that are thine Enemies
and Rebels were also,
Thou have captived captivity,
that forthwith they may go.
Though in that inner prison yet
thou sarest oh come you foes,
For here is redemption spoken,
by Jesus is broke out.
Oh come to him though you have been
slaves and vassals to sin,
Yet his Fathers free grace he does
unto your souls eke bring.
And says Oh Rebels I came forth
that so you might be changed,
And of rebellious made such which
shall with Christ ever reign.
Oh come says Christ, you captives bin
that Satan has held under,
Oh if you look upon a Christ
your foes shall not you plunder.
That he to his enemies should come
and make them his dear friends,
Calling them not his servants more,
but choice and only friends.
Oh report of your Savior,
that is a Prophet too,
And has treasures provided with
for every moment new.
Oh speak well of your Savior
which as a King appears;
Go declare him that is the Lord,
and wipes away your tears.
Oh go forth Saints, express your love
to this dear Jesus Christ,
Though some may despite show to him
yet open wide your eyes
Unto him, for to you he will come,
and also shall to others,
That with temptations are scorcht,
and are so full of smothers.
O that thy Saints that are cleansed
would to others the oath
Publish of grace and goodness which
in person he breathed forth
Oh notioners they shall go down,
at the sound of him which
Will not them fail who do him love
but he to them will reach
His arm for their salvation, and
puts them in his bosom,
Though sin and Satan would most fain
yet they cannot there come.
For thou have hedged thine about
and thou have lackt them in,
Oh none can fetch and drive them forth
from the most mighty King
Oh the longings of poor Souls sure
to see thy countenance!
Oh if the world did him behold
oh they would prize his glance.
When creatures are in Dungeon dark
they prize one beam of light,
Much more do thine when they do see
beams of thy lustrous light.
Oh they that have a while been
and pined with hunger bins starved
Oh they will prize any relief
from it they will not fling,
But eat it gladly, and will praise,
and then what may they do,
whom thou have brought from chains and from
satan who would them rue?
Oh Lord then thy spiritual ones,
the more of thee they eat
The more of thee they do desire
thou art so excellent sweet.
Such honey and such wine as which
does drop from thy sweet spring
Oh they desire to reach forth, and
most kindly take it in.
Oh they Lord, that have felt the cold
and in the storm have bin,
Oh how they will breath after thee
and crowd under thy wing!
And thou their Lord wilt cover them
from all the bitter storms.
They shall be kept under thy wing
and freed from the worlds harms.
Oh it is Lord, Oh it is sweet
to draw thee forth at length,
It is thou Lord that must draw out
thy self, thy height, and breadth.
For when thou have drawn up to thee
oh the large field thine is in
And the many paths where they may walk
hand in hand with their King.
Who lovingly does walk and tell
of things that shall break forth,
And of the new Jerusalem,
gloriously thou do afford.
Oh when thou take such from below
to thee that art so high,
Hallelujahs, must go forth through
the Heavens and the Skies.
Hallelujah when the sentence shall come forth
of dread against al those
That are against such a lovely God
and do thy Name oppose.
These were uttered and sung the twelfth day of this eleventh month.

Upon the thirteenth day she uttered many precious things in Prayer and Songs,
which the Relator could not for the press of people write down.

Here follows some short account of some things she uttered the 14th. day, as
the Relator could take them in some scattered expressions.

LEt thy Servant beg high springs for Saints; come in with full springs in such
a time as this, when that the waters are brought so high, that thy poor
children are ready to be overwhelmed by them, in their snares and
entanglements; they say these waters are very clear and sweet that come from
men, but at length they make the Soul very muddy; Why is thy Handmaid so long
with thee upon the Mount, seeing thy sparkling glory, and those reviving
springs, but that thy Handmaid may plead with thee concerning thy Saints, thine
Inheritance, and that her heart may take in the things concerning thy Saints.
There is now a great deal of provision for a poor man, and yet he will
wither and come to nothing; certainly folly will be writ upon his labor, Thou will not commend it as a piece of wisdom, Thou will not give it a badge of
honor, Thou will rather put a blot upon it, Thou will never write fair
concerning it; Thou art coming to write fair concerning the Palace of the Lord
Jesus, and the Glory of that Kingdom; oh, but they have a veil over their eyes
that they cannot see it; Oh, but says God I have a Jacob, a dew, a Lion, and
they shall know it: I have but a few names among you, in whom my Name is found,
though I have a great many souls; Thou will find. Lord, but a few that have
kept themselves undefiled from the world, that are pure Religious ones; there
are may fleshly, national, formal religious ones, but the poor, fatherless
and widow are the companions of the pure religious ones. They think it scorn
if one should tell them they are not Religious, they will say you are
censoririous, Oh, but thou will tell them, that they do not do that which is
pure Religion, that is so before God; who is such a burning and shining light
as John was, who gives forth such a Testimony of Jesus as John did? Is it not
said, that they who faint in adversity, it is an argument that their strength
is small? When they are in prosperity then they can speak large and high
things of Jesus Christ, but then to hold out in time of temptation, that has a
good report with God; God says, I will judge righteous Judgment, I will not
judge what you do, when you meet, and speak and pray together, but I will
follow you into your secret places, your Houses, your Callings, your Offices,
etc. those that breath after thee Lord, they are searching after their secret
sins, for thou come into the heart; they cannot prosper that cover their
secret sins; there is such a covering of secret sins, that prosperity flies
from us, and takes wings and flies away. --

It is not a time now to raise States, and Names, and great things, for thou
art now pulling down, they will set up their Beacons upon their own hills,
when thou say thou will have thy Beacon upon thine own hill, and thy
Standard set up there; oh how do men set up their posts by thy posts? --

When thou do make Bars and iron gates they will endeavor to break them open,
and beat them down, that the enemy may come in among us; they think if they
have armied men about them, it is well with them; O, but to have thy armed men
which are Chariots of fire about them that were safe indeed: When thou come
with thy hand, what are all these before thee? they are crushed on a sudden.
Take away Lord all that sour leaven that is upon the earth, it savors all the
meal, that it has a brackish taste; though many of thy children in their
affections and judgments may be sowred by this leaven, yet thou have some
into whom this sour leaven cannot enter: Take it out of thy Children that are
in the midst of the earth, and keep thy lump that it may not be infected; many
are infected, their language is infected, it was sweet before, but now it is
confused, it had an harmony, but now it has no relish. --

Thou have declared the coming of the Lord Jesus, that he shall come suddenly,
so the transactings of things here below do come suddenly, and poor man, how
is he confounded, he is in a smoother in his own judgment, he is in the smoke,
and cannot find the door! Let not thy Children be blinded and bloodshed, oh
take them out, and let them take heed that they do not return into such smoaky
houses again; oh, let thine bless thy Name, that thou have proved a clear
flame for their eyes, a burning flame, that shall burn up all smoking things,
as crackling thorns under their feet

Oh, that thy Children should drink up inflaming Wine, not like thy inflaming
wine, for that is a beautiful inflaming, but an inflaming to redness and
burning. --

Thine that thou keep from such things, they shall walk with thee, thou will
make them partakers of glorious Privileges, thou will bring them into thy
Territories above, into thy sweet Walks, how will thou hang them about with
Hony-Suckles? not like the honey that is of the earth, that is clogging, but
pure honey that is reviving; thy Ezekiels that behold thee by the River Chebar,
Oh what sights, what glories, what rivers, what springs do they enjoy! and yet
thy children are afraid to suffer; Oh what a spirit of slavish fear has
seized upon thy own children! though thou have said the Lord will be with you
in the fires and in the waters, yet what pale faces are there amongst thine,
oh, is this to profess Jesus! --

Thou will make the whole earth to be thy children, and wilt make them to be
the honorable ones, and yet they will not know, nor confider it; Oh this is a
time not for man to reign, but for the Lord Jesus, and this voice sounds out
here and there by a Son or a Daughter; Oh, but when shall all the Sons, and all
the Children cry for King Jesus? the Reason is, Because of the infirmities of
the flesh, and because thine are of a stammering speech, and of stuttering
tongue, but thou have premised that the time shall come that there shall not be
a people of a deeper speech then thy people, and they shall not be of a
stammering tongue. Come O all you Disputants, Monarchs, Scribes and Rabbis of
the world, come forth now, and let us see what Arguments you can bring forth
against the Spirit, the pourings forth of it, the rising of the Sun of
Righteousness upon the world, against the influences of the heavenly Orion;
oh, you shall be the men that shall be of a stammering lip and of a stuttering
tongue. --

Oh what a doubting is there now among thine, what disputing, what reasoning
what they shall do, whether they shall cry up a Man or King Jesus! let them
take the engagements of Man, and lay them under their feet, and take the
engagement of Jesus, and lay that to their heart; Let thy servants now be of a
public spirit, let them now fly high above the Skies, not into vain
conceits, vain speculations, and high notions; oh but thou call to an
exalting high through Jesus unto thee; they that have kept to a crucified
Jesus, they are thine: Oh, here are good words, great allegories, and high
expressions, oh, but they that honor thy Son, thou will honor them; they
that honor the Son honor the Father; Oh, they that say they will honor the
Father alone, and live in the Father alone, and lay aside the Son, they are
deceived, thou will have them keep within thy bounds, and not to stretch the
Point beyond the Compass. Oh, let thine take a through view, and not rashly
take up any thing: Thou will have thine try the gold as well as the dross;
thou will not have thine take up any thing, while they know not the life of it.

Oh, But who is he or she that admires the Lord Jesus through all, in all, and
above all; He is all in nothing-Creatures, the Creature is nothing, but thou
have said, thou do great things through nothing: Oh, that thine were taken
with Truth for Truths sake, that they would seek into the bottom, and go into
the golden Mine, and not only gather up the shavings thereof, let them not
take up the sparks but the fire it self.

That a poor Creature should subsist without sustenance, what a gazing is there
at this poor thing, while you forget the glory that is in it, go into the
Marrow, what matters it for the bone, let them have the Spirits, it is no
matter for any thing else, --

Oh that thy poor servant should thus long converse with thee, and so long sit
at thy fire, and feel the warmth thereof, and so bear testimony against all
false fires, and all things that are against King Jesus.

Then she uttered forth this Song, the greatest part whereof, as much as the
Relator could take, runs as follows.

OH, it is that light that burns bright,
a flame that is so clear,
The Soul and tongue, yea every part
unto thee shall draw near,
And praises his free grace for all,
and sets out Jesus too,
Who came forth from the Fathers seat
to bring that love unto,
Which is a fire so hot, and which
its warmth gives forth most clear;
Oh, it is a fire that is brought forth
by him that paid full dear;
Oh, when thy love sent out thy Son,
he sweetly did reply,
That he would hasten through the earth,
and on the Cross would dye.
Oh, when love did warm his bosom
there was no stay at all,
But the Lord Jesus he did reach
forth that which was royal,
And says, that love had sent him forth
to dye for Rebels great,
That they might come that enemies were
unto this Mercy-seat;
And be did fulfill his great work
with courage that was bold,
That there might come forth unto his
that pure and beaten gold,
Which was for to enrich them that
before were poor and mean,
Who has bestowed here on them
a glory pure and bright.
Which none can purchase by their worth,
nor treasure that is here,
For Free Grace it is to them rich,
and bids them come full near,
Where they may have that which will make
them rich for evermore,
And will be always unto them,
a bright and golden Oar.
Where no dross shall at all it reach,
nor cover it from sight
To those that Christ do, bring it for,
who tells them it is their right.
And therefore says, receive of him
who purchased has for thee,
Redemption out of all thy filth
and from thy slavery,
Rather then all Crowns or Palaces
wherein you do delight,
Oh covet more the brightness of
him which does make us white.
Oh 'twas indeed great love that such
which are so black below,
Full of the spots of filthiness,
that thou should them love so.
He that was God-man understood
the love was in the Father,
Whom none can see, nor can show forth
but he that was his Luster.
O thou most dear and only Lord,
that look down below,
Who in thy love thy Spirit brings forth,
and it does on us blow.
Oh, it is it which does maintain
all vitals that are within,
Oh, it repairs all parts throughout,
and fills to the brim.
Then raising her note she proceeds as follows.

O King Jesus, King Jesus, thou
in apparel art rich,
A Diadem about thy neck,
and forth it thou do reach;
Of thy rich Diademt to thine,
and of thy Crowns of Pearl,
And thou say unto thy poor Flock,
Oh, I will make you Earls,
Oh, I will make you Potentates,
and then believe my word;
For it is true says Jesus Christ,
look into my record,
And see whether I have not declared
what you are unto me;
Also what I am for your sakes,
and that you shall me see;
And look into the written Word,
and there you shall behold
How I have beautified, and have
made you as bright as gold.
O look into the written Word,
and there drink you of me,
For I am flagons of Wine, and
you shall partake of me.
O sit down at my Table, says
the Lord who is so high,
And I will come and fill you, and
I Will open wide your eyes,
That you shall me behold therein,
in all my Counsels here;
You shall see how I am the chief,
and your most choycest dear.
O look into the written Word,
and see the blessings there
To Servants, that do wait for him,
that is so high and dear.
He says he will come forth to them,
and gird himself about,
And set him down on them about
where none shall cast them out;
O when that Christ he forth does come,
at a Servant he does speak,
That he will wait upon them,
while they eat upon his meat;
He Will fill their Cups and Flagons too,
he will say, Drink O friends,
O drink, O drink abundantly,
for oh, I will you shend:
Oh draw, draw near says Jesus Christ,
and come and now reply,
Oh say unto the loving Lord,
that up on high you will fly.
You are my rare ones, and you are
the Darlings that I love,
Oh come, oh come says Christ the Lord
go up with me above.
Come hither, come hither says Jesus to
the Regions that are high,
Oh draw up to the Mount of God
to Jesus Christ on high.
And you shall see devouring fire
upon your enemies,
But I will be a light to you
and up you shall straight rise.
Oh you shall rise, indeed you shall,
when others they shall down,
Then you shall be raised up with me
when I my self shall crown.
Did they believe what in thy word,
reported is and penned down,
They would not then to men forth run,
and cry them up and crown.
Oh if they did believe the Lord,
what he does them declare
Concerning the coming of Christ,
oh then they would him fear.
Oh if they did believe the Lord,
what thou do say to them,
Concerning that true holiness
which shall appear as then,
When thou comst out then holiness
abundantly shall flow,
Sincerity and righteousness,
oh they then up shall go.
But now here is great transgression
in men, they are corrupt,
Oh they are taken with fleshpots
and with their sinful cup.
Oh blessed Lord do thou draw near,
do thou speak to them that
Which may now raise them up again,
and may lay all flesh flat.
Having uttered forth this Song (as she did all the rest) with melodious voice,
she proceeded to prayer without any intermission, somethings wherein were, as
follows.

It is not now as it was in times past, that a Kingly Progeny should reign,
for that was but for a time, and then after they should be judged, destroyed,
and taken off, and be no more, and then should the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus
come forth, and all the Kingdoms of man thrown down before it; And how has
thy Servant disputed, declared, remonstrated and appeared in the field against
Antichrist, and how is his language now confounded? it was the language of
Canaan, but now it is the language of Ashdod. --

Oh thy Servant (speaking of her self) must now come forth against the great
Rabbis of the world: Oh, thou know that thy Servant has often wrastled
with thee that thou would employ some other, but thou have overruled her,
and have put her to silence? and shall I not be willing to do or suffer thy
Will?

And thou give strength unto her, and bear up the Spirit of thy servant to
go through with the Work, thy servant is not an enemy to these men, thou
know, but a friend; Oh, it is for thy sake, and for thy servants sakes, that
thy Servant is made a voice, a sound, it is a voice within a voice, another
voice, even thy voice through her; Thy Servant knew that she was beloved of
thee, and that she lay in thy bosom from a child, and there she might have
lived without the condemnings or reproaches of men, or of this Generation; but
since Father thou will have it so, thy Will be done. If the body suffer never
so much, if it be for thy Self, thy Saints, thy Kingdom, it is better for her
then to be in her own Habitation, and in pleasant Gardens; and when thy Servant
has done thy work, she shall be willing to lock up her self in her Closet
again, and not to be seen of men; Oh Lord, thy servant knows there is no self
in this thing.

Having further in prayer made mention of the University-learning and the
National Clergy (as they are called) she proceeded unto singing, seven or eight
of the first verses of the Song could not be taken by the Relator, it being
Evening, and no light in the Chamber: The rest were as follows.

FOr human Arts and Sciences,
because you dote on them,
Therefore the Lord will others teach
whom you count but Laymen.
For you have set too high a price
upon your Learning here,
Oh that makes Christ for to come out
and from you it to tear.
Because you have the honor received,
so much fleece from Christ's flock,
Therefore now you shall be by Christ
oh made a stumbling block.
Christ's Scholars they are perfected
with learning from above,
To them he gives capacity
to know his depths of love
Oh you because have not kept in
within your bound and Sphere,
Therefore the Lord has declared
he will put you in great fear.
Though learning it be very good,
when in its place it stands,
But when it gaddeth forth thereout
it loses its great bands.
For in the Chimny the fire is
useful and precious,
But when the rasters it does reach,
it sets on fire the house.
And so is Learning, when you keep
it within its true bound,
But when you join it unto Christ
he will then it confound.
O you have been so gallant, and
you have in silken walked,
O you in dainty food have been,
that has made you to talk;
But when that they cease putting in
to your wide mouths that gape,
O then you will cease speaking that, which
before you did relate,
Concerning the sweetness of Christ,
your studies had drawn out,
O Christ I Am sure he will you try,
whether you truly spoke out.
For your trial will be, when that
your Revenues shall go,
Then it shall be made manifest
whither your wind shall blow;
But I well know that those that are
true Prophets of the Lord,
Will live upon that pay which he
declared in his Word;
And if they will trust and venture him
O he will them provide,
They shall not wait, nor be athirst
that swim within Christ's tide.
Oh, is it not better to have
your pay from Jesus Christ,
Then from those which do rome unto
the poor his interest.
The Lord Christ does against them speak,
they shall not long endure,
The Lord will set his fire to them,
and it shall them devour,
And shall upon them fly about,
and unto ashes go,
And by the floods it shall be washed,
floods shall it overflow.
O do not then, O rest not in
your greatness you have here,
For every one that is high will Christ,
he will put into great fear.
She proceeded again unto Prayer, and among many other, expressed these
following passages.

They that are thy true Seers shall stand, when they that are false Seers shall
fall, and wither, and dye; the true Seers they shall go on and prosper, thou will provide for them sufficient maintenance; Oh, let not men think that thine
do cry down the Ministry of them that are full of the Ministerial Office, and
of thy Spirit, and do speak from thee; but there are that are called
Ministers, that do deny Jesus Christ his coming to set up his Kingdom, O
thine would have them thrown down before thee, the Lord will not let there be
a famishing of the Word in the Land, and he will take care of them; let there
not be a cry among them, that if maintenance go down, the Ministry will
down; let them know that thy servants are not enemies to them that are truly
taught of thy Spirit; let them look into the Scripture, and there see what is
the true Ministry, and what is their pay; let them see what those were who were
thy true Ministers, were they such as did pamper their bellies, and their
backs? were not thine willing to feed upon any thing, to go in Skins, to be
any thing for the Gospel of Jesus Christ? Has not their fullness brought
blindness upon them? Oh, where has been that marrow and fatness flowing forth
from them? Oh, let there be more of that, thou will delight in such as delight
in thee, they that delight to serve Tables more then thee, and thy flock, thou will not serve them, what ever judgment or opinion they are of. -- Is not the
Narrative come from Heaven concerning what thou art a doing? Oh, let all thine
know it in time; they that are such as are true Students, do thou fill them
more and more, let them come forth as Trumpeters with a full sound, for if they
give forth an imperfect sound, how shall the Horse prepare to the Battle? let
them not go forth with the sound of their own minds, and their own carnal
studies, but with the sound of thy Spirit, and that is a right sound, and such
will follow thee with Timbrels, and with Music; O let such rejoice evermore,
and let them pray continually; oh, they love always to be praying, they can
never be weary; not that Prayer that is called a Gift, or an Habit, but it is a
spirit, it is the outgoings of thy Spirit, it is an Harmony that they that
have only a Gift cannot understand, and it is but like a beating of brass;
true Prayer is an excellent talking to the most High, it kindles up the
affections, and sokes into the judgment; for thy people are accounted by the
world a people of much affections, but of little judgment; but by this thou
do try thy People, for they that have little affections do soon change
their note; but they that have sound judgments, soaking judgments, and then
the affections right set, they Center then in thee alone, every way the Soul
is raised that is indeed wrapped up in thee; there are raptures in the Tongue,
and in the Brain, but the raptures of the Heart no floods can drown, no fire
can quench; the Tongue, and the Fancy, and the Natural life may be taken away,
but the Spiritual sense that returns into the Sun; oh what is the Carcass,
the Vessel? they are nothing, but when these are gone, then where am I but
there where I am made perfect in thy self; thou will bring thine into the
Grave before thou raisest them up to live; til thou come and put a
sentence of death upon all things here below, they will not look upon that which
is glorious.

Here she passed off from Prayer to Singing, some, or most of the Song was
taken, and was as follows.

O That they may say unto Death,
O Death, where is thy sting,
O Grave, where is thy victory?
over them thine shall sing.
When they do through death up mount
unto eternal life,
O then their hearts and speeches too
shall run to thee most rife.
O till they see grim Death before,
and its most ghastly looks,
They would not mount up unto thee,
to see thy pleasant looks.
Till they do feel his biting teeth,
their tongues will not sing to thee,
O therefore let them it behold,
Pale-faced death let them see.
They will then pray to thy rich grace,
thereto they then will fly,
They will to the most high then mount,
and that with open eye.
They shall look on the Sun so bright,
and on its beams of grace,
Which does appear, and comes forth,
and on them casts its rays.
The four last words of the last Verse are added by the Relator, who could not
take the Maids own words, her voice as it were dying, and sinking into her
breast, with which the closed for that time.

The fifteenth day being the first day of the Week, she began with Prayer, the
principal things whereof are noted in the following account, in the Language
they were delivered by her, though much more largely then the Relator did, or
could take them from her.

He that is entered into rest, has ceased from his own works, as God did from
his. Where Lord do thou take up thy rest? O Lord, do thou take up thy rest
in man? thou art the Center of rest, yet the outgoings of thy rest were upon
man; man must have thy Breath breathed into him, other Created pieces must have
thy Name, but he must have thy Breath; O how great is his Fall, and thou have
shown kindness to him, yet he does not consider, he does not take notice what
he fell from, and what thou have restored to him; Oh, thy Servant loves to
travel with thee in these created Pieces, to see thee the Alpha and Omega, the
great beginning, and the end; O what sights of the world, what fashioning of
curious Wits can compare with that infinite Wisdom! O that thy Breath should
be life to Man, that thou should come and breath upon him, that thou
should give forth substance about a poor shadow, and take counsel about a
poor shadow. Oh Father, what disputes there are about the Souls mortality and
immortality? Oh, it is because they do not thoroughly search into things, they do
see no more then the breath: Oh, who can set it out, who can give a definition
of man's soul, which is the breath of God? Thou Lord alone know what it is!
Thine that have conversed with thee in it, do see it is a most excellent
out-going of God into a poor carcass: It is a most excellent breath of God into
a poor creature: Man's life as confidered as the breath of God, and the work of
the Counsel of God, Oh how watchful should they be over their breath, that they
do not breathe against their Eternal Breath, against the Work and Language of
God. When thou had made Man, then thou said thou had finished thy work,
and would take thy rest: Who was this Rest? why Jesus was this Rest from the
beginning; he was the prepared Rest from the Creation: Thou broughtest forth a
Seventh-day, wherein thou said thou restedst, and a work wherein thou
restedst, and all to show that Jesus Christ is the true Rest; who is the true
Sabbath Day, the prepared Rest, the Eternal Rest; Oh, that there might be no
more wallowing in Satan's fires and quagmires! Oh they do miss of their Rest;
they do not enter into their true Sabbath; they do not see their first day: Let
them see Jesus Christ to be the true Rest, the true first day: Thou first
appeared as the first day to poor contemptible Creatures, to poor Women. Oh
Mary, I am thy Rest, and she answered, Rabboni. When thou appearst to be Rest,
then how do they take thee into their bosom, then they see no Peace under the
Sun but in thee? if he be gone, Rest is gone, Sabbath is gone, Peace is gone;
that bright day of the Resurrection which is brighter then the rising of the
Sun, does not then appear: When a poor soul knows not what to do, temptation
weighs them down, corruption sinks them; they know not what way to turn from
Briars and Thorns. Oh, then, thou appears and gives Rest, and makes them go
forth with joy- and leads them forth with peace, and then thou makes all melody
before them. Tempted souls can tell what it is to enjoy their Maker, they can
say he is their only Rest. Oh, who would not make thee their Rest?

Thou singledst out a Day, because thou knew man's cruelty, and
covetousness, that he would not give rest to Man or Beast; but whatis a day,
if thou in a day were not the Rest? The time will come that the whole Creation
shall have a Rest and Redemption which shall abide not for a day, but shall
continue.

Lord it is a Fasting day, indeed when thou art a Rest, when thou come out
with a sparkling rest; if thou had given a rest in thy Ordinary way, that had
been very sweet, oh but a rest in the Mount with thy self, a transfiguring
Rest among Angels with the brightest sun, oh can there be eclipses upon this
Sun, the Sun of Righteousness? who is the same, and there is no alteration, no
cloud can cover it.

Who can mix Water and Oil together? will not the Oil be always above? so
thou dear Jesus wilt still be above upon the top; if trouble come, thou say
begone; Surely Lord, I will make mention of thy Rest for ever; thy Rest has so
many Companions with it, Peace, and Quietness, and Regulation throughout the
whole Man, all is put to silence before it.

Thy Servant wondered at those words, the Lord is risen, let all the earth keep
silence; What art thou a coming forth? art thou putting a stop to all the
Nations of the earth, their designs and projects, all enemies both by Sea and
Land?

But I will put to silence (says the Lord) all enemies within; O arise against
all inward Enemies, and let them be put to silence; Let there be no more the
voice of the Earth heard in thine; thou have put the earth in thy poor Servant
to silence, thou have made thy Heavens to come down into her Earth. --

Whom the Son makes free, they are free indeed; Oh freedom indeed, other
freedom what is it? a poor freedom; but this freedom within is through the
resurrection of thee rising in the soul; there is such an harmonious company,
there is such an abundance of thine, when thou putest the earth to silence: Oh
put the earth to silence, that so they may come to the glorious stature of the
Lord Jesus, which none can fathom nor reach the depth thereof: --

Oh that poor creatures might not hear of a Jehovah of Righteousness, but
that they might also receive thee; thou sentest down a Ladder to the earth, the
humane nature of Christ, to gather up our Nature to the Divine: Oh how did that
humane Nature appear at the bottom of the Ladder upon the earth? oh what steps
did he tread, what steps in the Divine Nature to gather up Humane Nature into
it? thy poor shall lead up to the top, you are kept by the mighty power of God
unto salvation.

Oh it is good to walk up that Ladder, where there is such precious Air, and
such sparkling Stars, where there is not only seven days light, but seven
thousand such as none can number; Oh how can any get near unto thee, if they
will throw away the Ladder? poor hearts, they marvellously mistake, you cannot
come to the Father but by the Son, you must take both together, therefore this
Rest came forth, that so there might be a compleatnesse, that there might be
nothing wanting; every way what a perfect rest is the Lord Jesus? Oh dear
Christ, dear Christ, can any that have taken thee in, hear thee vilified?
could not thou keep silence concerning them, and can they endure to hear thee
contemned, to hear thee to be called only a Form, and to call themselves a
Christ? How can they choose but say we will have a Scripture Christ? O dear
Rest, the declaration of thee is mavelous sweet, the Declaration tells of thee
that thou art the true rest in the power thereof.

Here she seemed to have 'over-flowings of joy and delight in spirit, and
poured out her heart in a Song, as follows.

OH thou art Rest, eternal Rest
unto thy chiliren dear,
Yea through the great Creation
thou brings thy Rest them near.
Thou would have all things have a rest
that in the earth do breath;
Yea, also a Rest unto Fishes,
thou do to them bequeath.
Oh see and learn of Plants and Trees,
of Gardens and the Fields,
A rest there is from the mighty Lord
which he unto them yields.
The Creatures they have rest, much more
such that have sense and breath,
Their rest is higher then the other,
cause they are th'Commonwealth;
That they might be maintained for
the Sons of men herein,
Therefore a rest thou do provide
and quietness thou bringst in;
Calling the earth and all therein
to be in silence, and
To stay from gathering up the field
to accommodate the land.
O, what an increase through a rest
there is in the wide sea
An increase is in every thing,
brought forth out of the clay:
O land, thou do through rest come forth,
with great increase unto,
Of strength, and otherways from such
that thou bringst men unto:
What are the birds and cattle there,
whereon man is fed?
Thou art a rest to weary man,
who forth and in is led.
O shall all things that here do crall,
and beasts that hang their head,
Be more in praises to the Lord,
then those whom Christ is head.
For they after their kinds do praise,
much more then shall ensue,
When that the Lord makes kindness come
through all he will renew.
Love he does multiply indeed,
upon the sons of men,
That he might screw them to the top
of his glory in heaven
That they might not like muckworms be
and like such creatures which
Have no sense for to reach to him,
which is their king and liege.
O he is a rest that requires,
all his to draw him near,
And they shall have full sights of things
which in Creation are;
For he will show that Sabbath and
first day he will bring out;
Unto his Saints, and he only
shall draw the quintesence out
Of all things they shall draw the sap,
that runs from the root,
And get up into the high tree,
where none shall go and pluck.
No, none shall be above to see
thine, when they are in thy nest;
For they are closed in so round,
they lodge within that breast,
That none can scar, nor them afflict;
no musket shot can come:
There is not any can draw their spears
or at all shoot their Canon.
Though nests in trees may shaken be,
yet thine shall ever remain;
They rest and nest in Jesus Christ,
his hand shall them sustain.
Here closing her song, she proceeded without any pause to prayer, therein
uttering here and there as the Relatour could take them, the things following.
The poor carcass shall moulder before thy being, through a fight of thy bosom
thine are dazzled; in thy nest they see none of their own feathers, but a new
nest of thy own making: the very victuals dye before thee, that eternal life
that is sweeter than natural life, than all strength, all natural parts, what
are these to it? Father, when thou withdrawest thy glory from thy handmaid,
thou shall leave so much heat as shall refresh the body, and her health shall
return again from thee to her, thou will give her strength to persevere to the
end. Oh when shall men speak forth from the demonstration of thy Spirit? when
shall they go forth in thy garments, not their garments, not with their
Surplices and Tippets; Oh no, they say, these they have abhorred and put off,
Oh but they speak their University language, their headpiece language, their
own sense: Oh but where is the voice of the new Covenant-teaching, are not they
hid and concealed: the Beast has got in his foot, and has mudded the waters;
men are mudded, they speak a little of the new Covenant, a little of thee, and
a great deal of themselves; but thine have hope in thee, they have confidence
that way shall be made that shall be brought to light, which is thine indeed,
men shall not always be content with the outward relation of the word, without
the whisperings of thy spirit. Oh says Christ, when I come forth with my
power, and spirit, and Majesty, then there shall be more converted: now they
think they have done a great matter, if they have spoken twice a day, Oh but
have they had spiritual appetites? is there quickness in them? is the Lord
Jesus more drawn and set forth by them: let them wait that the Lord will come
forth more than he did upon the Primitive Saints, that there were longing and
panting after thy coming.

Here she closed for that day; upon the 16 day the Relatour came in and found
her in prayer, wherein she uttered among other things, these which follow, the
chamber being, as at other times, full of hearers.

If he were not (speaking of the Lord Cromwell) backsliden, he would be ashamed
of his great pomp and revenue, whiles the poor are ready to starve, and art
thou providing great Palaces? Oh this was not Gideon of old, oh why do thou
come to rear up the pillars, the stones which are laid aside? tell him, Lord,
thou art come down to have a controversy with him; Oh sin will lay thee flat
to the earth; Oh sin will bring down a dark smoke into thy judgment, oh sin
will hinder that judgment thou intendest to bring forth in the earth oh
Gideon, is it thy Statesmen shall carry on the work of the Lord, when they are
together in brainwork. What is an headpiece to an heart-piece? O do, thou
think to join hand in hand with head-pieces? Oh thou think, (because I cry
out for heart-pieces for thee) thou think hardly and jealously of me, Oh but
thou art deceived, I am for the Lord Jesus alone, it is neither advantage nor
disadvantage to me who is set up, or who is thrown down here below, for thy
servant O Lord, is for that pure interest of Jesus. Who would care a rush or a
straw, for the interest of man? What are they that are of his chief Council?
they are the chief men in the places of Judicature, but says the Lord, I have
said, that the Righteous, who are choice, who are dead to all outward things,
they shall be my Judges: but they will say, oh but they are godly too, but
says the Lord, they are such godly as I will none of, for they are ready to
join with any corrupt party that comes forth, they will own any thing, and say
unto any, you are my King, so they may have their fat and Fleeces, and all bow
down to them. Oh but know, the Lord is the great Redeemer in Israel, and he is
risen now, and will break all yokes as fast as they can put them on.

Because the Pastors of Churches some of them do own thee; will the Lord
therefore own thee. Oh no, the Lord will own such only, who are true in heart,
and in his sight; some of these have made as great an Alarm as others, and
have appeared as much as others; but now if they must suffer a little, they
will fly, oh, this is a base frame of spirit, says Christ, where is a spirit
for me; thou art going up and down the earth to seek where is a spirit for thee
that will cast down the Jezabels, there are but a few such, but they are
beautiful ones; Oh, thy servant hardly knows a volunteere that will go forth,
though they be slashed in the first going on; but thou know where such are,
oh fetch them out of their Cottages and holes where they lie in obscurity; they
have kept their garments clean. -- Israel would have a King, if you will have a
King, says God, you shall have him in my wrath; so it is now, people are of
such a mad frame of spirit, when the Lord says, do not do thus, they say, they
will do so, like old Israel, who were murmuring upon every occasion: because
thou have declared concerning the coming of the Lord Jesus, and wilst give them
Judges as at the first, therefore because thou do not give them presently,
therefore they will not stay, but will have their own first: when the
Resurrection did appear, presently the very Disciples were doubting and begun
to scruple; so it is now, thine have hardly faith to believe the second coming
of the Lord Jesus: Oh say they, we thought it had been by this time, but now we
see it is not yet, but for a longer time. -- Lord, let it be sounded in their
ears, and let them mark it, there will be as great superfluity, as great lust
and filthiness, as great wickedness and enmity, yea and greater than were
before, oh they are all for themselves and Satan, does not he appear in their
Feasts, in their garments, in their locks, yea, O Gideon, when in thy own
family there shall be that shall go naked and wanton; Oh this is found in thy
family! David had not such in his family as thou have, so many of these: and
must thou rule a whole Nation, and can not rule thy own family: Oh, thou
say, I cannot rule them! can thou not, says God? but I will make thee
know what I did, to Eli of old, because of his sons. -- How can any go and cry
out for King Josus, if they have him not in their own bosom? Oh, he is a
sealed one; and they that are sealed ones can go forth for him! Oh Gideon, art
thou one of those sealed ones? Then how beautiful would thy walks be? O, but
he has taken away thy glory here from among thy people? Oh Lord, help him to
search into his own family; let him consider to have such evil doings, and
actings in his own house, and shall he be afraid to reprove in his own family?
Oh then, where is his courage? will he blind his eyes, and bawlk as to them?
then he will blind his eyes as to other things; if the Lord Christ do not
reign in his soul, he cannot reign for Christ; therefore you doubting
Christians, have a care that you have courage given into your hearts from the
Lord, and that the Throne of Christ be set up there, before you go out to plead
against the Throne of Antichrist, and the Devil and wickedness. -- I hou wilt
not have thy son so despised, therefore come you mockers, your bands shall be
made strong, you that mock at the goings forth of the spirit of the Lord, at
the wisdom that comes forth through fools; I tell you O ye mockers, your bands
shall be made strong, the bands of filthiness, flesh and carnality made strong
upon you. Oh is it not better to have the bands of man, than to have the Lord
put bands upon you? Can you break the bands of the Lord from off you? O you
that have given your strength to the Delilahs of the earth; every thing shall
overcome you, every thread shall bind you, every thing shall close your mouths,
you shall be as weak as water, but they that have kept their garments clean,
they shall have strength and might, and they shall stand up for the Lord, and
shall have liberty, Oh but you will say, you were free men, and we were in
bondage, oh but if so, where are then the works of zeal? of love and courage?
the works of Abraham? Abraham was for five righteous ones: oh he breathed after
such as had deeds not words of righteousness, oh to be wrapped up in that
glorious Royalty, to have that complete garment, oh the effects of that are
precious, quietness and assurance for ever. -- Come, acquaint your selves with
Jehovah. You great Professors and Army-men, have you not acquaintance with
God? then all you have is nothing: oh do Justice, and do it for Justice sake,
and thou Gideon, that have assumed the highest place to thy self, thou art not
only to do Justice thy self, but thou art to see Justice done in all places,
Committees and Judicatures abroad, that they may not feed upon the poor; thou
art not to wallow in pleasures at home, but thou art to be laboring for the
Lord; are these like to be thy Judges that take any into office whomsoever;
thou art to go forth, thou counsel (as thou art called) go and see that the
flock of Christ have Justice done them, oh look to the whole Israel, to the
earth, to the whole earth, for the earth is theirs, and so manifest that you
love Justice and Mercy, as you would seem to do; oh remember Absalom, who was
of a very fair carriage, and of good words, take him to thee, for thou shall
not have David, Absalom he was of a lovely nature, that he might steal away the
people from his father David, oh do not thou bring in that rubbish now, that
thou have cast out before; they have cried down the King, the Court and such
things, and how are your tongues now tipped with their language, if your hearts
had not now turned you aside? Oh Gideon, in Scotland thou did read what great
things were going forth against Jacob, and thou wast afraid, that thou wast
that Jacob, but in the latter end thou did take in, that Jacob was to
overcome, to be a Conqueror; why? the Lord says, if thou be the true Jacob,
thou will do then as he did, act, and glorify, and sanctify the Lord; he was
not for great revenues, great increase, though the Lord gave him great
increase; if the Lord gave in to your increase it were well, oh but you take it
in from the poor, and from Gods Israel, oh that you would take up Jacobs
practice, as well as you are willing to take in his comforts when you were in
the fields.

Having added many other things, she uttered forth a large song, some part and
parcells whereof, the Relatour, as he could understand her words, did take, and
they are as follow.

Oh you that are Gods diadems,
wherewith you here do shine,
Oh you shall sparkle through the world,
in his most glorious clime.
Oh Gideon would that I could sing
a triumph here for thee,
Oh would I could behold thy work
to be glorious indeed.
Oh that I could thee trembling see
before the truth indeed.
Oh that thy mouth most willingly,
On righteousness would feed.
Oh that thou would drink draughts
which is pure Wine also:
That thou would of the truth so pure of that,
drink, and thereby might grow.
Oh that thou would be like to him
that was the Ninivites king:
For to confess thy sin to God,
and to abhor thy sin.
Oh do not rage, do not thou fume!
when thou art plainly dealt with,
But rather embrace them then al those
that brave it in their silk.
And tell thee that thou shall do well,
they do but flatteries speak,
For be sure the Lord has said that he
will spoil thy Gallantrie.
Oh he will cut it off from thee,
therefore do thou come up,
And beg of him that he should take,
and with his hand thee pluck
Thee from that which displeases him
that forth it thou may go,
And walk in those regions where thou
may not feel's heavy blows,
Oh desire rather a dish of herbs,
than this thy stalled ox
With those rather desire to sit down,
that strength may be in thy Locks:
That no Delilahs so great and strange
with speeches fair and sweet,
May take thee from that w ch is true,
and exceeding complete.
O would thou have a chair of State,
and have love from a God,
Oh then cleave unto that which is
recorded in his word.
Let him not imitate those Kings,
which knew nothing of God,
They did not regard what they saw
or read within thy word,
But he has a great tone thereof,
he has his tongue there tipped,
Oh he has many Scriptures which
come through those his lips.
Oh let not him do as those,
but other things him show
What does belong unto one that
has overcome his foes.
It is not his great chair of State,
that shall secure from thee;
When thou, Lord, pluckest him from thence
thou says, it shall not be:
Oh the Lord then will say to him,
he must not have such food,
Which Queen Mother, as they did call
did drink up as a flood,
That swallowed up all in the pulpe;
shall he such juice here take?
Or shall he have such gellies as
those, whom thou did for sake?
And take him Lord, and show him it;
now that he thus begins,
Acquaint him that these flowings will
increase his flame of sin:
Oh, make him like to wise Agar,
not too much for to crave,
Least that he be drawn from the Lord,
and his glory deprave:
Poor Gideon I did pray for thee,
when like Jacob so clean,
Thou have been valiant in the field,
and there thy foes have flame.
Oh then! the flock of God loved thee
more than their earthly lives,
They could have given their all for thee
that in the world did rise.
Their privileges here below;
yea all they said oh take!
So thou will keep thy Gideon then,
and him wilt not forsake:
Yea Lord thou know thy servant did,
Lord, let her life go for
The life of that dear one abroad,
who is a man of War.
Thy servant said, Lord, that she would
lay a side her interest,
And plead for him on his sickbed,
that he might see the breast,
Where he should be restored to life,
and walk again on earth,
And manage the affairs for thine:
thy servant said, Lord pluck,
Pluck him out of the Canon mouth,
and out from the sharp spear,
Oh, take him from all musket shot,
Oh, is not he thy dear?
Thy servant said further to thee,
oh, raise him from the grave,
And take away his fever strong
which makes his body rave.
Thy servant said, oh Lord give him
Cordials from thy dear self,
That he may come and drink of thee
who art his saving health.
Thy servant little thought, oh Lord;
when to Worcester he did come,
Where he did vows and promises make
for the most blessed Son;
And for the flock of Jesus Christ,
he would soon here draw forth;
But when he came, he did forget
his Promise and his Oath.
Oh that he should see such a rout,
at Worcester that last war,
And should not mind what he did see
from thee who art so rare;
And when from thence that he did come
thy flock about his heels,
And they reach out their wedge of gold,
and brought their. --
Then into the City he must come
among the great ones there,
And their great Royalties of food
which, Lord, thou'l from him tear
Oh this food and these dainty things,
these pleasures him did smother:
Oh they did darken his spirit,
when that he was brought over
From ruin and from that great stroke,
from red-shanks that were there,
When that a while he was at home,
he did forget his tears.
Oh you great Aldermen and Sheriffs,
you Lord Mayor also,
That have been in the City, you
have Gideon overflown:
For your entertainments and your baits
his spirit have so smoother'd
That he cannot go for a Christ
whom before he did honor:
O Aldermen, O, that you had
considered he was flesh,
You would not have so nourisht him
and brought forth your relish,
Which was a relish to proud flesh,
which shall crumble to dust,
For truly it has in him and you,
raised up fleshly lust:
Oh tremble ye therefore, for you
have roasted meat so dry;
His Wines you did mingle, whereby
you have blinded his eyes.
Much more she uttered in her song, which the Relatour could not take, the
press and noise of people in the Chamber swallowing the voice of her words,
that they could not be distinctly understood: After which she proceeded to
prayer, wherein were delivered, besides, many other, the passages following,

O poor Soldiers, take heed that you never draw your sword against the
Saints; do not smite with your tongue, as they did against Jeremiah! oh poor
soldiers, why do you appear against those, you have had their breath, their
tears, their prayers! do you think they are against you, when they would take
you out of your quagmires, when they tell you, you are upon slippery places;
they would not rest night nor day for you; and will you now mock them, who are
for the design for the Lord Jesus? Will you now speak that against them, which
you would have bit your tongue in the field, rather then to have spoken? Do not
the hearts of those pity you, that you think are against you? If you draw
spears against them, they will draw nothing but Faith and Christ against you,
and can you then stand? Oh no, you will fall backward. When they came to seek
Jesus and take him, they could not look upon him, but fell backward: Jesus
Christ set his face like a flint against his enemies for you, that he might
take you up and crown you, that so you might stand for him: Oh, the Lion of the
tribe of Judah calls upon you, will you not hear the voice of the Lion? do men
affright you to make you stoop and bow to them, oh here is the voice of the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, he will lend you privileges, your golden cups and
brave things you have in the earth; Oh Lord Jesus come quickly. Do thou tell
them what a Lion thou art; Oh, Lord thou will not honor them with the great
things thou have for thine that shall reign with thee. Oh that they would
repent, that they would look with pale faces upon him. -- Thy servant will
leave a Testimony within these walls, this Palace against them, for that they
have jeered against the kingdom and reign of Jesus Christ.

Oh you Sergeants! then your hearts shall tremble to put forth your hand
against one of the Prophetss, or people of the Lord; must you Sergeants, that
have prophesied and prayed with the people of the Lord, now put forth your hand
against them? come Lord Jesus and fill them with trembling, and let them rather
feed upon crusts, than to hold their places under these men: Know that the
glorious time is coming, when that blessed Tribe of Judah shall come in, what
will become then of the swift motions of your feet, where you have run for them
that build calves in Bethel. Oh when the Glory of that thy People shall
appear, what Language shall then come up; Oh! you will say, if that were
coming it were well, but will you make no preparation for it? If you will not
stand up for the deliverance of the People, deliverance shall come, though we
know not from whence: If thou art afraid to go into the Kings Palace; thou
shall be ashamed when that day comes: The Lord is bringing about a glorious
Freedom, let them know that the time is drawing on, that your staff of beauty
and bonds that have been broken, the Lord will bring them together again, and
they shall be stronger than they were before -- Lord, thou will suddenly come
to thy Temple, the foolish Virgins shall then cry, but says the Lord, I have
an open gate only for mine that have oil in their Lamps. You great
Professors, you who are but lamp ones, you shall not enter in, when he comes;
he will not come as a torn, battered, crushed Jesus, but as a lovely king, as
one full of favor; though many say, Io, here is Christ and there, but these
are deceivers? but oh the children shall by thy spirit know the countenance of
the true Christ, his true breath; his looks from all painted looks that are
upon the earth. Jesus Christ will not come flashily, but with such a light as
shall endure, such a light as you shall see that all other lights are
counterfeit to him; though never so many languages utter their voices; but when
thou come, thy language shall be discerned: Many are come forth into the
world, but thou say try the spirits, my Saints; it is not they can try the
spirits that have read many volumnes: University men have great knowledge, but
they cannot try the spirit; can those that have the form without the power,
that have great arguments? No, they only can try the spirits that are children
indeed; the other by virtue of their literal knowledge, their own
understanding, their own apprehensions, their own light, oh such are taken with
flesh, and say, this is Christ, and that is Christ: but thy people will not
only try Ranters, for they are known in the face of the Sun, but they will try
whether men be for a crucified Christ that suffered upon the Cross, or a
Christ within? thine indeed are for Christ within them, and they do love
Christ as he suffered at Jerusalem, and manifest within them; Oh, but thine are
too apt to run away from the simplicity of the Gospel! though things be high,
yet if they have not a footing in a crucified Christ, in God manifest in the
flesh, then let not thine embrace them.

Having with these uttered many other things, she sung of the glory of the new
Jerusalem, which escaped the Relators pen, by reason of the lowness of her
voice, and the noise of the people; only some pieces were taken here and
there, but too broken and imperfect here to relate: After her song, she
proceeded again to prayer, wherein she uttered the words following:

It is now much, that great Ones do not tremble, that they have such greedy
minds after things here below, if they did take things into their
understanding, least they should not be entertained at thy Table: How do they
think, that are in high places, to manage their proceedings aright, if they
have not the presence of God with them, if they have Prayer and Faith against
them? O, says Joshua, I will rather have all the Armies of the world against
me, than want the presence of God! oh, if they were jealous, that they had many
enemies within, then they would do as Joshua did, they would set themselves to
seek the Lord, they would say, come soldiers, let us seek the Lord: thou have
now put them to the trial, now let them examine whether their former prayers,
promises and declarations came from a legal and slavish or a Gospel-fear, a
fear that they should be smitten down to the earth, or a filial fear, a fear
that the name of the Lord would fall upon the ground! O, what will become of
thy great Name? had you had the name of God in your eyes, then you would have
it still; if the true fear of God wrought in you such effects before, why does
it not so now? why are you now so little for the name of the Lord, and so much
for your own name? If you had acknowledged my supremacy then in truth, you
would acknowledge it now? O, the Lord cannot endure hypocrites! Rational men
themselves abhor that which is flattery and dissembling, and what is not from
an ingenious frame of spirit, and will not God much more? Now that you come to
have fine houses, warm beds, sweet meats, do you now pay your Vows unto the
Lord? Oh, let them not side with the crookedness of this Generation; let them
draw nigh to meet their God; Oh, come, come, when you were trembling Ones,
praying Ones; then Israel exalted you, and delighted in you, and went to God
for your sakes: and now you have offended in Baal, you are dead, your spirits
are dead; will you not be told of it? You shall be told of it -- Come, O you,
that are in any Authority, in any Office, study what you are to do for the
Lord? wherein you might redeem the time? wherein you might serve the Lord?
though you have given up your members to serve sin and vanity; let the day
suffice that you have recreated, sported, filled, feasted your selves: Now say,
Lord, we will be for thee, and he will receive you: If they now set to
Temple-work, thou will say to them, thou though test to have taken them away in
the Wilderness; because they have done thus, and have gone back in the
wilderness; Yet the Lord will say to them, as to David, I accept of it at thy
hand, of the thoughts of thy heart, yet thou shall not build my house: Pray for
your children, that they may not be taken with crowns, nor with the summers
increase, as their Fathers have been; O let them not die without a repenting
frame of spirit: Oh thou love them that confess their sins; true
confession of sin will go with an endeavor against it: Or as David said, I
have made the hearts of the righteous sad, and to mourn, and grieve; Oh, that
they might say so; Lord I have been a back-slider, but I will yet return: Let
them not harden themselves, and become accusers against thine; let them not
think much to be accounted Revolters, when you are so, you shall be called
Revolters when you are so, when you act like Demas, do you think you shall go
untold of it; the Lord will make you to know it by a witness within you: Do
thou recall them, they have been a pleasant voice to thy people, but now they
have a confused language, and chill and cold spirits, thou will make them to
know it, Lord; If they sin openly, then reprove them openly: Let not thy people
fear to reprove them to their face; Let them do that which is just, Father;
Shall they run into fiery Temptations, and shall we not tell them? They cast
out thy people, but thy people will not cast them out; thy people pray that
they might see thy kingdom, and partake of the breath of his nostrils, and of
the brightness of his coming: Is it not pure Gospel for thine to tell them,
that they are gross finners against free Grace, against the Lord Jesus, the
Sorr. Oh, the Sun discovers all things: that which is thrown up against the
Sun, that appears most clearly; the sun will make you known what you are in
secret? can you stand it out against the Lord himself? let not them that have
given up their names to thee, be found flighters against thee; Shall thine, oh
Lord, be swallowed up? O^ no, thou will but hiss, and Armies shall comeeven
from heaven for thine, and then those that do task and seek to lay on the
burdens what shall they do?

Having uttered these with some other things concerning the new Jerusalem, she
sung forth the further enlargements of her heart in the song following.

He that did wait these things to know
that penned was within,
That book concerning thy coming,
as Potentate and King,
Oh he did mourn till that the Lamb
did come with chearing there,
And said he would open that book,
and those seals he would tear,
And lay it wide open before,
that he might read therein,
Concerning songs of Hallelu jah,
which shall fill to the brimme,
And that he should read there also
the downfall of the Whore
Of Babylon which sure shall fall,
and sink within her gore:
And that he also there should read,
the downfall of the great God,
Gog and Magog, how they shall go,
and by Christ down be plucked,
And he must read also how thou
would search all Nations wide,
And gather in thy remnant there,
and others wash with Tide,
With floods that should rise upon them,
and make them sink for ever,
That so thy Sion might thee praise,
who art that High one, rather
Then that they should exalt the praise
of men and things on earth,
For they know what thou do deelare
and what thou do discover,
And John he read long since thereof
concerning the great fall
Of those that stood out against him
who is the chief of all.
Oh he read here, thou would dry up
Euphrates that river,
And make dry Land for thine to go,
and thither to appear
Before thy Throne where they should be
and abide for evermore:
Therefore John read how that thou
the earth again restore.
None shall hinder them from those would
w ch John there did declare
Oh a Sea of glass there crystal was thrones
which none could it compare:
But oh your standing on the earth,
on glass that brittle is,
Which shall crumble under your seet
when that there come^ forth this,
This Sea of glass which is indeed,
that where thine thee behold:
Oh they may look up unto thee,
and through it extol
Thy love that did a book write sweet,
and many things there in store
Of Royalties which should come out,
and be given more and more,
Unto those that deny thy foes,
and Antichrist also,
They that go forth to strike at him,
thou will upon them blow,
Thy spirit upon them shall come forth
and Antichrist shall fall
Both in person, and also too,
in his coming principal.
Oh it is Lord, then sweet surely,
to read of such things here,
And John he mourned abundantly,
that the mystery might draw near,
That new Jerusalem above,
might come down here below,
And that they might see their High,
when that forth he does go.
Here she ceased and lay silent for the space of some two or three hours,
until about eight of the clock in the evening, the company being all departed,
excepting about four or five persons, she coughed, and being asked by a friend
or two with the Relatour how she did, with two or three such like questions,
she answered in a very few words (this being the first time the ^elatour had
speech with her) and suddenly was carried out in singing, and after wards in
prayer, wherein the Relatour left her about ten a clock in the night speaking
to God.

The day following being the 17th day of the Monethand the last day she spoke,
in White Hall, she begun with prayer, wherein she was very large, and amongst
many other, she uttered the things following.

Though they (speaking of the Soldiers) may build Tabernacles, and may
strengthen their cords, yet thou art risen. O poor creatures that they should
have no heart to hear. O Lord, they are given up to blindness, they will
refuse to hear, they will turn a-and go away. Blessed father, wilt not thou
follow them and shake them? Though they may shake off faith and prayer, yet
they shall not shake off thee: oh when the handwriting is come up in their
veins, will not their knees smite together? They shall see that an evil heart
is in them, and that godliness is another thing, than they thought on, though
they speak of light, yet they shall know that they are darkness, for they act
nothing but darkness, discover nothing but vileness and evil, that such
creatures should live in a time of so much Mercy, and trample them under seet,
wilt not thou reckon with them? Do not thou reckon with the Nations
throughout the whole earth? and will thou suffer them to go unreckoned with? it
is not every one that has a tongue to speak great things of thee, that are thy
friends; for if it were so, this Nation would be full of excellent ones, oh but
their heart is deceitful. When Ananias and Saphira did ly against the Holy
Ghost, they were struck dead; oh but how often have they lied against the Holy
Ghost, and yet thou forbearest: oh thy servane will not let thee alone till
thou risest.

Up in thy glory and thy Majesty, thou will make some to rise that are feeble,
poor, low creatures to utter forth against the wise ones of the world: oh they
have not thy sap, thy spirit, what ever they pretend. Wilt not thou come forth
and confound their language? Oh! thou will say, what have you to do to take the
name of God in your mouths, when you act for your bellies? If all thine should
hold their peace, thou will come thy self and appear against them: Oh they
shall be called the Jeroboams of the earth, they have made I srael to sin: oh
they would not be called Jeroboam, but the Israel of God, and therefore poor
Israel is bowed under them, and drawn under their skirts, when Ephraim offended
in Baal, then he died in spirit, in the affections of thine: oh then they will
come off with a great deal of damage and rust oh that they might now be
ashamed, now whiles they are peeping in at the crevice, let them see their
abominations; oh take them aside and tell them they ought not to do so; let
them not go and assume that to them, which belongs to God; tell them thou will
make them to (mart and seel thy rod for it: if they had stooped to the powers
before, the sin would not have been so great; but to stoop to those Powers that
have appeared against the Lord Jesus; Oh, who can be filent and hold their
peace at this? Thou will pour out thy spirit upon sons and daughters, and they
shall witness for thee against them: Thine may be Lambs and Sheep, meek and
lowly; yet they shall be, as thou have said; as a young Lion, and shall tear
all that rise up against them -- Oh, where is thy voice, Lord, thou that
speak with a mighty alarm, and thy voice breaks the Cedars; oh, thy voice
comes forth with much power! oh, let that voice come forth concerning
Restoration, and Generation-work; Oh, thou have put a price into the hand of
thine, and they have no mind to it! You show your selves to be very low; the
Prophets of old were willing to look to the Lord, and he sent siery chariots
round about them: Oh, if thine would go forth, who should be able to stand
before that wisdom and spirit, by which they speak -- Everlasting burning
shall come forth in righteousness against you that have put your shoulders to
a power that is against the Lord: Shall they go about to rear up that, which
thou have said fights positively against the crown of the Lord Jesus; It is not
like the other, for them thou have taken out of the way: but oh, these have
raked up their honor out of the grave; If you will have a Resurrection of it
again, you shall have prayer against you; and the voice of the Lord shall come
forth against you: They think if they could get Nations on their side, then
they were well enough! Oh but thou will scatter the Nations, thou will overturn
them? and do they think they can hinder thine overturnings? Thine can rejoice,
though they mourn to see poor Israel cheated and cozened by them; the spirit
blasphemed by them, they can mourn for the sin of the daughter of thy people;
yet they can rejoice, for new Jerusalem is coming forth through all this: Thou will go on, Lord, and strike down all their inventions, though they have a
great company of great head-pieces together; yet a little true wisdom shall
break down all their Policy: What is all their wisdom, if they have not thy
fear, thy spirit among them? Thou have told them plainly, but they cannot
abide to hear it, that the wisdom of the wise shall perish; and thy poor and
contemptible ones shall carry on thy work for thee in the world; the time is
coming that they shall be fruit, that they shall bring forth no more fruit for
thine; They pretend they will do great things for thee and thine: Oh, but if
the eyes were not blinded, they might see the partiality that is in them! Here
is one, no sooner were the Powers put to him, but he took them: Oh, poor
creature, how have thou deceived us? if thou have free grace, that must be
admired indeed in thee! oh but thou shall have no more, for he will honor thee
any more. The people of the Lord cry to the Lord against thee, though thou was
a sweet perfume and a lovely song to the people of the Lord; yet they do not
know how to speak for thee; and if all should come forth, and own thee, yet thy
servant will never do it, she cannot do it, for the work is on foot, and it is
not men nor Devils can stop it: when thine take a view of thy great works in
the Nation; how thou have taken away them that made the Nation nauseous and
stinking, and did build up Babylon, shall now refined ones come and build up
Babylon again? oh thy love to thy handmaid will not let her alone, but she must
cry unto thee, if thou love thy Savior then stand up, it is no matter if
that be laid aside and cast into the Dungeon. There are a great many whose God
is their belly, and they are willing to be filent; oh but you Saints, do you
go and speak to such as would shut this open door, as is open to the sheep. --
Do you thus requite the Lord who laid down his life for you? O Soldiers, you
said you acted for Christ and his flock, oh but your heart is deceived, and
has turned you aside. Come you mockers, you Army-men that are mockers, the
Lord says your bonds shall be made strong, you do add to the strength of that
promise and vow-breaking which went before: you sometimes said, let us have the
prayers of poor Saints, and now you can take turns in your Galleries, and say
they are yours, you have fought for them? is it so? who gave you your life and
fought for you? was it not the Lord Jesus? it is not yours, but the poore's and
thy peoples, the Lord will cast you out, and whereas you were expected to be
Oaks, full of shelter, of fruits and of refreshing, Oh but you have been but
blustering Oaks without root, without Sap. Oh let thine be ashamed, that
they have so much looked upon man, which to day is, and to morrow withers; Oh
thy people suffer even for their own sin; for they have made Idols of men; and
thou say, thou will not give thy glory to graven Images, and now thou will
make thine to smart for it, and to smart a while; were it not for thine, that
they shall be purged and purified to make them ashamed, and lay them in the
dust, to mould them into thy fashion, and to take away their sour leaven, were
it not for this work, thou would make these to crumble ere a day come to an
end; the Assyrian must be burned, when thou have done thy work upon Mount Sion.
All you great Ones, you shall not at all fare the better for these
manifestations of Grace which the Lords people shall have; oh that you might be
humbled at the last breath; was there ever any laden with so many mercies, and
yet so much tin and dross found in them? Oh poor Soldiers, your error was
here, that while you did strike down the Philistin without, you have not been
watchful to draw your swords against that that is within; here you were not
inquisicive, and this has made you to fall so flat, and this has deadned you:
thou would have thine full of eyes: poor Soldiers, you have had eyes
without, but not as those creatures recorded, have you had eyes within? --
Lord, they can resist the holy one of Israel; come, can you resist the Lord?
you may shoot against the creatures mud-walls, but can you batter the Towers of
the Lord? oh poor man, will thou contend with thy Maker? how will thou contend
against so glorious a King? Do thou think to come with thy brazen face, and
jeering countenance against the Lord of glory? though Christ when he came at
first, was willing to become weak, and to be thrown into the Grave, but he will
come in flames of fire; you Soldiers, he will come as the Messenger of his
Temple. -- Oh poor creatures, this wine of the Earth will inflame your blood,
but oh that you might have the wine from above, then would you be beautified,
and then would he say, well done good and faithful servant. -- O thy servant is
come near that Council, and thy servant will pray that they might see and hear,
and be delivered from that great fury that is coming forth. Oh soldiers, can
you stand against the sword of the Lord, that great shield? can you pierce the
Breastplate that is from on high? Oh, the Saints are able to fight with you,
not with material weapons, but with the sword of faith and the Spirit; oh where
is the sword of Goliab that can come and fight against that? oh poor Soldiers,
the Lord has sent his servant to tell you of your wickedness, and to tell you
what has been done in Scotland, Ireland, and elsewhere: if you keep not
Chronicles, others do; the Lord has written them down, and he will bring them
forth. -- Thou have a controversy with all languages, and they only that have
the language of Canaan shall be taken into thy Canaan, and shall have the honey
drops there; They cannot believe such great things are coming out, as the reign
of Jesus Christ; that thou art staining the pride of all Glory, and that thou will have no more Monarchies till the Monarchy of Christ come forth: it is
because they are so much seeking one from another; they are so taken up and
wrapped up in their own mantles, that they have no eyes to look up for Elias his
Mantle: They have the spirit of Man, and the courage of Man, but what is all
that courage? says Elihu, I have seen that for all that, Ages should teach
wisdom, and Years give understanding; yet you could not bring forth an answer
in wisdom to the condition of Job; so I waited for others, and was afraid my
self to speak, until the Spirit came upon me, then I was carried forth to
speak beyond my own courage; Oh thy Spirit is above the spirit of man; thy
Spirit informs and teaches, and brings forth new things, and declares old
things; thy Spirit brings forth what the ways of men are, it does declare the
great overturnings and disappointments that men shall meet with; when thou
openest, who can shut? it is not all their jealousies and surmisings concerning
designings, and this and the other thing, it is not all these things that can
stop the pipes of Christ that are golden; can you hinder the oil that runs so
sweet? Blessed be thy Name for that glorious Privilege that thine have, they
are made partakers of thine Anointing, and he calls them fellows; oh they are
poor Mortals that he should call them fellows! oh some poor creatures call
themselves Christ: because of this oneness with Christ, they will have no
distinguishing, thou will make them to know that there is a difference between
Head and Members: there is a wicked Generation that are risen up about this
place that do say so, that do pretend many spiritual things, who are enemies to
Jesus; others come out more openly, others more secretly, how are they ready to
join their evil spirit with the Spirit of the Lord Jesus? thy Servant sometimes
contended against them near this place, and now she is come to bear a greater
testimony against them; when thy sweet wine comes forth, and thy Spirit is
poured out, then they being in their false wine: oh but it shall never enter
into thy treasury, where thine are; they say, they (speaking of some rude
spirits which came to hear her) are one spirit with thy servant, but thy
servant abhors it through the Spirit of that crucified Jesus. -- This that thou
have now done upon thy servant, they will not understand that it is an
intimation to them of the pouring out of thy Spirit upon thine own, wherein
they shall go forth against the world: thy servant was one that was simple, an
Idiot, and did not study in such things as these, and must thy servant now
float upon the mighty and broad waters? [meaning of the Spirit] thou said
indeed that thy servant should declare in Gath and publish in Askelon: They
will say the spirit of madness and distraction is upon her, and that it is
immodesty; but thou know Lord, that it is thy Spirit; for thou have cast thy
servant where she would not, and have taken her contrary to all her thoughts;
surely thou shall be glorified and advanced by it; it is the Lord that comes,
and enlarges, and fills with his Spirit, and lays his foundation with precious
stones and sparkling colors; thy servant would not have any take it in without
trial: let them try whether it is from thy Spirit, or from what it is; Oh thy
servant knows it is from thy Spirit; let them know that it is so too, by the
language of it, by the Rule through which it comes; how is the written Word
carried forth in it! thy Spirit takes the Scripture all along, and sets the
soul a swimming therein; oh, those things that are concealed are made manifest,
when thy Spirit comes forth; oh that they might know what is the true sountain,
and what is pudled water; will thou dip them Father in the spiritual Baptism,
this Baptism of Fire cleanses: Zeal is another thing then a passionate humor,
where true Zeal is, there the flame of the Lord is; there is much in nature
that may deceive; A fine curious nature may seem to be Grace, which is not: an
amiable carriage and good words, these are all nature: Tell the sons of
Issachar that go forth to the work of the Lord, what qualifications, what
manner of conversations should be in them, and in the World, suitable to such a
day as this; this is a day wherein thou call up thine to glorify thee in
the fires: or that the names, Courtier and King should never come up again; and
though there be now a finer name yet there is the same thing, the same
superfluity and vanity as was among the Kings of old; they come forth in sheeps
clothing: you Council, you think you have done well in this, but surely the
Passing Bell shall ring for you: this is the saddest day that ever poor England
had; formerly their Children had their black patches, and naked necks, and
powdered locks, and so it is now; Kings must then sit alone, and so they do
now; What David! thou whom I have raised up from the lowest of men, from the
dust, will thou do this? these are crying things that are come up in thine ears
oh Lord; how can they be fit to Rule and Judge a Nation, to reprove sin in a
Nation, when they cannot Rule, and Judge, and reprove their own Families? they
that will not hear of their sins, they shall feel of the smart thereof, That
is, the sins they are galled within their Conscience; but it was not so with
David; For when Nathan told him of his sin, he struck upon his breast and
mourned. -- Though the name of Gideon was upon him (speaking of the Supreme
Magistrate) in the field, yet now it is taken off from him, thou shall no more
be called Valiant, because thou can not be contented with the name of thy
righteous ones; therefore thy name shall not be long: As to the name General,
thou have Lord, been with him, and have showed him thy presence; But in thy
other name, where is thy Victory, thy Righteousness, thy Zeal, thy Love, thy
Conquest now? Will not the Lord shut thee out, thou that go about to shut
out the Saints? the Lord will shut out thee; It is a King, not Saints, but King
Jesus that thou have sought to shut out; had not thou better to have died in
the field, to have fallen in thy Tent, then to come into this great Palace
which the Lord will rent from thee? Oh that he might be wrung out from among
them, that he might not seek the living among the dead; He seeks to do living
actions, and says he is not against us, but for us; How can he do any living
things among dead men, dead things? Does not he confound himself in his own
Language? do not his actions fly in his face? does not his conscience say,
thou tongue, thou say not right? tell him Lord God, though he thinks he is
so wise, and others about him; Yet tell him they are taken in their own wisdom,
they do not think what a Poison it will become unto them? Art thou a rational
man, a wise and a valiant soldier? how can the Commonalty be relieved, and
thou have such great things for thy Table? Wars shall come out against other
Nations, and what will you do then for pay, Soldiers? Oh you old Prophets!
that you should applaud him, and be Chaplains to him! I tell you the Lord God
will Eclipse your Glory, he will put a stammering speech into you, you shall
not suck from Gods Wine-cellars, the Lord will not bring so much as a taste of
his Wine to you: You have turned his Wine into water, will you sow your
downpillows of flesh under his Elbows? Have not thou a great deal to reckon
with them for that greatness they have had above all other men? he has now a
greater controversy with you then he had before; you amended the matter well
indeed, when you gathered up a Magistracy that might uphold you, when you must
both fall down into the ditch; The Lord has said, That both Prophet and
Priest, and all that have cleaved together, they shall fall; You will say, why
do you call us Priests? Indeed thy servant would not call you so, it is a grief
to her heart; but you do their actions, and will not you be likened to them?
You will not hear; you will say, do you think to contradict us who are wise,
great Scholars, and Universitymen? Yea Lord, thou will make a poor silly
Creature to come out against them, because they have acted so sillily, and thou
Lord wilt now take away their glory out of this Nation: You will say, you are
not to meddle with the Powers, but who meddles more then you, who have provoked
the Magistrate to this, and have helped to lead them into the Pit? If you were
the Daniels of the Lord, you would not care for the Kings Portion, as you do:
Oh poor Clergy! you have put off the outward badge of Antichrist, and you have
retained the inward: What is become of your Zeal and Exaltations of Christ,
have you ever a New-Covenant-Sermon to bring to your great Ruler? you will mud
it before you come; the Lord will have it set out in the freeness, and fullness,
and Glory of it in all the tendency and fruits of it; Are they like to the
Sermons of the Saints formerly, to the Apostles Sermons which the Lord Jesus
brought forth? more of their own heads and fancies are in it, then of thy
dainties; of their flowers, then of thine; Thou do not, Lord, look at the
curious decking of the dishes; No, thou look at the meat in it: Flowers will
soon wither, and their fine adornings will come to nothing, but the true meat,
that will abide for ever: Lord, rowse the poor Clergy; thy servant is persuaded
some of them are thy dear ones; will thou bring up them as thy great Alarm to
battle? Let their Trumpet sound forth, not with such an uncertain sound as they
do, but with a complete sound, that we may prepare to the Battle, to stand,
appear, and go forth for the Lord; If you bring forth true salt, then all
unsavory salt shall be discovered by it; the unsavory salt now comes in, which
is fit neither for the Land, nor for the dunghill. -- Hear oh house of Israel,
you Clergy, and oh house of the King! Why is thy servant come forth in thy
Spirit to proclaim your sin, and lay open your iniquity, and is not this to be
considered by you? Oh, you cannot abide to think it comes from God; for then
you would tremble; they say, we will not own it to be from God, but from some
evil Spirit, some Witchcraft, some design or hiring of men; But oh! says God,
though you would not acknowledge it, yet you shall acknowledge it, Says the
Lord; I would have it come against you at your first entering in; those of the
Clergy that are about you, they do not speak plainly, and faithfully against
you; therefore the Lord has sent a poor handmaid into the Palace, and there
she shall declare it, and though you will not come your selves, yet your
Servants shall declare it to you, and it shall be left upon the beams and walls
of this house against you: I have brought my word into thy place, thy very
Palace, and it shall enter the very walls and hangings thereof against thee;
and at such a time, Lord, as now, if not now, it would not have been suffered;
For when they had got in their great body, then she must not have spoken here,
that they might see, that it is thou Lord, that makes a cry to come out against
their transgression; The Lord would have your Protestations, Vows, Covenants
and Narrrations brought into your Palace against you, this shall be bitterness
in your dishes; You shall have plenty and fullness, but without comfort.

Here she begun and continued her Song, much whereof the Relator did take, and
was as follows.

BLessed be thy name oh thou Lord,
Which wilt break forth herein,
Thou will declare thy glory bright,
Against all them that sin.
Enemies shall know their folly great,
Which Prayer and Songs do show,
When Songs and Melody come forth,
Thy wind shall on them blow.
A wind Lord, that shall enter in,
Into their Palaces great,
A blustering wind from the great God,
A whirlwind that is complete.
That will tear them up by the roots,
And cast them on the ground,
Where they no greenness shall have here,
No sap shall be there found.
Oh Clergy that you should so wrong,
And extenuate your joy,
By bringing forth unto proud man
That which God does not covey.
Oh that you should so Nurture them,
And cheer them in their sin,
I tell you that Christ for this will
Not make your souls to sing.
You shall not hear Sions songs so sweet,
Nor their mirth which draws nigh,
But when it comes forth to light,
You suddenly shall dye.
Oh when that harmony comes out,
In the Reign of a Christ,
Oh then you Clergy shall go down,
And in it have no Interest.
Oh when those dear streams from on high,
Come running out so clean,
They shall not enter into you,
Who in the dirt have lain.
But they shall float and spring forth on
The grounds that lovely are,
Oh they shall have the sweet springings
From the Lord who is so rare.
They that would not any bawlk here,
But openly declare,
Oh it is they shall come to him,
Whom nothing can compare.
For they that Zealous have been for
A Christ as Lord and King:
He will himself open their mouth,
And make them for to sing.
Oh therefore come! Oh come thou Christ!
Oh show thy self now here,
Oh come! come King Jesus, declare
How thou art drawing near.
And that thine may from Sodom go,
And follow thee throughout,
Their travels in those pleasant plains
Do thou compass about.
And that flesh may thine fly before,
That darkness may go out,
And that King Jesus he may come,
And there himself set out.
The Lord is gone forth mightily,
He all might does appear;
Oh come, Oh come you enemies,
The great God for to fear.
Oh tremble and astonished be,
To hear that he draws on,
Against you he comes forth apace,
The Oppressors of the Land.
Oh he has said that he will reign,
Therefore Rulers shall fly,
Oh he has said that he will cast out
The fourth great Monarchy.
Oh he will show unto the pure,
And such that are upright,
To manifest to these proud walls,
That now to you are in sight.
Oh therefore Clergy, and you State,
Nothing at all you shall,
When that the Lord Christ he does speak,
You utterly shall fall.
What will you do then that have not
That wisdom which is good,
And how will you abide that stroke,
And that eternal flood.
Oh how can you then say you stand
For those that are Christ's flock,
When that you do so much declare,
So much for this great Oak?
Oh can you then stand out and say,
Oh will you not then stammer,
To hear the Lord, and also to
See hit most glorious banner?
Oh but when he comes, and when
You feel his stroke indeed:
Oh then you shall have no supply,
To comfort in your need.
Many of you shall only have
The earth to feed therein:
But you shall have no sights of him
Which is that mighty King.
Oh he will rend you throughout,
That Lion which is strong,
He will you trample under foot,
Who is my joy and Song.
Having Sung this Song with some enlargment, She breathed forth in Prayer; A
short account of some things therein you have as follows.

YOu will say, have not our eyes seen this before, and have not our ears heard
this before? Oh but when thou pourest forth by a vessel that is altogether
unlikely that any such liquor should enter into it: though you that are the
Great Ones, whom it concerned, would not lend your ears, yet the Lord has
accomplished his design in this work; and thy servant will leave this in the
bosom of them that have heard these beatings of thy Spices, and have their
senses open to feel the smell thereof: let thy servant request this of thee,
that when she is at a distance, they would hold up a hand of prayer for her,
that nothing may betray or enslave her; let them pray for the preservation of
thy poor worm, that she may be delivered from all Satanical delusions and evil
beasts: thy servant can as sweetly solace her self in thy bosom among the
still-waters, as upon the great Seas. -- Now any thing is taken for holiness,
any thing is taken for the shining of the Sun, which is but the shining of a
Glowworm; these are but the shells and outsides, and the storm is coming, and
where will all these be? -- The Life of vision here is excellent, and precious,
and glorious, when it is according to the Scripture, and comes from thy Spirit;
but thine for their life of Faith can forgo vision, and live sweetly in that
bosom that the Lord Jesus leads them forth unto; Vision! the body crumbles
before it, and becomes weak: men are mistaken when they think that the great
things of God will puff up; no, the more thou give of thy self, the more they
are humbled; they that have the flowings of thee, are self-denying; humility
shall make a difference between that which is not, and that which is; let then
thy servant to the end of her days be an example to all round about her.

Having uttered some more words, she concluded for that night with the Song
following, and therewith finished her testimony she bore in White Hall.

OH glorious Lord, thou do break forth
Unto thy servant here,
Oh the glorious shine of the great God
Most lovely does appear.
Oh the Seal of God is glorious,
It is a Seal abides,
Oh, it does seal the soul to thee,
That art its running tides.
Oh a Seal of the mighty Lord,
When others are gone, there comes
The fresh discoveries of that seal,
Given forth by thee the Son.
A broad seal sure, oh Lord it is,
Which none can break in sunder,
Yet is a seal that is within,
No foe can come it plunder.
A seal that is not by men here,
To be melted at all,
But it is a seal which thou do keep,
It never here shall fall.
Thy servant Lord shall be preserved
By this thy seal of Love,
Which over and over thou bring down,
From the Eternal Love.
Oh that all thine may know what it is,
That so they might up mount,
To magnify the Lord their God,
And give of this Account.
For who can Lord, show forth, but those
To whom thou do it bring,
Oh, who can with language set forth
The sealing of their King?
Oh, thou dear Christ, first sealed was,
That sealed One indeed,
And through the thine they do partake,
A sealing in their need.
When they are in great despairings,
And in great temptations lie,
Oh then comes forth the seal to them,
And draws them through the sky.
Through all Clouds they most swiftly fly
Unto their Savior great,
Which bids them welcome unto him,
And to his Mercy Seat.
Where they shall see his loving heart,
And his embracing arms,
Where they shall be forevermore,
Take up from all thee harms.
Herewith she closed, having layn in bed eleven days and twelve nights
together; in all or most of which time her weakness of body was such, that
after she had kept her bed the first two days and nights, being raised up
while her bed was made, she was not able to go, but as she was carried in a
Chair to the fire, and was ready to faint in the place, though they made have
to make her bed ready for her; notwithstanding this weakness, after she had
kept her bed 11. days together, without any sustenance at all for the first
five days, and with only a little toste in small beer once in 24 hours for
the rest of the time, she rose up in the morning, and the same day traveled on
foot from White Hall to Hackny, and back to Mark-Lane in London, in health and
strength.

FINIS.

