To undeceive the People of this Commonwealth.
WHereas there has been, and now are great multitudes of Bibles in 12o and in
8o and in 24o (known to all Booksellers by these Terms) printed beyond the
Seas, and Imported hither to this Commonwealth; and these Books being extreme
false, as has been found out by examination, and full of Errors, insomuch that
heretofore they have been Suppressed, Seized, and taken away in Quires and
Bound, yet nevertheless there is now great quantities Binding and Bound up
most surreptitiously, and the Bibles, not only themselves false and imperfect,
and basely printed, and counterfeit; but also the binding of the said Books be
bound most basely in Mutton Taffety, so termed, but in plain Terms, in Sheeps
Leather, both Black and Red, under the name of Spanish Leather and others: And
also many gilded with Party Gold, and not headbanded, nor truly sowed on
Slips, but on Packthread, and five Sawes in the back, and but three slips to
the said sawings; so that the people that buy them be merely cheated of their
money, and couzened in the Book and binding, and they cannot last to do good
service; and they go under false Names: As for example, The Bible in 12
Numprill, going under the name of Cambridge print by Roger Daniell, 1648, and
with black Lines round about, a counterfeit, is one of the easiest to be
known; and that and many others being sold in Tavernes, Alehouses, Inns, and in
the Country by Hawkers, Pedlers, Running Mercuries and such like, whereby many
be much couzened and deceived: Therefore this is thought fit to give notice,
that all beware of this deceit, and to take notice they be sold at two
shillings a Book bound, or rather under; so that by that very price, and
cheaper, they may be descryed, and by the false Binding, which will be (God
assisting) remedyed by the Parliament and State, and such course taken, as the
Commonwealth may no longer be abused, in a very short juncture of time: And of
this we wish all good people to take notice of.

Printed in the Year. MDCLII.


