Lutherus Redivivus: OR, The Protestant Doctrine of JUSTIFICATION By Christ's
Righteousness Imputed to BELIEVERS, Explained and Vindicated. PART II. By John
Troughton Minister of the Gospel, sometimes Fellow of S. John's Coll. in Oxon.

Augustine. Epist. 105. Ad Sixtum Presbyterum Romanum. Nullane ergo sunt merita
Justorum? Sunt plane, quia justi sunt; sed ut justi fierent, merita non
fecerunt: Justi enim facti sunt, cum justificati sunt; sed sicut dicit
Apostolus, Justificati gratis per gratiam ipsius. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Lee
near Popes-Head-Alley in Lumbard-Street. 1678.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IN the former Part of this Work I endeavored to open and refute the Novel
Opinion of Justification upon condition of Obedience to the Gospel: Which
(however plausibly worded, and vented) is in substance no other, than the Old
Popish Doctrine of Merits and Justification by Works: And wherein it is refined
from the old School-Notions, it comes but so much the nearer to Socinianism,
from whence the whole Platform of this Doctrine was taken, and differs from it
very little.

In this present Treatise my work is to explain and confirm the Protestant
Doctrine of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, imputed to us by God,
and received by us by Faith, which is denied by the Assertors of Conditional
Justification. They are indeed almost as loath the People should know, that
they deny us to be justified by the Merits or Righteousness of Christ, as once
Steph. Gardner was, That the Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace should be
preached to them: And for the same Reason, viz. The saving of their own Credit:
And hence they tell us, That the Term of Imputation of Righteousness, is still
to be retained: That Christ meriteth our Justification, That he is our Legal or
Pro-legal Righteousness, etc. They speak as like our Orthodox Divines as they
can, that it may not commonly appear wherein they differ: Yet in all this, they
mean no more but that Christ by his Obedience, or Death, or both, obtained a
New Covenant for us, i. e. the Evangelical Law, which if we fulfill, and
continue in it to the end of our Lives, we shall have our Sins pardoned, shall
be accepted and saved. So that the Righteousness for which we shall be
accepted, and made Heirs of Eternal Life, is our Obedience to the Gospel, not
the Obedience or Righteousness of Jesus Christ; and with them the Imputing of
Christ's Righteousness to us for Justification, is our being justified by our
own Obedience to the Gospel Covenant, which Christ procured by his
Righteousness; not our being justified or accepted to life for the
Righteousness of Christ intended, and performed immediately and only for us, as
all Protestants have hitherto taught, except the Dutch Arminians, and their
Followers. They do endeavor to obscure and perplex the Question what they can,
partly by the Rhetorical, and sometimes Imprudent Expressions of Popular
Preachers and Writers, (which ought rather to be interpreted and qualified,
than exagitated to the prejudice of Truth) and partly by the Philosophical
Notions and School-Terms accommodated to this Doctrine as well as others, and
too much transferred from the Schools of the Learned to the Pulpit and popular
Congregations: From both these they pick matters of quarrel against this
received and fundamental Truth: And always propose the Question in such terms,
that it may seem they dispute only against the Antinomians, or some that have
spoke too like them; or else some Logical Notions and Formalities of
School-Divines: Amongst all that I have read with some care to know the true
state of the Question, and what the New Doctrine of those men is, I have not
met with one that does fairly and ingenuously state the Question according to
the Sense, which they intend, and dispute for: But they always thrust in some
terms liable to exception, which belong not to the substance of the Question it
self, e. g. They usually propound the Question thus:

Whether Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, so that we are accounted by
God to have done and suffered all, that Christ did and suffered for us, whether
we fulfill the Law in him, and suffered the Penalty of it in him.

And then they infer from the Doctrine of Imputation in general, what follows
only from their misrepresenting it, That we satisfied for our selves, obeyed
and suffered for our selves, were our own Mediators and Saviors, etc. Which
Consequences seem not only uncooth but absurd I and are readily received by the
unlearned and precipitant Wits, who had rather seem ingenious in finding fault
with old received Doctrines, than take pains to understand them thoroughly.

I have endeavored to divest the Doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness Imputed, of the Additions, both of School-Notions, and popular
Rhetoric; and to present it in the plain Scriptural dress, to prove it by
plain Scripture and Arguments deduced thence, in the three first Chapters; and
then to examine their Ob^ections against it, which, when they are levelled
against the Question as it is plainly stated, are so inconsiderable, that I
cannot but wonder, that Learned and Pious men should lay so great a stress upon
them, as to innovate, and alter the Doctrine which all the Protestants have
professed, writ, and died for; this is done in the fourth Chapter, In the fifth
and sixth I examine the original and true meaning of the opposite Opinion and
refute it. In the rest of the Book I explain and defend the Instrumental Office
of Faith in justifying us, and answer the Objections against it.

The Question betwixt us is plainly this.

Whether God does justify Believing Sinners, i. e. acquit them from Guilt and
Punishment, and give them a Right to Eternal Life for their own Obedience to
the Gospel? Or immediately for the Righteousness of Christ wrought for them,
and trusted in by them, as it is declared in the Promises of the Gospel?

The former they affirm, and we have disproved in the other Part: The latter
they deny, and we affirm, and ^^ove, viz. That God does accept believing
Sinners, and gives them a certain grant of Eternal Life directly and
immediately for the Obedience of Christ ^^ought for them and proposed to them
(...) the Promises.

We say further, As to impute Sin (...) to account a man a Sinner, and
ju^^ciously to charge his Sin upon him to ^^s Condemnation; when a person has
^^thority to do it: So to impute Righteousness is to account a man Righteous,
and judicially to discharge him ^^om accusation, and to grant him the
^^ivileges and Benefits belonging to (...) Righteous Man: And therefore when
righteousness is said to be imputed (...) us without Works, the meaning is,
^^at God accepts us as Righteous, ^schargeth us from all the Accusations
(...) the Law, and grants us Right to all ^^iritual Blessings without any
respect (...) our Obedience: But immediately ^^d properly for the Righteousness
of ^^rist, wrought for us, which is there^^re said, to be imputed to us;
because (...) are reputed or accepted as righteous for that Righteousness
alone, trusted i^ by us upon the ground of God's own Premise of accepting us in
Christ, an^ Christ's Intention of doing, and suff^^ring all he did for us
alone, to the ^^tent that our sins should be taken aw^^ and we are made Heirs
of Eternal L^^ thereby.

Our Opposites on the other side aff^^^ That Christ did not obey or suffer
(...) Penalty of the Law of Works for (...) properly, that we should be
justified (...) that Obedience or Death of his: B^^ that God imposed on him a
certain, ^^culiar Law, made up partly of the M^ral Law, and partly of some
Spe^^ Commands to him, which he fulfill^^^ as a Mediator betwixt God and M^^
God thereupon might justly, and perhaps would, give men as moderate, (...)
easy a Law, by fulfilling whereof the^ should be saved, the obedience whe^^ to
should be their Righteousness, th^^ which should give them right to Life.

Against this Opinion diverse Learn^ and Pious Men wrote in the form Generation:
As Mr. Caple in an A^pendix to his Treatise of Temptations, Mr. Anth. Burgess
in his Second Part of Justification, Mr. Lyford his Book against Errors, Mr.
Blake, and reverend Mr. Norton of New England, Anno 1653; in Answer to one Mr.
Pinchin, who denied the Imputation of Christ's Active and Passive Obedience ^o
us, or that it was performed for us ^s Obedience to the Moral Law; But that
Christ was a Mediatorial Sacrifice for us, much after the same notion that
(...) now vented, of his fulfilling the Law ^f a Mediator: Which Book of Mr.
Norton, because it is not very common, I will transcribe the Sum of it, ^s it
is reduced by himself into three Particulars in the Conclusion; and the ^ather,
because it declares the thoughts ^f the danger of this Opinion, which ma^y
would persuade us differs but in words from the Orthodox, and the Difference
(...) of no great consequence, and that ^^e do not rightly understand the
meaning of their Authors, for whom they ^ave so great reverence: Like the
Phy^^cian who seeing in a dissected Body, that all the Nerves have their
Original from the Brain, said, he should have believed it was so indeed, if
Aristotle (...) not writ that they proceed from the Hea^^ Mr. Norton's words
are:

Taking Heresy for a Fundament^^ Error, p. 267.
i. e. such as whosoever ^^^veth and dies in, cannot be saved^ The Dialogue
contains three H^resies: The first denying the Imputation of the Sin of the
Elect un^^ Christ, and his suffering the Punishment due thereto: The second
denying that Christ as God-man Mediator obeyed the Law, and there with that he
obeyed for us as ou^ Surety: The third denying the Imputation of Christ's
Obedience unto Justification, destroying the very Being of a Sinner's
Righteousness^ by taking away the Obedience o^ Christ unto the Law, and
Imputation, which are the Matter and Form, i. e. the essential Causes of
Justification; and placing a Sinner's Righteousness in a fictitious Atonement
or Pardon of sin, such as in effect manifestly does not only deny it self to be
the Effect of, but denies, yea and defieth the very Being of the Mediatorial
Obedience of Christ to the Law for us.

With him in this his apprehension concurred diverse Ministers in New England,
as appears by their Letter annexed to his Book, which is subscribed, John
Cotton, Rich. Mather, Zech. Simmes, John Willson, William Thompson. And having
prefaced so much concerning the nature and weight of the Controversy, I
commend the Book to the serious consideration of the Reader, and am

Thine in the Work of the Gospel J. TROUGHTON.

Lutherus Redivivus: OR, The Protestant Doctrine of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness imputed to Believers, Explained and Vindicated.
CHAP. I. The Nature of Justification explained, and that it is not a mere
forgiving of Sin.
THE Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace and the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, has been so abundantly defended by our Protestant Writers of
every Nation and every University, professing the Reformed Religion, that I
need say little to confirm it; and especially seeing I have met with nothing in
our late Authors objected against it, but what has been frequently objected
against it by the Papists before, and as frequently answered by our Writers:
The chief Work is to discover the Artifice wherewith the New Doctrine of
Conditional Justification is covered and made plausible; whereas it is indeed
the Old Popish and Arminian Doctrine of Justification by Works, as I hope I
have in some measure proved in the former Part. Yet that this Treatise may be
complete, and that we may not seem only distruere aliena, and not at all
adstruere propria, I shall endeavor briefly to explain the received Doctrine
of Justification and imputed Righteousness. And first of the Nature of
Justification. Our fore cited Authors and their Friends generally affirm, That
the Justification of a Sinner before God is nothing else but a full Pardon of
all Sins, both of Omission and Commission, whereby all guilt and obligation to
punishment being removed, Man is restored ipso facto to his former State, and
to all those Privileges which by Sin he forfeited. This they maintain that
they may the more effectually overthrow the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, supposing that if the bare Remission of Sin does both acquit
from Punishment and restore a Right to Life or Blessedness, then there needs
no positive Righteousness to be imputed to entitle to life and to make us
acceptable with God. This is the main drift of Mr. Hotchkis his Book about
Imputation of Righteousness; Great Propi. p. 110. etc.
and is largely prosecuted by Mr. Trueman, not without many confident mistakes.
But this Opinion overthrows their own Doctrine of Justification upon
condition of our Obedience, as well as ours of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, and more; which I thus prove.

Mere Pardon of Sin is nothing else but a Discharge from the Process of the
Law, that a Man should not suffer the Penalties of it, but enjoy quietly his
former freedom and privileges notwithstanding his Offenses. Now this Discharge
requires no Righteousness at all, our own no more than Christ's, This Pardon
makes a Man righteous in the Law (they say) i. e. The Law has no more to do
with him or to say against him; he is as free from all condemnation as if he
were innocent, and had fulfilled the Law. Hence it follows that a Man is
justified without the intervening condition of his own Obedience: If any
positive righteousness be necessary to pardon, it is not mere pardon: And why
may not Christ's Righteousness imputed be joined with and be the Cause of
Pardon, as well as our own sincere Obedience? To say a Man is justified upon
the condition of Gospel Obedience (which is our Inherent Righteousness) and
that he is justified by the bare Remission of Sins, is a Contradiction.
Moreover, these Authors do acknowledge that Christ merited the Pardon of Sin,
so that a Sinner is justified or pardoned and so restored to favor for the
sake of Christ's Satisfaction. Does it not then follow that the Death of Christ
is the Cause of Pardon; then it is not mere pardon, but pardon procured or
merited: and if Christ's Death be the meritorious cause of pardon to every
Believer, then it is imputed or applied to every pardoned sinner: For no cause
can produce its effects without Application to the Subject, in whom the effect
is wrought; and the Application of a meritorious cause to the Subject for whom
it meriteth, is Imputation, or accounting that what was done by that Cause was
done for that Person. And thus we see this Doctrine makes more against
themselves than against us. But that Justification includes more than Pardon
of Sin, even a positive Righteousness, whereby Man is accepted to Life Eternal,
I shall thus evince.

1. From the Notation of the Words. To Pardon is only to release from the
Penalty of the Law; but to Justify is to Acquit in Judgment, to discharge from
guilt and accusation, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's
Elect? it is God that Justifies. It is confessed that to justify an innocent
person is to acquit; but to justify a Sinner, they say is only to forgive him:
But in what Language does the word so signify? When the King pardons an
Offender, does any man say, does the Law ever say the King justifies him? A
Brother is commanded to forgive his Brother from the Heart; and so Job did no
doubt forgive his Friends, and yet he says, God forbid I should Justify you.
Job. 27. v. 4.
Is any Man said to justfie him whom he pardons? Why should the Scripture
besides the familiar words of Pardoning and Forgiving use another term, viz. to
Justify? which in its Etymology and common use signifies to declare
Righteous, and yet mean no more by Justification than bare Forgiveness.

It Is said, A full Pardon makes a Man righteous, forasmuch as he that is
discharged from all Sin, is accounted not to have broke the Law; and not to
have broke it, is all one as to have fulfilled it: But this is a mistake; He
that forgives an Offender does not therefore account or make him Righteous,
though he will not exact the Penalty of him. Pardon does suppose a Man to have
been a Sinner, and so it leaves him as one that has deserved punishment,
though by favor he is exempted from it; the Law still charge him with sin
and sentenceth him to punishment, though the Judge supersedeth his Sentence and
will not execute the Law.

But it is said, Great Prop. p. 121.
Pardon is dissolutio obligationis ad poenam, dissolveth the Obligation to
punishment; and when there is no obligation to punishment, a man is innocent
and has right to impunity.

I Answer: The Antecedent is untrue; The Obligation to punishment arises from
the intrinsecal Nature of the Law, which (being broken) exacteth punishment as
a due Debt. The Wages of Sin is death, Romans 6.23. So that if pardon take away
the obligation to punishment, it makes sin to be no sin: But sin is sin though
forgiven, and the Sinner deserves to die although he shall not die. Pardon
takes away the Ordination or Destination of a Man to Punishment that he is not
appointed to die, but not the Obligation that he does not deserve to die. I
conclude Pardon does not render a Man as innocent, as no Transgressor, and
therefore it is not all one with justifying or declaring righteous.

2. From those Phrases whereby Justification is expressed, Ephesians. 1.4. It is
paraphrased thus: As he has chosen us in him that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love. He who is only forgiven his Sins, is not
accounted as holy and blameless: Pardon supposes guilt and that which some
call reatum culpae, the guilt of the fault remains after pardon, viz. That
such a Man has broken the Law, and by such habits or actions he has been
disobedient to the Commands. Pardon only takes away reatum penoe, the
appointment of a Man to punishment, therefore there must be something more to
render men (...), holy and blameless before God, and Objects of his Love. Rom
4.3, 4, 5. Justification is called Imputing of Righteousness; And Romans 10.5, 6.
Justification by Works and by Faith are opposed by the Names of the
Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith. To justify therefore
is to reckon or to declare in judgment, that a Man is righteous, and as if Man
had been justified by the Law of Works he had then been pronounced righteous:
So now he is to be justified by Faith, he is to be declared righteous by the
Righteousness of Faith, though not of Works. Therefore Justification is more
than Forgiveness.

Object.
It Is said Pardon makes a Man Righteous, as if he had not brok'n the Law.

Answ.
Ans;w.
This has been answered before: I am sure we should take it very ill if one
that has greatly offended us, and received his life and all from our Mercy,
should plead that he is as good as an innocent or righteous person, because he
is exempted from the Punishment he deserved.

Object.
A person of quality argues thus: If pardon be not a Sinners Righteousness, and
makes him not righteous, then a man may be pardoned and be unrighteous still
in the eye of the Law; which he thinks absurd, Justific. Evangelical, p. 18.
or else there must be a medium betwixt being righteous and unrighteous, which
he thinks impossible.

Answ.
Both parts of the disjunction are untrue: the first, that he that is pardoned
is not unrighteous still: for if by favor punishment be remitted, and no
satisfaction be made to the Law, then the Law remains broken still, and he is a
Sinner still though forgiven. For it is not the Law that pardons (if that
might take effect it would condemn) but the Lawgiver by his own Prerogative;
which pardon is not therefore looked upon as the fulfilling or the
Righteousness of the Law. But if (as in our case) the Law was satisfied, and by
reason of that satisfaction man is pardoned (as this worthy Author
acknowledges a little before) then that satisfaction of the Law repaireth the
Breach of it, and so there is the real righteousness of the Law, first imputed
to a Man, and then by reason thereof he is pardoned, i.e. acquitted from
punishment to which he was obnoxious before: And thus here is a fair
Contradiction that a Man is justified by a righteousness satisfactory to the
Law yet barely pardoned. The second part of the Disjunction; That there is no
medium betwixt being righteous and unrighteous is also untrue; we speak of a
declarative Righteousness. Now it is apparent that there is a Middle betwixt
being justified and being condemned, viz. Medium negationis, or rather
privationis. Adam before he fell was not condemned, having not yet sinned; nor
was he justified, having not finished that course of obedience to which life
was promised: It is true he was righteous inherently, and also in the eye of
the Law, so far as he had obeyed, and so far might be said to be justified,
viz. Inchoatively. But in this Question we take justification for that perfect
Act whereby a Sinner is fully acquitted and accepted to life eternal, and thus
Adam was not justified, and therefore in a middle state: So then, Pardon does
not make a Man righteous or justified, but in the precise Notion of it, it is a
Middle betwixt condemnation and justification, viz. Non-condemnation, but if
you add that a Man is forgiven for Christ's sake, then you add something
besides Mere Pardon and so desert the Question.

3. I argue from the nature of Justification ^s it is discovered in its
immediate and most proper Effects; the chief whereof is this, That ^t gives a
firm and immutable Right to Eternal Life. Our Opposites and we differ about
^ustification in this Life: They say it is imperfect and mutable, we say it is
perfect and immutable; but we agree in this, That Justification whenever it is
perfect and complete gi^eth an immutable Right to life, such as shall ^ever be
lost as Adam's was.

Hence I argue, Mere Pardon or Relaxation ^f punishment does not give an
immutable ^ight to life, but only restores a Man to the ^ondition he was in
before, and leaves him as subject and liable to lose it by new sins as ever he
was: But Justification by Christ does ^ot only restore Man to the Condition he
was ^n before, subject to change, but gives him ^n unchangeable Right to Life
Eternal; therefore it is more than Pardon: And further, that which gives an
immutable right to life, must suppose the Law to be fulfilled, which promised
life, which being fulfilled, there is nothing further to be required, nor any
further danger of a threatening of death, but man is to be ^eclared Righteous,
and to receive the promised Reward. But Justification gives such a ^ull and
immutable right to life, therefore it supposes fulfilling of the Law, by our
selves ^r another; and a Righteousness thence ari^ng, for which we are declared
Righteous and receive the promised Life.

Object.
It Is said, Full pardon (such as God's Pardon is) delivers from all
punishment, sensu and damni, Trum. ut supra.
from all positive punishment, and from the privation of all Privileges which
were or should have been enjoyed before; and this is equivalent to a right to
life in the nature of the thing. For when a Man is exempted from all punishment
and restored to his for men Estate or Favor with God, he is then in stat^ quo
prius, in the condition he was in before he sinned.

Answ.
By this Argument, Pardon should restore man into the Condition of Adam before
hi^ Fall, which is apparently false: For that i^ the State from whence he fell
by sin, and to which Mere Pardon must restore him, at leas^ when it is
complete, at the last Judgment: but neither then is man restored into Adam's
condition, but to a new State of Happiness by the Redeemer.

Besides, this Argument makes strongly against themselves, for the Condition
from which man fell was but a State of Probation, wherein he had no immutable
right to life; therefore Pardon restoring him but to his former Condition,
puts him again but into a State of Probation, and gives no certain right to
life. Nay by this Doctrine Sin is not pardoned in this Life: A Man is not
acquitted or put out of danger of punishment, seeing his Salvation depends
upon conditions which must be in fulfilling till his lives end: So that Pardon
with them is no more, than a Suspension of punishment, together with a promise
of life and impunity if man fulfill the Conditions of the Gospel. This puts
a Man into a possibility of life, but gives him no actual or certain Title to
it, and therefore is not Justification.

4. The next Effect of Justification is a new Heart or Grace to fit and bring
man to life which Justification entitleth to. The Spirit of Sons and the Glory
of Heaven are the Fruits of Adoption; but Life and Happiness simply, and the
Spirit of Sanctification are the Effects of Justification, Heb. 8.10, 11, 12,
13. The new Heart is promised as an Effect of forgiveness of sin. Hence I
argue, That which gives with the right to life all the means necessary to
attain life is more than pardon of sin: But Justification by Christ gives a
right to all the Means necessary to attain eternal life, as well as to life it
self: Ergo, The Reason of the Major is, pardon in the common notion of it, and
with our Opposites, does only put a man into that state or favor he was in
before, but in that condition there was no certainty of grace to persevere and
to come to life. When we pardon an Offender we receive him into our former
favor, and lay aside all thoughts of enmity, but we do not count our selves
engaged by all means possible to endeavor to prevent his offending for the
future; that care rests on him; therefore if Justification give a right to
the Grace of God which shall be effectual to bring us to life, it is more than
pardon, or putting us into our former condition wherein we had no such promise.
Mr. Truman ingeniously confesses (what is the natural consequence of his
Opinion) That Christ by his Satisfaction did not purchase grace to bring men to
life, Great Propit. p. 203. etc.
but only a Law of Grace, whereby it was possible for all men to be saved i^
they would, and God might justly save them, if they performed the Terms of that
Law. He says, Indeed Christ by the supereminency of his Person and Redemption
did deserve that his Death should not be in vain, and consequently that some
men should have grace given them (...) bring them to Heaven, but that he did
not preperly merit this Grace should be given them; So that this is a point of
honor to Christ, not o^ Justice or Debt upon the account of his Sufferings,
that some should have Saving and Persevering Grace. Yet he acknowledges that
the Father of his own good Pleasure gives this grace to those whom he has
chosen: So then the gift o^ Grace is the immediate Fruit of Election not of
Justification. But this Doctrine is as fall^ as new: Man's Sin deprived him of
Grace as well as of Happiness, and therefore if Christ purchased a right to
Happiness for him (which shall be proved in the next Chapter) he purchased
Grace also to attain it; the Means are included in the end. The loss of the
denial o^ Grace is the Effect of Sin, therefore the restoring of Grace is the
Effect of full Pardon and Justification. The Scriptures teach that all sulness
of Grace was given to Christ, that we might receive of his Fullness Grace for
Grace, John 1.14, 16. He has power to send the Holy Spirit to abide with us
for ever. Joh. 14.16. And the pouring out of the Spirit was reserved till his
Work of Redemption was finished, and he should be possessed of Glory, John
16.7. And then he promised the Spirit ^o lead us into all truth, to reveal
himself to us, and to glorify him in us, v. 12, 13, 14. Lastly, He prayed for
sanctifying Grace and perseverance for them that did, and all that should
hereafter believe, till they all come to be one in him, John 17.15, 16, 21. And
wherefore is the Power of giving Grace committed to the Mediator, if not
purchased by him, and why does he interceede for that he never bought and paid
for? If then Christ purchased Grace as well as a Right to Life, then
Justification gives a Right to Grace as well as to Life it self, and so is
more than Pardon.

5. I argue from the Impulsive Causes; Pardon is an Act of mere Mercy, but
Justification is an Act of Justice; therefore it is not mere Pardon. God
justifies Believers not as a mere Act of Favor, though free Mercy be the
Foundation and the prime impulsive cause of Justification, and all the Fruits
of it, but immediately, it is an Act of Justice, Justice being the immediate
Impulsive Cause. It is not only a Just thing with God to justify a Sinner
through Christ, that he may do it without wrong to his Justice, as some gloss
it; but it is an Act of proper Justice, having received satisfaction to his
Law, to justify and acquit him; it would not be just to deny it. This is
intimated, Romans 8.33, 35. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect?
It is God that Justifies. (...); Who shall indite or implead them in course of
Law or Judgment (or else there is enough to be charged against them.) The
Reason is, because it is God that justifies, God who is to be Judge, to give
the Sentence, and therefore will justify judicially or as an Act of Judgment:
And the ground of this is in the next words (...); Who shall condemn in
Judgment, seeing Christ has died and so satisfaction is made to Justice? When
we pardon an Offense, which we might justly punish, we do cedere de jure,
forbear our Right, and Justice gives place to Mercy; but Justice cannot pardon
or acquit unless it be satisfied, unless it have what is right and due
according to Law.

Object.
But it is said, That God pardons legally and judicially by virtue of the
Evangelical Law, so it is an Act of Justice as well as of Mercy: Vid. Justiif.
Evang. p. 23.
So Truman. They say a Sinner is not pardoned, by Free Grace and Absolute
Pardon, but upon conditions and terms required in the Gospel to be performed by
him, which when he has performed, the Evangelical Law does justify him,
pronounce him pardoned, and so his Pardon is an Act of Justice according to the
Gospel Law, though not according to the Law of Works, which is content with
nothing but Satisfaction.

Answ.
Let any fair Disputant judge whether this (...) not to shift the Question: They
have said, ^^at Justification is mere Pardon, bare Pardon, nothing but Pardon,
and yet it is not ab^^ute Pardon, but Pardon upon condition to (...) performed
by him that will receive Pardon. ^^re not these Conditions when persormed our
^^angelical Righteousness? This they con^^d for; And are they not a positive
Righteousness? Yes, they are Gospel Obedience: ^^hat sense is it then to say we
are pardoned ^^thout any positive Righteousness, that Pardon alone is all our
Righteousness. It may be ^^ese conditions are so small and so necessary to ^^e
receiving of pardon ex natura rei, that ^^y are not to be accounted as any
righteousness: Nay, but in the Gospel Law, all the ^^oral Duties that were
required in the Cove^^nt of Works are required still, though not ^^th the same
necessity of perfection: And ^^w they are much more difficult than before. ^^me
Moral Duties are required also and necessary, which were not directly nnd
properly ^^uties under the First Covenant; as Self-de^^l, Mortification, and
bearing the Cross. ^^sides these the Gospel prescribes new posi^^e Duties,
which neither were nor could be ^^uties under the Law of Works, viz. Faith,
^^ve, and Obedience to the Mediator, with (...) holy and reverend use of all
the positive In^^tutions of the Gospel. Are these small things, ^^s it
necessary to mere Pardon, that the pardoned should not only return to their
form Duty, but also receive new Terms, and Conditions which were never their
Duty before If a Prince subdue Rebels, and then promi^^ them Impunity, if
besides returning to the^^ ancient Duty and Allegiance they will receive some
new Terms; which he shall please to impose on them, does he freely pardon them
does he not deal with them as in a way (...) Mercy, so in a way of Sovereignty,
giv^^ them new Laws, and making advantage to himself and accession to his Power
by occasion (...) their misdemeanour? Besides, this is ve^^ improper to talk of
legal and judicial Pardon Pardon by a Law: For a Law is properly preceptive,
and judicial Proceedings are acquiting or condemning for keeping or breaki^^
the Law. Pardon is granted by supersed^^ the Sentence of the Law, at least the
Execution of it, or by a Promise or Declaration (...) Grace, which when
established for securiti^^ sake and promulgated, is sometimes called a^ Act of
Grace, yet it has not the full Nature of a Law. It is the Sovereign Legislator
wh^^ pardons, who has power to relax the Execution of the Law; a Law cannot
pardon But the plain meaning of those men is, Th^^ God seeing through the Fall
it was become impossible for man to keep, and so to be sa^^ by the Law of
Works, was pleased to ma^^ a new, milder, and easier Law, and to decla^^ that
if they would keep it, they should (...) pardoned and saved: Pardon then with
the^^ is nothing else but a waving of the Covena^^ of Works, i. e. God will not
proceed with men according to that Covenant, if they will submit to his new
Covenant; so then for all their specious words of mere Pardon to exclude
Christ's Righteousness, they only mean that God will not execute his First
Covenant which men have broken, but will save them if they fulfill his Second
Covenant, i. e. will be righteous and obedient according to the Gospel, and
thus they acknowledge a righteousness of a man's own, besides pardon whereby he
must he justified.

6. The Law requires a positive righteousness by the fulfilling of it: The end
of every Law being obedience to it. Just. Evang. p. 38, 39.
Therefore Justification cannot be Pardon of Sin without Imputation of
Righteousness. It Is said, That the Law of Works required a sinless perfect
righteousness, which Christ has satisfied for; but the Law of Grace is a
better Covenant, accepting an imperfect Righteousness. But this is nothing to
the purpose; let the righteousness be such as the Law will accept, perfect or
imperfect, it is all one, if the Law does require a positive righteousness,
then a man cannot be justified without it: And do not they themselves teach
that the Gospel requires obedience to it, as our Evangelical Righteousness,
therefore that cannot justify us without a righteousness conformed to it self.
It Is said further, Legal Justification, Ibidem.
i. e. according to the Law of Works, requires a fulfilling of that Law, but
not Evangelical Justification, A fallacy in words: Legal and Evangelical
Justification differ not specie sed modo applicationis, not in the
righteousness which justifies, but in the manner of its application to us. Had
we fulfilled the Law of Works, we had been legally justified by our own
righteousness, but now Christ has fulfilled that Law for us we are still
legally justified, to wit, by the righteousness of that Law; yet in an
Evangelical or Gracious manner, that righteousness being not our own but
Christ's imputed to us (a^ shall be proved in the next Chapter) and I beseech
you when men are justified, i. e. pardoned, (say you) what Law is it that
accuses them, for the violation whereof they are pardoned? Is it not the Law
of Works? (for i^ they break the Gospel Covenant there is n^ more sacrifice for
sin.) There must then be a legal Justification by that Law of Works, unless it
be wholly waved and made void by the Gospel.

Object.
But the Law of Works is satisfied by the suffering of Christ, and so pardon of
all sins i^ a sufficient Justification from it: Great Prop. p. 116.
There needs not Obedience and suffering too.

Answ.
The Law does not directly and immediately require both obedience and suffering
the penalty, but obedience only is the end of the Law; suffering the penalty is
no fulfilling of, or proper satisfaction to the Law, but a recompense to
Justice for the breach of the Law, that so contempt may not lie upon it: so
that if the Law be broken it does accidentally require both obedience and
suffering of punishment; the latter for the recompense of injured Justice, that
the Law may not be despised or broken impune, and the former as that which is
the proper and natural end of the Law. When a man suffers the penalty of any
Law, the Law is so far satisfied that it can exact no farther punishment, but
does he therefore deserve the rewards of the Law, as if he had obeyed it? He is
indeed restored to his former State, i. e. punishment cease and he is
admitted to the privilege of other men to live in obedience to the Law for the
future, but he has not the reward of obedience, nor is accounted for his
suffering to be upon the same terms with the obedient: In like manner, our Lord
Christ by suffering the penalties of the Law did recompense the injured Honor
and Justice of God, and of the Law, so that it could require no more punishment
of him or of those that believe in him; but he did not therefore deserve the
rewards of the Law, they were procured by his obedience to it. It is not true
of the Law of God, that it requires either to be obeyed, or that the penalty
should be endured; for so men should obey and fulfill the Law in a sort by
going to hell for breaking it. The Law promised life only to obedience, not to
the suffering of death; therefore Christ by suffering of death did fulfill what
the Law required, but accidentally and secondarily by reason of sin, but by
obeying the Law he fulfilled the primary and immediate end of the Law, and so
merited the promised reward. There must therefore be a righteousness of
conformity to the Law, whereby must be procured a right to life, as well as a
suffering of the penalty, whereby a stop is put to further punishment, which is
all that mere pardon of sin amounts to. Upon these grounds I take leave to
describe Justification an Act whereby God does acquit and accept a Sinner as
righteous unto life eternal for the righteousness of Christ, whereby he has
fulfilled the precept and suffered the penalty of the Law. Justification
actively taken is Gods Act acquitting or declaring a man righteous; passively
taken it is a man's state or relation to that Act of God, being declared and
accepted as righteous, of which as it supposes a change from a former state of
guilt and condemnation; the terminus a quo, or state from which he is
tranflated is a state of Sin and wrath; the terminus ad quem, is a state of
absolution or being righteous before God; pardon of sin or stop of punishment
is included in it, or does immediately result from it; so that Justification is
one single Act and not several concurring to make it up, though diverse things
are given or granted by it, either immediately or consequentially, as flowing
from the immediate effect or benefit of it. The main Argument against this
Doctrine is, That the Scripture does frequently describe Justification by
pardon and forgiveness, as if they were aequipollent terms: But the reason of
this is, First, Because men being sensible of sin and misery, do first look
after pardon, and therefore pardon is promised as that which will be most
welcome and comfortable to them; and also because men should be fensible of
their own guilt, and in capacity of making satisfaction to God; and therefore
that the righteousness by which they must be justified is not their own but
Christ's, nor contrived or provided by them but by God himself for them. What
then, Justification is called pardon of sin, ergo, it is nothing else but
Pardon; This is no consequence.

Object.
But the Apostle, Romans 4. fully describes Justification, the nature of it; and
he says, v. 6, 7. That Blessedness comes by forgiving, Justif. Evang. p. 27.
covering, not imputing sin.

Answ.
But he says also, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness. Now in the place here quoted, Genesis 15.6. and the context, there
is a promise of positive Blessing made to. Abraham, and he believed that
promise, and this was accounted to him for righteousness. Shall we say Abraham
believed, and this was accounted for pardon of sin? There is a positive
righteousness intimated as well as a positive act whereby it was procured and
applied, and positive promises granted thereupon. David indeed under great
horrors for his sin comforts himself most with apprehensions of forgiveness as
most suitable to his case, but what good will the fullest pardon imaginable do
a man without a certain right to eternal life, and a promise of effectual Grace
to bring him to it? will he not sin again and so lose the benefit of his former
pardon?

Object.
But a Sinner is capable of no other righteousness, but that of forgiveness.

Answ.
What then must become of the Evangelical Righteousness of Faith and Works,
which they contend for? A Sinner can have no other righteousness but mere
pardon, if it must rest upon him to satisfy or to provide satisfaction for the
Law: But does this hinder God's providing and bestowing on him the
righteousness of his Son? As a Bankrupt is capable of nothing, but to have his
debt freely forgiven him, for ought that he can do toward satisfaction, yet
this hinders not but his Friend may pay the Debt for him, and so render him
solvent in Law.

It Is once more said, Object. Iust^^. Evang. p. 35, 36.
If a Sinner be not made Righteous by pardon, but may be counted a Sinner
still, then by the same reason, when Christ his Righteousness is imputed, that
being not his own Obedience he may be counted a Sinner still, and so be
Righteous and a Sinner at the same time, which implies a loud Contradiction.

Answ.
It is no Contradiction being not eodem respectu, not in the same respect or in
the same sense: A man is a Sinner in himself and righteous in Christ, the Law
pronounces him a Sinner, and sentenceth him to death, but the Lawgiver who is
above the Law accepts Christ's fulfilling the Law for him; and thus being
admitted upon Christ's account, the Law it self must acknowledge him Righteous.

CHAP. II. The Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Believers explained and
proved.
HAving proved that to Justify is to accept as Just or Righteous, and likewise
that our own Obedience is not, cannot be, the Righteousness wherein we must
appear before God, it remains that it must be the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, for and by which we must be justified, and this is now to be
proved. But before we come to the Proof we shall briefly inquire, What we mean
by Christ's Righteousness, and what by the Imputation of it. The Righteousness
of Christ, which we say is imputed to a Sinner for his Justification, is that
Righteousness which he fulfilled or wrought in conformity to the Law of God,
whereby the Law violated by us, was fulfilled, and satisfied for us, and in our
stead, Romans 10.4. Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes. Therefore it is not the Righteousness of his Divine Person,
which is imputed to us; for that is Infinite, such as men are incapable of, and
'twas never required from them: Yet the Perfections of his Godhead do add the
meritorious Dignity to his Satisfaction. Nor is it the connate habitual
Righteousness of his Manhood: For this is presupposed to enable to the
performance of the Law, but not properly required by the Law, yet the Law
requires the preservation and exercise of perfect inherent righteousness. Adam
was created perfect to make him capable of receiving a Law of perfect
obedience; therefore that Law supposed a Holy Nature and only required
continuance in that perfection of Nature which he had received. In like manner,
it was necessary that Christ should be born with a perfect, holy Nature, that
he might undertake the fulfilling of the Law for us; and the preserving and
exercise of that Holiness once received was a part of his obedience to the Law:
but that Holiness as natural and habitual was antecedent to the obedience of
the Law, and therefore no prober part of it. Christ's Righteousness then which
is imputed to us, is his Holy Life in obedience to the Law of God, and his
voluntary obediential suffering the Penalties of the Law unto death it self,
for us and in our stead. By the latter he made satisfaction for our sins and
breach of the Law, and by the former he fulfilled the Law in the proper and
principal design of it, and thereby purchased eternal life, which was promised
by the Law to them that fulfill it. By obeying the substance of the Moral Law,
as given to Mankind and suffering death, the Penalty thereof, he satisfied the
Law and wrought Righteousness for men in general; and by obeving the Jewish
Law, and suffering the penalties, and that kind of death threatened, and
accursed particularly by ^t, he wrought righteousness for the Jews, Gal. 4.4,
5. Now when we say, This Righteousness of Christ is imputed to Believes,
reckoned or accounted theirs, Romans 4.3. (...) we do not mean, that they are
accounted to have done and suffered those Actions and Penalties which Christ
was Author of and endured. Christ and Believers are still distinct, natural
persons, and so the actions and passions of one person cannot be reckoned
properly the actions and passions of the other: Nor do we teach, by imputing
Christ's Righteousness to Believers, that God looks upon them as if they had
done and suffered in their own persons what Christ did in his, in any proper
sense. For Christ only is accounted the Author of his own Righteousness, and
though Believers be justified by it, yet the honor of working that
righteousness, and of being the proper subject of its Inherence belongs to
Christ alone. But by Imputation we mean, that God accounts the Righteousness
of Christ to have been wrought by him for every one that believes, and does
justify or accept them to life eternal: for that very righteousness believed
or trusted in, according to the promise of the Gospel, and so Christ's
Righteousness is reckoned theirs, or reckoned to them, put to their account, as
if it were theirs, not efficienter, but effective; not as if they had wrought
it, but that they may have the full benefit of it, and be justified by it as
effectually as if they had obeyed the Law perfectly in their own persons. This
is that which our Divines mean by saying Christ righteousness is ours in law,
that Christ and Believer are one in Law, viz. that the Law ^f God is as truly
and sully satisfied for us by ^he righteousness of Christ, as if we had
fulfilled it our selves; and that God being pleased ^o admit of the fulfilling
of the Law by Christ ^or us, the Law does pronounce us righteous and Heirs of
life, for that righteousness which Christ wrought in obedience to it. In this
^ence also they say, That the very formal righteousness of Christ is a
Believers righteousness or imputed to him, viz. not that a Believer is reckoned
to have wrought that righteousness as an efficient cause of it, nor that
Christ's righteousness is transfused into him, implanted in him, as the subject
of inherence, ^ut that the very righteousness which Christ wrought was intended
and wrought for him by the Son, and is accepted for him by the Father, that he
is justified for it and entitled to life eternal. Christ is the efficient and
the subject of Inherence of his own active and passive obedience, but the
immediate benefit of it as satisfactory to the Law is a Believers, and he is
the subject of it, a subject of external denomination; he is denominated
righteous from that righteousness wrought for him and accepted in his behalf.
Thus it is not forma inhaerens, but denominans, not an internal but an external
Form. When a Debtor is discharged, his Surety paying the Debt, the Debtor
cannot properly be said to be the Author of the payment; he paid not the Money,
'twas not his but the Sureties, yet the Money being paid for him, in his stead,
for his benefit, by the Surety, and accepted for him, instead of his payment,
by the Creditor, he is a subject of denomination and may be truly accounted a
clear and solvent person and the payment imputed to him, placed to his account,
as really and as fully as if he had paid it with his own hand and with his own
money.

Hence some call the Righteousness of Christ the Formal Cause of our
Justification, Vid. Whitaker de Ecclesia p. 460, 461. Synop. Leidens. disput.
33. Th. 21, 23.
and others the Matter or Material Cause; both mean the same thing, viz. That
Christ's righteousness is the very thing for which we are accepted and justified
before God. I will not contend about terms of Art, in so great a point whereon
Salvation depends, yet it seems more logical to say; In Justification, man in
the Matter or Subject, viz. the Person justified, Christ's righteousness is the
Form, that by which he is constituted righteous, or just before God:
Imputation, Gods accepting this righteousness for him, is as the Union betwixt
the Matter and the Form, even the Application of Christ's righteousness to the
person justified: God the Father is the Efficient, accepting or acquitting him
for the sake of Christ's righteousness. The Promise of the Gospel is the medium
whereby this righteousness is conveyed; and Faith the instrument or disposition
in the subject whereby it is rendered capable of receiving Christ's righteousness
or having it imputed to him: And Justification is the Condition or State of a
Man accepted with God to life eternal through the righteousness of Christ
imputed to him. From ^^ence I inser, that Imputation of Christ's righteousness
and Justification is all one and but ^^e real Act, and so Arctius defines it:
Justi^atio est imputatio justitiae alienae gratuita, Lib. Probl. loc. 25.
fa^^a a Deo, respectu meriti Filii Dei, ad salutem ^^ni credenti. Some learned
men make Justication to consist of 2 Acts. The First whereby Christ's
righteousness is imputed to a Sin^er; The Second whereby his sins are forgiven
and he accepted for the sake of that righteousness: But this makes it more
perplexed that it is to impute righteousness. We are righteous with the
righteousness of Christ, ^^t in a Physical sense as if it were inherent or
adherent to us, but judicially. We are accepted as righteous, i. e. discharged
from punishment, and entitled to life for it, and this (...) to be justified.
We may indeed make it Formal Acts, or formally distinct; the one thereby
Christ's righteousness is placed to our account, or reckoned to be done for us;
the ^ther, whereby we are accepted or entitled (...) life for that
righteousness: But it is really ^^e same thing, to account Christ's righteous^^
be wrought for us to satisfy and fulfill the ^aw of God, and to accept us and
give us ^ight to life for that righteousness. God in ^s Promise proposes life
to Sinners, on the account of Christ's satisfaction, in which when ^^ey believe
and trust, there is by virtue of that Promise a Grant and Title to life made
other to them, and hereby righteousness is imputed to them, or they are
justified, Thus, Romans 4, 2. When the Apostle would prove Abraham was not
justified by Works, he says, v. 3. Faith was imputed to him for Righteousness:
Then to justify or impute Christ's righteousness is all one, and God accounts
us righteous for this righteousness, i. e. God justifies or gives us eternal
life for Christ's righteousness, and frees us from condemnation Nor is Christ
first given to us and then his right ousness as some speak, as if we were
actually interessed in Christ's Person before we are his righteousness. God
works Faith in the Heart which apprehends the promise of li^^ through the
righteousness of Christ, and hereby we are accepted and justified, and this
righteousness is thus made ours or given to us and no other way. Afterward we
are adopted and receive the Spirit of Sons by which Spirit we are united to
Christ as to our Hear and the Fountain of Spiritual Life, and the Christ is
most properly given to us, or w^^ are actually interessed in his person; in
whom all the Elect have some interest before on the account of Election, but
this was not actual and proper.

These things thus explained, the Question betwixt us and our Opposites is
plainly th^^ Whether God justifies men and entitled them Life for the
Righteousness which Christ wrought in fulfilling and suffering the Penalties of
the Law? The Affirmative is the Protestant Doctrine, and now to be proved.

Argument 1.
1. I argue from the Parallel of Christ and Adam: Christ is called the Second
Adam, the Second Man, 1 Cor. 15.45, 47. Adam was the Figure of him who was to
come, viz. Christ, Romans 5.14. Whence is this but in respect of the general
Influence of what they did upon the rest of Markind. Hence I argue: As Adam's
Disobedience condemned men, so Christ's Obedience acquitteth and justifies
them: But the very Acts of Adam's Disobedience are imputed to men to their
Condemnation, they are condemned for them; therefore they that believe, have
the very righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and by that are justified.
The Major is largely proved by the Apostle, Romans 5.12. ad finem; where he
shows, That Justification and Life come into the World, in like manner as
Death and Condemnation did, each by a common Person, and by them derived upon
the rest of Mankind. As many were made Sinners, (...), by one Man's Obedience,
so by the Obedience of one many shall be made righteous, (...) v. 19. They are
constituted righteous and unrighteous in the same manner; unrighteous by Adams
disobedience, righteous by the obedience of Christ. But this I suppose will not
be denied, and he that denies the Minor, viz. That Adams disobedience is
imputed to us as the immediate Cause of our Condemnation is a down right
Pelagian. But because i^ this Age all the Foundations are destroyed, we shall
prove it from the forecited Text, Romans 5.12. where the Apostle affirms, That
by one man Sin and death entered into the World, and Death passed upon all men;
(...), whether we translate it, (...), i^ whom all have sinned, (as the the
Fathers did against the Palagians) meaning Adam, (...) whom all his Posterity
sinned, or in quantum, for as much as all men have sinned; the Sense is all
one: Sin and Death came upon all men from one man, i. e. Adam, and therefore
they were all made Sinners in him and by him. But this is clearer v. 15. where
it is said, Many are dead by the Offense of this one man, viz. Adam; And v. 26.
The Judgment or Sentence unto Condemnation came by one man, (...): and v. 17.
Death reigned, had its full power upon Man kind by means of this one Man: And
v. 18. By the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all to condemnation, all are
condemned for his Offense: And v. 89. The reason is, because by that one man's
disobedience, peccatores instituti sunt, they are made, constituted Sinners;
whence the Argument is strong: All men be condemned, dead, sentenced, adjudged
to death for the Sin of Adam; therefore that sin is accounted theirs, imputed
to them, not as if they had personally been the Actors of that Sin, or that it
did inhere or adhere properly to them, but Adams sinning as the Head of Man
kind, and as it were for all men, they are accounted to have sinned in him, so
as to incur all the punishment of his Sin. Now let it be observed that ex
adverso in like manner comes the Gift of Life, of Justification, and the Gift
of Righteousness by Jesus Christ; by his Obedience men are made righteous,
justi constitutisunt, are constituted righteous: But men were made Sinners by
Adams Sin, and so fell under the Sentence of death, before they sinned in their
own persons, without their own personal disobedience, through being destitute
of grace they must needs sin, and so add to their punishment: Therefore they
that believe are made righteous in Christ, with his Righteousness before any
personal righteousness in them, without the condition of their own obedience:
though being made righteous in Christ, they receive grace to be obedient, and
so to be fit to receive the Inheritance given them in Christ.

Object.
It is objected by a learned and grave Person, that in this place, v. 19. we are
not said to be justified with Christ's Obedience, Hotchkis, ut supra. p. 43, 44.
but by it, and that by signifies an efficient or meritorious cause, but with
a formal cause; and that we may be said to be justified by the Obedience of
Christ, as it merited Justification upon the Terms of the Gospel, but not with
it as imputed to us.

Answ.
Forgetfulness of Grammar is no wonder, scarce a fault in his Age; but that
tells us, that the Preposition (...) here used ((...)) when construed with a
Genitive Case does signify cum with, as well as per by, and gives this
example, (...) cum gladiis: The same also say the Lexicons. So then by the
favor of the Greek word we may translate it with the Obedience of one, many
are made Righteous. Moreover by signifies the formal Cause, which is causa per
quam; and with an Instrumental Cause, Part 1. p. 229, 230.
not a Formal, as has been showed: And thus this distinction is grounded upon
a mistake both in Grammar and Logic. But he farther says that here is no word
of Imputation or imputing Christ's Obedience to us, and that it is barely said,
By his Obedience we are made Righteous. I answer; It is necessarily implied, we
are made righteous by the Obedience of Christ, as we were made Sinners by the
Disobedience of Adam, but his Disobedience made us Sinners by imputation, or
being imputed to us: ergo, the Comparison is expressly (...). If this Authors
sense be admitted in the latter words, it must be affixed also to the former,
i. e. If we are made righteous by Christ's Obedience only, because he merited
that we should be justified if we obey the Gospel; then it must follow, we are
made Sinners by Adam's Disobedience, only because he merited by his Fall, that
if we sinned we also should perish: If Christ only brought in a way of
righteousness how we might be justified if we observed it, then Adam only
brought in a way of Sin, how men might be condemned, if they trod in his Steps;
but this is absurd. To return, that Adam's Sin is properly imputed to us I
farther prove from Ephesians. 2.3. We were by Nature Children of wrath even as others
(...), as the rest of men. Grotius his gloss upon these words, viz. That the
Apostle means only the Gentiles, who were born out of the Church and out of
the Covenant, and therefore were by nature Children of Wrath, is against the
words of the Text. For the Apostle having spoken of the Gentiles in the two
former verses, puts himself and the Jews into the same condition in this
verse, saying, Amongst whom we all had our Conversation in times past, and we
were by nature (...) Children of wrath, even as the rest. All men therefore are
by nature Children of wrath, i. e. are born Heirs of wrath under the Sentence
of Condemnation. For as Children of Life, Children of the Kingdom, signify
those that are Heirs, under the Promise of Life, so Children of Wrath are those
that are Heirs under the Sentence of Condemnation. Now I demand how all men
should come under the sentence of condemnation and inherit it as their natural
(though woeful) Birthright, unless Adams Fall be sharged upon them, and so as
soon as they have a Being derived from him in a natural way, the Sentence
pronounced against him, is ^n force against them also. Suppose God might justly
have deprived all Mankind descending from Adam, of his present Favor, and of
the Gifts and Graces, Privileges and Benefits which Adam enjoyed, because Adam
had forfeited them, and could not therefore leave them to be enjoyed to his
Posterity. A^ a Father spending or forfeiting his own Inheritance and Honors
does deprive his Children of them, though they are not therefore made guilty of
his Offense; yet how will it consist with Justice, besides the loss of all
Privileges, to adjudge, sentence men to death, before any Trial is made of
their Obedience, whether they will not do better than Adam did, or a^ least do
something that in their forlorn Estate may move some compassion to them, and
mitigate their misery. This is our Case, we are born Heirs of Death; Judgment
and Condemnation is past upon all men, takes hold of them as soon as they are
men: How can this be without any guilt chargeable upon them? and if there be
any it must be the guilt of Adams Fall: Ezekiel. 18.20.
God declared that the Son should not die for the Fathers Sin; it would
certainly be high injustice in men to deprive the Posterity of an Offender for
ever, not only of their Fathers Inheritance, but of all possibility of return
and recovery of themselves, so that they should ever be dealt with as
Malefactors. Much more is it consistent with Divine Justice to punish all
Mankind, not only with the loss of Adams Privileges, but with Eternal Death
inevitably (for any thing the Law provideth to the contrary) merely because
they descended from him without trying or expecting how they would behave
themselves. There must therefore be a Guilt upon all men by nature, viz. the
Guilt of Adams Sin, and that must be imputed to them; and if that be imputed,
then Christ's Righteousness is imputed also to them that believe. Moreover, if
Adams Sin be not imputed to us, then are we not guilty of the breach of the
First Covenant, ^en we were never obliged to yield perfect obedience, nor is
the want of it properly a ^^ in us, and so men are born in such a forworn and
lost state as the Scripture prescribes ^^em to be. The reason of the
consequence is, ^e were never under the first Covenant in ^r own persons, it
was made with Adam, ^t with us; and if his breach of it be not impted to us, it
must follow that the Covenant is intended for him only, not for his Posteri^^;
his Obedience should not have profited them to Justification, as well as his
Disobedience not hurt them to condemnation; and ^^s the Covenant of Works is
wholly made and by Adams Fall, nor was it ever renewed a Covenant of Life.
Moreover, Mr. Baxter's Preface to the Treat of the 2 Covenants, p. 2, 3.
our Opposites teach that the Covenant of Grace was ^^de with all Mankind,
immediately after (...) Fall they had all new Terms of Life given ^^m in
Christ: If then Adams Sin be not im^^ed to his Posterity, they have indeed lost
^^se blessed Privileges which Adam sinned ^^ay, and so could not convey to
them, but ^^y were not at all obliged to the Covenant of ^^fect obedience, but
were all immediately in under the Covenant of Grace, and are ^^y to answer for
their neglect of, and disobedience to that. Thus much for the first argument
from the Imputation of Adam's

Argument 2.
Christ was made subject to, Bradshaw de Just. c. 18.
and fulfilled the Law to which Man was subject, and the which Man had broken:
Ergo, his Obedience of Righteousness is imputed to us: For he was not made
subject to that Law for his own sa^^ but for ours, nor did he fulfill it for
himself but for us; he fulfilled it not simply as a general Law of Obedience,
but as the Law give to Man and broken by him; therefore what he did in this
case was done in Man's stead, a^^ to be imputed to him for his Righteousness
that the Curse of the Law might be remove and the Blessing of the Law might
descend up on Mankind.

Sermon of the Salvation of Mankind, Vid. Homilies of the Church of England.
and Christ is the Righteousness of all them that (...) truly believe in him:
He for them paid the Ransom by his Death: He for them fulfilled (...) Law in
his Life: So that now in him and (...) him every true Christian Man may be
called Fulfiller of the Law, forasmuch as that which their Infirmities lacked,
Christ's Justice has supplied. But this consequence will not (...) denied, it is
the Antecedent that must be proved, viz. That Christ fulfilled the Law wh^^ was
given to and broken by Man, and that was made Subject to that Law. For to av^^
this Argument our Authors have devised new Notion; That Christ fulfilled not
the Law as given to Man, knowing that then his Righteousness must be imputed to
Man, but the teach that Christ fulfilled only a particular Law given to
himself, which they call the Law of a Mediator, which consists so much of the
Law given to Mankind in general, and of so much of the Jewish Law as the Father
thought fit to appoint him to perform, and also of some particular precepts
peculiar to Christ alone, wherein Men were not concerned; which Law if Christ
would fulfill, Men should have a New Covenant of Life given them: But they
could not be justified by his fulfilling this Law, because it contained not all
things to which they were obliged; and moreover did contain some things
peculiar to Christ in which Men were not concerned. It must therefore be
proved, That Christ was obliged to and did fulfill the Law of perfect Obedience
given to Men, and the Jewish Law which concerned that Nation. It is sometimes
said by our Opposites, That Christ is our Legal Righteousness, that
Righteousness which the Law of Works required of us: If so, then he must have
fulfilled and satisfied that Law; but this has been touched before: I argue
therefore, Christ was subject to the Law of Mankind, else he needed not to have
been Man: The only reason why Christ was made Man is, that the same Nature that
sinned, might also satisfy for Sin; it must therefore be by fulfilling that
Law which concerned Humane Nature. For if any other way of satisfaction might
be admitted, why might it not be accepted from a Person of another Nature that
was not Man? If there was no necessity that the Law broken by Man should be
fulfilled, but that it was sufficient that something should be done to repair
God's Honor some other way, though his Law was not properly satisfied: Why
might it not have been enough if Christ as God only without assuming any
created Nature, would have undertaken to conquer the Devils, to bring all
Mankind to Repentance, to accept once of Pardon, and to restore them to perfect
Obedience again: This would have repaired the Honor of God and of the Law, as
much or more than the procuring a New Covenant of Salvation for Sinners, which
for any thing Christ did merit, might have never took effect in any: Why might
not this have served without his taking Man's Nature upon him? Moreover the
Angels are obliged by the same general Law of Love to God and their Fellow
creatures that Men are; though the particular Wages of exercising it be
different. If then it were enough that Christ fulfilled some Generals of the
Law without being obliged to all the Particulars that concerned Men, why might
it not have sufficed him to have taken the Nature of Angels, and not to have
come down into this miserable World, for in that he might have performed the
Law of a Mediator. However, a fortiori he needed not to have been the Son of
Adam born of a Woman and in the same condition with other men, or to have taken
upon him the Form of a Servant, Phil. 2.7. He might have been immediately
created as Adam was, and not have derived his Nature from him, if it were not
that he must be subject to the same Law which Adam had broken. It is said, Gal.
4.4. That God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. If
Christ could not redeem the Jews without being born a Jew, subject to their
Law, then neither could he redeem the Sons of Adam in general, without being
himself the Son of Adam, subject to the same Law that he was. I argue also from
the Nature of the Law; The End of the Law was Obedience, and for failure that
the Penalty of it should be suffered; and this was the absolute established
Decree, or Sanction of God: It must therefore be fulfilled by some one, it was
not done by Men, therefore it must be by Christ. To say that some of it was
fulfilled and some Honor done to it by the Mediatorial Law is of small moment;
for this did not fulfill it or satisfy the End of it: The Law as a Law and as
a Covenant betwixt God and Man was clearly laid aside if Christ fulfilled it
not, and all Mankind after the Fall were by him brought under a Covenant of
Grace, and so the Law is made void by Faith, contrary to the Apostle, Romans
3.31. Our Savior also testified of himself, Mat. 5.17. That he came not to
destroy, but to fulfill the Law: This was the End of his coming into the World,
and his fulfilling was his obeying, performing the Law as he had said before,
Mat. 3.15. It becomes us to fulfill all Righteousness: Therefore he was
Baptized, and therefore much more ought he to observe the Law which was of
ancienter Institution. This is confirmed by the Reason he gives for his
fulfilling the Law, Mat. 5.18. viz. That not one Jota or Tittle of the Law
should pass away till all was fulfilled, though Heaven and Earth might pass
away. The Sanction of the Law is more stable than the Ordinances of Heaven and
Earth, and must attain its End: Therefore every Child of Adam must be subject
to it. Our Savior adds, v. 19, 20. That he was so far from relaxing of the
Law, that on the contrary he affirmed, whosoever should break the least
Commands, and teach others so, should be shut out of Heaven: Nay that he
required a stricter Observation of it than the Scribes and Pharisees for all
their pretended severities in some things. Now that all this was meant of the
Law as given by Moses, chiefly of the Moral Law, is manifest by his proceeding
to expound and vindicate the Commandments in his following Discourse, v. 21. to
the end, from the slight Comments of their present Teachers. In like manner
when it is said, Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to all them
that believe, Romans 10.4. It is meant of the Law of Moses; for it is immediately
added, v. 5. Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law, that the Man that
does them shall live in them. Now Christ is the End of the Law, not simply by
waving it and disannulling its Obligation; for then the Law should not have its
End, nor be unchangeable as he had told us it was: but He is the End of it for
righteousness to them that believe by fulfilling it in his own person for them;
so that, their Righteousness or Justification may not depend upon their own
Obedience to it. Again Christ redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13.
being made a Curse for us. How was Christ made a Curse but by bearing the
Penalty of the Law for Sin? For the Curse is not only the Matter of Punishment,
the evil inflicted, but formal punishment, viz. Evil inflicted for Sin, for the
satisfaction of Justice and the violated Law. Now how came this Curse to fall
upon Christ? Even by the Law it self adjudging him to it. For thus the Apostle
argues, v. 10. They that are of the Works of the Law, under the power of it,
are under the Curse. And v. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law by being made a Curse for us. This is the Argument, Men cannot be justified
by the Law, for that curses all that are under it; but we shall be justified
by Faith in Christ, v. 12. because he bore the Curse of the Law for us. He must
therefore be under the Law as we were. And it is further proved, because it is
written, i. e. the Law says, Cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree. Deuteronomy.
21.23.
What is this to the Death of Christ, if he were not under the Law? And if he
were under the Jewish Law which pronounced the Death of the Cross accursed in
special manner, then by the same reason, he was under the Law of Adam, which
pronounced Death in general as a Curse for Sin. Lastly, If the Sufferings of
Christ were not inflicted by virtue of the Law of Works, then they were not
Penal, nor had they any thing of God's wrath in them, for it was that Law only
that threatened a Curse: They were only Prudential, viz. that something should
be suffered which that Law threatened, that so it might decently be laid aside.
Now if Christ were subject to the Law as to the Curse, he was also subject to
the Precept, and so his Obedience was in our stead, and therefore to be imputed
to us for our Justification. We were not obliged to the Law of a Mediator;
Christ fulfilled not that in our stead, if then he did and suffered any thing
in our stead, it was in obedience to our Law, and so to be placed to our
Account.

CHAP. III. More Arguments to prove the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to
us.
Argument 3.
THirdly, I argue from those Scriptures which call Christ our Righteousness,
and say we have Righteousness in him. He is not our Righteousness inherently,
his Righteousness is not implanted in us, therefore it is ours by imputation or
not at all, Isai. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say in the Lord have I
Righteousness and Strength. This is a Prophecy of Christ and Salvation by him,
which is to be brought about by this means, viz. having Righteousness and
Strength in him. If we translate it as some do, In the Lord there is
Righteousness and Strength; the sense is the same; but our Translation agrees
best with the following Verse. Now how have we strength in Christ? Surely he
communicates grace and life to us, and does not only procure and grant a
Covenant of Grace; he must likewise communicate Righteousness to us, and that
his own, not a Righteousness wrought in us, or else it is not distinct from
grace or strength mentioned in the Text, which the next words also confirm, In
the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. It is a
justifying Righteousness distinct from Grace or Strength infused into us which
we have in Christ, and this cannot be ours but by Imputation.

Jeremiah 23.5, 6. This is the Name whereby Israel shall call him, The Lord our
Righteousness. Who this is, the former words show, sc. the Righteous Branch to
be raised up to David, i. e. Christ: as also the Reason of this Name, because
in his days, his People shall be saved, and chiefly with a Spiritual Salvation;
this is because he is Jehovah our Righteousness. Our Salvation springs
primarily from hence, That we are made righteous or justified before God, and
this righteousness comes from Christ. As God is our Wisdom, our Strength, etc.
because he is the Author of it in us and to us, as also our Guide and
Protector; so Christ is our righteousness, i e. the Author of righteousness to
us, and that he will justify us by it.

Object.
Some object against this, That in chap. 33. v. 15, 16. Jerusalem the Church
seems to be called by the same Name: This is the Name whereby she shall be
called, The Lord our Righteousness.

Answ.
But the Context shows that it speaks of the same Person, and almost in the
same words, sc. the righteous Branch of David, etc. And therefore learned men
translate it, This is the name of him, who shall call her, viz. The Church, The
Lord our Righteousness: So Junius translates it, also the Geneva and the Dutch
Annotions and others; but if it be meant of the hurch, as Mr. Gataker contends
it must, Gataker in locum.
it only because the Name of Christ is put upon or, as being clothed with his
Righteousness the New Jerusalem, the Gospel Church, named Jehovah Shammah, the
Lord is there, ^^om his Presence in her, and as God himself pleased to take
upon himself the Name of ^^s People. Ps. 24.6. Ezekiel. 48.35.
This is the Generation (...) them that seek thy Face O Jacob, i. e. the ^^^d
of Jacob.

Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined ^^on thy People, and upon thy Holy
City to finish the Transgression, and to make an end of ^^ins, and to make
reconciliation for Iniquity, and (...) bring in Everlasting Righteousness.
Daniel ^^d prayed for the deliverance of the Jews, ^^d the forgiveness of their
Sins, and that not ^^r the sake of their own Righteousness, but ^^ods great
Mercy, v. 18, 19. He is answer^^d that the City shall be built again, and the
people saved by the Messiah, v. 25. and that (...) his being cut off, not for
himself, v. 26. ^^plying that it should be for them, and that ^^en should be
brought in everlasting Righteousness whereby Israel should be justified and
^^ved. This is the Righteousness of the Mes^^ah, for none else is a standing
and everlasting ^ighteousness: Ours is mutable and subject (...) fail, Hos.
6.4. Neither was our righteousness in special manner to be brought in by ^^e
Death of Christ, it had been before in the Sanctified in all Ages of the
Church. It was a new Righteousness then to be wrought and brought in at the
Death of Christ; though by the Virtue of it the former Saints were saved, yet
it was not actually wrought, and Justification by it distinctly declared till
now. Therefore it is all one with finishing transgression, making an end of
sin, making reconciliation for the people, which is plainly Justification to be
had by this Everlasting Righteousness.

Romans 5.18, 19. As by the offense of one, Judgment came upon all men to
condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life. All men were condemned by the offense or sin of
Adam: So they that believe shall be justified by the righteousness of Christ;
the free gift o^ grant of life comes by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, as
the sentence of death came by Adams unrighteousness. The 19 v. makes it
clearer: As by the disobedience of one many are made sinners, so by the
obedience of one many shall be made righteous. Adam did not make way by his Sin
for men's condemnation, he did not only render them liable to death if they
should sin as he did and break the same Covenant: But he brought them under the
Curse and Sentence of death absolutely by and for his Sin, so that all that are
of his Seed are under the Judgment of Condemnation ipso facto as soon as they
have a Being: In like manner Christ must not only make way for men's
Justification, or procure them a Covenant, whereby they shall be justified if
they perform it, as he performed the Covenant of a Mediator; but he must also
justify them, entitle them to life, so soon as they believe in him, by and for
his own Righteousness and Obedience. One Exception against this place has been
answered in the former Chapter.

Another excepteth: Object.
The Apostle does not say, IN one man's obedience many shall be made righteous,
Just. Evang. p. 72.
but BY one man's obedience (as a consequent and effect of it) many shall be
made righteous. As the effect of one man's disobedience, many come to be shapen
in iniquity, and brought forth in a sinful condemned nature; so as the effect
of one man's obedience many come to be new born and brought forth in a Righteous
and Saving State.

Answ.
The vanity of the exception from the word BY has been manifested before. The
Preposition (...) here used, signifies BY or WITH, which is the proper sense
of the place; the term IN would be more obscure: And thus (...) is translated,
Romans 14.20. To him that eats, (...), with offense; but the Sum of this
Exception is as it is largely prosecuted, p. 68. etc. That Adams personal
disobedience is not imputed to his Posterity; but he virtually containing all
men in his Nature and Sinning before the Act of Propagation, he did corrupt his
Nature, and so begat Children in a sinful mortal State. But I have before
proved the Imputation of his Actual Sin. I now add, Do Mankind derive a sinful
mortal Nature from Adam by mere necessity of Nature, seeing the effect must be
like the cause? or by virtue of Divine Constitution that his Posterity should
inherit the Fruits of his Sin? If by necessity of Nature (as this Author seems
to intimate) then the Soul of Man must be ex traduce derived from the Parents;
else it could not be born sinful by necessity of Nature, and then it must be
corrupted with the Body, and cannot exist without it, and at best must be
raised with the Body, and sleep in the dust till the last day (as the Socinians
teach:) Nor would the want of original righteousness, no nor positive
dispositions to sin in our Nature as derived from Adam be sinful in us, they be
poena and causa peocati, the Punishment of Adams Sin, and the cause of Sin in
us, but not peccatum, our Sin, no more than the natural Diseases of the Body,
which we derive from our Parents; For that which comes by mere natural
necessity cannot be a Sin: But if it be by Divine Constitution, then the
meaning must be, either that God appointed that if Adam should sin that one
Sin, then not only he should perish, but that he should also propagate a
sinful, mortal Nature to all his Seed without exception; and then the sin and
misery of all Mankind is directly and properly the punishment of Adams personal
sin only: which, besides the horror of the thing, that so many millions in all
Ages should be made miserable both here and for ever, as the punishment of
another man's Sin, in which they were no way concerned, is also against Gods own
Law. The Children shall not be put to death for the Fathers, nor the Fathers
for the Children, but ^very man for his own sin, Deuteronomy. 24.16. Or ^lse this
Constitution must mean that God appointed that Adam shall stand or fall for all
his ^osterity, and then his Obedience or Disobedience must be imputed to them
and be Cause ^f their life or death, even the immediate Cause.

Object.
Some say this Obedience of Christ is only is Sufferings according as he is said
to be obedient to the death, Phil. 2.6. and to have ^^me to do the Will of God
in offering up his ^wn Body, Heb. 10. v. 6. to the 11th.

Answ. 1.
This makes nothing against our main posi^^on, viz. That the Righteousness of
Christ is ^^puted to us, and we justified by it: For ^hether it be his Death
only, or his Life and ^eath both, for which we are accepted and ^stified it is
all one in this Question, so long (...) imputation of that Righteousness to us
be ^e way whereby it justifies us: And if they ^ean that his Sufferings are his
only obedience here mentioned to make us righteous by ^^ocuring a Covenant of
Grace to be fulfilled ^^ us; then they might as well have said, His ^^tive
Obedience without his Sufferings does ^^ake us righteous: For the Text leads to
^^e no more than the other. And Mr. True^^an when he had disputed against the
Imputation of Christ's Active Obedience, and for the Passive only, and yet that
must be only to procure a Law of Grace; afterward fairly grants, That in this
sense, viz. of procuring the Covenant of Grace, both Active and Passive may be
said to be imputed to us.

2ly. But the words will not bear this sense Adam's Actual disobedience made us
formally Sinners, and guilty of death: So the Obedience i. e. the Sufferings of
Christ, procures right to life for us. Thus they must run, but when is the
Parallel? The Sufferings of Christ can not be said to make us righteous
formally, a^ this Author tells; Sufferings are not righteousness; much less
suffering the Penaltys o^ the Law for the breach of it; but Christ suffered the
Curse of the Law for our sin against it his Sufferings delivered us from the
Curse o^ the Law, it having been born by him; but could not make us righteous
according to the Law, that we should obtain the reward (...) Life: It is true
Christ was obedient in his Sufferings, and did the Will of his Father in
offering himself; if they had not been voluntary and obediential, they could
not have been meritorious, but that his Sufferings as suffering of the Penalty
of the Law are his only Obedience that justifies us, or that he performe^ no
other obedience for us, does not follo^ at all.

1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, that he that glories, may glory in the Lord.
Here is expressed that God has made Christ our righteousness, sc. by giving him
to satisfy the Law for us; and accepting us for his righteousness: And here we
may observe, that the Apostle purposely proves against the despisers of
Christ; the Greeks who boasted of their own Wisdom, and the Jews who trusted in
their own Works, v. 22, 23. that Believers have all in Christ, v. 24. and that
they are in themselves, weak, foolish, nothing, v. 25.28, 29. all their
excellency is in, and from Christ, and therefore their righteousness and
Justification, as well as their Sanstification. Farther observe, that
Righteousness here is distinguished from Wisdom and Sanctification, and
therefore must mean that Christ is our justifying Righteousness, or that we are
justified by Christ as our righteousness; ^f we were to be justified by our
habitual and ^ctual holiness as the Condition of the Gospel, ^hen righteousness
and sanctification are all ^ne.

Lastly, The Apostle says we have all these ^n Christ, that he that glories,
may glory in the Lord: We may glory in Christ, in that we ^ave all grace from
him; but how shall we glory in him as to our Justification, if we be not
justified by his Righteousness, but by our own, though wrought by the help of
his grace; even as Adam if he had kept the Law of Works, would have been
justified by his own righteousness, and might have gloried in himself, that he
had done his duty, though it was by the power of the grace and assistance of
God.

2 Cor. 5.21. Christ was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Here righteousness by a usual Hebraism is put for
righteous: we are made the righteous of God, i. e. before God, or acceptable
with him in Christ, by or through Christ, as (...) with a Dative case is often
used: and how are we made righteous by Christ? even by his being made sin for
us, as he satisfied for our sin, so by that satisfaction are we made righteous;
as he that knew no sin was sacrificed, punished for our sins: so we that had no
righteousness, are made righteous by him, and this must be by imputation. Thus
B, Usher out of Claud. and Sedul. in locum. That this righteousness therefore
is not ours, nor in us, but in Christ, in whom we are considered as Members in
the Head: Non nostra, non in nobis, sed in Christo quasi Membra in Capite. Rel.
Just. p. 15.

Object.
Against these two Scriptures it is excepted, that in the former it is only
said, that Christ is made our righteousness, Hotchkis, p. 191.
not that his obedience is imputed to us for righteousness.

Answ.
Christ cannot be made our Righteousness any other way, than by imputing his
perfect Obedience to us, and therefore the Scripture in saying the one in words
says the other also in sense.

Object.
To the latter place, it is said, That it says only that we are made righteous
by Christ being made a Sin Offering for us, not by imputing his Obedience to us.

Answ.
If Christ was made a Sacrifice for our Sins, then our Sins were so imputed to
him as that he was punished for them; and if this make us righteous, then his
bearing the Punishment of Sin is imputed to us, and so his Righteousness is
imputed.

Phil. 3.8, 9. That I may win Christ, and be found in him not having my own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. The Apostle in this place
exhorts to rejoice in the Lord, i. e. Christ, v. 1. and to beware of
Judaising Christians who joined the Works of the Law with Christ, v. 2. saying,
That true Believers are the true Circumcision, the true people of God, even
they who rejoice in Christ and have no confidence in the Flesh, i. e. their own
Works, v. 3. And then reckoning up what he had to allege for himself from the
observation of the Ceremonial and Moral Law, v. 4, 5, 6. he says, That he
counted all this loss for Christ, v. 7. and not only what might be alleged
from observing the Law, but whatever else might be thought excellent or a
ground of self-confidence and rejoicing, v. 8. Yea doubtless and I count all
things but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus, etc. that
I may win Christ and be found in him, etc. From hence it appears that the
Apostle speaks of Justification by Christ in opposition to being justified by
any thing else, and of rejoicing in him contrary to any rejoicing in our
selves. In the 9th. v. therefore he opposes being found in Christ, to having
his own Righteousness which is of the Law, sc. of any works whatsoever, and
explaineth it by having the Righteousness of Faith, the Righteousness which is
of God by Faith: What can the Righteousness of God mean when opposed to his own
Righteousness of the Law, but either the Righteousness of him which is God, or
a Righteousness which God provideth for him, and which he did not work himself,
which is Christ's. Also the Righteousness of Faith is opposed to the
Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of God by Faith opposed to the
same Righteousness of the Law, must be a Righteousness which God gives us by
believing; and this is the Righteousness of Christ imputed.

Object.
It is excepted, By the Law he means the Jewish Law, and by his own
Righteousness he means that which was his own when a Jew, Hotchkis, p. 190.
not that which was his own when a Convert to the Christian Faith; and that the
things there opposed are Judaism and Christianity, or Judaical Observances, and
the practical knowledge of Christ; so that our own Evangelical Righteousness is
not there opposed to the Obedience of Christ.

1. Answ.
If the Apostle here only compare the Jewish and Christian Religion, then all
he means is that the Christian Religion is far more excellent than the
Jewish; but he cannot oppose them properly in the matter of Justification. For
the sincere Practice of the Jewish Religion did justify the Jews (according to
this opinion) as well as the Practice of Christian Religion justified
Christians. Yea methinks these Authors who (some of them) can allow the
Idolatrous Heathens to be justified by their obedience to the Law of Nature,
and hope in God's Mercy, though they have no express knowledge of Christ,
should not deny that Jews may be saved by their Religion and their Hope in the
Messiah, if they be only ignorant who he is and not malicious against him: If
so, there must be more meant by opposing Faith to the Works of the Law, then
the Law merely as Jewish.

2ly. The Apostle does not only renounce the Works of the Jewish Law, but all
other things which may be thought matter of confidence in our selves, v. 8.

3ly. There is the same reason for the renouncing Christian, as Jewish Works in
Justification, and those are Works of the Flesh when trusted and rejoiced in as
well as these. For the Moral Law is the same to Christians as it was to the
Jews, and all the Evangelical Precepts were the same to the Jews as to us; if
then they could not justify them, they cannot justify us. But if this Author
intend only the Ceremonial Law, it is contrary to the Text; for after mention
of the External Rights and Privileges, the Apostle says, He was blameless as
touching the Righteousness of the Law; which must mean the Moral Law: and the
Ceremonial Law, when in force, had its part in justifying as well as the Moral,
and now it is abrogated it cannot be damning if practiced out of ignorance
only. Acts 21.20, etc.
But that the Righteousness of the Law here does by parity of reason exclude
Christian Obedience from Justifying, is thus proved: This is not the
Righteousness of God, sc. of God's providing, but our own Righteousness as well
as Jewish Obedience was: It is also the righteousness of a Law, the Gospel Law,
though not the Jewish Law, Melanct. in Romans p. 8. Vocari lex debet ubicunque
praecepta leguntur, sive in libris Mosis, sive in libris Apostolorum, etc. And
further, It is not the righteousness of Faith, or by Faith any more than the
Works of Jews: For, No Law is of Faith, but be that does it shall live by it,
Gal. 3.12. It is spoken immediately of the Jewish Law, but the Reason extends
it to every Law; he that is justified by obedience to any Law, lives by it, is
justified by doing it, not by believing. And it may be said of the Gospel in
our Authors Sense, He that does it shall live by it, as truly as of the Law of
Moses or Adam. It has also been showed, that the Law has some Faith joined
with it, viz. the trust to be justified by performing that Law, and therefore
when doing and believing are opposed as irreconcilable extremes in
Justification, believing must mean a trust in another Righteousness, not in
our own, for that is doing; and thus the righteousness of Faith here excludes
all our own Works, therefore must be the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us.
Add to all this, That the Apostle in this place does not speak of Christian
Religion (as this Author says) or of the Doctrine of Christ, but of his Person
and what he wrought for us: For having expressed his desire of being found in him
not having his own righteousness, etc. he subjoyneth immediately, v. 10, 11.
That I may know him and the Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of
his Sufferings, etc. If by any means I might attain unto the Resurrection of
the Dead. And v. 12. That I might apprehend that for which I am apprehended of
Christ. These things concern Christ himself, not the Precepts of his Religion.

Object.
The general Evasion whereby those men wave the force of these and the like
Scriptures, is this; Hotchkis, p. 44, etc.
That Christ's Righteousness or Obedience is ours in the Fruits and Effects of
it, but not our Righteousness properly, viz. That Christ's Righteousness is not
that for which we are accepted of God immediately, Trueman Gr. Prop. p. 116.
but that it is the morally efficient, or meritorious Cause of our
Righteousness, i. e. that we shall be accepted with God if we fulfill the
Commands of the Gospel, because Christ has removed the Old Covenant of Works,
and purchased this New Covenant for us.

1. Answ.
Here it may not be amiss to advertise the Reader of the equivocation that lies
in these Words (especially as used by some Authors) whereby they hide their
sense and deceive many, sc. when they oppose the Imputation of Christ's
righteousness to the Fruits and Effects of it, which with us are not opposite.
For by imputation of his righteousness we do not mean that Christ's
righteousness is transferred to us and made inherently ours, or that we can be
denominated righteous by it as if we had wrought that righteousness, but we
mean that for the obedience of Christ God does immediately pardon and justify
them that trust in it, and give them a right to all the Fruits of it, as truly
and validly as if it were their own personal righteousness; so that God does
hereupon account the Law to be satisfied, and like to be purchased for them
without any thing to be further done by them as a condition of life. But their
true Sense is, That the Obedience of Christ is ours remotely only, sc. that it
has merited a New Covenant which if we perform we shall live.

2ly. According to this Sense Christ's righteousness is no way our
righteousness: It may be the means of benefit to us, but it does in no sense
make us righteous, or is the cause of our righteousness or justification, which
the Scriptures alleged do intend. This is thus proved; It is none of the four
kind of Causes, nor reducible to them; therefore it is no Cause. The Antecedent
I thus prove; It is not the Material or Formal Cause, this they grant, For then
we must be immediately justified by it, it must compose our righteousness; they
sometimes call it the matter of our righteousness, but without sense: It is not
the Final Cause, Christ's righteousness is not the end for which we are
justified: It is not the Efficient, neither Physical, nor Moral: Not Physical,
for then Christ's obedience must actively work obedience, or righteousness in
us, which is absurd. Not a Moral Cause, or Meritorious (which they most insist
on.) For Christ did not merit Grace, whereby we should obtain the Gospel, and
so be justified as they acknowledge, seeing he died for all alike (though thus
he would be but a remote meritorious Cause of Justification, meriting that for
which we should be justified) but he merited only the Covenant of Life upon
sincere obedience to the Law he should prescribe. All then that he is the
Meritorious Cause of is the New Covenant; for when this Covenant is promulgated
it is left to men whether they will obey or no, and so whether they will be
justified or no: He has merited nothing further. Now if any man come to be
justified by performing the condition of this Covenant, can Christ be said to
merit this Justification for him, which as to his Merits was contingent, might
or might not be, and depended wholly upon his own Will and Obedience? If a man
procure a Charter for a Town, and make them a Corporation thereby, and by
virtue of this Charter they that serve an Apprentiship shall have the
Privileges and Freedom of this Town, shall it be said of those that thus come
into the Freedom some hundred years after, that their Freedom was merited,
bought or procured by him that procured the Charter? Surely they themselves
merit their Freedom, the other was but an Instrument of procuring the Charter.
In like manner, if Christ only merited the Covenant, by performing whereof men
shall be justified, surely men themselves are the proper, meritorious,
immediate causes of their own Justification, or Righteousness; because they
fulfill the condition whereto it is promised, and which is the formal
righteousness for which they are justified; and Christ is but an Instrument of
procuring the Covenant, and an improper remote, and contingent cause of their
Justification, by their fulfilling it. And thus in their sense Christ is no
true Cause of our Righteousness.

Argument 4.
Fourthly, Mat. 20.28.
I argue from these Scriptures which say, Christ laid down his Life as a Ransom
for us, redeemed us, 1 Timothy 2.6. Col. 1.14. Tit. 2.14. Rev. 1.5. Isa. 43.3.
Exodus 30.10, 11. Number. 18.15.
that in him we have redemption, and that he washed us from our Sins in his own
Blood: From whence I argue, Redemption is of persons, a ransom and price is
paid for persons, not for Laws and Covenants; and this was typified by the
redemption of Israel out of Egypt, whom God says he redeemed and gave Nations
for them: By the Redemption of the First Born, and of the whole People whenever
they were numbered; and by the year of Jubilee, which is called the Year of
Redemption. I subsume, Ransoms and Redemptions if not paid and purchased by the
Persons themselves who were in Bondage, are imputed to them, i.e. they are
immediately delivered, set at liberty, by the payment of them, as much as if
they had paid the Prize themselves: Therefore if Christ properly redeemed,
bought, purchased us, paid a Ransom or Prize for us, then it is imputed to us:
we must be delivered by that very prize and ransom, as much as if we had paid
it our selves. Our Opposites are loath to speak downright with the Socinians,
and to deny that Christ's Death was a Prize and Ransom for us, but they must
and do interpret this Ransom, Prize, Redemption, etc. to be all improper and
metaphysical: Thus Mr. Trueman says, That the immediate Effect of Christ's
Satisfaction was only a Satisfaction to Justice, Gr. Prop. p. 86.
that God might be ju^^ though he should pardon Sinners, and that he might
pardon them salva justitia, upon what terms he pleases; not that he must pardon
them come what will of it, or else be unjust not that Sinners should ipso facto
be pardoner the Prize being undertaken, paid and accepted. And again, p. 89.
Christ's Sufferings were not proper payment, but a valuable consideration or
you may call it a refuseable payment, though it be not properly payment at all.
And Mr. Hotchkis paraphraseth (...), 1 Tix. 2.6. not a Ransom, but something
instead of a Ransom; they do therefore implicitly yield, if Christ's death was
a Ransom and Prize for us, that then we must be immediately delivered by it,
which is all one with his Righteousness being imputed to us, and in denying the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, they do deny, That his death was a Ransom,
Prize or Payment for us, against the current of the Scriptures. They make all
the Effect of the Obedience of Christ to be only the removing of that necessity
which lay upon God to condemn all men, for breaking the First Covenant, so that
he might if he pleased save Sinners by any other Covenant: p. 86.
So Trueman exprefly. From whence it follows, That notwithstanding the death of
Christ God might have refused to have made a New Covenant, or to have saved any
Sinner if he pleased: Which also the Synod of Dort charged upon the Dutch
Arminians, Proprium and integrity finem mortis Christi fuisse, Act. Syn. Dordr.
in Judic. Theol. Mag. Bri. Art. 2.
ut Deo Patri acquireret jus and potestatem servandi homines quibus vellet
conditionibus. How far then was Christ from redeeming men, if God after the
death of Christ, would have been just though he should have saved no man?
Moreover, how can we be said to be washed with Christ's Blood, if Pardon and
Justification was not immediately procured by it? Under the Law, when the
People were sprinkled with the Blood of t e Sacrifice (in allusion to which
Christ's Blood is called the Blood of Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24.) they were
immediately discharged from g^ilt and reconciled. If then we are sprinkled or
washed with Christ's Blood, we must in like manner be justified and reconciled by
it, which is imputation of his Righteousness: If Christ only procure a
Covenant, by fulfilling of which we may be justified, his Blood might ratify
and zeal the Covenant (as the Socinians teach) but it reaches not our persons,
nor are we cleansed by it, unless remotely and per accidens, as we are
justified by fulfilling that Law, to the Truth whereof his Blood sealed.

Argument 5.
5ly. I argue from the Priests and Sacrifices of the Law: The High Priest at
the time of Sacrificing wore a Crown of Gold, Exodus 29.36, 37.
whereon was engraven, Holiness to the Lord, in token that he was to bare the
Iniquities of the Peoples Services; v. 9, 10, 29.
he also bore the Names of the People upon his Shoulder and Breast to present
them before the Lord: Both the High Priest and other Priests in their daily
Sacrifices made reconciliation for the People, though few of them were present;
and when the People were present to bring Sacrifices for themselves, they
confessed their Sins over the Head of the Sacrifice, putting their Hands upon
it, and by this means reconciliation was obtained and preserved for the People.
What then the Priest did and was done unto the Sacrifices was imputed to the
People, they were accepted by and for these things done for them immediately
without further conditions, therefore Christ's Righteousness is immediately
imputed to Believers, and they are reconciled by it, without further conditions.

Object.
It is said that these Priests and Sacrifices obtained only a Political
Reconciliation, sc. to the Church and Public Assembly.

Answ.
However they were imputed to the People or else they could obtain no
reconciliation at all. But why were those Sacrifices means of Political or
Ecclesiastical Reconciliation, more than the Sacraments of the Gospel? Baptism
admits into the Church, the Lord's Supper continues Communion in the
Church, and in case of Excommunication, a Readmission to the Supper is a Means
of Reconciliation with the Church, and a Token of it. Will they say that these
Sacraments signify or convey nothing of Christ, but are mere Political and
External things, as the Socinians. (whose notion this is) do? The truth is, as
the Sacraments of the Gospel represent Christ come in the Flesh; so the Priests
and Sacrifices of the Law represented him as to come: Therefore it is said,
Col. 2, 17. All the Services of the Law were a shadow of good things to come,
but the Body (or substance) is of Christ. And Heb. 9. v. 7, to 14. They
signified and were Figures of what Christ was to do, in making way into the
Holiest of all by his own Blood. The Priests and Sacrifices therefore were
Types of Christ, and the Representation of him lay chiefly in this, That as the
Priests by their Service, and the Sacrifices by their Blood, did Symbolically
reconcile men to God, and admit them to all the Privileges of his People: So
these things were Pledges and Signs that they should be really reconciled to
God, and inherit the Promises by the Obedience and Blood of Jesus Christ, the
Great High Priest, and the Best-Sacrifice. Therefore as there was an Imputation
in the Type so there must be in the Antitype: As the Priests and Sacrifices
bore the Peoples Sins, made Atonement ^or them, and so reconciled them to God;
so ^he Obedience and Sufferings of Christ must ^ustifie by being done for us,
and so accounted or imputed to us. It is in comparison with the Levitical
Priest that our Savior is said to be the Surety of a Better Covenant, Heb.
7.22. viz. a better Covenant than they were Sureties of; for with them he is
compared throughout this Chapter: Now what the Surety does is imputed or
reckoned to him for whom he is Surety. The Socinians and Arminians from them
interpret these words to mean only that Christ is God's Surety to us, in that
he did ratify the New Testament by his Blood and thereby confirmed to us all
the Promises of God: but though Christ has ratisied God's Covenant, and has
undertaken that it shall be made good to us, yet he is our Surety, he
undertaketh for us also to stand betwixt us and the Father, to procure
reconciliation and acceptance for us and our services. This is manifest from
the comparison of the Levitical Priest here made: For as Moses and the settled
Priests after him did represent God to the People, in covenanting with them,
sprinkling Blood upon the Book of the Law, and upon the People, whenever there
was occasion to make Atonement for them: So also did they represent the People
to God: Moses spoke for them, carried their Promises of Obedience to God, and
received his Commands to them; wherefore when they sinned in the Golden Calf,
God said to him, Thy People whom thou have brought out of Egypt have sinned,
etc. And the Priests stood betwixt God and them, came into the Tabernacle to
appear before God for them, which the People might not approach to, offered
Sacrifice, made Atonement for them, and Intercessions also both daily, and upon
the solemn annual Expiation: Yea the Priest bore their Iniquities, Eat the
Sin-offering in the Holy Place, as taking the Peoples Sin upon them, Levit.
6.26. Chapter 10.17, 18, 19. They were therefore Sureties for the People to God. In
like manner Christ also must be our Surety in offering himself for us, in
making reconciliation and intercession for us, yea and in performing the Law
for us in his own person, that we might be pardoned and accepted and have new
Hearts given us: Heb. 8.8.13.
else his Covenant would not have been a better Covenant than that of Moses,
and the Levitical Priest.

Argument 6.
If our sins were imputed to Christ, then his Righteousness is imputed to us:
The Reason of the consequence is, If Christ did immediately suffer and satisfy
for sin, so as to take away the deserved Punishment of it, and to recompense
the violated Law, this very obedience and suffering of his must be our
righteousness and justify us, there needs no more than a full satisfaction
to Justice for our sins, and the fulfilling of that Law which we had broken.
Bradshaw de Justi. Chapter 16. Th. 2.
Deus peccata nostra Christo imposuit quod Christus pro nobis factus dicitur
peccatum, non quia peccata a nobis commissa in illum revera translata sint, aut
quasi: Deus mentis suae conceptu (ut de Deo (...) loquamur Christum
existimaverit ea ipsa peccata commisisse, quae nos ipsi commisser amus; sed
quia apud Deum perinde habetur, ipseque a Deo Christus perinde accipiebatur ac
tractabatur, ac si ipse ex persona propria ea omnia commisisset. But this is
not denied, we must therefore prove that our sins are imputed to Christ, where
we must first premise what we mean by it, and then prove it. When we say our
sins are imputed to Christ, we do not mean that they were translated to and
made inherent in him, o^ that he was accounted to have sinned, to have been the
Author, or any way the Cause of our sins, or that God looked upon him as such:
These things we account blasphemous; but we mean that Jesus Christ in all he
did and suffered did intend to satisfy the Law of God which Man should have
kept, and particularly in his Sufferings did intend and actually bare the
punishment due to our sins, to satisfy the Law thereby; and that the Father in
imposing this Obedience, and in inflicting these Sufferings upon Christ, did
intend that his Law which man had broken should be satisfied thereby, and that
Christ should bear the Punishment of our Sins; and further, that God did accept
of these Sufferings of Christ as a satisfaction for our Sins, and did look upon
his Justice as executed and satisfied in him. Thus our sins are said to be
imputed to Christ, because he was truly, and in the Fathers, and in his own
intentions punished for them. He was not reckoned an Offender, but he was
reckoned and dealt with as he who had undertaken to bear the Punishment due to
Offenders. Many labor to make this Position odious by misrepresenting it, and
putting it into harsh and unscriptural terms: But the Question is plainly this,
Whether the Sufferings of Christ were truly and intentionally the Punishment of
the Sins of Man laid upon him; whether Christ was properly punished for their
Sins? And this the Scripture abundantly and expressly affirms.

Isaiah 53.4. He has born our griefs and carried our sorrows: Yet more
plainly, v. 5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
are healed: v. 6. We have gone astray, etc. and the Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all: v. 8. For the transgression of my people was he stricken:
v. 10. His Soul was made an offering for sin: v. 11. By his knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many: And the means whereby he comes to justify
them is, because he shall bear their iniquities, v. 12. He bore the sin of
many. Can any thing be more express? If Christ was wounded, bruised, stricken,
offered as a Sacrifice for sin, then he was properly punished for sin; and
though the other terms, bearing of sin, carrying our griefs, etc. may have a
larger interpretation, yet being joined with those other more express and
significant words, they are to be taken in the same sense.

Galat. 3.13. He was made a Curse for us, etc. The Curse is the Punishment of
Sin, laid upon a person in pursuance of the Sentence of the Law: Christ then
was punished, the Sentence of the Law executed upon him with intention to
satisfy the Law.

2 Corinthians. 5.21. He was made Sin for us: Our Authors paraphrase this, He was
made a Sacrifice for Sin; the Sin-offering being sometimes in Hebrew called
Sin: And the Interpretation is not much amiss, but the Sacrifice for sin died
for the Sinner, and did typically bear the punishment of his Sin: Therefore
Christ the Antitype did really undergo the punishment of Sin. It is to be
observed that our Lord was put to death without the City, on purpose to answer
the Type of the Sin offering in special above the rest of the Sacrifices, which
was to be carried out and burnt without the Camp, Lev. 6.3. Heb. 13.11, 12.

1 Peter 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own Body on the Tree; by
whose stripes ye were healed. Here it is expressed that Christ in his own person
(...) bore our sins upon the Cross, in his own Body, (...): Therefore his
Sufferings upon the Cross were the punishment for our sins.

Our Opposites interpret this to be spoken figuratively: Trueman ^. ^rop. p. 89.
The Sufferings of Christ were not properly an Execution of the Law (though
they may figuratively be so called) but a satisfaction to Justice, that the
Law-threat might no be executed: They mean, That Christ's Sufferings were for
sin, i. e. to take away Sin by bringing in a Covenant of Grace, and possibility
of Pardon, but not that he satisfied offended Justice, by bearing the
Punishment of Sin, in his own person. Now this is not to die for sin at all,
nor to bare sin, be wounded for it, or stricken for it, but only to suffer by
occasion of sin, as sin was the occasion that Christ suffered to bring in a way
of Pardon; and so as Christ's Righteousness is not the cause of our
Justification, but the occasion of it, that which made some way for it (as we
have proved above) so also by this Doctrine our sins were not the cause, had no
proper influence upon the death of Christ, but were an accidental occasion of
it; because if we had not sinned, he had not died to bring in a Covenant of
Grace and pardon. What can be spoken full and clear enough, if these plain
Scriptures may be so easily waved? The same Author says, p. 86.
That Christ's death was a Satisfaction to Justice, that God might be Just if
he should pardon, not an Execution of the Law, but a satisfaction to Justice
that the Law might not be executed. I answer: The Justice of God is twofold,
Absolute and Essential, which is the infinite Holiness of his Nature, whereby
he can do nothing but what is becoming himself, or limited and ordinate, which
is a voluntary Obligation, which God has laid upon himself to proceed in his
dealing with Creatures according to the Law which he has prescribed them. I
demand which of these Christ satisfied, not the first, any further than as it
is included in the second, viz. as it is becoming God's infinite and essential
Holiness to proceed with his Creatures according to his own Laws, when he has
given them Laws to act by: For this Author and his Friends do not deny that
Essential Justice might have been content to have pardoned and restored Adam,
and us in him, without the death of Christ, it must therefore be limited and
ordinate Justice, which Christ satisfied. Now by this Justice God is obliged to
proceed according to his own Law, to see his Law fulfilled and executed, and
that it attain the end for which it was made; therefore there is no satisfying
of this Justice but by having the Law executed. To talk of satisfying Justice,
of which the Law is the Rule, without executing the Law, yea that the Law might
not be executed, but taken out of the way, is by fair consequence a
Contradiction.

Argument 7.
7ly. I argue; Either Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, we are justified
immediately by believing in it, or Christ only purchased a Law of Grace by
fulfilling whereof we should be justified. There is no medium betwixt these two
in the Question about Imputation: but the latter is false, therefore the former
is true. This is that our Opposites contend for, That Christ only purchased,
that we should be saved if we should perform that new Law, which he should give
us: But this shall be particularly considered in the Sixth Chapter.

CHAP. IV. An Answer to the Arguments against the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness.
WE are now to examine the Arguments which are brought against this Doctrine;
where as I shall pass by none that I meet with which seem to have any weight,
and whose solution may add any evidence to this weighty Truth; so I shall not
count my self concerned in a great number of Objections, that are heaped up by
some against it, some being mere devised cavilations, and many nothing to the
purpose. For our Opposites deal in this Argument as the Arminians did in the
point of Reprobation, load it with calumnies, or with the unadvised expressions
of some particular men, but say but little that concludes against the Truth it
self. Their usual Fallacy is Plus in conclusione quam in praemissis, or
ignoratio Elenchi; when the plain Question is, Whether we are accepted and
justified for the Righteousness of Christ wrought for us, and given to us by
the Promise of the Gospel, and accepted by Faith; And their Arguments should
conclude against this naked truth, they usually conclude against Imputation of
this Righteousness as expressed by the Antinomians, or by Popular and not Logical
Men, or else against some terms of Art applied to this Subject. The like they
do when they dispute against the Imputation of our sins to Christ; yet some
Instances of this kind I must take notice of, that the Reader may be the more
excited to observe it in their Books.

Object.
Christ's Righteousness is the Morally Efficient, sc. the meritorious Cause of
our Justification, Hotchkis ut supra, p. 23.
therefore it is not the proper matter, or properly a material Cause of it:
Matter being an internal constitutive Cause, and an efficient and external
Cause, which cannot agree to the same thing.

Answ.
The Question is not (nor did ever any man say it that knew what he said)
whether Christ's Righteousness be a proper material Cause, as Matter is opposed
to a Form: When it is said to be the Matter or formal Cause of our
Justification, it is meant only Analogically; Christ's Righteousness consisted
in Actions and Passions, which were neither Matter nor Forms as taken for
Internal Essential Parts of any thing: But when these Actions and Passions are
the thing for which a man is justified, they are analogically called the Matter
of his Righteousness, because his Righteousness is made up of them; and as a
man is accepted for these very Actions and Passions wrought for him, and
imputed to him, so they may be called the Formal Cause of our Justification, as
a man is denominated Just before God from that Righteousness: And thus as
Christ's Righteousness is analogically called Matter or Form, so it may
analogically be said to constitute a man Just or Righteous before God, or to be
pars constituens hominis justificati, quatenus juscificati, as any other
Accident, moral or physical, intrinsecal or extrinsecal, being appli d to the
subject makes the concretum ex subjecto and accidenti, and so the subject in
that composition is as the matter, though otherways perhaps the Efficient; and
the Accident as the Form; both are the Constitutive Parts of that concretum,
yet Analogically. Thus much for the Logic of this Argument, now for the
Divinity. It is true that Christ's Obedience offered as a Ransom for all the
Elect in general is the Meritorious Cause of their Salvation, but when it is
applied to each particular person (as all Causes must be applied to the Patient
that they may produce their Effect) it is that thing for which God does accept
and justify them in particular, and so is said to be the matter of their
Righteousness, the Material, and by some the Formal Cause of Justification, de
Just. chapter 22.
vid. Dav. Atque revera in justificatione, talis causa formalis ponenda est,
quae simul and meritoria esse possit: Nisi enim contineat illam dignitatem in
se, propter quam homo rite justificatus reputetur, nunquam erit formalis causa,
etc.

2. Object.
If Christ's Righteousness be imputed to us, then we are freed from all
obligation to Obedience: If he has obeyed for us, Trueman ut supra, p. 118.4.
what need is there of our obedience, we cannot mend his, and if he has done
all, there is nothing left for us to do?

Answ.
We are freed from any obligation to obedience of that kind and to that end for
which Christ obeyed: His Obedience was the Fulfilling of the Law of Works, as a
Covenant of Life, and by fulfilling it he purchased life for us, and so was the
perfective end of that Law or Covenant for righteousness to them that believe,
Romans 10.4. Perfect obedience to the Law of Works is not required of us, that we
should live by it, or perish for lack of it, as it would have been, had not
Christ obeyed for us. But it does not follow from hence that we are freed from
all Obligations of Obedience upon other accounts, viz. as Creatures to a
Creator, as Servants to an absolute and sovereign Lord, as Children to a
Father, and as the Preparatives to an Eternal Life; upon these accounts we must
obey still, though not to be justified by it: Christ himself is not freed from
the general obligation of obedience to God, as he is a Man, though he has
finished his satisfactory Obedience to the Law as the Means and Covenant of
Life, and is for ever acquitted from the Obligation thereto: In like manner his
Obedience has acquitted us from all obligation to the Law as the way of life,
yet not from all Obedience. But this Argument, as all the rest of this Author
in the same place, is levelled against a Popular Expression of this Doctrine,
and are nothing to the main Question, viz. That Christ's Righteousness is so
imputed to us, that we are accounted to have obeyed in him, to have fulfilled
the Law, to have done and suffered all in him, etc. which Position is true only
in this Sense, That all which Christ did and suffered was intended for us, is
given to us, and does as really justify us, as if we had fulfilled it our
selves. But it is not true that God accounts us to have personally obeyed in
Christ's obeying, or us to have suffered in Christ's suffering, to have fulfilled
the Law in his fulfilling it: For then we must be accounted to have satisfied
for our selves in him, and to have purchased our own Justification. The
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness is God's, accounting it to be wrought for
us, and so he accepts us for it; but not his accounting us to have wrought
it, or to have been actively righteous as if we had fulfilled his Law.

But did not Christ obey as a common and public person for all the Elect,
Quest.
and so he and they are one in Law, and so what he did they are accounted to
have done.

Christ was a common and public person in that he intended his Obedience not
for himself nor for any one person, but for the whole Company of the Elect:
Christ and they are one in Law, in that the benefit of his satisfying the Law,
was intended for them, and in time conferred on them: But he was not a common
person, or one in Law with them so as they might be properly reckoned to have
done what he did; for this holds only where the common person is a Delegate
or Commissioner of others, when they appoint him their Representative, give him
his Instructions and Authority to act in their Name, then they are looked upon
as doing what he does, and not else. But it was God the Father and not Men that
sent Christ, and appointed him to die for the Elect, gave him all his
Instructions what to do and suffer, and then accepted it for them, being done
by his own Appointment, not by theirs.

But are we not made Righteous with Christ's Righteousness, Quest.
and so may be accounted to have obeyed, or fulfilled the Law in him?

Answ.
We are made righteous with his righteousness, not morally, as if we were made
personally Holy and obedient by it, or were so accounted by God; but legally we
are made righteous, that is, justified by his righteousness, acquitted from
condemnation, and accepted to life eternal. Therefore we are justified as
sinners, as ungodly, Romans 4.5, 7. in the way of repentance, and acknowledgment
of our sins, by faith in the promise of life through Christ. But we are not
justified as innocent or blameless in our selves: Justification does not find
us righteous but makes us righteous, viz. it acquitteth and reconcileth us
guilty, condemned sinners for the righteonsness of Christ; and thus we are made
righteous in Law, such as shall not be condemned, but have eternal life.

Are we then justified according to the Premiant and Retributive part of the
Law, Quest.
and not according to the Preceptive part also?

Answ.
We are justified according to the Precept as well as according to the Promise,
Christ having fulfilled or obeyed the Precepts for us, and thereby procured all
the reward that was promised, with some addition of happiness, because of the
eminency of his Person and Obedience. He also purchased deliverance from the
Curse threatened, by undergoing the Curse for us, yet we cannot be said to have
obeyed the Precepts, or to have born the Curse in him in any proper sense: He
did it in our behalf, that we might thereby be justified and brought to life as
certainly as if we were innocent, but not that we should be accounted really
innocent in our own persons. M. Baxt. 4. disput. of Just. p. 263.
As for the distinction of Righteousness according to the Precept and according
to the Sanction, or retributive part of the Law, and that again divided into
the promise and the threatening: Idem Answer to Dr. Tully, p. 50.
Righteousness according to the Promise being jus ad donum, a right to the
thing promised, and righteousness according to the threatening being jus ad
impunitatem, a right to impunity or to escape punishment; this distinction I
say as to the matter of Justification, is very needless and impertinent. For it
is the fulfilling of the Precept which gives right to the reward promised, and
the violation of the Precept which intituleth to punishment. What though the
righteousness of obedience to the Precept, and the right to the blessing of the
Promise differ as the cause and effect, yet the latter does oppose the former,
when we are to be justified before God; so that if we have right to life on the
account of Gods Promise to the righteousness of Christ, and this righteousness
be his obeying the precept of the Law, then his obedience to the precept is
imputed to us also, and is the foundation of our right to the Promise: The like
is to be said of our right to impunity, which is founded upon Christ's suffering
the punishment for us, and therefore his suffering the penalty is imputed to us
also, and thus that which is built upon this distinction falls to the ground,
viz. That Righteousness as to the Promise and Threatening of the Law being in
some sort distinct from the Righteousness of Obedience to the Precept; that
therefore we may have the former without the latter, i.e. we may have a right
to life by the promise of the Gospel, and a right to be delivered from wrath,
and yet Christ's Righteousness of Obedience and Suffering not to imputed to us.
For this is the immediate Cause and Foundation of our right both to avoid the
penalty and inherit the promise. The rest of Mr. Trueman's Arguments I pass by
as being directed against the Antinomians only and not touching us, as also
what he writes against the Imputation of Christ's active and passive Obedience
in the sense before explained, which is repeated by a later Author, Just.
Evang. p. 54.
as being partly impertinent and partly answered in the first Chapter. This
later Author gives us three Arguments against the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, p. 56.
though he does (as the others before him) miss the state of the Question;
reporting our Opinion thus, That Christ's Righteousness is so imputed to us as
if we are accounted to have personally done and suffered what he did: p. 57.
His third Argument runs wholly upon this mistake, therefore I shall pass it
by, the two first deserve some consideration.

The First Argument is:
If every Believer be personally righteous before God in the very individual
Acts of Christ's Righteousness, p. 58.
one of these two things will thence ensue: Either that Christ in his own
person did perform all the particular Acts of Righteousness required as due
from each saved person; or else, That every saved persons righteousness before
God is identically and numerically the same with Christ in his public capacity
as Mediator, and so every saved person is personally righteous with a
Righteousness that has a stock of merit in it, sufficient to save the World.

Answ.
This Argument is untrue both in the dilemma and in the consequence: In the
dilemma, because there is no opposition betwixt the Members of it, viz. Christ's
performing the obedience due from every Believer, and their being righteous
with a Righteousness that has an infinite merit in it: These are not
destructive the one of the other: The consequence is untrue, because neither of
these things follow from the Doctrine of Imputation. The Error of this worthy
person proceeded from his thrusting two Arguments into one, when the Form of it
would not bear it: I shall therefore take leave to separate them and answer
them apart.

The one is, If we be justified by the very personal Righteousness of Christ,
then he must have performed all the Duties that belong to every particular
Believer, the Ceremonial and the Moral to the married and to the unmarried, to
Parents, etc. But this he neither did nor could do: Ergo.

Answ.
We grant that Christ did not perform all the particular Duties of every
particular Believer, nor was it necessary he should. They acknowledge that what
Christ did was sufficient to satisfy the Law of Works and to purchase a new
Covenant of Life, though he performed not the particular Duties of every
particular Man. If it was sufficient for this, why is it not sufficient to
justify us by immediate Imputation: They will not say that our obedience to
the Gospel does fill up the Righteousness of Christ wherein it was short or
desective, why might it not then justify us absolutely by the mere application
of it to us as well as purchase that we should be justified by New Obedience?
This is further manifest by this, That the Substance and End of the Law, sc.
universal Love and Subjection to God in whatsoever he does or shall command is
equally the Duty of all men, and every one must habitually keep the whole Law:
This was chiefly intended by God, and to be attended by Men; the particular
Duties are various, and something are the Duties of one which are not of
another; and in many cases things are and have been Duties at one time which
have not been at another. It was therefore sufficient that Jesus Christ had the
habit of all Grace and the readiness to obey his Father in any thing that he
should require, as well as in those things which he did actually perform, and
that he did obey actually in as many things as the Father thought fi^ to impose
on him, which were not a few: The Law had its end by him, even personal
Obedience, and those particulars wherein he observed it were more honor to God
than if we had all observed our particular Duties, because of the Dignity of
his person, and the supereminent measure of Grace and the Spirit from which he
did obey. This is evident a pari: Adam brought condemnation upon all men, not
by breaking every particular Command, which might concern every particular man,
but by one act of Disobedience, by breaking our Command, whereby his universal
Obedience was tried; Why might not then the Sovereign Lawmakers impose upon
Christ so much particular Duty for so many years as the Exercise of the
Universal Habit of Obedience that was in him, and accept it as if he had
fulfilled every particular of the Law? If he that offends in one Command is a
Transgressor of the whole Law, James 2.10. Why may not he that keeps it in
all particulars required of him, and that was able and ready to keep it in any
other, had they been imposed, be accounted to have kept the whole Law? If they
say, that Adam virtually broke the whole Law, I say that Christ virtually and
habitually kept the whole Law; Therefore this was sufficient that we might be
justified by his Righteousness. The same is to be said concerning the
Sufferings of Christ; he did not suffer all the particular Punishments due to
every particular Sin of all Believers, nor some of the circumstances of any
punishment, viz. Eternity and Desperation, etc. yet he suffered the Wrath and
Curse of God which was the substance of the Threatenings, and in such an eminent
manner as no mere Creature could have suffered, and with a Mind habitually
ready and able to have endured any other particular Punishments if the Father
had thought fit to enjoin them: It was death in the general, the Curse of God,
which was the Substance of the Threatening; God dispenses the particularities
of Punishment as he pleases, baring more and longer with some than others,
giving more and greater Mercies to some than others, and will exempt some, even
of the Wicked from Natural Death, even those that shall be found alive at
Christ's Coming: The particularities therefore of Punishments are not Essential
to the Law, and Christ did bear the Substance of the Curse with all the
Particulars of it, which God thought sit to inflict, being ready to have born
more if it had so pleased the Father. Why is not this sufficient to justify us
by Imputation, in concomitance with his active Obedience, as well as to procure
our Justification, upon fulfilling Gospel-Obedience, which they contend for? By
this also we may answer that Argument which all our Opponents use as
unanswerable, viz. That Christ paid not the idem but the tantundem, not the
very Obedience and Suffering due from every particular Believer, but something
in liew of it, and therefore it cannot be imputed to them for Righteousness:
For Christ did both, performing the idem in the Substance, obeying the same Law
which obliged them in his universal Obedience, and suffering the Substance of
the Curse, and also in as many particulars of obedience and suffering as the
Father thought fit to exact of him, and this which was so far idem, the same,
being performed by such a Person, was tantundem, equivalent to all the rest
which were not actually done or suffered by him: Yea he did habitually in the
readiness of his Mind, and virtually in the interpretation of his Actions and
Passions do and suffer all the rest. What some add, That Christ did not do and
suffer the very individual Duties and Sufferings of each Believer, Trueman ut
supra.
is (...), things being not individual before they exist, and Actions and
Passions, such as our Duties and Sufferings be, are individuated by the
subjects wherein they exist, at least in part, as are all other individual
accidents, which cannot be but in that individual subject wherein they are.
This therefore is impertinent.

The second Particular in this Argument is; If every Believer be justified by
the very Individual Righteousness of Christ, then every saved Persons
Righteousness before God, is identically and numerically the same with Christ's,
in his public capacity as Mediator, and so with a Righteousness that has a
stock of Merit in it, sufficient to save the World.

Answ.
We grant the whole, That every Believer is righteous with that Righteousness
which Christ wrought as Mediator, and which is infinitely meritorious: nor does
what is objected, in the least disprove it. p. 59.
It is said, that Christ's Righteousness was the righteousness of God-Man, that
no creature could perform any thing in that manner, and with those
circumstances as he did; yea, that some things which Christ did, would be
unlawful for Man to do, and that all he did and suffered, was in pursuance of
the Office of a Mediator: the whole comes but to this, that men are not, could
not be the authors, workers of the Righteousness of Christ, either in the
matter, circumstances, or immediate ends of it, and therefore they cannot be
justified by it: this is no consequence, they are justified by it, as wrought
for them by the Mediator God-Man, though not as wrought by them. Moreover,
though the Righteousness of Christ and a Believer be numerically the same
righteousness, the infinitely meritorious Righteousness of the Mediator; yet it
agrees to them in diverse manners, and so has different effects: it is Christ's
Righteousness as the efficient who wrought it, as the Mediator performing it in
pursuance of his Mediatorial Office, and thus it is one perfect and complete
public Righteousness, satisfying the Law, purchasing eternal life for all the
Elect, whereof Christ is the only immediate and proper subject; but it is a
Believers righteousness secondarily, as being intended and wrought for him,
that he should be justified by it, and so his only, so far forth as he stands
in need of it; not as Mediatorial, or meritorious, or universal extending to
others also; it is infinite and meritorious as it is in Christ, not as it is in
a Believer; for there it is an infinite meritorious Righteousness accepted for
him, so far as he needs it, not as infinite or universal for all the Elect.
Thus also we may answer what is commonly said; if we are righteous with Christ's
Righteousness, then we satisfied for our selves; we are our own Mediators,
seeing by that righteousness Christ satisfied and was our Mediator. For the
matter of the righteousness may be imputed to us, and not the circumstances and
qualifications of it; we may be accepted for that righteousness, and yet not be
accounted to have wrought it for our selves or others: it is a common rule,
Quie quid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; a thing is received
according to the capacity of the receiver; not always according to the extent
of the thing, or the virtue of the efficient. The Sun which is seen by half the
World at once; the sound which is heard by many thousands, are seen and heard
by each one in particular for themselves, but not accordieg to that universal
extent whereby they are seen and heard by all the rest. But to come nearer the
case, Gods act of Creation and conservation is infinite, and yet every creature
created and preserved thereby is finite: Gods course to the actions of the
creatures is infinite as proceeding from him, yet it makes not the actions of
the Creatures infinite; yea, all the acts of creation, preservation and
concourse are of the same species, of the same sort as they proceed from God;
it is not one kind whereby Men and Angels are created, preserved and assisted,
and another whereby the same things are done for lower creatures, but the same
infinite power of God applied to each one according to their necessities, yet
this Identity of the Divine Acts does not make the Creatures to be of the same
species or nature, or to exist in the same manner, or all to operate with one
kind of Action. In like manner the Righteousness of Christ as wrought by him,
and proceeding from him, and intended for all the Elect, is infinite and
meritorious, but as applied to every single person, it procures so much pardon
as they have need of, and satisfyeth so much of the Law as they are obliged to,
and so purchases Eternal Life for every one according to their necessity and
station. Of the same nature is that common Objection, viz. If we be justified
by Christ's Righteousness then are we as righteous as Christ; which follows
not, unless his Righteousness was applied to every particular Believer in the
same manner as it agrees to Christ, which is untrue. Christ is righteous
inherently, as the immediate, proper Subject of his own Obedience, and actively
as the Author of that Obedience, as he that in his own person fulfilled the
Law: A Believer is not at all accounted the Author of that Righteousness, is
not looked upon as the person that obeyed, nor is he the subject of inhesion, in
whom that Righteousness does inhere properly and physically, but he is a legal,
secondary subject, who receives the immediate benefit of that Righteousness,
as being intended for his Justification. Again, Christ wrought his
Righteousness for all the Elect in the Office and Person of a Mediator, and so
was not only righteous as a single person, but also as a public person; but
each believer is righteous as a single person, by that public and universal
Righteousness of Christ applied to his particular case and necessity. If a
Debtor be discharged by his Sureties paying the Debt, may he be said to be as
good, as solvent a man as his Surety, because the Sureties Payment is imputed
to him. If an Innocent person be accepted to die for one that deserves it, may
the Guilty person be said to be as innocent, or to have satisfied for his
Crime, as much as the Innocent that died for it: The Payment and the Punishment
are accepted for the Debtor and the Guilty; so that they are freed by them, but
the honor of being solvent and innocent, of paying and suffering, p. 61.
for a Friend, belongs not to them but to the Sponsor.

This Authors second Argument is, Object. 2.
If we be justified by the Acts of Christ's Personal Righteousness, then are we
justified by the Works of the Law; but it is the Apostles whole design to the
Romans, to prove that we are not justified by the Works of the Law nor
unsinning Obedience; Ergo.

Answ.
Never any Orthodox Divine denied that we were justified by the Works of the
Law, wrought for us by Christ, but on the contrary it is the soundation of the
opinion of Imputation, that the Law of Works cannot be waved but must be
fulfilled, both by obedience to it, and suffering the punishment when it had
been once broken; and this being impossible in our own persons, God sent forth
his Son in the likeness of Sinful Flesh; and for sin condemned sin in the
Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, Romans 8.3, 4.
That which justifies us is the Obedience of Christ to the Law of Works, but we
are justified not in a Legal but in an Evangelical way, because it is the
Gospel that grants us forgiveness upon the obedience of another, and not the
Law. Etsi haec Christi obedientia legalis nobis imputata, Bradshaw de Just. c.
18. th. 7.
pars sit aliqua justitiae illius qua coram Deo justificemur: Non tamen inde
concluditur, nos ex legis operibus vel ex part aliqua justificarieo sensu quo
ab Apostolo ea opera excluduntur, Romans 3.20. Galat. 2.16. and 3.11. Cum lex
illa postulet, ut quaecunque preceperit in propriae nimirum cujusque persona,
non autem per sponsorem, aut vicarium quemquam praestentur. The Apostle to the
Romans proves that we are not justified by our own Works wrought in our own
persons, but not absolutely, That we are not justified by the Works of the Law
in any sense; but on the contrary, when he says we are justified by Faith,
this implies that we are justified by the Obedience of Christ trusted in, or
applied by Faith: What is here further said touches not us, viz. If Christ's
Righteousness be so imputed that we are accounted to have done personally what
he did, then our being justified by his Works, is all one as if we were
justified by our own. For we do not maintain, that Believers are accounted to
have wrought what Christ did, but only that it was accounted to have been
wrought for them; and yet it is not true, that upon supposition that they are
accounted to have wrought in Christ, that it is all one as if they had wrought
it themselves. For still they did not obey the Law, but another for them; nor
did the Law account it self to have been fulfilled by them, but the Lawmakers
accepted another Obedience for them, and so discharged and rewards them in
the right of that Obedient Person. But this manner of expression holds only
when the Law allows a Delegate or Substitute, and the persons concerned do
choose and give him his Authority and Instructions to act in their name which is
not in our case.

Object.
It is further objected: If our Sins be imputed to Christ, so that his
Righteousness should be properly imputed to us, then would they corrupt his
person, and he must be accounted a Sinner, guilty of all that we have done.

Answ.
Our Sins are imputed to Christ not as if he should be accounted the Subject of
our evil Nature and Habits, or the Author of our Commissions or Omissions, but
that he should bear the Punishment of them, and so satisfy the Law which was
broken by us. This does not corrupt his Person or make him morally a Sinner. If
a Surety pay a Debt for another it makes him not guilty of the imprudence,
dishonesty, or ill-husbandry whereby the debt was contracted; but he having
undertaken to satisfy for the Debt, the Law requires payment of him as if he
were the Debtor, and so imputes the Debt to him: If an innocent person be
accepted by the Lawgiver to die for an Offender, it makes not him an
Offender, though he be punished in the Offenders room and the offense as to the
Punishment be imputed to him: Yet we may say, That legally Christ was made a
Sinner and his Person corrupted, in that he having undertaken to satisfy the
Law for Sin who had not broken it in his own person, nor was obliged to such
satisfaction before, does now become a Debtor to the Law, to suffer the Penalty
of it, having interposed himself betwixt the Law and the Persons that had
offended. And thus says Dr. Twiss: ^ vind. Grot. lib. 1. sect. 26. p. 211.
Col. 1.
Look on what manner Christ bore our sins on the Cross, in the same manner may
our Sins be said to have been in him or upon him, and we Sinners to have been
in him as he bore our person, or suffered the punishment of our Sins. Negari
non potest Christum tulisse, sive gestasse peccata nostra in ligno, ergo, qua
ratione gestavit peccata nostra, eadem ratione peccata nostra illi inerant, aut
saltem incumbebant; atque eadem ratione and nos peccatores illi incubuimus;
idque nondum habita a nobis posthumis in ipsum fidei, decimus omnes redimendos
fuisse in Christo, non quidem ^er fidem insitos, sed quatenus dari dicuntur
ipsi a patre, and quatenus ipsorum personam sustinuit.

Bellarmin to add strength to this Objection, de Just. lib. 2. chapter 7.
says, If our sins be imputed to Christ, then must be not only be counted a
Blasphemer, Murderer, etc. but also a Child of the Devil, seeing those for whom
he died were Children of the Devil.

Answ.
This is but in terrorem, to affright us with hard words: A Child of the Devil
is taken two ways; First by Imitation, for one that is like him and does
imitate his Nature and his Actions: So the Jews are said to be of their father
the Devil because they do his Works, John 8.44. And Elymas a Child of the
De^il, as being very subtle and obstinate in per^erting the right ways of God,
Acts 13. Thus all men by nature are the Children of the Devil; but Christ was
not, nor does it follow That because our sins were laid upon him ^^ bear the
punishment of them, he was the^ fore the Child of the Devil, i.e. like him ^^
Nature and Disposition. The Imputation ^^ our Sins did not alter Christ's
Nature, though it did alter the State and Relation of his Person for a time,
making him obnoxious to the Law as if he had been an Offender.

Secondly, A Child of the Devil may mea^^ one that is delivered to the Power of
Sata^^ as the Executioner of God's Wrath, he h^^ving the power of Death, Heb.
2.14. (...) Children of wrath are those that are born o^^ noxious to wrath, and
thus (though the te^^^ is hard and irreverent) we grant the thing, vi^ That
Christ suffering for sin, was also made o^^ noxious and subject to the Power of
the Devil, both in his Temptations and in his last Sufferings, of which he said
to the Jews, This ^^ your hour and the power of darkness, Luke 2^^ 53. of the
Prince of darkness: And again The Prince of this World comes and find^^
nothing in me, John 14.30. This is so far fro^^ making against us, that it
confirms our Doctrine. The Devil is God's Executioner (...) inflict
punishment for sin, but Christ the innocent and perfect Son of God was
delivered in^^ the Power of the Devil for a time, to be vered and troubled by
him, therefore it was (...) the Punishment of our Sin.

Object.
These Authors unanimously complain, that ^he Scripture no where says in
express words, That Christ's Righteousness is imputed to ^s.

Answ.
All Scholars know that this is the first Ca^il of Innovators to weaken the
Faith of the ^nwary. For themselves grant this concludes ^ot, It is not read
expressly in Scripture, there^^re it is not the Doctrine of the Scriptures: say
themselves grant it, as in express terms (...) other Questions, so by their
Practice in the ^resent Controversy; They having new mouled Divinity in this
last Age, and put it into ^^ew terms, and unknown both to Scripture ^^d
Antiquity: They that complain of us for ^sisting upon the term of Imputation of
Christ's ^ighteousness, as not contained expressly in ^cripture ought in all
justice and prudence to ^^ve showed us first the Chapters and Verses ^here
their Terms of condition, causa sine qua ^^n, first and second Justification,
remediaing Law, a Law of Grace, and the like are (...) be found. Moreover they
know, that Im^^tation of Righteousness is a Scripture Term ^^n times used in
the 4th to the Romans, and ^^at Righteousness is said to be imputed without
Works, to him that works not but be^^eveth on him that justifies the
ungodly, v. 4. therefore this Righteousness cannot be a man's ^wn Obedience;
and also that Christ is said Scripture to be our Righteousness, made of ^^od
Righteousness to us, and we made the Righteousness of God in him; which are
equivalent to his Righteousness being imputed to us. The Learned may find every
one ^^ these Objections against the Imputation (...) Christ's Righteousness,
with some others ^^ the like kind urged to the same purpose by Bellarmin and
answered by B. Davenant for substance as we do, de Justi. Cap. 24.
and B. Downam in many Chapters of his Learned Discourse of Justification.

Object.
It is further objected, Our own works an^ said to be accounted to us for
Righteousness as that Act of Phincas in slaying Zimri an^ Cozby, Numb. 25.7,
Psalm. 106.30, 31. And restoring the poor Man's Pledge, Deuteronomy. 24.13. It shall be
righteousness to thee before the Lord And the keeping of all God's Commandments
Deuteronomy. 6.25. It shall be our Righteousness if (...) observe all these
Commandments before the Lord Therefore Christ's Righteousness is not
immediately imputed to us for our Justification.

Answ.
When our own works are said to be ou^ Righteousness or accounted for
Righteousness it is only meant that God does accept then and reward them. Thus
he promised Phines the Priesthood for ever, which was yet revoked for the sins
of Elies Sons, 1 Samuel 2.30. etc. And the Reason subjoyned shows ho^ this
Righteousness was accounted, viz. Th^^ that honor me I will honor, and those
that a^^ spise me shall be lightly esteemed: It was accounted for
Righteousness, i. e. honored and rewarded. Thus mercy to the Poor shall be our
righteousness before God, i.e. he is pleased with it, and will reward it with
like kindness when we need it, Psalm. 41.1. And our keeping all the Commandments
shall be our Righteousness, shall be accepted and rewarded as the obedience of
Children. But all this proves not that we shall be made the Children of God,
have our sins forgiven, and be entitled to Grace and life for our own
obedience. We acknowledge obedience to Gods Commands is our Righteousness,
whereby we are morally and inherently righteous, i.e. conformable to God's Law
and Will; and this, while imperfect is our inchoate or imperfect Righteousness,
and when it shall be consummate it will be our perfect and complete
righteousness; as B. Davenant says well against the Papists Calumnies, de
Just. cap. 22. But the Righteousness for which we are pardoned, accepted and
made Heirs of Life, must be every way a perfect and complete righteousness,
even the righteousness of Christ, as the same Author says, Aperte affirmamus
Deum justissimum neminem justificare, h.e. cap. 22. p. 311.
(ut exposuimus) a reatu absolvere, justum declarare, ad vitam aeternam, quae
est justitiae praemium, acceptare, nisi interveniente vera and perfecta
justitia quae etiam vere fiat ipsius justitia. And again, Dicimus
neminemjustificari nisi qui donetur justitia tam cumulata tamque perfecta, Ibid.
ut Deus in illum oculos conjiciens non possit eadem donatum pro jnsto non
habere.

It is pleaded that Faith is imputed for Righteousness in the same manner that
other Works are, and so justifies but as they do, and is our Righteousness as
they are; and thus they interpret Genesis 15.6. Abraham's Faith was accounted for
Righteousness, i.e. it was reckoned a noble and excellent Act of Faith with
which God was well pleased and would reward it.

Answ. 1.
Faith in the Promise of Pardon and Life, of mere Grace and Free Gift cannot be
counted any part of our Righteousness: To trust in the general, in the
Goodness, Power and Promises of God is required by the Moral Law, and is a
Natural or Moral Duty, and so a part of our universal Righteousness or
Conformity to that Law: But to trust in the Promise of Forgiveness and Mercy
(which only is the Faith in question) is not required by the Moral Law, but
supposes us Breakers of it, and to be under its Condemnation; it only seeks
for Mercy proposed in a new, supervening Promise, and therefore is not our
Righteousness as Works are.

The Apostle takes occasion from a notable Instance of Abraham's Faith in a
particular case, 2ly.
and its obtaining the Promise of Great Blessings, to argue, That Faith in the
general Mercy of God in Christ does obtain Justification, Romans 4.2, 3. and that
with the exclusion of all works, v. 5. To him that works not, but believes
in him that justifies the ungodly, Faith is imputed for Righteousness; and
this Justification is explained by having sins forgiven, covered, not imputed,
v. 6, 7. Faith therefore is imputed for righteousness only as it does obtain the
forgiveness of sin, and the acceptance of them that have no works, that are
ungodly in themselves; and this must be by the Righteousness of Christ, not by
its self being our righteousness.

Object.
It is also said, If we are justified immediately by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, then there is nothing for us to do to obtain Justification; we must
only believe we are justified and we are justified.

Answ.
There is nothing for us to do to purchase Justification; this is done by
Christ: But we must apply this purchase to our selves by believing or trusting
in it, flying to it for Justification. When a Ransom is paid for a Captive,
there is nothing left for him to do to purchase his liberty, yet he must accept
and challenge the Fruit of this Purchase to himself, before he can enjoy it.
Though Adam has procured and entitled to death upon all his Posterity, yet
that Curse reaches not us till we receive a Being from and do habitually
consent to his Sin. In like manner Christ purchased life for all the Elect, yet
they do not partake of it till they are ingrafted into him, and we do, at least
habitually, consent and trust to be saved by him.

Object.
Lastly, it is argued, If Christ's Righteousness be properly imputed, then we
should perfectly be delivered from all sin and misery and immediately brought
to Heaven.

Answ.
Justification it self obtains remission of all sins, and an immutable right
to life, or the Favor of God, and an actual entrance into that Favor; this
every justified person does obtain upon believing, 1 John 5.12. He that has
the Son has life. Romans 8.1. Justification has its proper effect in this life,
viz. it takes away sin and the Curse or Obligation to Punishment, it
reconcileth to God, and brings us into that Favor which will endure for ever;
but God having redeemed us by his Son, intends not only to justify us from
our sins and give us the Life promised by the Law, but also to make us his
Children, to give us glory in Heaven, to make us Partakers of his Sons Glory
and Kingdom: And for this it pleases him to breed us, to nurture and sit us for
it, by conflicting with sin, by overcoming the World and the Devil, that the
Glory of his Son and Grace may appear the more: Therefore the imperfect
troublesome state of Believers in this life is not because their Justification
is not perfect, but because God has a further design in it, for his Glory and
their good.

CHAP. V. The adverse Opinion propounded and examined: Pelagius and Arminius
the Authors of it.
OF all that ever troubled the Church with their Errors, the Pelagians and
their ^ate Offspring the Arminians have most perplexed it with their Opinions,
partly by their importunity, reviving them and urging them ^afresh from time to
time, so that the Church has had little quiet from them for the last twelve
hundred years, though their Opinions have been most frequently and most fairly
examined and unanimously refuted above any Errors whatsoever, and that both by
particular Writers of all Ages, and also many Sy^ods greater and smaller: But
principally by their dishonest Art of misrepresenting the Orthodox Doctrine to
persuade the Simple that they oppose particular men's Sentiments, not the
Doctrine of the Church, and by covering their own Opinions, propounding them
plausibly and ambiguously, that the Falsehood may ^ot be easily discerned, that
at once they may ^nsinuate with the Simple, and have retreats ^o avoid the
Arguments of the Learned, wherein they do like those that sculk in Woods and
Thickets, whom it is as hard to find out as it ^s to conquer. It was a sit
Epithet that Hie^om gave Pelagius, Coluber ille Britannus, that British Snake:
For he had his many windings and foldings, and for his advantage could cast his
Skin to. When he was taxed to deny Grace, ascribing all to man's free Will, he
protested to ascribe all to Grace, and yet meant thereby nothing but Nature or
Free Will, which he called Grace because it was the Gift of God; Vossius Hist.
Pelag. lib. 1. pars 1. Joh. Latius Hist. Pelag. lib. 1. par. 1.
and when all his Opinions were summed up and objected to him in the Synod of
Diospolis or Lydda, he openly and severally renounct them all with Anathemas,
and all by equivocal words, keeping the same meaning. The like did his Scholar
Caelestius, when called to an account before the Bishops of Rome and Africa;
Fostus and Cassianus the Semipelagian Leaders trod in their steps, as the same
Authors out of Augustine and Prosper have showed. Arminius and his Followers
have not come behind them in this Art. The Preface to the Synod of Dort and
Lubertus sufficiently insorm us how Arminius strove to cover his Opinions,
contra Bersium.
till he might by secret insinuations gain a party to stand on his defense:
When he was suspected of novelty by the Presbytery of Amsterdam, Sancte
protestatusest, etc. he solemnly professed that he knew no man in the
Low Countries, that had a mind to bring in Innovations in Religion. His
Disciples were of the same temper, which they showed both in the Synod and in
their own Writing. By the same Art their Followers amongst us at this day
create us much trouble, especially in this point of Justification by Christ's
Righteousness imputed, about which they had their Doctrine from Arminius:
Popular Insinuations is the best of their Rhetoric; Generals, Equivocation and
Tergiversation is the greatest part of their Logic, which we shall make now to
appear by enquiring what is their Opinion concerning the Effect of Christ's
death and obedience, who deny us to be properly justified by it, or it to be
imputed to us: They do agree to retain the Term of Imputing Christ's
Righteousness. Just. Evang. p. 51.
The notion of Imputation in general (says one of them) is no way to be
opposed, it being impossible that we should receive benefit by, and the effects
of what another does without some kind of Imputation. But thus Socinus will
say, What Christ did was imputed to us, i. e. it was nostro bono, for our good
and benefit. Mr. Baxter charge Dr. Tully with the breach of all that is
Sacred, Answ. to Dr. Tully p. 18, 172.
for saying that he denies all Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and
tells us that he does not only hold it in some sense, but in a larger sense
than many do, viz. That not only his Passive Obedience is imputed to us, but
his Active also, yea his Habitual and Divine Righteousness so far as
influential to give merit to his Obedience; and yet all this is but words. For
whosoever asserteth the infinite value of the death of Christ, must and does
acknowledge the concurrence of his Active, Habitual, Papaeus.
and Divine Righteousness, to make his death an infinite Prize, which it could
not be unless the person dying, were God, of a perfect, holy Nature, and of
perfect holy Life till the time of his death. But he that uses a common word
(as this of Imputation is) and in that Question and Matter to which it
belongs properly, and uses it in a sense quite different from the common
acception and state of the Question, does but equivocate in retaining that
Term. Though Protestants have differed about the Righteousness of Christ
imputed, whether it be the Passive only or the Active also, yet till of late
there has been no question among them about the meaning of the term
Imputation; all understanding thereby that we were justified and accepted to
Life Eternal for the Righteousness of Christ intended and wrought for us. But
it is more strange that he who is so earnest to be accounted a maintainer of
Imputation, should no better defend himself from the accusation of denying it.
For when a few lines would have expressed any man's meaning in this point, who
was willing to be understood, he gives us many distinctions, divisions, chap.
2. p. 48, etc.
and sub-divisions, and fifty Propositions to explain in what sense he holds
Christ's Righteousness imputed, and in what not, and yet confesses after all
these that he doubts he has not made his meaning plain enough, to those who
are not exercised in the Controversy, who had most need of his Explication,
and therefore adds more distinctions and propositions to make his meaning
plainer, chap. 3. p. 79.
which is as well performed as if a man endeavoring to wash an Ethiopian
white, should first plunge him into a River of Water and afterward into a
Vessel of Ink: He goes ^n with the same Art and Chap. 4. p. ^9.
instead of opposing the Drs. sense of Imputation and de^ending his own, he
thrusts together all the ^ences of Imputation, which he denies both ^he sound
and the unsound, and then disputes against Imputation with 43 Reasons, but
against what or in what sense he would not have ^he People but only his Friends
to understand. (...) this be reconciling to devize new terms and ^ew questions,
if confounding things be clearing of them, if hiding ones meaning with
mul^itudes of words be to explain onesself, then ^his Author has acquitted
himself well. I will ^dd another instance of his Explications: I did assert
that Christ's Righteousness (even habi^ual, Appeal to the Light, p. 1.
active and passive exalted by his Divine ^ighteousness) being the fulfilling
of his Law and Covenant of Mediation, has perfectly me^ited Reconciliation,
Pardon, Adoption, San^tification, Glory, and all the good which ever ^^e
receive, to be given us freely in his own time, and on his own terms, by his
New Covenant, by ^is Spirit, and by his Providence; and that we are as justly
and certainly justified, pardoned, and saved by and for this meritorious
Righteousness and Sacrifice of Christ, as if we had done and suffered all our
selves, and that he suffered for us and in our stead, that we might not suffer,
and fulfilled all Righteousness for us that were Sinners, to those proper uses
we have and need no other Righteousness, and though it be not Scripture Phrase,
we may truly say that thus Christ's Righteousness is imputed to us, etc. This
was writ to avoid the charge of denying Imputation of Christ's Righteousness,
and therefore worded in Protestant Phrases as much as could be, and yet a
different sense couche in them, viz. in those words, to be given us on his own
terms, and by his New Covenant whereby is intended that Christ merited ^^
Reconciliation, Justification, etc. to be given to us as the immediate Effects
of his Purchase, but to be given us upon the fulfilling the Commands of the
Gospel, so that it is ^^ Christ's Righteousness that justifies us, or ^ imputed
to us to Justification, but it did only merit a New Covenant or Law by
fulfilling whereof we should be justified. We shall not endeavor to make plain
what these men would obscure and hide, viz. the difference betwin^ them and us
in the point of Imputation. It is the usual Protestant Doctrine that Jesus
Christ undertook to fulfill that Law which men broken and to bare that
Punishment which their Since deserved in the behalf of his Elect, and that God
accepting this undertaking of his from Eternity, and the performance of it in
time did therefore promise and grant pardon of sin, right to eternal life, and
his Spirit, and all spiritual blessings to be conferred upon each of these
Elect Persons, when by the Grace of Christ they should claim them, and put
their trust in him: Hereupon we say, when a man is actually pardoned and
intituted to life by virtue of this undertaking and grant, that Christ's
Righeousness is imputed to him, i. e. that these benefits are bestowed upon
him, for that Righteousness which Christ wrought and ^^d accepted, and he
flies to for Salvation ^^d for no other reason: And hereupon ari^^h in
justified persons an immutable right to ^^e and the Grace of God to bring them
to it; ^ereupon they may be certain of their Perse^^rance and Salvation: But on
the contrary ^^ese men teach, first, That though Christ ^^d materially fulfill
the Law broken by men, ^^d bore the Punishment due to their sins, (...). did
many things which the Law comman^^d, and suffered many things which it threat^d
against Sin, yet that he did not intend directly and properly to satisfy that
Law by o^^ying the Precepts and undergoing the Penal^^s of it, but did only
fulfill the Law of a Me^^ator imposed upon him and peculiar to him, which was
to do and suffer such things as God ^^eased to enjoin him. 2ly. That this which
christ did and suffered did respect and was intended, not for any particular
persons, but ^^r all mankind equally as Adam's Sin did. ^^y. That therefore
this Obedience or Righ^^ousness of Christ did not purchase Pardon,
^^stification, or any of the Fruits of it for all (...) for any man
immediately. 4ly. But that (...) procured this only, That God being content
^^ot to insist upon the Law of Innocence, and (...) hold man to that which was
now become ^^possible through the weakness of sinful ^^esh, he should grant a
Covenant of sincere ^bedience to them, that would repent of their ^^rmer sins
and receive Christ for their Lord ^^nd Savior, that they should be saved as
^ertainly as if they had not broke the Law of Innocence, or had satisfied it
when broken 5ly. And therefore their Justification must be mutable as their
sincere obedience is. 6ly. This is then that which they mean by Impu^^tion of
Christ's Righteousness, and its p^^chasing Justification for us, viz. That it
wa^ a means of taking the Covenant of Works on of the way, and of procuring a
New Covenant of sincere Obedience, which if men do perform, they shall be
justified or live by it, notwithstanding their sins and imperfections, a^^ much
as they should have been justified b^ doing the Law of Works; so that this
Co^^nant being the Effect of Christ's Death, (...) the Benefits of it,
Justification, Adoption etc. are to be reckoned the Fruits of it al^^ and when
we enjoy these Benefits, his Righteousness is imputed to us, i.e. we receive
the Benefit of that Covenant which his righteou^^ness purchased. Now I demand
what it is th^^ justifyeth or gives us a right to life immediately and
properly? By this Doctrine it is our fulfilling of the New Govenant, the
Christ's Righteousness does not properly ^^stifie us, or immediately procure
our Pard^^ or Life; then this Righteousness is not imp^^ted to us for
Justification. To call this Imp^^ting of Christ's Righteousness to us is a
sense so remote from the state of the question, which is, By what Righteousness
we are justified immediately before God; and from the very Notion of the word
Imputation, and imp^^ting or reckoning to one, that I cannot call^^ less than
equivocation or trifling.

Object.
But they say that Faith and Repentance or ^ur fulfilling of the Gospel Covenant
is a means ^f applying Christ's imputed Righteousness, 4 disp. of Just. p. 264.
and so is a Righteousness subordinate and subservient to his, not at all
derogating from (...).

Answ.
By applying Christ's Righteousness they ^^ean that then we have the Benefits
and Effects of Christ's satisfaction, when we have fulfilled the Terms of the
Gospel. As when a Man has served his Apprentiship in a Corporation, then he
enjoys the Privileges of the Charter, which was boutht or given many ^ears
before; but will any man say that then ^he buying or procuring of the Charter
is ^mputed to him? They teach that God has ^romised to pardon and save them
that obey ^is Gospel, what is it then that gives the immediate right to Pardon
and Salvation, that ^s constitutive of a man justified in Law, is it ^ot this
Obedience to the Gospel? Then this ^s it which is imputed to a man for
righteousness, but Christ's righteousness is not applied is that which does
constitute us righteous, for which we are justified, but when we are justified
by our obedience to the Gospel, this is a favor which we should never have
had, if Christ had not purchased it: To call this applying or imputing of
Christ's Righteousness, ^s to hide a Heterodoxie with usual and Orthodox terms.

Object.
But the same Author acknowledges that Christ's Righteousness is our only legal
righteousness, or rather pro-legally, p. 274. Ibid.
a righteousness instead of our righteousness or obedience to the Law: and
passim.

Answ.
If Christ fulfilled the Law of Works in our stead so that his Righteousness is
accepted for our fulfilling it, then must we be justified by his righteousness
without any further righteousness or conditions. For the Law being fulfilled
for us, must acquit us and give us life; this we defend: but he means not so,
Christ is our legal righteousness with him, not by proper fulfilling the Law of
Works for us, but by taking it out of the way, so that no such perfect innocent
righteousness should be required of us to Salvation; and this he mean by
pro-legal instead of our legal righteousness. This is still hiding his sense
with ambiguous words. It remains then that by imputing Christ's Righteousness
they intend nothing else but that Christ procured a Covenant of Grace, by
fulfilling whereof we shall be justified and saved though sinful and imperfect,
which Justification and Salvation we must originally yet remotely ascribe to
Jesus Christ, because he procured this mild Covenant for us; but the
righteousness which constituteth us Just in Law, and for which we shall be
pronounced righteous and Heirs of the Kingdom at Judgment is our own sincere
Obedience, not Christ's Obedience, as appears at large from this Author.

It is pretended that Luther in the heat of his Spirit and Zeal against Popish
Superstitions, Object.
let fall some words which sounded as if he thought Christ's Personal
Righteousness was every Believers righteousness, Answer to Dr. Tully p. 15. 11.
and their Sins were made his, which afterward he qualified, showing that
Christ's Righteousness is ^urs, and our Sins his only in the Effects.

Answ.
But that Luther maintained the same Imputation as we do, in opposition to all
works, his Sermons and Comments on the Gal: sufficiently show, and all both
Papists and Protestants do acknowledge: And if by imputing Christ's
Righteousness in the Effects be meant its Immediate Effects, viz. that we
should be justified immediately by that righteousness trusted in immedietate
formae, without the interposition of any other righteousness to be wrought by
us, it is the Doctrine we contend for: but ^f this be meant (as the drift seems
to be) that ^t is imputed so as to merit a New Covenant by performing of which
we shall be justified, and so it be imputed only in its remote Effects, it is
manifestly untrue.

Object.
It is said again, That most of our Reformers rightly asserted that Christ's
Righteousness was ours by the way of meriting our righteousness, Ibid. p. 16.
13.
though some of them followed Luther's Expressions of the Imputation of
Christ's Personal Righteousness.

Answ.
Calvin and Melancthon who do not much follow Luther's Expressions, affirm,
That our Justification consists in remission of sins for the Merit of Christ
received by Faith only, and it is most untrue that any of our Reformers talked,
That Christ only merited that we should be justified by our own Righteousness
according to the Gospel Covenant (as is here meant.) Problem. loc. de Just.
6.25.
Aretius Melancthon's Scholar defines Justification by the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, and does charge Thammerus once his fellow Pupil under
the same Master, with deserting his Masters and the Doctrine of all Reformers,
for teaching, That Faith in the business of Justification includes Obedience
to the Gospel, and that we are justified by it as the Fulfilling of the Gospel,
and that the Works which St. Paul excludes from justifying, are the Works of
the Law, not the Works of the Gospel, also that gratis per gratiam, being
justified freely by his Grace, was meant only that for Christ's Sake our
imperfect obedience is accepted to Justification and sinless obedience not
insisted on; where the Reader may find Thammerus his Arguments and
interpretation of Scripture there cited at large, for substance the same
produced by our Authors, and sharply taxed as a deserting from the Reformation.

Object.
It is farther said, The Papists fastening upon those Divines who held Imputation
of Christ's Personal Righteousness in its self, Ibid. 16.
in the rigid sense, did hereupon greatly insult against the ^rotestants, as if
it had been their common ^octrine, and it greatly stopped the Reformation.

Answ.
Thus Bellarmin pretended that amongst the ^rotestants there were several
Opinions about ^^e Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, one (...) Luther,
another of Calvin, a third of some ^^hers, besides that of Osiander, de Just.
cap. 22. p. 312.
to which B. ^avenant answers, Secundam sententiam illo^^m commemorat, qui
Christi obedientiam, ju^tiam, nobis imputatam, statuunt esse formalem ^^usam
justificationis, at haec communis est nostro^^m omnium sententia, neque quod ad
ipsam rem ^^tinet, quicquam e nostris aliter aut censit aut ^^ipsit: He
reckons this a second Opinion our Writers, That they say Christ's
Righteousness is the formal cause of our Justification, ( i. e. its self is our
Righteousness) but ^^is is the common opinion of all of us, nor did ^^er any of
us write or speak otherways, as to ^^e substance of the thing: He also affirms,
^^at all the difference betwixt our Reformers ^^as only in the manner of
expressing themslves, and that Calvin who places Justification in Remission of
sin, did yet mean that Re^^ssion to be granted for the Imputed Righteousness of
Christ, and that to be the Immediate Cause of it; and therefore adds as the
^^mmon Protestant Doctrine, p. 313.
Absque imputa^^ne obedientiae Christi, nulla remissio peccatorum ^^inetur --
haec causa est remissionis, haec cau^^ acceptationis, haec causa translationis
a statis ^^rtis ad statum vitae, i. e. without the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness there is no forgiveness; this is the cause of Pardon, this is the
cause of our acceptance with God, and of our translation from the state of
death to the state of life.

It is suggested that this offense of the Papists occasioned the German Divines
to dese^^ the Question of Imputation, Object.
So Dr. Tully, 17. q. 17, 18
and to dispute what Righteousness of Christ it is by which we are justified,
and many Learned Men maintained that it was the Passive only.

Answ.
This Question arose and was agitated among themselves as Paraeus informs us in
his Miscellanies, nor did it at all concern the Papis^^ who are Enemies to the
proper Imputation of Christ's Righteousness passive as well as active, against
his bearing our sins as well as performing the Law for us: And these Divines
who maintain the Imputation of Passive Obedience only, yet maintain that to be
our Formal Righteousness, by and for which we are justified, and not that it
procured a Covenant of Grace only. Th. Theol. de Justif.
Thus Vrsin, Justitia Evangelica est poena peccatorum nostrorum quam Constus
pro nobis sustinuit, credentibus a Deo gr^tis imputata: So Paraeus in the
Treatise alleged, and Windeline also in his Theologia, capde Justif. These. 6.
he says, That the instrumental cause of Justification is Faith or Affiance in
that thing, for which we are acquitted in the Judgment of God and taken into
favor, even the Merit of Christ. Instrumentalis of sides, h. e. fiducia, qua
id amplectimur and nobis ^pplicamus per and propter quod in judicio Dei
absolvimur a maledictione legis, and in gratiam re^ipimur, nempe Christi
meritum: And These. 7. That the satisfaction of Christ for our sin, or his
Passive Righteousness is that for which or by which we are justified; Materia
ejus est id ^^er quod and propter quod coram tribunali divino ^^maledictione
legis absolvimur and innocents and ^^usti reputamur; est id perfecta Christi
pro nobis satisfactio, qua poenas propter peccata nobis de^^ it as nostro loco
ipse fuit, etc. And that Mr. Gataker hereafter quoted, was of the same mind ^s
evident from his learned posthumons Trea^ise of Justification. In all this here
is no footstep of our Author's Notion of Imputation: ^or the question is not
What, Righteousness of Christ is imputed, but How it is imputed, whether
formally, properly and immediately, as all these Divines affirm, or remotely
only, ^^mediately and metaphorically, as some of late ^^contend.

In England most Divines used the Phrase, Object. Ibid. 18.
That we were justified by the Forgiveness of Sin and the Impputation of
Christ's Righteousness, and being accepted as righteous unto life thereon; but
the Sense of Imputation few pretended accurately to discuss, etc.

Answ.
True, they did not distinguish away the sense of Imputation, and leave only an
equivocal term. Our Homilies speak expressly that we may be said to have obeyed
and suffered in what Christ has done and suffered for us. ut supra. cap. 2.
The Doctrine of the Church of England has been constantly that we are
justified by Faith, as an Hand receiving, as an Instrument applying the
righteousness of Christ, as is manifest by the Homilies: King Edward's
Catechism composed by Dr. Ponet B. of Winchester, where the Phrase of Faith,
being an hand is extant; by the 39 Articles, with Articles of Lambeth; the
whole University of Cambridge in the Recantation which they enjoined Barret; by
the Articles of Ireland composed by English men mostly; and by the public
Question disputed in both Universities, collected out of their public Records
by Mr. Prin in his Antiarminianism; and sure this is nothing to Christ's
procuring a Covenant of Obedience and justifying us by that: Nor do Mr.
Wotton's three Assertions, as here alleged overthrow the substance of our
Doctrine. We grant there is an over rigid sense of these words, We are
justified by Christ's fulfilling the Law, as if we had fulfilled it in him: Yet
this proves not, That we are not justified immediately by Christ's fulfilling
the Law, as intended and wrought for us. Page 24, 25. the Author gives us his
own sense, viz. That all the Righteousness of Christ, habitual, active,
passive, and divine, as advancing them in value, is the meritorious cause of
our Justification. But are we accepted and justified immediately for this
Righteousness? No: Yet that is the Imputation all former Divines maintained.
How then? Why, for this Righteousness God makes a Covenant of Grace, in which
he freely gives Christ, Pardon, and Life to all that accept the Gift as it is;
so that the Accepters are by his Covenant or Gift as surely justified and saved
by Christ's Righteousness, as if they obeyed and satisfied themselves, etc.
viz. That the conditions of the Gift in the Covenant of Grace being performed
by every penitent Believer, that Covenant does pardon all their sins (as God's
Instrument) and gives them a right to eternal life for Christ's Merit. This is
a confession of what we represented before, sc. That the fulfilling the
Gospel-conditions of faith, repentance, etc. is the righteousness which gives
us the immediate right to pardon and life, and that Christ's righteousness only
merited this grant of life upon those conditions. It might be expected by this
History of the controversy that some Divine should have been quoted which
taught this Doctrine, but alas here is not one since the Reformation! Therefore
I shall quote the true Authors of this Opinion after I have vindicated B.
Davenant and Mr. Bradshaw, who are here and elsewhere ingeniously represented
as laying the ground of this Opinion, and as maintaining Imputation in another
sense than all had done before them.

For the most Learned and Pious Bishop, It is said, p. 18, 19. That though he
most stiffly defended Imputation in words, yet when he tells what Protestants
mean by it, he says, That our own Actions, and Passions, and Qualities may not
only be imputed to us, but also some extrinsecal thing neither inherent in us,
nor done by us; de facto autem imputantur, quando illorum intuitus and
respectus valent nobis ad aliquem effectum, aeque ac si a nobis aut in nobis
essent, i.e. They are imputed, when the sight or respect of them does profit us
for any effect, as much as if they were in us or done by us: [Note that he
says but ad aliquem effectum non ad omnem, i.e. to some, not to every effect.]

Answ.
By this we are to understand that the Bishop meant Christ's Righteousness was
imputed for some certain Effect, viz. To procure a New Covenant, not
immediately to justify us. I see I need not despair, but my Books hereafter
may be quoted for metaphorical imputation. In truth the Bishop does not say, ad
aliquem tantum, but to some effect, but aliquem effectum, simply meaning
quemvis, any effect, sc. That things without us (he intends Christ's
Righteousness) may be imputed, i.e. profit us to any effect, as well as things
in us or done by us; and that the following Similitudes show, of a slothful
person promoted for the Merits of his Ancestors, or a Malefactor pardoned by
another suffering in his stead, which in both cases is done by the immediate
imp^tation of such merits and suffering, without performing conditions by the
Parties. But that the Bishop maintained imputation in the same sense that we
do, and almost in the same words, is so evident that I am ashamed to produce
the Proofs in so clear a case. His 37th Determination is, That Justifying Faith
is fiducia, affiance in God for the remission of sins through the satisfaction
of Christ, that this is the very formal Act of Justifying Faith. His 8th
Determination is, That the Sanctified may be sure of Salvation, which will not
consist with conditional Justification, and one Proof is Arg. 4. As it is most
certain that Christ paid a sufficient price for all men, so it is no less
certain hanc satisfactionem omnibus fidelibus and paenitentibus imputari and
applicari, quasi ab illis ipsis Deo oblata and praestita fuisset, i.e. That
this satisfaction is imputed to all Believers, as if they themselves had made
it and offered it to God. But I shall confine my self to that Book which is
misrepresented. Chap. 22. he proposes the Question, de Just habit. and actual.
Whether we are justified by the Obedience or Righteousness of Christ imputed
to us, and that be the formal cause of Justification? Where he explaineth the
Nature of Justification, of Imputation, the Righteousness of Christ, and the
Formal Cause of Justification, in the same terms as we do and without any
difference in sense. He gives us the Sum in these words, p. 313. Vno verbo,
utcunque Deus sanctificatos nos reputat, at que inchoate justos per impressam
and inhaerentem qualitatem justitiae, tamen justificatos, i.e. a peccatis
absolutos and ad vitam aeternam acceptatos per and propter justitiam
Mediatoris, nobis ab ipso Deo donatam, hac side spirituque applicatam, i.e.
Though God reputeth us inchoatively righteous, or holy by the habit of holiness
wrought in us, yet he accounts us justified, acquitted from sin, and accepted
to life by and for the Righteousness of Christ given to us by God and applied
by his Spirit and our Faith. Then he layers down two Propositions opposite to
the Papists, which he pursues to the 30th Chapter. The one excludes Works as
the Papists maintain them, the other affirms that the most perfect Obedience
of Jesus Christ dwelling in us and uniting himself to us, is the formal cause
of our Justification, for as much as it is made ours by Faith and by the Gift
of God. Prop. 1. Christi Mediatoris in nobis habitantis, atque per spiritum
sese nobis unientis perfectissima obedientia, Ibid.
est formalis causa justificationis nostrae, utpote quae ex donatione Pei and
applicatione fidei fit nostra: Observe he does not say Christ's righteousness
does in some sense justify us, or is ours for or in some effects, but he says
we are justified for that very righteousness or obedience of Christ, this is
the form whereby we are made righteous or justified in opposition to our own
Holiness; and that because it is our righteousness from Gods Gift, from our
Union to Christ and Faith in him; and then he lays down the contrary Position
of the Papists to be refuted, and answers their Calumnies against our
Doctrine of Imputation, which are much the same that are scattered in our late
Authors. The Proposition is Thesis 2. Papistarum, Mediatoris obedientia sive
justitia non donatur aut applicatur credentibus, vice aut per modum causae
formalis, Ibid.
cujus virtute and fiducia stant justificati, aut Deo ad aeternam vitam
acceptati. The Bishop goes on, and Chap. 24. answers 11 Arguments of
Bellarmin against Imputation, mostly the same with those alleged Chap. 4th.
Chap. 25. ut supra,
he answers Bellarmins Citations out of the Fathers against the same
Doctrine. Chap. 27. He further explaineth the Nature of Imputation, and what we
mean by a Formal Cause, just as we do. Chap. 28. He proves that Christ's
Righteousness is imputed as that very Righteousness which justifies us, which
he does by 11 Arguments, and by all the same Scriptures out of the New
Testament, which have been cited above Chap. 3. and by some others, all in the
same sense which we take them. Chap. 29. He alleges the Fathers for our
Doctrine. Chap. 30. He refuteth the Papists slanders in saying that this
Doctrine takes away the necessity of good works, where he has this memorable
passage concerning the difference of the two Covenants, Lex in condition
operum vitam habet ipsam vim and formam icti faederis, p. 396.
at Evangelium in Mediatoris sanguine fide apprehenso collocat ipsam vim and
formam, operum autem conditionem annectit ut subservientem huic faederi
Evangelico, non ut continentem aut constituentem ipsum faedus, i. e. the
Covenant of Works includes Works in the very form of it as the conditions of
that Govenant, but the Gospel places the form and force of the Covenant in
Faith in the Blood of Christ, but that it subjoyneth works as a subservient
condition, not as containing any part of the Covenant. Can any thing be more
contrary to the Doctrine we oppose, that the Gospel is a Covenant of sincere
Obedience, and that Obedience is the condition of the new Covenant whereby we
must be justified? In all this here is not a word favoring this new Opinion:
Chap. 31. There is something which may bare a color of some approbation of
this Doctrine, but it is but a color. He says, that Works are in some sort
necessary to Justification and Salvation; but that the term necessary ought not
to be used in Disputes with Papists, or in Discourses to the People, lest they
ascribe too much to them. Concl. 2, 3. And in the 4th he says, No works are
necessary neither Legal nor Evangelical, p. 402.
as a Meritorious Cause (but conditions of the Covenant are a meritorious
cause) Nulla opera bona sunt renatis ad salutem aut justificationem necessaria,
si per necessaria intelligamus sub ratione causae meritoriae necessaria, dico
nulla, ut excludam non solummodo opera legalia, sed etiam opera inchoatae
justificationis. And then Concl. 5th, he says, Bona quaedam opera sunt
necessaria ad justificationem, p. 403.
ut conditiones concurrentes vel praecursoriae -- ut dolere de peccato,
detestari peccatum and consimilia, i. e. Some good works are necessary to
Justification though not as efficient and meritorious causes, yet as previous
or concomitant conditions, such as sorrow for sin, humiliation, begging of
mercy, hoping in it, and the like. But by this he means not that these
dispositions have any direct influence on Justification it self, but that they
fit the Justified Person to use and improve his Justification: This we all
acknowledge that ordinarily in persons that can use their reason there are such
ministerial preparations both for conversion and justification, and yet they
are the causes of neither: Nor does this hinder but that God may
extraordinarily sometimes work Grace, infuse Faith, and justify men without
such previous dispositions: The reason following shows this was the Bishop's
sense. For God, says he, does not justify Stocks and Beasts but Men, and
those humble, contrite, and tractable to his Word and Spirit: Ibid.
Divina enim misericordia non justificat stipites, h. e. nihil agentes, neque
equos and mulos, h. e. recalcitantes and libidinibus suis obstinate
adhaerescentes, sed homines, eosdemque compunctos and contritos, ac verbi
spiritusque divini ductum sequentes. vid. plura. To make it more plain he adds,
When we say things are necessary it does not presently follow that they are
necessary as causes, but for orders sake: Not andum quando dicimus aliquid
necessarium ad hoc vel illud obtinendum, p. 404.
ex ipsa vi verborum non ninuitur necessitas causalitatis sed ordinis. Ibid.
Concl. 6th. he says further, Good works are necessary to preserve the state
of Justification; Bona opera sunt necessaria ad Justificationis statum
retinendum and conservandum: But how? Not as causes that work or deserve the
continuance of Justification, but as means without which God will not continue
it: Non ut causae quae per se efficient aut mereantur hanc conservationem, sed
ut media seu conditiones sine quibus Deus non vult justificationis gratiam in
hominibus conservare. He explaineth himself, That a life of obedience is
necessary, that a justified man may improve and enjoy the Fruits of
Justification, and also obtain the remission of following particular sins; and
to prevent a course of sin, which is contrary to the nature of a justified man:
In a word, That they are no otherways necessary to the continuance, then they
were to the beginning of Justification, sc. by way of concomitance and order,
not of influence: Nam ut nemo recipit Justificationem generalem, quae liberat a
reatu omnium praecedentium peccatorum, nisi concurrente paenitentia, etc. ita
nemo retinet statum a reatu liberum respectu peccatorum consequentium, nisi
mediantibus iisdem actionibus, credendi, etc. Ratio est quod haec abesse non
possint perpetuo ut non ad esse incipiant illorum opposita quae pugnant cum
natura justificati. Ibid.
Again, Quia Deus non vult carnales, etc. frui beneficio justificationis,
requirit assidua opera fidei, etc. quorum praesen. tia arcentur incredulitas,
etc. aliaque gratiae justificationis venena, at que particularium peccatorum
particularis condonatio obtinetur: p. 405.
And Hae autem actiones non conservant vitam gratiae proprie and per se
attingendo ipsum effectum conversationis, sed improprie and per accidens
excludendo and removendo causam destructionis. He acknowledges also, that the
falls of the Godly do not lose their Justification, Ibid.
Concl. 7. Vtcunque justificati in via bonorum operum claudicare, atque
aliquandiu extra hanc viam per abrnpta libidinum suarum aberrare possint, statu
filiorum haud amisso.

Lastly, He says good works are necessary to ^alvation and our coming to
Heaven; Non necessitate causalitatis sed ordinis, not as causes ^f it, but as
the order that God has appointed, that we should first glorify him on earth,
and then be glorified with him in Heaven. Now what they have gained by the
Bishop's Testimony; let the Reader judge: We willingly ^ubscribe to all this in
substance.

Mr. Bradshaw's Testimony will serve them to better; Praefat. de Just.
they cite his Preface for their purpose: his words are, Quid enim prohibet quo
minus ^traque Christi obedientia ad peccati cujusque re^tum tollendum, and ad
peccatorum nostrorum omnium veniam consequendam necessaria statua^ur? quid
obstat? quo minus etiam ad imputationem utriusque hoc sufficere dixerimus, quod
Deus utramque cum bono nostro admiserit obedi^ntiam, and propter came utramque
nos acceptos ^abeat, ac si nos ipsi eo quo par erat modo, legem ^livinam
implevissemus, qut paenas aeternas ex ea^em nobis debitas apud inferos
sustinuissemus. Here he endeavors to reconcile those that contend for the
Imputation of either the Active or Passive Obedience alone, and says, That we
may say they are both imputed, both performed for us, i. e. for our benefit, in
that way that God thought fit, and that we are justified by both as much as if
we had fulfilled the Law or suffered Eternal Death. But does Mr. Bradshaw here
express the manner how we are accepted by the Obedience of Christ? does he at
all derogate from our being justified immediately by Christ's Righteousness, or
does he lay any foundation for Justification by fulfilling the Gospel Covenant?
There is not a word of that here, or in all his Book: He does indeed speak more
accurately and cautiously of the notion of Imputation, and what Obedience of
Christ may be said to be imputed and what not, than others do; yet in substance
he agrees with them, and asserteth the old Protestant Doctrine particularly
Chap. 22, 23, 24. per totum: He affirms Christ's satisfaction to be the only
matter of our Justification, Chap. 22. Th. 1. In satisfactione Christi
supradicta, vera and sola justificationis posita est materia; And that by this
Satisfaction we are not only freed from eternal wrath, but made truly
righteous before God. Th. 2. Redemptio sive satisfactio illa qua pretium
ejusmodi persolvitur, cujus vi peccator non a debita tantum poena liberetur,
sed etiam in foro divino vere justissimeque justus factus dicitur, non est
fucata, metaphorica, etc. And that the form of our Justification is the
alleging of Christ's Righteousness, Chap. 23. Th. 2. Hujus Justificationis
forma est satisfactionis sive justitiae illius in gratiam ejus pro quo
praestita est coram Deo factae vel alligatio vel declaratio quaevis. And
lastly, he says, That the immediate effect of Justification is Reconciliation,
whereby all sins are forgiven, and God receives a Sinner into favor for the
Satisfaction of Christ accepted in his behalf, Chap. 24. Th. 2. Hominis cum Deo
reconciliatio ex vera justificatione orta est, qua Deus propter Christi
satisfactionem gratiosissime admissam cum peccatore in gratiam rediens,
remittit eidem peccata universa ipsamque pro vere justo habet. In the
Conclusion of his Book he gives us the Sum of what he had delivered immediately
touching the point of Justification.

1. Deus Pater justificat admittendo and imputando. 2. Deus Filius
satisfaciendo and advocatum agendo. 3. Sacro-Sanctus Spiritus revelando and
obsignando. 4. Fides apprehendendo and applicando. 5. Bona opera manifestando
and declarando.
This is the whole and usual Protestant-Doctrine.

We must now seek some other Authors of this Opinion. Art. 24.
Arminius in answer to the 31st Article objected to him, says, Christi
justitia imputatur in justitiam mihi non probari dixi: Having in general terms
as our Authors profess, to acknowledge that Christ's Righteousness is imputed
to us, and that we are justified by it; yet he here denies, That Christ's
Righteousness is imputed to us for Righteousness, and gives this reason;
Quicquid imputatur in justitiam, vel ad justitiam, vel pro justitia, ad ipsum
non est ipsa justitia stricte and rigide sumpta: At Christi justitia quam ille
praestitit Patri obediendo, est ipsissima justitia stricte and rigide sumpta:
Ergo, non imputatur in justitiam; i. e. That which is imputed to us for
righteousness, must not be righteousness strictly and properly so called; But
Christ's Righteousness was a strict and proper Righteousness or obedience to
his Father, Ergo. Arminius we see takes imputing Christ's Righteousness for
nothing else, but that it procures Justification for us, not that it self does
justify us or make us accepted; and that the righteousness which is imputed to
us, whereby we are justified, is not Obedience to the Law, but something else
which God for Christ's sake graciously accepts to our Justification: Declar.
sentent. oper p. 102.
What this is he expresses, having said that Christ's Righteousness is the
only meritorious cause of Pardon: Statuo, hoc censeo been and proprie dici
fidem homini credenti in justitiam ex gratia imputari, quatenus Deus Jesum
Christum filium suum proposuit tribunal gratiae, sive propitiationem per fidem
in sanguine ipsius, h. e. Faith is imputed to us for righteousness in as much
as God has made Christ the Tribunal of Grace, which is all one as to say with
ours, Christ as a King and Judge does justify us by and for believing in him.

And again in answer to the 26th Article objected to him, he contendeth, That
though Faith may be said to concur as an Instrument to Justification; yet the
Act of Faith does justify as it is graciously accepted for our Righteousness:
Apprehensio Christi est proprior quam instrumentum apprehendens, vel quo
objectum apprehenditur: Apprehensio autem est actio, itaque fides non qua
instrumentum, sed qua actio, imputatur in justitiam, quanquam propter illum
quem apprehendit.

Bertius in his Epistles explaineth this that Faith is required by the Gospel
instead of perfect Obedience to the Law of Works, contra Lubbert.
and so justifyeth us that should have done, as the fulfilling of the Command
of God, with this difference, That perfect Obedience needed no Pardon and
Grace, but Faith per gratiosam accepti lationem; of God's Gracious
condescension is accepted as a Man's Righteousness, he being pleased to require
no more of him, because of his inability to keep the Law; so then Christ's
Righteousness has purchased that we should be justified by our Faith, but it
self does not justify us. But do the Arminians by Faith mean only the
apprehending or trusting in Christ's Righteousness in opposition to or
contradistinction from all other Graces and Works in the matter of
Justification: Nothing less. By Faith they mean Obedience to the whole Gospel,
and all good Works, they say, are intended in Faith, that Faith and Repentance
are all one, though sometimes they are separated and spoken of apart for
clearness sake. Thus Hornbeck proposes their Opinion, Sum. Contro. lib. 8.
Quest. 20.
Number coram Deo justificemur non fide apprehendendo Christi justitiam, quae sola
nobis imputetur in peccatorum remissionem, ^sed fide ut est actus and opus
nostrum, includens in se obedientiam operum Evangelicorum, propter quam,
quamvis non ex ejus dignitate and merito justificemur? i. e. That we are not
justified by Faith as it apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, but as it is
an Act or Work of ours, including Obedience to all the Commands of the Gospel.
Harm. Remonstr. and Socin. Art. 12, 17.
Joh. Peltius has largely showed, That by Faith the Remonstrants mean
Obedience to the whole Gospel, and that this is it by which they would have us
justified. Take 2 or 3 citations.

Art. 12. Parag. 6. p. 157. ex Remonstr. confess. cap. 10. Hac ratione
considerata fides, totam hominis conversionem Evangelio praescriptam, ambitu
suo continet. Faith comprehends man's whole Conversion. Episcop. disput. 22.
Fides illa quae credenti imputari dicitur in justitiam, bona opera non tantum
non tollat, sed ea ipsa, aut eorum saltem faciendorum propositum natura sua in
se contineat and comprehendat; i.e. Faith which is imputed for righteousness
does not exclude Works, but contains them, or at least a purpose of doing
them. Joannes Geister. Confess. Bona opera and gratia non pugnant inter sese,
and sub fide etiam bona opera comprehenduntur; i.e. Grace and Works are not
opposite, and Faith comprehends Works. Yea this Man was so ingenuous as to tell
us, that we do not contend with the Papists, whether we be at all justified by
Works (in this the Remonstrants and Papists are agreed) the question only is,
By what Works we must be justified: Quando cum Papistis disputatur, non est
inquirendum, an per bona opera justificemur, sed per quae opera. He would only
exclude Popish superstitious Works, as our Authors would have, The Apostle Paul
only excludes Jewish Works or Ceremonial Observations, from our Justification.
Would you have the matter yet plainer, Adolph. Venator will put it out of
question: Justificamurne etiam ex operibus? Certe ita, i.e. Are we justified by
works also? Yes verily: And the Remonstrants in their Apology boldly affirm, ex
operibus hominem justificari istud non tantum non est absurdum, sed verissimum
esse totidem verbis pronuntiat Apostolus, Jacob. 2. Nec evadent hunc ictum
censores, cum hunc locum pro suo more de declaratione justificationis
intelligendum esse dicunt, i.e. It is so far from being absurd that a man is
justified by works, that it is most true; and the express words of the Apostle
James, which cannot be evaded by interpreting them of declarative
Justification. Thus we see that the Arminians meant the same thing, when they
said the (...) credere, the Act and Work of Faith it self does justify us,
that our late Authors do when they ascribe Justification to Faith and
Obedience; both agree that Faith in its usual acceptance and full latitude
comprehends assent and obedience to the whole Gospel, and that thus it
justifies and no other way, and in this how the Remonstrants do conspire with
the Socinians, Peltius does clearly demonstrate, ut supra,
which also the Arminians do not deny, as in their Apology; Si quis dicat hanc
sententiam, Quod Fides quatenus viva est, justificat, esse ipsissimam Socini
sententiam, is, dato quod id verum sit, necesse est, ut fateatur tandem Socinum
hac in part conspirare cum reformatis Ecclesiis quoad substantiam ipsam, i.e.
If any man say that this is Socinus's Doctrine, he must confess that Socinus
does so far agree with the Reformed Churches in substance: And this also
seems to have been the true sense of Pelagius, vid. Vos. Hist. Pelag. lib. 3.
par. 1.
viz. That men are justified and saved by their acknowledging and obeying the
Gospel, for as much as he taught that under the Gospel men were saved by
obeying it, as the Jews were by observing the Law of Moses, and those before
Moses by observing the Law of Nature: He also ascribes to the Death of Christ
nothing but the pardon of sins; acceptance with God must depend upon men's own
obedience, Christ helping them in it, by the instructions and encouragements of
the Gospel and by his own Example; and this does not much differ from the
Doctrine in hand.

Thus we see that the First Authors of these Opinions were the Pelagians and
Arminians, and that herein the Socinians differ little from them. Let us now
inquire, seeing we must not be justified by the very Righteousness of Christ's
Obedience and Death, to what End Christ died according to those men.

CHAP. VI. This Doctrine overthrows Christ's Merit and Satisfaction.
THE Apostle Romans 4.25. says, That Christ was delivered, i. e. to death, for
our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification: Whence our Protestants
have taught that the proper and immediate Effect of the Death of Christ was the
procuring or grant of Pardon, Justification, Life Eternal, to all the Elect, in
the Purposes of God, and that accordingly God in due time publishes to them
the Promises of the Gospel, by which through the effectual operation of the
Holy Ghost they are persuaded and drawn to Christ to believe and trust in him
for Life, and so they are made actual partakers of his Death, and justified.
But these Authors denying us to be justified immediately and properly by the
Righteousness of Christ, must and do deny Justification to be the immediate and
proper Effect of it, and assign some other immediate End of Christ's Death.
What this is we shall show, and how it does make void the Merit and
Satisfaction of Christ. I meet with two Opinions in this matter: The First,
says, That the immediate and proper End of the Death of Christ was not to
procure Reconciliation, Justification, etc. for all or any man, but to render
God placable or reconcilable to man, i. e. not that God upon the Death of
Christ does grant, purpose, or covenant the Justification and salvation of any
man, but that he may now justify, forgive, and save men in what way and upon
what terms he pleases. Thus Mr. Trueman as before: Gr. Prop. p. 86.
The immediate Effect of Christ's Satisfaction is, that God might be Just,
though he should pardon Sinners, that he might pardon salva justitia, not that
he must pardon them, come what will of it, or be unjust -- And again; The
Justice of God as a flaming Sword obstructeth all treating with us upon any
terms of Reconciliation whatsoever, and this would have been an eternal Bar to
all Influences and Effluxes of Favor; and now this Justice being satisfied,
and this Bar and Obstacle removed, Divine Grace and Benignity is left at
liberty freely to act how it pleases, and in what way and upon what terms and
conditions it thinks meet. This he had from Arminius, who having said, That
Justification, Pardon, or Reconciliation of any man, is not immediately
purchased by the Death of Christ: He tells us, The proper Effect of it is,
Reconciliatio Dei, remissionis, justificationis and redemptionis apud Peum
impetratio, contra Perkins, fol. 76. apud Twiss.
qua factum est ut Deus jam possit, utpote justitia cui satisfactum est non
obstante, hominibus peccatoribus peccata remittere and spiritum gratiae
largiri, i. e. the Reconciliation of God, the obtaining of remission and
redemption, viz. That God may forgive and sanctify men if he please without
breach of Justice, which is now satisfied. Hereupon they go so far as to tell
us, That when Christ had done and suffered all which was appointed him, God was
free to save or not to save men, or to save upon what terms or whom he pleased.
Thus Grevinch contra Ames. fol. 8. Peltius. p. 126.
Postquam impetratio praestita ac peracta esset Deo, jus suum integrum mansit,
pro arbitratu suo eam applicare vel non applicare, nec applicatio finis
impetrationis propria fuit, sed jus and potestas applicandi pro liberrimo suo
placito quibus and qualibus vellet, i. e. After Christ's Purchase was made and
finished, God was perfectly free to apply ^t or not to apply it as he should
please, nor was the Application of it the proper End of Christ's Purchase, but
that God might have power to apply it to whom and how he should think fit.
Episcopius goes a step further, and says, There could not be a deliberate
purpose in God of saving men, and opening a way of ^ise to them, till Christ
was sacrificed: Disp. 5. Ibid.
Deli^eratum mortale salvandi salutisque ostium apetiendi propositum in Deo
esse requirit, priusquam sacrificium oblatum esset. Now if this be the only
proper Effect of the Obedience and Death of Christ, that God who was before
bound to condemn Sinners by the Law of Works violated by them, might now think
of a way to save them if he pleased, and withal might choose whether he would
save them, or propound terms of Life to them or not. It follows ^ence:

1. That the Obedience of Christ was not meritorious, nor did merit any thing
of the father: It is true there was an intrinsecal, infinite value in Christ's
Obedience, by reason of the Divine Excellency of his Person, and so there was
an equality or proportion betwixt his Obedience and the Happiness which was to
be procured for men: But this is the Foundation of Merit, not Actual Merit. To
merit, is to deserve a Reward, to do something whereupon a Reward is due; so
that Merit in its proper notion does imply an actual Right or Obligation to a
reward, which Obligation arises from some Law, Promise, or Compact betwixt the
Parties; and he which does not give that Reward according to Merit offends
against some Law, either of strict Justice, or at least of Gratitude,
Generosity, Kindness, etc. If then God was not bound by Covenant, Promise, or
so much as deliberate Purpose to save men, or to give them any terms of Life
for all that Christ did or suffered, then his Obedience merited nothing, there
was nothing due, no reward proposed to him, which he would challenge; for God
was still free to do what he pleased with men: God (they say) would not have
been unjust, if he had not saved men (though Christ died) he was not then bound
by the Law of Justice (and he could not be bound by any other Law) to
remunerate the Death and Sufferings of his Son with such an happy Effect, as
man's Salvation. Christ's Death (say they) was a refuseable payment for sin,
even when it was presented to the Father; God might then have refused it, and
yet have been Just: But it would not have been just to have denied Jesus Christ
that which he merited, that would be due debt to him. They say indeed Christ
was the meritorious cause of our Justification? But what did he merit?
Justification: Then God was not free to deny it; he must justify those for
whom Christ merited Justification, or be unjust, unless there can be a cause
without an effect or causality: The effect of merit is some reward deserved,
given for the sake of the merit; the causality of merit is some compact Law or
Promise, whereby one is bound to reward that merit: If then God was bound to
nothing upon the Obedience of Christ, but still had jus integrum, entire
freedom to do what he pleased, then Christ did as freely offer his Obedience to
the Father to do what he pleased with it, or upon it; and certainly this is not
to merit. Thus Slatius declar. apert. Jesus Christus per passionem and mortem
suam nihil meritus est, nec solvit pro nostris peccatis, veluti vas pro
debitore, qui non est solvendo. If they say that he took away the Covenant of
Works and the necessity which God was under to condemn men, and this might be
the Effect of his Merit; this is not true: By this Opinion Christ did not take
away the Covenant of Works nor the Sentence of it: For then man must have been
discharged without any further Covenant or Terms, which is the thing they
oppose. They must say Christ offered himself to his Father in such manner, that
he might take occasion from it, if he thought it, justly to lay aside his
Obligation to Punish by the Law of Works, and proceed to terms of Grace, but
not that he must do either; and so Christ merited nothing at all of his Father.

2ly. It follows from this Doctrine, That Christ's Obedience and Death were
not properly satisfactory to Divine Justice. The say, That by Christ's Death
God's Justice w^ satisfied, the obstacle of Justice was removed, But how? God's
Justice in this case is nothing else but his Will or voluntary Obligation of
himself to deal with men according to his Law: To satisfy God's Justice is to
satisfied his Law, and to satisfy the Law is to fulfill (...) by obedience to
it, or suffering the penalty (...) it, or both: But they will not allow, That
Christ properly satisfied the Law of God Mr. Trueman says, Ibid. p. 89.
His death was not proper Payment at all: And if Christ did properly satisfy
the Law, then those for whom be did it must be hereupon discharged without any
further conditions to be required, or (...) be performed of them. But if Christ
satisfied not the Law, how could he satisfy Divine Justice, which has the Law
for its Rule (...) is tied to it? It was of Divine prerogative or infinite
Sovereignty, that God did accept of Christ to fulfill the Law for man, to wh^^
it was given, and who only was obliged by (...) But when the Lawmakers
Prerogative (...) accepted of the Surety, and of his under^^king for the
Sinner; then he himself was m^^^ under the Law, and satisfied Justice by
satisfying the Law; but if he satisfied not the Law then his Obedience was not
performed as Obedience to the preceptive part of the Law, or his sufferings
endured as subjection to the unitive part of it; and so neither of them ^ere
exacted in a way of Justice, or performed as submission to Justice, either
preceptive, or punitive; and so Justice could no ^ay be satisfied by his
Obedience: Moreover (...) after all the Obedience of Christ, God was ^ree to
save or not to save men, then he was ^ree either to give them new conditions of
Life, ^r to proceed to destroy them, according to ^he sentence and curse of the
Law of Works; and is it possible that Gods Justice should have received real
satisfaction from an infinite Price and Person, and yet the Persons for whom
satisfaction was made not be discharged, but Justice still be left in full
force to take vengeance, if the Judge pleased? Surely among men, if Justice be
satisfied either by the guilty person or by his Surety, by the Judge's consent,
even Justice it self must acquit and discharge the party concerned. The truth
is, By this Doctrine there was no satisfaction made to Divine Justice by
Christ's Obedience, and therefore the Sinner has no discharge procured, but
the whole transaction of the business of Man's Redemption, betwixt the Father
and the Son, was but a point of honor or a kind of generosity (if we may so
speak) As if a young generous Prince should perform some noble and difficult
exploits for the honor of his Father, and the Father again should pardon some
condemned Rebels, and restore them to his Favor hereupon, not as being any way
obliged to it, but as an act of a Noble and generous mind, and to express some
honor and requital to his Son. Thus Slati^^ Epist. ad N. Martin. An Christus
pro nob^ satisfecit? Respondeo, Nos negare, i. e. Did Christ satisfy for sin?
We deny it; And he gives five reasons, the last whereof is, The God could
neither punish for sin, nor require Faith as a condition in order to Salvation.

3ly. It follows also that Christ's Death was no Ransom, Redemption or Price
for Sinners: For if God after the death of Christ was still free to save or not
to save Sinners, then this death had properly bought or purchased nothing of
him. A ransom or price is not a valuable consideration only for a thing worth
it, or equal in value to it, but it must also be paid with the Compact or
Agreement, that the thing bought or ransomed shall for that price become the
Buyers, and the property be transferred to him, and no longer remain in the
Seller: If then Christ propetly bought us, ransomed us, etc. then our Salvation
became his de jure, he had a right to it upon his death, and it could no longer
remain in the free power of God to grant, or not to grant it: But if there were
no compact that life should be granted to Sinners if Christ would die for them;
if to give Life was still in God's absolute disposal, then his obedience is no
ransom, nor was he a Redeemer, he did not purchase his Church with his own
Blood, nor was that Blood a Price of their Redemption.

4ly. It follows that Christ did not at all die for sin: The Prophet says,
He was wounded and bruised for our iniquities, yea his Soul ^us made an
Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.5, 10. But if Christ did not take away sin and
procure pardon, but left God still free to pardon or ^ot, then he did not die
for sin, sin was not ^he meritorious cause of his Death, nor was ^he pardon of
sin the immediate end of his Death, but only to free the Father from the
necessity of condemning Sinners: Sin could be ^t the most but a remote
occasion, or causa ^ne qua non of the death of Christ: if that had not been,
God would not have been bound up from the exercise of his natural goodness, and
^o there would have been no occasion of Christ ^o die, to remove that obstacle
out of the way. And yet it is not easy to imagine what these ^en mean by the
obstacle of God's Justice, which hindered his Mercy to Sinners, which was
removed by Christ's Obedience. For ^oth they, and their Friends the Arminians
^eem generally to grant, That God of his infinite Sovereignty might have
pardoned sin without satisfaction, so that his absolute Justice (...) as not an
obstacle to his Mercy; and for his Law, and that Justice which respects it,
Christ (say they) did in no proper sense satisfy (...), and therefore his
Obedience could have ^o proper respect to Divine Justice, much less ^o sin that
had offended Justice.

5ly. Nor was Christ's Death a Propitiation ^r Atonement for our sins. The
Apostle, 1 John 2.1. says, That Christ was a Propitiation for our Sins; that
he loved us and washed us from our sins with his own Blood, Ap^^ 1.5. But this
is true only accidentally and eventually, if the immediate effect of Christ's
death was only that God might pardon, not that he must; and it was not the
prime and principal intention of his death: Since God has pleased to grant
terms of Salvation upon the death of Christ; his death may improperly be said
to have made atonement or reconciliation for them, because it occasioned it,
(...) made some way for it; but that which left God still entirely free to
pardon, or not, that did not appease his Anger, remove his displeasure,
reconcile him, or obtain his good Will (as is the nature of a Propitiation or
propitiatory Sacrifice) nor was it immediately (...) directly intended for that
end.

6ly. Nor can it properly be ascribed to God's Love to the World, that he gave
his Son to die, or to the Son's Love to Mankind, that he gave himself. For if
love to men were the Motive of Christ s Obedience and Death, both to the Father
and the Son, men's Salvation would have been immediately designed and intended
in it; it would have been medium ordinatum, a proper means, designed to bring
about their Salvation. But they tell us it was designed only to save God's
Honor, in case he should forgive Sinners, but not that he had obliged himself
any way to do it, no, nor that he had resolved with himself or deliberately
purposed to grant terms of Salvation when he sent his Son into the World, or
when he laid his wrath a curse upon him; it seems God did not yet know what use
he would make of the Death of his Son, neither could the Son know, when the
Father was not resolved. Thus we see this Opinion overthrows the whole Nature
and Intendment of Redemption; and Christ's Merit, Satisfaction, Ransom,
Sacrifice, and all that belong to it are but improper Metaphors, and the
greatest Mystery of Godliness must fly for refuge to a poor Trope to save it
from being an untruth; and Christ himself must be at most, but an honorary
Mediator and Redeemer.

The Second Opinion concerning the End of Christ's death is, That he died to
purchase the Covenant of Grace, or Conditions and Terms of Salvation, by the
fulfilling whereof men might be saved. Thus the Arminians used to speak, That
Christ died viam salutis pandere, to open a way for Men's Salvation, to purchase
conditions whereupon they might be saved, whereas before their Salvation was
impossible, by reason of the Curse or Sentence of the Law of Works. Act. Syn.
Dort. Art. 2. Remon. Christus merito mortis suae Deum Patrem universo generi
humano hactenus reconciliavit, ut Pater propter ipsius meritum, salva justitia
and veritate sua, novum gratiae foedus cum peccatoribus and damnationi obnoxiis
hominibus inire and sancire potuerit and voluerit. Thus Mr. Baxter faith, That
Christ purchased Justification and life to be given by his New Covenant; not
that he purchased these absolutely, to be certainly given to any persons, but
that he purchased a Covenant or Law of Grace, whereby these are promised upon
condition of Faith and Obedience. And this must be the sense (if any) of those
that assert Christ dying for all men to make them salvabiles, salvable; and to
render their Salvation possible, being impossible before, while the Law of
Works stood in such sorce. For before Christ's death, Men's Salvation was
possible to God, no new power was acquired to him; and possible in its self,
Men being subjects naturally capable of Salvation; this possibility then, must
be a possibility in Law, as we say, id possumus, quod jure possumus, that
Christ purchased a Law and grant of Salvation upon certain Terms, whereby it
now became possible for all Men to be saved if they should have sufficient
notice of it. This Opinion is a little more plausible, but no more true than
the former; which I thus prove,

1. It cannot be conceived how Christ did purchase this Covenant, according to
the rest of their Notions. The occasion or ground of this Purchase was, That
God was bound by his own Law of Works violated by Men, to condemn them without
Mercy: Now then, could this Obligation be dissolved without satisfaction to,
and fulfilling that Law, which yet they will not allow Christ to have done,
unless per accidens, as part of it is comprised in that special Law of
Mediator, which was given to him: If it was the Law which hindered God from
showing mercy, and made man's Salvation impossible, then that Law does oblige
God to see it fulfilled, or else to grant no life to Sinners; and if Christ did
not fulfill it, nor was made properly subject to it, (as they teach) then he
could not properly purchase a Covenant of life; if he did fulfill it for
sinners, then they must be discharged by his satisfaction, without further
conditions imposed on them, (as has been often said.) They say the Law of
Works was neither abolished nor fulfille by Christ, but relaxed; I suppose they
mean, That God did not insist upon the absolute performance of the Law, but was
pleased to admit of an aequivalent reparation of his Honor, by the Obedience
of Christ to that Law which he should impose on him, wherein should be
comprehended a great part of the Moral Law. I reply, If God did relax the Law,
so as not to require the proper fulfilling of it; then he did lose the
obligation which was laid upon him to see it fulfilled: The ordinate or
relative Justice of God obliged him to proceed according to that Law; and if he
admitted of another way of reparation to his Honor, he did not proceed in a
way of Justice in all that he laid upon Jesus Christ; and he might as well have
saved Man without the Obedience of Christ as with it; his Justice or Law
allowing that relaxation no more than a total superseding or laying aside the
Law: by this purchase therefore they can mean no more, but that Jesus Christ
did so honor the Father by his Obedience and Sufferings, that he might with
Decorum to his Majesty give to Sinners terms of Salvation, and would do it: but
this is no purchase, which transferreth a legal right to the Purchaser, if the
Purchase be accepted; but depends merely upon Promise or Terms of Honor. It
is also great presumption for Men to judge what is becoming Divine Majesty,
and what will salve his Honor, other then what is according to his Law or
Promise: wherers here they make him to wave his own declared Law founded in the
highest reason and equity.

2ly. Nor in this sense is the death of Christ a ransom, satisfaction or
propitiation. A ransom respects persons to be redeemed; it is a price given
for them, not for Laws and Covenants: Whoever paid a ransom without agreeing
to whom it should extend, and that it should take certain effect? whereas here
is nothing purchased but a Covenant or Promise, that all those that believe and
obey the Gospel should be saved, which perhaps might be none nor was it agreed
how long the World should stand, and so what number of Men should be made, or
should need, or be capable of this Redemption. A satisfaction to God in this
case, is a satisfaction to his Law, whereby the Sinner must immediately be
discharged. A Propitiation is a Sacrifice appeasing and reconciling God to Man;
neither of which it done, if only a Promise be procured to save Men upon their
fulfilling the conditions of a New Law.

3ly. If Christ only purchased a Covenant of life, then his Redemption is much
more in-effectual to fave, than Adam's Fall was to destroy Man. The Apostle,
Romans 5.17, 18, 20. comparing the Death of Christ with Adam's Fall, says, As
Sin reigned to death, so Grace much more reigns to life; as Sin abounded to
condemnation, Grace much more abounds to justification and life: but where is
this much more? the Obedience of Christ falls far short of Adam's Disobedience
in its effects, if he only purchased conditions of life. Adam in a few moments
by one transgression procured a sentence of certain death upon every individual
person that should naturally descend from him, as soon as they should have a
Being; but Jesus Christ by his transcendent Obedience of thirty four years, by
enduring the Wrath of God, the rage of Men and Devils, and a most ignominious
death, purchased life for no one certain Man, but only conditions whereupon
they that should hear of them (not half Mankind) should be saved, if they did
fulfill them; which, for any thing he purchased, or was contained in the
Covenant of life, was a mere contingency, viz. whether any should ever believe
and be saved or not.

4ly. If Christ only purchased a Covenant of life, then he purchased no more
for the Elect, than for others; no more for the Sheep, than the goats, and they
that go to Heaven may hereafter say, Christ redeemed them no more than he did
those in Hell; the difference betwixt them proceeded from their applying and
performing the Covenant and its conditions, which others neglected: For the
Covenant is equal to all that hear it, promising life upon conditions only,
which every one is equally concerned in, alike capable of Salvation, and one no
more likely to perform the conditions than another. The Arminians grant this,
that Christ died for all alike, Syn. Dordr. Ibid. Th. 2. Heterodox.
Christi mortem impetrasse omnibus hominibus restitutionem in statum gratiae
and salutis.

5ly. It follows also, That for any efficacy there was in the death of Christ,
there must have been no man saved. For the Covenant of Grace which only he
purchased, would have been as true and as firm a Covenant, viz. That they
should be saved who would believe and obey the Gospel, though no man had
fulfilled it; and so been saved by it, as the Covenant of Works was, which
(according to them) was never fulfilled, nor ever gave life to any. The
Covenant required no more, then that God should be ready faithfully to give
eternal life to all that fulfilled it; and all that Christ purchased, was a
Promise that he would so be, which would have been true, though all men had
perished by their unbelief, and so Christ might have had the empty Title of a
Redeemer, without any person being redeemed by him: And this Arminius,
Gravirch, and others are not ashamed to confess. Arnoldus contra Molin. Omnino
credo futurum fuisse ut finis mortis Christi constaret, etiamsi nemo
credidisset. Some of ours fay, That God had his Elect whom he purposed to bring
to Christ and save by him: But the Scriptures are as express that Christ died
for the Elect, as that God elected them; And if Christ purchased no more for
them, then for others, they might have perished as well as others, for any
thing his Redemption or Purchase could do for them or had done.

6ly. If Christ intended his death for certain particular persons, then he
purchased more than a mere covenant or conditions of Life. The consequence is
evident, If he purchased life to be given to certain men certainly and
infallibly, then he purchased more than offer of life to them upon conditions,
which they might, or might not perform. The Minor, That Christ in his death
intended the redemption of certain, particular persons, the Scriptures assirm,
He laid down his Life for the Sheep, Joh. 10.15, 16. even for those of the
Gentiles, that were not of the Jewish Fold, and so yet knew him not; And the
effects of this laying down his life for them was on purpose to call them in
due time, v. 16. to teach and make them follow him, v. 27. and to keep them
safe to life eternal by his own and the Fathers power, v. 28, 29. and from
these Sheep are distinguished those who are not of his Sheep, and therefore all
means are ineffectual to make them believe, v. 25, 26. He died to gather
together in one all the Children of God, Joh. 11.52. that were scattered
abroad, i. e. all the Elect of God, dispersed throughout all Nations: And the
Apostle Paul says of himself, He loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.30.
Therefore Christ redeemed particular persons, and did not only purchase Grants
and Covenants.

7ly. Christ purchased the Spirit and Grace to make his Death effectual to
those he died for; therefore he purchased more than a Covenant of Grace. A mere
Covenant of Grace only promises Life upon conditions of Faith and Obedience,
leaving it to men whether they will perform them or not; as the Covenant of
Works promised life to perfect obedience, and then left it to Adam whether he
would obey or not: A mere Covenant makes no provision of grace and strength to
enable men to perform it; If then Christ purchased grace, to believe and to
obey for the Elect, he purchased more than a Covenant of Grace; and that he did
so has been partly proved, and may be further evidenced by this, That when
Christ says, he laid down his life for the Sheep, Joh. 10.16, etc. he
presently adds he must bring home all the Sheep, and make one Fold, under one
Shepherd himself, and that he will make them follow him, and will preserve and
lead them to Eternal Life, and no Wolves shall pluck them out of his hand, v.
27, 28, 29. Also that he died to gather into one all the Children of God: This
must be done by his Spirit and Grace purchased by his Redemption, and that
power which is given to him not only to purchase, but also to apply the blessed
Fruits of Redemption to them.

Thus our Divines at Dort. Rations omnes, Act. Syn. Art. 2. Ibid.
a scripturis, fideique analogia petitae, quibus Christi incarnatio,
humiliatio, vel exaltatio, probatur, vel confirmatur, eo spectant, ut
demonstretur divina expressa intentio de fructuoso hujus tanti mysterii
effectu, non conditionaliter producendo (nempe, si homines cum aeque nolle
possint, velint, ut hic fructus in de enascatur) sed infrustrabiliter
efficiendo, potentia divina id operante, i. e. All those Arguments that prove
the Incarnation, Humiliation, and Exaltation of Christ, tend to this, to show,
that it was God's express intention to produce the certain effects of that
great Mystery infallibly, by his own power, and not to leave them to be
conditional, depending upon Man's Will, who might as well neglect and refuse as
accept of them.

I conclude, the Sum of this Doctrine comes to this, That God took occasion by
the Incarnation, Obedience and Death of our Lord Jesus Christ to grant men
terms of Salvation, viz. if they should believe and obey the Gospel, not as any
satisfaction to his Justice or Law, which man had broke, but as some kind of
salvo to his Honor, at least as he was pleased to interpret it: And what need
Christ have been God to do no more than this? How easy is the slip from hence
into the dead Sea of Socinianism? To lay that Christ came by his Life and Death
to declare and confirm only this Covenant of Life, on condition of Faith and
Repentance, and to intercede for the Penitents Indeed the whole platform of
this Doctrine was borrowed from Socinus by the Arminians, from whom most of our
modern Writers have it, and some immediately from the Socinian; from whom also
came that common (but illogical) Evasion of works, being not the meritorious,
but the causa sine qua non of our Justification. Opera ea sunt ex quibus
justificamur, sunt autem opera ista nostra, Soc. de Justif. apud Pelt.
i. e. ut dictum fuit, obedientia quam Christo praestamus, licet nec essiciens
nec meritoria, tamen causa, ut vocant sine qua non, justificationis coram Deo,
at que aeterne salut is nostrae. I do not desire this should be believed on my
credit, much less do I write to reproach any, who do in heart abhor that
blasphemous heresy, however their words and notions may agree too much with
it. I only beg that Scholars and Divines would take the pains to examine and
compare them before they imbibe this new Doctrine.

CHAP. VII. Of the Nature of Faith, that it justifies as an Instrument
applying the Promises of life in Christ, and not as a Condition or Part of
Obedience.
T The Apostle Paul was sent to preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, Act. 26. v.
17, 18. to this end, that they might receive the forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance amongst thom which are sanctified by Faith which is in Christ;
therefore forgiveness and a right to the heavenly Inheritance comes by Faith:
But what this Faith is and how it gives right to Life, is now to be inquired
into. In explaining the nature of Faith I shall wave all that is usually drawn
from Philosophy to this Argument, from the nature and difference of Man's Soul
and his Faculties; and the difference of the Faculties from each other, also
from the nature of Habits intellectual or moral, which things are fit Exercises
for Scholars, but not fit to build the Doctrine of Justification and Eternal
life upon; and if the best Philosophers can give us no certain account how men
see and hear, and how the external Senses (which yet are more material in their
operations than the understanding) do exercise their functions; there is much
less certainty to be had concerning the Faculties, Operations and Habits of the
rational part; and the Scripture speaks of believing as a work of the whole
Soul, With the heart man believes unto righteousness, Romans 10.9. The like may
be said of every Grace, and of every Sin, that has the consent of the Heart,
that they carry the whole Soul with them: What then is this Faith? The
Socinians affirm Faith and Obedience to be really the same thing, Peltius,
Artic. Parag. 21.
distinct only formally or docendi causa, Soc. resp. ad Epist. Joan. Opera and
Fides nullo modo distinguuntur a Paulo, nec ab ea seperari queant, imo animo
seu forma fidei sunt. The Arminians agree with them in this, and our late
Authors with them both, and make believing and obeying the Gospel all one; and
to be justified by Faith with them is to be justified by obedience to the
Gospel: Aphor. Th. 70.
Hence it is that they describe Faith to be, so to believe God, as to love him,
fear him, trust him, and obey him in every particular command, or more briefly,
to be an accepting of Christ for our Lord and Savior, i. e. to promise
obedience to him, Ibid. 69, and 67.
and to desire and expect to be saved by him. Now we grant, as the Gospel is
sometime taken for the whole Doctrine or Mind of Christ containing both
Promises, Precepts and Threatenings, though properly it be nothing but a Promise
of Life through Christ, in contradistinction to all Law and Precepts; so also
the Faith of Christ and of the Gospel does sometimes comprehend the whole
Christian Profession, whereby we promise both a belief of the doctrine and
obedience to the Command of Christ: Yet Faith, taken properly, is to be
distinguished from all obediential Graces, viz. those that are the immediate
cause of obedience, as much as those graces are distinct from each from other;
as Love from Fear, both from Patience, etc. That we may wave that Philosophical
question also, whether Graces be several distinct habits, or one universal
habit, distinguished by several acts and objects, it is sufficient if Faith be
distinct by its acts and proper object from all other graces, as much as they
are distinguished each from other: And that it is so, is evident, because it is
an assent of the mind to divinely revealed truth: Its acts are to believe or
assent; its formal object is the revealed truth of God, as such (we speak of
Divine Faith only.) The immediate End of it is the satisfaction of the mind in
the certainty of a true proposition, and the like. All these are distinct from
love, fear, desire, which are the immediate principles of all obedience or
practice, in doing good, or avoiding evil. Moreover, Faith is the root of
obedience, not as the immediate principle of the elicite acts of obedience, but
as a more remote principle, which does excite and direct all the immediate
principles of it. Thus Faith is prerequired to seeking and serving of God, Heb.
11.2. to the End; and yet the immediate principles of them were fear, v. 7.
self-denial, v. 25. holy courage, contempt of the World, and the like. Faith
works by love, Gal. 5.6. purifieth the heart, Acts 15.9. Therefore it is not
love it self, or the purity of the heart, but something that inclines and
disposes to love and purity; and surely before we can love and obey God, there
must be an apprehension of his goodness, faithfulness, readiness to accept and
reward, which must incline the heart to it: We cannot love and serve him (...)
we neither know him nor his Mind concerning us, nor have any confidence in his
good will toward us: And this is Faith, which we may thus describe, Faith is a
hearty and practical assent to all divine truth, so as to believe the
Histories, fear the Threatenings, trust in the I remises and expect the
fulfilling of Prediction which proceed from God. All this is easily gathered
out of the 11. Heb. where the Apostle having spoken in the end of the 10th
Chapter of believing to the saving of the Soul, subjoyn^ this description of
Faith, v. 1. viz. That it is the substance ((...)) the subsistence of things
hoped for, and the evidence ((...)) of things not seen, which subsistence and
evidence things yet suture have only in God's Word and Man's real belief of it;
things hoped for, properly respect the Promises; things not seen, the History
of things past; as the belief of the Creation, v. 2. and the Prediction of
things to come, as Noah by Faith feared the Deluge, v. 7. and all the
Patriarchs died in faith or expectation of the coming of Christ, v. 13. Now
that Faith has several acts and causes several affections, as hope, trust,
fear in the soul, is because it has several objects, things to be desired,
things to be feared, and things to be hoped for, which is common to it with
other graces, which have their several acts and affections toward several
objects, or the same objects severally con^dered: That special act of Faith
which re^^ects Promises, or affection immediately ^owing from Faith, without
which it is not ^ompleat, in Scripture is called by several ^ames; rouling,
resting, leaning, relying upon God, flying to him for resuge, hiding our ^^lves
under him, putting of our selves under ^he Shadow of his Wings, which and the
like ^re Metaphors from the Body, and when we ^eak properly of the acts of the
Soul are best ^prest by believing, or trusting in the Promises; which the
Protestants express by fidu^a, affiance or fiducial recumbence, which is ^^so
the Scripture term, of putting our hope and confidence in God and (...), a
pervasion, and (...), a full assurance, of ^is Promise. Now Faith justifies a
Sinner, ^ot in its whole Latitude; for so it believes ^eer Histories as well
as practical things, and ^e Threatenings as well as the Promises, and ^^useth
fear as well as hope: But a Sinner cannot be reconciled unto God by fearing his
Wrath and Judgment, though fearing may ^cite him to look after mercy in the
Promise; ^or by believing the History of things past, as ^^e Creation and
Flood; or the Prediction of ^^ings to come, as the Resurrection and day (...)
Judgment, though these things may set forth God's veracity, and confirm the
Truth of his promise, and may excite fear and diligence (...) seeking after
mercy; As trusting in the promises of particular mercies and deliverances, is
the means of obtaining those mercies, as the promises are made to such faith or
(...) Isa. 26.3.4. Thou shall keep him in perse peace whose mind is stayed on
thee, because trusts in thee. The promises of deliverant go before, and this
is added as the means procure the accomplishment of them, viz. That they should
trust in God; so in like m^ner, the general promise of Pardon and Justfication
is made to believing or trusting in and faith gives right to it, and is the
means having it performed to us: Faith then justi^^ as it obtains mercy, Heb.
11.33. Saint^ Faith obtained Promises, viz. a performan of them: and in the
Gospel frequently, (...) Faith has saved thee, and thy Faith has m^ thee
whole, etc. As Faith obtains these mercies, neither as an act of obedience, not
the cause or root of obedience; but only trusting in the Power and Faithfulness
of G^engaged by the particular promises; so a^ Faith justifies a Sinner by
trusting in (...) Grace and Mercy of God through Je^ Christ expressed in the
general Promise of (...) Gospel, He that believes shall be saved, (...) the
like. We do not contend about the a^ ception of faith in this proposition: We
a^^ justified by says, whether it be taken objectively only, as some think, i.
e. we are justified by Christ believed on; or relatively, (...) are justified
by faith as apprehending the mercy of God promised through Christ, and (...) by
any works of our own; it comes all one at last. The Mercy of God is the c^^sa
proegomena, the moving cause of our Justification, the righteonsness of Christ
wrought for us, the meritorious cause, procuring our acceptance with God, and
also the material or formal cause, being the very thing for which God accepts
us to life. The Promise in the Gospel is the external, moral or legal means
whereby God conveys Justification and this Righteousness, having promised (...)
to them that believe: and faith is an internal means on man's part, to apply
Christ's Righteousness for his Justification, by trusting him, promising of it,
and that partly natural, is faith is an act or habit, or act properly
conversant about a promise; and partly mo^al, as God has appointed our faith
in the promise of Justification to be a means of obtaining it; and this is all
that Divines mean by saying, Faith justifys as an instrument, or intrumentally,
and when they call it the mouth and the hand of the soul, viz. That Man is
Justified by the Righteousness of Christ, which Justification is proposed and
promised in the Gospel to all that will accept it and trust in it; which is
believing; so that Faith it self is ^ot the matter or righteousness which does
Justify us under the Gospel, instead of our Obedience under the Law; but it is
the means whereby through the Promise of the Gospel, Christ's Righteousness is
imputed or applied to us, by, and for which we are justified.

Object.
It is no better than a cavil which is objected: If Faith justifys as an
instrument, whose instrument is it, Gods or Man's? if Man's, then he justifys
himself; if Gods, then Man does nothing in the business of Justification, which
is Antinomian. For,

Answ.
The like may be asked of all instruments, Natural or Moral. Our Food, whose
instrument is it to nourish us? If Gods, then we need not eat; if ours, then we
nourish our selves. The Word and Sacraments are instruments of grace, if they
are our instruments, then we work grace in our selves; i^ Gods, then we need do
nothing: all these and the like are instruments of Gods appointing, to be used
by us, to the right use of which he has promised a blessing: he has commanded
us to take food, and promised life by it (...) to use the Ordinances, and
promised grace by them, and that in believing him, we shall have life
everlasting. So Faith, as the rest is Gods instrument, as to appointment an^
success; ours, as to the use and practice of it (...) only it is not proper to
call it a passive instrument (as some do) or to say it justifies passively,
(whose mistake is rather in the term, tha^ in the sense.) For Faith is a Moral,
not (...) proper Physical instrument, which only can be passive; Again, a
passive instrument is tha^ which has no activity at all, but is merely used by
the Agent in his action, as a Knife Saw or the like; but Faith justifies
actively, or as a grace whereby the whole Soul understanding the promise of
pardon in Christ accepts it, trusts in it, expects Salvation only that way;
now this is a moral reception, or acceptance of, and dependence upon Christ in
the Promise, not a Physical passiveness, as the term seems to imply. We are now
to prove, That we are thus justified by Faith as has been laid down, because,
though the Scripture is full and express for it in many places; yet other
senses are now put upon them.

Argument 1.
Faith is the means of obtaining all particular merits, both spiritual and
temporal, only by trusting in the promise of them: hence blessedness is
ascribed to trusting in God, Ps. ^4.13. and many times God delivered men,
because they trusted in him, 2 Chr. 20.20. Obedience qualifies and fits the
subject to receive ^ercies, but still Faith is supposed as that which gives
right to mercies. The Virtues (...) Unbelievers have no promise, the promise to
Faith; therefore Justification also com^^ by Faith, in the Promise of pardon;
for ^ere is the same reason for all the Promises ^aith as faith obtain other
Promises, why ^t this also: besides the Promise of Justification is the
foundation of all the rest, and ^^udes them virtually; therefore if Faith
en^^le to all other Promises and Mercies, much ^^re to this; nay Faith in
particular Promi^^ obtains mercy, chiefly upon this account, ^^cause it has
first obtained reconciliation ^^h God, and the promise of his love in Christ:
for upon this all promises are founded, and true trusting in them does suppole
our trusting in God first for Justification; yea, is a secondary act of the
same Faith. 2 Cor. 1.24


Argument 2.
As Abraham was, so are all men justified, Gal. 3.7, 8, 9. all Believers are
his Seed, an^ blessed with him, and in the same way; bu^ Abraham was justified
by Faith, as it is a trusting in the promise of God, viz. a promis^^ that he
and all the World should be blesse^ in Christ, Ergo. That Abraham was thus
justified, the Apostle affirms, Gal. 3.6. He believed, and it was imputed to
him for righteousness; and this believing is opposed to seeking righteousness
by the works of the Law, v. 10. Thsy that are of the Law are not blessed with
Abraham, but under the Curse, because th^^ keep not the whole Law, which
comprehen^^ the Moral, as well as Ceremonial, therefore faith as trusting in
the promise, justified him^ Moreover, Christ redeemed us from the Cu^^ of the
Law, that we might receive the promi^^ of the Spirit by Faith, v. 13, 14. Unto
Abraham, and his Seed were the Promises made, v. 1^ and the Inheritance is not
of the Law, but (...) Promise, v. 18. The Faith then that justifi^^ Abraham,
was a trust in Gods Promises, contradistinct to obedience to the Law or
Commands. If you ask, what Promise? I answer v. 17. direct us to it, The Law
was 400 (...) 30 years after the Covenant or Promise, whi^^ points at the time
when Abraham was first ^alled, and of the Promise made to him then, and to all
Nations in him, Genesis 12.1, 2, 3. by believing that promise Abraham was
justified; and his faith in the promise of a Son mentioned above, Chap. 15.6.
and Romans 4. was but a subsequent act of his justifying faith, and its ^eing
imputed for righteousness, Vid. Pressed. On the Cov. Sermon. 11.
but an instance or evidence that his faith in the promise of being blessed in
Christ did justify him before God.

Argument 3.
The Just shall live by Faith, Habak 2.4. The Prophet spoke it immediately,
concerning temporal deliverance in public calamities; but these deliverances
to the Children of God are tokens and forerunners of deliverance from the
Wrath to come, and effects of their reconciliation with God: therefore ^s it is
usual in the New Testament to apply such promises to spiritual things, so the
Apostle applies this of the Prophet to Justification; wherefore, as to live,
in the Prophet principally signified preservation from the temporal effects of
the wrath of God, so with the Apostle, it signifies to be delivered from
eternal wrath and eternal death by the special favor of God, i. e. to be
justified: now this he ascribes to Faith only, Romans 1.17. where he proves,
that the Gospel is the power of God to Salvatian in them that believe, because
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from Faith to Faith; which is
further confirmed, because the Just shall live b^ Faith: it is believing then
that saves me^ and faith that makes them partakers of the Righteousness of God
revealed in the Gospel therefore by that they live, i. e. are justified and yet
more express, Gal. 3.11. The Apostle proves by this Text, That a Man cannot be
justified by his Works, and thinks it a^ Argument above exception, but that
no man is justified by the Law in the sight of God it (...) evident, for the
Just shall live by Faith.

Argument 4.
To be justified by Faith, is directly opposed to Justification by Works, and
by ou^ own Righteousness: therefore Faith justified only by trusting in Gods
Mercy through Christ The Antecedent is the Apostles, Romans 10.5, 6. The
Righteousness of the Law says, That h^ that does them shall live in them: but
the righteousness of Faith says, If thou believe in thy heart, that God raised
Christ from the dead thou shall be saved, v. 9. likewise Gal. 3.10. having
said, the Just shall live by Faith, he adds the Law is not of Faith, but the
Man that does them shall live by them: therefore Man cannot be justified by the
Works of the Law, i^ must be by Faith only: will they again say^ that these
places only exclude the works o^ the Ceremonial Law? Surely Moses in the place
cited, Lev. 18.5. speaks of the whole Law given to the Jews, as the context
shows, and as it is interpreted by the Prophet Ezekiel 20.13. Or will they
say that only perfect Works, and the Law of innocence are excluded, not
imperfect sincere Obedience? Ans. If any works justify, they must be perfect,
else there must be a conjunction of Gods mercy and Man's own works to justify
him, and so a Medium betwixt Justification by Faith and by Works, even to be
justified by both together, and so the Apostle argues imperfectly, yea falsely,
a male divisis ad been conjuncta: we are justified by Faith, Ergo not by works:
nay, it may be by both together.

Argument 5.
We are justified freely by Gods grace, therefore by faith as a trust in the
Promise: The Antecedent is the Apostles, Romans 3.24. Being justified freely by
his grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ: the Consequence is
his also, for he adds, God has set forth him to be a Propitiation through
Faith in his Blood: likewise Romans 4.16. It is by Faith, that it may be by
Grace. If we are justified by Obedience to any Commands, as Obedience, then may
we be justified by grace in part, there may be some mercy in it, but not freely
by his grace. Faith only accepts Salvation as a gift of mere grace, pleading
nothing but the free Promise of God, in which it trusts, and Faith only
applies the Righteousness of God by trusting in it: but Obedience, be it what
it will, provides a Righteousness of our own; and hereby only is all the glory
of our Salvation ascribed to God when we trust to nothing of our own in any
sort: But Christ is Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption to
us, which is by Faith only, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. For obedience, as obedience,
brings something to God, and does not receive from him, and some of the Glory
is due to it.

Argument 6.
The Spirit is given by Faith, as affiance to trust; therefore we are justified
by it: The consequence is gathered hence; the Spirit is the Author of all Grace
in the Sanctified, and of useful gifts both in them and in the unsanctified,
for the edifying of the Church, both these are means of fitting men for Heaven:
If then Faith obtain the means, surely it obtains a Right and Title to Heaven
first. The Antecedent is the Apostles, Gal. 3.2. in a question importing a
negation as to Works, and an affirmation as to Faith, Received you the Spirit
by the Works of the Law or by the hearing of Faith? And v. 5. He that
ministers the Spirit and works miracles amongst you, does he it by the Works
of the Law, or by the preaching of Faith? The former words I understand of the
Graces, the latter of the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, but does come,
not by preaching obedience to the Law, but the Promises of the Gospel. Again,
v. 14. We receive the Promise of the Spirit by Faith: now here they cannot say,
the Apostle opposes the works of the Law to the works of the Gospel, implied
in Faith, as they do sometimes. For those he disputes against were believing
Jews, and such as pretended the Authority, at least, the Example of Peter and
John for their Doctrine, as appears, Chap. 2. and Acts 15.5. These did not
exclude the works of the Gospel, but meant that men should be saved by
believing in Christ and fulfilling the Precepts of the Law and Gospel, and
differed nothing from our late Authors in this point, but in that they
accounted the Ceremonial Law still to oblige. Gal. 1.6, 7. I marvel that you
are so soon removed, from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto
another Gospel, which is not another: but there are some that trouble you and
would pervert the Gospel of Christ: If they had contended for the works of the
Law distinct from the Gospel, it had been another Gospel they had preached:
their Doctrine therefore was a mixture of Faith and Works: Nor is it the
Ceremonial Law only whose works are excluded; For these Teachers endeavored
that the Gentiles should be circumcised and keep the Law of Moses, Act. 15.5.
the whole Law; which is also opposed to the Promise made to Abraham, by which
he and his Seed were justified, Gal. ^.16, 17. Ceremonies indeed are
particularly instanced in; because men put most trust in them, whether
appointed by God or devised by themselves, and chiefly because they were the
bond and badge of the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. I testify to every man, if he be
circumcised, he is a Debtor to keep the whole Law: It is therefore
Justification by obedience to God's Commands, as well as believing in Christ,
ushered in by imposing the Jewish Ceremonies, which the Apostle disputes
against in this Epistle, and against which he proves, We are justified by Faith
in the Promises.

Argument 7.
Miraculous Faith, as trusting in the Promise and Power of God, obtains
miraculous Effects; therefore Faith in the Promise of Pardon obtains
Justification. The Antecedent is frequently laid down in the Gospel, Thy Faith
has saved thee; thy Faith has made thee whole; be it unto thee according to
thy Faith: And that general Promise, Mat. 17.20. If you have Faith as a grain
of Mustardseed, you shall say to this Mountain, Remove to yonder place and it
shall obey you, and nothing shall be impossible for you. The consequence is
thus proved; The Faith of Miracles, as in the unsanctified, it was an
extraordinary degree of common or notional Faith; so in the Godly it was but an
extraordinary degree of that sound Faith which justifies them. We have no
reason to make it a distinct gift or grace, no more than that Faith whereby we
believe particular promises in spiritual or temporal things, should be distinct
from the Faith of the Pardon of Sin. Now then, if a trusting in extraordinary
promises will procure these extraordinary effects thereby promised, by the same
reason, trusting in the Promise of Justification, should be effectual to
justify us.

Argument 8.
Ex opposito. If Faith does not justify, as trust in the Promise, but
Obedience with it, and as a part of Obedience; then it may be said truly and
properly there is Justifying Repentance, Justifying Love to God and our
Neighbor, Justifying Patience, etc. as well as Justifying Faith, in that we
are justified by them as well as by Faith; but the Scripture is silent to any
such thing. Nor will it serve to say, Faith justifies principally and
primarily, works secondarily and less principally, and therefore it is ascribed
only to Faith: For (besides that we must not distinguish where the Scripture
does not) Works in their intrinsecal value are much more excellent than Faith.
To believe the Scriptures, or trust in a Promise, is of it self the meanest,
lowest Act, that man can perform to God, and which he does only for his own
good; but in Obedience man denies himself and seeks only the Honor of God:
And if you say, as a condition, Faith is principal, Works less principal. I
answer, It is strange that the less considerable thing should have the greatest
weight laid upon it: But let it be showed how Faith does reconcile us to God
more than Love and Obedience; till then we may look upon this distinction but
as an old Popish Evasion revived.

CHAP. VIII. Objections against this Doctrine answered.
IT is objected by a late Author, Object. 1.
If we are justified by trusting in the Mercy of God through the Blood of
Christ, then the whole end of justifying Sinners is to glorify the Mercy of
God, without providing for the Honor of his Justice or Holiness, both which
seem better secured if Justification depend upon man's works, as well as faith,
that he cannot be reconciled to God without a holy life as well as believing in
Christ. For thus God would appear not only merciful but just and holy also, in
that he will not pardon Sinners but in a way of holiness.

Answ. 1.
The Justice and Holiness of God were abundantly declared in exacting
satisfaction to the Law of Jesus Christ; his obedience and death did more
declare and vindicate the Justice and Holiness of God, infinitely more than the
worthless, imperfect obedience of men can do: Hereby it was declared, That God
would not justify Sinners but in a way of Holiness, and perfect obedience to
his Law. There was perfect holiness and justice toward Christ, though infinite
Mercy toward Sinners.

Tit. 2.14. So then, Faith trusting in God's mercy and free grace, supposes
for its foundation the Obedience of Christ, whereby God's Justice and Holiness
has been highly glorified, and also obtains for men, by and from Jesus
Christ, the Spirit of Adoption, by whom they shall in due time be make
conformable to the Image of his own Son, and so more excellently holy than they
would have been, if they had not sinned: Therefore in justifying a Sinner, in
the whole design, Holiness and Justice are as much magnified as Mercy, though
Mercy only appear in the Act of justifying him without his own Righteousness.

This Doctrine seems to lead to Enthusiasm: Object. 2.
If there be nothing for man to do that he may be justified, but only to
believe in God's Mercy and Christ's Righteousness, then may they fancy
themselves justified when they please; and if this Faith must be wrought by
God, then must men only expect till God will infuse Faith and so justify
them: What use then of the preaching of the Gospel.

Answ.
For Fancy: May not men as well fancy their obedience to be sincere and their
works ^o be such as argue them good Christians and give them hopes to be saved,
yea, do not most men thus think and profess? If works must be tried by the
Scriture, so must faith also, and ^hen this is no more liable to fancy than the
^ther.

Answ. 2.
For Enthusiasm, which is nothing else but infusion or inspiration of something
into the Mind, we grant all the godly do enjoy it in the working and increase
of supernatural grace, and so must our Opposites also, unless they will turn
down right ^elagians, and say, That all Grace is the mere work of Nature and
Reason: Thus Enthusiasm follows from the Doctrine of Supernatural Grace,
whether we be justified ^y Faith or Obedience: But Enthusiasm is were taken in
the worst sense, and so the meaning must be, The Doctrine of Justification by
Faith does necessarily lead to ungrounded, unwarranted Enthusiasm: Now this may
be reduced to two sorts: for matter and for manner: for matter, when men
pretend Inpiration of God for things contrary to ^cripture, which God has
given as a standing rule to the Worlds end: for manner, ^hen Inspirations are
expected to exclude and ^upersede the use of reason, Scripture and ^ll Divine
Ordinances: these are properly called Enthusiasts who pretend to these. Now our
Doctrine of Faith naturally leads to neither of these: Not to the first, in the
matter, for faith apprehends and rests only upon the Promises revealed in the
Scripture; out of that it see^eth nothing for its foundation: and that some
Antinomians have leaned to unwarranted Revelations and Fancies, is no more a
natural consequence of Justification by Faith, tha^ the Papists pretending
Revelation for Image worship, and many of their Will Worship do naturally flow
from from the Doctrine (...) Justification by Works. Not the second, (...) the
manner. We are so far from teaching^ That men must expect Faith to be wrought
o^ increased, without the use of means appointed; that on the contrary, we say
with the Scripture, That faith comes by hearing, an^ hearing by the Word of
God, Romans 10.15. Tha^ God requires men to know, understand an^ meditate on his
Word, to use their Reason Conscience and Affections: and while they thu^ do, he
inspires faith into his Elect, which enables them to do it effectually and
savingly much like as our Savior, John 9. made Clay anointed the Eyes of the
blind man with i^ sent him to wash in the Pool of Siloam, an^ while he thus
did, by his divine Power he restored his Sight. The same also may be said if we
must be saved by our Obedience, w^ may sit still and expect God to work all
(...) us; unless they will say, we need no supernatural Grace, or at least that
it depended on, and follows the Will of man: Enthusiasms therefore are the
abuses, not the just consequences of this Doctrine.

It is objected, If we be justified by Faith only, Object. 3.
then there need be no care of good works.

Answ.
This follows as much as that objected to the Apostle, Romans 3.8. We are
slanderously reported to say, let us do evil that good may come of it, and Romans
6.1. Let us continue in sin, that grace may abound. Surely there is more show
of reason to say, if we are justified by free grace only, then no matter though
we sin, grace will be but the more magnified in our forgiveness, than to say,
Because God justifies freely through Faith, therefore we need need not care to
please him. The Apostle was not moved to mitigate this Doctrine for the said
slanders. Ungodly men will speak and act according to their own lusts, whatever
their Opinions be; and Calvin observes among the Papists, as we may the same
among Protestants, that none are more zealous maintainers of Justification by
good Works, than they who have fewest good works to show; it seems therefore,
that the Doctrine of Justification by Works, is not such a real incentive to
holiness, as some men think, but rather, that the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith, crosses corrupt nature more, and stirs up to more deep and inward
holiness; else why should profane Wits, and unsanctified hearts so generally
oppose it? But that this Doctrine does not naturally lead to unholiness; but to
most strict and spiritual holiness, may thus appear,

1. As Faith trusts in the promise of eternal life, it does naturally stir up
men to use all means to attain that, and encourage men in the use of these
means against all difficulties. If we fly to God for Salvation, and depend upon
his Promise for it, does not this in its own nature oblige us to follow him in
the way he has appointed for the performance of that promise? and does it not
undo and revoke what faith has done in accepting and trusting in Christ for
life, to be negligent of the means whereby it should be brought about? yea, it
shows Man regards not life, and so does not really trust in Christ for it:
trust and confidence in any friend to bring any business to pass for us, makes
no man more regardless of his friend, or negligent of doing his part.

2ly. Faith trusts in God for his Grace and Spirit, as well as for Pardon;
though faith as justifying directly and formally, respects only the ptomise of
pardon and life; yet secondarily it considers and trusts in the promises of a
new heart, assistance and perseverance to the end; and here we are said to be
kept by the power of God through faith to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.8. and to be
saved by hope, Romans 8. because the power and grace of God to bring us to Heaven
is given to us believing and trusting in it: If then Faith takes in the
promises of grace also, how should it open a way to sin and sloth?

3ly. Faith does virtually include an acceptance of grace, or of Christ to
sanctify, as well as to pardon; it implies some repentance and aversion from
sin, and therefore must naturally engage to mortification and holiness, ^ot
hinder it. I say not that accepting of Christ is a proper act of Faith (as is
usually ^^firmed in popular discourses.) Acceptance ^^mally is rather an act of
love, liking of, and ^^senting to such a person and his motions; (...) as
before faith is wrought, the heart is ordinarily prepared to believe, by
knowledge, repentance, love, acceptance and de^^e of pardon, and grace by the
common ^ork of the Spirit, so Faith really trusting in (...) promise of eternal
life, resting upon it ^^h the whole heart does include and imply ^^ind of
acceptance of it, and afterward it (...) up more express acts of desire and
acceptance from love, which follows faith; like^^e the heart being prepared by
Convictions (...) Sorrow to welcome Pardon, then it does (...) all sincerity
trust in the Promise of Par^^^; this does include an aversion from sin,
willingness to be holy, why else should we (...) strongly in the Promise of
Forgiveness (...) Life, coming from a holy God through (...) holy Mediator?
and this necessarily ex^^^ express acts of Repentance and Morti^^tion; he that
truly understands what it is (...) pardoned and justified, and trust in the
promise of it with all his heart, does in so doing show an implicit resolution
against sin, and must manisest an explicit one afterward.

4ly. Trusting in the grace of God, when true, brings the favor of the love of
God and Christ, Romans 5.1, 5. and this naturally inclines to love, thankfulness
and obedience. The groundless boast of Gods love, are made an occasion of sloth
by unsanctified hearts, bu^ a true apprehension of it is a great motive t^ love
and obedience, a greater and more effectual than an expectation of being
justified b^ Obedience. For such Men will take a libert^ to sin sometimes; but
the sense of the love (...) God while strong in the heart, will suffer n^ such
thing; it is not only a rational, but (...) natural principle too, and
therefore it wor^^ more forcibly, 2 Cor. 5.14. The Love (...) Christ
constrains us, because we thus judg^^ If one died for all, then were all
dead; a^^ that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto h^^ which died for them, and rose again. If t^^
true sense of Gods love, without danger (...) Hell, were not enough to engage
men to (...) bedience, what engages Saints and Ang^^ in Heaven? now this sense
of the love of G^^ comes by Faith in his Mercy, therefore Fa^^ engages to
Obedience.

If we are justified by trusting in Gods M^^cy, Object. 4.
and through the Righteousness of Chr^^ without fulfilling any Terms or
Conditions, Vide Trueman Gr. Prop. p. 89.
then is there no proper Pardon of Sin: For Christ's Righteousness being the
perfect fulfilling of the Law; and we being justified only by applying that
Righteousness to us, it seems we shall be accounted to have fulfilled the Law
by our Surety, and so not to be chargeable with Sin, nor to need forgiveness.

Answ. 1.
They do wisely to begin to complain first; for their own Opinion is not only
liable to the same exception, but seems inexcusable from it. There are but
two kinds of sins, as they distribute them; some against the Law of Works,
others against the Law of Grace and the Gospel, and neither of these are
properly pardoned: Not the sins against the Law, for says our Author, (and his
friends must say the same) Christ did not properly fulfill the Law, nor was the
Curse of it properly executed upon him; but he endeavored that the legal
threat might not be executed, and gave to God a valuable consideration, for
which he might with Justice not execute that Law, and be free to prescribe new
con^itions of life to Sinners.

Hence I argue, The Law was waved, not fulfilled by the sinner, or any for him,
neither was the sinner thereupon reconciled; therefore the sins against the
Law, when men come under the Gospel, are waved, superseded, but not pardoned.
Proper pardon is not only a forbearing to punish, but a remission of the
punishment, with a reconciliation to th^^ offender: but in this case God is not
reconciled, but only gives them new terms of Savation, nor does he remit the
punishment though he forbear it for the present: for if after trial they fulfill
not the Terms of the Gospel, their sins against the Law also shall b^ charged
upon them: and if at last they d^^ fulfill the conditions of the Gospel, they
a^^ saved thereby, fulfilling the new terms tha^^ are given them; then their
old sins against the Law are forgotten and past over; but the^ is no proper
pardon of them, or reconcilin^ the breakers of the Law, as such. Nor (...)
there pardon of their sins against the Gospel for if men fulfill not the
conditions of it, the^ are condemned, and so not pardoned: If the^ do fulfill
them, this is their righteousness, b^ this they are justified and saved,
because the^ have performed those terms whereupon li^^ is promised: where then
is there place f^^ pardon, when the Law is fulfilled? If they say their
Obedience is imperfect and sinful, I answer, it is so, compared with the Law
(...) Works, but not, compared with the Law (...) Grace: Sincere Obedience to
the Gospel, (...) as much as is required to bring a man to Heaven; therefore by
the Gospel, it is reckone^^ a fulfilling of what was required, and so (...)
need no pardon: Nor can it be conceive^^ how the sinful infirmities of the
Saints should be pardoned by this Opinion. For as the Author tells us, Christ
did not properly fulfill th^^ Old Law, so they also say, (and with mo^^ truth)
he fulfilled not the conditions of the Gospel for us; nor give he any
satisfaction to God for them: how then should they be forgiven?

Thus this Opinion excludes all use of Pardon, and teaches that man is
justifind by fulfilling what is required in the Gospel, the demands of the Law
being waved, i. e. he is justified by a Gospel-innocency of his own; though not
by the Innocence of Adam, or the Law of Works.

that Man should obey and live, and die if he disobeyed, either he or his
Surety; we grant in this case there had been no proper pardon; but God in
Justice would have been bound to discharge the sinner, when the Surety had
satisfied the Law for him; because it was his own agreement, that either the
principle or the Surety should satisfy disjunctively; and when there is such an
agreement, it is all one to the Creditor, would have been all one to God, which
pays the debt or fulfils the Law: But this is to state the question for us, and
then to dispute against it. We say not, that the first Covenant did allow of a
Surety; much less, joined him in the Covenant with Man: Man himself was to
obey, or die: but God, as the infinite Sovereign and Law-Mater, was pleased to
substitute a Surety to fulfill thee Law for him; who as he was not induded in
the Law; so was not there any particular Covenant in the Law against a Surety;
and this supposed, we further answer.

John ult. and 2.1. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
them: and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is a
Propitiation for our sins (...) The blood and his being a Propitiation are her^
joined with forgiveness of Sin.

Yet we grant further, That the Justification of a Sinner, is an act of Justice
as wel^ as of Mercy. Mercy and Forgiveness as to him; but Justice as to Christ,
who by God's appointment and consent had satisfied the Law in Man's stead, and
therefore it was just and due, that they who should be interested in it, viz.
Believers, should be discharged and justified by his Obedience: They also must
grant, if Man be justified by his Obedience, his Justification is an act of
Justice, according to the New Covenant.



Answ.
Afflictions may be distributed into three ranks,

1. Such as arise from the common condition of Mankind since the Fall: as
crosses in Children, in Worldly Affairs, etc. in these the Saints must have
their share while they live here, though they were perfect in grace, and
perfectly justified; because these calamities are annexed to this present
State, and therefore these cannot be reckoned punishments, or do argue a defect
in their Justification, who live here below, seeing they befall them upon the
account of others, more than themselves, and they would come were they never so
perfect.

2ly. A Second sort are such as though they were occasioned by sin; yet they
come not upon the godly for any particular sin, but are means of quickening and
increasing grace; such were David's in his younger days, and Job's, and many
others daily, who are afflicted from their youth upward: That these are not
punishments, or argue any defects in their Justification, is manifest from
hence, because they usually fall in the greatest measure, upon the best
Christians, where there is most grace to bare them well to the Honor of God.
If afflictions be properly the punishment of sin, then in equity, they that are
most sinful, and least sanctified, should have most afflictions; but it is
often otherwise.

3ly. A Third kind, are those which are sent upon occasion of particular sins;
as the calamities that befell David for his great sin, 2 Samuel 12. and these are
most properly chastisements, the other are means of improving and sometimes, of
working grace, being joined with the Word, suited to Man's sinful and dull
temper in this life; which the godly are not to take as signs of hatred, nor to
faint under them; but these chastisements for special sins, are effects of Gods
Fatherly displeasure, and may be called Paternal punishments; yet are they not
judicial or legal punishments, or any parts of the curse, Isa. 27.9. By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away
his sin: If that be all the fruit then, that is all that God intends by
affliction, and not to execute the Curse of the Law, or to satisfy his
Justice, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7. Whom the Lord loves, he chastneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives. If you endure chastning God deals with you as
with Sons, but if you be without chastning whereof all are Partakers, their are
you Bastards and not Sons, etc. If chastisements be signs that we are Sons of
God, how are they signs that we are not perfectly justified? If they are
certain effects of God's Love, how are they proper punishments and fruits of
the Curse? It is rather a fruit of the Curse to want them when we need them, a
sign we are Bastards and not Sons; therefore to have them cannot be a part of
the Curse: But to make this more clear, I shall add these two Reasons.

The Curse was the Sentence of death pronounced against man, 1st.
of death at last and all miseries tending to that issue, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. If
then the afflictions of this life are parts of the Curse to the godly, then are
they intended for their death and ruin, but if they are intended only for
their good, then they are natural evils but not curses, and natural evils may
be inflicted without sin: Even Arminius, Episcopius and others of their chief
Friends grant, That God may without injustice lay temporal evils upon men
without respect to sin, of his own mere pleasure.

If Afflictions be part of the Curse to the godly, it must be by some Law: 2ly.
It cannot be by the Law of Grace; for that is a remediating Law, threatening no
curse to them that obey it: If by the Law of Works, then Believers are in part
still under the Law; whereas the Apostle makes these inconsistent, to be under
the Law and under Grace, Romans 6.14. Moreover, Afflictions (if they be
punishments) must be satisfactory to Divine Justice. For the Law requires
nothing but in order to satisfy Divine Justice by obedience, or punishment for
failure, and then Christ has not redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, part
of it remaining for us to bare; and so Christ's Redemption must be diminished,
he having only purchased that the Law should not have its full force, viz. to
condemn us for ever, but that we should have terms of grace or life eternal;
nevertheless that we should be left in the hands of the Law for this life, that
God may lay what curses upon us he pleases, so that he save our Souls. The
same is to be said concerning sin and spiritual evils; some sins are proper
chastisements, when men are suffered to run into some sins to correct them for
former sins: As David's Murder was a correction for his Adultery; but these
chastisements proceed really from the love of God though mixed with fatherly
displeasure: but for the general, that God has left sin in the hearts and
lives of the Godly is not to satisfy his Law or the Curse, but to magnify his
Grace and Wisdom in overruling sin and death to his own Glory, and to further
man's Salvation by those things which the Devil designed to undermine and
overthrow both.

any thing for them to do in way of obedience, but only to expect that God
should bring them to Heaven by his Grace, to which Faith gives right as well as
to life it self.

Answ.
As Faith it self is commanded, though it be the work of God, so is the use of
all means whereby Grace is to be improved and exercised, and in the use of them
in dependence on God's Grace lies a Christian's Obedience: The Promises of
Grace and Perseverance do encourage to obedience, but alter not the nature of
obedience, Phil. 2.12, 13. As you have always obeyed, etc. work out your
Salvation with fear and trembling: For it is God that works in you both to
will and to do of his good pleasure. Our Savior came not to dissolve the Moral
Law, nor gave he commission to any man to do it, but requires better obedience
to it than that of the Pharisees, though they expected to be justified by it,
Mat. 5.18, 19, 20. and upon all occasions he directs men to the Law as the rule
of Life, Mat. 19.17. Chap. 22. v. 37. etc. Though Faith encourage and Love
incline to good works, yet these works are properly obedience, because done
upon the Command of God. It is true, the Law is not a Covenant of Works, or a
Law of Life to Believers, promising Life to Obedience perfect or imperfect, and
threatening death to the want of it: Nor is this essential to a Law that life
and death must depend thereon, though they do so upon some Laws; nor is it
essential to obedience that it must proceed from hope of life and fear of
death. For there is no such thing with Saints in Heaven, where yet is perfect
obedience; yet is it a Rule of Obedience, a Declaration of God's Will, how his
Children ought to walk and to please him, which is the very nature of a Law.

But it is not necessary to the Sanction of every Law, Quest.
that there should be Promises to obedience, and Threatenings to disobedience?

Answ.
Not from the nature of a Law, but because of man's infirmities it is needful,
Gal. 3.19. So the Gospel has promises of Blessings in this Life, peace of
Conscience, increase of Grace, and the Fatherly Love and Presence of God, to
obedience and diligence, and the threatening of the contrary to negligence and
disobedience; yea the knowledge of the Covenant of Works, as it restrains the
ungodly, so it is of use to the godly in this life, to curb the flesh, and to
make them more afraid of sin, and to quicken them to diligence: But life and
death eternal are not the Sanctions of the Law as properly given to Believers.

But do not the sins of Believers deserve Hell and put them into a damned
state? Quest.


Answ.
No. They interrupt their peace with God and the Work of Grace, but make them
not Children of wrath; their sins in their own nature tend to death, as they
are an aversion from God, but he will recover them out of them by repentance,
at death, if not before; and they deserve death according to the Law of Works
by which they must judge of the ^inousness of them, and be humbled accordingly:
But as the Law is tempered by the Gospel, they shall not bring death. And
de^^rt of sin being obligatio ad poenam ex lege, the Laws binding a man over to
punishment, (...) may be truly said they do not deserve death according to the
Gospel; because that does not threaten death eternal to them, yet they (...)
deserve other corrections threatened there^y, which are more effectual to
restrain the godly, than the threatening of Hell is to the ^icked.

But does not this open a way to Sin and Sloth, Quest.
^hen men that think they are Believers shall ^hen conclude their sins shall
not damn them?

Answ.
No. For it is not the promise of great Retards, nor threatening of great
Punishment that (...) keep men from sin, else the Angels and Adam would never
have sinned; but it is the certain assistance of effectual grace which can
(...) will make men obedient, without such ^^nctions by other Reasons and
Motives. If Christians were left to their free will as much is Adam was, then
would there be a necessity (...) the like Promises and Threats to keep them
(...) their Duty; but because God has undertaken to work all our Works in us,
it is enough ^^at God declare his Will to them, and will make them obedient;
Promises and Threa^ of another nature are added because of the infirmity of the
Flesh, but they could not kee^ them in obedience if there were not a certainty
of prevailing grace, and when these infirmities shall be taken away, then the
Declaration of God's Will without any Promise (...) Threat will be a sufficient
Obligation to Obedience for ever, by the perfect and full concurrence of the
Grace of God. For it is the Spirit of Grace that holds men to obedience,
whether there be Promises or Threa^ or none, or whatever they be, which he do^
in this life with many infirmities, and in Heaven without any.

CHAP. IX. That Faith does not justify as a Condition, and that it does not
justify as believing in Christ, as King and Prophet as well as Priest.
THat Faith justifies a Sinner as it is a trust in the Promise of Life through
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, has been proved and vindicated in the
preceding Chapters: We are now to consider what the opposite Opinion is
concerning Faith and its Influence upon Justification.

The Scriptures teach that Abraham the Father and great Exemplar of all
Believers was justified by Faith, his Faith was counted to him for
Righteousness, Romans 4.3. And that this Faith was a Trust in the Promise of God
is evident, both from the occasion and immediate Object of it, the Promise of a
Son against all natural hope and probability, and that his Seed should be
numerous, be the people of God, the Blessed of the World, Genesis 15.4, 5, 6, 18.
etc. and also from the Apostles Explication, or Amplification of this Faith, in
this Chapter, v. 19, 20, 21, 22. viz. That it was a believing in hope against
hope and a not considering the natural impossibility of the thing promised, and
not staggering at the Promise through unbelief, but being strong in Faith and
fully persuaded that God was able to perform what he promised; and that this
Faith justified him, as such a trust in the Promises, and not as an Act of
Obedience, is evident from the Apostles own Reason in the close of that
Discourse, v. 22. Therefore i^ was imputed to him for Righteousness; Wherefore?
Because it was a firm trust in the Promise of God: It is also added, v. 23.
That this Example was written, not for Abraham's sake only, but for ours that
succeed, because Faith also shall be imputed to us for Righteousness, if we
believe in him that raised Christ from the dead, who died for our sins and rose
again for our justification, v. 24, 25. If this was written for our sakes, then
the Faith that justifies us must be a trust in the Promise as Abraham's was,
even in the Promise of Life through the death of Christ, and must justify us
as a trust in that Promise as his did him, and not upon any other account. It
is the Righteousness of Christ for which God justifies believing Sinners; but
because they are rational Creatures, God does not justify them without their
knowledge, consent, or acceptance, but with and by means of it; and this is
Faith, sc. Man's trusting in or acceptance of Life promised in Christ, which
does render the subject, as a rational Creature, capable of pardon and mercy by
a Promise, though that natural capacity of the subject would not obtain pardon,
if it were not promised to it, and this is all we mean, when we say, Faith is
the Instrument of our Justification, viz. That God having promised
Justification through Christ to all that believe or trust in it; this Faith
does trust in it, or is that disposition of the soul, whereby it does trust in
that promise, and so obtain a grant of Jnstification: We acknowledge, to
believe God's Promises is commanded by him, and an act of our Obedience to him
always indispensibly due; but we say, That Faith obtains any thing promised,
and Justification in particular; not as, or because it obeys the general
command of believing Gods Promises; but as it trusts in, depends upon the
Promises, and consequently, that God fulfilleth the Promise of Pardon,
Justification, and the immediate fruits of it to a Believer, out of his mere
goodness and faithfulness, not out of remunerative Justice and Debt, as he
must, if he justifies for Faith, as an act of Obedience to any Command.

But our Opposites will have Faith to justify us as the condition of the New
Covenant (...) Gospel, not as a mere trust in the Promise. A condition says
Amyrald, Amyrald. dissert. de great. unic. p. 52.
is a certain ^aw added to a matter or business, which is required to be
performed by a man: Conditio (...) Lex addita negotio quae ab homine exigitur:
^o that believing in Christ is annexed to the promise of Justification, as a
Law requiring that faith; and then says must justify as obedience to, or
fulfilling of that Command; is Perfect Obedience was the condition of the ^aw:
So (they tell us) Faith is the condition of the Gospel, and one justifyeth now,
as the other did then, sc. as Man should then have been justified for his
Perfect Obedience, as the fulfilling of the Law to which life was promised; so
now Faith justifies as, or because it obeys the Gospel Chmmand of believing
in Christ to which life is promised to Sinners. To strengthen this, they
further say, (which indeed is but a just consequence of it) that as the
Covenant of Works, upon the condition of Perfect Obedience, was made with all
Mankind in Adam; so also the Covenant of Grace, was made with all Mankind in
him also, after the Fall, and renewed to Noah upon the condition of Faith in
Christ, i. e. as before they were all commanded to obey perfectly, and they
should live for so doing; so now, they are all commanded to believe in Christ,
and they shall live for so doing: Foedus gratiae salutaris and in Adamo cum
omnibus and singulis hominibus initum, Ibid. p. 87.
et in Noa, cum omnibus and singulis hominibus sancitum fuit, sub fidei
condition, adeo ut si omnes and singuli crederent, salutis a Christo partae
compotes fierent. This we are now to examine, and there are two Opinions about
it: One acknowledges Faith to be fiducia, a trust in the promise, and this
only to be the condition of Justification; the other makes Faith to include
Obedience to the Gospel Command; so that when they say^ Faith justifys, they
mean Faith and Obedience flowing from it.

To begin with the First, It Is usual with Divines to call Faith the Condition
of the Gospel and Justification, but they take the ter^ condition improperly,
and largely for any thing required of us, and that must be in us, in order to
being justified; they mean no more, but that men are not justified by the Death
of Christ, as a Ransom paid for them, without any thing in them to apply it to
themselves in particular; but that his death does justify them, being offered
in the Promises, and trusted in them for themselves in particular, Ibid.
in this sense we grant Faith to be a condition of Justification: But some,
Amyraldus and others, take a condition strictly for something required, not
only as a disposition of the subject, or as an internal rational means of
obtaining a thing; but also as acquiring a right to it, as the performance of
that Command which required it; and thus they say, Faith is the Condition of
Justification, i. e. we are justified, because we fulfill or obey the Command of
believing in Christ: Against this, I thus argue,

1. If Faith justify as a fulfilling the command of believing, then the (...)
credere, Faith it self is our Righteousness, and Christ's Righteousness has
only procured a Covenant of Faith, by fulfilling whereof we should be
justified, as we should have been by fulfilling the Law of Works. For in this
Opinion, Faith justifyeth as Obedience to the Command of believing, and
Obedience cannot be the Medium of applying Christ's Obedience for our
Righteousness; but is it self a righteousness according to the Law that
requires it: So then, Faith must be our Righteousness now, as perfect Obedience
was under the Law; and must justify as the Work of the Gospel.

2ly. Faith is the unfittest of all Graces to be the condition of life, because
it is only a trust in Free-Mercy, and carries with it, an acknowledgement of
our unworthiness, and nothingness, and so brings nothing to God, but a bare
object of Mercy and Compassion. All other graces bring some positive Honor to
God, together with a denial of our selves, and our inordinate desires to the
Creatures; but Faith brings nothing but a confession of Misery with a desire
and hope of Mercy; therefore is unfit to be our Righteousness, and to come into
the room of Perfect Obedience.

3ly. If Faith justify as a condition, then Man has a natural power to believe
in Christ, how else can Faith be required of him, as a new condition of life,
after he had failed of life by the first condition of Obedience? The Gospel by
this Doctrine, is a Law of Faith, but a proper Law does suppose power to obey
in the subjects of it; Quest. Obj. Quest. 9. Vid. Pelt. Art. 13. Paragr. 2.
This Arminius confesses, Deum non posse ullo modo fidem in Jesum Christum
postulare ab homine lapso, quam ex se habere non potest, nisi aut dederit aut
dare paratus sit gratiam sufficientem, qua credere possit si velit, i. e. God
cannot by any means, require Fallen Man to believe, which of himself he cannot
do, unless he has given him, or will be ready to give grace sufficient to
believe, if he will.

4ly. If Faith be the gift of special grace (as is acknowledged by these I now
deal with) how can it be required of all that hear the Gospel? seeing they have
neither power of their own to believe, nor a promise that Faith shall be given
them. If it be said, that Faith is promised, I ask, is it promised on some
other condition, or absolutely? If upon condition, then we shall have
conditions in infinitum; unless we stop in something that is in Man's Power to
do, Ibid. p. 55.
as Amyraldus well observes, Fides impetrata fuit non ut offeretur sub
acceptandi condition, sed ut ipsa illa conditio esset, per quam salus
recipitur, alioqui res abiret in infinitum, nec ullus unquam esset terminus
conditionum impetrandarum. If absolutely, either to all that hear the Gospel,
and so all should believe, or to some only, but no such promise can be
produced, that when the Gospel is preached to a people, such and such shall
have Faith given them. But if it be said, the Promise of Life in Christ is
declared to all, and God persuadeth whom he pleases to trust in it; Is it not
then better to say, that Faith is only an instrument whereby God inableth Men
to lay hold of the Promise ^o Justification, than to offer violence to the
nature of all proper Laws and the conditions of them, by making Faith the
condition required by a proper Law, which Man has not ^ower to perform, nor is
sure to have it given when he needs it: and I suppose no instance can be
given of any such Law, either Human or Divine, that requires a condition out
of the power, or beyond the ability of the subject, before the Law was made,
and does not certainly provide that ability for him any other way.

The Second Opinion is of those that affirm, Obedience to be included in Faith,
and so Faith and Obedience to be the condition of life, i. e. that we are
required sincerely to believe and obey the Gospel Commands, Histories and
Promises to our lives end, and for so doing, we shall be justified and saved.
Faith in this Opinion, is not an immediate trust in the Promise of life through
Christ, but a general belief of the truth of the Histories and Promises of the
Gospel, encouraging to obey the Precepts of it; yea, though there be (...)
particular persuasion, that this man in particular shall be saved if he obey
the Gospel (...) yet this is not proper trust or affiance, but a more practical
assent to the general Promises and Doctrine of the Gospel; a trust upon an
uncertain condition, is no more a tru^ and proper trust, than a proposition
depending on a future contingency, is a proper o^ certain proposition, or has
determinate truth or falsehood: This is the Doctrine (...) the Remonstrants (as
has been showed Chap^ 5.) We may also observe, That though the Opinion be
commonly expressed by believing in, or receiving Christ as our King and Prophet,
as well as Priest; yet in truth, it makes Faith, or the condition of the
Gospel, t^ respect Christ only as a King immediately, and as a Prophet and
Priest accidentally and remotely. For to prescribe Laws and Conditions of Life,
whereby men must be judged, saved, or condemned, and then to judge them by
those Laws, and either justify or condemn them for their obedience or
disobedience to them, are all Kingly Acts or Exercises of Kingly Power, and
these only are immediately respected by this Faith, which is nothing else but
obeying what Christ has commanded upon belief of the truth of what he has
declared, and promised to that Obedience, and so is that for which men shall be
judicially justified. It is true, Christ as a Prophet does explain and teach
his own Law, but this is accidental to a Legislator, and men must obey the
teaching of Christ, but obedience as such is not because he teaches, but
because he that teaches is also the Law maker, and has authority to command
obedience: Therefore Faith, as obedience, and so justifying, does not properly
respect Christ as a Prophet, nor does it eye him as a Priest, being not a trust
in his satisfaction and Righteousness to be saved by it, which was the main
Exercise of his Priestly Office, but an obedience to the New Law which Christ
had made as a King, and only had purchased as a Priest leave of the Father to
make such a Law, and that those that obeyed it should be saved: The Priesthood
therefore of Christ is but remotely respected in believing, as the foundation
of his Law and Promises annexed to it: This Mr. Baxter confesses in effect, 1
Disput. of Just. P. 25.
when he says, Christ's Merit is the remote, moral cause of our Justification,
but his granting of this Promise or Act of Grace, is the true, natural,
efficient, instrumental cause of our Justification, even the immediate cause.
If Christ's Merit was but the remote Cause of Justification, then justifying
Faith does respect it but remotely, as the procuring cause of the New Covenant;
and if the grant of an Act of Grace be the only, proper and immediate Cause of
Justification, then Faith only respects that immediately when it justifies, and
so Christ only as a King, or as the Enacter of a New Law. Ibid. p. 27.
Again, he says, It is most evident in Scripture that Merit and Satisfaction
are but the moral, remote, preparatory causes of our Justification (though
exceeding eminent, etc.) and that the perfecting, nearer, efficient causes were
by other Acts of Christ, and that all concurred to accomplish the work. By this
it appears that Justification is an Act of Christ as a King only, though his
Merit made way for his Kingly Power; and his Prophetical teaching promoteth
man's obedience, and that his justifying us is his acquitting us from guilt and
condemnation, because we have obeyed his Law or New Covenant; and that
obedience to that Law, as obedience to a Royal Law, is the condition of our
Justification, or the thing for which we must be justified; and that Faith with
these men is nothing but obedience to the Gospel-Precepts grounded upon a
belief that they came from Christ, and shall be rewarded according to his
Promise, and therefore when they contend, That Faith justifies not by one act
of affiance, but by all its acts, they do but confound themselves and the
question: For even according to themselves, Faith justifies properly and
immediately by one act only, or under one only notion, viz. of obedience to
the Gospel; and that directed to Christ only as King, and that the other acts
of it respecting his Merit and Teaching, are but accidental to it, and without
its notion as justifying: We are then to prove that obedience to the Gospel is
not the condition of our Justification, though joined with, or builded upon
Faith in the truth of it, and thus I argue:

The First Argument.
From Romans 4.16, 17. Therefore it is of faith that it might be of grace, to the
end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to that only which is of the
Law, but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us
all, etc. The Faith here spoken of is that whereby Abraham was justified, and
by which the Promise should be made sure to all his Seed, both Jews and
Gentiles, which is the Promise of being blessed with him, in his Seed Christ:
Now the Apostle says. That Justification or Blessedness comes by Faith, that
it might be by Grace, i.e. altogether free, but Justification upon the
condition of obedience is not altogether free; therefore justifying Faith
includes not obedience, as the condition of Justification. I prove the Minor
thus: Grace and Works are utterly inconsistent in God's dealing with Man for
his Salvation. For Work bring some worthiness though not strict Merit, but
Grace supposes nothing but dese^^ of Punishment, Romans 11.6. If by grace, the
not of works, otherways grace is no more grace Election of grace, v. 5.
excludes all works why does not Justification also, if it be b^ Grace? If
obedience to the Gospel be the condition of our Justification, as perfect
obedience to the Law of Works was formerly how is it Grace more now than it was
then Did God graciously grant the New Covenant to lost Sinners? True, here was
Grace; but when he had granted it he justifies them only for the performance
of it, or their obedience to it; therefore the giving of the New Covenant is of
Grace; but Justification by obedience to it, is not of Grace but of Works Does
a New Covenant accept of imperfect obedience, and carry pardon with it? It do^^
indeed not insist upon perfect obedience to the Law of Innocence, as the only
way of life but it does not dispense with, or allow the breach of any of those
Commands that were perpetual: What then? It requires perfect and exact
obedience to the Gospel, and f^^ want of that obedience men shall be condemned;
there is no pardon for want of sincere obedience under the Gospel, no more that
there was for want of perfect obedience to Adam, therefore all the mercy, grace
and pardon of the New Covenant lies in relaxing the Covenant of perfect works,
in giving a New and somewhat Milder Covenant to men, when they might have been
condemned for the breach of the former; but still their Justification or right
to Life depends wholly upon their obedience to this New Covenant, and so ^^
no more of Grace properly than Adam should have been. But they say our
obedience is performed by the efficacy of Divine Grace, and therefore we may be
said to be justified by Grace, though by our Obedience. As if the Elect Angels
that stand were not justified or accepted in and by their own integrity,
because preserved by the Grace of God; or as if Adam could not have been
justified by keeping the Law, unless he had done it merely by his own connate
strength, without additions or assistance of Divine Grace throughout his Life:
What the Grace is which these men allow to our obedience is yet uncertain; but
this alters not the nature of Justification; if it be by obedience it is not
of grace but of works, i. e. a man is pronounced Just or Righteous for his own
obedience by what principle soever it be wrought; therefore the says here
spoken of neither is nor does include obedience. Again, It is a Faith that the
Promise may be sure or firm to all the Seed, but if obedience be the condition
of life, the Promise cannot be sure to all or any Believers, Ergo, this Faith
does not include Obedience. Professed Arminians grant there can be no assurance
ordinarily of any particular man's Salvation, yea that there is no absolute
certainty thet any Man should be saved, though Christ died for them all: Others
speak more dubiously; but if Justification be suspended upon our Obedience to
the Gospel to our lives end; it cannot be certain to any Man, that he shall be
justified and saved, till he be out of the World: there may be indeed an
objective certainty of the Promise in general, viz. He that obeys to the End
shall be saved; but thus the promise to Adam was as certain, viz, if he had
obeyed perfectly to the End, he should thereby be justified; but here was a
Promise to Abraham, That he and his Seed should be blessed; and this Promise
was not made to the Works of the Law, but to the Faith of Abraham and his Seed,
that the promise might be certain, i. e. that they should certainly attain the
promised blessedness, and by no means fall short of it; but this certainty
comes not from persevering Obedience, which is it self uncertain, Ergo. If any
say, Believers may be sure they shall persevere, and so the Promise shall be
certain. I answer, None of the Authors we deal with, will say so; and if they
should, this would overthrow Obedience, being the condition of our
Justification; for then we should have an absolute Promise of perseverance: and
so of Justification, before we are perfectly justified, which no sober man will
affirm: Besides, to what is this Promise of perseverance made? to Faith? then
Faith alone has the Promise of Obedience and Perseverance, whereby we must be
justified, though they will not allow it to justify us, and then they contend
to little purpose. Moreover, this Faith of Abraham was such, as whereby both
Jews under Moses's Law, and Gentiles exempt from that Law, should be justified;
but the Jews under the Law, were not justified by Obedience to the Gospel
dispensation, which then was not given, nor was Abraham himself justified by
it, which was not then in force; nor yet are the Gentiles since the abolition
of the Law obliged to the same Obedience that Abraham was, he being under the
Law of Circumcision and Sacrifices, and other Institutions afterward
incorporated with the Law of Moses; therefore this Faith which justifies
Abraham and all Believers alike, is not Obedience to the Gospel, or any edition
of the Law of God, and the Apostle himself explains it in the next words, v.
17. Abraham was made the Father of many Nations before him whom he believed,
etc. (...), it may be rendered, forasmuch as he believed in God, who quickneth
the dead, and calls things that are not, as if they were, who against hope
believed in hope, etc. all this plainly respects Abraham's trust, and Gods
Promise, not his Obedience; and by this he was justified and made the Father,
and Pattern of all believers; therefore Belie^evers are not justified by
Obedience.

Argument 2.
If Gospel Obedience, or Faith as including Obedience, justifys, then the
Gospel justifys as a Law; not as a Promise of Mercy and Grace in Christ; but
Fallen Man cannot be justified by any Law, Ergo. The Consequence is evident;
Obedience respects the Law as such, and to be justified by a Law, or the
observance of it; and to be justified by a promise of mere Mercy, are directly
opposite. The Gospel according to them, may have a Promise of Life annexed to
Obedience; but it justifies for that Obedience to which life was promised,
after the manner of all other Laws, that have Promises of reward annexed; and
not as a Promise of Mercy and Life to be given gratis.

I prove the Minor, Fallen Man cannot be justified by any Law of God, because he
is not able to perform any, he is no more able o^ himself to obey the
Evangelical Law, tha^ the Perfect Law of Works; for having n^ principle of
spiritual life in him, he has n^ more power to yield imperfect than perfect
Obedience (in nothing, there are no degrees not more and less.) The Apostle
says, Ga^. 3.21. If there had been a Law given, or could be given, which could
give life, Righteousness should be by the Law. God as a Creator and Lord first
expects Obedience from his Creatures, and would reward them for it. (...) Men
were able to fulfill any Law of Obedience fit for God to require of him, in
order to h^^ own honor, and Man's happiness, God would certainly enjoin him
that Law; but by (...) Law is the knowledge of Sin, Romans 4.15. b^ every divine
Law, as well as the Law (...) Works. Man does but discover his own sinfulness,
because not able to obey it; and therefore he can be justified by no Law: If
they say, God can enable them to fulfill the Precepts of the Gospel; so he could
also have enabled them to have peformed the Law of Innocence. If it be said,
God has promised he will enable men to it; then this Promise must be as
universal as the Law; else the Law would require an impossibity of some Men,
and if it be, then all that are commanded to obey the Gospel, are promised to
be made able to perform it: which is the Jesuits Universal-sufficient-grace in
the highest degree; but if the Gospel do not carry with it a certain promise or
power to fulfill it (as it does not) before Faith; then it propounds to Men a
way of Salvation, which to them at present, is as impossible, as to be saved by
the Law of Works; and for what they know, ever shall be; therefore the Gospel
cannot justify as a Law. But the natural consequence of this Doctrine is, That
Man has Natural Ability to obey the Gospel, and that his Nature is not
corrupted; or not so far, as to extinguish all spiritual life, and therefore
that men by diligence may overcome their own indisposition, and obey the Gospel
sincerely, which God will mercifully accept to their Salvation; and hence Mr.
Trueman and others, tell us, That the Gospel is fitted to Man's weak and broken
condition, requiring no more than is a greable to it; it is indeed fitted to
Man's miserable state, if it be taken for a free promise of life, but not, if it
be a Law promising life only to Obedience, unless he has power to obey. If a
Creditor to whom is due 1000 pounds, would be content to take 1000 Pence from a
poor Debtor, and yet will stand upon it, that he should perish in Prison,
unless he pay the 100 Pence, when he knows he can neither pay nor procure one
Penny of good and current Money; surely he cannot be said, to have tempered and
suited his terms and demands to the broken and shattered condition of the Poor
Debtor.

Argument 3.
If Obedience to the Gospel justify Christians, then Obedience to the Law of
Moses did justify the Jews that were under that dispensation: For that was
then the way of life and obedience to the Jews, as the Gospel is now to
Christians; nor was it given them as a Covenant of perfect Obedience; but was
indeed a more imperfect and obscure edition of the Gospel; and the Jews were
but as Heirs in their minority under Tutors and Governors, till they were fit
for the greater liberty of Sons, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Nor can there be any
reason, why the Jews should not be justified by sincere obedience to the Law,
unless it be affirmed to be a Covenant of Perfect Obedience, and then their
case was worse than Adam's, more being required of them, than of him, and they
without strength to obey it; Minor: But the Jews were not justified by sincere
obedience to the Law of Moses, Ergo. Acts 13.38, 39. St. Paul preached to the
Jews, That in Christ's Name was preached to them the forgiveness of sins; and
that by him all that believe are justified from all things from which they
could not be justified by the Law of Moses; Their Justification must come by
forgiveness of sins, through believing in Christ's Name, and not by their
obedience to the Law, which he says ^^as impossible, Romans 4.14. If they that
are of the Law be Heirs, faith is made void, and be Promise of none effect: The
Apostle here proves, from v. 9. That Justification was ^ot restrained to the
Jews, because the Promise was made to Abraham's Faith, which justified him, and
made him the Father of all Believers, while he was yet uncircumcised; therefore
the Law here spoken of, was the Law of Moses, which was given after Abraham,
and the Promise is of his being Heir of the World, or Head of the Faithful,
viz. That God would raise up a Church in, and from him, which should be saved
by Faith as he was; and Faith here, is Abraham's Faith in that Promise, by
which he was justified before he was circumcised, and by which all ^is Seed
shall be justified, directing their says more expressly to Christ, v. 14. Now,
says the Apostle, if they that are of the Law, the Jews, are Heirs of the
Promise, i. e. by the Law, (for by Faith they were Heirs as well as the
Gentiles) then the Promise and Faith were made void, i. e. Abraham and his Seed
by Faith without that Law could not be justified, because men at that time were
to be justified only by that Law, and further he says, ver. 11, 12, 13. That
Abraham was justified by Faith before he was circumcised, and received
circumcision as the Seal of the righteousness which he had being uncircumcised,
to show that the Gentiles shall be justified by Faith, though they were not
circumcised, nor obliged to the Law of Moses: and that the Jews though
circumcised, and observing the Law (of which circumcision was a Badge) should
be justified by Faith as he was, and not by that circumcision, v. 11, 12. He
received the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith
which he had ye^ being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them
to believe, though they be no^ circumcised, that righteousness may be imputed
unto them also: and the Father of circumcision to them that are not of the
circumcision only: bu^ also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father
Abraham, which he had yet being uncircumcised: The Father of circumcision to
them that are not of the circumcision only, i. e. not because they were
circumcised, and had th^^ Law of Moses; but because they walked in the steps of
his Faith, of the acceptance where of Circumcision was a Seal: He adds another
reason, v. 15. why the Law could not make them heirs of the Promise, for by the
Law is the knowledge of Sin, and where there is no Law, there is no
transgression, i. e. the Law as given to the Jews did but show the^ their duty,
and so convince them of sin, because they could not keep it; and therefore that
could not make them heirs of the promise, but on the contrary, if they must
stand and be tried by that Law, then the Promise was to no purpose, and Faith
in it had no force, ergo, the Jews were not justified by the Law of Moses; they
were brought into Canaan for the Promise, Deuteronomy. 9.5. not for their keeping the
Law; and that was a Type of their attaining eternal life.

Argument 4.
Romans 5.1, etc. the Apostle having proved that we are justified by Faith, lays
down the Effects of this Justification, where first he speaks of
Justification as a thing done and transacted already to Believers, (...), being
therefore justified by Faith, or when we are justified by Faith; and then he
descends to the Effects, 1st. Peace or reconciliation with God, v. 1. which
he amplifyeth, v. 10, 11. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, and being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life, i. e.
brought to glory, and through him we have received the atonement, (...), and
glory in God on that account, which is proved by the comparison of our fall in
Adam, v. 12. ad sinem, viz. as by being born of Adam we are enemies to God,
under his wrath and condemnation, so by believing in Christ we are reconciled
to God and have peace with him. A second Effect of Justification here
mentioned, is access into that grace or favor wherein we now stand, v. 2. i.
e. present favor with God, and freedom of access to him. A third rejoicing in
hope of glory, v. 2. (...), we boast, the highest kind of rejoyceing. A fourth,
rejoicing in tribulation, v. 3, 4. in confidence of spiritual benefit by them
and deliverance out of them. A fifth, a pouring of the Love of God into the
heart, v. 5. (...). All these flow from Justification in this Life, as natural
fruits in Believers; but if we are justified by obedience none of these can
stand.

1st. There is no justification in this life, it is no past or present certain
thing, but a future and uncertain: If obedience to the Gospel be that whereby
we must be justified, then we are not justified till our obedience be
fulfilled, and that is not till the Soul be out of the Body. We are told that
there is a sententiall Justification, when the Judge shall pronounce us
acquitted, which is not till Judgment; but there is a constitutive
Justification by the Judgment of the Law in this Life, when the Law
pronounces us Righteous according to it, and to be such as the Judge will
justify; but neither will this hold, the Gospel cannot judge a man to have
fulfilled it before he has fulfilled it, which it must do if it judge or
pronounce us righteous for the obeying the Gospel to our lives end, before we
be dead. The complete condition of Justification they acknowledge is obedience
to the end of our lives, and Justification is an acquitting us and accepting us
to life for that obedience; therefore till that obedience be performed, the
Gospel does not acquit us, nor pronounce us Heirs of Life; therefore there is
no constitutive Justification in this life by obedience. Imperfect or inchoate
Justification, which they sometimes speak of, when a man begins to obey the
Gospel, is nothing but a probability of being justified: For if a man fall from
his Integrity he shall never be justified, though he obeyed for a time, no not
in part, nor his condemnation lessned. All that can be said is, That such a man
is in that way wherein if he continue to the end he shall be justified, but if
he continue not to the end, he shall no more be justified than he that never
entered into that way: Nor can these Effects of Justification stand upon the
foundation of obedience; 1st. Not peace and reconciliation with God; For if we
are to be justified by obeying the Gospel to our lives end, then God is not at
peace with us, nor reconciled to us till then: There is a suspension of the
execution of the Curse of the Law, and there is a Law of Life given, by which
(when we have fulfilled it) we shall be saved, and former sins forgiven, but if
we fail (as we may) both the Curse of the Law and the Condemnation of the
Gospel will fall upon us; all this while we are but Probationers for life, and
all God's kindnesses to us spiritual and temporal, are merciful encouragements
to us, but not the Effects of reconciliation. 2ly. Not the present favor of
God, God indeed out of his infinite goodness bestows many blessings for our
present comfort to own and to encourage obedience, but they proceed not from
the Love of a Father to Children; the greatest inward comfort and joys of the
Godly, cannot be tokens of fatherly love or certain special favor: For
Adoption does certainly presuppose Justification. God must 1st. justify us
before he be our Father, and so accept our persons before he accept our
obedience as the service of Children; but obedience to the end being the
condition of our Justification, neither Justification, nor Adoption, nor the
special Fruits of it can take place in this life, and I think none will say we
have inchoate adoption for God to be our Father and we to be his Children in
this life imperfectly, and when our obedience is complete, that Relation will
be consummate also. 3ly. Nor joy in the hope of Glory, for upon the uncertain
condition of obedience (which no man can be sure by this Doctrine that he shall
persevere in) a man can have at the most but a good probability of his
Salvation mixed with fear and danger, and this fear will be the greater, the
more serious men be, and apprehensive how hard it is to enter in at the strait
Gate; what room then is there for great Joy and even boasting in the hope of
Glory? 4ly. Nor joy in Tribulations. Afflictions by this Doctrine are accounted
some part of the curse, fruits of vindicative Justice; we must bear them, Number.
196, 197.
but what great comfort can there be in them? How can we be sure that they
shall not sift out our Grace rather than our Chaff, and that we shall have a
blessed Issue of them, seeing we have no Promise of any such thing, but what
depends only upon the condition of our own obedience? 5ly. Nor can the heart be
filled with the sense of God's Love: The largest apprehensions of the general
offers of mercy and love, though they may calm the Soul, yet cannot make it
joyful under afflictions, nor fill it with joy and peace in believing; and if
there be a sense of Gods particular, eternal love to us, sealing to redemption,
and swallowing up all fears, and the sense of other troubles, as cannot be
denied to have been in many Martyrs and some other Godly persons; this must
suppose their Salvation to be out of danger and not to depend upon conditions
not yet fulfilled: If Christians do here receive, in some sort, the end of
their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls, and rejoice even with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, and can be thankful for it, then the finishing
of their obedience is not the condition of it, but it comes by believing, 1
Pet. 1.8, 9.

Argument 5.
If we are justified by obedience to the Gospel, or obedience be the condition
of our Justification, which is all one, then it may be truly said we are
justified by love, patience, by self-denial, and every other grace as well and
as much as by faith; For these in habit and exercise are the parts of
Gospel-obedience, and Faith it self is but a part of the same, and in it self
not so noble and excellent a part, as Love and some other Graces; but the
Scripture is wholly silent of any such matter: We are never said to be
justified by Love, Patience, etc. but always by Faith, and when it is once
said, Jam. 2. A man is justified by works and not by faith only: Justification
is taken improperly, viz. That a man cannot be a true Christian and saved by
Faith which brings not forth obedience: If they say that it must be taken
properly, and that works in general include every particular Grace, and so we
may be said to be justified by them severally in part, I demand how faith is
opposed to works in justifying, in the Apostle's Dispute about it, in the
Epistle to the Romans and Galatians? Does Faith signify obedience to the
Gospel flowing from Faith or a belief of it, and Works perfect obedience to the
Law? Thus they say, but I would fain know why obedience to the Gospel should be
called Faith rather than obedience to the Law; for Faith had as great a^ part
in it, and as great influence upon that obedience as upon Gospel-obedience:
Adam, that he might have kept the Law of God perfectly, must have perfectly
believed the Existence and Nature of God, his Authority over him, that this Law
was from him, that it was just and good for him to obey, that the Promises and
Threatenings annexed would be certainly fulfilled as there was occasion, and
then in the course of his Obedience he must have trusted in God for the
fulfilling of every Promise which concerned each part of his Obedience, and
moreover that he should be happy ^^ he did persevere to the end. Now
Gospel-Faith (according to this Doctrine) does no more; it believes that Jesus
Christ is King and Savior, that he gave the Gospel as his Will and Law, that
if we keep it to the end we shall be saved, that all the Promises and
Threatenings of it in the general, shall be performed, and in particular, as
there is occasion for them in our lives, only this Faith is imperfect as well
as our obedience, mixed with unbelief and subject to wavering; why then may not
Faith comprehend perfect as well as imperfect obedience, or why should the
latter be called Faith in opposition to the former, if it be said Gospel-Faith
does also include a belief of the Pardon of Sin, which Adam's Faith did not?

I Answer, The addition of one new partial object alters not the nature of the
habit. Faith is Faith still, though it believe some particulars under the
Gospel, which it did not extend to under the Law: as it did then extend to some
particular ( v. 9. perfect freedom from all trouble in the continuance of
innocence) which it does not believe under the Gospel; but perhaps, belief of
pardon may be the reason why it may be opposed to perfect works; it may be the
reason why imperfect works, and the Faith joined with them, may be opposed to
perfect works and their faith; but it can be no reason, why imperfect works
should be called faith simply without any limitation; and perfect works be
called works simply, as if they included no Faith. Moreover, the belief of
pardon in the Gospel, is but accidental by this Doctrine ^^ for eternal life is
promised to sincere Obedience to the Precepts of the Law; the direct and
principle object of Gospel Faith here, i^ the promise of life to Obedience, i.
e. if they obey the Gospel sincerely they shall be saved; and this was the
nature of Adam's Faith, to believe if he obeyed perfectly, he should be saved;
now it is accidental to this that men be sinners and need pardon, and so must
believe that they shall be pardoned: and yet with these men, Pardon is nothing
but nolle punire, that God will not condemn for sin; and thus, when we believe
God will save us, if we obey sincerely, we do consequently and implicitly
believe he will not condemn us, i. e. will pardon us all our sins, but thi^ is
implicit and indirect; therefore the belief of Pardon cannot be a reason why
Gospel Obedience should be called Faith, and opposed to the Works of the Law.

Argument 6.
If Faith and Obedience be the Condition of Justification, then the great falls
of the godly (such especially as wast Conscience, and make a breach upon their
sincerity) must interrupt their Justification, and bring them into a state of
damnation; so that their only remedy must be to begin their Repentance and
Obedience a new; and if they have not time to do that, but should die in their
sin, or senselesness after it, they must perish for ever: but we do not find in
Scripture any word of this. We read of the fall of some, as Noah, Lot, Sampson,
and read nothing of their recovery, and yet no question made of their
Salvation: We read also of David's and Peter's Repentance, and their great
Sorrow, yet not that they reckoned themselves under condemnation: We find David
and others, in the Psalms and Prophets much complaining of their Sins and
Afflictions, the fruit of them, of the want of God's Favor and Presence; yet
they call him their God, and beg the restoring of his Favor, that he would not
take his Spirit utterly from them, Psalm. 51.11, 12. All their Complaints and
Prayers argue want of present fense of God's Favor, and the quicknings of his
Spirit: not that they were utterly out of favor, or a reconciled state. It is
true, it is not safe for young or unexperienced Christians, when guilty of foul
sins, or great decays of Zeal, to retain mueh confidence of their good state:
but rather, to remember from whence they are fallen, and to repent and do their
first works, because they may be easily mistaken about the truth of grace, when
there has been but little proof of it: but well-rooted and experienced
Christians upon their miscarriages are not bound to question their
Justification, but to humble themselves greatly for abusing the grace and
kindness of God, and submit to his fatherly correction, and should they doubt
as some do, yet is not that the best and most proper motive to humble and
recover them, but rather a discouragement and hinderance. Fear of Hell, and
such like Motives work best upon the unexperienced and ignorant; but the want
of God's Presence, and other effects of his Fatherly displeasure are more
suitable, and more effectual to grown Christians: Nor does the Scripture speak
any thing of the condemnation of those that die in actual sin; and either have
not actual repentance, or not time to make proof of the sincerity of it. The
young Prophet, 1 King 14, and the excellent Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.21, 22. were
both slain presently upon an act of disobedience to the express Commands of
God; and yet nothing is said to render their Salvation doubtful: and in this
case I would ask whether the habit of Faith and Obedience be utterly
extinguished? If not, it is strange that Men should go to Hell with a real
disposition to love and serve God, only wanting time to recover themselves from
some fall. If it be extinct, it is also strange, that one, or a few acts of
sin, it may be for a few moments, should utterly root out grace, which has
been long in planting and confirming.

Argument 7.
Lastly, If Faith and Obedience be the Condition of Justification, then there
is no way to comfort Consciences troubled for sin; but from the evidence of
their sincerity past, or by telling them they must be obedient for the time to
come; but for the present there is no peace nor hope, no, though they were
going out of the World. This Argument is much used by our first Reformers,
Luther, Melancthon, Chemnitius, etc. and they thought it unanswerable, viz.
That however men insensible of sin might dispute for the influence of their
works on Justification; yet when men have sore terrors of Conscience, wounded
for sin; neither their works past, nor their promises and purposes of what they
will be for the future, will comfort them; but only the Doctrine of Free Grace
and Pardon, by hoping in the Mercy of God. Our Martyr Mr. Bilney, hearing a
Rhetorical Preacher laying great stress upon Repentance and Obedience as the
only ground of hope, was offended and said, How uncomfortable would this
Poctrine have been to me, when I was in my great terrors for my fall! The
Consequence is undeniable, If we must be justified by Obedience, and that
persevering to the end; there is no comfort to a distressed sinner, unless you
can show him, that he has sincerely obeyed sometime past, and therefore is
fulfilling the Condition of Justification; or by telling him, he must now
resolve to be obedient for the future; and if he do so resolve, there is some
probability he may be saved; but there can be no good hope till after some
process of time he has evidenced the sincerity of his Obedience, which should
he quickly die, there would be no time for, therefore no to lerable ground of
hope or comfort for him, but a bare perhaps that his purpose of obedience may
be true and sincere, and so accepted for his Justification. But the Scriptures
teach otherways, our Saviors, who knew best how to speak to the Soul, says to
the Paralytick Mat. 9.22. Be of good cheer, thy sins are for given thee; and to
the Woman, Luke 7.48 Thy sins are forgiven thee; and Peter, Act 2.37, 38, etc.
when the Jews were pricked at their hearts, bids them repent, and b^
baptized in the name of Christ for the remission of sins, and that they should
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, because the Promises did be long to them
and their Children. We see forgiveness is immediately promised to trembling
souls, and they are directed to hope for that and look to the Promises of it
for present peace and comfort, and certainly when God enlightneth the
Conscience and sets sin in order before it, vid. Job 9. v. 19, to 23. and v.
13, to the end.
no man's sincerity will be a sufficient stay to him, his obedience will appea^
very small, not fit to be presented to God the best will cry out, If thou Lord
should^ mark iniquity who shall stand? Psalm. 130. v. 2^ and enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant for in thy sight shall no flesh be justified, Ps.
143 3. And though they that be but lightly touched with sin are ready to
promise great matter for the future and to quiet themselves with that, yet they
that be thoroughly wounde^ and humbled can never build their peace upon purposes
or promises of obedience, but upon the free Mercy of God in Christ, from whence
also they must have their power to obey, or their purposes are in vain, and
also the acceptance and forgiveness of their poor, imperfect obedience.
Whatever are the disputes of curious Wits, or of rational Parts, who would sain
bring the Methods of Sovereign Grace to the Rules of Humane Reason, yet I never
met with any serious man, nor I believe never shall, who would soberly say,
That he expected to be saved or justified for and by his Obedience to the
Gospel.

CHAP. X. An Answer to the Arguments for Obedience being the Condition of
Justification.
WE come now for a close of this Work to consider the Principle Arguments that
are brought to prove, That Obedience to the Gospel or Faith, as comprehending
all Obedience, is the Condition, by fulfilling whereof we must be justified;
and it is alleged,

1st. That this way of Justification seems most rational, obvious and
agreeable to the whole Tenor of Scripture, which makes the Promises both of
this Life and that which is to come, to Obedience, 1 Timothy 4.8. And that the way
of Justification by trusting in the Promise of Mercy puts some force both
upon Reason and many Texts of Scripture: Thus Mr. Trueman often.

1st. It was Melancthon's Observation, Answ. Lex com. de isustif. judic. in Romans
That man's Reason, which he called humana Philosophia, does always cherish a
notion of being justified by Works, and therefore Justification by Faith ever
has been, and ever shall be opposed both by curious Wits and by grave Moral
Men, not only among Heathens, but in the Church also; which comes partly from
the Pride of Man, who would fain be something, but chiefly from the impression
of the Law of Nature or Works, which taught and allowed no other way of
Justification, and therefore men's Consciences, though they hear the Letter of
the Gospel, do not, cannot believe that they can be justified by Free Grace,
without any respect to their Works, till they are inwardly persuaded by the
Spirit of Christ. Christ crucified was a stumbling Block to the Jews, who
trusted to the Works of the Law, and Foolishness to the Greeks, who thought
themselves wise and rational men, 1 Cor. 1.23. It is therefore no
inconvenience, that Justification by obedience is most agreeable to carnal and
unsanctified reason, and Justification by Faith not suitable to it: But I
suppose this Author by rational, meant, That the several parts and consequences
of the Dostrine of Justification by Obedience did better cohere and agree
together, than if it were affirmed to be by Faith only. Of this let the ^ious
Reader, that has been sensible of sin ^^d guilt, and feelingly understands the
grounds of a Christian's Hope and Peace, ^^dge. They say, That man being under
^rath for breaking the Law of Works, desti^te of the Image or Grace of God, did
yet receive a New Law purchased by the Death ^f Christ, to repent, believe, and
obey the ^recepts of it, and for so doing he should be ^^aved, his former sins
forgiven; yet all this ^hile he is not able to repent, believe, or o^^y, nor is
there any promise that he shall be ^ade able; and if he receive Grace to do
this ^any measure, yet it is not insured to him; he may and many do lose it,
yea he may recover and and lose it again, and if death should seize him in any
of these sad intervals, all his obedience profits nothing, but he perishes
for ever; if this will comfort or settle an afflicted, unsettled conscience, or
be agreeable to the tastes any have had of the Grace o^ God, let such judge. On
the other side, we teach, That man being utterly lost by guil^ and inability to
obedience, God sent his So^ fully and absolutely to satisfy his Justice and to
purchase eternal life for as many as he had chosen. This purchase he declared
in the Gospel, promising pardon and eternal life to al^ that humbly fly to and
trust in him for it, that when his promise is published God sendet^ forth his
Spirit, and persuades the hearts o^ his Elect to trust in it, that hereupon he
gives them pardon of all their sins, and a right to eternal life, for the sake
of his Son's satisfaction and purchase, that being thus reconciled to them; he
does further make them h^^ Children, and heirs of Glory for his Son sake, and
because they are his Children, h^ gives them the Spirit of his Son to rene^
them after his Image, to continue and perse^ grace in them, and forgiveth all
their infirm^ties, and blesses them with all temporal an^ spiritual blessings
in Christ, and orders a^ his providence for their good, to purge o^^ sin and
to perfect grace, till at last of his Fatherly Goodness he crowns them with
etern^ life, after their hard service on Earth; to e^^ courage them in which
Heaven was proposed as a Reward to them; wherein is this irrational or
inconsistent with it self?

The Scripture for the most part speaks to the Conscience and Affections,
2dly.
more than the Judgment, and therefore handles not things distinctly and
didactically, but puts many things together, says and obedience in general
or in particular duties, as is most suited to practice; and therefore it is no
good Argument, Faith and Obedience are joined together often times as the means
of Salvation without distinguishing the several Offices of each, and what
influence each have upon the several parts of our Salvation, ergo, both
together and alike do justify us before God. Yet it is evident from the whole
Tenor of the Scripture, That forgiveness of sin, reconciliation, peace; with
God, hope of Heaven, all come by our flying to and hope in Mercy and Grace
alone. This was renewed to Adam by promise of the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.17.
And by Sacrifices; in like manner renewed to Abraham by promise, with the Seal
of Circumcision, and a more particular promise of Christ. The Psalms
practically exemplify, That our only refuge is Free Mercy: The Prophets are
full of promises of Pardon, of healing Backslidings, Jer. 3.12. of loving
freely, Hos. 14.4. of forgiving beyond man's thoughts, Isa. 54.6, 7, 8. and the
like. Our Savior and the Apostles preached this Doctrine to convinced and
humbled Sinners, though they insist much upon Obedience to convince and reclaim
the hypocritical backsliding Jews: To the Heathens, who had no excuse for sin,
they preached nothing but pardon at first, and besides this, when the Doctrine
of Justification is distinctly propounded and proved, it is wholly ascribed to
Faith in the Promise, in two most argumentative Epistles to the Romans and
Galatians; upon which they that would bring in obedience are fain to make a
manifest force, whereas we force no Scripture, but explain those that speak
generally, by showing the several Acts of Faith, and ascribing to it and to
Obedience their distinct Offices.

Argument 2.
They argue, That God is not to be considered as a Creditor in the business of
Justification, but as a Rector or Governor, dealing with Sinners, Gr. Prop. p.
86.
not as with Debtors, but as with rebellious Subjects, who are to be forgiven
and reclaimed by Laws, and by granting them Terms and Conditions of Pardon and
reconciliation. (Mr. Trueman.)

Answ.
The Scripture sets out God under the notion of a Creditour, and pardon by
forgiving of debts, Mat. 18.23, 27. etc. and such a one as does not release
part only, and requiring a third or fourth of the Debt, but as one that
forgives all, even to ten thousand Talents; and we are taught daily to pray,
Forgive us our Debts as we forgive our Debtors; and yet we acknowledge, That
God in justifying deals with men as a Rector or Governor. To Pardon is an act
of Government, yea of Sovereignity, none but a Sovereign can forgive the breach
of his own Laws, and restore offenders to favor. God as as a Supreme
Legislator and Rector thought of a way to save sinners, appointed his Son to
die for them; accepted his satisfaction when it was made, promises pardon to
them that fly to his mercy, and mercifully forgiveth them that trust in it, and
justly acquitteth and discharges them for the Righteousness of his Son; and
when they are justified and made his Children, he does eternally govern them by
his Laws of Obedience: all these are the acts of a Rector; therefore on this
account, there is no need that they should be justified by Conditions of New
Obedience.

Argument 3.
They argue, From the comparison of Men's forgiveness, which is always upon
conditions of amendment, either expressed or implied. When a Prince Proclaims
Pardon to Rebels, it is either expressed or implied, that they lay down their
Arms, and return to their obedience and continue in it: In like manner (they
think) God cannot pardon men, but upon Conditions of Repentance and obedience
for the remainder of their lives.

Answ.
If a man should receive and accept satisfaction from another in the behalf of
an offender, and then impose conditions upon him, for his Pardon or
Reconciliation, he would certainly be unjust: and this is our case toward God:
he has accepted a Ransom and Atonement in the Blood of his Son, and forgiveth
men for, and in respect to that; and therefore requires no conditions of them
for their reconciliation; but that they accept of a trust in the mercy promised
in his Son.

There is another great difference betwixt God and Man in the matter of
forgiveness. 2dly.
Man cannot make the Offender obedient for the future; nor can be sure he will
be obedient; and therefore he makes conditions with him, and obliges him by
hope of impunity and fear of punishment, if he offend again: but God can, and
does intend when he pardons man to give him a heart to love and obey him to
the end; and therefore needs not make this a condition of their pardon: Besides
the greatest Princes have not such absolve Power of pardon in the breach of
their own Laws, as God has of his; nor can they repair the dishonor done to
themselves and their Law, as God can; partly in magnisying his grace, and
partly in the inestimable value of his Sons blood, by which all the dishonor
done to him by Man is abundantly repaired: But Mr. Baxter has handled this
question in a set Disputation to which he refers us; 4 Disp. of Justedisp. 1
where he give us 10 Arguments to prove this Thesis p. 13. We are justified by
God, by our believing in Christ as Teacher and Lord, and not only by believing
in his Blood or Righteousness, which I shall briefly consider so far as they
tend to prove Obedience to be the condition of our Justification, which is the
main drift of them, though not as they mediately respect the terms of his
Thesis, which I have before proved out of this same disputation to be
oequivocal and improper: For by this Doctrine, we are justified only by obeying
the Gospel of Christ, which consists of his Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings, which all proceed from him as a King, not as a Priest or Prophet;
i. e. therefore we are justified by believing in him as King only, not as a
Priest or Prophet, unless accidentally and remotely, as he confesses, p. 25.
The Argument follows.

Argument 1.
From the confession of those that we dispute with. p. 13.
If it be granted that believing in Jesus Christ as Lord and Teacher is a real
part of the condition of our Justification, then it is granted, that by this
believing in him we are justified as by a condition; but the former is true,
therefore the latter.

Answ.
If he had quoted any Authors, we might the better have judged of the truth of
the Antecedent: all that looks like a proof is, p. 14. 3dly. They expressly make
it antecedent to our Justification, as of Moral necessity, ex constitutione
promittentis, and say it is the Fides quae justificat: All the meaning whereof
is, that as the Gospel reveals Christ who dyed for us to be a King and
Teacher of his People; so in order to our coming to him to be saved by him, we
must acknowledge or believe this Doctrine, that he died for our sins, and is to
teach us and rule us, that he may save us. But,

1. It is not necessary to Justification, that persons should have a distinct
knowledge of the Offices of Christ, but it is sufficient that they seek Pardon
and Salvation only through him. This Faith saved them before Christ's coming,
though without any distinct knowledge of his Person; and under the Gospel, many
ignorant persons, and weak capacities, yet true Christians, scarce ever have a
more distinct knowledge of their Savior in whom they trust, (much less have
they it before Justification.)

2ly. If believing in Christ as Lord and Teacher mean (as it ought in this
Argument) a purpose or promise of Obedience to Christ; it is no part or act of
justifying Faith; not of the faith quae justificat, but an effect wrought by
it; and if any of our Divines say it is, they speak popularly not logically,
and are popularly to be understood, viz. that justifying Faith is always
conjoined with a purpose of obedience.

3ly. If believing in Christ as Lord and Teacher, as well as in his blood, be
taken for trusting in Christ to be taught, sanctified and ruled by him to
eternal life, as well as to have our sins forgiven; this we grant to be
justifying Faith, Faith quae justificat; but these are several acts of Faith,
and they have their several particular objects and their order, and do not all
go before Justification; but a sinner first looks to Christ to satisfy the Law,
to reconcile him to God, to deliver him from wrath, and when the Promise of
this is revealed to him, he trusts in it, and hereby is accepted and
reconciled; his next care is, how he shall hold out to serve God, and to be
brought to his Kingdom, and then upon knowledge of the Promises of the Spirit
and Grace of Christ flowing from him as Prophet and King, he trusts in them
to be preserved to the Heavenly Kingdom; but this follows his Justification,
and is the immediate root of his Obedience; for having hope in Christ for grace
and perseverance, he is thereby stirred up to make a Covenant or Promise of all
Obedience; but all this is nothing to prove that our Obedience is the condition
whereby we must be justified, but the quite contrary.

Argument 2.
The usual language of the Scripture is, p. 14.
that we are justified by Faith in Christ, or by believing in him, without any
exclusion of any essential part of that Faith: But Faith in Christ does
essentially contain our believing in him as Teacher, Priest and King or Lord,
Ergo.

Answ.
To the Major, Faith as including habits and acts of all grace is an aggregatum,
and has no essential parts, and as a single habit is a quality or something
like it, and has not essential parts.

To the Minor I answer, That justifying Faith does contain an assent to the
Doctrine of Christ's Person and his Offices, at least implicitly, and a trust
in the promise of the benefits of them all, and this is essential to it; but
from hence it follows not, that Obedience justifies as well as Faith: But if by
believing in Christ as Prophet, Priest and King be meant (as it seems to be)
a belief of, and subjection to the whole Gospel of Christ, then the Minor is
false. Justifying Faith does not include this as the essential parts of it;
Obedience to the Gospel, and to Christ as King and Prophet is the effect, not a
part of Faith, or any elicit act of it; and though Faith do essentially (rather
integrally) include a belief of the whole Doctrine of the Gospel; yet the sum
of that Doctrine is comprised in the Promise of Justification by Christ, all
other truths being some way subservient, and to be referred to it; and so Faith
has nothing else essential to it, but an assent to, and trust in the promise,
and those things th t belong to it. When it is added, That we are to prove that
to justify is restrained to any one Act of Faith, exclusive of the rest; that
is sufficiently done when we prove that Works are excluded, and that Faith
justifies only instrumentally or as a trust in the Promise.

The Scriptures alleged do some of them prove that Faith taken complexly for
all Gospel-obedience is required to Salvation, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.16, 17, 18.
and v. 36. but then Salvation also is taken complexly for the whole deliverance
from sin and misery, till we are brought to Heaven, whereof Justification is
but one part; and others spoke of Faith properly which is opposed to Works, and
said to justify us without them, as Romans 1.16.17, 18. and Romans 3.22, 25, 28,
31. Romans 5.1, etc. And this we deny to include the promise or purpose of
Obedience.

Here it is not unseasonable to show the concurrence of Dr. Preston with us in
his explaining justifying Faith to extend to all the Offices of Christ; because
he is confidently alleged by those we dispute against for their Opinion,
though as injuriously as the two former: They that will satisfy themselves may
please to peruse his 11th Sermon on the Govenant; out of which I observe these
few things.

He says, That the way to obtain the Spirit, 1st. Use 3. Ibid.
to mortify Sin, is to believe, to apply to a man's self the Covenat of Grace,
the promise of the Pardon of his Sins; These are his own words: That is the way
to get the Spirit, that is the way to mortify the deeds of the flesh, and to
get the heart changed, and to be made a new Creature: For he adds; Hope of
pardon and mercy melts the heart, and makes a man go about the Commands of
God as now possible, yea to be delighted in. It is plain the Dr. makes the
Covenant of Grace, and the promise of Pardon to be believed and applied to our
selves, before we can make any Covenant of Obedience with God, and that
believing is trusting in the Covenant as a Promise, and that the Promise of
Pardon is the first thing a Sinner is to apply to himself, as the meansto
humble, change, and to bring him to God.

Use 4.
God's Covenant with Abraham and with all believers, is to give them all
blessings in Christ, and distinctly from all his Offices; pardon from his
Priesthood, teaching from his Prophetical, the Spirit and Victory over all
their corruptions, together with all other Privileges from his Kingly Office.

The Condition of this Covenant, that God requires to make a man Partaker of
these Blessings, is Faith alone: The Condition, says he, is, Thou shall
believe this, thou shall believe that such a Messiah shall be sent into the
World; Art thou able to believe this, Abraham? etc. Again, Abraham did believe,
and God accounted that Faith of his for Righteousness, i. e. he accepted him
for it; for that Faith he reckoned him a man sit to make a Covenant withal, he
accounted him a Righteous person, i. e. he was willing to enter into a Covenant
with him, because he believed him.

Moreover, That his believing for a Son, and for the Inheritance of Canaan were
trials whether he could believe the Promise of the Messiah, that they were not
the Faith that did immediately entitle him to the Covenant, but acts of the
same Grace of Faith, of the same habit or gracious disposition, whereby he
believed the Promise of the Messiah; and that his Faith was tried again when he
was commanded to offer his Son, whereupon God renewed his Covenant with an
Oath, Sure, says he, I will perform my Covenant, since I see that thou
believe me, and fear me, and preferrest me before thine only Son; N. B.
These are but the Concomitants of Faith.

Again, The Condition that God requires of every man to be made Partaker of his
Covenant is nothing but to believe in God, i.e. God says, I will give my Son
to you -- and I will make him a King, a Priest, and a Prophet to bless you; he
shall give you remission of sins, he shall teach you to mortify your lusts,
and shall make you Partakers of his Kingdom; he shall make you Heirs and Sons:
This is a very great Promise, can you believe this? If a man will but believe
God now, I say, it makes him Partaker of the Covenant: Hence it is manifest
that Faith only intitleth to the Covenant of Grace, that this Faith is nothing
else but a trust in the Promise of the Benefits of Christ in all his Offices;
and that by a Condition is meant only a qualification of the Subject, whereby
he is made fit to be covenanted with.

This is further proved by the Reasons he gives why Faith only is the
condition. 1st. Because it works sanctification, not that it is a part of it.
2ly. Because nothing else can answer the Covenant but Faith. The Covenant is
not a Commandment, Do this and live, but a Promise; it runs all upon Promises;
I will give thee a Seed, in that thou shall be blessed, etc. The Covenant on
God's part stands all in Promises: Now you know, it is faith that answers the
Promise, for the Promise is to be believed. If the Covenant had stood in
Commandments and Rules of the Law, then it must have been answered by Works and
Obedience, and therefore it could not be by Obedience; for that holds not
proportion, there is not agreement between them; but since the Covenant
consists of Promises, that must needs be by Believing, and not by Works. 4ly.
It is of Faith that it might be of grace, and not of Debt; for if God should
give a Law and Rules to men, and promise them life upon it; then when they had
performed the work, they would challenge it of debt: No, says the Lord, it is
an inheritanee; I do not use to deal with my Children as Men do with their
Servants, that I should give them work to do, and when they have done, I should
give them Wages. Lastly he says, Sermon 12. at the beg.
That Christ gives first Remission of sins as a Priest, wherein consists
Justification; next as a Prophet he gives Knowledge, and then as a King he
gives Guidance, Peace and Victory over Spiritual Enemies. Thus we see he
opposes Faith to Obedience, to Commands, and says, The Covenant is nothing
but a Promise on God's part, and that Faith must first look for Remission of
sins from the Priesthood or Satisfaction of Christ, and for other Benefits from
his other Offices afterward, which is the Doctrine we defend; and yet this must
be meant only implicitly as to a great part of Believers, few having the
knowledge and skill to make this distinct use of Christ's Offices.

Argument 3.
The Scripture does not only by the specific denomination, p. 19.
but also by description and mentioning those very Acts, include the believing
in Christ as our Lord and Teacher, etc. in that Faith by which as a condition
we are justified, Ergo, we are justified by believing in Christ as our Lord and
Teacher.

Answ.
We deny the Antecedent: Faith does neither justify as a condition, nor does
the Scripture ascribe Justification to any other acts of Faith than trusting in
the Promise of Life through Christ. Let us consider the Proof, Romans 10.4, to
10. We are said to be justified, 1st. by believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, v.
9. Therefore his Lordship is included in the object of Faith as justifying.

Answ.
Here is nothing but a designation of the person, not a distinct intimation of
his Kingly Office, and yet Faith which justifyeth, trusts in Christ as Lord
and King (as was said before.)

We must also believe that God raised him from the dead which was no part of
his Priestly Office. 2ly.


Answ.
Christ's Resurrection does belong to his Priestly Office, though it cannot be
properly called a part of it: For it was the complement or consummation of his
Satisfaction, and immediately necessary to his appearing in Heaven, there to
present his Satisfaction and to intercede for us, as the High Priest after the
Sacrifice of the Goat, went into the Holy of Holies, to sprinkle the Blood
before the Mercy-Seat, and to pray for the People. Besides, to believe in
Christ as rising from the dead, is nothing else but believing in him as having
made a complete satisfaction, which was evidenced by his Resurrection. The same
Answer will serve to what is pleaded from Romans 4.24, 25. only it is added here,
that we must believe in him that raised Christ from the dead, Answ.
Ergo, Faith respects not Christ only.

Faith immediately respects the Promise of Life by Christ as the formal object
of or reason why it expects Salvation by Christ; then it trusts in God to
justify for Christ's sake, and then in Christ as him that has purchased
Justification for us, and will see it applied. To believe in him that raised
Christ from the dead, is to trust in God to justify us, who has testified his
acceptance of Christ's Satisfaction for us, by raising him from the dead. What
is this to Obedience?

1 John 1.9, 11, 12. The Faith whereby we are adopted (wherein Justification is
included or presupposed) respects Christ, as the Light that enlightneth every
Man.

Answ.
It believes the promise of salvation preached by Christ, and so trusts in
it; what is this to a Promise of subjection to Christ's constant teaching as a
Prophet?

2ly. It respects his Person [it receives him] and not one single benefit.

Answ.
Nor do we say that Justification gives, or justifying faith obtains, but one
single benefit; it obtains reconciliation with God, and right to life, which
either include or draw after them all saving benefits.

3ly. It is believing in his name that signifies his Person and Offices, and
is all one with taking him for the Messiah, and becoming his Disciples.

Answ.
To believe in God's name is the same that trusting in him. They that know thy
Name will trust in thee; so to believe in Christ's Name, was to trust in him as
the Messiah or Savior, and this gives right to Adoption.

4ly. Faith does not physically receive Christ by way of apprehension, as I
receive Gold in my hand (whoever said it did?) but dispositively, it qualifieth
the subject in the sight of God, and he gives power thereupon to become his
Sons.

Answ.
But how is this proved from the Text? If it had been said power was given, etc.
to them that receive him without any explication, there might have been some
color for this plea; but it is explained by believing on his Name, i. e.
trusting in him, but trust is no proper legal qualification, though it puts
the subject into an immediate natural capacity or disposition to receive the
benefit; and Moral also, when the object is Moral.

Many other places are added, where we are said to believe in the Son of God,
to hear his voice, and believe that he was the promised Messiah, etc. which
denote the whole Person of Christ, Ergo. Justifying Faith respects immediately
and directly all his Offices.

Did ever any Man contend, that we are justified by believing in one part of
Christ's Person? or cannot we trust in the whole Person of Christ, without
respecting all his Offices, distinctly, primarily and immediately? Do we divide
the Essence of God, or exclude his other Attributes absolutely, when we do
immediately respect his Wisdom alone, or his Power, or Goodness, according to
our present occasion, at that time not distinctly making use of others? and yet
justifying Faith does trust in Christ for the benefit of all his Offices, Answ.
(as before) This proves not that Obedience is joined with it in justifying.

Argument 4.
We are justified by Christ as Priest, p. 24.
Prophet and King conjunctly, and not by any of these alone, much less by his
Humiliation and Obedience alone; then according to the Opponents own Principles
(who argue from the distinct interest of the several parts of the Objects, to
the distinct interest of the several acts of Faith) we are justified by
believing in Christ as Priest, Prophet and King.

Answ.
Faith as a distinct habit, has no acts, but practical assent to a revealed
truth; which in respect of the promise is called trust or affiance. One habit
has but one sort of elicite acts, though it may cause diverse effects upon the
will and affections according to the nature of diverse objects; therefore we do
not argue from the distinct interest of several acts of Faith; but from Faith,
as trusting in the Promise of Justification, as the special object of the act
that justifies. Again the Object of justifying Faith according to this
Opinion, must be the whole declared Will of Christ, or the whole Gospel; for
that is it which we believe and obey, and Obedience to it is the form or
righteousness by and for which we are justified; therefore those Terms of
Christ's justifying in his whole Person, and all his Offices, or Faith
justifying with respect to them, are added in vain, they being no more included
in the nature of Justification, or respected by Faith as justifying in this
way, than in ours. The promise of life by Christ to believing only, is as much
founded upon his whole Person and all his Offices, as if the promise were made
to our Obedience to the whole Gospel: But we deny the Antecedent, let us hear
the proof.

The Word Justification signifies these 3 acts, p. 24.
1st. Condonation, or constitutive Justification by the Law of grace, or
promise of the Gospel. 2ly. Absolution by sentence in judgment. 3ly. The
execution of the former, by actual liberation from penalty: The two former are
more properly called Justification. As for the first, I argue, Christ does as
King and Benefactor (on supposition of his antecedent Merits) enact the Law of
grace or promise, by which we are justified, Ergo. As King and Benefactour he
does justify us by condonation or constitution. As the Father by a right of
Creation was Rector of the new created World, and so made the Covenant of Life
that was then made; so the Son (and the Father) by right of Redemption is
Rector of the new redeemed World, and so made the Law of grace, that gives
Christ and life to all that will believe, etc.

Answ.
Christ as God, the same in substance with the Father, did together with him
enact both the Covenants of Works and of Grace; but as Mediator (which only is
to our purpose) he did not enact the Covenant or Law of Grace, and it is only
said, that he did, and not proved. It was God as God, and in special the
Father, according to the order of the Three Persons that gave the Law of Works,
that was offended by sin, that condemned sinners, and therefore he only that
could appoint a way whereby they should be saved, and he only coul justify
him; Christ as Mediator, though God in Nature, yet in Office was God's Servant,
Isa. 53.11. Mat. 12, 18. and his business was not to enact Laws, or constitute
a way for Man's Redemption; but to work out, and bring to pass that way which
God purchased, and to fulfill his Will in it, Heb. 10.7. which he did, first by
satisfying the Law and purchasing Reconciliation as a Priest; then by declaring
as a Prophet, that Pardon was to be had by believing in his Blood; and Lastly,
as a King, yet ministerial under the Father, by overpouring the hearts of Gods
Elect to believe, that God might justify them, and then by sanctifying and
ruling them by his Word and Spirit, to bring them to life. It belongs to the
Father to justify constitutively, i. e. to propose the way wherein Men should
be justified, and through believing to justify them; to the Mediator, almost,
but ministerially to declare it to Men by authority from the Father, but most
properly to bring it to pass by the execution of all his Offices, Romans 8.33,
34. It is God that justifies, it is Christ that died, rose and intercedeth.

p. 25.
2ly. It is said, Justification by sentence of judgment is undeniably by Christ
as King: for God has appointed to judge the World by him, Acts 17.31, etc.

Answ.
Christ in judging the World is but a ministerial King: For God is the Supreme
Judge, Heb. 12.23. however we deny what is here took for granted, That the
sentence of the General Judgment is a declaration of a sinners Justification
from the guilt of sin: It is only the adjudging of justified Believers to Glory
in Heaven for their Obedience, according to Gods Fatherly promise.

p. 25.
3ly. It is said, For the execution of the sentence by actual liberation, there
can be little doubt being after both the former.

Answ.
Christ is ministerial in this also: for he calls Believers to inherit the
Kingdom, as being the blessed of the Father, and it being prepared for them
from the beginning of the World, Mat. 25.34. Besides, Glory in Heaven is a
fruit of Adoption, not of Justification immediately; and Adoption is the act of
the Father, not of the Mediator.

And let it be observed, That here all Justification is referred to Christ as
King properly and immediately, as was before said; and he as Priest and Prophet
did but make way for his justifying of us as King; and therefore these offices
are mentioned in the Question only for a show, that they acknowledge we are
justified by his Blood: This is in effect confessed in the following words, As
the Teacher of the Church Christ does not immediately justify, but yet
mediately he does, Ibid.
and it is but mediately that he justifyeth by his Merits.

It is also said, That Christ's granting the Promise or Act of Grace, is the
true, natural, p. 25.
efficient, instrumental Cause of Justification, even the immediate Cause.

So then the whole Gospel as to be obeyed by us, is the proper and immediate
Instrument of our Justification; and our obedience to the Gospel, together with
God's acceptance of it, is the only, internal Cause of Justification, or the
Righteousness for which we are justified; and Christ's Merit and Righteousness
and his Promulgation of the Gospel, are but extrinsecal, remote, and
preparatory Causes of it, and these not absolutely necessary, seeing these
Authors do not deny but that God might have saved man without satisfaction; and
then it will follow, if a man obey the Precepts of the Gospel, and acknowledge
Christ as Lord and King, he may be saved, although he believe only in a
Glorified Savior, as the Jesuits preached to the people of China; yea I
understand not but a Socinian may be saved by obeying the Gospel, though he
deny the Merit of Christ, having all the immediate, proper causes of
Justification, both internal and external, and wanting only the remote
preparatory causes. If obedience to the Gospel as the Law of Christ, be that
alone to which Justification is promised, then unbelief of his Merit, when a
man is not convinced of the truth of it, can no more damn him than the unbelief
of any other History concerning Christ, suppose his being born at Bethlem, or
living at Nazareth, etc. when a man is not sufficiently persuaded of them: For
these were necessary ex Hypothesi, because God would have it so; and Christ's
Merit was no more by their confession, nor was it impossible (according to
their Principles) but Christ might have been a King and enacted this Law of
Grace, though he had not been a Priest and satisfied for Sin: And thus we have
the bottom of this Mystery.

Next it is proved that Christ justifyeth as a Prophet; p. 25.
because the Gospel is a Law that must be promulgated and expounded, and a
Doctrine that must be taught and pressed on Sinners, till they receive it, and
believe that they may be justified; and this Christ does as a Teacher, and
Faith must accordingly respect him.

Answ.
Faith must believe and trust in the Promise of Life made in Christ, and
preached by Christ, and revealed to the heart by his Spirit: But what is this
to prove that a professed subjection to the teaching of Christ must justify us
as well as Faith; and yet methinks he that teaches, That the Covenant of Grace
is written in all men's hearts, and is a Secondary Law of Nature, teaching men
that God will forgive them that serve him sincerely, though they know not that
it was to be brought about by the Mediator, should not make it necessary to
Justification to believe, That Christ in Person preached the Gospel.

We have here Scriptures multiplied to prove that Christ has power to forgive
sins, which is an Act of a King, Mat. 9.6. chapter 11. v. 27, 28. chapter 28. v. 19,
20, etc. which we grant he has Ministerially, viz. To declare the Promise of
Forgiveness and to pronounce Pardon: For he received this Power of the Father;
It follows therefore that we must trust in him to declare and pronounce us
forgiven, but it is for his own Righteousness, not for our Obedience.

Argument 5.
It is a necessary condition of our being baptized for the Remission of Sins,
p. 27.
that we profess a Belief in more than Christ's Humiliation and Merits, Ergo,
[More] is a necessary condition of our actual Remission, Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Pet.
3.21. Act. 8.37.

1st. Answ.
Here is continually ignoratio Elenchi: We do not say that Christ's Humiliation
and Merits are the only object of justifying Faith, excluding his Person or any
of his Offices; but that Faith as justifying does trust only in the promise of
Reconciliation through the Merit of Christ, but that it does also in subsequent
distinct Acts trust in the Promises of Illumination and Sanctification, and in
Christ himself to work these in us as a Prophet and King, and to obtain them
for us by his Priestly Intercession; but all by virtue of his Merit and
satisfaction, which as it is the foundation of the other Offices of Christ, so
Faith always respects it as the foundation of all other Blessings to be hoped
for.

2ly. 2ly.
I deny that any thing is necessary to Baptism for remission of sins, more than
a trust in Christ, or the promise of Reconciliaon through his Blood. Baptism is
(as Circumcision was) a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. i. e.
that we shall be forgiven through believing. It is God's Seal to his Covenant
or Promise, which men are supposed to have a right to, before they are
baptized, and so before they can promise obedience. Believing in the whole
Trinity, and then believing Christ to be the Son of God, proves nothing but
that the remission which Baptism seals, is to be expected from the true God,
in opposition to the Heathen, and Jewish false Gods, or false Notions of God,
viz. That we are to trust in the Father, to justify us through the Blood of his
Son, who will bring us to eternal life by the Operation of his Spirit; and that
Jesus of Nazareth is this Son of God, so to be trusted in, Mat. 28.20. Men are
first to be baptized being instructed in the Doctrine of Christ, afterward
taught all his Commandments; and thus the Apostles practiced, preaching through
Christ the remission of sins, and then baptising them that believe, Acts 10.
Acts 13. If a Promise of Obedience be the condition of Baptism, then Infants
are not to be baptized. 1 Pet. 3.21. only shows that Baptism as an outward
Sign will not profit without reallity in the heart, in believing or trusting in
Christ, which will produce obedience. The Covenants of Obedience which the
Church annexed to Baptism, are not annexed to it as conditions of obtaining
Remission of Sins, but as conditions of men's Admission into the Fellowship of
the Church, and those as evidences of the reality of their Faith in Christ.

Argument 6.
The Apostles of Christ themselves before his death, p. 28.
were justified by believing in him as the Son of God and the Teacher and King
of the Church, (yea perhaps without believing at all in his Death and Ransom
thereby,) Ergo.

Answ.
If believing here mean, as it ought, the Apostles acknowledging Christ to be
the Son of God, King and Teacher of his Church, and their giving themselves to
obey him, then I deny the Antecedent; they were not hereby justified, but by
their trust in the Promises of Pardon and Reconciliation through the Messiah,
whom they now knew to be Jesus Christ, though they knew not the particular way
how he was to reconcile them to God: They were justified as Abraham and David
and all the former Saints were; and their Love and Obedience to Christ so far
as they understood him was an effect of their Faith: All the Proof is, The
Apostles were justified, and they acknowledged, loved, obeyed Christ as King
and Prophet, and understood not that he was to die for them, therefore this
justified them; Which is no Consequent.

Argument 7.
The Satisfaction and Merits of Christ are not the only objects of the
Sanctifying and Saving Acts of Faith, p. 30.
therefore not of Justifying.

1st. Answ.
Faith looks only to the Satisfaction of Christ, or rather to the Promise
founded on that merit (as the procuring cause) for Sanctification and
Perseverance, viz. That as perfect Justification, so perfect Sanctification is
purchased for us by Christ.

But the Sanctifying Act must respect Christ's following applicatory Acts, p.
31.
and not the purchase of Sanctification only; so the justifying act must
respect Christ's following collation or application, and not only his purchase
of Justification.

i. e. Obedience as well as trust in his death do justify; and here Faith both
as justifying and sanctifying, is taken for a trust in Christ, in all his
Offices, to bestow Justification and Sanctification upon us; and we never
denied that justifying Faith does extend it self to all the Offices of Christ.

As Faith trusts in Christ as King and Prophet, 2dly.
and Interceder with his Father for the progress and perfecting of
Sanctification; so we never denied that justifying Faith looks to Christ, as
King, Interceeder and Prophet, for the comfort and effects of Justification; But

As trusting in Christ's Merits only, 3dly.
obtains the grant and habit of Sanctification; so trusting in the same
Merits obtains the grant and actual Justification; and looks no further for
it. Faith indeed looks to Christ in his several Offices for daily
Sanctification, for new degrees of it, because that is a divisible and
successive work; not only to be purchased by Christ; but also wrought by him
gradually in prosecution of his own purchase; but Justification is one
indivisible act of the Father, whereby a sinner is accepted to life eternal;
there is no place for subsequent acts; and this Justification absolutely
considered is only purchased by Christ; there needs no other acts to apply it,
except in the comfort and effects of it. Therefore we deny the consequence of
the main Argument: Faith trusts in all the Offices of Christ for
Sanctification, Ergo. It does for Justification.

Argument 8.
It is the same Faith in habit and act by which we are justified, p. 31.
and by which we have right to the Spirit of Sanctification (for further
degree) and Adoption, Glorification, etc. But it is believing in Christ as
Prophet, Priest and King, by which we have right to the Spirit of
Sanctification, Adoption, Glorification.

Answ.
I deny the Minor, Believing in Christ as Priest, or in his satisfaction and the
promise o^ life thereupon, gives a right to Reconciliation and life
immediately, and to the Spirit of Adoption and Sanctification consequently; the
promise of this being annexed to the promise of life, and the having it being
necessary to fit us for glory; but believing or trusting in Christ as Prophet
and King distinctly, is a means of actual obtaining the Spirit of
Sanctification, and further degrees of it, to which we had right before; as Dr.
Preston has expressed it (as above) and yet many true Believers have little or
no skill to make this distinct use of Christ's Offices; but trust in the
general, That as God for Christ's sake does forgive and take them into favor;
so that he will for Christ's sake also give them his Spirit, and whatsoever is
needful to fit them for his Kingdom. Our Author takes the Minor for granted by
us, and offers no proof.

Argument 9.
There is in the very nature of a Covenant, p. 25.
condition in general, and of God's imposed condition in special, enough to
persuade, that the benefit depends usually as much, or more on some other
act, as on that which accepts the benefit it self, Ergo. We have reason to
judge that our Justification depends on some other act, as on the acceptance of
Justification.

Ergo always; Therefore in this case, this follows not.

To the Antecedent, I deny the supposition, 2dly.
viz. That we are justified by a proper strict Covenant condition. The Promise
of Life through believing is, a Testament, a Promise, and but improperly a
Covenant, because it cannot be bestowed, but upon a capable subject, i. e. one
that trusts in it, and accepts of it; So Dr. Preston expressly (as before)
Assurance and sense of Pardon, usually comes upon our entering into, or
renewing a Covenant of Obedience; but the right to Pardon and Justification,
which puts us into a pardoned State, is our humble accepting and trusting in
thee Promise of life through Christ.

And in this, God's Covenant or Promise of pardon in Christ, differs from Men's
Covenants, 3dly.
in that they do usually depend upon conditious to be fulfilled; because Men
have no other way to prevent the abuse of their kindness, or to oblige to duty
and gratitude for the future; but God that can and will sanctify the heart, as
well as give right to life, and thereby prevent the abuse of his favor,
needs not to suspend his mercy upon such engagements, and conditions from the
creature.

It is not unusual (we have seen many public instances of it in our days) for
men to pardon offenders by an absolute act of grace without imposing any
conditions, 4ly.
only leaving men to their own ingenuity for the future, and to the Law, if
they offend again.

It is said, p. 36.
God is the principle end of his own Covenant, and therefore his honor must be
principally respected in it; and therefore a promise of Obedience, and
subjection to him, and to Christ as the procurer of life, which men are most
unwilling to, must be the principal parts of the condition of the Covenant; and
the acceptance of Pardon which all men are willing to have, can be but a part
of the condition, and the less principal part.

Answ.
Here it is plain, That by the foregoing ambiguous discourse of believing in
Christ as Prophet, Priest and King, was meant a promise of subjection to him in
all his Offices, not a trusting in him for the benefits of them; and that Faith
here is nothing but Universal Obedience to Christ, and a trust in the promise
of Pardon, or in Christ as a Priest, is no part of it, nor can go before, but
must follow after it, i. e. when we have promised and in part performed
obedience to Christ, then may we hope for pardon and not before. To the
Argument I say, the consequence is weak many ways.

1st. Because God's own Honor is the principle End, does it follow that in
order of execution he requires the Creature immediately, and in his first
acting toward him, distinctly and principally to aim at his Honor? Surely he
allows, and his Word tends to this, That self-preservation from the wrath to
come, should first move the Creature to fly to his Mercy, and then as hope of
pardon dawneth, love to God and his Honor springs; and as hope of pardon
increases, so love to God prevails above the consideration of
self-preservation. Again, God has had his greatest Honor from the obedience
and satisfaction of Christ already, before he grants pardon to the Sinner;
and is it no honor to God to trust in his free Sovereign Grace for the pardon
of Sin and Gift of eternal Life? Romans 4.21.
Is it no honor to Christ to trust in him, as able to save to the uttermost
all that come unto him? Surely this is the greatest Honor that can be done to
the Grace of God. Nor is it so easy a thing rightly to trust in free pardoning
Mercy. They that know themselves know it is the hardest thing in the world, and
it seems God accounts it so too, by so often repeating his Promises with
all manner of confirmations, protestations, seals, oaths and examples of the
greatest Sinner being forgiven, 1 Timothy 1.16, 17.

Lastly, There is no reason why God may not pardon a Sinner and promise him
eternal life without interposing the conditions of his obedience, so long as he
immediately reveals to him, That this eternal life consists in the love and
enjoyment of himself, and that holiness of heart and life shall and must be the
way to it, and does immediately make the heart of the humbled sinner (...)
agree to it; does not God sufficiently provide for the Honor of his Holiness
in this, as in the very act of justifying he did chiefly respect the Honor of
his Free Grace.

Argument 10.
The condemning unbelief, p. 38.
which is the privation of the Faith by which we are justified, is the
non-believing in Christ as King, Priest, and Prophet, Ergo. The Faith by which
we are justified is the believing in him as King, Priest, and Prophet.

Answ.
If the word only be put in as it ought, viz. That the only condemning unbelief
is the non-believing in Christ as King, Priest, and Prophet; I deny the
Antecedent: But if only be not added, the consequence is apparently false, viz.
This unbelief is one cause of condemnation, therefore the contrary, Faith, is
the sole cause of Salvation: I suppose this will be admitted, for the Scope of
what follows is to show that such a Faith is the only condition of
Justification; and then the opposite unbelief must be the only sin that damns
without remedy, that bars all Justification; I say therefore directly to the
Argument: Non-believing in Christ as King, Priest, and Prophet, (as it is here
taken for subjection to the whole Law of Christ or obedience to him) is not the
only damning sin; final despair of the Mercy of God in Christ will as
certainly damn as final disobedience to Christ and contempt of him, yea though
there be a willingness to obey, if they could have any hope of Mercy; but
despair is not the oppo^^^^ of obedience or of faith in Christ as King, Priest,
and Prophet, therefore that is not the only unbelief that damns.

Again, If disobedience to Christ be the only damning sin, then obedience is
the only saving condition, then a Socinian that obeys the Gospel Precepts, and
acknowledges Christ to be the Messiah, King, and Prophet of his Church, may
and must be saved though he deny his Priesthood and trust not at all in his
Blood: For obedience respects not Christ's Priesthood at all, though that be
here mentioned for a show; Christ as a Priest reconciles us to God, and
intercedes for us; the only Grace that respects this is Faith, or a trust in
it for reconciliation and acceptance. If therefore obedience be the only saving
condition, then that will save without a trust in the Blood of Christ: If it be
said they make Faith and Obedience both to be the entire condition,

I answer, Their Faith is nothing but Obedience (as has been abundantly
proved) and is largely insisted on under this Argument; particularly from, Joh.
3.36. where he that believes not is expressed by (...), which is sometimes
rendered Disobedient; hence it is in ferred, That the only unbelief is
disobedience, and the only Faith is Obedience to the Gospel: Nor is it possible
to join Faith and Obedience in the justifying a Sinner in the usual acception
of Faith; for to trust in mere Mercy for reconciliation and life, and to obey
precepts that we may have life, are things toto genere opposite, utterly
inconsistent: nor can there be a trust in the Promise of Life in their Opinion,
till a man has obeyed in some measure; because the Promise is made to
Obedience: So trust in the Promise must follow the condition, not be a part of
it: And thus much for these Arguments, to all which I oppose this one:

Justification is the acquitting of a sinner from sin and guilt, and the
entitling him to life eternal; But this is purchased fully and only by the
Obedience and Blood of Christ, the shedding and offering whereof is his
Priestly Office only; therefore Christ justifyeth only as a Priest: And Faith
apprehending Justification must respect only the Priesthood of Christ. I prove
the Minor;

The Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. He
loved and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1.5. When he had by
himself purged our sins ( i. e. by the offering of himself) he set down at the
Right Hand of the Majesty in the Heaven, Heb. 1.3. And the Apostle proves
largely, That Christ as a Highpriest offering his own Blood in the Tabernacle
of his own Body, has obtained eternal redemption for us, that by this one
offering he has brought in remission of sins, and for ever perfected them that
are sanctified, sprinkled with his Blood, as all things under the Law were
cleansed by the sprinkling of blood, from Heb. 9.11. to chapter 10. v. 18. And in
this Christ was a more excellent Sacrifice than those under the Law; that they
did but typifye pardon and cleansing, but his Sacrifice does really cleanse the
Conscience; they cleansed from ceremonial pollutions, as touching dead bodies,
etc. and restored men to the Congregation, but his Blood cleanses from dead
works, our own sins, and makes us really accepted that we may serve the living
God, Heb. 19.13, 14. Now the Levitical Priests were Teachers and Rulers of the
People, some were Prophets, as Jeremiah and Ezekiel, some were Kings also, as
the Macchabees, but they took away the sins of the People, and reconciled them
to God, only as Priests, by offering up Sacrifices for them; so also Christ
though he be a Prophet and King, yet he makes reconciliation for Sinners only
as a Priest, by offering himself in sacrifice to God for them. Now the reason
of the consequence is, Faith, that it obtain Justification, must look to Christ
under that notion, or in that way only by which he has purchased
Justification, therefore it must look to him only as a Priest, or which is all
one, trust in the Promise of Reconciliation through the satisfaction and death
of Christ; and thus the Apostle concludes from the same Premises, Heb. 10.19,
20, 21, 22. Having therefore boldness to enter into the Holiest by the blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the
vail, that is to say, his flesh; and having a High Priest over the House of
God: let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. It is Faith in this High Priest, by which we draw nigh to God with
boldness, confidence of acceptance, and then that makes us devote our selves
sincerely to his Service.

FINIS.

