A True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE ASSIZES, Held for the County of
SURREY at CROYDON, Begun on Wednesday the 28th. of February, 1683. and there
continued for several Days.
With a RELATION of the PRISONERS TRIED and CONDEMNED at the said ASSIZES.
ON Wednesday the 28th. of February, 1682. the Assizes began for the County of
Surrey at Croydon; The Lord Chief Justice Pemberton, and Mr. Justice Charleton,
being the Judges at the said Assizes.

Above Forty Prisoners were carried down from the Marshalsea, that had been
committed since the last Assizes; besides others who lay in the said Goal upon
former Convictons, and five or more brought by Habeas Corpus from Newgate.

Abraham Morton, alias William Smith, one of those so brought by Habeas Corpus
from Newgate, being Indicted for stealing Horses, was found Guilty thereof.

William Fellows, Committed by the Coroner for the County of Surrey, for the
Fellonious Murdering of one Thomas Allison, was Committed of the same.

John Brown, Indicted for entering the dwelling House of one Roger Hammond, and
Stealing from thence several Parcels of Wearing Apparel, he was found Guilty of
Felony and Eurglary.

John Harris, and Elizabeth Briscoe, Committed for Breaking into the dwelling
House of Joshua Boulton, and Stealing thence several Parcels of Goods, to the
value of Seven Pounds, were likewise Convicted of Burglary.

Samuel Hall, Committed for Stealing a Horse and two Mares, and Indicted for
the same was found Guilty.

William Haynesworth, for Stealing a Pair of Black Fringe Gloves, out of the
Shop of one Richard Dringly, was found Guilty.

Robert Smith, Committed for Stealing a Bay Gelding, of the value of Six
Pounds, out of the Stable of one John Wood, in the Town of Malden, in the
County of Essex; upon his Trial for the same, was found Guilty.

Lawrence Addington, William Brayzer, and Henry Lovell, were all Committed for
Felloniously, Stealing three Silver Tankards, and a Beaker from Peter
Sallaways, but upon their Trials, the Evidence against them not being clear,
they were Acquitted.

William Spragg, Indicted for Stealing a Mantua Gown, and other things out of
the House of one Mary Wright, and thereof was found Guilty.

Gabriel Low, Indicted for picking the Pocket of Elizabeth, the Wife of Edward
Hubbald, was found Guilty.

Mary Denby, Tried for Stealing a Deal-box, and therein several Pieces of Gold
and Silver, of which she was found Guilty.

Thomas Emerton, Committed for picking the Pocket of one Mary Johnson, but upon
his Trial was Acquitted.

Anne Emerton, Tried for Felloniously entering the House of one Thomas Nichols,
and Stealing from thence several Pieces of Wearing Apparel, and thereof found
Guilty.

John Stoaks, Committed for picking the Pocket of one Thomas Hopgood, but upon
his Trial was Acquitted.

Alice Fergison, Peter Anderson, and Thomas Fernely, Committed by the Coroner
for the County of Surrey, for the Fellonious poisoning of one John Fergison;
but being Indicted and Tried for the said Murder, the Evidence produced, could
not positively prove, that any thing by them given the Deceased, was the cause
of his Death, or at least they did not give a satisfactory Evidence, when in
Court; so that the said Persons were thereof Acquitted.

Many other Persons having been Committed since the last Assizes, to the said
County Goal of Surrey: Part of them were Tried and Acquitted of the several
Crimes for which they were Indicted, and some of them not Indicted at all, viz.

William Christian, Committed for Stealing of a Copper.

William Benn, for Breaking the Prison of St. Katherines, near the Tower of
London.

Thomas Toll, for maintaining several Seditious Principles in public Discourse
against the Government of England.

John Talbot, for the Fellonious taking of a black Cow from a Person, who when
he was Committed was not known.

Richard Scarlet, for Stealing Three and Twenty Shillings from one Evan Heighes.

Samuel Lamber, for the Fellonious taking of a Brown Gelding.

Daniel Fry, and George Norman, for Stealing of Thirty Nine Perpetuanes and
Says, and a Coat of Thomas Godsells.

Abigail Swinfield, for Stealing a Silver Caudle-Cup from one Charles Dumvill.

Elizabeth Villard, for Stealing a Parcel of Crape, Linen, and other things to
the value of Forty Shillings, out of the House of one James Kenaston.

Edward Arthur, John Vollers, William Thomas, and Richard Osbourn, for Stealing
of a Chest of Goods, out of a Cart at Bear Key, and a Bag of Money, containing
Seventy and Four pounds, from a Compter of a Goldsmiths in Lumbardstreet.

Mary Aims alias Symonds, for Stealing of a Flaxen Sheet, out of a Shed or
Out-house.

Joseph Tennant, and Susan his Wife, for Stealing a Piece of Lawn, out of the
House of one Elizabeth Green.

Meriam Arthur, for picking a Pocket.

George Collington, and Anne White, for Clipping several Parcels of the current
Coin of this Kingdom, and for stamping and uttering several Parcels of false
Moneys.

Edmund Terry, for a Burglary upon the House of Mr. James Davison at Kingstone
upon Thames; and stealing from thence several pieces of Plate and Moneys.

Henry Bailey, for misdemeanors at unseasonable times in the Night.

William Hammond, for Stealing Eleven Hens and a Cock.

Vriah Holder, for Breaking into the dwelling House of one Thomas Tyler, and
taking thence several Goods, to the value of Nine and twenty pounds.

George Whitehead, William Seamore, John Price, and Francis Elbocrous, brought
also by Habeas Corpus from Newgate; one of which was found Guilty.

It was by many expected, that Mr. Nathaniel Vincent the Presbyterian Minister,
would have come to a new Trial before the Judge of Assize, upon the late
Indictment against him (and upon which he was Convicted) at the last Quarter
Sessions held at Darking for the said County of Surrey; but what ground there
was for such expectations I know not, for he had no new Trial at the Assizes.

In Conclusion, Twelve received sentence of Death, viz. William Fellows, Robert
Smith, Abraham Moreton, alias William Smith, John Price, David William, Samel
Hall, Anne Emerton, Mary Denby, John Harris, Elizabeth Briscoe, William
Hopkins, and John Brown.

But two of the three Women pleaded their Bellies, and Juries of Women being
thereupon Impannelled; they brought them in to be Quick with Child.

There were Three Burnt in the Hand, viz. William Spragg, Gabriel Low, and
William Hainworth.

Also Ten begged Transportation, viz. Anne James, Samuel Johnson, James
Steward, Joyce Folks, William Bishop, Henry Slaughter, William Tooth, Geofery
Knightly, George Pinfold, and Elizabeth Booth.

Of the Twelve Mentioned to be Condemned, some are in hopes of a Reprieve until
the next Assizes, besides the Two Women, who were found to be with Child; so
that the day of Execution not yet public. But the Assizes Ending on Friday
Night, the Prisoners were again brought back on Saturday to the Marshalsea.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by George Croom, in Thamesstreet over against Baynard's Castle.


