A True, and Brief RELATION OF THE Lord Lisles Departure from his Command in
IRELAND, As it was Writ from a Gentleman of Worth from Cork in MUNSTER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1647.

A True, and Brief RELATION Of the Lord Lisle's departure from his Command in
Ireland, etc.
SIR,
SInce my last the face of things is much changed here, and the not continuing
of the Lord Lieutenants power (at least that we know of) is undoubtedly the
sole cause of it: For, no sooner was it noised abroad that his Lordship would
be going for England when his Commission determined, but great disputes did
arise about the Command of the Army. The General Officers pretended a right
unto it, in the absence of a General, to which purpose some of them (in
Petition presented to the Councell-board) desired their power might be
confirmed unto them before his Lordships departure, to avoid all future
contestations to the prejudice of the service; on the other side, the Lord
Inchequin resolved as much to stand upon his pretentions, which appeared, by
what he said to an Officer here (as I am credibly informed) That if the Lord
Lieutenant should leave the Lieut. General of the Horse behind him in Command,
he had a Friend, who would accuse the said Lieut. General of Treason, but that
was not at all regarded. This contestation seemed so high, and of so great
concernment, that the Councell-board took it presently into debate; and having
received the Lord Inchequins Reasons, for the right he claimed to Command in
Chief; as also the Reasons of the General Officers, they resolved to settle the
command of the Army in 4. Commissioners, viz. the L Inchequin, and the L.
Broghill, the two Principal Officers of the Army of Munster; and Mr. Sidney,
and Sr. Hararess Waller, the one Lieutenant General of the horse, and the
other Serjeant-Major-Generall of the Army of the whole Kingdom; which were
only to continue till the Parliament should declare their pleasure therein: and
the Counsell-board was the rather inclined to this resolution, because upon
conference with the Attorney General of the Kingdom about this particular, it
seemed clear unto them, that the Lord Inchequins power being granted, but
during the pleasure of the Parliament, did cease when the Lord Lieutenants
began; and could not be reassumed, but by a new grant from the Parliament. Yet
so desireous they were to give the Lord Inchequin all satisfaction herein, that
they offered to leave any person of the aforementioned Commissioners, out of the
Commission, whom his Lordship should except against, so he would join with them
in this order; but his Lordships answer was, That his concurrence herein would
prejudice his right; yet if the Board should think fit to make any such Order,
that he would give all ready obedience unto it. Whereupon, the Board made an
Order for settling the Command of the Army, in the four Commissioners formerly
named, till the Parliament should dispose otherways of it; and gave one part of
that Order to the Lord Inchequin, and the other part to the three other
Commissioners of the Army. But so far was his Lordship then from yielding
obedience unto it, that he protested against it, as soon as the
Lord-Lieutenants Commissioners determined, and likewise offered to return to
the Lord Lisle the order, which his Lordship refused to receive, being then, as
he told him, a private person and having already done whilst he was in power,
all he could to settle quietness in the Army, till the Parliament was made
acquainted with it. And then the Lord Lislle resolved to go toward the Sea,
which being known then of the Commissioners (for the Lord Inchequin did
absolutely refuse to join with them) gave order only to his Lordships own
Regiment to be in Arms, and to attend his Lordship out of town, a custom
usual to such persons of his quality; but as soon as the Lord Inchequin had
notice hereof, he presently published a Proclamation by sound of Drum,
forbidding them to do it upon pain of death, yet did that Regiment in obedience
to their former Orders, stand in Arms all that day, but least some mischief
might arise from hence, both the Lord Lisle and the Counsel resolved to stay
one day longer at Cork, to reconcile those great divisions in the Army, which
happily they put an end unto; notwithstanding the Lord Inchequin had called
several Officers from the out-Quarters, and got some hundreds of Soldiers and
Reformadoes that had been Cavaliers into his House, as it is Confidently
believed here, having likewise ordered one of his own Troops to come into the
Town, but the other Commissioners kept that out, and instead thereof, brought
in some of the Lord Broghils Troops, by which means, they had the absolute
command of the Town, and were fully resolved to maintain their right (as I have
heard) and to proceed to act according to their Commission, had not the Board
persuaded them to suspend the execution of their power, and to go for England,
where they might make known to the Parliament the Lord Inchequins carriage, by
which I believe it will appear, that no consideration of any hazard that might
happen to the public, could draw his Lordship from his own particular
interest. The full power of all is now in his Lordships hands, and all things
in great quietness here, yet can I not express the apprehensions we have upon
the Lord Lieutenants removal from us, and indeed when I consider that most of
the Council and chief Officers do go over with him, and more will follow; what
disaffection there is to the Lord Inchequin in those that remain, especially,
the Forces lately sent over, and how vast an expense the Kingdom of England
must be at before new Governors and Forces can be sent into this, besides the
difficulty of raising money for them, I cannot almost but despair of any
service this Summer, the loss of which season must doubtless prove dangerous,
if not destructive unto us. God turn all to the best which shall be the daily
prayer of, SIR.

One or two things I had almost forgot, which is, that when the Lord Lisles
Trunks, and household furniture were shipped, the Lord Inchequin gave order to
have them searched, which I believe has not been known in the like case.

The other is, concerning the getting of Cnocknone, which my Lord Lisle by
treaty obtained, and which is of great advantage to the Parliament, whereas its
said, others might have had it if they had pleased: it was not sure well done
they took not possession.

Those who come along with the Lord Lisle, are the Lord Broghill, the
Lieutenant General of the Horse, the Commissary General of the Horse: the
Privy Counselors viz. the Lord of Valentia, Sir Adam Loftus, and Sir John
Temple, who are all that were there, but the Lord Inchequin, Col. Gray, Sir
Arthur Loftus Colonel, Major Piltson, Major of the City of Cork, Capt. James
Parsons, Capt. William Merydith, and diverse others.

FINIS.

