A True and Authentic COPY, Of the Form of The most Horrid and Stupendous
OATH, WHEREBY The French King Confirmed his Alliance with the TURKS.
Faithfully Translated from the French Historiographer, Du Ribier, in his
Memoirs, whereof the Latin Original is here annexed.
The True Form of the Oath.
BY the Great and High God, Merciful and Gracious, Maker of Heaven and Earth,
and of all Things that are in them; and by the Holy Gospel, by the Holy
Baptism, by Saint John the Baptist, and by the Christian Faith; I Promise and
Swear, to Declare all Things I shall know, to the Most High Lord Sultan --
whose Reign God be pleased to strengthen; I will be a special Friend to his
Friends, and an Enemy to his Enemies; I will be a Redeemer to the Turks
Prisoners, from the hands of his Enemies, nothing shall be fraudulently done on
my side. And in case I neglect to do it; I shall be an Apostate, and a
Prevaricator against the Commands of the Holy Gospel, and of the Christian
Faith; I will say the Gospel is false; I will deny that Jesus Christ is living,
and that his Mother was a Virgin; I will slay a Hog upon the Font of the
Baptism, and Curse the Priests of the Altar; I will commit Fornication upon the
Altar with Lasciviousness, and receive upon my self all the Curses of the Holy
Fathers. So help me God from his High Place.

Here follows the Original Copy in Latin.
PER Deum Magnum and Altum, Misericordem and Benignum, Creatorem Coeli and
Terrae, and omnium quae in eis sunt, and per Sancta haec Evangelia, per Sanctum
Baptisma, per Sanctum Johannem Baptistam, and per Fidem Christianorum, Promitto
and Juro, quod omnia quae novero, aperta erunt Altissimo Domino Sultano, --
cujus Regnum Deus fortificet; Ero Amicus suorum unicus, and inimicus
inimicorum, ^o Redemptor Captivorum Turcarum ex vincu^^ Hostium ejus; nihil in
mea part fraudulentum erit. Quod si hoc neglexerim ero Apostata;

Mandatorum Sancti Evangelii, Christianaeque Fidei Praevaricator, dicam
Evangelium falsum ^sse, negabo Christum vivere, and Matrem ejus Virginem
fuisse; super Fontem Baptismatis Porcum interficiam, and Altaris Presbyteros
maledicam; super Altar Fornicabor cum Luxuria; and Sanctorum Patrum
maledictiones omnes in me reci^iam. Ita me Deus respiciat ex alto.

GOod God! What a complication of Impiety, Blasphemy, Contradiction,
Extravagancy, and Folly, is there in this Oath, and how Guilty are both those,
who Swear such an Oath, and those who prescribe it to be Sworn!

We see by this Oath, the French King prays to God to prosper the Sultan's
Reign; and engages to do his utmost endeavors to promote his Interests against
his Enemies, who are the Christians, and to be their Enemy in the Turks behalf;
and in case he neglects to do it, he consents to be an Apostate from the
Christian Faith; that is, unless he strives with all his power to overthrow the
Christian Interest and Faith, and the Holy Gospel, he will be an Apostate from
the Christian Faith. Nothing, says he, shall be fraudulently done on my side.
How! can there be any thing more fraudulent and treacherous, than to call God
for a Witness of such an execrable Oath, contrived against God himself? Is it
not a horrid fraud, to call the Gospel and the Baptism Holy, and at the same
time, to say, that in case he does not himself all what in him lies to destroy
both; the Gospel, and the Christian Faith will be false. But we are much
beholding to him for his Moderation, in committing only Fornication upon the
Altar, though he does it with Lasciviousness, for he might as well for ought I
know, have committed the Crime of Sodomy.

A Prince, who offers to do such Things as are mentioned in this Oath, in case
he does not keep such an abominable Oath, is guilty of all those Crimes
already; and does no better, than if he had said, I Swear by the Most High God,
to Kill my Father and my Mother, and all my Relations, and in case I do not
perform my Vow, I am resolved to say there is no God; such is the Religion of
the Most Christian King.

It was Francis the I. who, first of all the French Kings, took this
astonishing Oath, as it is reported by the French Historiographer Du Ribier, in
his Memoirs; he was then engaged in a War against Charles the Vth Emperor, so
that he thought fit to make an Alliance with the Turks, to get some Succor
from them; and indeed, they sent a great Fleet and Army to help him, under the
Command of their Admiral and General Barbarossa, who Landed in France; and did
in Provence and the County of Nyssa great mischiefs, more a great deal than to
the Emperor's Subjects. Du Ribier reports, that none in the French King's
Council opposed this Oath, but only Chancellor du Prat, who was mightily
against it, but could not prevail, so that it was taken by Francis accordingly.

But it may be, some will say, tho Francis the Is It. took that Oath, it is not
certain, that Lewis the XIVth. has taken it, in making Alliance with the Turks.
I confess indeed, no Historiographer has relate (...) as has been done of his
Pred^ (...) it is no wonder, for such things are carefully kept secret during
his Life, and shall not be known before his Death; Methinks there is little
Reason to doubt he has done it also, or some other worse, and this for the
following Reasons. 1st. It is the constant practice of all the Princes and
States, when they have once prevailed upon another State to Treat an Alliance
with them, upon Terms, and Forms, and Expressions Favorable, Advantageous, and
Honorable to their own Party, never to change any thing of them in the
following Treaties or Alliances with the same, unless there has been a great
Change made also in the respective Fortunes of those States, and that which was
the less potent then, is become the more powerful or predominant. We do not see
there has been any such alteration or mutation made amongst those two great
Nations, the French and the Turks; and this has certainly still as great
advantage now over Lewis the XIVth, as she had over Francis the Is It, when he
took this Oath. 2. Francis the Is It. was certainly, as appears by his History,
far less Ambitious, and a Better, and Greater Man in all respects, than Lewis
the XIVth ever was. 3. There must needs be a horrid Engagement between them,
against the Christians, since we see every year, what efforts the French King
makes against Germany in the Turks behalf, and that the Turks persist in
continuing this War, so extremely ruinous to them, against their Custom. But
however it be, it can be easily proved, he has done much worse in that respect,
than his Predecessor engaged to do, so that we cannot do him any injury, in
thinking he has taken the same Oath, or a worse one, if possible. For suppose
Lewis the XIVth, has not taken the same Oath, yet it cannot be denied, that he
is more guilty, for having done without Oath, what Francis the Is It, had engaged
by Oath to do, but did not actually perform it. This took that Oath,
Transported with a great Passion against Charles the Vth, Emperor, but the
other does it in cold Blood. And we do not see by Francis his History, he has
done any great mischief to Christians, in behalf of the Turks, comparable to
what Lewis the XIVth has done. It Is worse ten times to commit a Crime without
threatening; than to threaten without committing of it.

By all the Tenor of this present French King's Conduct, we see he has Sworn,
I know not how many Oaths upon the Holy Gospel and Baptism, in several
Alliances and Treaties with most States in Europe, and with his own Subjects
also, and has broken as many times his Oaths. This is as much as to say, the
Gospel and the Christian Faith are false, and to deny that Christ is Living.
When he does condemn one year by all his Universities, the Pope's
Infallibility, and his Authority above the Council, his Power over the
Temporals of Princes, and of Deposing them when he pleases; and another year
admits the same Infallibility of the Pope, and his Almighty Power both in
Heaven and Earth, etc. Is it not as much as to say, the Gospel is false, and
the Christian Faith, a trifle? When he pretends to impose Laws upon Men's
Consciences, and force them to believe what he pleases, and will be called by
the Name of Providence, of Immortal, of Divine Majesty, is it not as much as to
curse the Gospel and the Christian Faith? As for his being a special Friend to
the Turks, and an Enemy to his Enemies, every body knows what mischiefs he has
done to Germany, in behalf of the Infidels, and how he helps them with all kind
of Officers and Engineers against the Emperor, the Polonians, and Venetians,
and has exhausted almost all the Money of his Kingdom for their sake, postponing
his own Subjects Interest, to theirs, and treating them as Enemies to the
Turks: So that it is evident, he must have taken his Predecessor's Oath with the
Turks, or some other more execrable Oath, since he has done a great deal worse,
and is without Comparison more Ambitious, and Irreligious than Francis the Is It
was, and stands in greater need of the Turks help, for his unjust Designs.

We have here also a true Character of the Turks Genius, who prescribed the
French King such a Contradictory and Blasphemous Oath, upon which they could
not rely in the least, if they had had any Honesty or Judgment. For how could
they imagine, that a Man professing himself to be a Christian, and calling the
Gospel Holy, and the Baptism Holy, etc. would oblige himself seriously and in
earnest, to deny all the Truths of the Gospel, in case he failed himself of his
word; that is, to believe that God should be false, because he should have been
false himself. For it is just the same, as if a Christian Prince, did exact from
the Sultan such an Oath, whereby the Sultan should Swear by his Holy Alchoran,
and the Holy Mohammedan Faith, and by his Great Prophet Mahomet, that he would
be faithful to Christians, in destroying the Mahometan's Interest; and in case
he did neglect to do it like a Knave, Mahomet would be a Knave also, and his
Alchoran a Fable, and that he would hereafter Worship a Hog in his Mosque, and
commit Adultery upon Mahomet's Tomb. Certainly, no Man of any Honesty or
Judgment, would impose such an Oath upon any other Man. The Turks did it only
out of a blind and inveterate aversion they bear to the Christian Religion;
they pretended to raise thereby a great Triumph to Mahomet, over our Savior.
For how is it possible otherwise, to trust to such an Oath, which none but a
Treacherous and Unworthy Man can take, of what Religion soever he may be?

Licensed, Feb. 22. 1693. D. Poplar.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, 1694.


