A True ACCOUNT of the BEHAVIOR OF Thomas Randal, Who was Executed at
STONE BRIDGE, For Killing the QVAKER, On Wednesday the 29th of this Instant
January 1695/6.
On the Lord's Day, after the Condemnation of the Criminals, the Ordinary
Preached on this Text, viz.

PSALM. xc. Verse. 11. Who knows the power of thy Anger?


The Doctrinal Observation.
THO God's Anger be infinite in it self, and be the Declarations of his just
displeasure against Sin and Sinners, yet it is no otherwise feared, than as it
works upon Men's Hearts, to amend the miscarriages of their Lives, and as it
forms them to Reverential sincere Obedience to his sacred Laws.

In treating of this Observation, I shall show these Particulars.

1. What is Anger properly in God.

2. In what respects God's Anger is declared in the Severity of it.

3. How Men's Presumption declares it self, in provoking God's Anger against
themselves.

4. What is the difference 'twixt shavish Consternations at the penal effects
of God's Anger, which vanish without any Impression of Reformation, and the
genuine Fear of holy Persons.

5. From the whole Discourse, I shall set down some Rules and Motives to the
Condemned, how they may not fall under the stroke of God's Severity.

First. What is Anger in God? It is not an Impotent Passion, as in Men, but an
holy, well regulated Declaration of his Hatred against Sins in the just
punishment of Sinners. This is without any disturbance of his Essential
Blessedness in the serene Enjoyment of himself, and without any Injuriousness
toward Men.

2ly. Tho God be infinitely armed with Power to destroy Sinners, yet he stirs
not up his whole displeasure till Sinners despise the Riches of his Mercy and
Goodness, designed to lead them to Repentance and Amendment.

Men by hardening their Hearts in an obstinate Course of Sinning, fit themselves
for eternal Destruction.

Thus final wilful Inpenitency lifts up its Head above all other Impieties,
triumphing as it were over the Mercy and Goodness of God.

Such know not the Power of his Anger, who by an insensible Security plung
their Souls in sensual Pleasures, till God's Justice suspend all Tenderness,
and Triumph in their Destruction.

Second Head.
God's Anger in the Severity of it is declared in three Respects,

1. In wounding the Consciences of the most insolent audacious Sinners, when
they most bless themselves in their Impieties, as presuming that they shall
defeat the stroke of Vindictive Justice.

2. In punishing Sin with Sin, with Blindness of Mind, Hardness of Heart,
desperate Obstupifaction in the Conscience.

This is not only an assuring Pledge of Eternal Torments, but the saddest
Anticipation of them, as Sealing up inpenitent Sinners to the day of Wrath.

3. By punishing Sinners beyond the Grave, in subjecting then under an infinite
and eternal weight of Wrath, ever coming and abiding, as the Curse on all
incorrigible Sinners: The Hell of Hell being the perfect Consummation of their
Wickedness.

Yet these dreadful effects of Divine Anger, tho infinite in it self, and
eternal in those Punishments which it inflicts, makes little or no Impression
on Men's Minds, Hearts, and Conversations, to awaken them to Repentance and
Reformation.

Third Head.
How Men's Presumption declares it self, in provoking Gods Anger against
themselves.

O consider the Power of God's Anger in time, lest he tear you in pieces, and
there be none to deliver you.

The stoutest Sinners have neither power nor fortitude of Mind to bear up
under, much less to grapple with ahe wrathful Indignation of the Almighty.

What is this? It is not only God's Anger breaking forth into a flame of Wrath,
but the utter loathing and Abhoring of the perverse Sinner, in the utter
Rejection of him, so as to leave him justly to himself in filling up the
measure of his Iniquities, till he be ripe for Destruction.

Is it any wonder, if the utmost severity of the Lord, take hold on such, who
strengthen themselves in their Wickedness, yet are Impudent and Shameless, in
sporting with those very Thunderbolts, which strike others dead, as Monuments
of God's fiery Indignation? who is able to abide the day of the Lord's Wrath?
Yet Presumptuous Sinners treasure it up, as If they were covetous to intaile
Damnation on themselves. Let such consider, that Holy Persons dread the
excellency of God's purity, when he comes to Search and Try the most innocent
passages of their Lives; to refine them in their Conversations. Here argue
thus: What Fearfulness will surprise all Hypocrites, to whom the just Lord
armed with Fury, will not be a refining, but a consuming Fire, in the utmost
Efforts of his vindictive Wrath to all eternity.

Fourth Head.
I shall to undeceive Hypocrites, state the difference 'twixt slavish
Consternations, at the penal effects of God's Anger, which vanish without any
Impression of Reformation, and the genuine fear of holy Persons.

1. A true Penitent is troubled at the very remembrance of God's Holiness, as
being vile in his own account, when he is most exact in his Obedience.

2ly. He grieves for the least Offense of God, even when he has sealed his
Pardon, and is pacified toward him.

3ly. The true fear of God, is a settled Reverential Observance of him, which
overrules a Saint to a perfect hatred of the least Sin; it maintains an holy
strict Discipline, in mortifying the inordinate Lustings of the Heart.

4ly. A real Penitent cannot enjoy himself with any Peace of Mind, unless he
devote himself to serve the Lord in a Reverential Love of him, for his Divine
Excellency and Perfections: Thus the true fear of the Lord flows from Love, and
is guarded by an holy humble Wariness, not to displease God by the least
Remisness in any Circumstance of his Duty.

You have heard, how God Arms his Justice with Severity against Sin and Sinners.

Yet wilful Sinners bid the God of Mercy depart from them, they desire not the
knowledge of his ways: These are always grievous to them; they mock at his fear,
and harden their Hearts against him: But are they strong enough to conflict,
with Omnipotency, to escape God's Vengeance is impossible, and to bear it is
intolerable.

The Anger of a Man may be appeased, but when God's (...) suffering is abused,
by turning the offers of Grace into prodigious excesses in sinning; what Ransom
ca^ mitigate God's Wrath, or rescue the Sinner from that Destruction, which he
has wilfully brought upon himself.

Would you be fortified against the King of Terrors, beg of God that he would
unite your Hearts to fear his Holiness, rather than the penal effects of Sin:
such a fear of God would quite disarm Death of its sting.

It would turn it against it self, making Death to be swallowed up in a
victorious Triumph.

Repent that you have not feared to sin against God's Mercy and Goodness, which
should have prevailed on you, to the Reformation of your Hearts and Lives.

Thus you will not be over fond to have your Lives spared, but will encounter
Death with an holy Courage.

Having apart in the first Resurrection, as dead to the Love of sin, and being
quickened by the Spirit of Sanctification to heavenly Qualifications; you shall
under the sharpest Agonies of dying, triumph over them, yea, you shall trample
under your Feet all the Powers of Hell, as exalted to Thrones of Glory in
Celestial Blessedness, through all the Ages of Eternity.

I proceed to give an Account of Three Condemned Criminals, at the Session in
the Old Baily, on Saturday the 18th of this Instant January.

I Preached twice on the Lord's Day, yet Randal was very insensible of his
barbarous Crime, and did not attend to the Sermons nor Prayers, with any
Relenting.

On the Monday I visited him, and another Criminal Condemned with him, both
were far from any ferious Behavior in my Praying with them.

On Tuesday I visited them another Minister assisting me, he endeavored to
make Randal sensible of Murdering Mr. Levens, yet he utterly denied it, and
affirmed that he knew nothing of it.

On Wednesday in the Afternoon, I took him aside, and for a considerable time
endeavored to persuade him, no longer Athiestically to deny the Crime; but he
stood out in the denial of it, whereupon I read to him, what was sworn against
him at his Trial, and that the Jury was fully convinced in their Consciences
that he was guilty, which they declared, when they gave their Verdict. He
replied, That he did not matter that, being clear in his own Conscience. Then I
told him, that he obstructed any Rational Hopes of his Salvation, and that all
Persons who read the Book of Trials, whom I met with, believed him to be guilty.

I prayed, that God would work him to a free and full acknowledgment of his
Crime, and grant him Repentance for it. Yet he denied it, and said, That he was
resolved to do so at the time of his Death. I told him of a Person who
Murdered his Wife, and denied it several times at the place of Execution,
wishing Damnation on himself, if he knew any thing of it. After I had prayed
thrice, that God would persuade him to declare the Truth; I told him, If I went
out of the Cart any more, he would be presently Executed, and then he could not
be Saved, dying in his Atheistical Impenitency. At last he called me back, and
said, I Murdered my Wife with a Pistol, and shot her in the Head; but let not
the People know it. I said, your self shall declare, that you Murdered her.
Then he said, All you that behold me, pray for me, that God would Pardon my
great Provocation of him, in denying my Crime against my Conscience; for had I
died with a Lie in my Mouth, I had been damned. This Account somewhat startled
Randal, and altered his Countenance then I prayed again, that God would not
leave him to dye in so barbarous a Crime, but to confess it, and to Repent of
his former Obstinacy. After this, he said not any word by way of reply: Then I
told him, that he ought to consider of whatsoever I had said, and I hoped that
he would confess the Crime before he died. He said, that he had lived in much
Sinning, but would not acknowledge any particular.

II. Richard Tarrant, alias Skinney Dick, Aged 20 Years or thereabout:
Condemned for Picking the Pocket of Mr. John Knight, and taking from him a
Watch, value Nine Pounds; he denied it, but Mr. Knight was very positive in his
Evidence; and the Jury found him guilty. He had been an old Offender, and
denied not that formerly he was guilty of such an Offense.

Tarrant lived with his Father in the Country, and kept him to Comb Wool. But
he was not Obedient to his Father, as he ought; so he left him some years
since. And he led an idle Life, which he said laid him open to sinful Courses,
such as Sabbath-breaking, omitting of Prayer, that he was guilty of Swearing,
and wished sometimes in his Passion Damnation to others. He relented that he had
not served God; but now he prays that God would make him sensible of all his
Sins, for said he, Christ affirms, that for every idle Word, we must give an
account in the day of Judgment; and the least Sin will damn a Man without
Repentance.

III. Anne Walters, Condemned for Picking the Pocket of one Richard Clark,
taking from him two Guineas, and 20 Shillings in Money numbered. Two Guineas and
six Shillings were found in her Mouth, which Mr. Clark said was his Money,
whereupon the Jury brought her in guilty.

She did not utterly deny the Fact. She confessed that her Life had been bad, as
to Sabbath-breaking, and not regarding to pray that God would keep her from
Sinning. She was known to have been an ill Liver, and could not call any body
to her Reputation at her Trial. She was little sensible of the state of her
Soul, as to the future Judgment of God.

On Wednesday the 29th of January; Thomas Randal, who killed Roger Levens the
Quaker, was put into a Cart and conveyed by the Deceased's Door at
White-Chappel, and from thence to the Place of his Execution at Stone Bridge by
Kingsland, where he is to hang in Irons, on a Gibbet, till his Body be
consumed. He did confess that he was at the Marshalsea with Lock and Green, but
denied that he never spoke any such Words, that he did kill the Quaker: He
acknowledged that he did say to the Sergeant when he was Taken, that he was a
Dead Man, and that he had been a very wicked Sinner, and had been Guilty of all
manner of Sins in general; (except that of Murder) He owned a Burglary that he
committed at Linton, near Saffron-Walden in Essex; but would not confess any of
his Accomplices. He said that Hunt and he had been in many Robberies. The
Worthy Sheriffs did exhort him with Spiritual Council, that he should make an
Ingenious Confession, and not to persist in his Obstinacy, and Dye with a Lie
in his Mouth, but to have regard to his precious Soul; it wrought nothing upon
him, his Heart being so hardened, he would not discover any thing of the
Murder; nor any of the Persons that was with him at that time; but hoped that
he had done his Work with God Almighty. Then Mr, Ordinary pressed him, and told
him that Confession was the first step to Repentance; and without that he could
hardly make his Peace with God; but it did avail nothing with him, he still
persisting in the same, till the Cart Drew away; He was turned off.

This is all the Account I can give of this Sessions. Sam. Smith, Ordinary.
Dated January 29.
LONDON: Printed for E. Mallet, near Fleet-Bridge, 1695/6.


