A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Trial and Conviction OF THAT Notorious High-way-man
Captain JAMES WHITNEY, at the Old Bailey, Wednesday the 18th of this instant
January, 1692, for the great and famous Robbery at Mims-wash.
WHen any famous Malefactor, especially a Brother of the Pad, comes to the Bar
of Justice, he generally divides the Affections of the People; one Party are
for crying, He is a very fine Gentleman, a bold brave Fellow, and it is pity but
he should be saved. The other Party in the other extreme, are bellowing out on
him for a great Villain, How many honest Men has he undone? A mere Pest to the
Nation, and it is the best thing the Government can do to make a clear riddance
of such Vermin, and fairly hang 'em all out of the way. Much such a divided
share of Popular Favor on one side, and Odium on the other has been our
Captain's Portion since his Commitment to Newgate: And on Tuesday being brought
upon his first Trial for a Burglary committed upon the House of a Miller, the
Evidence against him not rising high enough to the positive Proof required,
though his Person was exactly described as a main Actor in the Fact, yat his
face being muffled with a kind of half Vizor, the Tenderness both of the
Witnesses, and the Consciences of the Jury could not fix the Fact sufficieutly
upon him, insomuch that he was acquitted of that Indictment. Hereupon his
favorite Party grew loud upon the matter; 'twas a public Outcry in the Town,
That he had stood at least half a dozen Indictments, and with flying Colors
got clear from 'em all: that no body either could or would appear against him:
that before the morrow night he would certainly be bayled out, and as free as
an Alderman. This Cant run so current, that his Life and Death, like a Siege of
Mons or Namure, grew the subject of very griat Wagers, and Odds offered on the
saving side; nay, some were so positive of his Safety, that a small matter
would make 'em share hit Destiny, and hang with him if he died this bout.

But to turn ihe current of all this Noise, yesterday being Wednesday, after
Dinner, himself, Ben. Callow, and Stafford were all three set up to the Bar
together, and all indicted for that great and famous Robbery committed at
Mims-wash, which has already rung so loud in all ears, where the Country
Lace-men were robbed of several hundred Pounds, and all other Passengers either
robbed or stopped, most of their Horses being barbarously killed by the
High-way-men to prevent the danger of a Pursuit.

The chief Evidence against them were four honest Countrymen who all swore
home; more especially one of them, as to Capt. Whitney, the Testimony being
very positive, (though not affecting Callow nor Stafford, who were acquitted:)
The Evidence were a Lace-mans Boy of Newport-Pagnel, a Haberdasher, and a
Peddler, etc. the Fact in fine appeared so plain, that the Jury with little
matter of consult upon the Verdict, brought him in Guilty. At which he very
boldly told the Court,They had done all they could do. From thence he was
ushered on foot to Major Richardson ^s own house, and now lies to expect his
Sentence accordingly.

London: Printed for Richard Johnson near Fl^^^-bridge, 1693.


