A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE HORRID CONSPIRACY AGAINST The LIFE of His Sacred MAJESTY
WILLIAM III. KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.

Setting forth how it was Contrived; How it was to be carried on; And the
manner of its DISCOVERY.

Published By Authority.

DUBLIN,

Printed by John Brent at the Hercules-Pillars in Essex-street, for Jacob
Milner; and are to be Sold at his Shop over against the End of Essex-Bridge.
1692.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE HORRID CONSPIRACY AGAINST The LIFE of His Sacred MAJESTY
WILLIAM III. KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.
SOme of the Ministers in the Highest Employments, and of the Greatest Credit
in the French Court, having formed a design to Assassinate his Majesty of Great
Britain, they made choice of one Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight. Sieur de Grandval,
as their Instrument to manage the Enterprise, to find out persons fit to be
employed in it, to engage them by promises of great Rewards; as also to be
aiding and assisting in his own person.

The said Grandval being informed, that one Anthony Du Mont had already been
engaged in this Design, in the Lifetime of the late Marquess of Louvois, he
proposed it to him again, to execute the same, by Order of the Marquess of
Barbesieux, and some others. Whereupon several Projects were drawn up, several
Petitions delivered, and many Conferences were held, and at last the resolution
was taken to bring it to effect the last Campaign 1691. But the Providence of
God having disappointed them, yet notwithstanding they did not let fall the
prosecution of their horrid design. But Grandval was employed to write
frequently to Du Mont (who was retired to Hanouer,) to stir him up to another
Attempt this Campaign, which at at last they agreed upon.

One Leefdale coming to Paris about that time, Grandvall making an acquaintance
with him discovered to him the said Design, which Leefdale showed a willingness
to be concerned in; but soon after gave notice of it by Letters to his
Relations in Holland, that they might inform his Majesty. And the like
discovery was made by Du Mont to his Highness the Duke of Z^ll, who acquainted
his Majesty with it about the same time that he received the other account.

In the mean time Grandval having appointed Du Mont a Rendezvous at Vden in the
Country of Ravesteyn, he set out from Paris in company with Leefdale, passing
through Brussels, where he communicated his design to one John d'Amours, who
was formerly a Domestic Servant to Leefdale's Father. From thence they went to
Antwerp, and so to Eyndhoven, where Grandval was seized, and carried to Bois le
Duc.

His Majesty directing the Examinations to be taken there, Leefdale was first
examined, who declared with great exactness, all the circumstances of the
Conspiracy. But it is not necessary to mention more of them here, then that
Grandval told him, The King of Great Britain was looked upon as the only
Obstacle to the French King's Designs. That Grandval had send to Du Mont last
Winter above 200 Pistols, to keep him firm to the business; and that he sent
him ten Ducats from Brussels by Bill of Exchange. That whilst they were at
Mons, a Report being spread of some disorders in Scotland, which would oblige
his Majesty to cross the Sea again: Grandval fearing it might happen before he
could execute his design, spoke to Leefdale in these words: Dear Friend, we are
like to lose our Fortunes: I beg of you that we may go away immediately.

John d'Amours being next examined, deposed, That Grandval told him at
Brussels, He had a great business to do, which had miscarried the last year.
And they two falling into a discourse about his Majesty, John d'Amours asked
Grandval, if he had any thing to say to the King? Yes, answered he, To break
his Neck. John d'Amours representing to him the difficulties that might attend
such an attempt; Grandval replied, I have given my word to Monsieur Barbesieux,
and I Will do it. D'Amours adds further, That going one day with Grandval and
Leefdale by the Jesuits Church at Brussels, Grandval said, Let us go in and say
a Pater noster, that God would bless our Undertaking: And accordingly they went
into the Church.

Du Mont having been examined since, has owned the Fact in all its
circumstances; adding several other particulars, viz. That Madam Maintenon was
acquainted with the design; and that Grandval, in one of his Letters sent to
him, used this expression, That he would accommodate the Matter by the means of
Madam Maintenon. That Grandval told him, the Business succeeding, he (speaking
of himself,) should have an ample Recompense, even to be a Duke. That whilst he
was at Hanouer he imparted the design to Monsieur Bedal, alias Hasfelt, who was
at that time the French King's Minister in that Court; That he showed to the
said Monsieur Bedal all the Letters he writ to Monsieur Barbesieux and
Grandval, as also the Answers he received from them, That the said Bedal
approved the design, saying, It would be a very good business, if it could be
brought to pass; and that Bedal lent him fifty Crowns at Hanouer. Du Mont adds
further, That he was intimately acquainted with one Miller, an Agent for Bedal;
that tho said Miller told him, as a great Secret, That Bedal had sent him
several times to Holland with Dispatches, that came from France, for Monsieur
Moreau, Envoy to the King of Poland; that he always gave those Pacquets into
Monsieur Moreau's own hand, and Monsieur Moreau gave him the Answers to them in
like manner. And that by the help of Monsieur Bedal, and Monsieur Moreau, the
Court of France managed their choicest Correspondence in Holland.

At last Grandval was Examined, who perceiving that the matter was discovered,
and that his own Letters could be produced to convict him, he ingenuously
confessed all the circumstances of the design, as they are particularized in
the Sentence.

After which, Grandval being brought to the Army, he was put upon his Trial
before a Grand Court Martial, consisting of General Officers, where he appeared
several times, together with the Witnesses abovementioned, who not only
persisted in what they had already deposed, but added many other Particulars
and Circumstances, of which there were very few that Grandvall did not agree
to, and that freely, without so much as naming the Rack to him, either before
or after Sentence.

Grandvall, during his Imprisonment, drew up two Petitions to be presented to
His Majesty, all written with his own Hand; in which he says, That as to the
beforementioned Design, He acted in it but in obedience to the Orders he had
received from Monsieur Barbesieux and Monsieur Chanlais; That Du Mont was
Guilty; That Leefdale was Guilty; And that he (Grandvall) was Guilty, since
every one that Conspires against a Crowned Head, is worthy of Death,
acknowledging his own Fault.

The Judges after this, having met several times, at last gave this Sentence,
which is here inserted word for word.

Whereas Bartholomew de Liniere, Knight, Sieur de Grandvall, Born at Liniere
in Picardy, aged about Forty Three years, and now a Prisoner, has confessed
before the Grand Court Martial, without any Constraint by Plain, or being in
Irons; and it further appearing to the said Court Martial, That the late
Marquis de Louvcis, in his Lifetime, Secretary of State to the French King, in
the year 1691. entered into an Agreement with one Anthony Du Mont, about the
Murder of his Majesty, William the III, King of Great Britain, etc. and that
the said Du Mont had framed a Project, setting forth in what manner that Design
might be Executed; that he delivered the said Project to the said Marquis of
Louvois; That the Prisoner, some time before the Marquis of Louvois's Death,
asking his leave to go somewhere else, was ordered by the said Marquis not to
go away, for that he had some Business of Consequence to employ him in, which
the Prisoner-supposes to have some Relation to the said Design; but the Marquis
of Louvois dying some time after, there was no further Progress then made in
the said Design.

That the Marquis of Barbesieux, Son to the said Marquis of Louvois, as also
Secretary of State to the French King, having five days after his Fathers death
found the said Project, together with a Warrant for Thirty Pistols to be paid
to the said Du Mont, among his Fathers Papers; the said Design was revived
again, and the thirty Pistols were paid accordingly. That the Prisoner
contracted an Acquaintance with Du Mont at Monsieur Rabenac's House, where
Monsieur Paparell, Play Master General to the French Kings Armies, saying one
day to Monsieur Rabenac, (the Prisoner being present) That if they had a mind
to seize the King of England, Du Mont would be a fit Person for it; Du Mont
replied with Execrations, That he would carry off his Majesty alive or dead, as
he had promised to Monsieur de Louvois.

That Du Mont having delivered the same or the like Project to Monsieur de
Barbesieux, the Prisoner to promote the said Design, had several Conferences
with Monsieur Barbesieux and Monsieur Paparell, in one of which, Monsieur
Barbesieux told the Prisoner, That he suspected his Father was Poisoned by
Order of the Prince of Orange, (meaning his present Majesty of Great Britain)
and therefore he would be Revenged of him: That Monsieur Barbesieux told the
Prisoner in another Conference, That he should give Du Mont notice, that his
Majesty of Great Britain wore a Coat of Mail, which the prisoner acquainting Du
Mont with, he answered thereupon, It is no matter, I Will kill him for all that:
That Barbesieux had said further, He would not speak himself with Du Mont,
fearing he might be taken Prisoner; and if he should happen then to Name him,
it might make a great Breach in his Fortune.

That the Prisoner was engaged with one Parker, a Colonel belonging to the late
King James, to put the said Design in Execution; and that Parker had told him,
He had formed the said Design with the late Marquis of Louvois.

That at last, the Prisoner, with the said Barbesieux, Paparell, Parker and Du
Mont, agreed upon the manner of Executing the said Design, viz. That the
Prisoner and Parker, should meet at the Grand Guard of the Duke of Luxemburg's
Army, where they were to have 1500 Horse: That Du Mont should go to the King of
England's Army, and watch the time when his Majesty went to visit the Grand
Guard; and at the same time he was to shoot his Majesty; that the Prisoner and
Parker, with 1500 Horse, were to rescue and bring him off, the said Du Mont
giving timely notice to the Prisoner of the intended Execution. That Barbesieux
giving the Prisoner Orders to accompany Du Mont to Menin, he gave him at the
same time an Order to the Duke of Luxemburg for furnishing the Prisoner with
such a Detachment of Horse as he should require, and think necessary for the
Design.

That the Prisoner by Monsieur Barbesieux's Order, Received of Monsieur
Paparell 80 Lewis d'Or; and in pursuance of Monsieur Barbesieux's Directions,
he gave to Du Mont 55 Lewis d'Or out of that Sum, viz. fifteen Pistols in
Specie, and a Bill of Exchange for 460 Livres French Money, to be paid at
Ghent; that the Prisoner accordingly left Paris the 11th of September 1691, and
went Post with Da Mont to Menin; That he defrayed the whole Charge of the
Journey; that Du Mont acquainted him on the way, That Monsieur Barbesieux had
promised him an annual Revenue of 20000 Livres, and to make him a Knight of the
Order of St. Lazarus, in case the design took effect: That the Prisoner coming
to Menin, went to the Governor, Monsieur Pertuis, as he had been directed by
Monsieur Barbesieux, and obtained of him a Passport for Du Mont, who parted
immediately for Ghent, promising the prisoner, that according to their
agreement, he would send to him at the Grand Guard; that the Prisoner thereupon
went to the Duke of Luxemburg's Army, and he and Parker continued at the Head
of the Grand Guard till the day before the Rencounter at Leuza, without hearing
from Du Mont.

That Du Mont going to Hanouer. the Prisoner had kept a constant Correspondence
with him about executing the same design at some other opportunity; that the
Prisoner communicated what Letters he received from Du Mont to Monsieur
Barbesieux, who gave him directions what Answers he should return; That the
Prisoner resolved with Monsieur Barbesieux, that the design should be Executed
this Campaign, Anno 1692, which had failed the last; That the Prisoner had
taken some measures concerning the same with Monsieur Chanlais,
Quarter-master-General to the French King.

In the mean time, one Frederick Aelbreyt, Leefdale, heretofore Captain
Lieutenant of a Troop of Dragoons in the Service of the High and Mighty States
General of the United Provinces coming to Paris, was brought acquainted with
the Prisoner by the means of one Sterck; That the Prisoner having contracted an
infinite familiarity with the said Leefdale, discovered the said design to him
toward the latter end of March last 1692, telling him, That an Officer who
would Ingratiate himself in the King's Favor, must venture at something of
Consequence; That he, the Prisoner, had concerted the Execution of a Design
upon which his Fortune depended; That it was indeed a matter without hazard;
but the greater the difficulties were, the more would be the Honor,
encouraging Leefdale to be concerned in it; and the said Leefdale showing a
readiness to comply with him, the prisoner opened himself with greater freedom,
and told him, That he was engaged last Campaign with one Du Mont to Assassinate
the King of Great Britain, but it had no Effect, by reason of his Majesty's
leaving the Army so soon; but it was resolved again to put the same in
execution this year: That Du Mont by many repeated Oaths, had sworn he would do
it; yet, he the prisoner feared, that if he were not present, Du Mont would not
so exactly observe his Orders, and therefore he was resolved to go along with
Du Mont, asking Leefdale, If he would be of the party? who answering, That he
would, the prisoner discoursed to him at large of all particulars concerning
the Design, and afterward brought him to Monsieur Barbesieux and Chanlais.

That Chanlais in one of the Conferences held upon that Subject, told Leefdale,
the prisoner being by, That a great Reward should be given him, the Business
succeeding; That Barbesieux and Paparel had both of them knowledge of the
promised Rewards.

That he the prisoner, with the said Leefdale and Colonel Parker, went to St.
Germains on the 16th of April 1692, to speak with the late King James about the
said design, who had knowledge of it, and to take leave of him before they
began their journey; That the prisoner had Audience at the same time of the
said King James, the late Queen being present; King James telling him, Parker
has given me an Account of the Business; If You and the other Officers do me
this Service, you shall never want. And Parker, the prisoner, and Leefdale
entered into a discourse about this design.

That Du Mon's Wife delivered to Monsieur Barbesieux several Letters, which she
received from her Husband whilst he was at Hanouer, and the prisoner continuing
his Correspondence with him all the said time, he engaged du Mont by Letters,
especially those dated the 20th and 25th of April, and the 12th of May last, to
come from Hanouer to a Rendezvous at Uden in the Country of Ravesteyn, in
order to take a final Resolution with the said prisoner and Leefdale concerning
the manner of executing their Design: the Prisoner pressing Du Mont to hasten
his Journey, for fear the King of England should have occasion to re-pass the
Sea; the Prisoner adding withal, That he should be mad if he failed in his
Business.

That the Prisoner, with Chanlais and Leefdale, were agreed in what manner the
Assassinate should be committed on the Person of His Majesty, viz. That when
the King should ride along the Lines, or should go out to take any View, or
when the Army should decamp, that Du Mont should lie in Ambuscade, and when His
Majesty should pass within 100 Paces of him, he should then fire upon the King;
That Chanlais (to whom notice was to be given before of the time) should be
with 3000 Horse at the Duke of Luxemburg's Grand Guard; That the Prisoner had
told Leefdale, There would be no danger for him, since Du Mont had a Secret to
charm Peoples Eyes, and at all Adventures they two would keep with those who
followed the King; and when every body was pursuing after Du Mont, they should
have time to escape and save themselves, and carry the Account to Monsieur
Chanlais; and it little concerned them whether Du Mont should be taken or not,
provided they could escape themselves; That the Prisoner and Leefdale received
their last Orders from Chanlais, who told them he was going to Mons, and that
they should stay for him there.

That the Prisoner and Leefdale went from Paris the 17th of April last, and
arrived a few days after at Mons, having waited some time for Monsieur
Chanlais's arrival; and finding he did not come, they resolved to go forward to
the Rendezvous by the way of Brussels; That the Prisoner, as they were
traveling on the way, told Leefdale, That their Design taking place, the
Alliance among the Confederate Princes would be broken; That the Princes
concerned would each of them re-call their Troops, and the Country being
thereby left without Soldiers, the King of Frace would easily make himself
Master of it, and King James would be Restored again.

That the Prisoner with Leefdale, went to the Mayery of Boisleduc, and was
apprehended at Eyndhoven.

And whereas this Horrid Design is contrary to the Laws of God, of Nature, and
of all Nations, and ought for the deterring of others from the like
Machinations, to be punished with the greatest Rigor: The said Court Martial,
having with mature deliberation Examined and Considered the whole matter, have
thought fit to Judge and Declare, as they do hereby Declare, The Prisoner to be
Guilty of High Treason, and do Condemn him to be Drawn on a Sledge to the place
of Execution, there to be Hanged on a Gallows; To be cut down before he be
Dead; His body to be opened, and his Bowels to be taken out and burnt; His Head
to be set upon a Pole; His Body to be Quartered; And the four Quarters to be
hung up where his Majesty shall think fit. And do further declare all his
Estate to be Confiscated, and Condemn him to bear the Charges and Cost of this
Trial. Given and pronounced in the Headquarters of the Army under the Command
of His Majesty of Great Britain, by the Earl of Athlone, General of the Horse,
President; the Lieutenant General Van Scravenmore, and Lieutenant General
Talmash; the Marquis de la Forest, the Here Var Weed, Count Noyelles, and the
Here Zobel, Majors General, and the Brigadiers Churchil and Ramsey; Cornelius
Van Wou, and Richard Vthwayt, Judges Advocates, Assisting at Limbeck, the 11th
of August, 1692.

Signed, ATHLONE.
And Lower, By Order of the Court Martial, Thomas Du Val.

In pursuance of the Sentence abovementioned, the Chevalier de Grandvall was
Executed in the Camp on the 13 of August 1692. All that he said at the place of
Execution, was, to recommend himself to the Prayers of those that were present:
But the same morning before he went to Execution, he writ this following Letter.

Du Camp de Hall, ce 13 Aout, 1692. Mademoiselle,
JE Vous pry d'aller trouver Monsieur l'Archeveque de Rheims, avec Monsieur
Jourduil, and fair connitre au dit Seigneur Archeveque, qu'il m'en couste la
vie, pour avoir obey aux Ordres de Monsieur de Barbesieux; C'est la grace que
vous demand votre serviteur,

De Grandval.
Voyez Monsieur le Marquis d'Arsy, qu'il contribue a fair prier Dieu pour moy.


A Mademoiselle Jure, rue Trevelle, vis a vis de la rue des deux Escus, pres de
l'Hostel de Soissons, a Paris.
From the Camp at Hall, Aug. 13. 1692. Madam,
I Pray you to go to the Archbishop of Rheims, with Monsieur Jourduil, and to
let the said Archbishop know, That it costs me my Life for having obeyed the
Orders of Monsieur de Barbesieux; which is the Favor desired of you by your
Servant

De Grandval,
Speak to the Marquis d'Arsy, That he take care I be prayed for.



To Madam Jure in the Trevelle-street, over against the Street of the Two
Crowns, near the Hostel of Soissons at Paris.

Upon the Occasion of this Letter, it willl not be improper to take notice of a
Passage that happened some days before Grandvall's Condemnation, since it has
so great an Agreement with the said Letter, and may serve to explain it, if it
needed any clear Light, which is as follows.

One discoursing with the Chevalier Grandvall in Prison, and observing he
sought to justify himself upon the Orders he had received from the Marquess of
Barbesieux, he told him, Though that was in it self a very weak Excuse for
being engaged in a base Action, yet still it might prove so much the worse, as
that it was like enough Monsieur Barbesieux would disown that he gave any such
Orders, or that he was any ways concerned with him in a Business of this
Nature. To which Grandvall replied, Let him deny what he pleases, yet if I were
put upon it, I would make it appear very plain; for I have an Original Paper
under Monsieur Barbesieux's own hand, which I have lodged with a Friend of
mine, who will not part with it to any one but my self, and no body else knows
with whom I have entrusted it.

FINIS.

