THE TRIALS At the SESSIONS In the Old-Bailey, Which began for the City of
LONDON, County of Middlesex, and Goal Delivery of Newgate, on Wednesday the
8th of this instant December, and ended on Thursday the 10th of the same;
giving a full and satisfactory Relation of the most remarkable Circumstances
that happened in each Trial; as that of Elizabeth Owen for Firing her Masters
House, and John Sancey for Robbing a French Marquess, and Wounding his Steward,
with several others; as also the number of those Condemned to Dye, to be Burnt
in the Hand, Transported, and Whipped.
ELizabeth Owen was Tried upon two several Indictments, the first of which was,
for setting fire to the House of James Cooper, in the Parish of St. Dunstans in
the West, on the 8th day of November last; she being then a Servant in the said
House. The circumstances of the Fact were these, That in the evening of the day
beforementioned, between eleven and twelve of the clock, she came to the
Tapster, and informed him that she smelt a grievous smoke, and thereupon
demanded of him what he was burning? who answered, nothing but Coals; with
this, she not being satisfied, went to her Master, and informed him how that
she believed the House was on fire, for there was a smoke that made her coff
extremely, yet at that time there could be no smoke perceived, but the Tapster
going into the yard, soon discovered that the upper part of the House was on a
light fire, at which, in a great consternation, he and the rest, ran up stairs,
and with the assistance of several Neighbors, had the good luck to extinguish
the flame, which had consumed several Trunks, and burnt quite through the
floor: during which space the now Prisoner went directly to another Garret, and
opening a box, found that on fire likewise; upon these, and her denying to
carry water, she was suspected, and upon farther search, they found that she
had broken open the Trunk, and tying up the wearing Apparel of Erasmus
Armstrong in one of her Aprons, had thrown them into a Neighbors yard. As
likewise she had taken away three Rings, and a Jacobus. These circumstances
being proved against her, she was found guilty of both the Indictments, that
is, for seting fire to the House, and stealing the Tapsters Clothes, Rings, and
Gold, etc.

Margaret Adams, of the Parish of St. Brides, took her Trial for Murdering her
Male Bastard Child; the Evidence against her was, that she being lately come to
London, had got her a Service, her Mistress not perceiving that she was with
Child, but lodge^ a little Girl with her, when she on the 28th of November
last, was delivered without the knowledge of any, and rising early next
morning, went about her occasions, leaving the Child dead in the bed with her
Mistresses Daughter, it being conjectured that she had smothered it with the
Bed-cloaths, the which the Girl waking found, and called out, saying, there was
a Child in the bed, whereupon several Neighbors coming in, found it to be so.
Upon her Trial she pleaded that the Child was still born, and that one John
Ashmore, upon promise of Marriage so far prevailed as to deflour her, but upon
the reading of the Statute in that case made and provided, she was found guilty
of the Murder.

Charles Sancey a French man, was Tried for feloniously entering the house of a
French Marquess, in the Parish of St. Martins in the fields. The Evidence
against him, and his own Confession before Justice Floyd, was this, first the
Evidence swore, that about one or two of the clock in the morning, he heard
Murder and Thieves, cried out in the Marquesses Lodging, whereupon rising and
running thither, he found the lower doors open, and going up stairs, found the
Marquesses Steward weltting in his Blood, and a great Knife lying by him, so
that finding no man there beside, he searched about, (there being then several
come to his assistance) and in the Celler found the Prisoner, all besmeared
with the Stewards Blood, who being carried before the Justice, did confess,
that he and four more had a design to rob the Marquess, they having not long
since robbed him of 400 Guini^s. Upon his Trial he pleaded that he was drunk,
and that he got into the House by chance, not knowing any thing of the
business; yet that served not his turn, for although he carried away nothing,
as being timely prevented, he was found guilty of breaking the house in the
night time with an intent to steal.

Thomas Stone was Tried for Robbing of, and barbarously wounding Henry Atley of
the Parish of Lathum in the County of Middlesex, the substance of the Trial
thus; the Prisoner setting upon the aforesaid Atley, bid him deliver his Money,
which he refusing, he drew out a Pistol and shot him through the wrist, of
which wound he languished from that time, it being the 27th of February, to the
second of March, and then dyed. There was very strong presumption against the
prisoner, but there being no positive proof that he was the Man, he was
acquitted.

Susanna Haselw^od received her Trial for entering the House of Jeremiah Lupton,
on the 26th of October, in the day time, and taking thence one Holland sheet, a
Table Cloth, a pinner, and several other things, being by some of the
Neighbors taken as soon as ever she came out of the house; she pretended she
lodged there, and going in again, she threw down the things, and dropped
several Picklock keys in the Chimney corner. Upon her Trial she denied that she
ever was in the House; but the proof being plain, she was found guilty to the
value of four shillings and six pence.

Benjamine Wilcason was indicted for stealing a Shift, several Napkins,
Table-cloaths, and other Linen, out of a house near Paul's Wharf, and pleaded
guilty to all Felonies within the benefit of his Clergy; and thereupon was
burnt in the hand.

Samuel Doughty and John Cows, were tried for stealing a silver Tankard from
Walter Briscoe in the Parish of St. Andrew Holborn, valued at five pounds. The
Prisoners pleaded that the said Briscow's Wife had given the Tankard to one of
them, viz. Doughty, who, as he said, had been a Servant to the Marquess of
Winchester, for some Kindnesses that he had obliged her in; and that she had
often opportun'd Cows, who was a Hat-maker by Trade, to deliver the same to
Doughty, telling him, He should come to no damage by the same, saying, That it
was in part to make him amends for the service he had lost by keeping of her
company; and that she would farther gratify him, or words to that effect. Upon
which he delivered it, and it was sold to a Goldsmith, in whose hands Briscowe
found it; but there being no Proof to contradict the woman's delivering of it,
they were both acquitted.

Jane Lant was tried for stealing of Silks to the value of twelve pounds, from
a Mercer. Her Plea was, That another had stolen the same and delivered it to
her; but she being present at the same time when it was stole, and part of the
Goods afterward found in her custody, she having been a notorious Shoplift,
and several times pardoned, was found guilty of the Felony.

Edward Townsend was indicted for the murdering of Isaac Smith a Watchman, in
Ivy-lane in the Parish of Saint Faiths, London. The Evidence against him was
this, That he, in the company of Whitticar and Watson, condemned for the same
the last Sessions, was coming down Pater Noster Row in May last about three of
the clock in the morning, and in their way made such a noise as made the
deceased, who was then upon his Stand, question them, and endeavor to stop
them; whereupon they resisted, and endeavored to make their Escapes, Whitticar
striking up Smith's heels, and Watson beating down the Lanthorn of another
Watchman there assisting; which made Smith the deceased collar one of them,
after which Watson snatching away his Staff, with the same knocked him down,
and thereupon they all made their Escape. The blow was so violent, that it
broke Smith's Scull, and of the said Wound, according to the Oath of the
Surgeon, he died within the space of four months after: When as they having
notice that the Parties that had done the Fact lived in the Parish of St. James
Clerkenwel, they were apprehended, Watson and Whitticar, as aforesaid, being
condemned for the same the last Sessions: But against the now Prisoner there
being no positive Proof that he was of their company, or that he meddled in the
Affair, he was acquitted.

Anne Maurlin and Jane Fowler were [severally Tried, for Stealing the Goods of
Richard Huetson, of the Parish of St. Botolfs without Algate; the former for
stealing of a Quart-pot, valued at 1 shil. 6 d. the which, as they swore, she
conveyed away in a bundle of Linen, which she had to wash: Her Plea was, that
the Maid of the House delivered it to her; and that she had since told her,
that i^ was a Lodger that put it in for the Jeasts sake. The Evidence being
heard on both hands, it proved, that the people that prosecuted kept an ill
house; So that the Jury brought the Prisoner in, Not Guilty.

The latter was Indicted for stealing of Sheets, Tablecloaths, Napkins, and
other Goods, to the value of 20 s. and several pieces of Plate and Moneys, she
being a Nurse in the house. The most remarkable passage sn this Trial was, that
a Fellow coming to testify in the behalf of the Prisoner, that the Prosecutor
had no such Goods as were pretended to be lost, himself knowing what was in her
possession, having taken an Inventory of all during the time of her Husbands
absence, and that he was fain to lend the woman of the House his Shirts to
wear. But in his earnest discourse Swearing an Oath, the Court obliged him to
pay 12 d. for the same, and the Prisoner was acquitted.

One John Bullion was brought to the Bar, to be Tried as a Popish Priest; But
Pleading he had formerly been tried for the same before a Judge of an Assize
and there Acquitted, his Trial was put off till the next Sessions.

My Lord Lumley being Indicted for Recusancy, brought sufficient Evidence, that
he had been at Divine Service, and taken the Sacrament according to the Church
of England; and thereupon Order was given for the withdrawing the said
Indictment.

There were Five Condemned; viz. Elizabeth Owen, Margaret Adams, Frances Small,
Jane Lant, and Charles Sancey. Four Burnt in the Hand. Three to be Transported.
Two to be Whipped. And so the Session concluded.

FINIS.

