Of that Eternal Breath begotten and brought forth not of flesh and blood, nor
of the will of man, but by the Father of spirits, which according to his own
will works to will and to do of his good pleasure, when, or in whom he pleases
AM I moved to warn you the Parishioners of Ashted, and all others as
opportunity is given? who as you in the darkness are, and know not what you are
doing, nor whether you are going, who from the light are, out of the Covenant,
and so not taught of God, but are always learning as silly Women, but never
come to the knowledge of the truth, that he who is righteous in all his
Judgments, and faithful in all his promises, who was dead, but is alive, is
risen in great power, and is dreadful to all his enemies, rendringvengeance on
all that know him not, and yet wills that all men would repent and live; so
loving the world, that he has given his only begotten a light into the world,
that whosoever comes to him shall not abide in darkness; And this is the common
salvation which was and is declared by all sent of him* who is no respecter of
persons, but will be worshipped in truth and in spirit; and for such
worshippers does he now seek every where, all other Worship being an
abomination, Who has required them at their hands, says the Lord? who in his
Son only is well pleased; and though in the day of darkness God winked, yet
now having visited from on high with his dayspring, (you that sit in darkness
and in the Regions of death) requires all to return from the darkness to the
light with which you are enlightened, which convinces of sin, and condemns the
evil doer, that by his Judgments the soul may be redeemed.

And this is no new invented Fable, or error, as your Hireling teachers tell
you, who are talking of a Gospel, and are found fighters against the true and
everlasting Gospel, which Moses and the Apostles were witnesses of, which is,
nigh, and not far off, the gift of God freely, not sold or bought for money, as
those deceivers would make you believe, who are upholding the first Priesthood
by taking tithes, and so deny Christ come in the flesh, as Pope, Prellate, and
Priest, though in words confessing, yet in works deny him that come to put an
end to the first, that he might consecrate to himself a new and a living way,
which way in the light is seen and learned, and the Scriptures declare of it;
say not who shall ascend on high and fetch him down, or go down into the depths
and fetch him up, for he is near thee in thy heart, and in thy mouth, and this
is the Gospel Paul taught who was called of God and not of men, and sent to
turn people from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, and I
of grace being made a witness of the same Gospel, and an heir of the same
Covenant, as moved of God, call on you to come thereto; that in the light you
may behold the way of the just, for the wicked are posting to destruction, and
being in the darkness know not where you are, nor whether you go, and that you
are there in your worships and meetings, has been confessed to by your teacher,
whom when I met coming to visit William Burcheds wife would have past by me,
but I calling to him to hear me, he hasted away as formerly, and with anger
asked me, Why I sat all that while in darkness, (meaning while I sat and heard
him in his Pulpet?) says he, Thou heardest darkness, why did not thou
speak before, but sat in darkness all that while thou heardest me? so people,
if as by his own confession I sat in darkness, and heard darkness, who heard
him but an hour on that day, what do you that hear him weekly and think you
serve God in it? truly they that hearken to darkness hearken to the devil who
is the Prince of darkness, and they that sit in darkness si^ in the kingdom of
the Devil, who rules in darkness, and I confess I did hear darkness there, and
the fruits of darkness, were manifest, and I in the light saw the darkness, and
had power to witness against the Doctrine of darkness, and in the same power
should have proved it to be a Doctrine of darkness by plain Scriptures, had he
not fled when fear surprised him, as it will do all that are in darkness.

And so teacher and people, who teach and hear in darkness; of the Lord who is
light are you warned once more, and while you have time prize it, to turn from
the darkness, and to the light attend, which condemns the darkness and leads
out of it, and by it only is the knowledge of God gained, and by it only is
power obtained over death, and over him that has the power of death, the
devil, for Christ the light was and is manifest to destroy the wor^s of the
devil, the works of darkness, and this must you know, obey, and believe in,
which convinces of sin and calls out of the worlds ways and worships, which
are in the darkness, ere the promise you can obtain, which makes partakers of
the divine nature, and in Christ Jesus is the yea and Amen; which all who in
the darkness are, are resisting and striving against, for he is light, yea the
true light which enlightens every man that comes into the world, and by this
only can man and woman fallen from God come to see what they were, where they
are, and whether they are going, and by this which is the truth in the inward
parts, only can man and woman be freed, from the bonds of darkness, and by
the light only must the powers of darkness be brought under and consumed, for
there is no other name for salvation but the light and truth, Christ Jesus
whose first appearance is to destroy sin in the flesh.

Mind it people, has not the grace of God appeared to you all? does it not yet
strive with many of you, showing your unrighteousness and calling out of it?
verily this is it that has and does teach the children of light, to deny all
ungodlynes and worldy lusts, and to walk soberly, righteously, and godyl in
this present world, and that of this you might be taught and led by it out of
the snares of the Devil, has the Lord sent his servants to call you out of
darkness, and to bear witness against all that deceive your souls by false
Doctrines, and fained speeches, which have run and God never sent them,
therefore they profit you not, who make Merchandise of your souls, who sell the
Scriptures for money; these are they of whom the Scripture speaks, that feed
upon the sheep but feed not the sheep; they send for their gain from their
quarter, and if they have it not, they raise war against you; is it not so? An
horrible thing is committed in the Land, the Priests preach for hire, and the
people love to have it so; but what will you do in the latter end? Confess
people, is it not so with you and your Teacher? And the Lord is my witness whom
I serve in the spirit, that I have not envy, hatred or Wrath toward any man,
Teacher, or Hearer, but in the meek spirit and fear of the living God, have
spoke and writ in good will unto all, being there to called of him who warns
all, and is calling and gathering his own out of Babylon, where the many
Languages and Opinions are See people, Is it not your Teachers that are in the
confusion, drawing the people after them; some crying for Prelacy, others for
Presbytery, others for Independency, and others for Baptism; with several other
opinions, as visibly apears to all? and in this day is light arisen, which
whoso have received it, see that the Whore has made drunk both Powers and
People with her abominations, that they reel to and fro, and many must fall and
sleep, and never awake again; for the time of her righteous Judgment is come,
who has long deceived Nations and people, and into the pit with the Beast
that carries her, must she be turned to be tormented for evermore.

And blessed are they that understand these things, and come out from her, that
they be not plagued with her whose destruction is sudden and sure, and she
knows it not.

And people, I having nothing else in my eye but the exaltation of that Name
(unto which every Knee must bow) and the salvation of your souls, cannot but
use much plainess, as ne who was long in the dark as you are, and thought I
did God service in running after men to teach me, and in taking the Scriptures
for my rule, and read them daily, but erred, not knowing them as all you do who
to the light are not come; for the Scriptures are of no private interpretation,
but were written by holy men as they were moved by the holy Ghost, and are
only revealed and interpreted by the same spirit; and the unlearned which are
not taught by this spirit, pervert them to their own destruction, as they did
which read them daily, and yet put Christ to death of whom the Scriptures
witnessed. And truly, he that is the Rule and the Way of Eternal Life, is this
day slain by the Readers and Professors of the Scriptures, spiritually, in the
street of the great City, spiritually called Egypt, as sure as he was
crucified at Jerusalem, and though many who are doing it, know it not no more
then they did who if they had known, would not have put to death the Lord of
Life: Yet both they had, and you have the Visitation of the Li^ht to lead out
of the darkness; and this is the Rule by which you must walk if ever you come
to the way of life, for there is no other Name whe^eby any can be saved, but
by Christ Jesus the Light of the World; and this is the true light that
enlightens every one that comes into the world: So our God, who is the living
God, and is no respecter of persons, shall be righteous when he comes to
Judgment, who has given to every one of you a gift to profit withal; and as
to this you are faithful which reproves all evil of thought, word or deed, the
eye shall be opened, and the Vail rent, and he known who opens the Scriptures,
and gives the knowledge of God, who dwells in the light, and disobedience to
this has filled the World and all minds with darkness and error; but God will
recover his own Inheritance out of the hands of the Destroyer in this the day
of his Power, which shall bring down all the Powers of darkness, which yet are
upheld by the strong Works of darkness, persecuting and lying, either putting
in prison, stocking whipping or bearing those which are sent to show them their
darkness and nakedness, and to call them to repentance; or by false accusing
and lying against the Truth and Witnesses thereof in their Pulpits and
elsewhere, as that we deny Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, and the Scriptures,
and Magistrates, and Laws, and Ministers, and Relations, which comes all from
the Liar their Father, which begets and brings forth lies; for though the
children of the Light deny and witness against all the evils of these which in
the vain imaginations of man has been invented and brought in; yet all these
things as the Truth is in Jesus, we confess to and witness for, against all
them that are departed from the truth thereof; and to all these particulars
there are Answers in pring by several of the servants of the Lord, that their
lie may be manifest who are accusing of the Brethren, and speaking evil of
things they know not; but the Work of the Lord shall prosper, and the Wheat
shall be gathered into the Ga^ner, and the Chaff shall be burned with the
unquenchable fire; for the day of the Lord shall burn as an Oven, and the
Wicked shall be as stubble therein. And the signs of his coming are seen, who
as a Thief in the night will come upon all those who to the Light are not
turned, and his reward is with him.

Therefore great and small, high and low, fear before the living-God, and come
to know the true and faithful witness of God which was with him in the
beginning of the Creation; and we that believe have the Witness in our selves;
and without you fell and obey that which condemns all unrighteousness, earthly
mindedness, and shows your darkness, you shall never find cleansing, and in sin
none are justified; for our God (beside him there is no God) is of purer eyes
then to behold iniquity.

So all you to whom this comes, slight not the day of your visitation, for it
will soon pass over your heads; let not the love of this World nor ease and
pleasures, keep your souls in death; nor fear of men which can only kill your
bodies which must return to dust, but mind that which is given to redeem your
souls out of the bonds of death by, breaking the Serpents head, which has and
does captivate in Chains of darkness, and by the Seed only that must be
destroyed, which is very small among you; yet for it, and to it is the
proclamation of the everlasting Gospel.

Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour of his righteous Judgment is
come, and from heaven he is revealed in flames of fire, to take vengeance on
them that know him not; and in love to all your souls hereof are you warned by
me who am a Witness of the new Covenant in the heart, written in the inner
parts, taught of God, knowing the pouring forth of his spirit upon sons and
upon daughters, and in it prophecy of the things which shall shortly come to
pass; and as freely I have received, so I give forth, calling you to be
partakers of the same grace, setting before you all this day, life and death,
choose you whether; if you love your iniquities pleasures and profits of the
world, betraying the just for them, then with the world must you to
destruction; but if to the light you come, and by it be subjected, him shall
you receive who is not of this World, and by him be led into the inheritance
which is undefiled, and fades not away; pure is this inheritance, and so must
all they be that inherit it; and that you may be blessed by that which leads
out of the curse, love and follow that which condemns all injustice, deceit,
vain, wanton and unprofitable words and actions, and leads to justice,
righteousness and so berness And then shall you know, that God in love to all
your souls has sent this visitation, though by one of them whom the scornful
world calls Quakers, known by the Name of

REBECKA TRAVERS.

THE END.

