By the Committee for the Affairs of the Poor Protestants in the Valleys of
PIEDMONT.
THe All-wise and Holy God, whose ways of Providence are always righteous,
though often secret and unsearchable, has made it the constant lot and portion
of his people in this world, to follow the Lord in bearing his Cross, and
suffering Persecutions, thereby holding forth and verifying that irreconcilable
Enmity between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, which was
visible betimes in the Bloodshed of righteous Abel, whom Cain (though his
brother) slew, being of the wicked one, yea and for this cause, for that his
own works were evil, and his brothers good. Thus they that are born after the
flesh, persecute them that are born after the spirit to this day, and so will
do while the the world lasts. In which Cause and Quarrel the Lord has very
many glorious ends. But scarcely have any sort of the Churches Enemies more
clearly followed the pernicious ways of Cain herein, then has the
Antichristian Faction of Rome done, that Mother of Harlots and Abominations,
whose garments are dyed red with the blood of Saints, which they have always
cruelly shed, and made themselves drunk with, even the blood of those holy
Followers of the Lamb, chiefly who would not receive Antichrists mark, nor
worship his Image, nor drink of the golden Cup of his Fornications, but rather
come out from them, and witness against them, though they did it in sackcloth,
and were slain for it.

Among those chosen and faithful Witnesses, the Lord seems very signally to
have raised up those Christians, who (though dispersed in diverse Countries)
have been commonly known by the name of Waldenses, who for some Centuries of
years have lived among their Enemies as Lambs among Wolves, to bear their
Testimony for the Truth of Christ, against the apostasies and blasphemies of
Rome, for which they have been killed all the day long, and appointed as sheep
for the slaughter. Nevertheless the Lord, the great Shepherd of the sheep, has
made their Blood thus shed, to become a constant seed of faithful and valiant
Witnesses for him; which is indeed the more mavelous in our eyes, that this
Bush has so long burned, and is not yet consumed.

This little Flock and Remnant which the Lord has left and reserved, are
scattered partly in the Valleys of Piedmont, of whose tragical Sufferings we
have not long since heard, and have drawn forth our Bowels to them, whereof a
very faithful Account is given to the world, both for satisfaction of Brethren
and Friends, and for stopping the mouths of all Calumnies.

The other part of this poor; yet precious Remnant, have been dispersed in the
Kingdoms of Bohemia and Poland, whose Sufferings, together with the Lords
signal Providence about them, have been very eminent and remarkable, as has
been made appear unto Us by three godly persons, delegated by those persecuted
Churches, which are now the sad Monuments of their Enemies Rage, and of the
Lords sparing Mercies.

These have made their Addresses to His Highness the Lord Protector by
Petition, declaring the deplorable estate wherein this persecuted Remnant now
lies, and with loud cries importuning the Christian Bowels and Bounty of this
Nation, which cannot but be moved to mourn over them, and to show mercy to
them. And indeed upon a due sense and consideration of this lamentable subject,
even common humanity, but much more Christian charity should provoke us to a
Fellow-feeling of their present distressed Condition.

These sometimes flourishing Churches, were by degrees worn out by the constant
Underminings and open Outrages of the Antichristian party, being first driven
out of Bohemia into Poland, then after their taking root and spreading in
Poland unto a numerous Company, were forced out of the chief Cities there, and
now at last by the Jesuited and enraged Polish Army persecuted in their few
hiding places, with fire and sword.

Their Ministers were tortured to death by most exquisite and unheard of
Barbarism, by cutting out of the Tongues of some, pulling out the Eyes, and
cruelly mangling the Bodies of others; nor did their Rage and brutish Cruelty
reach only to Ministers, but to others, yea even to women and young children,
whose heads they cut off, and them at their dead mothers breasts.

Nay, their rage brake out, not only upon the Living (not one of whom they
spared that fell into their hands) but also upon the dead, plucking the bodies
of honorable Persons and others out of the graves, tearing them to pieces, and
exposing them to public scorn.

But the chief Eyesore and Object of their Fury was the City of Lesna, which
(after plundring and murdering all whom they found therein) they burned to
ashes, and laid in rubbish; only the Lord in his mercy having alarmed the City
of their Enemies approaching march, the greatest part of the Inhabitants (being
three famous Churches) saved themselves by flight, and are now wandering up and
down in Silesia, the Marquisate of Brandeuburg, Lusatia and Hungary, poor,
destitute, afflicted and naked.

His Highness and the Council having referred unto this Committee the
Testimonials and Petitions sent by the said Churches, We finding upon
examination thereof, their case to be thus deplorable, which is more at large
stated and declared in their own Narrative, have caused the said Narrative to
be translated, and herewith published, thereby to stir up the Lords people in
these Nations to put on bowels of mercies toward these their exiled and
afflicted brethren, refreshing their hearts by your love, and the tokens of it
in a cheerful and liberal supply; which will not only preserve this holy seed
from perishing, that has a blessing in it, but also uphold among them the
purity of Religion and Power of the Gospel.

The rather considering the present freedom from these bloody outrages, we the
people of these Nations do by the blessing of the Lord enjoy, the continuance
whereof we may the more comfortably hope for, by how much our compassions are
more freely extended to those in misery. And if a cup of cold water given to
one disciple, as such, shall not lose its reward; how much more when a
bountiful relief is given to more then five thousand disciples?

Which we should be the more forward to advance, because they acknowledge they
have received much confirmation in the Religion for which they suffer, by light
received from our Countreyman John Wicklef, that famous Witness of Christ
against Antichrist, even in the darkest times of Popery.

And we doubt not but that God who has lately opened your bowels to so large
and eminent a Contribution toward the persecuted Protestants of Piedmont, (for
which many Thanksgivings have been made to God on your behalf) will again draw
out your hearts upon this like sad occasion, to the like bountiful liberality,
it being our duty to cast our bread upon the waters, and to give a portion to
six and also to seven, not being weary of well-doing, because in due time we
shall reap, if we faint not. Considering also how honorable it is to act grace,
and to lay out our selves upon such occasions, we recommend it again as the
work of God accompanied with his own voice, calling aloud upon us to enlarge
our selves in this ministration, and withal to pour out our hearts in faith and
prayer, that the Lord would yet please to raise up Sion upon the Ruins of
Babylon, hastening his work, and blessing means to it.

John Trevor Christopher Pack Will. Purefoy Edward Cresset Thomas Vyner Joseph
Caryl John Owen Will. Jenkyn Philip Nigh Will. Cooper Edmond Calamy.


The utmost Fury of Antichrist against the Protestants or Reformed Church of
the Bohemian Confession in Poland, set down in a brief (but faithful)
Narrative, and according to the truth of the matter.
THe Spouse of Jesus Christ, she who in the Cradle was besprinkled with the
blood of a Protomartyr, has always brought forth into the world men like Abel
or Stephen, that so there might never be wanting to cry from the earth unto
God, and that the wounds of that Rose which lies among the Thorns of
Persecution might not be concealed. Every age, and every year in each age, and
every month and day in each year, has produced new inundations of blood unto
this day; and yet the little flock of the Lord has always increased under
persecutions, one while here; another there, shifting their seats and
habitations. While it pleased God by the means of Wicklef to kindle the light
of the Gospel in Great Britain, John Huss asserted the truth of Jesus Christ in
the midst of thick darkness of Popery in Bohemia, many thousands being stirred
up by God to receive it, who despising all the cruelty of Tyrants, received it
with joy, until by Gods assistance they took rooting in the Kingdom, and grew
up into flourishing Churches. In a short time after, Antichrist breathing out
his fury, the Truth was banished out of Bohemia, and the Confessors being
driven out, transplanted the Gospel into Poland; where being favorably
entertained by King Sigismond, they in a short time increased to so great a
number, that being little inferior to the Papists, they were able to boast of
an equal authority and privileges with them. Hence it came to pass that the
Kings at their Coronations were wont not only to promise, but solemnly to
swear protection to such as disagreed from the Roman Religion, and therefore
they proceeded not to open persecutions, save only in those Cities where the
Jesuits had seated themselves in power (to wit) Cracovia, Posen, Lublin, Vilna,
and where by their disciples, and by stirring up the common people to fury, the
Churches of the Reformed Professors were a good while ago demolished, and
diverse Ministers cruelly massacred. Nevertheless the malice of the Enemies
being no whit allayed, they were many ways afflicted, first indirectly,
afterward by pretenses under color of Law, until those Churches being worn
out by degrees, and overthrown, were not many years ago reduced to a very
inconsiderable number, especially when as in the Reign of the late King, the
enemies being confident they might do any thing, brought things to this pass at
length, that there were no more then Twenty one Congregations remaining in the
Greater Poland, and those also ready to perish. But among these Twenty one
remaining Churches, the chief, and as it were the Mother of them all, was that
of Lesna, which was divided into three Congregations, the Bohemian, the
Polonian and the German; each of which had their own Pastors, but the
Communicants jointly were about Two thousand: Therefore it was that this Church
was in the first place exposed to the Enemies malice, and of late designed to
the slaughter, as well by reason of its being very much frequented and grown
famous, as also because of the Synod there usually celebrated, as likewise a
famous University and Printing House, and Books frequently published to the
world. When therefore in the year 1655. the Swedish Army out of Pomerania drew
near to the borders of Poland, and the Nobility were summoned to Arms,
according to the Custom of the Country, it came to pass that the Papists brake
forth into many furious expressions, crying out, That the Heretics had invited
the Enemy, and therefore they were first of all to be put to the sword and
extirpated; which reports, though most falsely scattered abroad (for the
searcher of hearts and reins knows, that we never so much as dreamt of it)
yet they easily found credit among the sworn enemies of the Gospel, who sought
nothing more then our ruin. Hereupon they who first consulted to agree with
the Swedish Army, being terrified by its power, concluded about the Surrender
of all Great Poland into the Kings protection, and namely, the Royal Cities of
Posen, Calissen, Meserick, and to which also Lesna was expressly added: In a
little time after they endeavored to cast off the Swedish Yoke, and turned
their Arms not against the Swedes, but first against our Evangelical
Professors, as conspiring with the Swedes upon the account of Religion, and
none of them scrupled to take revenge upon them. They first of all set upon
those of Lesna, with resolution of putting all to the sword, and destroying
that Heretical City by fire, and they had effected both, unless God had by
sending some persons before, who by signifying the coming of the Enemy, and
with what intent they came, had possessed the Citizens with a panick fear, so
that leaving all their Estates, they every man fled; and thus within the space
of one hour, a most populous City abounding with all manner of wealth, was left
without Inhabitants, who in a miserable condition wandered then into the
neighboring Woods and Marshes into Silesia. But the Polish Nobility with their
Army entering the City, did what they pleased, slaying a great number of
decrepit old people, and sick persons, that were not able to save themselves by
flight; then the City it self was first plundered, and afterward so destroyed
by Fire for three days together, that no part of it remained beside rubbish and
ashes. In what manner they would have handled the Citizens, especially their
Pastors, they showed by their heroic actions performed in other places, by the
most savage Slaughtering of diverse Ministers of the Church, and other faithful
Members of Christ of both Sexes; for of all that they laid hold on, they gave
not one man quarter, but very cruelly put them to death with most exquisite
tortures. They endeavored to force Mr Samuel Cardus, Pastor of the Church of
Czuertzinen, to renounce his Religion, after they had taken him, and miserably
handled him with all manner of cruelty, but he stoutly resisting, they first put
out his Eyes, and led him about for a Spectacle, then they pulled off his
Fingers ends with pincers; but he not yet condescending to their mad Fury, they
found out a new kind of torment, poured molten Lead into his mouth, and at
length while he was yet half alive, they clapped his Neck between folding Doors,
and violently pulling them together, severed his Head from his Body. They took
John Iacobides, Pastor of the Church of Dembnick, and Alexander Wartens his
Colleague, and another that was in company with them, as they passed through
the Town of LUBIN, and hurrying them up and down for diverse hours, and
grievously handling them after the manner of Tyrants, then last of all cutting
their Throats with a Razor, threw them headlong, while they were yet breathing,
into a great pit, which had been beforehand prepared for their Martyrs, and
stifled them by casting down Dung and Dirt upon them. They a great while
pursued Andrew Oxlitius a young man designed for the Ministry, whom after long
seeking, they at last found in the open field, and in the end having taken him,
they cut off his Head with a Sith, chopping it into small pieces, and the dead
carkase also they slasht in a barbarous manner. The same fate befell Adam Milota
a Citizen of Lesna; but they more grievously handled an old man of above
seventy, whose name was Simon Priten, and many others, whose names it were too
tedious to relate. Of that barbarous execution which they did upon the weaker
Sex, there were besides other examples, horrid Trophies of Cruelty erected in
the said City of Lesna: a pious Matron there, who was the mother of three
children, not being able quick enough to leave the City, and being slain in the
open street, they cut off her hands and feet, and cutting off her childrens
heads, they laid two of them at her breasts, and the third by her side. In like
manner, another woman having her hands and feet cut off, and her tongue cut out,
being enclosed and bound in a Sack, lived the space of two days, making most
miserable lamentation. Grief forbids us to add more, for they behaved
themselves so furiously toward us, that there remains not an example of any
one man saved of all those that happened to fall into their hands. It is
notoriously known how that fury of theirs tyrannized also over the dead; some
they dragd out of their graves and cut in pieces, as at Zichlin; others they
exposed naked for a public Spectacle, as at Lesna; of which outrageous action
we had an example, even in the dead Body of the most Serene Landgrave of
Hassia, which was drawn out of the grave, who was heretofore slain in a most
barbarous and tyrannical manner at Koscian, but buried by our Friends at Lesna.
The like was acted also upon the Body of the most Noble Arciszevius, heretofore
the valiant Admiral of the Hollanders in Brazile, which was likewise dragd out
of the grave, and being stripped of the Grave-clothes, was found after the firing
of Lesna. There are diverse other examples, which the Christian Reader may find
in the Book, Entitled, Lesnae Excidium, faithfully written, and lately set
forth in print; but they are such examples only as are commonly known, for who
is able to relate all things in particular? as burning men alive, drowning
others with stones tied about their necks, etc.

Now Lesna being destroyed, the fury of the Enemy proceeded to the persecutions
of others, they in a short time utterly demolished all our Congregations, not
only driving away the Pastors, but also either burning or leaving most of the
Temples desolate, as at Karmin, Dembnick, Skochy, Czriuczin, etc. yea and the
Auditories themselves were either slain (as in the Town of Skochy, where there
was a very flourishing Church of the Bohemian Exiles, Sixty persons, both men
and women were cruelly put to death) or else they were scattered abroad, so
that there remained not one place wherein the Worship of God may be celebrated.
Lo, this is the most miserable state and condition of our Churches; moreover
our Countrymen, to the number of 5000 besides youths and children, being
dispersed in banishment (which has now befallen most of us the second time)
especially throughout Silesia; as also through the Marck, Lusatia, Hungary,
etc. find no comfort, but much misery, and are there exposed to the hatred and
envy of men. We that are Pastors dare not openly minister to our Auditories
with the Word and Sacraments, but only in private Meetings, or in Woods among
Fenny places, God only seeing us, who is witness of these calamities, and our
comfort in extremities. Indeed being thus destitute of all things, we lead a
wretched life in banishment, being afflicted with hunger and nakedness, and are
become next to the most miserable Waldenses, the greatest spectacle of calamity
to the Christian World, for so it has seemed good to that Sovereign Wisdom
that governs all things, that we should be inheritors of the Closs and
persecution of those men from whom we have derived the original of our Doctrine
and external Succession: For truly we are the remaining Progeny even of the
Waldenses, with whom being raised from the ashes of blessed Huss, and with whom
combining into the same holy Fellowship of the Faith and afflictions of Christ,
we have for two whole ages and more, been perpetually subject to the like
storms of Calamities, until at length we fell into this Calamity, greater then
ever was known in the memory of our Fathers, and which threatens us with utter
destruction, unless God prevent it. The truth is, this business constrains us
to amazement and tears, greater then can be expressed in words, to set forth our
affliction and sorrow: If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of
love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, we desire
that this affliction of Joseph may be recommended, especially to all that are
of the household of Faith. Let them not suffer those to perish whom the same
Faith, and the same Spirit of Christ has joined with them in so near a
relation; we beseech them in the Name of Christ, that they would rather make
haste to relieve those who are ready to perish, we being assured that we suffer
this persecution upon no other account, then for the confession of the Truth,
from those Enemies who have acted such things as these are against us in times
past, and are now at length by Gods permission, pouring out their fury upon us.

Signed in the name of the said distressed Churches, by their Delegates and now
Exiles for the Cause of Christ; Adam Samuel Hartman, Pastor of the Church of
Lesna in Poland, and Rector of the famous University there. Paul Cyril a late
Member of the University of Lysna.


LONDON: Printed by HEN. HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness. Anno
Dom. 1658.


