A True Account of the BEHAVIOR OF Mr. Francis Newland, Who was Executed at
Tyburn, on Friday the 19th of April, 1695. for the Murder of Francis Thomas,
Esquire
Together with a Paper delivered to the Ordinary, attested with his own Hand,
desiring that he would publish it, for the Benefit of his Friends and
Acquaintance.
MR. Newland was conveyed to Tyburn in a Coach, out of which he ascended into a
Cart; many spectators being present, he spoke nothing to them. His whole
deportment was very humble and serious, as became him in the near approach of
his Death. I exhorted him to beg of God strength of Faith, a submissive
Resignation of himself to the mercy of a gracious Redemer. He replied, that he
had no other refuge to comfort him in this his distress. After several Prayers,
he desired the 32d Psalm might be sung; accordingly it was. At my departure out
of the Cart, he gave me a paper, written with his own hand and subscribed
Francis Newland, in which is very pathetical good Counsel to his Friends, and
all other young Persons: He desired me to publish it in print, it began thus.

Tho I am come hither, publicly to dye, for a barbarous Murrher, I declare (as
I hope for mercy from God) that I had not my hand in this murder. Indeed I was
an Eye witness, but knew nothing of the quarrel, nor was any way concerned in
it. Neither was any other persons, except James Philboy, and Daniel Tully.
Notwithstanding there were several swords drawn in the Street, no one injured
the deceased, that I saw; but on the contrary several would have parted them
had they not been prevented by Tully, which was my only reason of drawing my
sword.

Notwithstanding I publicly suffer death, no one wishes better success to my
Country. I heartily forgive all who have injured me, as I hope all do me, whom
I have injured. I wish all People, and especially my Friends and Acquaintance,
that my unfortunate End, may be a sufficient means to prevent them from any
thing, which may in the least cause them to depend on others mercies.

It is not for me now to insist upon this, since I am at peace with all the
World. I shall say something to detain all people from idle quarrelsome
company, which undoubtedly is the inlet to all other mischief, and misfortune,
as by me plainly appears. I suffer (I heartily believe) a most just reward, for
my past sinful life and conversation. I not long since thought my self as far
from this untimely end, as any of my acquaintance; and therefore I hope, that
since in this case I am able to say but very little, that the very Example it
self may deter them, from their sinful wicked courses of living; which
undoubtedly will be as severely punished, if not in this World, in the next,
they may shortly expect it, which will be far worse, unless they unfeignedly
repent, which can never be too soon, tho it may be too late; for assure your
selves nothing can be half so great a Terror to a man?, that when leaving this
World, to find himself altogether unfit for another, and examining himself
finds, that he groans under an immense burden of sin, which he can no way get
rid of. The ill consequence of which, I am not able to describe, but must leave
them further to consider of it.

Tho I bess God, that since my dismal sentance, I have so much reflected on my
past life, together with the good advice I had of several people, that that
which I thought formerly most dear and pleasant to me, is now so odious and
unpleasant; that were I now at my liberty and accidentally should meet with any
of my former acquaintance, I should certainly thin^ them all Drunk, were they
never so Sober. And I suppose, they, on the contrary, would think me mad. Yet I
am so well pleased and satisfied with this my misfortune, that rather than I
would give my self over to my former course of life, where I to live, and on my
deathbed to undergo the Agonies and Terror which since my sentance I have
done, I would first choose to undergo the cruellest Death that can be afflicted.

From Your Unfortunate Friend, Francis Newland.

To all my Friends and Acquaintance.
Licensed Febr. 22.

LONDON, Printed for E. Mallet, near Fleet-bridge, 1695.


