The fair Dealer: Or, A Modest ANSWER TO THE Sober LETTER of His Excellency,
The LORD General Monck; Being a Brief Discovery of the Meetest Expedient, and
most Sovereign Remedy for our present Distempers.

By the private hand of a Gent. of Devon.

LONDON: Printed for James Hanzen. 1659.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY The Lord General Monck.
My Lord,
IT is no small encouragement to the sober Party of these Nations, to hope for
either their Native Freedom, or at least a more soft and silken bondage, than
formerly; whilst they shall see your Excellencies influence to have any
operation upon the Government or Governors of this Nation: And the rather,
because your Excellency in your Letter from Leicester, of the 21th instant to
the Gentlemen of our County, laying aside your thundering Canons and bellowing
Drums, were pleased to dispute the difference with sober reason, enameled over
with courting affection; a way unusual in those that have been before you:
which shows the lineaments of your Noble spirit, far more precious than the
savage features of our late Bassaes; which sweet deportment, has courted me
forth amongst others, to reply (with what reverence and softness, I may) to
your Excellency. That notwithstanding that handsome Plea contained in your
Letter, and therein the most and best that can be said for that cause; Yet the
excluded Members (according to our Declaration) are the best expedient that can
be proffered, for the prevention of farther Mysteries, and settling the Nation
in a lasting peace.

Your Excellencies Argument is, That the Excluded Members are most of them for
Monarchy in Church and State, which cannot now be set up in either (as you
judge) without a new War. Not in the Church, 1. Because these wars have
produced different Interests, as Presbyterians, Independants, Anabaptists,
Sectarians in the Church, who ought to have Liberty, as far as Gods Word will
warrant them. 2. Because the Bishops, Deans and Chapters Lands are sold. Nor in
the State, 1. Because Crown Lands, the support of Monarchy are sold. 2. Many in
England have fought against the King, and so dread his return. 3. Monarchy
necessarily induces uniformity. 4. The Army will never endure Monarchy in
Church or State.

For answer to what is Ecclesiastic, 1. Admit the Presbyterian, Independent,
etc. Interests, could not be secured but by a Republique; Yet who should bring
in a Republique but a Free Parliament. 2. Admit that the Excluded Members would
destroy these Interests, if restored: Shall we do them injustice, in keeping
them from their trust; because we fear they will do so to others? Is it justice
in me to take away a Travailers Sword, because I fear he may kill an honest man
as soon as a Thief. Casuists determine, it is more Christian to suffer evil from,
than to do evil to others. 3. A Parliament consisting of all it is Members, but
what are legally outed (which cannot with any pretense of reason be averred of
the Excluded Members) are the only and proper Judges, which way and how these
Ecclesiastic Interests may be secured; and therefore the business before us,
is coraem non judice till they are restored. 4. All Parties in this Nation may
better expect their security, as to Ecclesiasticalls, from a legal and Free
Parliament, which carries (as it were) a Stamp of Divine Majesty on it, rather
than from such a foundation, as carries force and violence in the face of it.
Men seldom thrive that dare not trust Gods way. Casuits say, we ought to tread
paths of righteousness, though they would certainly lead us into mischiefs:
which yet is but supposed, the Excluded Members would do, if restored. 5. How
can your Excellency suspect, the Excluded Members would erect Monarchy in the
Church? when themselves pulled it down, and sold most of the Church Lands. 6.
And for toleration of all religious Interests, as far as is warrantable by the
Word of God (which is your own rule) Oliver made it the Stairs to Tyranny,
telling us that our civil and spiritual Liberties, were inconsistent, and gave
this for the reason, why he excluded so many of every Parliament in his time;
because if he permitted them, to enjoy their freedom they would impose upon
tender Consciences. But to clear this, there are many of their Declarations
extant, holding forth this Liberty at large, yea, the late King himself never
denied a fair, warrantable Toleration since 1643. witness his Message for a
Treaty, March 3. 1643. therein offering all just and reasonable ease of tender
Consciences. And in his Message July 4th 1644. after Sir William Wallers Defeat
at Cropredy Bridge, defires all due regard may be had to-tender Consciences.
Again in his Message concerning his Concessions, January the fifteenth, 1645.
he offers full Liberty for the ease of their Consciences, that will not
communicate in the Service established by Law. And in the Explanation of his
Concessions, January 29. 1645. his Majesty further declares, He intends that
all other Protestants (to wit, besides Presbyterians) behaving themselves
peaceably in, and toward the Civil Government, shall have the free Exercise of
their Religion, according to their own way. Add his Concessions to these
Excluded Members, upon which they were excluded, of September 29. 1648. So that
no man can rationally doubt, but these several Interests are sufficiently
secured, by the Excluded Members, already. Yet it is a sign of a naughty heart,
to uphold Injustice; because Injustice will uphold him, and Justice will not.

7. All religious persons have reason to trust full and free Parliaments in
religious Matters, more than any Faction of men; for free Parliaments carried
on the Reformation from Henry the Eight's time, till now. Who appeared against
burthensom Ceremonies etc. but this free Parliament? How much did free
Parliaments strengthen the hands of Qu. Elizabeth in her Reformation? Does not
Democritus Junior, a Sectarian in show, but a Jesuit in truth, demonstrate our
free Parliaments conscientious diligence to establish Religion, and true
Liberty? whilst he in that late Pamphlet, asserts our Gospel and Ministry to
have been from Parliaments, not from Christ.

8. Proprietors in Bishops Lands, etc. are not like to be molested by the
Excluded Members, if readmitted to their Trust, for that the Act for the Sale
of them was passed by themselves. And yet if it were judged needful to return
any Lands to the Church again, as they were sold to supply the incident Changes
of the Nation, so the Nation ought to rpeurchase them, of the now Proprietor;
which judicious men say, two months revenues (that now goes to maintain the
present government) would effect; yea, that three months Revenue more (as now
established) would satisfy all Proprietors of Kings, Queens, and Princes Lands.

And who can doubt the Nation unwilling to pay these Sums: rather than endure
these unjust proceedings: and the rather considering they must pay a 1000 times
as much, to maintain the present State as it now stands. So that your
Excellencies supposed necessity, of a civil War to arise afresh, upon the
Account of these Interests; is clearly removed, while each Proprietor receives
full satisfaction. And the support of Monarchy (if needful) may be restored.
9. And if these several Interests stand (as your Excellency conceives) upon the
minor part of a Parliament, against the Major; they are secured, not by Law,
for the Legislative power is confessedly in the Major part, as such; but by
force, which is none of the best tenures: and therefore do truly need the
restoring the excluded Members, for their better confirmation. Lastly, be
pleased my Lord to consider, that by excluding these Members, we are like to
venture all our civil and religious Interests on the success of a battle or
two, in which we must engage against Charles Stuart, a Free Parliament and 11
parts in 12 of the people, who though they want Arms, and you have their Purse,
yet their very Numbers will increase their courage: And what a hazard will
these Interests be then forced to run? So that the War you dreaded, by
admitting these Members, will certainly follow, without admitting them: the
main of which danger may be averted by your Excellencies diligence, in
restoring the excluded Members; for then you will have none left to oppose you,
but the damme Cavaliers. In failure of which, if the conquering Sword of
Charles Stuart, with all these adherents take place, and the profane multitude
get head (my Lord) all the tears in your eyes will be too few, to bewail the
misery your negligence has brought upon us; when you shall see all good
Interests dying, while you are (pardon me, my Lord, if I say) mistakenly
careful to uphold them.

Now for answer to what concerns civil affairs; to wit, that the excluded
members are most of them for Monarchy, and the Inconveniences of that. 1. If
that be true, so are almost all England: and who will, or can withstand a
multitude, where the danger is not horribly mischievous, to give them their
will, neither can it be a Government, but Tyranny, where things are managed
against the will of the people. 2. Most of them ('it is probable) have so much
conscience, as to judge they are bound to be so by the Covenant: and if so, how
unsaint-like is it to tempt them to perjury? by the loss of their reputation,
exclusion from the House, and such other miseries, as have befallen Sir George
Booth already. 3. The whole House, as a House, did never yet declare, they were
for Monarchy: So that they are punished, only upon suspicion: a thing only
practicable among Turks, or against young Foxes, and Cubs of Beasts of prey. 4.
Your Excellency knows that most of the present House, have, and yet do deem,
the former Government of England, to have been the best on earth; but not now
practicable, lest it should turn them off the helm; or for some other
circumstances, arising from our bloody discensions. 5. The Excluded Members,
have as much cause to fear a Monarchy, as either of these now sitting, (unless
it be for some private gain in the dissolution of Monarchy) and ought to be as
careful to make good terms; for that they also have fought against the Stuarts
Family. 6. That position of your Excellencies is not clear; that many must
fight against the Stuarts, because they have done it already: for the Scots
Nation fought against them, and since have fought for them: so have particular
men of the best rank, as Langhorne, Poyer, Powel, Massey, etc. and doubtless,
you know 10000. that are at this day in the same propenseness. 7. That the
support of Monarchy is taken away, is answered in the 8 Resp. of Ecclesiastic
affairs. 8. That Monarchy requires uniformity in the Church is not clear: in
that K. James is always instanced in, as one that allowed toleration, and so is
Constantine by many, and Steven K. of Poland, our late K. Charles professed it:
the Jewish Monarchy admitted it, Poland has for many hundred years allowed it,
France tolerates Hugenotes in great abundance; and the Turkish Empire it self
gives way to it, so that if the excluded Members should reduce Monarchy with
them, yet not Uniformity; And yet admit they should, It is not lawful for us to
keep them from their right, because they will do what is not meet with it. 9.
Your last argument, that the Army will not endure it, is the sting in the
tail, the greatest and most substantial of all the arguments offered, which
indeed I cannot answer, because I have not a sword in mine hand. But what will
not the Army endure? a Monarchy? who set up Oliver but the Army? and Lambert
and Fleetwood, but the Army who made Emperors in despite of the Roman Senate,
but the Army? who encouraged Julius Caesar to pass Rubicon against the
Senatorian Decree, but the Army? As Armies are best lead by a Unity, so they
best lead to a Unity. It Is true, the Army may not endure a Monarchy, but
doubtless can endure a Tyranny: and that I doubt not but we shall see, as soon
as they have a little leisure. But my Lord, it is a Wallingfordian distinction
to talk of populus and populus armatus, as if the Soldiers Rendevouz-votes,
were binding as Senatorian Laws, we hope your Excellency has fought against
those lawless practices. Thus have I unfolded my thoughts to your Excellency,
concerning your Letter; in such lines as my rude country, and ruder education
will afford, giving you only this farther Information, that the eyes of this
Country are much upon you, and would be proud to hear, that your Excellency
should prove the only true Patriot, that durst venture his fortunes, to save
over tottered vessel from utter shipwreck; which alone can be done, by
restoring the Excluded Members. In doing of which your grateful country will
cast their lives, and what is dear to them, at your feet, and reckon themselves
your ransomed vassals; In which that the Lord would strengthen your hands, is
the earnest prayer of

Your Excellencies humble Servant, J. Trev.

FINIS.

