THE TRIAL OF Edward Fitz-Harris, WHO Was Convicted at the Kings Bench-Bar in
WESTMINSTER HALL.
ON The ninth of this Instant June, 1681. For High Treason, in conspiring the
Death of the King. And by several Treasonable practices to subvert the
Government, with the several Sercumstances that attended his Trial. As also the
Trial of Oliver Plunket Titular Arch Bishop of Dubling, who was Tried at the
Kings Bench-Bar, and there found guilty of High Treason the eighth Instant.
EDward Fitz Harris being brought to the Kings Bench-Bar, the last Term where
his Indictment for High Treason, being Read he pleaded by his Counsel to the
Jurisdiction of the Court; alleging that he stood Impeached by the House of
Commons, and therefore could not be Tried in any Inferior Court, as likewise
that there was a Record of his Impeachment in the House of Lords. But upon
Inquiry that was found a mistake, so that notwithstanding the many and tedious
objections his Counsel made, against his being Tried, after the Kings Counsel
had Learnedly answered each Objection; And Mr. Attorney General demurred to his
Plea, the Court thought fit to over rule the same, and Order him to prepare for
his Trial, as this day which he no ways neglected, but summoned his witnesses,
and took all convenient Instructions having had as fair a time allowed him as
he could wish. So that none can Object that he was Tried without mature
deliberation. So that according to appointment he was brought to his Trial this
day, from the Tower by water guarded very strongly, and being brought to the
Bar after the Jury were sworn, the Court proceeded and his Indictment being
Read which contained many horrid Treasons against his Most Sacred Majesty. It
being drawn from a Seditious and Treasonable Libel; Entitled the True English
man, speaking plain English which the Prisoner gave Mr. Everard Instructions
how to draw and write a good part of it, with his own hands as was attested
upon Oath by him in Court. The Indictment was specified according to that of
the Libel, wherein was contained such Treasons and Rebellious Practices as are
not convenient to be mentioned as to particulars, but in general it was to
render His Majesty detestable to his Subjects, to stir up jealousies and fears
amongst them, of arbitrary Government and introduction of Popery to raise a
universal Rebellion, which should be carried on under the notion of the
Desenters. And then in the general confusion they designed, that the French
King should Land an Army, and swallow us up in a moment. So that the whole
Foundation of the Protestant Government should be overturned, and these Kingdoms
be reduced under the Tyranny of Papists and Popery. These were his practi^^^
and in order to putting them in Execution about the 21 (...) Feb. last he came
to Mr. Everards Chamber in Grays I^^^ and began to sound how he stood affected,
he having h^^ some small knowledge of him in the French Kings Servi^^ grew the
more familiar, telling him that he had heard h^^ hardly he had been used, since
he had adhered to the P^^testant intrest, but that if he would stand to the
Catholi^ he should not only have a considerable Sum of Money but be advanced to
great preferment; the which Mr. Everard seemingly consented too. Then began he
to talk of drawing up the pernicious Libel, which Libel he told Mr. Everard was
to be put into the pocket, not only of several Worthy Protestant Lords, but
into several Citizens and others, and then he would have Villans ready to
detect them, and swear against them* with several other Treasonable designs.

And further he would have had Mr. Everard the witness against him to have gone
to the Citizens and to have procured them to make an Address to the Parliament,
and offer to stand by them with their lives and fortunes, and to offer them
several Hundred Thousand Pounds for the securing their Liberties and Property,
which he was to insinuate were in eminent danger to rise, and not to disband
themselves till they had accomplished their designs, or words to that effect.
And further he told him, that the French Ambassadors Confessor was chiefly
concerned in it, and that the Ambassador had daily notice given him what was
done in Parliament by some that did adhere to the French Interest: At these
notorious Treasons Mr. Everard was somewhat startled, yet hid his resentments,
resolving to find out the depth of the design, if possible; whereupon he
appointed him a day to come for the Libel before mentioned, and in the mean
while he acquainted soveral worthy Gentlemen what had passed, amongst which
were Sir William Waller, and Mr. Smith one of the Kings Evidence, who at
several times he conveyed into private places to overhear what discourse passed
between him and the Prisoner: The first was Mr. Smith, who gave his Evidence
that about the latter end of February. 1681. when Fitzharris was there, he
being in a private Closet, through a hole made for that purpose, not only saw,
so as perfectly to know him again, but heard him discourse about the horrid
conspiracy or villainous design, and heard Mr. Everard say when they were
discoursing about the Libel, that it was a Treason and horrid design, and he
did not think it safe, to which Fitzharris replied, that the more Treason the
better, and he was as safe as himself, for he was more involved in it than Mr.
Everard, for he had given his hand for it: And further Mr. Everard said, that
he told him as soon as he had writ the Papers he should have 40 Guinies, and
become a Pentioner to the French King, and have some Thousands of Crowns,
extolling greatly the Liberality of that Prince, saying, that he never spared
his money upon such occasions.

Sir William Waller being sworn, did likewise testify that Mr. Everard sending
a Letter to him to desire him to come to him, but he scrupled it at first, as
not knowing what the intention of it might be, but upon mature deliberation,
and out of a zeal to serve his King and Country, he went, and after some time
was conveyed by Mr. Everard into a private Room, where through a crevis, and a
slit in the Hangings, he could discern the Prisoner: And if Mr. Everard brought
him the Papers, which after he had perused, he gave them a private mark to know
them again, and that he heard the Prisoner discourse after his usual manner,
and saw him make several alterations in the Papers, telling Mr. Everard he
should have a good reward, but at that time named no certain Sum, after this
happy discovery of so horrid a villainy, he was apprehended.

And upon examination confessed a treasonable Paper to be his handwriting;
there were several other Witnesses, but the worthy Gentlemen before mentioned
were the most material.

To these home Treasons so positively sworn against him, he rather strove to
justify himself, by reflecting upon, not only his Majesty, but several other
Persons of Honor, even in the face of the Court, and turning his Majesty's
charitable benevolence toward him, to evil constructions, to the detestation
of all good Subjects that heard him aggravate his Villainies, he called several
Persons of Honor to testify on his behalf, but for the most part their
Testimonies were rather against him than for him, so that after the Kings
counsel had summoned up the Evidence, and declared the nature of so heinous a
Crime; the Court proceeds to give the Jury their Charge, and having satisfied
them in some scruples by them objected, they went out, and after half an Hours
debate brought him in Guilty of High Treason, at which there was a general Hum
throughout the Court.

ON the Eighth of this instant, Oliver Plunket Titular Archbishop of Dublin,
was brought to his Trial, where it was proved against him, that he held
Correspondence with the French Kings Confessor, and designed to bring in a
French power to subdue that Kingdom, to Levy War, and raise an Army, in order
to which he had made great Gatherings of Moneys, and given out Commissions,
designing to betray several Important Landing-places to the French, of which
Treasonable practices he was Convicted, etc.

FINIS.
Printed for Thomas Davis.


