A True and Perfect NARRATIVE Of the late Dreadful FAMINE In the great and
populous City of MESSINA in the STRAITS, Where vast Multitudes of Men, Women,
and Children, have Miserably Perished in the Streets, for want of Food; and
those that Survived, were forced to go many Days without Bread, Feeding only on
Horses, Mules, Cats, Dogs, Leather, Hides, taken out of the Tan-fats, Vermin,
etc.

WITH A Description of the Place, the occasions and manner of their Revolting
last Summer from Spain, and putting themselves under the Protection of the
Crown of France, and a Journal of all Considerable Actions, performed there
since their present troubles.

Extracted from several Letters, from Milan, Naples, and Palermo.

LONDON Printed 1674.

An account of the Troubles and Terrible Famine at Messina.
MEssina is an eminent City of Scicily, a great Island (Seven hundred Miles in
Compass) which lies in the Mediterranean S^a, supposed to have formerly been
joined to Italy, and Divided by the fury of the Waves, the Fretum or narrow Sea
between them being not above a Mile a^ half broad, in which, Charybdis a Gulf
or Whirlp it being on the one side, and the Rock Scylla just opposite on the
other, the dangerous passage for unskilful Mariners, occasioned that their
Proverb, whereby we say, when a man knows not which way to turn him, he is
between Scylla and Carrybdis, In this Island Polyphemus and all the Cyclops
dwelt, here is the Hill Hybla so famous for Bees and Honey, here is Likewise the
Hill Aetna (now called Morgibel) which continually Belches forth flames of Fire
to the amazement of all beholders, and lastly to this mathematick Learning is
more beholding than to Athens, Rome or any other place, Euclyde and Archimedes
the two Pillars of that Art, being both born and flourished here.

The People are Ingenious, Eloquent and pleasant, but withal wondrous
Inconstant, and no less talkative whence G^^rae siculae becomes Latin, for old
wives Fables, they follow the Romish Religion, and use the Italian Language,
but very much Impaired and fallen from its true Elegancy by reason of the
Commixture of the Greek, Saracen, Norman, Spanish and French Tongues, the Soil
is incredibly fruitful in Wine, Oil, Honey, Sugar, etc. such abundance of all
sorts of Grain, that it was of old Counted the Granary of the whole Roman
Empire, to which usual plenty to which they were accustomed, must needs make
the Pinchings of Famine so much the more sensibly resented by the poor
inhabitants at Messina During their late extremity of want.

About July la^t the People being lamentably afflicted and oppressed by great
Taxes, Impositions, Gab^ls and Excise laid on all kind of Commodities,
especially on Meat and Drink and the necessary Provisions of Life, and
suffering several other Greivances, the the whole Island was filled with
Murmurings and Complaints, but no place more than this Messina a very Large and
Populous City, Situate just opposite to Rhene in Italy whose Haven and
Entrance are so strongly sconced and Bullwarked that they used Commonly to let
their G^^^s in deris^^^ of the Turks, stand continually open (...) the People
here pretended at least to have received (...) insufferable abuses and
oppressions from their Governors (...) at last occasioned a General Mutiny and
(...) wherein they beseiged their Strates (...) Magistrate in the P^lace Royal
and on the third of August 1674. S. N. having caused a Mine to be sprung, by
which a great part of the said Palace was thrown to the Ground, and by other
Means reduced him to the utmost Extremity, so that it was impossible for him
longer to defend himself, he submited to a Capitulation, and yielded the place
and retired to the Castle of Salvadore, but not thinking himself safe there, he
Embarked for Melaro to confer with the Marquess of Bayon than Viceroy of
Scicily about reducing that City to its duty, whose inhabitants in the mean
time, taking the supreme power into their own hands, took from the several
orders of the religious within their precincts, all their Plate and Coined it
into money, made incursions into the adjacent Country, and brought all within 16
Leagues of their City under their jurisdiction, sent several deputies into
Foreign parts to solicit succors, and buy Powder and other Ammunition, and
having an Implacable hatred against the Family of the Marly caused one Hundred
and sixty, Persons of that Race to be executed, and amongst them 3 Women who
were beheaded, and a Gentleman of the Family of Poverde, in this exigence of
affairs the Viceroy there, is likewise these of Naples and Milan used all
diligence to rasse Forces to, Reduce them to obedience.

The Pope was solicited to aid, the Crown of Spain, with his Galleys, but his
holiness avoided it with Complement, so also did the great Duke of Tuscany, and
the (...) of Venice, but the Republic of Genoa seemed for a while inclinable
to yield assistance, as long as the Rebels pretended a Respect and alleigance
to Spain and that their aim was only a redress of grievances and a restraint of
the Insolent Exorbitances of their Magistrates, but soon after, they had
offered subjection to the French King, and that he had taken them into his
protection, that state (fearing to disoblige his most Christian Majesty who was
but nowly reconciled to them by the mediation of his Majesty of great Britain)
recalled their Galleys home, however 2000. foot being sent from Naples with
other forces, the Viceroy endeavored to block them up by land, who in the
mean time had made themselves Masters of the Castle of Salvadore and several
other strong Forts, and grew more extravagant in their demands then before,
relying much on the Succors that were sent them from Marseilles and Tholon, at
last the Spanish Armada consisting of several Galleys and men of War, being got
to sea and lying before the mouth of their Haven and his Catholic Majesty's
forces, on shore hindering all intercourse so that no provision could be brought
them by land, and they themselves being very numerous, this City of Messina and
its territories being estimated to conteyn near one hundred thousand Souls, all
kind of food began to grow very scarce, having no store houses prepared before
hand, which obliged them to send out great numbers of the more aged weak and
poorest people to seek their fortune amongst their enemies; in this strait
things stood with them most part of this winter, and the Hardships they endured
are almost inexpressible; it is certain there is no enemy so terrible as the
b^lly unsatisfied, nor any torment like Famine, to see the meager looks of so
many thousand people half-famished walking the streets like so many ghosts or
frightful Apparitions, to hear the sad cries and dismal complaints of Men Women
and Children ready to perish for want of Bread, must certainly be an object of
pity enough to affect the most obdurate heart; all kind of usual meat was
wasted, herbs and roots devoured not out of a wanton delicacy as before, but
for pure necessity. At last they fell to kill their Horses and mules dressing
their Dogs and Cooking their Cats, and those nice Stomachs that within these
Twelve-moneths were wont to ransack the elements to gratify the Luxury of their
insatiate palates and scarce thought any thing that Earth or water or air could
yield, dainty enough to please their Appetite, could now with a ravenous
delight feed on a piece of Carrion, and esteem a dish of Rats and Mice a most
relishing repast, nay would have thought themselves happy if they could but
have had their Bellys full of such Cheer. For by a severe order every man was
stinted his Quantity how much he should eat in a day, which it was death for
him to exceed, to such an extremity of wants they were reduced that they
Commonly Eat leather, and Hydes, even after they had lain a long time in the
tan fats, and even this wretched fare was so scarce that there was not above an
ounce and an half or two ounces at most afforded for a man or Woman for a whole
day; In this deplorable ease they Continued a considerable time, having nothing
to live upon but hope, which being it self now grown almost helpless, was at
last answered with releif: For on the 11th of February last past, The duke of
Vivonne coming up with nine ships under his Command, within sight of the Cape
del Fare, designed to carry them provision, the Spanish Armada consisting of
20. men of war and 16. Galleys lying along the cost of Calabria and being
resolved to hinder such their design weighed anchor, and fell upon the French
with great fury, who notwithstanding the disadvantage of number bravely
defended themselves till noon, at which time 5. more fresh men of war came into
their Assistance, and in fine after a sharp and obstinate dispute, which
Continued from Eight a clock in the morning till an hour after Sun set, the
French having got the weather gage, the Spaniards thought fit to sheer off, and
standing away toward Naples, lest the French to prosecute their Voyage, who
soon after Arrived at Messina with great quantities of Corn and other necessary
Provisions to the infinite Joy of the languishing Inhabitants.

FINIS.

