A True and perfect Relation Of a monstrous and Prodigious WHALE Lately cast on
Shore at RINGS-END NEAR Dublin in Jreland: With the manner of its taking. ALSO,
An Account of what Damages happened to several Ships in those parts by a great
Storm.

Sent over in Letters from DUBLIN, to several Merchants and others in LONDON.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for T. N. 1679.

A True and Perfect Relation of a Strange and Monstrous Whale, cast upon the
Shore at Rings-End near Dublin in Ireland, the beginning of January 1678/9.
SIR,
IF your more weighty Employments, to which great Worth and approved Abilities
have deservedly called you, can admit of any Divertisement, I hope you will not
take it ill if I endeavor to contribute toward it: Especially having Engaged
my self to give a just and due account of such Occurrenc s as in this juncture
of Affairs shall happen here in Ireland.

I should be loath to disturb your more serious hours with Feigned Rumors,
Chymaeras and Prodigious Trisles of that nature to make up a Pamphlet; but such
things as have really happened, and are worthy of Observation; and whereof many
thousands in this Nation have been Witnesses, I may be the more confident to
relate as real Truths; and consequently more fit to be communicated to your
Knowledge.

About the latter end of the last Month, the year ended in an Angry humor; God
grant the next may shine upon us with more Benevolent Stars, and Crown the best
of Kings His most Gracious Majesty, with Length of days, Happy ensuing years,
against all the malice of His Enemies and Envious Conspirators.

On the 22d. of December last, the Wind being at W.S.W. it blew a great Storm,
but we heard of no loss of Shipping, only some few Merchantmen that fell foul
one of another in our Harbor. This high Wind brought down such a vast quantity
of Snow, as has not been seen in this Country for many years; which in few
days being washed away with the abundance of Rain that succeeded, and the great
Floods that fell from the Mountains, caused so great a Fresh, that several
Meadows and Islands about the River Liffy were overflown.

But what was the most remarkable and worthy Observation in this Occurrence,
was a man who Swom down the River on a Hay-Cock. This man near a place called
Killmanum near Dublin above the Bridge, endeavoring to save a Cock of Hay that
the Water had encompassed, leapt thereon with a Pole in his hand; his Ship was
now afloat, and he had no sooner got one foot aboard, but he was lanched forth
into the main Current, and driven on with that success, that he past the Bridge
without any Damage: When he arrived on the other side the Bridge, there were
several Attempts made to save him, but the Rapidness of the Stream would admit
of no help; only one Boat, which meeting full side with the Hay-Cook, was
overturned with two men it, who were both lost. At last more obliged to
Providence then his skill in Steerage, when he expected no less then the Main
Ocean for his Refuge, he was left in a safe Harbor on Clantarf Island betwixt
Clantarf and Rings-end.

This Adventure of the Hay-Merchant was the whole Discourse and wonder of the
Town, and had continued so yet, if the Sea, more fertile in Monstrous
Productions then the Land, had not afforded them new cause of Admiration: For
the next day, (as if the Floods were weary of their Load and willing to
discharge themselves of so great a Burden) was thrown on the Shore a Whale of
so vast a Magnitude, as never yet was discovered in these parts, or hardly ever
seen in Bermudas their Native Coast.

It was taken up by Rings-end, within two Miles of Dublin, where it lies as
yet, the wonder and amazement of all Spectators, who flock from all parts both
of City and Country to satisfy their Curiosity with the sight of this
Prodigious Spectacle.

This Immense Body of boundless Natures begetting, as it exceeds all other
Creatures in quantity of it exceeds almost all possibility of enforcing a
belief of the vastness of its Dimensions on any save those only that have been
Spectators, and which I would not undertake to describe unto you, had I not my
self been an Eye Witness.

It is in Length 52 Foot, in Breadth proportionable, the Tail is 14 Foot broad
when it is extended, the Fins of a Prodigious Length and Breadth, and the Head
answerable to the Bulk of the Body (...) his upper Jaws are supported from the
under part of his Mouth with a Beam of Oak of eight Foot long; the Tongue was
in Length eight Foot and a half, of a proportionable Tinckness and Breadth; The
Tongue being cut ou^, I have seen many people pass through his Jaws, and
several stand upright in his Mouth at the same time.

But the most surprising thing was this, when they had Dissected him of several
Shoales of Fish, which they found in his Belly of all sorts whole and
Undigested, together with a Seaman entire in his Clothes, (which being laid on
the Shore by the side of the said Whale) was soon discovered by his Wi^e and
several other st^ing by, ^o be one of the two men that were overturnd by the
Hay-Cock the day before.

Many strange Conjectures have been made of this prodigious Bulk; Astronomers
and Astrologers have past their Judgments upon it, and scarce an (...) wife of
Cobbler in Town but have had something to say to it; and no doubt but it will
serve the whole (...) with Rashers and Discourse for many days to come.

But for my part, all the Prediction I shall draw from it; is that our Kings
most Sacred Majesty shall be now restored to a state of greater Glory and
Security, (as he was formerly) to his lawful Kingdoms and Loyal People;
delivered from the hands of all His Enemies and Bloody Conspirators, against
the Life and Sacred Person of so Good, so Gracious, and so Indulgent a Prince.

Their design being to Subvert Monarchy, and alter the Government, which by God
and the Laws are Established in these His Majesty's Realms.

Such a Whale was cast up in England in the time of the late Usurpation, a
little before the time of His Majesty's blessed Restoration: And another was
cast ashore at Carrig-Fergus in the North of this Country in the year 40. but
that was very small in Comparison of this.

And we His Majesty's Faithful Subjects do heartily wish here, that this
Miraculous Prodigy cast on this Shore, may be a true Omen, and Presage the
Downfall of all such as were Consenters, Abetters, or Contrivers for carrying on
this Horrible Plot, either against our most Gracious King or Government, whom
that God may long preserve against all their Conspiracies, is the Hearty
Prayers and Wishes of

Sir Your Affectionate Friend and Humble Servant. J. M.


