A true and perfect Copy OF THE PROTESTATION OF THE Archbishops and Bishops OF
IRELAND Against the Toleration of Popery. As it was agreed upon, and
subscribed by them at DUBLIN, the 26. of November.

MDCXXVI.

London, Printed, 1641.

The Protestation of the Archbishops and Bishops of IRELAND against the
toleration of POPERY.
THe Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous, their faith and
Doctrine erroneous and Heretical; their Church, in respect of both,
Apostaticall. To give them therefore a toleration, or to consent that they may
freely exercise their Religion, and confess their Faith and Doctrine, is a
grievous sin: and that in two respects.

First It is to make our selves accessarie, not only to their Superstitions,
Idolatries, Heresies, and in a word, to all the abominations of Popery; but
also (which is a consequence of the former) to the perdition of the seduced
people, which perish in the deluge of their Catholic Apostasy.

Secondly, To grant them a toleration in respect of any money to be given, or
contribution to be made by them, is to set Religion to sale, and withal, the
souls of the people, whom Christ our Savior has redeemed with his most
precious blood.

And as it is a great Sin, it is a matter of most dangerous consequence. The
consideration whereof we leave to the wise and judicious: beseeching the
jealous God of truth to make all those who are in Authority zealous of Gods
glory, and the advancement of true Religion, and resolute and courageous
against all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry. AMEN.

To the READER.
THis Declaration of the Bishops of Ireland against Popery, howsoever fifteen
years ago, is now thought sit to be further published. If thou shall hear the
whole order taxed with a continual complying with the times, here thou shall
find them laboring against the stream; nay like such Prophets as God once
sought for standing in the gap. Ezekiel. 22.30.
If accused of Court pleasing; here thou see them hazarding the contrary. If
Laodicean like, of Lukewarmnesse in Religion; here thou find their zeal
burning. Art thou hot against Idolatry? these are enflamed, Art thou pulling
it down? these are razing the foundation thereof. Do thou account it
erroneous? these Heresy. Thou superstition? these Abomination. Thou abhorrest
the practice: they the Toleration. Popery and Episcopacie thou may see were
here far asunder. Let not the ornament therefore be wholly cast by, for a few
spots that may be washed out. Separate the Religious from the vile, and thou
shall be as Gods mouth. Jer. 15.19.


FINIS.

