A true and exact NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of the Parliaments Fleet,
against the Island OF BARBADOS.

With the manner of the Reducing thereof: Together with the submitting of the
Islands of St. Christophers, Antego, and St. Mevis, to the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND.

Written by an Eyewitness, Mr. T. H. from aboard the Amity, in Carlisle Bay,
and sent to a Friend in London, to be published for satisfaction, and printed
verbatim by the same Copy.



LONDON, Printed for Richard Harper in Smithfield, 165^.

An exact Narrative of the reducing of the Island of BARBADOS, etc.
IN July 1651. the Fleet appointed for the reducing of Barbados, under the
Command of Sir George Aiscough, set sail from Plymouth, viz. the Rainbow,
whereof Admiral Sir George Aiscough of 52 Guns, the Amity whereof Vice
Admiral Michael Pack of 36 Guns, the Su^ses whereof Captain Witheridge, the
Ruth whereof Captain Thomson, the Maliga Merchant whereof Captain Colin, the
Brazeel Frigot whereof Captain Heath, the Increase whereof Captain Varvill
with some Merchant men and Victuallers: this Fleet set sail from Plymouth the
27, of the month aforesaid, and at the beginning of August following we arrived
before Lisbone, where having stayed three days, and understanding that Prince
Rupert was not there, we departed from thence, and on the 26. of August we
arrived at the Cape Verde, where we stayed to refresh 11 days, and in regard
our beer stanke, we were constrained to throw it over board, and to fill our
Caskes with water; which having done, we proceeded on a direct course in our
voyage to Barbados, in which we were very long, by reason of the exceeding
heavy saying of some of our ships, viz. the Brazeel Frigot, the Increase, Ruth,
and Maliga Merchant, so that it was the 16. of October before we arrived at the
Barbados, early in the morning.

Being arrived as is before mentioned, Sir George Aiscough sent three ships,
viz. the Amity, Surses, and the Maliga Merchant, to take a view of Carlisle Bay,
the Body of the Fleet coming after with what speed they could into S. Austins
Bay; having before appointed, that if any occasion were for a remove to our
ships at Carlisle Bay, that the Amity should make a sign, which they said they
did, but it could not be seen by the Officer who was appointed to watch for the
same; however, presently after we saw those ships go into the Bay by one of the
Island Forts, and a Shalop came from them, and informed us thereof, and also of
their being fifteen sail of ships and Galiots in that Bay, whereupon Sir
George immediately commanded the whole Fleet to weigh Anchor, and fail down to
the Bay, and was met by a small Boat with a flag of Truce in her, and being
commanded to come on board us, they refused, whereupon we fetched them in, and
in her there was the Lord Wiloughby^^ Martial, whom we detained Prisoner; but
in the mean time the Shalop returning which came to us was twice shot at from
the Fort at Nedam point.

Whereupon Sir George commanded the Master of the Rainbow to sail as near the
Fort as possible he could for depth of Water, and so we came within half
Musket shot of the Fort, which presently gave us many shot. some of which took
place in our ships, but the whole Fleet lost but one man; but Sir George caused
the Rainbow to power a whole broad side upon them of no less then 26 great
shot, which (being so near) we believe was to purpose; also the rest of our
ships, as they passed by, shot at them many shot, and so we came all into
Carlisle Bay, where we found that our three ships (which we had before sent
thither) had seized on all the ships in the Bay, except three of the smallest,
who saved themselves by running a ground: thus we surprised 12 sail of ships
and Galliots, the which were all Dutch and Hamburgers. Sir George now caused
more men to be put aboard of every ship, and commanded them to be brought from
under the Command of the Forts, which were four in all, viz. the Fort at Spikes
Bay, the Fort at St. Austins Bay, the Fort at Carlisle Bay, and the Fort at
Nedam point; the next day we took another Dutch ship coming to Trade here, she
was a Vessel of 25 pieces of Ordnance, her lading also was of a considerable
value; those we had before taken in the Bay, were some of 18. 16. 12. and 10.
Guns, and some less; the Commanders of all these ships being on board us, they
had given them an empty Vessel to carry them to Antego, they earnestly
desiring the same.

After we had proceeded thus far in order to the reducing of this Island, and
not withstanding our tedious voyage, which was full 11. weeks, yet all our
people were in health, although by reason of our going to Portugal held so
southerly a course that we did expect some sickness, and then at our arrival
to surprise so many Vessels under all their Forts, with the loss only of one
man, although we exchanged many pieces of Cannon with them, all which we had
abundant cause to acknowledge were the Lords transcendant mercies unto us.

All this while the Lord Willoughby so little regarded our being here, as that
he with Col. Wolrond, Col. Mudiford, and other of his chief Officers continued
feasting of it 12 miles up in the Island; the cause of this their contempt of
us, (we heard) was because that some Dutch men (who arrived here a little
before us) had published about the Island, that before they came from Holland,
certain Intelligence was come thither, how that the Scotch King having rowted
the Lord General Cromwell in Scotland, was marched into England with an Army
of 40000 men, and that he was very near, or in London; and moreover, that our
Fleet was ran away from England, to seek for shelter in another place: and for
the better confirmation of it, they brought with them several printed Duch
Diurnals, all relating the same matter.

But now the Lord Willoughby hearing that his Martial was taken by us, first
sent a Message unto Captain Pack, thereby desiring the speedy release of his
said Martial but Captain Pack returned Answer, that Sir George Aiscough had
the Command of the Fleet, without whose Order his Lordships Martial could not
be released.

Whereupon his Lordship presently sent a Letter to Sir George, therein
signifying, that he having understood from Capt. Pack that his Martial
detained, could not be released without his Order, he therefore desired that
his said Martial might forthwith be released, and returned unto him with his
Trumpeter who brought his Lordships Letter; but Sir George returned this for
Answer, that his Martial being taken without his Lordships Pass, he therefore
desired to be excused, if at present he did not satisfy his Lordships request
in that particular.

Shortly after this Sir George sent a summons unto the Lord Wiloughby to this
effect, that the Island of Barbados being a Colony and Plantation, settled at
the cost, and planted by the people and Parliament of England, and ought
therefore to be subject to such Laws, Orders, and Regulations as are, and
shall be made by the Parliament of England; and whereas many Acts of Rebellion
had been committed among them, setting up themselves opposite to, and distinct
from the State and Common wealth of England, as was mentioned by an Act of
Parl. bearing date Sept. 1650. passed to that purpose.

And that the Parliament of the Common wealth of England, the supreme Authority
of that Nation, having taken the defection of that Island from their due
obedience into their consideration, had armed and set forth a greet Fleet of
Ships under his Command to endeavor (by the blessing of God) the reducing of
that Island; and being safely arrived there to prevent the ruin and
destruction of the Island, by such acts of hostility wherewith he was
sufficiently able to annoy them: he did therefore think fit to send unto his
Lordship this summons to deliver up to him the said Island of Barbados, with
all the Strengths, Fortifications, Ports, and places thereof, for the use of
the Parliament of England. The Lord Willoughby having received this summons,
returned a peremtory answer, to this effect.

That upon the arrival of Sir George his Messenger, he rather expected some
overture about our making reparation for those acts of hostility committed by
us, upon those ships in the Bay, and the person of his Martial, then such an
unreasonable demand, as in his estimation Sir George his summons was: and his
Lordship returned Answer, briefly thus: That he acknowledged no Authority over
English men, but the King; for whom, he said, he was resolved to defend and
keep the Island, unto the utmost of his strength and power; all which he
assured us was his firm resolution; withal directing it to, on board His
Majesty's ship the Rainbow.

Sir George finding now that the way of summons would produce no effect, and
not being then in capacity to attempt any thing on shore; he resolved to hinder
them from having any Trading at sea, and also to alarm them constantly, from
place to place about the Island, thereby to hinder them from planting and
managing their affairs in the Island; it being conceived that this way might
prove most conducible and effectual to bring them to their due obedience. And
to the end no rational opportunity might be left unassay'd by us, whereby we
might make this, then stubborn Island, know their obedience to their Lawful
Superiors, it was resolved that a Declaration should be drawn up and signed by
the Parliaments Commissioners, on board the Fleet, and sent it unto the
Islanders, the which Declaration was to this effect.

That they the Commissioners thought it not amiss to send unto them the
Gentlemen, Inhabitants, and free people of the Island of Barbados, the Copy of
a Summons sent unto the Lord Willoughby, upon our arrival before this Island;
from whom they having received no satisfactory Answer, and being tender of the
good and welfare of the Island, and being not willing to omit all amicable and
friendly ways to reduce it to its due obedience, before they proceeded to acts
of hostility; did think fit, to send the same or said summons unto them, viz
that the Island being a Plantation and Colony which ought to be subordinate to,
and depending upon the Common wealth of England; and had ever since the
planting thereof been, and ought to be, subject to such Laws, Orders, and
Regulations, as were or should be made, by, and derived from, the Parliament of
England: and whereas diverse acts of Rebellion had been committed by some
persons amongst them, setting up themselves in opposition unto and distinct
from the State and Common wealth of England; the Parliament of England, the
supreme Authority of that Nation, having taken into their consideration the
defection of the Island, from their due obedience, and resenting the burdens
and opprested estate the people of the Island then lay under, by the present
prevailing power over them: and they being studious to promote the peace and
welfare of the Island, under their power and protection, had not spared the
expense of a great sum of Treasure, to arm and set forth a great Fleet of
ships, though at a great distance of place, and having appointed themselves as
Commissioners, to endeavor by the blessing of God the reducing of the Island,
and to settle the peace and safety thereof, and to establish them in their
wonted privileges and immunities, as might conduce to the well being, and
flourishing state of the Island.

And that they being by the blessing of God in safety arrived here, had as much
as in them lay, endeavored to prevent the ruin and destruction of the Island,
by forbearing such acts of hostility, by which we were sufficiently able to
annoy them; not doubting but seeing their own liberty, and safety both of
their persons and estates; lay at stake, by their complying with such as were,
or should continue to be theirs and the enemies of the Commonwealth of England
then amongst them; but if they would so do, it would constrain us to use such
hostile ways to reduce the Island, as by which their long labored for
estates, and in joyments would be endangered; but rather that they would lay
hold on this opportunity, to regaine their freedom and wonted privileges, and
not rashly engage themselves in a quarrel against the Common wealth of
England; and at length instead of reaping the benefit and fruit of their many
years labor and industry in this so hopeful and flourishing an Island, make
it become the seat of War, the sad events and consequences thereof in the
Island, if God prevented not, they would be (when too late) sufficiently
sensible of, to the ruin of themselves and their posterities; whatever the
specious pretenses of any among them were, as if they minded the good and
welfare of the Island, and that they could not be ignorant, but they were
altogether unable to give them protection or liberty of freedom, without which
the Island could no way subsist, but in their due obedience to the Common
Wealth of England, whose Authority God has sealed, to the astonishment of
their Neighbor Nations, having wonderfully appeared for them in their Armies by
Land, and Navies by Sea, against their Enemies in England, Ireland, and
Scotland, the two former whereof, being by the blessing of God, on the
unwearied endeavors of the Parliament, with the expense of much blood and
treasure, settled in their long desired rest and Peace, from the bondage and
servitude they were so long held under, by Tyrannical Kingly power, and
government: and are become a Republic, a Free State: and that the foundation
of War having been by the same Enemy laid and carried on in Scotland, God has
there also wonderfully appeared for us, and brought that War to a narrow
compass, if not ere then to a period, the power of God being so eminently seen
in our Armies, as that the Enemy have not been able to stand before them. These
things the Commissioners laid before them, if they pleased to take them into
consideration, to prevent the effusion of blood, and a devastation of their
estates enjoyments, which inevitably would follow their contempt of timely
offers of peace and mercy: and that wherever the interest of the Commonwealth
of England lies, be it at never so great a distance, they would not be soon
wearied to lay out that power God has put into their hands, to reduce such to
their obedience, as shall obstinately stand out; but that they rather hoped
that the Lord, who is the searcher of hearts, and knew the bottom of their
designs, to be no other but to settle the Island in peace and happiness under
that Government, who is both willing and able to protect them against all
opposers, and that they hoped the Lord would so incline their hearts, that from
thenceforth they would be able to judge who were their real friends, and
decline giving their assistance to those evil affected persons, as should
persist in their rebellion, to involve them altogether in misery and
destruction; but rather use their best endeavors to suppress them; and in
their actings of this kind, they assured them that they might rely upon the
diligent assistance of the Fleet; and for the better effecting of those ends,
they desired to hold frequent intelligence with them, and for their further
encouragement, they did assure them indemnity to all such as should for the
future decline assisting the enemies of the Common wealth of England, then
among them, and endeavor to promote the reducement of the Island, to their
obedience under their government and protection.

This Declaration of the Commissioners being published about the Island, took
such impression upon the people of the Island, that in all probability the
Island had been ours without any further hostility, had they not been overawed
and kept under by the Lord Willoughby, and his Accomplices; so that they durst
not appear for us openly, they being (as they had great cause to be) very
sensible of the decay and want of Trade amongst them, in regard that no ships
durst venture to come and traffic with them, by reason of our being here; as
also their being continually kept upon watch and duty, to defend the Island
against us, whereby the Island was much impoverished, the planting and
n^^^uring of the Island being almost wholly neglected upon which account the
people would gladly have been freed, upon any rate, as afterward we found at
our Landing.

But now advertisement came unto Sir George Aiscough, how that the Governor of
S. Christophers was drowned, and that there was a contest between two persons
in that Island for the Government thereof. Sir George not knowing at present
how their affections stood, in reference to the Common wealth of England,
resolved with the Commissioners of Parliament to send a Declaration unto them,
to this effect:

That they being informed the Governor of that Island was carried away by a
flood, and that there was a contest between two persons among them, for the
Government of the Island, and they not knowing either of their, or the Island
affections to the Parliament of England; did therefore require them speedily to
give an account unto them, how the affairs of the Island stood, in reference to
their obedience to the Common wealth of England; and not to choose a Governor,
other then such as they should appoint: with this farther intimation, that in
case they did otherwise, such course should speeddy be taken with them, as
might make them sensible of their defection.

We having now been before this Island, from the 16 of October 1651 unto the 10
of November following, the greatest part of the which time we spent in
coasting, from place to place, about the Island, thereby to keep them in
alarums in all parts of the Island, hoping that way would conduce to the speedy
rendition of it; also within compass of the said time Sir George Aiscough sent
a second, and a third summons unto the Lord Willoughby, the which proving
ineffectuall, it was resolved at a Counsel of War, held on board the Rainbow
to attempt something ashore, at a place called the Spikes Bay; the which we
were now the better able to do, by the arrival of another Fleet of Merchants,
and some Men of War from England: and to the end aforesaid, a Regiment was
formed out of our ships, which consisted of 600. men, whereof 200. were Scots,
being some of those taken at the defeat at Worcester, and brought hither in the
Merchants ships aforesaid.

The Enemy having notice of our design, four hours before our landing, they
had nine Companies afoot, and three Troops of Horse, to oppose our landing at
that place; and our Boats being ready to set the men on shore forthwith stood
in for the Spikes bay; and having set the men on shore, the Enemy presently
gave a very resolute Charge upon them: but no sooner had we embraced their
onset, but we immediately fell in among them, and after a short, but hot
dispute, we routed their whole Brigade, their Commanders like persidious
Cowards ran away, and left the Foot engaged; who also retreated to their Fort
Royal: the which our men presently stormed, with the loss of nine men, and
some few hurt, as Col. Morris, who commanded our men; his Major, and some
others; the said Col. Morris did behave himself very gallantly, both at this
place, and also before at the reducing of the Isle of Scilly: the which we
performed, with the assistance of General Blake, in our Voyage hither: we
killed about 50. of the Enemy, and took about 1^0. Prisoners, 4 Pieces of
Ordnance, and razed down the Fort, and burnt many houses, the place not being
tenable.

Sir George again sent a Trumpeter, with another Summons to the Lord
Willoughby, the which produced a Treaty, and Hostages being given, Articles
were concluded on, viz. that the Islands of Barbados, St. Christophers,
Antego, and the Mevis, should be surrendered to the obedience of the
Commonwealth of England: that the Lord Willoughby, Col. Wolrond, Col.
Mudiford, and others of their Party should have protection for the enjoyment of
their Estates, either in England or elsewhere: and also be pardoned and
indemnified for all past by Actions, done or committed by any of them: that the
Inhabitants of the several Islands should be protected from the fury of the
sword, and to enjoy and live peaceably in their Habitations; acting nothing
prejudicial to the Government which should be established over them, by the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

And that Col. James Drax, Col. Lewis Morris, Sergeant Major Hilliard, Captain
Gregory, and all others, who had been banished the Island, and their Estates
sequestered for their good affection to the Commonwealth of England, should be
invested in all their Estates; notwithstanding the former Confiscation thereof;
and that restitution should be made unto them for all damages and losses which
they had sustained.

But now the Inhabitants of the Islands of St. Christophers, Antego, and St.
Mevis, hearing of the rendition of Barbados to us, did all of them immediately
send unto us, assuring us that they would cheerfully submit to the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England; and that they would be subject only to such
Laws, Orders, and Regulations, as the Parliament should please to impose upon
them: Also they desired us to appoint in the mean time such Governors over
them, as were of good integrity, and affection to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England.

Thus were all these remote Islands reduced to the obedience of the
Commonwealth of England, from which they revolted in the year, 1650. and
proclaimed Charles Stewart, King over them, and did accept of such Governors as
he appointed over them viz. Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham, Governor of
Barbados, who landed there in April. 1650. and with the assistance of Col.
Wolrord, and Col. Mudiford, and some other evil affected persons, he outed
Major Philip Bell, who was then Governor for the Parliament of England: and
also banished all those who would not join with them in their pernicious ways,
or take the oath which the said Lord Willoughby and his Associats had prepared
to administer, to the Inhabitants of the Island: the which they compelled every
man in the Island to take, upon pain of banishing their Persons, and
confiscating the Estates of all such as should refuse to subscribe thereunto:
but notwithstanding all this their sharp Rhethorick and violent dealing, yet
several conscientious persons of the best repute and quality in the Island, did
utterly refuse either to join with them, or take the Oath aforesaid, who were
therefore banished the Island, and their Estates sequestered wholly, both real
and personal; the chief of them who were thus proceeded against, were
Lieutenant Colonel James Drax, Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Morris, Sergeant Major
Hiliard, Captain Gregory with many others, whose names for brevity sake shall
be omitted: also the Governor appointed at the same time of Antego, was one
Poynz, formerly known in England by the name of General Poynz; those also who
were appointed Governors of the other Islands being of the same Royal Stamp,
were no whit behind the former in oppressing and tyrannizing over those people,
from all which they were happily delivered by the blessing of God upon the
endeavors of the Parliaments Fleet, Commanded by the worthy and right valiant
Sea Commander, Sir George Aiscough.

FINIS.

