A TRUE and JOYFUL RELATION Of two Famous

Battles fought against the Lord Marquess of Hartford, The first by the Earl
of Pembroke and the Earl of Bedfords Forces, being in Number. 800 foot, and
4000, horse, who having joined their Forces together, marched toward
Shereborn-castle and assaulted it, where the Marquess had strongly entrenched
himself, but after one day spent, obtained the Victory.

Together with the Earl of Pembrokes Proceedings in the County of VViltshite
Read in the House of Commons upon Friday, August 26. and immediately Ordered to
be printed, it being very joyful and delectable Tidings to all true
PROTESTANTS,

The second a Glorious Victory obtained by the Parliaments Forces against the
Cavaleeres near Norwich and Poole, with the Number of those that were slain on
both sides, and the Parliaments command to all Lieutenants in every several
county.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be
forthwith printed and published.

John. Brown. Cler. Parl.



Printed for R. Watkins August 27. 1642.

A FAMOUS BATTLE FOVGHT BETWIXT THE TRAINED Band of Poole in the county
Dorsetshire, and the Lord Marquess of Hartford, August 25.
LOng has the Proceedings of the Marquess of Hartford struck terror in the
county of Sommerset, but seeing that he could not prevail in those parts, he
then marched with speed toward Dorchester and Poole, with a great Number of
men, who coming there, he desired and propounded these following Proposition
unto the Major and Citisens of Poole.

I. That they would deliver and resign up the Town unto him, and in so doing,
his Majesty would account them true, and Loyal Subjects, and esteem of them
hereafter accordiig to their Deserts.

II. That as his Majesty has bin pleased to Grant unto him the Title and to
make him Lord Lieutenant General of all Wales, Dorsetshire, Sommersetshire,
etc. yet thought no place so fit to entertain his Greatness as Pool, therefore
he desired them to surrender up the town but they would not.

Whereupon they immediately fell to blows, but after some two hours fight, the
Marquess had the worst out, having lost a great Number of men in the said
Skirmish.

Upon Wednesday last being, the 24 of this instant month of August, information
was given by Letters from Norwich, that some of the Cavaleers belonging to the
Kings Army came to tge said town upon Tuesday last putting themselves in battle
array against it, but before they could assault it, the Parliament Forces
marched against them, charging very courageously against them also, and within
the space of two hours, there was slain of the Cavaleers about 30, which very
little loss on the other side.

Whereupon the House fell into consideration of hastening away more Forces to be
sent to assist those that are gone already.

The Earl of Pembroke is gone down into Wilsshire, and does oppose all those
that stands against the Parliament, he having the assistance of the whole
county expressing their willingness toward him, and has also sent him 800.
Horse with men well armed, so that the Earl does not fear the whole Army of
Cavaleers,

There was also upon this instant month of August, many skirmishes in
Dorsetshire, betwixt the Inhabitants thereof and the Marquess of Hartford, the
Proceedings whereof, are here in this ensuing Relation made manifest, the
Commons House of Parliament having information of the same, as is plainly
related in these ensuing Particulars.

Upon the 22. of this instant month of August. information was given to the
House of the Resolution of the Marquess of Hartford to ceize upon the Magazine
at Dorchester and Poole, but the said Town have bravely fortified themselves,
and have mounted above 30. pieces of Ordnance against thhe said Marquess,
laboring and endeavoring daily to make trenches to prevent the Designs of the
Marquess and his followers, and the said Marquess is in great Fear, that the
Earl of Pembroke, and the Earl of Bedford will come so strong against them,
that they shall not be able to resist their Force, the said Earls having in
Number about 800. Horse, and 4000 Foot, and as it is credibly reported are
marched in a full Body toward Shereborn Castle, being resolved to lay siege
against the same.

But it is thought that the Marquess is extraordinary strong, and has set
down his Resolution to resist and venture his life against all those that shall
offer or presume so far to oppose him having command from his Majesty to
raise all Forces that he possible can, for the safety of the Kingdom.

Yet the Earls of Pembroke and Bedford having joined their Forces, marched
toward the said Castle of Shereborn, and assaulted it, insomuch that there
insued a great and bloody battle betwixt the Marquess and the Earls Forces,
where having spent the greatest part of the day in hot service one against the
other, the Marquess sounded a parley, where having some consultation thereupon,
the fight was referred rill another day, and it is thought that about the 29.
of this month they have a general meeting, where they are resolved to fight a
pitched Battle.

And although his Majesty at the raising of his Army from before Coventry gave
them 3. days Respit for the Rendering it up; yet it is thought the Cavaleers
will scarce come again to demand it, for as yet it is not certainly known
which way they are gone, many of them being lately fled from Warwick, and it is
Reported by some that come out of those parts, that the Earl of Northampton
will fly away before the Parliament Forces come thither, although they are not
above six miles from Warwick.

It is declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that all
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and other His Majesty's Officers, and loving
Subjects, shall aid and assist his Excellence the Earl of Essex, as need shall
require, in defense of His Majesty's Subjects from all oppression and violence
with the power of the Counties and Trained Bands.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be
forthwith printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.


