A true and perfect Relation of the Grand Traitors Execution, as at several
times they were Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered at Charing-crosse, and at Tiburne.
Together with their several Speeches and Confessions which every one of them
made at the time of their Execution.
depiction of the execution of regicides

THe Doctrine and the Practice of deposing and destroying Kings being merely
derived from the Principles of the Jesuits (as most abundantly may be shown if
we had either the room or the leisure of giving you a Catalogue of their
horrible Positions;) we shall at this time wave that unpleasing Enquiry, and in
the first place give you an Account of the Trial and Execution of many of
those persons, who in the year, 1648 entered into an abominable Conspiracy for
the taking away the life of our late dread Sovereign Charles the First, whose
Memory (for all the bloody Endeavors of his Assassinates) shall be blessed for
evermore.

The Sentence against the King being pronounced on Saturday, Jan. 27. 1648: And
all the Members of the said Court standing up, and assenting to what was
pronounced by the President by the holding up of their hands; the King offered
to speak for himself but was not sufferd

Monday following, Sir Hardresse Waller, Maj. Genesis Harrison, Col. Ireton, Col.
Dean, and Col. Okey were appointed to consider of the Time and Place for the
Execution of the King according to the Sentence.

On the Tuesday being the Fatal Day of the Execution, His Majesty continued in
prayer all the morning, and received the Sacrament; And about Ten of the Clock
in the Forenoon, he was conducted on foot from St. James's Palace to White Hall
by a Regiment of Foot Soldiers, part before Him and part behind Him, with
Colors flying, and Drums beating, and a private Guard of Part^zans about him;
Doctor Juxon Bishop of London was next unto him on the one fide, and Col.
Tomlinson on the other; being come to Whitehall he continued in his Cabinet
chamber at his Devotions refusing to Dine, only about Twelve a clock he Eat a
bit or two of bread, and drank a Glass of Claret Wine; From thence he was
conveyed to the Banqueting House, and the window being enlarged he passed
through it to the Scaffold, the Rayls being hung round, and the Floor covered
with Black, His Executioners were disguised with Vizards which nothing at all
affrighted his Majesty. He showed more care of the people living, then of
himself dying: And looking round about upon the people, whom the thick Guards
of Soldiers kept at a great distance, and perceiving he could not be heard by
them, omitting (probably) what he purposed to have spoken to them, he turned to
the Officers that on the Scaffold were near unto him, and expressed himself in
a short, and excellent Speech, which being ended he meekly kneeled down and
prayed; And afterward, after some heavenly Discourse betwixt the Bishop and
Himself, He lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and mildly prayed; And stooping down
to the Block, He most humbly bowed his neck to God, and the vizarded
Exceutioner cut off his head at one Blow. Thus fell King Charles, and thus fell
all Britain with Him.

We have hitherto given you an account what these barbarous persons have done,
we shall now represent unto you the most just judgments which after 12 years
forbearance, a great part of them have suffered, and which many more of them
are condemned to suffer for this horrible Murder they have committed.

On the beginning of the month of May, there were Remonstances presented to the
House of Lords then sitting in Parliament, both from Ireland and from Scotland
demanding Justice for the most horrid, and unparallelled Murder committed on
the Sacred Person of the late King. And on Friday the 18. of May upon complaint
made by the Commons in Parliament, an order was issued from the house of Lords,
that the Estates both Real, and Personal of those persons who sat in
Judgment upon the late Kings Majesty (whether in their own hands, or in the
hands of any in trust) be forthwith seized and secured, and they agreed also
upon the Names and number of those persons who were to be exempted from pardon.

Not long afterward several of them came in, and surrendered themselves in
Expectation of mercy, diverse of them being Guilty of their Horrible Conspiracy
fled beyond the Seas, and diverse of them were taken and committed to the Tower
of London in order to their Trial.

On Saturday September 22, His Majesty sent out a Proclamation for the
apprehending of Col. Whaley and Col. Goffe who were exempted from pardon by Act
of Parliament, as Traitors for their execrable treason in sentencing to Death
our late Sovereign King Charles the first of blessed memory; it was there
declared that whosoever should discover the said Traitors, and cause them to be
brought in alive, or dead (in case of resistance should have a reward of 100 l.
for each of the said Traitors, and it was ordered that a reward of 300 l.
should be faithfully paid to any that should apprehend Col. Edmund Ludlow.

On Monday October 8. Was the long expected Trial of many of the Judges of our
late Sovereign Lord King Charles. Sir Orlando Bridgeman in an Eloquent and a
learned speech at Hicks his Hall, having set forth the haniousnesse of their
Guilt, the Bill of Indictment was ^ound by (...) which consisted of Knights and
Gentlemen of the County of Middlesex, and on the Wednesday following twenty
eight of them were conveyed in several Coaches, from the Tower to Newgate;
They were attended with a Troop of Horse, and a strong Guard of Foot. They had
not been long in Newgate but by a private way they were brought before the most
honorable Lords and others of his Majesty's Commissioners in Justice-hal in
the Old Bailey. The Names of those that were Prisoners were.

Thomas Harrison, Tho. Scot. John Cook, Hugh Peter's, John Carew, Francis
Hacker, Rob. Titchburn, Rob. Lilburn, Henry Marten, Sir Har: Waller. W.
Hevenningham, Henry Smith. Edmund Harvey, John Downs. Gregory Clement, John
Jones. Adrian Scroop. Daniell Scroop. Simon Meyn. Peter Temple, James Temple.
Thomas Wait, George Fleetwood. Vincent Potter, Owen Roe. Isaac Pennington,
Gilb. Millington, August. Garland.
Sir Hardres Waller confessed himself guilty, so did Mr. George Fleetwood, who
pleaded his Majesty's Proclamation, having submitted himself to it within 14
days But Major Gen Harrison who in the way from the Tower to Newgate had
showed some tokens of a very insolent spirit did behave himself with the same
boldness when he was brought to the Bar, for he refused to hold up his hand at
the Bar, and the Judges prompting him to his duty, he at the last said I
conceive it to be but a formality, and therefore am contented to do it, being
demanded guilty or not guilty, he did fly out oftentimes into impertinencies,
but at the last being made sensible of the great danger into which his
obstinacy did threaten to bring him, he replied not Guil^y.

Alderman Robert Titchburn desired he might have Council assigned him,
Alleging that there would be matter of Law in his Case, but the Council
assuring him that neither Council nor any thing else could be granted him
until he answered Guil^y, or not Guilty, he at the last replied not Guilty.

Henry Marten pleading the Act of Indemnity, it was told him that he was an
Exempted person, but Alleging that his Name was mistaken, and that he
conceived all penal Laws were to be taken literaly, he was at the last
satisfied in his error, and pleaded not guilty.

Robert Lilburn did refuse to answer, and would seem to stand out to Law, but
the Judges telling him how little the law would make for him, he said not
guilty.

John Carew would give no answer till his Majesty's Atturny General told him
that he should be recorded for his stubborn silence, whereupon he said not
guilty.

Thomas Scot, Tho. Wait, and Dan. Axtell, did all refuse to answer to their
Indictments, but being urged to it by the necessity of incurring a greater
danger, they answered not Guilty.

Hugh Peter's being demanded to answer, whether he was Guilty, or not Guilty,
did lift up his eyes and hands toward Heaven, and said, Guilty? no, not for
ten Thousand Worlds.

All the rest upon the first demand replied not Guilty.

On the day following Major Genesis Harrison was brought again to the Bar where
after the impanelling of three Juries before he could be satisfied in them, he
was Indicted for Imagining and Contriving the Late Kings Death, which was
proved by his presence when the sentence was pronounced, and by his signing and
sealing the Warrant for his Execution, he did break out into many impertinent
discourses, and answering nothing material for himself, the Jury without
stirring from the Ear did find him Guilty, for which he was condemned to suffer
as a Traitor.

On the day following, John Carew, Mr. Scot, Mr. Scroop, Mr. Gregory Clement,
and Mr. Jones, were all of them brought to the Bar and tried, and the Charge
against them being proved by many Witnesses, they were all found guilty, and
condemned in the same words to suffer death, as was Maj. Genesis Harrison the day
before.

THE next day being Saturday, Maj. Genesis Harrison was drawn upon a Hurdle from
Newgate to the Round, or railed Place near Charing Cross, where a Gibbet was
set, upon which he was Hanged. Many of his acquaintance did seem to triumph to
see him die so Confidently; whiles numbers of true Christians did grieve in
earnest to see him die so impenitently. We have been told, that when he took
his leave of his wife, he comforted her, and told her that he would come again
in three days; but we hear nothing as yet of his Resurrection. When he was half
hanged, he was cut down and quartered, his bowels burned, and his head severed
from his body to be disposed at his Majesty's pleasure.

This day Mr. John Cook was brought to the Bar, he excepted against none of his
Jury as Maj. Genesis Harrison did the day before. His Indictment being read he
spoke many things very pertinently in his own defense, but being to clear
himself as to life, the Jury without stirring from the Bar, gave in their
Verdict, that he was guilty, and Sentence past upon him as on the former.

Hugh Peter's being brought to the Bar, and his Indictment read, had very many
Witnesses that were ready to give in their Evidences against him, and being not
able to contradict their Truth, the Jury gave in their Verdict, and the same
Sentence was pronounced on him as was before on Mr. Cook.

I made mention before that the Doctrine of the Seminaries of the Sectaries is
the very same, as to Regicide, as is the Doctrine of the Seminaries of the
Jesuits. John Carew who being condemned on Saturday, was on Monday, October. 15.
drawn upon the Hurdle to Execution some hours before his departure out of the
Dungeon of Newgate, was heard in his prayer (which he spoke loud enough to show
either his blind zeal, or bold Rebellion) to express these words. Take the
Scepter out of the hands of earthly Kings, and rout their Armies. Like John of
Leyden, and others of the same stamp; he quoted many places out of the
Revelations which were never rightly understood by the best of that Sect, and
is very likely not to be fit Texts to be expounded by Traitors. It is a sad
thing for a dying man to add more Coals to that Fire which by the Laws of
Nature and Christianity he is bound to extinguish. If I hear the Truth, one
thing is observable, that this Traitor, who had so red a hand in the taking
away the life of the King, did contribute also to the taking away of the life
of his own Brother, who some years before was Executed on Tower Hill, for
endeavoring to assist the Cause of the King.

On the same day and much about the same Time, Col. Axtell was arraigned in the
Old Bailey; many and heavy Charges were brought in against him, The whole Trial
(the Witnesses being many, and all of them tending to show what an obstinate
spirit he had against the King) did take up the space of three hou^es; but the
Jury (observing how fully the Charge was proved) without any more deliberation
gave in their Verdict that he was Guilty.

After him Col. Hacker appeared, who of himself confessed that he signed the
Warrant for the Execution of his Majesty, but pleaded withal that he was drawn
in by the Artifice of that Arch-Incendiary Oliver Cromwell. The Jury without
any more ado brought in their Verdict against him, and the same Sentence of
Condemnation passed upon him, as on the former.

Immediately after him William Howlet or Hewlet, who was one of the disguised
persons in a Frock on the Scaffold who gloried that he executed the King, had
his Charge and Indictment read, And the Jury on the Trial of this man did
withdraw themselves, and after a little Consultation they found him guilty, and
accordingly Sentence was pronounced against him.

On Tuseday October 16. Mr Cook was drawed on a Hurdle from Newgate to Charing
Cross, to suffer the pains of Death for his Execrable Treason; he showed much
contrition of spirit, and taking notice that Hugh Peter's was there and to be
Executed next after, he heartily wished that he might be reprieved, being as he
conceived, not prepared to Dye.

And indeed it is very remarkable, that Hugh Peter's who heretofore had
expressed himself a violent Enemy against the Letany, and for this Reason
(amongst some others) that it taught to pray against sudden death, should now
at the Hour of his Death, and after many weeks imprisonment be himself so
unprovided, as to be pitied by all that knew him, and to have such violent
distempers that he was fitted neither for Life nor Death.

He came to the Ladder unwillingly, and by degrees was drawn up higher, and
higher. Certainly he had many Executioners within him; he leaned upon the
Ladder being unwilling to part from it, but being turned off, the spectators
gave a great shout, as they did when his Head was cut off, and held up a loft
upon the point of a Spear. The very Soldiers themselves whom heretofore he did
animate to slaughter, and a thorough Execution of their Enemies were now
ashamed of him, and upon the point of their Spears showed that guilty head
which made them guilty of so much blood.

On this day Sir Hardresse Waller, Hen. Marten, Jsaac Pennington, Will.
Hevenningham, Gilb. Millington, Rob. Tichburn, Owen Roe, Rob. Lilburn, Hen.
Smith, Edmund Harvey, J. Downs, Vincent Potter, August. Garland, George
Fleetwood, Simon Meyn, James Temple, Peter Temple, and Thomas Wait were
Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered; but the Execution of their
sentence was suspended until the King by the advice of his Lords and Commons
in Parliament, shall order the Execution accordingly to be passed.

On Wednesday October. 17. Tho. Scot, Greg. Clement, Adrian Scroop, and John
Jones, were drawn on several hurdles to the aforesasd place of Chering Cross.
Mr. Scot did seem to have wept abundantly, for his eyes were Red with
penitence; but coming to the place of Execution, he seemed to take new
Courage, and for the same cause to dye with the same confidence as heretofore
has been practiced and prescribed by the Jesuits of Rome. Gregory Clement,
seemed to express much sorrow and much repentance, acknowledging that his
Judges had done nothing but according to the Law, and that he most justly
suffered both by God and Man.

Adrian Scroop, dyed full of the confession of his enormous fault, and desired
the prayers of all good people. He prayed to God to forgive his Accusers.

Col. John Jones, all along as he was upon the Sledge desired the prayers of
all beheld him; being come to the place of execution, he confessed that if he
were in his Majesty's condition he should do no less then his Majesty did.
Dying he prayed for his Majesty, and the happiness of his Kingdom.

On Friday October. 19. Col. Hacker heretofore of Horse, and Col. Axtell of Foot
were drawn upon the Fatal Hurdle from Newgate to Tyburn, Col. Hacker did speak
but little, that which he said was to excuse himself, and to lay open the
error of his Judgment, he had a paper in his hand (intended as it seems to
speak for him, weakly declaring that he was an Officer in the Army, in which
too peremtorily he endeavored to discharge his Trust.

Col. Axtell said that he was drawn to this War very unwillingly, First in the
time of the Earl of Essex, and afterward under the command of the L. Fairfax,
under both which Authority he was a Commissionated Officer, yet notwithstanding
he did nothing of himself, but was advised to what he did by a Minister, who
told him it was the cause of God, and upon which account he endeavored to do
his work. Col. Hacker was only Hanged, but Col. Axtell being cut down was
Quartered.

Thus we plainly may perceive how the Kings of Christendom are daily crucified
(as Christ their Lord was) between two Thieves the Jesuits and the Sectaries,
who have designed all those Princes to destruction, whom in their own
Traiterous and Irreligious Hearts they have condemned for Tyranny. I hope
neither Peers nor people for the time to come will be so fond to believe them,
or so wicked to follow them. God in his great mercy grant us all of his spirit
of Truth, to direct us in all Loyalty, that being not seduced by these
seditious Sectaries we may stand fast in Obedience, embrace Love, and follow
Peace. Amen

London, Printed for William Gilbertson. 1660.


