A True and Perfect RELATION OF THE TAKING OF A GREAT SHIP at Yarmouth, October
4. Sent from the Queen out of Holland to the Kings Majesty, wherein was ten
pieces of Ordnance, 50. Barrels of powder, and 100. and 50. Commanders, as it
was informed to the House of Commons, October. 6.

Also Her Majesty's Letter to the King, Read before the Committee, October the
sixth, which letter was taken in the said ship at Yarmouth.

Likewise the manner of Master Hothams taking of Keywood Castle in Yorkshire,
since the agreement of the laying down of Arms in that County. With the
Instructions from the House to the Lord Willoughbie of Parham, to aid and
assist the said M. Hotham against the Earl of Cumberland.

October 7. Prinred for H. Blake, 1642.

A TRUE RELATION OF The taking of a ship sent from the Queen out of Holland to
his Majesty, October the 4.
ON Thursday the sixth of October, a packet of Letters was brought to the House
of Commons, and from thence referred to the close Comittee for the defense of
the Kingdom, which came from Yarmouth, and came out of Holland from the Queen
which were intercepted in this manner, viz.

The Queen of England having bought a ship with her own money, sent the same
over into England with ten pieces of Ordnance, and forty or fifty barrels of
powder, and a hundred and fifty Cavaleers which were to land at New Castle, and
from thence to be conveyed to his Majesty, the King of Great Britain.

But when the said ship come near to New Castle, she was driven in at YARMOVTH
by a contrary wind, and when the Cavaleers that were in the said ship perceived
that there was no remedy, but that they must come into Yarmouth, where they
knew they should be searched, and all their intentions made frustrate, they
began to bethink with themselves, that it was better to dro^vad all their
Letters, then to put it to the hazard of having all their Secrets come to
light,

And thereupon they agreed, that they would sink their Packet of Letters in the
Sea, before they came to Land,

And for the better effecting of this, they put into the packer two or three
bullets, and so threw them into the Sea, which being perceived by a Fisherman
that was in a small boat near to the ship, the said Fisherman dived after it
into the Water being well acquainted with the depth of the Waters in that
place) and took up the said Packet of Letters, and presented them to the
Governors of Yarmouth.

VVhereupon the said Governors immediately resolved to send them to the
Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT the great Council of this Kingdom, which was
this present day being the sixth of this instant month of October presented to
the house of Commons, the worthy Members of the said House gave order and
Command, that they should be referred to the close Committee, which was
accordingly performed, and at the opening of the same, there was one Letter
sent from the Queen in HOLLAND to the Kings most excellent Majesty, as
follows.

That her Majesty intends to be in England very speedily, having fourteen of
the Hollanders ships ready provided for her conduct into ENGLAND, together with
diverse other Letters, the particulars whereof are not as yet known.

It was also informed to the House, that the said ships and the Cavaleers, and
other provision of War that were in the said ship were seized upon at
Yarmouth, and there detained custody, until they receive further Directions
from the Parliament,

This is the true and perfect Relation that came to both Houses upon Thursday,
being the sixth of October.

A true Relation of Master Hothaws taking of Keywood Castle.
THis day News came to the House out of Yorkshire, that Master Hotham
disclaimed any consent or agreement to the Articles of a peace between the
Earie of Comberland and the Lord Fairefax and the rest of the Gentry of the
County of York: And that for said agreement Master Hotham with his Forces
took the Town of Selby, and has stopped the passage of all boats to York,
and taken a strong Castle called Keywood, belonging to the Bishop of that
Diece, and resolves to maintain his Majesty's Pretogative, the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, the Laws of the Kingdom and the Liberty and
propriety of the subject according to the Instructions sent unto them of that
County from the Parliament, he being of opinion, that the Articles agreed upon
are prejudicial to the whole Kingdom, and of that County in particular, and
that no one County ought to withdraw themselves from the common cause, bue to
aim with the Parliament in the defense of the Kingdom, and with them to
labor by all good means to procure a general peace and protection from the
King, for all his subjects with both the Houses of Parliament, have by many
humble Petitions desired by His Majesty but cannot yet obtain.

And according to the Parliaments Declaration, if they should suffer any
particular Counties to divide themselves from the rest of the Kingdom, it will
be a means to bring all to tuine and destruction, and therefore the said Mr.
Hotham is ready with those forces that he brought with him from Hull to assist
the Parliament in this cause which news was very acceptable to the House, in
regard that they had voted the said agreement to be void, because it was
destructive to the peace of the Kingdom, and agreed that the L. Willoughby of
Parham in Linc^l^shire, should make all the speed he could possible to aid and
assist Mr. Hotham and the rest of the County of York that are well affected to
the proceedings of Parliament against the Earl of Comberland* for the settling
of the peace of that County.

FINIS.

