A True and Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE Birth, Parentage, Education, Life and
Conversation OF Edmund Audley, Who was Executed at Tyburn on Wednesday the 22d.
of June, School. for the Barbarous Murder of Mrs. Hannah Bullevant in St.
Martins le Grand, near Aldersgate.

AS ALSO, An Account of his Marriage with a Ministers Daughter at Exeter; the
occasion of his leaving her, and his coming to London; with other strange
passages of his Life from his Birth, to the time of his shameful Death.

To which is added, The Particulars of his Trial and Condemnation; as also his
Disputes with several Divines in Newgate, together with his Speech and
Confession at the place of Execution.

(...)ikewise, An Account of the sad Accident that happened at his going out of
Newgate, by the Fall of St. Pulchers-Church-Wall, which killed several Persons,
and dangerously wounder many others.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed by J. R. in Little Britain, School.

A True and Impartial Account of the Birth, Parentage, Life and Conversation of
Edmund Audley, etc.
MR. Edmund Audley was Born at Swansey (it being a Seaport in Clamorganshire
in Wales) Anno 1661. His Father Mr. Humphrey Audley being a Merchant, who dealt
in most sorts of Commodities, and lived in good Credit and Reputation, being no
less beloved than well known in those parts, having two Sons and two Daughters,
the eldest of the Sons was this Edmond, to whom he gave good Education, in
order to qualify him for the management of his business in the way of
Merchandising. However, finding his Inclinations wholly bent to Learning, and
seeing he had improved himself therein, so far as to attain Arithmetic, fair
Writing, and several parts of the Mathematics; his Father advised him to keep
a School in Swansey, which he willingly assented to, and accordingly continued
in that Station with indifferent success for two or three years; but being of a
mutable and unsettled Fancy, he desired of his Father to procure him a place of
Residence at Exeter, ^ order for a School there, which in a short tim^ was
effected, and that seemingly to his satisfactio(...) However, he had not been
long in Exeter befo(...) he fell in Love with a Beautiful Young Wom(...)
Daughter to an Nonconformist Minister, whose Father had a respect for him, upon
the account of his Parents, whom he knew, but not so much as to make him his
Son in Law, which Mr. Edmond perceiving, and knowing the Maid had a more than
ordinary Love for him, took the advantage of the Old Gentleman's absence one
Evening, and stole her away privately in the Night; And the next Morning three
or four Miles from thence, was Married together, contrary to the knowledge of
her Father and Mother: Which news, though very unwelcome to them, yet considering
it was past Remedy, they instantly sent for their Son and Daughter, and in
short, a Reconciliation was made, and Mr. Audley and his Bride were admitted
into the number of their Family, where they lived lovingly together for some
time, till a strange Whimsey (or rather Jealous Humor) possessed his Noddle,
that his Wife was Disloyal, though he could never show any just ground for that
suspicion, yet his Jealousy increasing, (it being a Fire which is sooner
kindled, than extinguished) he secretly made a motion to some Ministers for a
Divorcement; but not being able to give a just Reason for such a separation,
his Motion was not only rejected, but himself much reproved, for having such an
unworthy opinion of an Innocent and Virtuous Woman (for so she was generally
esteemed) However, being much perplexed, he takes a Horse, (some say without
leave) it being in the Year 1695. and comes to London, leaving his Wife with
Child, who no sooner understood of his rude and abrubted departure, but
miscarried, and soon after dyed.

I shall omit particularizing his undecent Behavior toward her before his
departure, and of his attempting to sell her, being loath to reflect too much
upon the unhappy Memory of this unfortunate Person, and that chiefly for the
sake of his Father and Mother, who at the writing hereof were both living at
the place aforesaid, being very Godly, Religious, and honest People.

Being come to London, he much frequented the Company of the Dissenting Clergy,
and used all the endeavors possible to advance himself to the Ministry, having
procured a Letter from an Eminent Nonconformist Minister of the West of
England, by way of Recommendation to Mr. James, whose Meeting is in
Nightingale-Lane in East-Smithfield, where he was admitted to Preach several
times; and was also introduced to Preach several times in many Presbyterian
Meetings in and about London, particularly in Southwark, etc. However, having
no fixed Station assigned him, he at last became Usher to a School near
Eastcheap, where his Revenue only amounted to 5 s. per Week and Diet; but his
Pride and lofty Spirit soon put him out of that mean (though honest) Employ,
often saying (to use his own Expressions) That he was called to proclaim the
Gospel; but whether with Sword and Pistol, I leave the Reader to judge, for he
was often observed b^ his Landlady (where he lodged about a twelve Month since)
to threaten several Persons (whom ^e called Traitors and Conspirators) with
se^ere punishments, if he could bring his Business about, which in part he
performed upon the Person of Mrs. Bullivant, as hereafter will appear.

Having ofren frequented many Meeting Houses, and Preached in others, he of
late much used to come to Mr. Dolittle's meeting in Silver-street; and we
under^^and by his own Confession since, that he much observed one Mrs, Hannah
Bullivant, pretending that she was in a Plot against the King and Government,
though I believe there is more in it than he has declared) he goes to Mr. Tailor
a Gun-Smith near Algate, and asked him, If a Gentleman had not been there over
Night for a pair of Pistols; and being answered in the Affirmative, he said he
came for them, and in short, they made a Bargain. During which time, Mr. Audley
behaved himself like a warey Buyer, and not like one distracted, as the
Gun-Smith made Oath of at his Trial: Having paid for them, he gets suitable
Ammunition, and a Sword by his side, as also a Lathing-Hammer in his Britches,
and goes sometime after to the Meeting House in Silver-street, where he finds
Mrs. Bullivant, his pretended King-killer, but whether he minded the Sermon or
Mrs. Bullivant most, may be easily judged by the following discourse.

The Meeting being done, out comes Audley to watch for this supposed
Traytoriss, but not being willing to put his barbarous design in Execution,
where so many People were together, (as fearing to kill the Righteous with the
Wicked,) he followed her till she went into a Shop in Silver-street, where
having occasion to stay about half an hour, Audley walked backward and forward
till she came out, and then he dogged her into Saint Martins le Grand, near
Aldersgate, where seeing the Street clear of People, fired one of his Pistols
at her which though it missed, yet the noise so affrighted her (being so nigh)
that she ran directly into a Glovers Shop at the Corner of Bell-Court, where he
closely followed her, and Shot her dead with the other Pistol upon the place;
whereupon he was seized, and that Evening being the first of June, was by Sir
Edward Clark committed to Newgate, where he remained till Thursday, June the
9th. at which time he was brought to the Bar a^ the Old Bailey, where he was
Indicted for the aforesaid Barbarous Murder, who after the Jury was called and
sworn, had the boldness (or rather Impudence) to except both against Judges and
Jury too, telling the Cour^ That they were concerned in a Plot and Conspiracy
against the King, and therefore he appealed to the King and Council to be
tried: Adding, That he would not be tried by those wh^ were Enemies to the King
and Government. However, the Court rejecting his frivolous and trifling
Arguments proceeded to his Trial. And being asked whether Guilty or not? he
said, He owned that he killed the Woman, but pleaded Not Guilty of the Murder,
alleging, That the deceased was (with several others) concerned in a Plot to
take away the King's Life, and tha^ he had been at several Magistrates (whom he
named in order to have her and others Apprehended, and finding no Warrant could
be obtained, and the King and Nation in danger, he conceived it lawful in such
a desperate case to execute Justice himself. Whereupon four Evidences
successively were called, who depose^ That the Prisoner pursued Mrs. Bullivant,
shooting o^^ Pistol at her in St. Martins near Aldersgate, and afte^wards
followed her into a Glovers Shop in Bell-Co^^ and there shot her on the left
side of the Body, of whi^^ Wound she immediately dyed: And further depose^ That
he said that he had killed Queen Mary, who ha^ been there Incognito, and that
he endeavored to escape. ^^^ther Evidences deposed, That they had several
times ^^^rd the Prisoner Preach at Meeting Houses, and ne^^^er could perceive
either in his Behavior or Discourse, that he was any ways troubled with
Madness, Frenzey, ^r any thing like being Craiz'd or Distracted. And ^eing
asked some Questions of his knowledge, relating ^o the particulars of his
Pretended Plot, he said, That ^f he made Confession in Court, it was the way to
have the ^lotters escape: But added, that he knew of 30 Wagon ^oad of Arms
which was brought into the City for the late King James 's Service one morning
before day, and that he ^ad seen the Prince of Wales in the Lobby Chamber; and
that he had killed the Woman, supposing her to be the late Queen, having seen
her often at Mr. Dolittle 's Meeting-^ouse. But being told that King James's
Queen was of (...) contrary Religion to come to a Meeting House. He ^eplyed,
That the very Devils could transform themselves unto Angels of Light. However,
the Evidence being ^lain and full, the Jury thereupon brought him in Guilty of
Wilful Murder; and on the Monday follow^ng he received Sentence of Death for
the same.

His Conference with several Divines, during his Confinement in Newgate some
Days before Execution, concerning the Barbarous Murder of Mrs. Bullivant.

A Learned Divine of the Church of England told him. That by ^his cruel
Murder, he had stained the Christians Religion he professed. He replied, That
though many apprehended it to be a Bloody Fact, yet ^e thought otherwise of it,
by reason he thought that Mrs. Bullivant was in a wicked Conspiracy against the
present Government. But being told, A private Person ought not to have killed
her, but rather have accused her in some Lawful Court of Justice. He said, He
conceived the Fact to be no Murder, by reason his Conscience stirred him up to
perform it. But he was told, That was a wicked and Devilish (...)word. And
further asked him, Whether any one had hired him to ^urther her. He answered in
the Negative. And being further ^^^stion'd, What was the grounds of his Malice
against her? He ^^^^rly replied, That he would give no further Account than
what he had done already. And seemed much to depend upon his ^^^ceited
knowledge, and continued very sullen and obstinate, though (...) way resembling a
Lunatic, or distracted Person, either in Di^^^^ or Behavior, as Dr. Bedford
and several other Divines can witness.

On the 22d of June, about Noon, Mr. Edmond Audley was conve^ed from Newgate to
Tyburn in a Cart with two other Criminals; (...) appeared very obstinate and
wilful for a considerable time, who b^ing asked; What induced him to kill Mrs.
Bullivant? He said, He d^^ it for the common good of the Kingdom: And continued
to repeat h^^ former Whimsical Stories of a Plot against the King; and upon the
Ordinary's telling him, That 'twas supposed he killed her upon h^^ preventing
his Marriage with a Young Gentlewoman. He said, was very false, and added, that
there was a Conspiracy to bring in t^^ late King James; wishing, that he had an
oppertunity to declare his mi^^ to the King about it, adding that he knew
several of the Plotters; b^^ being desired to declare who they were, He said,
he would make Confession to any but his Majesty. Whereupon it Was demanded in
wh^^ Profession he Dyed, He said, in the Faith of a Christian as revailed the
Scripture, desiring the Ministers not to ask him any more Questions hinder his
Devotions. So after having refused to join in Prayer wi^^ the Ordinary, he made
a short and silent Prayer to himself, and was turned off with the rest of the
Criminals.

At his going from Newgate with the other Crm^^als, a ver^ Strange and
Surprising Accident happned, for just before the Ca^^ (wherein he was with two
other Criminals, reached the end of S^ Pulchers Churchyard, the Wall being
thronged and Loaded with Crou^^ of Numerous Spectators who pressed to see him,
the greatest part (...) it fell Flat to the Ground, almost from one end to the
other, and wit^ it Multitudes of People one upon another, doing Extraordinary
D^mage, Killing a Wine Porter out right, who Dwelt in Nightingga^^ Lane, and
with the violence of its fall, Miserably Squeezed to peic^^ Arms, Legs, Backs
and Thighs of many, (Some says) to the Number af above 40 Persons, 4 or 5 of
which are since Dead of the^^ VVounds, and it is Doubted that several of the rest
are Mortally hu^^^ This unhappy Accident obliged the Officers to Convey the
Criminal^ through Pye-Corner and so down Hosier-L^^e, the like having n^^ been
known in the Memory of any Man Living before.

FINIS.

