A True COPY of a LETTER FROM His Majesty's Camp BETWEEN Mecklin and Vilvoord
IN FLANDERS. July 22.
Written by a Gentleman of Quality in the Army, to a Friend of his in London.
SIR,
ON Tuesday last, being the 18th. Instant, the King immediately after Dinner,
received Advice that some French Squadrons began to appear on the Hills before
the Camp: Also that morning we heard that the French were in Motion, though it
was not known which way. That morning I had rid out with the King to the end of
the Left Wing of our Camp, and I heard his Majesty ask, What are those
Squadrons, seeing some at a good distance, and which no body else would take
notice of; but about three his Majesty got on Horseback, and soon disposed the
Army into its due order, for receiving the Enemy if they advanced. All that
Evening we beheld the Enemy gently approaching toward us; and our Army as well
as theirs lay that night under their Arms in the open Field, without Tents or
any refreshment. His Majesty also lay that night in one of his Coaches in his
Clothes; the next morning we beheld the French Squadrons and Batalions nearer
to us, expecting to receive them from the Ground where we had posted our
selves, and where we had toward the Right cast up a good Trench in the night
time. It is since said that the French did little expect to find us there in
the morning, but thought we should retreat in the night, because their Numbers
were so much superior to ours; for they were esteemed to be 80000. whereas our
Army, after the Duke of Wirtemberg's Detachment, and 10 Batalions more to Liege
from Hoperting Camp, was not thought to have been above 45000. which Number in
the Muster-Roll seldom gives above 40000 effective Men, as some tell me. About
half an hour after Four that morning our Cannon began to play, and in a little
time they returned upon us, both of us playing from different Batteries till
after eight, and then our small Shot began to Fire, and we drove the French out
of a Village they had possessed before a Village they had possessed before us;
which Attack was led on by the Duke of Friesland; then they came on more
toward the Right, but seeing our Trenches that we had cast up, they retreated;
after this their main Attack was on our Right Wing, which was continued for
about five Hours, and our Men often repulsed them with great bravery and
resolution; but they still supplying their Men with fresh Batalions to support
them as they drew off, or filed before ours; and our Foot being at last spent
for want of more reserves, and some Horse on our side not behaving themselves
so well as thy should, the French at last broke in upon us, and our Men gave
way, so that we lost the Field of Battle, and retreated in some disorder,
having left many of our Cannon behind us.

We took the Duke of Berwick, and some others, Prisoners, who were sent some
hours before to Leewe. Count Solmes, as he was sitting upon the ground, at the
Head of Brigadier Earl's Regiment, had one Leg about the Ancle much shattered
and contused by a Canon Bullet, which also wounded the inward part of his other
Thigh, of which wounds we hear he since died: The Duke of Ormond having his
Horse shot under him, and his Groom being then out of the way, with his other
Horses, he went and charged on Foot, and was taken Prisoner, but one of the
Wretches who took him, drew a Dagger and run him through the Neck, of which
Wound he is like to recover. Mr. Zeulestein, and Major General Scravenmore are
also Prisoners. My Lord Portland is Wounded in one of his Fingers of each hand,
but that hinders not my Lord's great and continual application to business. The
French have no great reason to boast of a Victory; for Monsieur Gattinier tells
me, That there are 28000 dead on the place of Battle, whereof we as yet reckon
them to have lost but 21000. An Aid du Camp, of the Elector of Bavaria, was
sent hither last Night to inform His Majesty that the French have sent 6000
Wounded Soldiers to Namur, and above 600 Wounded Officers, besides what they
have sent to Mons and other Garrisons: And instead of pursuing us from Near
Hespen, or advancing at all sinc the Battle, they are retreated toward
Tongres: They have lost Forty Officers of very great Quality, whereof seven
Brigadier Generals; whereas we have not lost so much as one Colonel or General
Officer, besides those mentioned to be taken Prisoners.

We have lost only the name of a Victory; but the real Advantage and Honor
lies wholly on our side. The Court is all one, just as full as before. The
strength of our Defense we wholly owe, under God, to his most Excellent
Majesty, of whose Galantry and Conduct the French Officers are so very
sensible, that several of them have said to Monsieur Zeulestins Aid du Camp,
who has been among them to see his Master since the Fight, That if our King
were theirs they should adore him. His Majesty on such Occasions is
indefatigable, and can live on Horseback longer than the strongest of his
Followers. He led up himself diverse Attacks, and rallyed our Men, that would
otherwise have fled. He had one Bullet struck on his Scarf about his Middle,
but God be thanked did his Majesty no harm: Another Bullet went through his
Peruke and did no hurt.

It strikes me still with Horror to think to what Danger the Safety of all
Europe was exposed in his Majesty's Person. We are now encamped between two
Rivers near Vilvoord. And this day my Lord Athlone, and General Talmash joined
us with their Army, which they had brought from about Die. The Duke of
Wirtemberg is ordered to encamp four or five Miles off, here being not room
enough to receive him: And we do, or shall soon find our selves much stronger
than before. I shall only add, That with the extraordinary Fatigue of that
terrible Day, his Majesty had indeed lost much of that Plumpness and Ruddiness
which he had before. The whole Day of Battle and the Night following, when he
lay upon Straw in a little Cottage, near Tirlemont, his Majesty did not cough
at all; but he was the worse for his not coughing. Now he begins already to
return to his pristine Vigor and good Complexion, which I never saw his
Majesty to have better than before the Fight.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Hodgkin. 1693.


