A true and perfect RELATION OF A Great Victory obtained by the Parliaments
Forces IN NORTHVMBERLAND: Together with a List of all the Prisoners, Horse and
Arms taken; with the surrender of Curtington Castle, with all the Arms and
Ammunition.

As also the late bloody practices of the Garrison of Pontefract at Doncaster,
and other places.

In two Letters from Gentlemen of quality to their Friends in London.

London, Printed by J. M. 1648.

A true Relation of the great Victory obtained by the Parliaments Forces, under
the Command of Major General Lambert, over Langdales Forces, in Northumberland
and the Bishopric of Durham.
SIR,
GOd is pleased to work wonders daily; and when we least think of help, but
rather expect a ruin, God then is pleased to step in and stay us, as may
appear by this great victory God has given to us unexpectedly; the manner of
it was thus: The Scots were near the borders of England to join with Langdale,
and those Forces that belonged to Northumberland and Bishopric, who were now
in Northumberland under the Command of Col. Gray and Sir Richard Tempest, being
in number about twelve hundred Horse, who lay together expecting to join with
six hundred Foot that were to march out of Barwick that day they were taken,
and had not they then bin taken they had within 3 hours bin upon their march to
meet the Foot toward Barwik, being unwilling to engage without more Forces
though they were twelve hundred and we but nine hundred: Our men very early on
Saturday morning before break of day fell into their quarters, and after they
had beaten up one of their quarters and taken them that were there prisoners,
the soldiers then were so resolute that they rode Post to all the quarters
round about where the Cavaliers were quartered, and took them in their beds,
and their Horses at grass: only Cartington castle, where sir Richard Tempest
was, stood out two hours, but we lost no men, only two horses killed: It will
much daunt the Scots joining with Langdale and interrupt their present design,
which was to march into England to engage the Forces with LAMBERT: I see it is
good to leave all to God; when we think least God does most: Oh that men would
give the whole glory to God! The Commanders that are taken were the chief
Actors in raising a new War in the North and bringing in the Scots. I have much
more to write, but I am in haste, in providing entertainment for the prisoners,
therefore say no more, but give the glory to God.

Prisoners taken in Northumberland July the first.
Colonel Edward Gray Commander in chief of the Forces in Northumberland. Col.
Richard Tempest, Baronet, Commander in chief of the Forces in the County of
Durham. Sir Francis Ratliff. Baronet Ratliffs son. Sir Jervis Lucas. Mr. George
Bellasis, M. George Collingwood, M. John Collingwood, Reformadoes. Lieutenant
Col. John Salkeld: Lieut. Col. Ralph Millett: Lieut. Col. John Thornton. Major
Thomas Salkeld: Major Trollope. Captain Francis Brandling: Cap. James Shaftoe:
Cap. Hugh James: Cap. Smith: Cap. Ascue: Cap. Ambrose Carleton; Cap. Fetherston
Haugh: Cap. Francis Carleton. Mr. Gowen Ratcliff: M. Ralph Bows: M. Roger
Ratliff: M. John Wright: M. John Thornton: M. William Hodgson: M. Charles
Selby: M. John Thurlwel: M. William Hampton: M. Shawe: M. Hauslet Selby: M.
Nicholas Woodhuse: M. Anthony Trollope: M. John Fitz Williams: M. John Sison:
M. Thomas Hurdey: M. John Watson: M. Ralph Claxton: M. John Sison senior. M.
Thomas Hurdey: M. John Watson.
And many other Gentlemen and Officers that I cannot give you the number of
now, and above three hundred soldiers, and betwixt five and six hundred Horse,
with great store of Arms: The Enemy was about eleven or twelve hundred strong,
and we about nine hundred strong.

A true RELATION OF THE BEHAVIOVR OF THE PONTEFRACT FORCES IN DONCASTER.
SIR,
UPon the ninth of this instant came a party from Pontefract to Doncaster,
between one and two of the clock in the night, unto the dwelling house of Mr.
Hafford, the Postmaster, and knocked at the door, and cried, a Post, the door
being opened they cried, Lights, Lights, struck the servants, and cut one of
them in the head, crying, God damn me, ye Rogues, where is your Master that
traytorly Rogue? Crying, wounds they would cut him as small as herbs for the
pot; she being in bed, slipped on a Petticoat, and went down to them, but they
drove her up the stairs again with their naked Swords and Pistols, crying, God
damn me, you whore, you Parliament Bitch, your money, your Plate, and your 20.
l. Horses; one with his fist struck her on the face, saying, The King is come
home Jade, and striking her over the shoulder with his sword, said, Pontefract
Castle is ours Whore: and so taking 3 horse, with some other things that they
stole, they went away to Mistress Cooleings, where my Lady Fairfax of Gilling
lay, which was supposed to be the Lord Generals wife; they knocking at the
door, which was not opened in that have they expected, they cried, bring up the
Foot, march up Dragoons, cast up your fire-bals and fire the house; the door
being opened, they strait up to the Ladies Chamber; she being of their own
party, thought them to be Sheffield men; they broke up the door upon her, not
suffering her to put a petticoat about her, crying, Yield up your self Whore,
your Rings, your Jewels, your Horses, and your self; standing with their Swords
and Pistols over her, cried, God damn me, Whore, speak not, but yield up your
self, you Bitch, you Jade. The Lady in this sad condition, asked if there were
a Gentleman among them? One of them said he was a Gentleman; then she desired
him to divulge himself to her, and she would divulge her self to him; which
when they understood, that she was one of their own Party, they said they were
sorry for what they had done to her: and one of them said, as he sat on horse
back, to George Cooleing, present my service to my Lady and tell her, God damn
me, that he was sorry for what he had done unto her Ladyship: But God confound
him, body and soul, had it been Fairfax his Lady, he would have pistolled her,
and have run her through with his sword, and have cut her up for the fowls to
have gazed upon.

The next day the said Lady went to the Castle to complain of them, the Castle
said they went without order, and that they should be punished: They, to color
their doings, said, Mistress Hafford sent them over; yet some of them said they
had news of her being there the night before: Whereupon one called Captain
Bishop writ thus to Mistress Hafford, to wit;

Mistress Hafford, through your abusive misinformation, you made us injure
such souls as our souls honored, for which you must look to give a strict
account; therefore I would advise you, for your now security, to send me your
brown bay Nag, which if you will do, I shall be your servant, if not, you must
expect what follows; thus If you will obey my command, and send me your Nagg, I
shall rest

Your friend Rich. Bishop.


There was Captain Mathewman, and M. Nash that we knew, the rest are unknown as
yet by name.

One of these Pontefract Gentlemen came to Mistress Cooling, and stroaked her
with his hand under the chin, and said to her, O little Rogue! who would have
thought to have seen the Cavaliers to have reigned again. She said, Sir, the
Cavaliers are very welcome to me, and they carry themselves like civil
Gentlemen; hereupon he lift up his hand, and smote her a good round box on the
ear, saying thus, A pox take you for a dissembling Jade.

FINIS.

