A true and strange RELATION OF A BOY, Who was entertained by the Devil to be
Servant to him with the consent of his Father, about Crediton in the West, and
how the Devil carried him up in the air, and showed him the torments of Hell,
and some of the Cavaliers there, and what preperation there was made for Goring
and Greenvile against they came.

Also how the Cavaliers went to rob a Carrier, and how the Carrier and his
Horses turned themselves into flames of fire.

With a Coppie of a Letter from Mayor General Massy, concerning these strange
and wonderful things, with a certain Box of Relics and Crucifixes found in
TIVERTON Church.

Hermes or Mercury, carrying a staff of his astrological symbol, and a written
paper

London, Printed by J. H. 1645.

A true and perfect Relation of a Boy that bound himself Apprentice to the
Devil, and related what Cavaliers be saw tormented in HELL.
THAT the Devil has bin a grand imposter ever since the worlds infancy, and
does still prosecute his inveterate enmity against Adams Progeny, seeking by
variety of stratagems and cunning delusions, first to entrap, and then utterly
to subvert all men of what Rank or Quality soever: Is such an infallible
Axiom and Tenent of Christianity, as needs no further proof; considering that
every day proceeds one or other memorable passage, wherein is detected the
policy of that roaring Lion, who by divine permission does insinuate himself
with the Children of disobedience, and stirs them up to the perpetrating of
most odious and execrable actions; but in the end pays them home, with the due
reward of all their delinquencies, so that their very memory is abhorred of
all posterity.

The matter which we are now to treat of may seem to pass the bounds of
humane conceit and credulity, but if we duly examine that diverse Subjects of
the like nature have issued from the Pens of most worthy and approved Authors
both ancient and modern, we need not question any of the circumstances here
inserted. For that Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light, is
sufficiently testified by holy Writ, and appears in that notable delusion
which he puts upon Saul at his reparing to the Witch of Endor about the raising
up of Samuells Ghost. But to be brief, the verity of this subsequent treatise
is already confirmed by sundry persons of good rank and quality inhabiting
about the place where it happened, as I shall briefly declare.

In the County of Devon at a Market Town called Bow, lives one John Buxford by
profession a Worsted-comber having a Son named Joseph, aged fifteen years or
thereabouts, whom he had bound Apprentice to a Weaver, named Simon Culiver
dwelling in Crediton: this Joseph being a stubborn and untowardly Boy, could
not brook his Masters service, but after a Months time secretly departed away
to the Kings Army with one Byerly a Leiutenant to a Troop of Horse in the Lord
of Cleavelands Brigade, with whom he continued a roguish course of life; most
of this last Summer till the defeat which the Cavaliers received at
Langport-Moore, where the Leiutenant his Master lost his Horse, and clothes,
and the Boy was stripped and turned into rags: so that seeing no probability
to be furnished with apparel from his Master, he came home to the old man his
father who clothed him and would have had him return to the Weaver again,
but no persuasions or entreaties could prevail or work upon the froward
disposition of this obstinate and disobedient Boy, which so incensed the old
man, that he swore in great fury, that if he would not consent to go to the
Weaver, he would bin him Apprentice to the Devil, which rash and in
considerate threatenings, he often times used and repeated, but perceiving that
words took small effect, he determined to take a more rigerous course, and
shortly put the same in execution.

Upon the fifth day of November in the morning, he charged the Boy to prepare
himself for to go along with him to Crediton, which the Boy presently refused,
saying he would rather go to the Devil: whereupon the old man taking him by
the arm did fall a beating of him, so that by mere force compelled him along,
(the Boy all the time using many bitter execrations, and the father bestowing
many grievous stripes up on his shoulders) contiuning this posture for above
balfe a miles distance from the Town, which they met with a Carrier driving
before him four Horses laden with packes of Cloth, who seemed to this John
Buxford to be one whom he had often observed to frequend the Road. The Carrier
very courtiously demanded of him why he used such severitie toward the boy;
wher^pon he willing to satisfy him, told him all the circumstances of his
Sons refractory behavior in running from his Master, and his unwillingnes to
take any good course of life, or honest vocation for his future maintenance.
The Carrier replied, that, it was pity the Boy should miscarry by undertaking
a forced service upon him: But if they two could agree, and that the Boy were
willing to go a long with him, he doubted not but he should find a Master for
him, and such employment as would put him in the way to gain a complete estate
to maintain himself and help his friends. But the old man willingly listed to
the Carriers proposition, and being very desirous to provide for his sons good,
(as the natural affection of all Parents toward Children does greatly oblige)
was content that he should go a long with the Carrier, who condtioned with him
to bring or send back the Boy in eight days time at the furthest, if he
should not take likeing of the promised service, thus all parties have
concluded, the boy being more inclined to any service then to live with his old
Master the Weaver. The old man took his leave of them both, bequeathing his
son Joseph to the hopeful tuition and custody of this supposed Carrier.

No sooner was he departed out of their sight, but suddenly ensued the
beginning of this stupendous Miracle, the ending whereof is able to amaze each
curious inquisitour, that studies to pry in the Cabinet of Divine or Humane
Mysteries, for in the first place, the Horses and Packes vanished, the timorous
Boy beholds his new Master metamorphesed in a trice from a man to a flying
Horse in a black and ugly shape and color; who now proves so officious to his
Servant, that he will carry him upon his own back, and so snatches him up
sorthwith into the air through which he hurrie; him with violence and motion
swifter then imagination, so that this new Rider was quickly mounted above the
middle Region the earth seemed unto him of a very small proportion, London and
other magnificent Cities on greater then small Cottages: and having measured
the wast concave of the Moon with more curiosity then Tycho Branche, or the
subtillest Astrologer could ever invent; they descend by and by Torrenti smile
with a more precipitious motion then the Cataracts of the seven headed Nole,
and so are plunged into the vast Caverners Neptune, in whose watrie dominions
(during the time of this short and miraculous transportation) the Boy observed
the most strange and unutterable wonders of the deep diversified in more
several pieces, then the wisest Phoylosophers have hitherto at any time
mentioned or expressed, at length they came into a profound Cell or Cave, (the
earth seeming to open it self) as the swallowing up of Korah Dathan and Abiram.

The Devil now discharges his burden, and assumeth a more terrible shape
then that of the flying Horse, saying to his Guest: Be not dismayed, thy
employment here shall be only to take a view of diverse men, who thou have
formerly seen or known in the Malignant Army, whose base course of life have
occasioned their sudden and unexpected deaths, and now are sent tame to
receive their due recompense for the same. Where upon there instantly insued a
most hideous and fearful howling, and a great many ghastly apparitions
presented themselves before him, amongst whom he observed many whom he supposed
to have seen before Langport fight, who bitterly bewailed their insupportable
pain in these words, Woe, woe, unto us that ever we undertook the defense of
such an unjust Cause: But that which made the greatest impression in the
distracted fancy of this wreched Spectator was the sight of Sir Peter Ball,
(one of the Commissioners of Excester lately deceased) lying all along after a
strange manner, his Legs and Feet schorching in furious flames, his Buttockes
upon a Crediron, his Back and Shoulders in a frying pan, his Head in a boiling
kettle of pitch, bellowing and roaring out in griveous sort, and cursing the
hour of his ativity, with his extorting, coveteousnesse, and cheating of the
Country. There was preparation made for Greenvile and Goring, whose places was
alloted unto them close by Sir Peter Ball, there to stand with three furies
attending upon them whose Office was four Ladles of scalding Acomite down
their belching throats. Not long after came in the Lady Scot, Gorings sister,
being usherd by that immeasurable luxury and perjured Caytiffe Greenvile, who
was to be hung up by the tongue upon hot burning tenter hooks: Lastly appeared
the Lady Dolkeat, Nurse to the young Princess lying at Bedford House in
Excester. All these and infinite more were confined to their several stations
of tormend, whose confused eiulations and waylings were too tedious here to
relate but were in sine so full of dread and horror to this wreched Boy, that
he earnestly wished himself out of this place, to undergo any servitude
though never so miserable and deplorable.

The time being now expired according to the former contract made which this
arch enemy of mankind, whose power extends no further then God has limited,
the Boy Joseph was conveyed back again to a place named Cannon Lee in Devon,
where he was found by two honest Laborers being servants to Mr. Justice Cullum
living there, who first espied him under a Hedge, and coming to him demanded
what he was, but receiving no answer but only signs with his Head, they
perceived that he was speechless, and his hands and legs strangely distorted,
his hair of his head singyd, his clothes all be smeared with pitch and rosin,
and other sulfurous matter, which yielded an odious stench; but they
commiserating his miserable condition, took him up betwixt them and carried
him home to there Masters house, where he was shifted and put in a warm bed,
and shortly after by means of some nourishing broah given him, was so well
revived that he then declared unto them his name, birthplace, and his strange
journey with the Devil, which seemed at first rediculous to the Justice and
most which heard him, but then a little better pondering in what manner he was
found and brought to the house, he sent for the old man his father, who coming
thither, acknowledged him to be his son, and manner of his departure, with
other circumstances above rehearsed: There were present Mr. Jonathan Gainwell a
very zealous and godly Minister of the Parish, who took special notice
thereof and gave the Boy very pious admonitions of obedience, which by Gods
grace took such good effect, that he there delivered good testimonies that he
was truly penitent of his former lewd courses and there reconciled himself to
his father, with whom he now lives and is almost cured of that distortion of
his members.

A true information was sent by Justice Cullum and Mr. Gainwell the Minister,
unto Major General Massy at Tiverion, of all these precedent circumstancies
related unto them by the old man and his some, which for the noveltie thereof
was much admired by all that ever heard it.

The Coppie of a Letter from Mayor General Massy, to Mr. Davenport a Cheshire
Gentleman now resident in LONDON.
SIR,
I Lately received your Letter wherein you give me notice that my business is
much retracted, and has not obtained that happy issue which I expected it
should have done. We have no new; at present, but such as I suppose is already
come to your ears, only this wonder here enclosed the true Relation whereof I
received from Mr. Cullum of Cannons Lee, a Gentleman of approved integrity and
astimation in this County: I have sent you by this bearer a Box of Relics
with a great Crucifix found in Tiverton Church in the wall which the Cavaliers
had there built for the strenghtning of the porch, which way serve as a
sufficient argument to convince your wives good opinion, which she formerly
conceived of those Champions of Antichrist the Cavaliers, You shall do me a
favor, if you please to hasten Mr. East about the finishing of my Watch, and
send me half a pound of the best sealing wax, I remain

From Tiverton, Nov. 18. 1645. Your faithful Friend Edward Massy.


The some day that the Devil departed from the Boy where the Laborers found
him, happened another strange thing worth the relating. The Devil assumed his
former shape of the Carrier, and was encountered upon the way by straggling
Troopers of the Malignant Party, who viewing such fair horses made themselves
sure of rich purchase, and presently addressed themselves to plunder, but as
they went about it the Catrier and his Horses suddenly vanished away in the
flames of fire, leaving three of those Plunderers dead in the place, the rest
so terribly shaken and almost stifled with the noisome sent of Brimstone, that
they hardly escaped to carry news of this strange accident.

FINIS.

