The true Causes of the Commitment of Mr. Clement Walker to the Tower.
IT is spread up and down in the City, as many other lies are very
industriously (for there is no trade so quick at this time) that Master Clement
Walker is committed for writing a Book against Colonel Fines, a lie as loud as
any in that Book, though there will appear to be as many there, as there are
leaves and many more. The truth is this, he was never questioned for any thing
concerning Colonel Fines, that being by Order of the House of Commons, and
direction of my Lord General thereupon, referred to a Council of War: But
in his Book he had laid an aspertion upon a Peer for carrying in and out
things secretly into the Island of Lundy, the mysteries whereof must not be
discovered; for Colonel Nathaniel Fines he did never once send to that Island
all the while he was Governor of Bristoll: The Lords upon this; to vindicate
the honor of that Lord (whose the Island was) did order the Gentleman Usher to
bring Walker before them, to declare what the mysteries were that he spoke of,
and what he knew to be carried in and out of that Island: He attending one
day, and there being not time to hear him for other business, the next day
he rode out of the Town; Whereupon the Gentleman Usher receiving a check from
the Lords, he sent the Messenger Master Baker after him, who over-tooke him
and brought him back again: This put the angry Gentleman into such a fury (who
they say once stabbed his Wife as she sat at Table with him) that he called
that Lord (by whose means he thought it was done) base beggarly Lord, and
this was deposed by Baker who brought him up: Yet there being but one witness
of this, and he denying it, the Lords proceeded not upon it; but demanded of
him what were the words he spoke: who answered, that he said, that Lord did
prosecute him maliciously. This he charged the Lord with sitting in the House,
and upon this he was censured, that Lord having withdrawn himself. The Lords,
before they went to give their censure, calling for the Records, and perusing
them to see what had been formerly done in the like cases. Mr. Walker being
afterward called into the House (a day or two intervening that he had
sufficient time to advise of it) and the judgment read unto him, when he was
asked, whether he would submit to the Justice of the House; he answered, noe,
for that it was against the liberty of the Subject, because there was no
original Writ or Record before them; and because he was a Commoner of England,
and a Committee in the County; and therefore ought not to be judged by the
Lords, unless he was first heard in the House of Commons. This when it was in
the case of one of their Members, and that sitting in their House, openly at
their Bar, was such a derogation to the privilege of Parliament, and
subversion of the power of Judicature in the highest Court of the Kingdom,
that the Lords commanded the Clerk presently to set down the words, and
committed this Gentleman to the Tower, ordering that they would proceed further
upon this, as that which struck at the root of the power and privilege of the
Lords House. That this is the truth, and not those lies which are spread
abroad, will appear in the Journall Book to any that shall examine it.


