The True Levellers Standard ADVANCED: OR, The State of Community opened, and
Presented to the Sons of Men.

By William Everard, John Palmer, John South, John Courton. William Tailor,
Christopher Clifford, John Barker. Ferrard Winstanley, Richard Goodgroome,
Thomas Star, William Hoggrill, Robert Sawyer, Thomas Eder, Henry
Bickerstaffe, John Tailor, etc.


Beginning to Plant and Manure the Waste land upon George-Hill, in the Parish
of Walton, in the County of Surrey.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCXLIX.

To all my fellow Creatures that shall view these ensuing Lines.
THE God of this world blinding the eyes of the men of the world, have taken
possession of them and their Lives, Rules and Raigns, and in a high measure
opposes the everlasting spirit, the King of Righteousness; both in them, and
on the whole Creation, bending all its wit and power to destroy this spirit,
and the persons in whom it lives, rules and governs; making Laws under
specious pretenses, yea and penalties too, that all Nations, Tongues, and
Languages, shall fall down and worship this god, become subject, yea in slavery
to it, and to the men in whom it dwells: But the god of this world is Pride and
Covetousness, the roots of all Evil, from whence flows all the wickedness
that is acted under the Sun, as Malice, Tyranny, Lording over, and despising
their fellow Creatures, killing and destroying those that will not, or cannot
become subject to their Tyranny, to uphold their Lordly Power, Pride, and
Covetousness.

I have had some Conversation with the Author of this ensuing Declaration, and
the Persons Subscribing, and by experience find them sweetly acted and guided
by the everlasting spirit, the Prince of Peace, to walk in the paths of
Righteousness, not daring to venture upon any acts of injustice; but
endeavoring to do unto all, as they would have done to them, having Peace and
Joy in themselves, knit together and united in one Spirit of Glory and Truth,
Love to their fellow Creatures, Contentation with Food and Raiment, showing
much Humility and Meekness of spirit; such as these shall be partakers of the
Promise.

Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.

Secondly, For this action of theirs, in laboring to Manure the wast places of
the Earth, it is an action full of Justice and Righteousness, full of Love and
Charity to their fellow Creatures; nothing of the god of this world, Pride and
Covetousness seen in it, no self-seeking, or glorying in the Flesh.

Vouchsafe to read, or view over these ensuing Lines ye Powers of the Earth;
Oh that Reason might sit upon the throne of your hearts as Judge; I am
confident there is nothing written in anger or hatred to your persons, but in
love to them as fellow Creatures; but against that which have bound up your own
Spirits in slavery; if you could speak impartially, your own Consciences can
bear me witness, and only bears sway in your forcing you to exercise Tyranny,
scourging and trampling under foot your fellow Creatures, especially those
whose eyes are opened and can clearly discover the great Devil, Tyranny, Pride,
and Covetousness working to and fro upon your Spirits, and reigning in you,
which will prove your own destruction: The Angels that kept not their first
Estate, are reserved under Chains of darkness unto the Judgment of the great
day.

The whole Creation are the Angels of the everlasting Spirit of Righteousness,
they are all ministering spirits, speaking every Creature in its kind the Will
of the Father. The Chariots of God are 20000 thousands of Angels, Psalm. etc.

But ye the great ones of the Earth, the Powers of this world, ye are the
Angels that kept not your first estate, and now remain under Chains of
darkness: Your first Estate was Innocence and Equallity with your fellow
Creatures, but your Lordly power over them, both Persons and Consciences, your
proud fleshly imaginations, lofty thoughts of your selves, are the fruits of
darkness which you are kept under: The whole Creation groaneth and is in
bondage, even until now, waiting for deliverance, and must wait till he that
withholds be taken away, that man of sin, that Antichrist which sits in the
throne, in the hearts of the men of this world, the Powers of the Earth, above
all that is called God.

I know you have high thoughts of your selves, think you know much, and see
much, but the Light that is in you is Darkness; and how great is that
darkness? They that live in the light of the Spirit can discover that to be
the blackness of darkness which you count light. And truly, a great Light, a
bright Morning Star which will flourish and spread it self, shining in
Darkness, and darkness shall not be able to comprehend it, though you Spurn
never so much against it.

I expect nothing but opposition, mockings, deridings from Lord Esau the man of
Flesh: I know it will be counted in the eye of Flesh, a foolish undertaking, an
object of scorn and laughter; but in this is their Comfort and encouragement,
That the power of Life and Light, the Spirit by whom they are commanded, will
carry them on, strengthen and support them, rescuing them from the Jaw of the
Lion and Paw of the Bear; For great is the work which will shortly be done upon
the Earth. Despise not Visions, Voices and Revelations; examine the Scriptures,
Prophesies are now fulfilling; be not like Joseph's Brethren, speak not evil of
things you know not: For whatsoever is of God will stand, do what you can,
though you may crush it for a time, the time is near expired it will spring up
again and flourish like a green Bay tree: What is not of the Father will fall
to the ground, though you bend all your wit, power and policy to keep it up;
but of that will be no Resurrection. That the eternal Spirit may enlighten you,
that Reason may dwell in you, and act accordingly, is the desire of your Loving
Friend, and Fellow Creature,

JOHN TAILOR.
April 20, 1649.
A Declaration to the Powers of England, and to all the Powers of the World,
Showing the Cause why the Common People of England have begun, and gives
Consent to Dig up, Manure, and Sow Corn upon George-Hill in Surrey; by those
that have Subscribed, and thousands more that gives Consent.
IN the beginning of Time, the great Creator Reason, made the Earth to be a
Common Treasury, to preserve Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Man, the lord that was
to govern this Creation; for Man had Domination given to him, over the Beasts,
Birds, and Fishes; but not one word was spoken in the beginning, That one
branch of mankind should rule over another.

And the Reason is this, Every single man, Male and Female, is a perfect
Creature of himself; and the same Spirit that made the Globe, dwells in man to
govern the Globe; so that the flesh of man being subject to Reason, his Maker,
has him to be his Teacher and Ruler within himself, therefore needs not run
abroad after any Teacher and Ruler without him, for he needs not that any man
should teach him, for the same Anointing that ruled in the Son of man, teaches
him all things.

But since humane flesh (that king of Beasts) began to delight himself in the
objects of the Creation, more then in the Spirit Reason and Righteousness, who
manifests himself to be the indweller in the Five Senses, of Hearing, Seeing,
Tasting, Smelling, Feeling; then he fell into blindness of mind and weakness of
heart, and runs abroad for a Teacher and Ruler: And so selfish imaginations
taking possession of the Five Senses, and ruling as King in the room of Reason
therein, and working with Covetousness, did set up one man to teach and rule
over another; and thereby the Spirit was killed, and man was brought into
bondage, and became a greater Slave to such of his own kind, then the Beasts of
the field were to him.

And hereupon, The Earth (which was made to be a Common Treasury of relief for
all, both Beasts and Men) was hedged in to In-closures by the teachers and
rulers, and the others were made Servants and Slaves: And that Earth that is
within this Creation made a Common Storehouse for all, is bought and sold, and
kept in the hands of a few, whereby the great Creator is mightily dishonored,
as if he were a respector of persons, delighting in the comfortable Livelihood
of some, and rejoicing in the miserable poverty and straits of others. From
the beginning it was not so.

But this coming in of Bondage, is called A-dam, because this ruling and
teaching power without, does dam up the Spirit of Peace and Liberty; First
within the heart, by filling it with slavish fears of others. Secondly without,
by giving the bodies of one to be imprisoned, punished and oppressed by the
outward power of another. And this evil was brought upon us through his own
Covetousness, whereby he is blinded and made weak, and sees not the Law of
Righteousness in his heart, which is the pure light of Reason, but looks
abroad for it, and thereby the Creation is cast under bondage and curse, and
the Creator is slighted; First by the Teachers and Rulers that sets themselves
down in the Spirits room, to teach and rule, where he himself is only King.
Secondly by the other, that refuses the Spirit, to be taught and governed by
fellow Creatures, and this was called Isreal's Sin, in casting off the Lord, and
choosing Saul, one like themselves to be their King, when as they had the same
Spirit of Reason and government in themselves, as he had, if they were but
subject. And Isreal's rejecting of outward teachers and rulers to embrace the
Lord, and to be all taught and ruled by that righteous King, that Jeremiah
Prophesied shall rule in the new Heavens and new Earth in the latter days,
will be their Restoration from bondage, Ier. 23.5, 6.

But for the present state of the old World that is running up like parchment
in the fire, and wearing away, we see proud Imaginary flesh, which is the wise
Serpent, rises up in flesh and gets dominion in some to rule over others, and
so forces one part of the Creation man, to be a slave to another; and thereby
the Spirit is killed in both. The one looks upon himself as a teacher and
ruler, and so is lifted up in pride over his fellow Creature: The other looks
upon himself as imperfect, and so is dejected in his Spirit, and looks upon his
fellow Creature of his own Image, as a Lord above him.

And thus Esau, the man of flesh, which is Covetousness and Pride, has killed
Jacob, the Spirit of meekness, and righteous government in the light of
Reason, and rules over him: And so the Earth that was made a common Treasury
for all to live comfortably upon, is become through man's unrighteous actions
one over another, to be a place, wherein one torments another.

Now the great Creator, who is the Spirit Reason, suffered himself thus to be
rejected, and trodden under foot by the covetous proud flesh, for a certain time
limited; therefore says he, The Seed out of whom the Creation did proceed,
which is my Self, shall bruise this Serpents head, and restore my Creation
again from this curse and bondage; and when I the King of Righteousness raigns
in every man, I will be the blessing of the Earth, and the joy of all Nations.

And since the coming in of the stoppage, or the A-dam the Earth has been
enclosed and given to the Elder brother Esau, or man of flesh, and has been
bought and sold from one to another; and Jacob, or the younger brother, that is
to succeed or come forth next, who is the universal spreading power of
righteousness that gives liberty to the whole Creation, is made a servant.

And this Elder Son, or man of bondage, has held the Earth in bondage to
himself, not by a meek Law of Righteousness, But by subtle selfish Councels,
and by open and violent force; for wherefore is it that there is such Wars and
rumors of Wars in the Nations of the Earth? and wherefore are men so mad to
destroy one another? But only to uphold Civil propriety of Honor, Dominion and
Riches one over another, which is the curse the Creation groans under, waiting
for deliverance.

But when once the Earth becomes a Common Treasury again, as it must, for all
the Prophesies of Scriptures and Reason are Circled here in this Community, and
mankind must have the Law of Righteousness once more writ in his heart, and
all must be made of one heart, and one mind.

Then this Enmity in all Lands will cease, for none shall dare to seek a
Dominion over others, neither shall any dare to kill another, nor desire more
of the Earth then another; for he that will rule over, imprison, oppress, and
kill his fellow Creatures, under what pretense soever, is a destroyer of the
Creation, and an actor of the Curse, and walks contrary to the rule of
righteousness: (Do, as you would have others do to you; and love your Enemies,
not in Words, but in actions).

Therefore you powers of the Earth, or Lord Esau, the Elder brother, because
you have appeared to rule the Creation, first take notice, That the power that
sets you to work, is selvish Covetousnes, and an aspiring Pride, to live in
glory and ease over Jacob, the meek Spirit; that is, the Seed that lies hid, in
and among the poor Common People, or younger Brother, out of whom the blessing
of Deliverance is to rise and spring up to all Nations.

And Reason, the living king of righteousness, does only look on, and lets
thee alone, That whereas thou counts thy self an Angel of Light, thou shall
appear in the light of the Sun, to be a Devil, A-dam, and the Curse that the
Creation groans under; and the time is now come for thy downfall, and Jacob must
rise, who is the universal Spirit of love and righteousness, that fills, and
will fill all the Earth.

Thou teaching and ruling power of flesh, thou have had three periods of time,
to vaunt thy self over thy Brother; the first was from the time of thy coming
in, called A-dam, or a stop-age, till Moses came; and there thou that wast a
self-lover in Cain, killed thy brother Abel, a plain-hearted man that loved
righteousness: And thou by thy wisdom and beastly government, made the whole
Earth to stinck, till Noah came, which was a time of the world, like the coming
in of the watery Seed into the womb, toward the bringing forth of the man
child.

And from Noah till Moses came, thou still have ruled in vaunting, pride, and
cruel oppression; Ishmael against Isaac, Esau against Jacob; for thou have
still been the man of flesh that has ever persecuted the man of
righteousness, the Spirit Reason.

And Secondly, From Moses till the Son of Man came, which was a time of the
world, that the man child could not speak like a man, but lisping, making signs
to show his meaning; as we see many Creatures that cannot speak do. For Moses
Law was a Language lapped up in Types, Sacrifices, Forms, and Customs, which
was a weak time. And in this time likewise, O thou teaching and ruling power,
thou wast an oppressor; for look into Scriptures and see if Aaron and the
Priests were not the first that deceived the people; and the Rulers, as Kings
and Governors, were continually the Ocean-head, out of whose power, Burdens,
Oppressions, and Poverty did flow out upon the Earth: and these two Powers
still has been the Curse, that has led the Earth, mankind, into confusion and
death by their imaginary and selvish teaching and ruling, and it could be no
otherwise; for while man looks upon himself, as an imperfect Creation, and
seeks and runs abroad for a teacher and a ruler, he is all this time a stranger
to the Spirit that is within himself.

But though the Earth has been generally thus in darkness, since the A-dam
rise up, and has owned a Light, and a Law without them to walk by, yet some
have been found as watchmen, in this night time of the world, that have been
taught by the Spirit within them, and not by any flesh without them, as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the Prophets: And these, and such as these, have
still been the Butt, at whom, the powers of the Earth in all ages of the world,
by their selvish Laws, have shot their fury.

And then Thirdly from the time of the Son of man, which was a time that the
man-child began to speak like a child growing upward to manhood, till now, that
the Spirit is rising up in strength. O thou teaching and ruling power of the
earthy man, thou have been an oppressor, by imprisonment, impoverishing, and
martyrdom; and all thy power and wit, has been to make Laws, and execute them
against such as stand for universal Liberty, which is the rising up of Jacob;
as by those ancient enslaving Laws not yet blotted out, but held up as weapons
against the man-child.

O thou Powers of England, though thou have promised to make this People a Free
People, yet thou have so handled the matter, through thy self-seeking humor,
That thou have wrapped us up more in bondage, and oppression lies heavier upon
us; not only bringing thy fellow Creatures, the Commoners, to a morsel of
Bread, but by confounding all sorts of people by thy Government, of doing and
undoing.

First, Thou have made the people to take a Covenant and Oaths to endeavor a
Reformation, and to bring in Liberty every man in his place; and yet while a
man is in pursuing of that Covenant, he is imprisoned and oppressed by thy
Officers, Courts, and Justices, so called.

Thou have made Ordinances to cast down Oppressing, Popish, Episcopal,
Self-willed and Prerogative Laws; yet we see, That Self-wil and Prerogative
power, is the great standing Law, that rules all in action, and others in words.

Thou have made many promises and protestations to make the Land a Free Nation:
And yet at this very day, the same people, to whom thou have made such
Protestations of Liberty, are oppressed by thy Courts, Sizes, Sessions, by thy
Justices and Clarks of the Peace, so called, Bailiffs, Committees, are
imprisoned, and forced to spend that bread, that should save their lives from
Famine.

And all this, Because they stand to maintain an universal Liberty and Freedom,
which not only is our Birthright, which our Maker gave us, but which thou have
promised to restore unto us, from under the former oppressing Powers that are
gone before, and which likewise we have bought with our Money, in Taxes,
Free Quarter, and Bloodshed; all which Sums thou have received at our hands,
and yet thou have not given us our bargain.

O thou A-dam, thou Esau, thou Cain, thou Hypocritical man of flesh, when will thou cease to kill thy younger Brother? Surely thou must not do this great Work
of advancing the Creation out of Bondage; for thou art lost extremely, and
drowned in the Sea of Covetousness, Pride, and hardness of heart. The blessing
shall rise out of the dust which thou treadest under foot, Even the poor
despised People, and they shall hold up Salvation to this Land, and to all
Lands, and thou shall be ashamed.

Our Bodies as yet are in thy hand, our Spirit waits in quiet and peace, upon
our Father for Deliverance; and if he give our Blood into thy hand, for thee to
spill, know this, That he is our Almighty Captain: And if some of you will not
dare to shed your blood, to maintain Tyranny and Oppression upon the Creation,
know this, That our Blood and Life shall not be unwilling to be delivered up in
meekness to maintain universal Liberty, that so the Curse on our part may be
taken off the Creation.

And we shall not do this by force of Arms, we abhor it, For that is the work
of the Midianites to kill one another; But by obeying the Lord of Hosts, who
has Revealed himself in us, and to us, by laboring the Earth in righteousness
together, to eat our bread with the sweat of our brows, neither giving hire,
nor taking hire, but working together, and eating together, as one man, or as
one house of Israel restored from Bondage; and so by the power of Reason, the
Law of righteousness in us, we endeavor to lift up the Creation from that
bondage of Civil Propriety, which it groans under.

We are made to hold forth this Declaration to you that are the Great Council,
and to you the Great Army of the Land of England, that you may know what we
would have, and what you are bound to give us by your Covenants and Promises;
and that you may join with us in this Work, and so find Peace. Or else, if you
do oppose us, we have peace in our Work, and in declaring this Report: And you
shall be left without excuse.

The Work we are going about is this, To dig up Georges-Hill and the waste
Ground thereabouts, and to Sow Corn, and to eat our bread together by the sweat
of our brows.

And the First Reason is this, That we may work in righteousness, and lay the
Foundation of making the Earth a Common Treasury for All, both Rich and Poor,
That every one that is born in the Land, may be fed by the Earth his Mother
that brought him forth, according to the Reason that rules in the Creation. Not
Enclosing any part into any particular hand, but all as one man, working
together, and feeding together as Sons of one Father, members of one Family;
not one Lording over another, but all looking upon each other, as equals in the
Creation; so that our Maker may be glorified in the work of his own hands, and
that every one may see, he is no respecter of Persons, but equally loves his
whole Creation, and hates nothing but the Serpent, which is Covetousness,
branching forth into selvish Imagination, Pride, Envy, Hypocrisy,
Uncleanness; all seeking the ease and honor of flesh, and fighting against the
Spirit Reason that made the Creation; for that is the Corruption, the Curse,
the Devil, the Father of Lies; Death and Bondage that Serpent and Dragon that
the Creation is to be delivered from.

And we are moved hereunto for that Reason, and others which has been showed
us, both by Vision, Voice, and Revelation.

For it is showed us, That so long as we, or any other, does own the Earth to
be the peculier Interest of Lords and Landlords, and not common to others as
well as them, we own the Curse, and holds the Creation under bondage; and so
long as we or any other does own Landlords and Tennants, for one to call the
Land his, or another to hire it of him, or for one to give hire, and for
another to work for hire; this is to dishonor the work of Creation; as if the
righteous Creator should have respect to persons, and therefore made the Earth
for some, and not for all: And so long as we, or any other maintain this Civil
Propriety, we consent still to hold the Creation down under that bondage it
groans under, and so we should hinder the work of Restoration, and sin against
Light, that is given into us, and so through the fear of the flesh man, lose
our peace.

And that this Civil Propriety is the Curse, is manifest thus, Those that Buy
and Sell Land, and are landlords, have got it either by Oppression, or Murder,
or Theft; and all landlords lives in the breach of the Seventh and Eighth
Commandments, Thou shall not steal, nor kill.

First by their Oppression. They have by their subtle imaginary and covetous
wit, got the plain-hearted poor, or younger Brethren to work for them, for small
wages, and by their work have got a great increase; for the poor by their
labor lifts up Tyrants to rule over them; or else by their covetous wit, they
have out-reached the plain-hearted in Buying and Selling, and thereby enriched
themselves, but impoverished others: or else by their subtle wit, having been
a lifter up into places of Trust, have enforced people to pay Money for a
Public use, but have divided much of it into their private purses; and so have
got it by Oppression.

Then Secondly for Murder; They have by subtle wit and power, pretended to
preserve a people in safety by the power of the Sword; and what by large Pay,
much Free Quarter, and other Booties, which they call their own, they get much
Moneys, and with this they buy Land, and become landlords; and if once
Landlords, then they rise to be Justices, Rulers, and State Governors, as
experience shows: But all this is but a bloody and subtle Thee very,
countenanced by a Law that Covetousness made; and is a breach of the Seventh
Commandment, Thou shall not kill.

And likewise Thirdly a breach of the Eighth Commandment, Thou shall not
steal; but these landlords have thus stolen the Earth from their fellow
Creatures, that have an equal share with them, by the Law of Reason and
Creation, as well as they.

And such as these rise up to be rich in the objects of the Earth; then by
their plausible words of flattery to the plain-hearted people, whom they
deceive, and that lies under confusion and blindness: They are lifted up to be
Teachers, Rulers, and Law makers over them that lifted them up; as if the Earth
were made peculiarly for them, and not for others weal: If you cast your eye a
little backward, you shall see, That this outward Teaching and Ruling power, is
the Babylonish yoke laid upon Israel of old, under Nebuchadnezzar; and so
Successively from that time, the Conquering Enemy, have still laid these yokes
upon Israel to keep Jacob down: And the last enslaving Conquest which the Enemy
got over Israel, was the Norman over England; and from that time, Kings, Lords,
Judges, Justices, Bailiffs, and the violent bitter people that are
Freeholders, are and have been Successively. The Norman Bastard William
himself, his Colonels, Captains, inferior Officers, and Common Soldiers, who
still are from that time to this day in pursuit of that victory, Imprisoning,
Robbing, and killing the poor enslaved English Israelites.

And this appears clear, For when any Trustee or State Officer is to be Chosen,
The Freeholders or Landlords must be the Chusers, who are the Norman Common
Soldiers, spread abroad in the Land; And who must be Chosen? but some very rich
man, who is the Successor of the Norman Colonels or high Officers. And to what
end have they been thus Chosen? but to Establish that Norman power the more
forcibly over the enslaved English, and to beat them down again, when as they
gather heart to seek for Liberty.

For what are all those Binding and Restraining Laws that have been made from
one Age to another since that Conquest, and are still upheld by Fury over the
People? I say, What are they? but the Cords, Bands, Manacles, and Yokes that
the enslaved English, like Newgate Prisoners, wears upon their hands and legs
as they walk the streets; by which those Norman Oppressors, and these their
Successors from Age to Age have enslaved the poor People by, killed their
younger Brother, and would not suffer Jacob to arise.

O what mighty Delusion, do you, who are the powers of England live in! That
while you pretend to throw down that Norman yoke, and Babylonish power, and
have promised to make the groaning people of England a Free People; yet you
still lift up that Norman yoke, and slavish Tyranny, and holds the People as
much in bondage, as the Bastard Conqueror himself, and his Council of War.

Take notice, That England is not a Free People, till the Poor that have no
Land, have a free allowance to dig and labor the Commons, and so live as
Comfortably as the Landlords that live in their Enclosures. For the People have
not laid out their Moneys, and shed their Blood, that their Landlords, the
Norman power, should still have its liberty and freedom to rule in Tyranny in
his Lords, landlords, Judges, Justices, Bailiffs, and State Servants; but that
the Oppressed might be set Free, Prison doors opened, and the Poor peoples
hearts comforted by an universal Consent of making the Earth a Common Treasury,
that they may live together as one House of Israel, united in brotherly love
into one Spirit; and having a comfortable livelihood in the Community of one
Earth their Mother.

If you look through the Earth, you shall see, That the landlords, Teachers and
Rulers, are Oppressors, Murderers, and Thieves in this manner; But it was not
thus from the Beginning. And this is one Reason of our digging and laboring
the Earth one with another, That we might work in righteousness, and lift up
the Creation from bondage: For so long as we own Landlords in this Corrupt
Settlement, we cannot work in righteousness; for we should still lift up the
Curse, and tread down the Creation, dishonor the Spirit of universal Liberty,
and hinder the work of Restoration.

Secondly, In that we begin to Dig upon George-Hill, to eat our Bread
together by righteous labor, and sweat of our brows; It was showed us by
Vision in Dreams, and out of Dreams, That that should be the Place we should
begin upon; And though that Earth in view of Flesh, be very barren, yet we
should trust the Spirit for a blessing. And that not only this Common, or Heath
should be taken in and Manured by the People, but all the Commons and waste
Ground in England, and in the whole World, shall be taken in by the People in
righteousness, not owning any Propriety; but taking the Earth to be a Common
Treasury, as it was first made for all.

Thirdly, It is showed us, That all the Prophecies, Visions, and Revelations of
Scriptures, of Prophets, and Apostles, concerning the calling of the Jews, the
Restoration of Israel; and making of that People, the Inheritors of the whole
Earth; does all seat themselves in this Work of making the Earth a Common
Treasury; as you may read, Ezekiel. 24.26, 27, etc. Jer. 33.7. to 12. Esaias. 49.17,
18, etc. Zach. 8. from 4, to 12. Dan. 2.44, 45. Dan. 7.27. Hos. 14.5, 6, 7.
Joel 2.26, 27. Amos 9. from 8 to the end, Obad. 17.18.21. Mic. 5. from 7 to the
end, Hab. 2.6, 7, 8.13, 14. Genesis 18.18. Romans 11.15. Zeph. 3. etc. Zach. 14.9.

And when the Son of man, was gone from the Apostles, his Spirit descended upon
the Apostles and Brethren, as they were waiting at Jerusalem; and the Rich men
sold their Possessions, and gave part to the Poor; and no man said, That ought
that he possessed was his own, for they had all things Common, Act. 4.32.

Now this Community was suppressed by covetous proud flesh, which was the powers
that ruled the world; and the righteous Father suffered himself thus to be
suppressed for a time, times and dividing of time, or for 42 months, or for
three days and half, which are all but one and the same term of time: And the
world is now come to the half day; and the Spirit of Christ, which is the
Spirit of universal Community and Freedom is risen, and is rising, and will
rise higher and higher, till those pure waters of Shiloe, the Well Springs of
Life and Liberty to the whole Creation, do overrun A-dam, and crown those
banks of Bondage, Curse, and Slavery.

Fourthly, This work to make the Earth a Common Treasury, was showed us by
Voice in Trance, and out of Trance, which words were these,

Work together, Eat Bread together, Declare this all abroad.

Which Voice, was heard Three times: And in Obedience to the Spirit, We have
Declared this by Word of mouth, as occasion was offered. Secondly, We have
declared it by writing, which others may read. Thirdly, We have now begun to
declare it by Action, in Diging up the Common Land, and casting in Seed, that
we may eat our Bread together in righteousness. And every one that comes to
work, shall eat the Fruit of their own labors, one having as much Freedom in
the Fruit of the Earth as another. Another Voice that was heard was this,

Israel shall neither take Hire, nor give Hire.

And if so, then certainly none shall say, This is my Land, work for me, and
I Will give you Wages: For, The Earth is the Lords, that is, Man's, who is Lord of
the Creation, in every branch of mankind; for as diverse members of our human
bodies, make but one body perfect; so every particular man is but a member or
branch of mankind; and mankind living in the light and obedience to Reason, the
King of righteousness, is thereby made a fit and complete Lord of the Creation.
And the whole Earth is this Lords Man, subject to the Spirit. And not the
Inheritance of covetous proud Fesh, that is selvish, and enmity to the Spirit.

And if the Earth be not peculiar to any one branch, or branches of mankind,
but the Inheritance of all; Then is it Free and Common for all, to work
together, and eat together.

And truly, you Counselors and Powers of the Earth, know this, That
wheresoever there is a People, thus united by Common Community of livelihood
into Oneness, it will become the strongest Land in the World, for then they
will be as one man to defend their Inheritance; and Salvation (which is Liberty
and Peace) is the Walls and Bulwarks of that Land or City.

Whereas on the otherside, pleading for Propriety and single Interest, divides
the People of a land, and the whole world into Parties, and is the cause of all
Wars and Bloodshed, and Contention every where.

Another Voice that was heard in a Trance, was this,

Whosoever labors the Earth for any Person or Persons, that are lifted up to
rule over others, and does not look upon themselves, as Equal to others in the
Creation: The hand of the Lord shall be upon that Laborer: I the Lord have
spoke it, and I will do it.

This Declares likewise to all Laborers, or such as are called Poor people,
that they shall not dare to work for Hire, for any Landlord, or for any that is
lifted up above others; for by their labors, they have lifted up Tyrants and
Tyranny; and by denying to labor for Hire, they shall pull them down again. He
that works for another, either for Wages, or to pay him Rent, works
unrighteously, and still lifts up the Curse; but they that are resolved to work
and eat together, making the Earth a Common Treasury, does join hands with
Christ, to lift up the Creation from Bondage, and restores all things from the
Curse.

Fifthly, That which does encourage us to go on in this work, is this; We find
the streaming out of Love in our hearts toward all; to enemies as well as
friends; we would have none live in Beggary, Poverty, or Sorrow, but that every
one might enjoy the benefit of his creation: we have peace in our hearts, and
quiet rejoicing in our work, and filled with sweet content, though we have but
a dish of roots and bread for our food.

And we are assured, that in the strength of this Spirit that has manifested
himself to us, we shall not be startled, neither at Prison nor Death, while we
are about his work; and we have bin made to sit down and count what it may cost
us in undertaking such a work, and we know the full sum, and are resolved to
give all that we have to buy this Pearl which we see in the Field.

For by this work we are assured, and Reason makes it appear to others, that
Bondage shall be removed, Tears wiped away, and all poor People by their
righteous Labors shall be relieved, and freed from Poverty and Straits; For in
this work of Restoration, there will be no beggar in Israel: For surely, if
there was no Beggar in literal Israel, there shall be no Beggar in Spiritual
Israel the Antitype, much more.

Sixthly, We have another encouragement that this work shall prosper, Because we
see it to be the fullness of Time: For whereas the Son of Man, the Lamb, came in
the Fullness of Time, that is, when the Powers of the World made the Earth stink
every where, by oppressing others, under pretense of worshipping the Spirit
rightly, by the Types and Sacrifices of Moses law; the Priests were grown so
abominably Covetous and Proud, that they made the People to loath the
Sacrifices, and to groan under the Burden of their Oppressing Pride.

Even so now in this Age of the World, that the Spirit is upon his
Resurrection, it is likewise the Fullness of Time in a higher measure. For
whereas the People generally in former times did rest upon the very observation
of the Sacrifices and Types, but persecuted the very name of the Spirit; Even
so now, Professors do rest upon the bare observation of Forms and Customs, and
pretend to the Spirit, and yet persecutes, grudges, and hates the power of the
Spirit; and as it was then, so it is now: All places stink with the abomination
of Self-seeking Teachers and Rulers: For do not I see that every one Preaches
for money, Counsels for money, and fights for money to maintain particular
Interests? And none of these three that pretend to give liberty to the
Creation, do give liberty to the Creation; neither can they, for they are
enemies to universal liberty; So that the earth stinks with their Hypocrisy,
Covetousness, Envy, sottish Ignorance, and Pride.

The common People are filled with good words from Pulpits and Council Tables,
but no good Deeds; For they wait and wait for good, and for deliverances, but
none comes; While they wait for liberty, behold greater bondage comes instead
of it, and burdens, oppressions, taskmasters, from Sessions, Lawyers, Bailiffs
of Hundreds, Committees, Impropriators, Clerks of Peace, and Courts of Justice,
so called, does whip the People by old Popish weather-beaten Laws, that were
excommunicate long ago by Covenants, Oaths, and Ordinances; but as yet are not
cast out, but rather taken in again, to be standing pricks in our eyes, and
thorns in our side; Beside Free-quartering, Plundering by some rude Soldiers,
and the abounding of Taxes; which if they were equally divided among the
Soldiery, and not too much bagd up in the hands of particular Officers and
Trustees, there would be less complaining: Besides the horrible cheating that
is in Buying and Selling, and the cruel Oppression of Landlords, and lords of
Mannours, and quarter Sessions; Many that have bin good Housekeepers (as we
say) cannot live, but are forced to turn Soldiers, and so to fight to uphold
the Curse, or else live in great straits and beggary: O you A-dams of the
Earth, you have rich Clothing, full Bellies, have your Honors and Ease, and you
puff at this; But know thou stout-hearted Pharaoh, that the day of Judgment
is begun, and it will reach to thee ere long; Jacob has bin very low, but he
is rising, and will rise, do the worst thou can; and the poor people whom
thou oppresses, shall be the Saviors of the land; For the blessing is rising
up in them, and thou shall be ashamed.

And thus you Powers of England, and of the whole World, we have declared our
Reasons, why we have begun to dig upon George hill in Surrey. One thing I must
tell you more, in the close, which I received in voce likewise at another time;
and when I received it, my ey was set toward you. The words were these: Let
Israel go free.

Surely, as Israel lay 430. years under Pharaohs bondage, before Moses was sent
to fetch them out: Even so Israel (the Elect Spirit spread in Sons and
Daughters) has lain three times so long already, which is the Antitype, under
your Bondage, and cruel Taskmasters: But now the time of Deliverance is come,
and thou proud Esau, and stout-hearted Covetousness, thou must come down, and
be lord of the Creation no longer: For now the King of Righteousness is rising
to Rule In, and Over the Earth.

Therefore, if thou will find Mercy, Let Israel go Free; break in pieces
quickly the Band of particular Propriety, dis-own this oppressing Murder,
Oppression and Thievery of Buying and Selling of Land, owning of landlords, and
paying of Rents, and give thy Free Consent to make the Earth a Common Treasury,
without grumbling; That the younger Brethren may live comfortably upon Earth, as
well as the Elder: That all may enjoy the benefit of their Creation.

And hereby thou will Honor thy Father, and thy Mother: Thy Father, which is
the Spirit of Community, that made all, and that dwells in all. Thy Mother,
which is the Earth, that brought us all forth: That as a true Mother, loves all
her Children. Therefore do not thou hinder the Mother Earth, from giving all
her Children suck, by thy Enclosing it into particular hands, and holding up
that cursed Bondage of Enclosure by thy Power.

And then thou will repent of thy Theft, in maintaining the breach of the eight
Commandment, by Stealing the Land as I say from thy fellow creatures, or younger
Brothers: which thou and all thy landlords have, and do live in the breach of
that Commandment.

Then thou will Own no other God, or Ruling Power, but One, which is the King
of Righteousness, ruling and dwelling in every one, and in the whole; whereas
now thou have many gods: For Covetousness is thy God, Pride, and an Envious
murdering Humor (to kill one by Prison or Gallows, that crosses thee, though
their cause be pure, sound, and good reason) is thy God, Self-love, and slavish
Fear (lest other serve thee as thou have served them) is thy god, Hypocrisy,
Fleshly Imagination, that keeps no Promise, Covenant, nor Protestation, is thy
God: love of Money, Honor, and Ease, is thy God: And all these, and the like
Ruling Powers, makes thee Blind, and hard-hearted, that thou does not, nor
cannot lay to heart the affliction of others, though they die for want of bread,
in that rich City, undone under your eyes.

Therefore once more, Let Israel go Free, that the poor may labor the Waste
land, and suck the Breasts of their mother Earth, that they starve not: And in
so doing, thou will keep the Sabbath day, which is a day of Rest; sweetly
enjoying the Peace of the Spirit of Righteousness; and find Peace, by living
among a people that live in peace; this will be a day of Rest which thou never
knew yet.

But I do not entreat thee, for thou art not to be entreated, but in the Name
of the Lord, that has drawn me forth to speak to thee; I, yea I say, I Command
thee, To let Israel go Free, and quietly to gather together into the place
where I shall appoint; and hold them no longer in bondage.

And thou A-dam that holds the Earth in slavery under the Curse: If thou will
not let Israel go Free; for thou being the Antitype, will be more stout and
lusty then the Egyptian Pharaoh of old, who was thy Type; Then know, That
whereas I brought Ten Plagues upon him, I will Multiply my Plagues upon thee,
till I make thee weary, and miserably ashamed: And I will bring out my People
with a strong hand, and stretched out arm.

Thus we have discharged our Souls in declaring the Cause of our Digging upon
George-Hill in Surrey, that the Great Council and Army of the Land may take
notice of it, That there is no intent of Tumult* or Fighting, but only to get
Bread to eat, with the sweat of our brows; working together in righteousness,
and eating the blessings of the Earth in peace.

And if any of you that are the great Ones of the Earth, that have been bred
tenderly, and cannot work, do bring in your Stock into this Common Treasury, as
an Offering to the work of Righteousness; we will work for you, and you shall
receive as we receive. But if you will not, but Pharaoh like, cry, Who is the
Lord that we should obey him? and endeavor to Oppose, then know, That he that
delivered Israel from Pharaoh of old, is the same Power still, in whom we
trust, and whom we serve; for this Conquest over thee shall be got, not by
Sword or Weapon, but by my Spirit says the Lord of Hosts.

William Everard, John Palmer, John South, John Courton. William Tailor,
Christopher Clifford, John Barker. Ferrard Winstanley, Richard Goodgroome,
Thomas Star, William Hoggrill, Robert Sawyer, Thomas Eder, Henry
Bickerstaffe, John Tailor, etc.


FINIS.

