AN EXPOSITION WITH Practical Observations UPON The three first Chapters of
the PROVERBS: Grammatical Rhetorical, Logical, and Theological.


As they were delivered in several EXPOSITORY LECTURES at Christ-Church in
Canterbury.

By FRANCIS TAILOR, B. in D.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Honorable Trustees for MAINTENANCE of MINISTERS, And other Pious uses,
etc.
William Steel Esquire Sergeant at Law, late Recorder of the City of London, now
Lord Chief Baron; Sir John Thorowgood of Kensington Knight, George Cooper,
Richard Young, John Pocock, Ralph Hall, Rich. Sidenham, Edward Hopkins, John
Humfries, and Edward Cresset, Esquires.
Honorable Gentlemen,
WHat the Sun is to the world, that the Scripture is to the Church. No man can
see the Sun it self, nor any thing in the world, but by the light of the Sun.
No man can know God, nor any of his creatures, aright, but by the Scripture.
The Rabbis tell us, (...). There is no glory but the Law. Aboth. cap. 4. And
Rab. Chija in the Jerusalem Talmud in Peah, tells us, that in his account,
(...) All the world wholly is not of equal value with one word out of the Law.
The labor then of those men of God, whom God has fitted for interpretation of
Scripture, is not lightly to be esteemed. The rather, because of the difficulty
and profitablenesse of the work. The difficulty Augustine sets out well, Lib.
11. super Genesis ad literam. Major est hujus Scripturae autoritas, quam omnis
humani ingenii perspicacitas. Greater is the ^uthority of this Scripture, then
the perspicacity of all humane wit. The profit of it is as well set out by
Hierom. ad Ephesians. lib. 1. Non putemus in verbis Scripturarum esse Evangelium, sed
in sensu; non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in sermonum foliis, sed in
radice rationis: Let us not think the Gospel is in the words of the Scriptures,
but in the sense; not in the outside, but in the marrow; not in the leaves of
words, but in the root of reason. Among many other Books of the Scripture, this
of the Proverbs excels in height of matter and expressions. It needs therefore
a careful Interpreter. The method used by me is new, and never formerly
exactly followed in every Verse, by any Writer, Protestant or Papist, that ever
I read.

1. Ye have the Grammatical sense in the various significations of every Hebrew
word throughout the Old Testament, which gives light to many other texts.

2. Ye have the Rhetorical sense, in the Tropes and Figures.

3. The Logical, in the several arguments.

4. The Theological, in divine observations.

If it be objected, that there are many Comments already on other Books of
Scripture, and on this in particular; I confess it is a truth. I my self have
made use of forty Writers on this Book of the Proverbs, as will appear by the
Catalogue of Authors added. Yet every one sees not so many, nor cannot
understand them all; nor have means to buy them, or time to read them. Will it
hurt any man to have the marrow of them all in one Book? Will it not save him
much time, money, labor? Besides, the Reader will find something new, that is
not in any of them. Gods hand is not shortened. He can as well manifest his
truth by us, as by former Writers. And the rather, because we have their help.
A dwarf standing on a gaints shoulders, may see further then the giant. I have
made choice of you (Worthy Gentlemen) for Patrons of this Work, not doubting,
but if any shall oppose the truth manifested in it, ye will stand up with me
for the defense of it. A more particular engagement to prefix your honorable
names, is that great trust the State has put in you, to take care of the
maintenance of many godly Ministers, upon whom many thousand souls depend in
this Nation. I have found you faithful and careful. So have many other godly
Ministers. The great God that has laid great a charge upon you, make you still
faithful dischargers, that so your names may be honorable to posterity, and
your souls saved eternally. So I shall never cease to pray, and ever remain

At your Honors service in the Lord, Francis Tailor.

Advertisements for the Reader.
Christian and courteous Reader,
BE pleased to observe a few things, which may help thee much in the perusing
of this Book.

I. Be not offended that the places cited in it are not set down at large, but
only some part of the Verses quoted. For,

1. The Reader may hereby perceive in what words the strength of the proof
lies; to wit, in those words he finds here. This I learned of the Jewish
Rabbis, who use not to transcribe the whole Verse cited, but only those words
wherein the strength of the proof is. Indeed the Masorites do otherwise. They
set down only the beginning of the sentence, and leave the Reader to seck for
the word in the text quoted. But this breeds trouble and confusion.

2. Writing thus concisely, will make men mind the better what they read.

3. It will make them look into their Bibles for further satisfaction.

4. It makes this Book the shorter, and so the cheaper.

II. Complain not that many things are taken out of other Writers and
Commenters. For,

1. Here is no wrong to them. God gave those notions to them, they to us, and
why may not we give them to others?

2. No wrong to thee who has the pith and marrow of forty Translations and
Comments in this Book. It would have cost thee (as it has done me) much more
money to buy them, much more time and labor to read them.

3. Thou will find many things added, that God has given in to me, that are
not in any of them; for all mine and theirs is from him alone, and to him is
due all the glory.

III. Object not to me, that for the various significations of the Hebrew
words, I borrow much out of the last Edition of the Annotations on the Bible,
out of the Notes upon Job. For,

1. It cannot be called borrowing, for a man to take his own, and none of my
partners in that great Work went that way but my self. And having taken much
pains there, why should I take more about the same words?

2. There I give only figures for chap. and verse. So that if the figures be
false printed (as they are too often) the Reader is to seek for the place. Here
I set down the words also, that he cannot mistake.

3. The figures are here also corrected by me in all I make use of from thence.

4. Some significations are added in some words.

5. Some are left out that were mistaken.

6. All have not money to buy, nor time to read those large Annotations.

IV. Where thou find other texts in this Book quoted for words, or proofs of
doctrines, there look for the like matter. For,

1. No man handles one point fully in one place.

2. God may give a man new matter the second time, not thought of before.

3. I did of purpose never look back to those former places, though they lay by
me, hoping that God that put me upon it again, would give me some other
thoughts of it.

V. Quarrel not that some places are twice quoted, and some things repeated in
the Book. For,

1. I may forget what I did before in so large a task.

2. All Readers will not read all the Book. So some may find them in one
place, some in another.

Lastly, whereas by reason of my far distance from tke press, many faults have
escaped, and I have therefore added a Table of the most material ones that
corrupt the sense, I desire that the Reader would follow the practice of a
godly and reverend Minister in Kent, who reads no Book till he have first
corrected all the faults in it with his pen, according to the Authors mind
expressed in the Errata. So shall thou meet with no such rubs in the way, nor
puzzle thine own head to find another man's meaning. This is all: and so
commending both thee and the Book to Gods special blessing, and desiring if
thou get any good by it, thou would give God the glory, and me thy prayers; I
remain

Thine in the Lord, for the furtherance of thy faith, Francis Tailor.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE Three first Chapters of the Proverbs.
PROVE. 1.1. The Proverbs of Solomon the son of David King of Israel.
IT is the custom of Preachers, and writers to say something by way of
Preface, when they begin a book. The Text it self gives occasion to speak of
the worth of the work, and of the Writer. But I shall by way of Preface speak
first of all Solomon's works comparing one with another. Secondly, of this
particular work. Three works there are of Solomon's in Scripture, arguments of
that large wisdom, which God gave him resembling his people: the one like the
sand on the sea shore, 1 King. 4.29. the other like the dust of the earth, 2 Chronicles. 1.9. That he begged, that he had. 2 Chronicles. 1.10, 11, 12. Give me now
wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people. For
who can judge this thy people, that is so great? And God said to Solomon,
Because this was in thine heart, and thou have not asked riches, wealth or
honor, nor the life of thine enemies, neither yet have asked long life, but
have asked wisdom and knowledge for thy self, that thou may judge my people,
ever whom I have made thee King: wisdom and knowledge is granted unto thee,
and I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honor, such as none of the Kings
have had, that have been before thee, neither shall there any after thee have
the like. The Proverbs set out true Wisdom; Ecclesiastes, worldly Vanity;
Canticles, heavenly Love. The first teaches us how to live in the world. The
second, how to wean us from the world. The third, how to rejoice in the love of
Christ. And Solomon varies the title sutably to the occasion. In the beginning
of the Proverbs, he writes himself King of Israel, that he might teach all his
people. In Ecclesiastes he calls himself King in Jerusalem, Eccl. 1.1. that the
people that had seen his vanity there, might not imitate it. In the Canticles
he takes no kingly title at all, Cant. 1.1. No more, but bare Solomon. Proprium
nomen sufficit, nescit se esse regem. He is content with his own name, taking
no notice that he was a King. He had no title to Christ's love as a King. Every
good subject of his had as much title to it as he. For this work of the
Proverbs, I shall treat of seven general heads.

1. Of the number of Solomon's Proverbs. 2. Of the time of uttering them. 3. Of
the speakers of these Proverbs. 4. Of composing them. 5. Of the manner of
speech in them. 6. Of the division of the book. 7. Of my manner of handling it.

For the first, The number of Solomon's Proverbs. They are said to be three
thousand, 1 King. 4.32.

Quest. What is become of all the rest, for we have not one thousand of them
left?

Answ. Either they were not written by himself or others, for it is not said he
writ them, but he spoke them: or else they were lost in process of time being
not so much regarded as the rest, as not appointed by God for canonical
Scripture to abide for the information of his people to the end of the world.
So all his Songs being one thousand and five, are lost, except the Canticles
the best of them: and all his Philosophical discourses of the nature of all
kind of bodily creatures, mentioned 1 King. 4.32, 33.

For the second thing, The time of uttering them. I conceive that Solomon did
ordinarily utter them at his table, and especially at feasts for the good of
such as did eat with him, or attended on him. It was the custom of the
Philosophers, and other wise men among the Heathen to speak of profitable
things at their meals, especially at supper, for they seldom had set dinners.
And the Jews feasts were ordinarily at supper, when the business of the day
was over, Luke 14.16. Rev. 19.9, 17. Hence it was said, that they who supt with
Plato, were better the next day, both for their temperate fare and good
discourses. Of this practice writ Atheneus, Plutarch, Gellius, Macrobius, and
others. Insita natura scientiae cupiditas efficit, ut etiam inter epulas
aliquid aut docerent aut discerent libenter, aut didiciss: se ostenderent,
Athen. l. 1. The desire of knowledge bred in men by nature caused them even in
their feasts, either to teach or learn something willingly, or to show that
they had learned. Indocti ex ea consuetudine eruditionis aliquid accipiunt, and
sicut mutae literae ex commixtione vocalium in valde concinna, and dearticulata
crumpunt verba: ita rudes isti ex convictu sapientum sapere incipiunt. Plutarch
in lib. Symposiac. Unlearned men out of that custom get some erudition, and as
consonants mixed with vowels break forth into very fit, and articulate words,
so these rude ones begin to be wise by feeding with wise men. And Homer the
wisest of their Poets, when he would bring in the Heathen Gods discoursing
about any weighty matter, brings them in speaking at a feast, Athen. l. 5.

And this custom of the Heathen in Philosophy was imitated by Gods people in
Divinity. As may appear by diverse allusions in this Book. So Solomon speaking
of a feast, says, The morsel which thou have eaten thou shall vomit up, and
lose thy sweet words, Prove. 23.8. and 25.11. A word fitly spoken is like apples
(...) gold in pictures of silver. As in the end of feasts they brought i^
yellow apples in wrought silver dishes (for so the word signifies) to conclude
the feast, which began with eggs, and ended with apples (ab ovo ad mala) so
when their bellies were full, then they began to feed their souls with some
spiritual food. So some read that in Cant. 8.2. I will bring thee into my
mothers house, there thou shall instruct me, I will cause thee to drink of
spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranats. Solomon's household provision
plentiful, and daily is set down, 1 King. 4.7, etc. And his wisdom annexed to
that discourse, verse. 29, etc. showed in speaking Proverbs, very likely at his
table. The Queen of Sheba observes the order of his table, and blesses his
servants, that attended, not for their delicate fare, but for hearing Solomon's
wise sentences there dropped out, 1 King. 10.5, 8. To this custom Solomon
alludes (or rather David, as we shall hear hereafter) when he brings in Wisdom
making a feast, and giving good counsel withal, chap. 9.1, etc. Men are
willing to learn of good housekeepers, that invite them, and of such as are
familiar and use to eat and drink with them. Therefore Christ the true Solomon
fed the people miraculously, that they might the more willingly hearken to his
Doctrine. And he taught often at the table, and largely at his last supper,
Joh. 13. A thing much neglected now adays, but very profitable, if men would
intermingle pious discourses with their meat, and so feed souls and bodies
together, themselves and others at the same table.

For the third thing, The speakers of these Proverbs. Some conceive them to be
all spoken by Solomon, but they are deceived. The contrary appears evidently.
For after that Solomon had delivered his own thoughts in the three first
Chapters, at the 4. verse of the 4 Chapter he brings in his father David
speaking. At the beginning of the 10 Chapter, he speaks again himself. In the
30 Chapter Agurs Prophecy is inserted and his mother Bathsheba's instruction
in the last Chapter. And some think that the first six verses of this chapter
were written by such as put the Proverbs together, as a Preface to the rest, as
some conceive the first Psalm to be made by Ezra, who (as they imagine) put
the Psalms in order. It being more fit in their understanding, for another man
to commend the work, ^en for Solomon himself. As it is certain, the end of
Deuteronomy was not written by Moses, nor the second of Samuel by Samuel, being
written after his death, as the other was after the death of Moses. Yet these
may be Solomon's words in the first six verses of this Chapter for all that
objection, and the style seems to speak as much. He might commend the work, not
out of oftentation, but out of desire to draw others to read it for their
spiritual good. So Jeremy commends his Prophecy by his pedigree, and by those
famous Kings under whom he prophesied. The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah
of the Priests that were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin, to whom the Word
of the Lord came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon King of Judah in the
thirteenth year of his reign, etc. In Job there are many speeches of others,
and in Isaiah, is Hezekiahs Song, yet the books bear the name of Job and
Isaiah. So we call the Psalms David's, yet many of them were made by others,
but the most by him. So may these be called Solomon's Proverbs, because the most
are his, and the rest collected out of his writings though first spoken by
others. Neither is there any necessity that those six verses should be written
after Solomon's death, as the end of Deuteronomy and second of Samuel were after
Moses and Samuels death.

For the fourth point, of composing them together. Some think they were all
written together by Solomon's own hand, and so delivered by him at first in one
entire piece, as now they are; and that Agur and Lemuel were names of Solomon,
or else imaginary persons brought in conferring with Solomon, as the Heathen
had such in their written Books of discourses at feasts. But that cannot be,
for Agurs name alone is not set down, but his parentage also, which is a note
of a true story, and that that Chapter is his. Lemuel indeed is taken for
Solomon himself by all or most Commenters, but the words are his mothers
instructions. Salazar to maintain this opinion is forced to say, that the two
last Chapters were written before chap. 25. that it might have some face of a
conference: others think, that though most of these Proverbs were uttered by
Solomon, and left in scattered papers, yet they were put together by others.
Quinchi thinks by the Prophet Isaiah. Others by Hezekiahs men. But the
likeliest is, that Solomon left all the twenty four first Chapters written in
that order that now they are. And that learned men appointed by Hezekiah, writ
the last out of Solomon's remaining papers, and among the rest Agurs Prophecy,
and Lemuels Mothers instructions. And that because in the beginning of the 25.
Chapter the Holy Ghost makes a transition from what was written before, (very
likely, entirely by the Author) and what was copied out after by Hezekiahs men.
The same thing learned men conceive of David's Psalms, that the 72 first were
left by David himself in that order they now stand, because of the conclusion
of the 72 Psalm, The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended. And that the
rest after, though many of them be of David's penning, yet were set in that
order by Ezra, or some other.

For the fifth thing, The manner of speech used in them. Sometime Solomon
speaks in his own words, sometime in his father David's, as chap. 4.4, etc. and
sometime in Agurs, as chap. 30. and sometime in his Mothers, as chap. 31. that
so he might affect men the more with this variety, and show whence he had his
first knowledge, and what pains both his parents took with him. A fit Precedent
for other parents.

For the sixth head, The division of the Book. There is in it, 1 Solomon's
Preface to his Proverbs in the three first chapters. 2 David's Catechism for
his son Solomon, with a short Preface of Solomon's to it, from the beginning of
the fourth chapter to the end of the ninth. 3 Solomon's own Proverbs not only
uttered, but written by himself, as appears by the title of the tenth chapter,
which reach to the end of chap. 24. 4 Such Proverbs of Solomon as were
collected by Hezekiahs men long after Solomon's death, from thence to the end of
chap. 29. 5 Agurs Prophecy, chap. 30. 6 Solomon's Mothers instructions, chap.
31. In the Preface and David's Catechism, the coherence may give light
sometimes, where the sentences hang well together. But in the other parts the
opposition in each verse, gives most light in many places, for there is seldom
any coherence of verses one with another, but distinct Proverbs uttered at
diverse times, and upon diverse occasions.

For the seventh and last thing propounded, My method in handling them shall be,

1. To give you the Grammatical sense, or translation, and original force,
and various significations of the words.

2. The Rhetorical sense, or interpretation, showing what is literally and what
figuratively spoken.

3. The Logical sense holding out the coherence of one verse or word with
another, and the strength of arguments couched in the words.

4. The Theological sense in some short observations out of the words, not
without suitable applications. I shall sometimes parallel these Proverbs with
other like Scriptures, and sometimes with sentences of other authors, and rob
the Egyptians to enrich the Israelites. I begin with the first part, and am
retiring to my text, as fast as I can. It is part of Solomon's Preface contained
in the three first chapters, for as for the six next from chap. 4. to chap. 10.
they are David's words. For Solomon fathers them upon him, chap. 4.4. and
discharges him not till chap. 10.1. and then challenges the rest following or
many chapters to himself, and sets his stamp upon them afresh. The Proverbs of
Solomon. Which had been needless, if Solomon had spoken before, since he
brought in David spaking. He sets out his Fathers goodness in teaching him so
abundantly, and his own in learning so plentifully.

To return to Solomon's words, note, 1. The inscription of the Book to the 7
verse of this chapter. 2. His counsel to his son to the end of the 3 chapter.
In the inscription note 1. The penman, verse. 1. 2. The profit and scope of the
book in the five verses following.

I am now arrived at the haven, and come to my Text. And first for the
Grammatical sense or translation of the words.

(...). The Proverbs. Vox gravida. A wo^d great with child. as Salazar calls
it. It contains much more under it, then we ordinarily conceive: it comes from
(...) which signifies, 1. To rule, Dan. 11.4. Which he ruled. And that for
diverse reasons.

1. Because Proverbs are most eminent ornaments of discourse, and excel in
speech, as Kings in a kingdom. They are of most account, and like stars do
illustrate our speech.

2. Because other speeches are deduced from them, as from undoubted principles,
and receive all their credit, and authority from them. These are like Axioms in
all Arts, worthy of credit in themselves, and from them other sentences are
derived by consequence, and therefore they rule over these latter, like Kings,
and other sentences must stand, or fall by their doom.

3. Because most of them are sentences coming from Kings and Princes, or others
eminent for wisdom, as princes in the Schools, whose sentences are
Chronicled, when other meaner men's words lie dead and buried. So David's,
Solomon's, Bathshebas; are here mentioned, and all Histories are full of such.

4. Because they are so certain that they have a throne in all men's minds, and
no man dare contradict them, but all that hear them are convinced of the truth
of them. Thus Christ's sentences had weight in them. He spoke as one that had
authority, and not as the Scribes, Mar. 1.22. His words were weighty like the
words of Kings, and rulers. The Greek word for a Proverb is (...) of (...) and
(...). Basil calls it (...), A word used by the way. Things commonly talked of
by passengers in the way, as generally believed. Or, because they were written
upon pillars in the highwayes, that travelers reading them might have occasion
of meditation, and discourse for their instruction, and correction. Athen.
Synops. l. 14. The Latin word Proverbium or Proverb is Proverbo, That which is
worthy to stand for a word.

2. The word may import a similitude, for (...) signifies sometimes to liken
one thing to another. Ezekiel. 16.44. Behold every one that uses Proverbs, shall
use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is the daughter.
And that,

1. Because a multitude of Proverbs are similitudes, wherein one thing is
compared with another. To this the Greek word (...) answers of (...) and (...),
To lay one thing by another. And so Hierom on Matthew, says, Parabola. est
rerum natura discrepantium sub aliqua similitudine facta collatio. A parable is
a comparison of things different in nature made under some similitude. Parables
compare things with things, persons with persons, state with state, business
with business.

2. Because they are an Anatomy, and character of good men's manners, and
express them as the seal does a picture in wax. A lively representation, and
likeness of them, and of their carriages in all conditions.

Under this word then are contained,

1. Principles in Divinity commonly believed of all, and used in common speech,
as Ezekiel. 18.2. What mean ye that ye use this Proverb concerning the land of
Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
are set on edge?

2. Witty sentences spoken by men of note for wisdom and learning, as these
Proverbs of Solomon.

3. Riddles or hard sayings, requiring labor for the understanding of them.
And so (...) and (...) a Proverb and a dark saying are used promiscuously. I
will incline mine ear to a Parable; I will open my dark sayings upon the Harp,
Psalm. 49.4. See the like, Psalm. 78.2. Such was Balaams proverb or parable,
Numb. 24.15.

4. Similitudes: So the unjust carriage of the great Kings of Judah, and Gods
destroying of them is set out under the fimilitude of two Eagles and a Vine,
Ezekiel. 17.2. etc. All of these kinds are to be found in this Book, and so they
may justly be called Proverbs.

Of Solomon. He was the son of David by Bathsheba, and appointed by God and him
to be heir of the Kingdom, though not the eldest son. His name carries peace in
it in the Original, and such was his reign. So was he called by God before he
was born, 1 Chronicles. 22.9. His name shall be Solomon, and I will give peace, and
quietness unto Israel in his days. This name was imposed on him by the Father,
as the Text runs, 2 Samuel 12.24. But the (...) or marginal reading, attributes
it to his Mother, reading (...), And she called his name Solomon. God gave him
another name there, verse. 25. the name of Jedidiah, because he loved him.
Doubtless then was Solomon saved, notwithstanding his errors, for whom God
loves he loves to the end, Joh. 13.1. Solomon is observed to be the first of
the writers of Scripture, that set his name before his Book. Moses did it not,
nor any other. If Nehemiah be objected, it is answered, that he lived long
after Solomon in the time of the captivity, though his book be set before to
continue the History of the Church, and Doctrinal, and Prophetical Books set
after. The Prophets that followed after, imitated Solomon, but not the
Historians, that went before. David writes his name indeed before some
particular Psalms, but not before the Book of Psalms.

The Son. The Hebrew word (...) a son comes of (...) to build. A son is a
better monument of a father, especially a wise and good son, then a stately
Palace left behind him. In this language speaks Sarah, Genesis 10.2. to Abraham
persuading him to go in unto her maid, It may be, that I may obtain children
by her, Heb. (...). be builded up by her; as in the margin of your Bibles. So
the Greek word (...) is thought to come of (...) to plant, A better memorial,
then a curious Garden.

Of David. His name is also taken from love, for God loved him, He was
preferred to the Kingdom, when Saul was rejected. Solomon mentions his Father,
as some other Sacred Writers do,

1. To preserve his Fathers memory, like a good child, that would not have his
Father forgotten so long as his own memory remains, even to the worlds end.

2. To show, how well he was bred, and whence he had his instruction at the
first.

3. To show, that his Father was a Prophet, as well as himself, and instructed
him from his youth in holy mysteries. It is Quinchis Observation in his Preface
before the twelve small Prophets. It is the Tradition of the Elders, says he,
that every Prophet that sets his own name, and his Fathers in the beginning of
his Prophecy, was certainly a Prophet, and the Son of a Prophet. He that sets
only his own name, was a Prophet, but not the Son of a Prophet. He that sets to
his name, and the name of his City, was a Prophet of that City. He that sets to
his name, and not the name of his City, was a Prophet of Jerusalem.

4. And lastly, for his own honor, though not to be proud of it. For it might
well be an honor to Solomon to have the title given afterward to Jesus
Christ, Matthew. 1.1. The Son of David. I mention this last, because though it
may become me to name it for Solomon's credit, yet I believe it was the least
reason of the rest in his eyes, who preferred Gods honor, and his fathers
before his own.

King. It may be understood either of David, or of Solomon, for both of them
were Kings of Israel.

Of Israel. Jacobs name, but here signifying his posterity. He got it by
wrestling with God, and it signifies a Prince with God, Genesis 32.28. And he
said, thy name shall be called no mate. Jacob, but Israel: for as a Prince have
thou power with God, and with men, and have prevailed.

For the Rhetorical sense, or interpretation. All is literal, but the first
word, and the last. We have no proper English word to express the first, and
therefore we call them by a Latin name, Proverbs. And under that name by a
figure of the part for the whole is comprehended, not speeches commonly vented
only, but also similitudes, riddles, and wise men's sayings. So the soul is put
for the whole man, Exodus 1.5. where seventy souls are said to come out of
Jacobs loins. We may call them by a Periphrasis, Excellent sentences, as by the
Greeks they are called (...), Things worthy to be taken notice of. For the last
word, Israel, Jacobs name. It is put for the Israelites his posterity by a
figure of the cause for the effect. So Judah for the Jews that came of him.
Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, Hos. 4.15.

Now for the Logical sense, or arguments. Here is 1. the effects, a Book of
Proverbs. The Proverbs. 2. The efficients; Solomon set it out, who is
described, 1. By an adjunct of his name, Of Solomon. 2. Of his pedigree, The
Son of David. He was David's son. 3. Of his Office, King of Israel. He was no
mean man, but as the son of a famous King, so was he himself King of Israel. I
must be brief in the Doctrinal Observations, and leave you to chew them, and
gather more, for my great work is Exposition, that ye may understand Scripture
aright, and be kept from errors. I beseech you bear with prolixity in
Exposition. It may be with me, as I find it with most Commenters, who are like
Horses, free at the beginning, and out of breath, before they end. And if you
bear with me, I will bear with you then, and God will bear with us all. The
same words will come again and again, which I shall refer to the former places
to avoid Tautologies, and that will be the mother of brevity. I come now to the
Theological sense or observations. The 1. Doctrine shall be general. 1. This
book of the Proverbes is of excellent use.

1. Because it consists of Proverbs, ruling sentences, full of wisdom and
gravity, more excellent then other sentences, and more current among men,
looked upon as Princes on earth, or as the two great lights, the Sun and Moon
among the Stars in heaven. More excellent then other Proverbs, which are merely
humane, whereas these are of divine authority, as being parts of Canonical
Scripture. Solomon was wise, but a greater then Solomon is here. Gods Spirit
directed him. More excellent then many other parts of Scripture, for not the
pith only, but the husk also is excellent. Sense, and expression are both
admirable. High matter and style. I will speak of excellent things. Heb.
Princely, or leading things, chap. 8.6. And also because they are all Proverbs.
So are not ordinary writings, nor other books of Scripture. This book
contains nothing, but illustrious sentences. They need not be marked with a
star, or finger, or N. B. Nota been, Mark well, in the margin, as in other
books: and as Seneca was fain to set marks in books, on things he liked, Epist.
6. for all here are remarkable. And after the nine first chapters ye need not
study for light by reading many verses together to find the sense of one: but
each contains its own light within it self, like a Lanthorn. They are like an
heap of Corn, wherein are many grains, but no one mixed with another, each has
its weight in it self. They are brief sentences fit for learners, for man's
memory is short, forgetful, and confounded with prolixity. They make the deeper
impression for their brevity. They contain matters of piety, morality,
civility, household affairs, and are useful for all men. They contain also many
parables, and similitudes, which are very fit to teach, (Christ taught often by
them) to persuade and delight. Take away metaphors out of Scriptures, and ye
take away a great part of the choycest household stuff out of the house. God
therein plays with us infants, and as it were stutters to us, and cures our
eyes with clay. He sets out things, that men are desirous to understand, and
are too high for them, by things more obvious, and delightful. If this will not
work with men, nothing will. So much Christ himself testifies, If I have told
you earthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye believe, if I tell you of
heavenly things? Joh. 3.12. Etiam sine probationibus ipsius monetis autoritas
adest, quo modo jurisconsultorum valent responsa, etiams^ratio non reddatur.
Advocatum ista non quaerunt, affectus ipsos tangunt, and naturd vim suam
exercente proficiunt. Even without any proofs money has authority in it self:
as Lawyers answers, though no reason be given. These seek no advocate, they
touch the affections themselves, and prevail by their own nature exercising its
strength. Senec. Epist. 94. And in the same Epistle, Quis negaverit brevissimis
quibusdam praeceptis, feriri efficaciter etiam imperitissimos? Haeo cum ictu
quodam audimus: n.c. ulli licet dubitare, aut interrogare, adeo etiam sine
ratione ipsa veritas ducit. Who can deny, that some very short precepts strike
effectually upon the most ignorant? These things we hear with a certain stroke:
neither may any man doubt, or ask; so far even without reason does the truth it
self lead. And in his 33. Epistle, Stoicorum tot us contextus virilis est:
inaequalitatem scias esse, ubi quae eminent notabilia sunt. Non est admirationi
una arbor, ubi in eandem altitudimen tota sylva surrexit. The whole context of
the Stoics is manly: know, that there is inequality, when some things more
eminent are observable. One tree is not admired, when the whole Wood is grown
to one height. And in the same place, Quocunque emiseris oculum, id tibi
occurret, quod eminere posset, nisi inter paria legeretur. Turn your eye, which
way you will, that will come to your view, that would be eminent, if it were
not read among equal sayings. Lastly, they contain many lively pictures of men's
manners, and carriages set out lively, and to the eye. Ye may see the sluggard
folding his arms, the drunkard reeling, as the Lacedaemonians showed their
drunken servants to their children, that they might abhor drunkenness; the
laborers working; the good houswise spinning, and employing her maids, and
providing for all her household; the King chasing away wicked counselors with
his eyes, so that they dare not appear in his presence. Pictures are very
delightful to us, and affect more then letters. We hang them therefore in our
sight. Sight of shadows works often more then words of substance. As musical
sounds sometimes make men weep, sometimes rejoice, being suitable to what is
within; so do Parables. Omnis imitatie est similis effectrix. Every imitation
brings forth the like. Plato. Dial. 2. de leg. They breed good manners, as well
as resemble them. Arist. Politic. l. 8. c. 5. Imagines and parabolas
necessarias existimo, ut imbecillitatis nostrae adminicula sint, and ut
discentem, and audientem in rem praesentem adducant. I judge Images and
Parables to be necessary in speech, that they may be helps to our infirmity,
and that they may bring the learner, and the reader into the thing as present.
Sense. Epist. 59. Praeclarae adinferendam rebus lucem repertae sunt
similitudines. Similitudes are found to be very excellent to bring light to
things. Quintil. Inst. l. 1.

2. Because they are Solomon's Proverbs, to whom God gave more wisdom then to
any other mere man since the fall, living either in his time, before, or after
it. For he was wiser then all men; then Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and
Chalcol, and Darda the sons of Mahol, and his fame was in all Nations round
about, 1 King. 4.31. When God gives more excellent gists to some then to
others, he conveys more excellent things to us by them, then by others. Greater
talents are put to greater use. Paul labored more then all the Apostles in
preaching and writing, and spreading the Word far and near. I labored more
abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15.10. From Jerusalem and round about to
Illyricum, I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.19. For God had
bestowed better breeding, and greater gifts on him then on others. I was
brought up (says he) in this City at the feet of Gamaliel, and taught
according to the perfect manner of the Law of the Fathers, Act. 22.3. He was
caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful
for a man to utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. He writ more highly, then the other writers of
the Epistles, (as John the beloved Apostle excelled among the Gospel writers)
to show what learning could do improved by grace, though now too much
contemned. Augustine wished for three things, To have seen Christ in the flesh,
Paul in the Pulpit, and Rome in her glory. So doubtless more excellent things
are communicated to and by Solomon, then some other holy writers; for pipes
filled with water, or Wine, run out accordingly. Solomon was also the son of
David. His Father was a powerful King, a wise Prophet, and an holy man, who
bred his son accordingly. Had he been meanly bred, as Amos among the herdmen of
Tekoa, Amos 1.1.7.14, 15. yet being so wise he had deserved audience, much more
coming of such a Father. He was also a King, not a subject, nor a Tyrant, but a
wise, and a good King. Kings speeches though mean are Chronicled, and greedily
received, as from those that in regard of their Office have Gods Image stamped
upon them, and are called Gods, Psalm. 82.5, 6. In that respect they are worthy
of audience. Neither was he King of a small Nation, but of Israel a great
people, which he guided with much wisdom, and made very prosperous, and
therefore may well guide us by his counsels. He was King of all Israel, of all
the twelve Tribes, before the Kingdom was lessened by division, as afterward.
It was much more populous in his time, then in after days. He was also King of
Gods people, and of his only people upon earth, a great, wise, and
understanding Nation, Deuteronomy. 4.6. and best able to judge of these Proverbs of
all the people in the world. Having Gods Law to guide them, they could best
discern the solidity of Solomon's Proverbs. And fit it was that they should have
a very wise King. Therefore we may the better learn of him. As this adds to
Solomon's honor to be King over the wisest people in the world, so to our
esteem of the Book written by the wisest man, a great King, and son of a great
King, and King of the wisest people.

The first use is for Ministers to study these Proverbs well, that they may be
able to crack the shell, and give the kernel to the people. So great is the
fullness of these sentences, that though many have written, and preached on
this book already, yet they have left matter enough for others. As in the
silver and other rich mines men are daily digging, and yet still meet
successively with more matter of like price, that which the word (...) alludes
unto, Joh. 5.39. So the treasures of divine wisdom in this Book cannot be
drawn dry. Study it well, that ye may not wrong the writer, as one writing on
Job said, that if Job were now alive, he would be more weary of his Comment
then he was of all his troubles; and so he left writing, as despairing of ever
finding out Jobs true meaning. He that will profit by these Proverbs, must
bring the words to the speakers intention, and not force them to serve his own.
You must not make a Sermon first, and then choose a Text here: but first choose a
Text, and then gather points naturally out of it, the words being well cleared
first, because often they are more obscure then in some other books.

The second use is for the people, that they should read this book often, and
hear it expounded willingly. Many despise Books, because written by mean men.
This is by a famous King. King James his Basilicon Doron took much for the
Authors sake. Here the Sun stands still for your instruction, as he did in
Gibeon. Woe to them, who hear not Solomon Preaching within their gates, when
the Queen of Sheba went so far to her great cost to hear him. And woe to those
great Politicians, that leave Solomon to follow Matchiavil. How great a favor
is it to confer daily with so great a King? How great a fin is it to leave him
to confer with humane works, as if a young man should leave a choice Lady to
woo a nasty beggar woman? Here is a golden, there a leaden pen. If Solomon's
Crown, or Sword, or Scepter were to be seen, how would people flock after it?
His Books are his best relics. No danger of superstition in conversing with
these. Here is Solomon's Crown, and Jewels, and treasure. Attend then to the
reading of them, or hearing of them expounded to the ends mentioned in the five
verses following, and if thou attain to them, thou will not lose thy labor.

For particular observations. The Proverbs. 2. Doct. All Scripture should be
read with diligence, but some places more carefully, then other. As the
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Isaiah, John's Gospel, Paul to the Romans,
the Revelation, as written in an higher strain then others, and containing high
mysteries. Use. Be sure to be awake, and watchful in perusing these of all
others; yet be negligent in none. Carry thy eyes about thee in these Books
especially.

Of Solomon. Peaceable. A good name imposed by his Parents. 3. Doct. It is was
the use of good men to do so, and it is very laudable. They had more
Prophetical infight in this business, and were more guided by Gods Spirit then
we. Hence Isaac had his name from laughter, Jacob from supplanting, Noah from
rest; Zedekiah the King, and Jehozadac the high Priest before the captivity had
Gods justice set forth in their names. But after the captivity, the great men's
names set out Gods mercy, as Ezra an helper, Nehemiah bringing comfort from
God, Jehoshua the High Priest taught them by his name, that God would save
them. We have not that gift, yet may impose good names, that may put our
children in mind of good things, unless they forget their own names. So the
Saxons in this Island gave their children good names, though now through the
alteration of the language men understand not their own names. Edmund signifies
a mouth of troth, as Verstegan would have it, or blessed peace, as Camden
renders it: Like our Solomon's name. Edward keeper of his oath, Frances free. We
say still, Frank and free. Hugh, Joy, or comfort. Humfry Home peace. Ralph
helping by counsel. Richard a liberal mind. Robert famous in counsel. Roger a
preserver of quietness. Rouland the rest of the Country. It were well if men
would give good names to children now, that might be monitours of good to them,
when their parents shall be dead.

More particularly. 4. Doct. Solomon's name, Peaceable, shows, what the
disposition of a King, or Magistrate should be. He should with Mordecai, seek
the wealth, and peace of his people. Esth. 10.3. Apes iracundissimae, atque pro
captu corporis pugnacissimae aculeos cruentos effusos in vulnere relinquunt,
sed solus rex earum aculeo semper caret: natura enim telum ei detraxit, and
iram ejus inermem reliquit. The Bees the most angry creatures and quarelsome
for their bigness, leave cruel stings shot out in the wound, but their King
only always wants a sting: for nature has taken away his weapon and left his
anger without a dart. Senec. de Clem. l. 1. It were good for the world if Kings
had no stings. Trajan was so merciful, that he was angry, that a Traitor was
executed without his knowledge, and commanded it should be no more, saying, He
is a mad man, that had rather pluck out his sore eyes, then cure them. He had
more desire to root out wickedness, then wicked men. If men's nails be sharp
they pull them not off, but pare them. Musicians break not strings out of tune,
but put them in tune. Yet sometimes though to the pain of the body, a member
desperately ill must be cut off, lest it gangrene all the rest. Ne pars sincera
trahatur.

The Son. Ye heard before the word comes from building. 5. Doct. Men defire to
leave memorials behind them. The best is a good child like the Father, as
Solomon was like David. Had Absalom had a son then alive, he would never have
built him a pillar to keep his name in remembrance, 2 Samuel 18.18. Our children
may honor God, when we are dead. An ancient Minister of good note in this
Nation, being unmarryed himself, reasoning with a married Gentlewoman about the
best estate of the two, pleaded his great freedom he had from family cares,
and for his studies. She calls a child of hers, and catechizes him before the
Minister. Now Sir (said she) you had need serve God well, while you live, for
he shall get no glory by you in this world, when you are dead. This child may
honor God, when I am gone, and others that may come from him, to the worlds
end. This may teach Parents,

1. To be thankful to God for children. If cattle be a blessing, Deuteronomy. 28.4.
what are children then? The barren leave no remembrances behind them. When an
old tree dies, it is a comfort to see a young one come up in the room.

2. Endeavor to make your children Gods children. If God give Samuel to Hannah,
Hannah will give him back to God again, 1 Samuel 1.11.

Of David. Beloved, of God. This was better then his Kingdom. 6. Doct. Gods
love is more worth then all the world. Because he can do more for us then all
the world can, both here and hereafter. This is the Saints triumph. Unto him
that loved us be glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Rev. 1.5, 6. And Paul's
glory in particular. I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me. David
might be so called, because his parents loved him, but much more, because God
loved him.

Try then whether ye be David's, and Jedidiahs, beloved of God; ye need no
greater portion. All in heaven, and earth is yours. God has dealt graciously
with me (says Jacob) and I have all things. (...). so it should be translated,
whereas an Esau not beloved of God can say no more, but (...). I have much: for
so the words run in the Original, Genesis 33.9, 11.

Another point may be observed from hence, that (7 Doct.) A wise son of a godly
Father makes a sweet harmony. He comforts his Father while he is alive. A wise
son makes a glad father, Prove. 10.1. See the like chap. 23.15. My son if thine
heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine, or, even I. Altogether. Not
my heart alone shall joy, but my tongue also shall utter it. He is no shame to
his Father, while he lives, Prove. 27.11. My son be wise, and make my heart
glad, that I may answer him that reproacheth me. He will revive his memory with
credit, when he is dead. No doubt but many in Solomon's best days were ready to
say, This was David's son. Though he be dead, yet he lives in him. Let children
then learn to be comforts to their Parents, while they live, and their life
shall be long, and comfortable in Gods land, Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy. 5.16. They
shall also honor their parents memory, when they are dead, and have others to
comfort and honor them according to Gods promise to the house of the
Rechabites, who kept their dead Fathers commands, Therefore Jonadab the son of
Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever, Jer. 35.19.

King. 8. Doct. If it be meant of David, it shows, what a great blessing to a
State a good Governor is. He will see that God be honored, and use his power,
as David did, to settle the Ministry, that his people may not only be quiet
under him, but live with him for ever in heaven, where he shall be no Ruler,
nor they no subjects. Pray then that our Governors may be such, and we enjoy
Gods Ordinances purely under them.

9. Doct. If it be meant of Solomon, it sets before us the benefit of living
under wise Rulers, who know how to protect their subjects against all perils,
and bring plenty unto a Nation, as Solomon did. This should make us to pray to
God so to direct our Rulers, that we may daily live more quietly and
plentifully under them.

10. Doct. Secondly, it informs us, that dependence on othere is a great
hinderance to those, that should teach others. Solomon might speak freely, and
spare none, being free from all servile dependences. Hope of gain, or fear of
displeasure keeps back much, that might be taught. We learn hence then, that
our Teachers should not be almesmen, but have a certain means, be the Auditors
pleased, or displeased. Else are they worse provided for in the Gospel, then
under the Law. No man then could deny Tithes, or Offerings. Their Office is not
arbitrary, but necessary to the end of the world. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. God has
has appointed Teachers to abide, Till we all come in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ. And certainly all will never come to
this height in this world. As long therefore as this world remains, they that
have a certain work, should have a certain maintenance.

Of Israel. 11. Doct. Gods people have need of Government. Ever since they
outgrew a family they had public Governors, either foreiners, as in Egypt, or
of their own, as Moses, Joshua, Judges, Kings. For all men have not grace to
guide themselves aright, no not in the best Churches. And such as have grace
are imperfect, and very subject to be partial in their own case, and had
therefore need of others to rule over them, and judge in their affairs. This
reproves those, that place all government promiscuously in all the people
without respect of Officers, and so by their creed utterly overthrow the fifth
Commandment. How would an Army be governed, if there were no Officers in it?
This practice would subvert Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and Families; for why
should not children and servants help to govern there, as well as private
Subjects in a Commonwealth? Lycurgus, when one desired him to set up a popular
government in the City, bid him first set it up in his own house, and if the
other liked it there he would set it up in the City. (...). Plutarch Sympos.
Salus populi suprem^^ lex, The safety of the people is the highest law, carries
another sense then the Levellers would give it. Not that all people, when they
think themselves wronged may right themselves disorderly against authority, for
then the Christians, when in former time they grew numerous, needed not have
been Martyrs, and they in their Apologies give out, that they could free
themselves by multitudes, but against lawful authority they knew no arms, but
prayers and tears. They that cry, All the Lords people is holy, to pull down
Magistrates, and Ministers, whom God has set over his people, are least holy
themselves. Witness Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their company, and Gods
judgments on them. The Proverb then rather shows that rulers should look more
at the peoples good, then their own, and not that private men should revenge
their own supposed wrongs against Magistrates, or others. Let us make this use
of what has been said, so to plead our freedom in Christ, that we resist not
lawful authority. Else we may look that others, enemies, or inferiors pull us
down. Avoid tumults: see authority go before you. Else as ye bring confusion,
so ye may expect it: Subjection to men set over you by God, will bring an
eternal blessing on you from God.

Verse. 2. To know wisdom and instruction, to perceive the words of
understanding.
In the five verses following is set down the excellent use of the Book of The
Proverbs, and singular good that may come to us thereby. Before he had by a
fair title, and large commendation of the Author sought to make the Reader
attentive in reading it. Now he seeks to make him flexible, and willing to be
taught, and to give credit to what he should read by setting forth the
excellent uses of this book.

1. The general end is set down, verse. 2, 3. showing what it may bring to all
men.

2. The particular end, what it may bring to young and simple ones, verse. 4.
what to wise men, verse. 5, 6.

The general end is 1. Theological, verse. 2. 2. Practical, v. 3. Both are
called Wisdom, and both are so. To retire to this 2. v. And first for the
words. Many words here seem to be of the same signification, or at least to
differ but little. We had therefore need to weigh the natural force, and
different significations of each word; for variety of words is used to make us
the more affected with the Book.

To know. To convey to man the knowledge of those things he knew not before.

Wisdom. In this verse it is taken for the Theorical part of wisdom, to know
the truth of things, as appears by the opposition of manners in the next verse.
It may be meant of wisdom in general, knowledge of the truth; for many
Philosopical truths are contained in this Book. But it has a special eye to
the knowledge of God, and divine truths, as appears, verse. 7. And it signifies
an exact knowledge of things by the causes, or other properties, whereby we may
be able to distinguish between real, and apparent truths.

And Instruction. The word properly signifies the manner of teaching, by which
wisdom is attained. It is set after wisdom, because that is the end and
perfection of instruction, and therefore more worthy then the means. Finis
primus in intention, ultimus in executione. The end is first in intention,
last in execution. Men think of dwelling, before they think of building. It
signifies such instruction, as is communicated to boys joined with correction,
for the word imports both. To make scholars bred up under severe discipline to
learn wisdom. These Proverbs are better then rods. They will teach, what rods
cannot.

To perceive. Heb. To understand, or make to understand.

The words. For thoughts cannot be understood. They are known only to God. Nor
deeds are not said to be understood, but to be seen. Understanding properly
has relation to that which comes in at the ear.

Of understanding. Words of weight worthy to be understood, and well understood
by those that delivered them, and coming from men of great understanding, and
making them such, that learn them. Acute sentences full of good matter, fit to
pass for authentical, like current money. This specifies what wisdom the
holy Ghost here meant, to wit, knowledge of things to be believed. As in the
next verse, he first names wisdom, and then shows what kind of wisdom he
means. To know justice, etc. I will not trouble you with that, that troubles
the interpreters, how to distinguish wisdom, instruction, and understanding
into knowledge by causes, or other arguments, and many other distinctions, for
I take it, the latter in each verse do but expound the former: and
instruction, knowing, perceiving, and receiving do but set out the means of
attaining it.

For the figures. Wisdom. A figure of the general for the special. For divine
wisdom, which indeed is the best of all other wisdom, and deserves to carry
away the name from all the rest. Humane truths are not to be named the same day
with divine. So Christ is called the Son of man, Gods Word the Bible, and
Scripture, because he is the most excellent Son of Man, and it the most
excellent book, and writing.

Instruction. A figure of the cause for the effect. For the wisdom gotten by
instruction. As Judah and Ephraim for their posterity. Or, of the adjunct for
the object. Instruction for the things, wherein men are instructed, as hope
reserved for us in heaven, for the things hoped for there, Col. 1.5.

Of understanding. A figure, either of the efficient for the effect, as before,
because they came from understanding men: or of the matter, because they
contain things worthy to be understood: As here is wisdom, Rev. 13.18. that
is, wise matter. Or of the effect, because they breed understanding men. As
pale death, because it makes men pale.

For the division, and arguments. 1. Note the general. 2. The particular. The
general, To know wisdom, and instruction. And in it 1. The act. To know. 2.
The object. Wisdom. 3. The means to attain it. Instruction. In the particular,
the wisdom here meant is set out, 1. By an act. To perceive. 2. By the object.
The words. 3. The adjunct. Of understanding.

The Observations follow. 1. Doct. In reading Scripture the end should be
always before our eyes. Solomon writ the Proverbs, that men might get wisdom
by reading them. So the builder still minds his end, whether he build for
himself, or to let out for gain, and builds his house accordingly. It is Gods
great question in religion, To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices
to me, says the Lord? Isai. 1.11.

Reason. 1. The end incites to the work. Much profit sets the Seaman, Plowman,
Tradesman on work. Omnia in rebus humanis spebus aguntur: All endeavors in
humane affairs are driven on by hopes: Salu. contra avar. Spes alit agricolas,
spes sulcis semina credit. Hope nourishes the husbandman, and makes him commit
his seed to the furrows. Tibul. l. 2. el. 7.

2. The end orders all the means. No man can fit the means, unless the end be
in his thoughts. Workmen, matter, form, all must be ordered by the end.

3. The end attained perfects the work. It is imperfect till the end be
attained.

4. Senseless things only set no end before them, as fire, and water. Beasts
have an end, they go to the pastures, and to the waters, that their life may
continue. Use. It blames most readers of Scripture, which travail to no end.
They read a chapter, or make their children do it out of custom merely, but
know not why, or wherefore. Why should Gods Word be worst used by them? They
work, and play for some end, but read for none, and therefore are never the
better.

2. Doct. Wisdom is to be gotten out of Scripture. Solomon writ his Proverbs
to teach men wisdom. The holy Scriptures are able to make Timothy wise unto
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. The writers were wise men, as Moses, who was learned in
all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. David's wisdom and Solomon's are
well known by their works, and reigns. Paul's also, who was brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect manner of the law of the
Fathers, Act. 22.3. As for Daniel, God gave him knowledge, and skill in all
learning, and wisdom, and he had understanding in all Visions, and Dreams,
Dan. 1.17. Those that were not learnedly bred, had tongues, and wisdom given
them from God immediately. The Lord took Amos an Herdman, and bid him
prophecy, Amos 7.14, 15. He found him unfit, but he made him fit, else no
doubt, he would not have sent him. Some of the Apostles were Fishermen. But on
the day of Pentecost, They were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to
speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance, Act. 2.4. From
wise men we look for wise Books. But that which is more then all this, the most
wise God guided their heads and pens, which had been enough to have made a man
blind and foolish to write aright, and wisely. Holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Use. Lose not your labor then to
seek heavenly wisdom in humane writings with neglect of the Scriptures, as
your great Politicians and Moralists do. Men seek it in many arts, businesses,
studies, inventions, but in vain: here it is to be found, and abundantly more
then elsewhere. Experience confirms it in David, who by reading the Scripture,
became wiser then his enemies, teachers, elders, Psalm. 119.98, 99, 100.
Sapientia sapida scientia. Wisdom is a sappy knowledge. And sure the marrow of
wisdom full of spiritual delight is to be found in the Scriptures. It may
better be learned here, then out of Lipsius his Bee-hive, or Matchiavills
Spiders web.

3. Doct. Divine truths are far more excellent then other. Therefore are they
called wisdom here by way of excellency. Men may be spoiled by vain Philosophy
following men's Traditions, and worldly rudiments, and not the doctrine of Jesus
Christ, Gol. 2.8. Philosophy may be profitable, but vain in comparison of
Divinity. Nothing but Christ will down with a Paul, I determined not to know
any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. The
matter proves it, being not bodily, but spiritual; not moral, but holy; not
civil, but heavenly; not treating of creatures, but of God himself. Use. Be
more studious to know these, then any Arts in Schools, University, or trading,
for which men can be content to serve an apprentiship. It is a better trade.
Read, hear, meditate, advise, learn by your selves, and others.

4. Doct. There is need of wisdom to guide both the understanding, and the
will. For the understanding is blind. Man is born like the wild Asses colt,
Job 11.12. Hence came so many superstitious among the Heathen, Because they
knew not God. Hence arose so many foolish opinions among the Papists, of
merits, and prayer to Saints, and good meanings. Hence spring so many ignorant
assertions among us, as that men have served God ever since they were born:
that they shall be saved, because they have done no man wrong, nor none can say
black is their eye. And the will must needs mislead men then, for if the blind
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Matthew. 15.14. Use. Let us
bewail our natural misery, that neither know, nor care, how to do well. It is
a great grief to Gods people, that they know not how to do right in some
cases. It is a great unhappiness, that befalls many wise men, that they have no
will to do the good they know. But both together how great a mystery? Yet all
naturally subject to it.

5. Doct. Divine truths must be enquired into as well as divine precepts. Hence
comes that charge, Buy the truth, and sell it not, Prove. 23.23. Knowledge of
the truth is a great privilege. Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free, J^h. 8.32.

Reason. 1. Because the sun and eye of the soul is reason and understanding.
The Suns light is pleasing to the bodily eye, so is the discovery of truth to
the soul.

2. There is no content in any place, or calling without the knowledge of the
mysteries thereunto belonging. Use. It blames such as slight all truths in
matter of knowledge. Moral things they like, they may bring some good to the
Commonwealth, but as for heavenly truths, they make no reckoning of them. All
need not be Divines (say they) yet there are divine truths, that all had need
to know, else why did God reveal them? Why a Sun in the Firmament? Is it not to
show us the beauty of the world, as well as how to work and travail?

6. Doct. Pains must be taken to distinguish real truths from apparent. So is
Christs-precept. Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Dig as for minerals; ye have
the example of the noble Bereans, who hearing Paul searched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things were so, Act. 17.11.

Reason. 1. Because real, and apparent truths are hard to be distinguished, and
that upon a double account. First, in regard of their likeness. As copper is
like gold, pewter like silver. Secondly, because of our blear-eyednesse, that
cannot well judge of colors, and so may easily call light darkness, and
darkness light.

2. Because they are worth distinguishing, the one being far more excellent,
then the other. More then silver is better then pewter, or gold then copper.
Melius est pallens aurum quam fulgens aurichalcum. Better is pale gold, then
shining copper. Bern. Use. Read therefore with understanding, and what thou
know not or can not answer, go to Ministers, or other learned in Gods
Word to know the meaning of it, as men do to Lawyers in hard cases of Law for
resolution, and to Physicians for their bodies.

7. Doct. Instruction is the means to get wisdom out of Scripture. So Luke
dedicates his Gospel to Theophilus, that he might know the certainty of those
things, wherein he had been instructed, Luke 1.4. The Apostle reckons it as a
difficult, (if not impossible) thing, to believe without hearing a Preacher,
Romans 10 14

Reason. 1. Because therefore God gives more knowledge to some, then to others,
that they might as Conduit-pipes pour out to others, or as rich men, yet Gods
Stewards give to others.

2. Experience shows it in all Arts, and Trades. Men learn their skill from
Teachers, and Masters, Artifices sine Doctore esse non possunt. None can prove
workmen without a teacher, Hieron. ad Paulin. Use. Let us not be ashamed to be
taught, or to reveal our own ignorance, that we may learn truth. The sick man
is not ashamed to tell the Physician his disease, (...). Neither is it good to
hide ignorance, as Heraclitus says, but to bring it forth, that it may be
healed. Plut. de audiend. Vid. eundem advers. Epicur. de latend. Some are
willingly ignorant, 2 Pet. 3.3. Sunt qui volunt intelligere, and non valent:
sunt and qui nolunt intelligere, ideo non intelligunt. Aug. in Psalm. 35. Some
would understand, and cannot: and some will not understand and therefore do
not. Homo aliquando mente nimium perversa time^ intelligere, ne cogatur, quod
intellexerit, facere. Idem de verb. Apost. Sermon. 13. Sometimes a man out of a
mind too perverse fears to understand, lest he be forced to do what he
understands. Be not fastened to the world, as Sea-weeds to rocks. Long more for
instruction, then Ulysses did for the smoke of his house after ten years
absence. As the Scripture sets out spiritual arms to maintain truth, so
instruction teaches us how to fit, put on, go in, and use them. Fire in a
flint must be beaten out. There is then excellent use of Ministers to bring
forth the fire of truth out of Gods Word.

8. Doct. Hearing divine truth without understanding does men no good. Lots
sons in law perished for all Lots counsel, Genesis 19. and the old world, though
warned by Noah, Genesis 7. For it is affected and wilful ignorance, as not seeing
when the Sun shines. Use. Beware of the gross ignorance of these days,
notwithstanding so much preaching more then formerly. Say ye not, ye are
Protestants, and hear Sermons: that will not save you. He must not be saved by
his Book that cannot read, nor he by Gods Book, that understands it not.
Eternal life is not to hear, but to know. This is life eternal, that they might
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.

9. Doct. Knowledge of trivial things is little worth. It is like Fishermen by
the Seaside gathering fine shells, and letting Oysters alone, or fools playing
with feathers. Hereby much precious time and labor is lost. Use. It should be
our wisdom to pass by such things, as being known will do us little good,
that we may have time for better things. A good choice of matter, and books is
a great help. A bad choice a great hinderance.

10. Doct. Knowledge of divine truth will do us much good. It will bring us
acquainted with God more fully then the creatures can, Psalm. 19. comp. verse. 1.
with verse. 7. It will show us the way to heaven, Joh. 17.3. Use. Go to the
Fountain Gods Word. Thirst for those living waters as the Heart, Psalm. 42.1. C^y
out with David, Oh how do I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day
Psalm. 119.97.

Verse. 3. To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
equity.
The former verse directed us to Theorical, this to practical wisdom. For the
words, To receive. From others by instruction. The word (...) signifies,

1. To receive, or take away from others by force, as 2 Samuel 12.30. He took
their Kings Crown from off his head.

2. To receive what is purposely given, Thou shall not take a gift, Deuteronomy. 16.19.

3. To take a thing not given, As though they would have fetched wheat. Heb.
Taken wheat, 2 Samuel 4.6.

4. To receive instruction, or to learn of another, as Job 22 22. Receive I
pray thee the Law from his mouth.

5. To allure, or take with fair speech, Let her not take thee with her
eyelids, Prove. 6.25. So there is a taking of souls, Pr^v. 11.30. He that
wins (Heb. takes) souls, is wise. And the Apostles were made fishers to
take men, Matthew. 4.19. Here the word is taken in the fouth sense for learning,
and receiving knowledge out of these Proverhs, which do minister, and offer it
plentifully to us, and are it were dead teachers of living men. Much is got by
conferring with the dead in their Books.

The Instruction. Expounded before in the second verse to be not a particular
head of knowledge, but the way of attaining it, or receiving from our teachers.

Of Wisdom. Not (...) as before, Theorical wisdom, but (...), Prudence, or
providence. It comes from a root, that signifies good forecast, wifely to
foresee all conveniences, and inconveniences, that we may order our actions
aright. So it is used, 1 Samuel 18.30. David behaved himself more wisely then all
the servants of Saul. Hence it signifies to prosper. For prosperity ordinarily
follows wife managing of business, as ruin follows foolish carriage of
affairs. Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them, that ye may
prosper in all that ye do, Deuteronomy. 29.9. The first signification is here
intended. Such instruction as may teach a man how to carry himself wisely, that
he may prosper.

(...) Justice. That is, giving every one his right. Not to be restrained to
Magistrates alone, but to be applied to the people also, for all may do right
or wrong to others, though they be no Magistrates.

Judgment. The word (...) is used,

1. For discerning right from wrong. The aged do not always understand
judgment, Job 32.9.

2. For the law, manner or rule of it. The judgments of the Lord are true,
Psalm 19.9.

3. For punishment or execution of judgment. God would bring forth his people
out of Egypt by great judgments, Exodus 7.4. Here it is used in the first
fignification to teach men how to discern right from wrong: Neither is this
peculiar to Magistrates, but common to others also, for though all have not an
authorative judiciary power either in Church or Commonwealth, yet all have a
power so far as concerns their own actions, to judge before, and after, what is
fit to be done to others, and what not.

And equity. Heb. (...). Straight ways, that go on foreright, and even like
plains when men go not up hill, and down hill in their actions, but proceed in
an even course. It comes from a word that signifies to be right, and equal. It
is translated taking the straight way; 1 Samuel 6.12. It signifies also a thing
right in Gods, or man's eyes, which they approve as just and equal, Doing that
which is right, and good in the sight of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.18. Because that
which is right pleases God, and should please men also, although it be to
their loss. Heb. Equilies, that is, all kind of equity, or equity in all our
actions, not in some only: or it may be the word wants a singular in Hebrew.
Wisdom then is required for the guiding of all these three, justice,
judgment, and equity. Some think these three words to contain three several
virtues, but cannot well distinguish them. All three are found, chap. 2.9. Some
understand by Justice the matter of our actions, that it be lawful; by
Judgment the manner of them, that it be right; by Equity, moderation, that we
use not the extremity of the law, nor do all that we may. Others understand by
Justice right actions, by Judgment discerning good from evil, by Equity
integrity of mind in working and discerning. Set out by the clean creatures in
the law. The first by chewing the cud, ruminating on Gods Word to know what is
just. The second by dividing of the hoof, distinguishing between good and
evil. The third by the fishes, that live in the clear water above the mud. So
a right mind carries us above the sinful ways of the world. Others by Justice
mean that which is just, and right by Gods Law or man's, by Judgment that which
is due by contracts or bargains, by Equity that which nature dictates to be
equal. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. That which thou would not
have done to thee, do not to another. Others take them all to be Synonymas,
fignifying the same thing, and trebled to work more upon men's affections,
especially there being some difference in the notion, though the things be the
same. Justice looking to the object, what is Gods right, what man's, what our
own. Judgment looking to the workman, who must discern the difference, that
each may have his right. Equity looking to the manner of doing it, not going
too far, nor falling short in any of them. This last I think to be right,
because the former do either interfere one with another, or do not so well
agree with the nature of the words, and use of them in Scripture, where they
are often put promiscuously.

Figures I find none, the words being all literally to be understood.

Here is first another general end of these Proverbs to teach us practical
wisdom.

2. An explanation of it by particulars.

In the general note 1. an act. To receive. 2. The instrumental cause. The
instruction. 3. The object. Of wisdom, or prudence.

The particulars are three, 1. Justice. 2. Judgment. 3. Equity.

1. Doct. Matters of practice must not be perceived only, but also received.
There is a piercing of truth into the understanding, and a receiving of it into
the judgment. The natural man cannot receive the things of God, because he
cannot perceive them, 1 Cor. 2.14. So in matters of practice, there must first
be a knowledge of them in the understanding, and then a receiving them in the
will, and affections, before they can be brought into action. The seed on good
ground are they, which in an honest, and good heart having heard the Word keep
it, and bring forth fruit with patience, Luke 8.15.

Reason. 1. Because they do a man no good, if they only swim in his brain.
What good does a Physicians, Lawyers, Seamans knowledge without a will to
practice it for his own good, and others?

2. They attain not to their end else, but are like fruit falling before it be
ripe, or a ship cast away.

3. As the proper Element of truth is the judgment, so the will and affections
of holiness, and righteousness. Elements out of their place do hurt. A man
knows, that there is a God; if he would be this God himself like Alexander, and
challenge divine worship, he might ruin himself and others. So a man knows
what is to be done, and believes it, yet if he have a mind to do otherwise,
much mischief may follow. Air in the earth breeds earthquakes. Fire out of the
chimney burns houses: Earth falling in mines kills men. Water overflowing drowns
cattle. Use. It reproves such, as have good heads, but not good hearts,
illumination without sanctification, whose knowledge appears in their tongues,
not in their lives, and serves to guide others, but not themselves. If ye know
these things, happy are ye, if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. ye are not happy for
knowing, but unhappy for not doing, and shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke
12.47. Brag not of your knowledge then, that have no will to do good with it.
A cunning Papist, and Protestant may reason the case of religion, yet both go
to hell, the one for idolatry, the other for want of piety. A Moralist, and an
Epicure may both dispute of the chiefest good, yet both meet in hell, the one
for lack of faith in Christ, the other for a vicious life. Subdue your will
then, or look to perish by your wit.

2. Doct. Knowledge is ordinarily received from others. Theophilus had his
knowledge from instructors, Luke 1.4. Apollos from Aquila and Priscilla, Act.
18.26. Abraham's family from their M^ster, Genesis 18.19. Solomon from David his
Father, Prove. 4.4. and some from his mother, Prove. 31.1. Therefore are parents
set up in their family to teach children, Schoolmasters for boys, Masters of
families for youth, Ministers for men.

Use 1. It calls on us to praise God for teaching us by men like our selves, for
putting heavenly treasure in earthly vessels for us, 2 Cor. 4.7. The treasure
must not be contemned for the vessels, but regarded for their own worthiness.

2. It shows us that teaching is not enough without learning. What good will
the running of the Fountain do, where is no mouth to drink? What good will an
alms do not taken? Giving is but offering if not received; and who ever
thrived by offers?

3. Let parents especially be careful to teach their children piety, and
justice, who brought them into the world ignorant. Else it will be an eternal
grief to breed a child for hell, and not seek to save him.

4. Let children learn, and as willingly receive instruction from parents, as
they do inheritances. This they may do, and not be tempted to desire to be rid
of their parents, yea they may be saved with their parents.

3. Doct. A spiritual wisdom is required to guide all our actions. A wise man
shows out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom, Jam.
3.13. See the like there, verse. 17. Wisdom is profitable to direct, Eccles.
10.10. With the well advised is wisdom, Prove. 13.10. Through wisdom is an
house builded, and by understanding it is established, Prove. 24.3.

Reason. 1. Because it is hard to know, what is to be done upon all occurrents.

2. If we want this spiritual wisdom, our passions will quickly blind us, and
lead us on to our own and others ruin.

3. Because of variety of means, some fit, some unfit, and some fitter then
other. A wise choice of instruments, and matter wonderly furthers a building,
or any other work.

4. Diverse ends present themselves, and if the right end be not chosen all
means are in vain, though never so good in themselves. Though they could effect
other things as good, yet not that. As meat may feed, yet not keep us warm, and
fire may hear, but not cool. Use. Let us bewail the want of this spiritual
wisdom both in good men and bad. Our actions do not smell of it. By our
indiscretion we often give occasion to be ill spoken of, and make our Religion to
be reproached.

2. Think it not enough to know things to be believed, but learn out of Gods
precepts, how to carry thy self in all things. That is it which must win others
to love thee, and serve God, 1 Pet. 2.12.3.1.

4. Doct. Every ones right must be preserved. Render unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, Matthew. 22.21. Render to all their dues, Romans 13.7.

Reason. 1. There are distinct rights. God has his right, Superiors have
their right, equals have theirs, inferiors have theirs, we have ours, and
beasts have theirs.

2. This right is by the law of Nature, or Scripture, or laws, and customs of
Nations.

3. This right must be preserved. And that 1. because the division is
originally from God. 2. The preservation is commanded by God in all the
Commandments. 3. Much mischief comes to our selves, and others by violating
it. It breeds confusion in the greater world among the elements, and in the
lesser world among our selves. If it were in heaven, neither God, nor Angels,
nor Saints should have their right. On earth much wrong would be found in
family, State, and Church. Use. It condemns those who take away others right
unjustly, by fraud, or violence. So are they unthankful to God, discontented
with their own condition, injurious to others.

5. Doct. Men must study to know, how to judge of interests. This is the study
of Divines, of Lawyers, of private persons. It concerns every man, that he may
not do, or suffer wrong. Use. Study this point. It is very comfortable for
soul, body, credit, and estate. Labor to know every ones right with a will to
preserve it in thy calling, and then all will be happy, if every one do it:
Wars and contentions will be prevented, and a quiet state recovered, Psalm.
85.10, 11. Glory will dwell in that land, where mercy, truth, and
righteousness meet, and abide together.

6. Doct. Extremity of justice is not always to be used: moderation sometimes
is to be exercised. As David did to Shimei, 2 Samuel 19.23. David said, and swear
he should not dye, though he well deserved it, and Abishai pressed David to do
it. God is content to lose his right in the Shewbread, when men are hungry.
Abiathar the High Priest gives it to David, and his hungry followers, Mar. 2.26
Much more should man. Gods own Law, Deuteronomy. 22.23, etc. might have been abused. A
Virgin in some places in a City might cry long ere any could hear her, yet if
forced, she must dye. A strumpet going willingly into the field, or seducing a
young man, there might be naught, and never cry out, and yet escape. Much more
need will there be of moderation in the execution of humane laws upon variety
of circumstances. Summum jus summa injuria. The strictest sentence, though
legal, may prove the greatest injury. Use. Take not all advantages against
others, that Gods, or man's law allows, but win men by moderation, where it will
prevail. A Chancery, or a Court of equity may do well in some cases.

Verse. 4. To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge, and
discretion.
The common good to be gotten by these Proverbs has been spoken of before in
the 2. and 3. verses. The good that may come to particular persons by reading
them follows. And that 1. To such as are unwise, in this 4. verse. 2. To such as
are wise, in the 5. and 6. verses.

For the 1. in this verse, It may be objected thus, these Proverbs coming from
Solomon's deep wisdom, are not for every one to read, and being brief, and
therefore the more obscure, had need of wise men to peruse them; simple men can
look for little good out of them. The answer is in this verse: Men of the
meanest capacity may get good by them, for though some of them are so deep,
that they may exercise the wisest heads; yet some are so plain, that simple men
may get profit by them. For the words.

To give. An elegant relation. Before he had showed what we might receive,
verse. 3. Now lest we should think the profit came from the Readers wit, and not
the Writers, as wise men will gather wit out of other men's folly, and
Physicians heal by poison, he shows, that the profit flows naturally out of the
Proverbs themselves, and so evidently, that simple men perceive it: These
breasts hold out milk for children. These Proverbs hold out an easy way for a
simple man to get subtilty. The Hebrew word (...) is used,

1. For delivering a thing into ones hand, as Genesis 39.4. All that the keepers
had he put (Heb. gave) into Joseph's hand. Not to possess, but to guide,

2. To put a thing in its place. God set them in the Firmament, Genesis 1.17.

3. To suffer. God will not suffer the destroyer to come in, Exodus 12.23.

4. To make. I will make the land desolate. Ezekiel. 61.4.

5. To set over. See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt, Genesis 41.41.

6. To teach or give instruction. Give to a wise man. To wit, instruction, as
is added in little letters to fill up the sense, Prove. 9.9.

7. To account. The Lord of the land took us for spies of the country, Genesis
42.30.

8. To express wishing. Would God, Numb. 11.29. Heb. Who will give?

9. To bring forth. Who can bring a clean thing out of an ununclean? Job 14.4.
A good man is like a tree that brings forth his fruit in his season. Psalm.
1.3. Here it is taken in the sixth sense, for teaching or giving knowledge to
the mind.

(...) Subtilty. The word is taken sometimes in an ill sense, for a crafty wit
to deceive others. Now the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the
field, Genesis 3.1. So God disappointeth the devices of the crafty, Job 5.12.
Sometimes it is taken in a good sense, for understanding to prevent dangers,
that crafty men might bring upon us. O ye simple, understand wisdom, chap.
8.5. So it is taken here. Such will not easily be deceived, or deluded.

To the simple. From this word (...) comes futuus in Latin, a fool. Such, who
being flexible like reeds, are carried about with every wind of doctrine,
Ephesians. 4.14. It comes from (...) that fignifies to allure or seduce one that
wants understanding of God truths, and will, and so is easily allured to any
error, or wickedness by good words, as giving credit to every thing, because
not able to examine things for want of judgment. He falls into danger for lack
of knowledge. The simple believes every word, or thing, chap. 14.15. It is
opposed to (...) subtilty, and healed by it, Prove. 9.4. Who so is simple, let
him turn in hither, says Wisdom. The word signifies also one, who wants
foresight to prevent danger. The Lord preserves the simple, Psalm. 116.6. Both
may be meant here. The Proverbs will bring wisdom to a simple man, showing him
how to prevent error, and danger.

(...) To the young man. Some understand it of one young in knowledge, spoken
of Ephesians. 4.14. But it may well be understood of one well in years, who for
want of instruction, and experience, (though of better capacity then the
former) is unskilful, and seldom troubled with serious thoughts. It comes from
(...) to shake out, I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man, etc.
Neh. 5.13. It signifies one, that has, as it were, cast off parents and
tutors, and yet is not well able to guide himself for want of experience, like
the childish King, that brings a woe to the land, Eccles. 10.16. It signifies
an infant also as one cast out of the womb into the world, until the child
be weaned, 1 Samuel 1.22. But here more properly it intends one free from
Governors, yet wanting experience to govern himself, and more fit to take,
then to give good counsel.

Knowledge. The principles, and beginnings of knowledge, such as first come
into young men's minds, when they are taught by others. Opposed to the next
word (...), Discretion. It comes from a word that signifies to conceive, and
agitate things in the mind, and upon deliberation to be able to conclude
aright, what is best to be done, or to be left undone. Not bare thinking, or
devising, as Psalm. 10.4. God is not in all his thoughts, or determining, as
Jer. 51.11. His device is against Babylon, for both these nature teaches, and
it is not worth pains to learn. But more acute and subtle thoughts are here
intended. Young men do things rashly without consideration, and therefore had
need of thoughtfulness, or advisement, or discretion. Sometimes it is taken in
an ill sense for plotting mischief, and bringing wicked devices to pass, Psalm.
37.7. So the root of it (...) is taken, Deuteronomy. 19.19. Ye shall do to him, as he
had thought to have done unto his brother.

Figures here are none. Note 1. the good that comes to men of mean capacity. 2.
The benefit that accrues to young men.

In the first note 1. the effect of These Proverbs. To give. 2. The object,
Subtilty. 3. The subject. To the simple.

In the second note 1. the subject. To the young man. 2. A double adjunct.
Knowledge by others. Discretion by pondering on these Proverbs read, or
expounded.

1. Doct. The Scripture contains store of heavenly knowledge sufficient to
inform simple persons.

In the prosecution of this point, note 1. The store of heavenly mysteries in
the Scripture.

2. The clearness of them. For the store, see 2 Timothy 2.15, 16, 17. The holy
Scriptures are able to make men wise unto Salvation, and are profitable for
doctrine, reproof, correction, instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Two arguments are
here couched to prove it.

1. The various uses of it, To inform men's judgments, show them their sins,
bring them to amendment, direct their lives afterward.

2. The effect. To make men more then worldly wise, wise unto salvation. Wise
not to get wealth, but heaven. This requires store. Gods treasure mentioned, 2
Cor. 4.7. is laid up here, and hence Gods Stewards fetch enough to make
themselves, and others rich. In a treasury is much gold, and silver laid up.
The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life, Prove. 10.11. How much more Gods
Word? So here. Subtilty is to be had to prevent errors, and dangers. Knowledge
of things needful. Discretion to guide men in safe ways. There is then store
of heavenly truths in Scripture.

For the second, the clearness of them. It is compared to a light, and a
lanthorn, Psalm. 119.105. It gives light unto the simple, Psalm. 119.130. It
makes wise the simple, and inlightens the eyes, Psalm. 19.7, 8.

Reason. 1. Many things are as plainly set down, as any man can speak, as the
the History of the Creation, Genesis 1. Redemption in the Gospel. Precepts of
holiness in the Epistles.

2. Heavenly things are set out by earthly similitudes for our capacity, as in
many parables, Matthew. 13. These are spectacles to help our weak sight.

3. They are fitted by God to our capacity, not to his high wisdom in the
manner of delivery. And who can speak plainer then God, or teach better?

1. Use. See the difference between Gods Word, and men's. Though Gods Word be
much deeper, yet weak ones may draw water hence. A Lamb may wade, and an
Elephant may swim in this river. It was writ over Pythagoras his school doors,
(...). Let no man ignorant of Geometry enter. But God Iets ignorant persons,
and children come into his school and learn, 1 John 2.14.

2. Use. Be encouraged notwithstanding your natural ignorance to go to school
to Gods Word to learn knowledge. There is store of matter, and clearness of
delivery. If this book of The Proverbs, that is so deep, may serve to instruct
simple ones, much more other plainer books of Scripture. Peter Martyr in his
Epistle Dedicatory, before his Comment on the Epistle to the Romans, speaks
strangely, yet truly, Equidem scio multos esse, qui hoc non credunt, and non
paucos qui ea rideant, nosque insanire arbitrentur, sed istos rogatos velim,
etc. I wot well, there are many, that will not believe it, and not a few, that
will deride those things, and think, that we are mad in ascribing so much to
the Scriptures. But ^oh that they would be entreated, to make trial a while,
and to take to the reading of the Bible. Male mihi sit (itae enim in tanta
causa jurare ausim) nisi tandem capiantur: sentient denique quantum divina haec
ab humanis distent, etc. Let ill betide me, (for so I dare swear in so great a
cause) if they be not taken at length: they will perceive in the end, how far
Gods writings differ from men's. Add Erasmus his testimony in his Preface to
the Gospel of Luke. Expertus sum in meipso, I can speak it by experience, that
there is little good to be gotten by reading the Bible cursorily, and
carelessly: but do it duly, and diligently, with attention, and affection, and
you shall find such an efficacy, as is to be found in no other book that can
be named. Yet was Erasmus a great scholar, and knew the worth of books.

2. Doct. Subtilty for preventing of dangers is best learned out of Scriptures.
They teach us how to countermine, and go beyond our enemies plots, Psalm.
119.98. Serpentine wisdom is required, Matthew. 10.16. Serpents prevent real
dangers by folding the tails about the head to safeguard the chief part, and
keep life. They prevent verbal dangers by laying one ear on the ground, and
stopping the other that they may not be enchanted. August in Psalm. 57. that is,
58. with us. Also when they come to wholesome water, they drink not, till they
have cast up their poison, Epiphan. Haeres. 37. There are in Scripture
directions how to prevent evils that follow wantonness, Prove. 5.1. etc. that
follow suretiship, Prove. 6.1. etc. Examples also are here to be found. Joseph
would not be undone by his Mistresses daily solicitations, Genesis 39.10. Nor
would Esther endure to see the destruction of her people, Esth. 8.6. Here are
we taught the art of prevention of all sorts of dangers of soul, of body,
temporal, spiritual, eternal. Use. Despise all Politics in comparison of
Scripture. Let Machiavel sleep, and learn of Solomon. Let Aristotle go, and
learn of Paul, how to escape hell. Else all other evils are escaped to no
purpose. Good men had need to get policy from hense, because they have to do
with politic enemies, crafty men, and devils, who will else sorely wound them,
and quickly overthrow them.

3. Doct. We are naturally simple and easily led into error. Man is born like
a wild Asses colt, Job 11.12. Man that is in honor, and understands not, is
like the beasts, that perish, Psalm. 49.20.

It appears 1. by our falls into error. How easily does every light objection
draw us?

2. Into dangers. No warnings will keep us out.

3. By our ready hearkening to bad counsel, whereas good will hardly down with
us.

4. By the disparity of our condition. Men of great birth run as wild courses,
as other meaner of education. It argues a great stain in nature, that education
cannot rub out. Use. It lays us low. A generation of silly creatures. If
others will tempt us, we presently agree to undo our selves, like children of
great men, that make ill matches against their parents will. If none will tempt
us, we will undo our selves. We quickly err in judgment, or practice. Ill
opinions, or lusts will be sure to ruin us for ever, if we want grace, and if
God keep us not better, then we can keep our selves.

4. Doct. The way to keep us from errors, is the right understanding of
Scripture. From thence subtilty is gotten to prevent them. All errors, and
lusts come either out of want of a perfect rule, or misapplying that rule that
is perfect, or willingness to err, or do ill. Ours come not from the first.
The Scripture is a perfect rule, Psalm. 19.7. and able to make us perfect, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. God neither wants skill, nor will to give a perfect rule, as men
do. There was enough revealed in the Old Testament to guide men of that age.
Therefore God forbids any to add to it, or take from it, Deuteronomy. 4.1, 2. or to
go aside to the right hand, or to the lest, Deuteronomy. 5.32. which they might have
done had they not been strictly tied to a perfect rule. It was impossible for
them to err then for want of a perfect rule, much more for us now, when it is
more fully explained, and the charge of not adding nor diminishing backed with
terrible threats of plagues to be inflicted, and the loss of eternal life,
Rev. 22.18, 19. To err by mispplying the rule is ordinary. Unlearned and
unstable men wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3.16. So was
Paul's preaching mis-interpreted to countenance lying and evil doing, Romans 3.5,
6, 7, 8. To err willingly is shameful. As for a man that has a true measure
and weight, willingly to shorten his neighbor of his due. Use. It shows us,
where the fault must be laid of errors, and lusts in our days; Not on God,
for his rule is perfect, though many now disgrace it blasphemously, which have
guided many thousands to heaven. The fault then must be in man's misapplying it,
or willingness to wander out of Gods ways.

2. Use. Study to apply the rule well, and rest satisfied with it. Leave it
once, and never go right.

5. Doct. Most danger of going astray is in the time of youth. Young men are
most subject to walk in the ways of their hearts, and sight of their eyes,
Eccl. 11.9. Remember not the sins of my youth, Psalm. 25.7. As this was David's
confession, so Paul seeks to keep Timothy from such errors. Fly youthful
lusts, 2 Timothy 2.2^.

Reason. 1. Because they are out of the conduct of Parents and Masters, that
could guide them well. Like young birds newly fledge, forsaken by the Dams, and
easily taken. Men's disposition is not known till then; Dum Aetas, Metus,
Magister prohibent; Age, Fear, Master keeps them in awe. Terence.

2. They want experience to guide themselves. When the bridle is out of the
Horse mouth, then he runs wild. Use. Young men hearken to me. The Devil lays
close fiege to you, and beleaguers you round about. Ye are not free from God,
though from Governors. Ye are strong to do evil, and have scarce learned to do
good. Oh! be watchful, lest like young prodigals ye run so far out, that ye
never can recover all your life long. Yea, worse. They die beggere, ye will die
damned wretches. Their debts are all paid by death, your greatest debt is to be
paid after death, and never discharged to eternity.

6. Doct. Bare knowledge is not enough, but discretion must be labored for
also. A good man will guide his affairs with discretion, Psalm. 112.3.
Discretion shall preserve thee, Prove. 2.11. For knowledge is imperfect, and
will need further augmentation by deliberation. And knowing men do things
rashly oftentimes, being disturbed with passion. Use. Add to your knowledge
discretion. Seek to learn both out of this and other Books of Scripture, and ye
will not study in vain.

Verse. 5. A wiseman will bear, and will increase learning; and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.
The benefit that all men may get by these Proverbs, was set out before, verse.
2, 3. For simple men, and young men, verse. 4. Now for wisemen, whose gain is
set out, verse. 5. and their profit, verse. 6. For the first. Lest any man should
think, because these Proverbs bring benefit to simple men, and young ones,
therefore they are good for none but children, and fools, and may be contemned
by wise men, as too low for them; he shows that they are good for wise men
also, to increase their knowledge. Though one main end of writing this Book
were to instruct young ones, as appears by often repeating My Son, My Son, yet
here is excellent matter, worthy also for wise men to learn.

For the words. A wise man, or, That the wise man may hear. And so it may go on
to set out the true end of writing this Book, whereas your Translation carries
the event only, which may seem to some to come rather by the Readers care,
then the Writers aim. So that is justly added by the Translators, Psalm. 9.20.
That the Nations may know themselves to be but men. So we say, Know you are
men; that is, Know that you are men. Or, if ye read it as it is in the
Translation, it shows the readiness of wise men to make use of this Book for
increase of knowledge. Having invited simple ones, he makes no doubt but wise
men will hear and learn. A wise man is one that has already attained to a good
measure of heavenly knowledge, yet is willing to get more by this Book.

Will hear. The word (...), signifies,

1. To hear, as in hearing a report. I have heard, that there is corn in
Egypt, Genesis 42.2.

2. To mark what is said, or attend to it. The Lord has heard, that I was
hated, Genesis 29.33.

3. To understand what is spoken. They knew not, that Joseph understood them,
Genesis 42.23. Heb. heard them.

4. To grant what is asked. As for Ishmael, I have heard thee, Genesis 17.20.

5. To believe a thing reported, to be true. They hearkened not unto Moses,
Exodus 6.9.

6. To obey what is commanded. Abraham obeyed my voice, Genesis 26.5. So speaking
is put for commanding, Est. 1.10. Here the word is used in the second sense,
for marking and giving his mind to it. He will give heed to these Proverbs. To
such, a blessing is promised, Rev. 1.3. It signifies attending with ears of
mind and body. Wise men are willing to know more. Fools desire it not. They
know not the worth of learning.

And will increase. Heb. Add; to wit, to that which he had before, and make it
more, as an heap is increased by addition of stones or money. Hence Joseph had
his name, Genesis 30.24. And she called his name Joseph, and said, The Lord shall
add to me another Son. It may be understood of adding to others, as well as to
himself; that not only he will know more then he did before, but also be so
full, that he will run over to teach others.

Learning, (...). Received from others by hearing them, as the word imports,
and as it were taken out of their knowledge, yet without loss to them, as one
Candle takes light from another. Homo, qui erranti comiter monstrat viam, quasi
de suo lumine lumen accendat, facit, Nihilo minus ipsi lucet, cum illi
accenderit. Ennius apud Cicer. offic. l. 1. He that gently shows a wandering man
his way, does as if he lighted another man's candle at his. His shines
nevertheless when the others is kindled.

A man of understanding. He that understands these Proverbs well, or has a
better capacity then others, will gather very profitable Conclusions out of
them. Such were the men of Issachar, which had understanding of the times to
know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chr. 12.32.

Shall attain to. The word (...), signifies,

1. To get any thing by price or labor, or prayer, or any way of right. Thence
Cain had his name, I have gotten a man of the Lord, Genesis 4.1. And Genesis 25.10.
The field which Abraham purchased, Heb. got.

2. To possess a thing when a man has gotten it. The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, Prove. 8.22. Here it is taken in the first sense. He shall
get by labor and industry in learning from others, and so have a right to it,
and use of it, as a labourer at night has to that which was another man's in
the morning.

Wise counsess, (...). We want a word to express it, and are forced to use a
Periphrasis, or circumlocution to set it out in two words, which is but one in
the Original. The derivations are two, but from the same root (...), to govern
a ship. Some derive it from the Governor that sits at the Stern, called (...),
who must guide the ship wisely, or else all must be lost that is in it.
Sapientia suam Gubernator torquet nabem, haud valentia. Titin. apud Nonium. The
Governor guides his ship by wisdom, not by strength. He is called the
Shipmaster, Jon. 1.6. As the Mariner long rouls up and down thoughts in his
mind, what to do in a storm; so this wise man to guide his actions, that he
may choose the best upon deliberation. The word imports any accurate way of
doing any thing, as Seamen accurately guide ships between rocks and
quicksands, especially in storms. Others derive it from (...), a rope. As
Seamen clime up and down the ropes perpetually, yet fall not into the Sea: so
wise men easily dispatch their affairs without damage, though dreadful to
others, as the former employment is to such as are fearful or unskilful. Or,
it may be of preferment to places of command, to guide others, as a Pilot
guides a ship by the stern, and tackling, and rudder. In this last word may be
a Metaphor taken from Ship-men, the rest are literal. In this verse. is first
the augmentation of wisdom by reading these Proverbs. Secondly, the height of
what is to be gotten.

In the first note, 1. The agent, or cause, A wise man. 2. The action, or
transitory effect, as building, will hear. 3. The thing made by action, as the
house, and will increase.
Set out by the object, learning.

In the second note, 1. The agent, A man of understanding. 2. The effect, shall
attain unto. 3. The object, wise counsels.


1. Dect. No man so wife, but he may learn more. And that both in Theoricall
and Practical knowledge, how to think, and how to do better. We are all
children, while we are here, and know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.11. Christ himself
increased in wisdom, Luke 2.52. Before the Law they had but a few Revelations
and Traditions. Under it, they had the truth in obscure shadows and sacrifices.
After it, the darkness of the understanding remained, though more light
appeared. Adam in innocence might know more by reasoning and occurrents. Angels
learn from Gods dealing with his Church. Unto the principalities and powers in
heavenly places, is made known by the Church the manifeld wisdom of God, Ephesians.
3.10. Which things the Angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.

Reason, 1. Want of light. The Sun of knowledge shines not so clear here as in
heaven, clouds of ignorance come beween* There are few clouds in Egypt, whence
comes want of rain, and they are forced to water their gardens with their feet,
Deuteronomy. 11.10. Seldom a cloud seen in Japan. But there are many clouds in the
wisest men's brains, to keep them from understanding many truths.

2. Want of sight. We see here by the spectacles of Gods works. Invisible
things of God are seen from the creation of the world, Romans 1.20. We see by the
perspectives of Ordinances, and must so do till the day of judgment, Ephesians.
4.11, etc. We cannot see so clearly here, as we shall in heaven.

1. Use. Be not content with that measure of knowledge ye have, but labor
still for more. As men in trading finding the world come on them give not over,
but go on to get more riches. Youth must learn, middle age increase learning,
old age attain to wise counsels. Bodies grow old, Souls do not. Solon was wont
to say, (...): I grow old always learning many things. Platon. Dialog. de
Philosophia, and de Fortitud. and de Repub. l. 7. and in Cicer. de Senect.
Marcus Antoninus the Emperor went often to the house of Sextius the
Philosopher, saying, (...): It is good even for an old man to learn. Salvius
Julianus a most famous Lawyer was wont to say, Ets^ alterum pedem in sepulchro
haberem, adhuc addiscere vellem: Although I had one foot in the grave, yet I
would learn still. Pandect. l. 4. Nulla dies fine linea, said Apelles: No day
without a line. And Augustine acknowledges himself both a Writer, and a
Learner. Ego ex eorum numero me esse profiteor, qui scribunt proficiendo, and
scribendo proficiunt: I profess my self to be of the number of them who write
by profiting, and profit by writing. August. Epist. 7. Sapiens quamdiu vivit,
tamdiu addit: A wise man adds as long as he lives. Ambrose.

Use 2. It shows us what little hope we have of children and young men, that
think they know enough already, when old men and wise men may learn. Multi
potuissent ad sapientiam pervenire, nisi se putassent jam pervenisse: Many
might have proved learned men, but that they thought they were so already.
Senec. de Tranq. c. 1. (...), Opinion is the let of profiting. Diogenes
Laertius l. 3. de Bionis vita. Ego senex a juvene, and Episcopus tot annorum a
collega nec dum anniculo paratus sum doceri. August. apud Gratian. c. 24. q. 3.
I an old man, and a Bishop of so many years standing, am ready to be taught by
a young man, and a Colleague scarce of one years standing.

2. Doct. Much knowledge comes in at the ear. We have heard him our selves, and
know that this is indeed the Christ, Joh. 4.42. How shall they believe in him,
of whom they have not heard? Romans 10.14. Hearing and Seeing are by Aristotle
called the learned senses, because by these doors learning enters into the
soul. Yea, and life also. Hear, and your soul shall live, Isa. 55.3. David
Chytreus, when he lay a dying, lift up himself to hear the discourses of his
friends that sat by him; and said, that he should die with better cheer, if he
might die learning something. Unto you that hear shall more be given, Mar.
4.24. The ears are the Conduit-pipes of wisdom to convey it to us. Argento,
auroque non fiunt homines meliores, sed ditiores virtute ex sapientum dictis:
Men are not made better by gold, and silver, but richer in virtue by wise men's
sayings. Socrates apud Xenoph. l. 4. The Heathen man Cicero could say, Cujus
aures clausae sunt veritati, hujus salus desperanda est: He whose ears are shut
against the truth, there is little hope of his safety. A man may learn that
from another in an hour, which the other has been studying many hours, and it
may be himself could not find it out in many days. Therefore Christ bids not
his Disciples read, or tells them only where the Prophets speak of him, but
expounds those places to them, Luke 24.27. So does Philip to the Eunuch, Act.
8.35. This is the very end of preaching, and conference, that men might be
taught by the ear.

1. Use. Bless God for your ears. It is a great question, which is the greater
loss of Seeing or Hearing. I suppose of Hearing, for a man that wants it,
cannot reap any good by Sermons, Conferences, Discourses, nor converse
comfortably with others, nor have others to read to him. But a man may have all
these benefits, that wants his fight, and may have others to read to him also.
A blind man has all these helps. A deaf man has only Gods works to see, and
good books to read to help him to knowledge and comfort. The former may be
helped by others, the latter must do all out of her own head.

2. Use. Content not your selves with studying the Scriptures, but
acknowledging the weakness of your brain, learn of others also, even of men
that are meaner then your selves, whose pains or trials may acquaint them with
some particulars that ye need, yet know not. Semper mos est sapientum, ut
dictis majorum auscultent, aliquan do minorum: It is always the custom of
wise men to hearken to the sayings of their betters, sometimes of their
inferior. Beda in text. Not only the Queen of Sheba could learn of Solomon,
Paul of Gamaliel, and Nicodemus of Christ, but also Moses of Jethro.

3. Doct. The Scripture brings in increase of knowledge. Aquila and Priscilla
expounded unto Apollos the way of God more perfectly, Act. 18.26. Give thy self
wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all, 1 Timothy 4.15.

Reason, 1. Because it is the highest Book in the world. A Book of Gods own
making, who is most wise. When thou have learned all thou can out of men's
Books, thou may learn more out of Gods.

2. All heavenly wisdom in other books comes from thence, as water in rivers
from the fountain. Use. It taxes those that find more delight in reading other
good books, then the Scripture it self. It shows a double weakness, one in
judgment, the other in affection. Rivers are profitable, but fountains more.

4. Doct. Scripture learning is the best learning. Paul counted all things
loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8. He buried his
other learning in his preaching. I determined not to know any thing among you,
save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2.

Reason, 1. It is the most profound knowledge. Above low Geometry, above high
Astronomy. Above Philosophy, for it reaches above all creatures, and aspires to
the knowledge of God.

2. It is most profitable. Other Arts show how to live here for a while, this
how to live in heaven for ever, through Christ. Use. It reproves our curious
spirits, who count Scripture learning nothing worth. Rhetoric and Politics
are great with them. Not many so wise are saved, 1 Cor. 1.20. What profit in
wisdom that will not keep from eternal misery?

5. Doct. Natural parts well used help much in Religion. Paul's learning was a
great help to him, and Solomon's high reach.

Reason, 1. They may learn the things of God more easily, which others hammer
long about, as dull ones in Schools.

2. They may get more in less time. Such a trade men generally look upon as
will make men speedily rich. Use. If your children be pregnant, put enough into
them. I remember I have seen a grave Doctor and a good Minister in this Nation,
much pleased with Nurses that would talk to the children, using this
expression, It puts much spirit and livelynesse into them, which the parents
may afterward turn to good. Men can be content to fill Houses, Tables, Barns,
Treasuries, Why not Children? Much ill may be kept out, much good put in, if
ready ones be instructed betimes, and constantly.

6. Doct. It is a wonder what may be attained by industry, and Gods blessing
upon it. See the great success of Paul's preaching at Ephesus. Curious Books
burnt, to the value of fifty thousand pieces of silver: So mightily grew the
Word of God, and prevailed, Act. 19.19, 20. The Churches were multiplied when
the storm of persecution was blown over, Act. 9.31. Ministers preaching much,
and peoples hearing, increased the graces, and number of Saints. As in worldly
things, men grow rich by Husbandry, or Merchandise. Use. It reproves the
sluggishnesse of Christians, who think a little knowledge and grace enough.
Such may justly fear, their grace is not true. Pictures are idle, and grow not,
living creatures feed, and grow.

7. Doct. Much difference between a wise man's course, and a fools. The one
orders his affairs well, the other carelessly. Their courses are often opposed
in Scripture. The wise in heart will receive commandments, but a prating fool
shall fall, Prove. 10.8. The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he
that hearkeneth unto counsel, is wise. A fools wrath is presently known, but a
prudent man covers shame, Prove. 12.15, 16. Every prudent man deals with
knowledge, but a fool lays open his folly, Pr. 15.16. The simple believes
every word, but the prudent man looks well to his going. A wise man fears,
and departs from evil, but the fool rages, and is confident, Prove. 14.15,
16.

Reason. Because they work from different principles. A wise man follows the
dictates of reason, a fool of will and affections. Use. Choose the wise man's
course, which is far the better. He steers the ship of his life among all the
waves of worldly troubles, and floods of worldly passions, to the heaven of
happiness. The World is like a Sea, up and down, rough and calm. So is man's
heart and soul. Basil. in princip. Proverb. A wise man like a skillful Pilot
looks on the Sun by day, and stars by night, his eyes are still toward heaven.
So he rids himself out of most intricate affairs, as Solomon did by wise
discerning the right Mother, 1 King. 3. And others oftentimes, as the Pilot
guides the ship safe to shore, when the rest sleep. Labor then for these wise
counsels.

Verse. 6. To understand a Proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the
wise, and their dark sayings.
The gain or increase of wise men in reading these Proverbs, was set out, verse.
5. The profit that comes by it, is set out here. It is sufficient for simple
ones to learn so much subtilty out of the plainest of these Proverbs, whereby
they may keep themselves from being deceived; but wise men will learn to
understand the darkest of them, whereby they may get much more knowledge. For
the words.

To understand. See on verse. 2. Not to read a similitude carelessly or
cursorily, but observing what is meant by it. Some read it, To make to
understand, or teach; and the word will bear it, and it suites well with what
went before. The man was wise before, and as he may get more wisdom to direct
his own ways, verse. 5. so also to teach others; in this verse. So Eccl. 12.9,
10.

A Proverb. See on verse. 1. Any Proverbial sentence, though difficult and
obscure to others. He that understands this Book, by reading it will be able to
understand other Proverbs propounded by others, and to propound some himself.

And the interpretation. How do the understanding of a Proverb, and the
interpretation ^^^er? He that understands it, can interpret it. Answ. The first
may be meant of understanding the words, or literal sense. The second of the
mystical. Or, And may be taken for Even, and so the latter be an exposition of
the former. To understand a Proverb; that is, to know the interpretation of it.
So to understand a dream is to be able to interpret it, Genesis 41.15. So And is
used, Gods wrath slew the fattest of them, and (that is, even) smote down the
chosen men of Israel, Psalm. 78.31. As the choice of the flock are the fattest
cattle.

The interpretation, (...). So (...), an Interpreter. One that can tell the
mind of God, Job 33.23. So here, to interpret a similitude, and show what is
included, more then appears at first fight. Not only to understand easy
Proverbs, but to know the meaning of hard ones. But especially to understand
the hardest of these Proverbs by the easiest, yet it may be understood of other
Proverbs also. To understand the sense of mysteries or eloquent speeches, such
as Ambassadors use; for so the word is translated, 2 Chr. 32.31. or such as
Scoffers use; for so the word is used for scorning, Job 16.20. Or it may be
read, And the sweetness thereof; for men find much sweetness in Proverbs,
when they know the meaning of them. Otherwise they are more harsh then other
sentences. From (...), to be sweet. Whence the learned Rivet derives (...) and
mel honey. See Trap.

The words, (...). 1. signifies a word. The word of the Lord, Hos. 1.1.

2. A thing; for that expresses a man's meaning when it is done. It came to
pass after these things, 1 King. 17.17. Here it is used in the first sense. He
speaks not of their actions, but sayings. Neither does it signify single
words, but words knit together in sentences. So the Ten commandments are
called Ten words in the Original, Exodus 34.28. For several words without
respect to others, do little good.

Of the wise. Of other wise men. Not only ordinary Proverbs that are in all
men's mouths, but the learnedest sentences that come from wisest men, and are
approved for the authority of them, that spoke them; like Achitophels counsels
esteemed as oracles, 2 Samuel 16.23.

And their dark sayings. Questions that can hardly be answered. Such as the
Queen of Sheba put to Solomon, 1 King. 10.1. Or, hard expressions, which often
contain high mysteries in them, not easy to be perceived, till they be
expounded, as Sampson's Riddle, and Sphinx hers to Oedipus of the creature that
went first on four legs, then on two legs, lastly on three legs. And such are
some speeches above the common reach. Such also were the Egyptian
Hieroglyphics, as a staff with an eye on it, to set out Gods providence,
looking over all the world, and ruling it. This is well added, to prevent an
objection. For it might be said, It needs no great skill to understand wise
men's sayings, for some of them are plain. Answ. But (says the Wise man) by
reading these Proverbs ye shall understand the hardest of them also.

Figures none, except a figure of the part for the whole. A Proverb, that is,
all kind of Proverbs, even the darkest and hardest. As an Horse, for any
Horse, Psalm. 33.17.

Note. 1. The act. To understand.

2. The fourfold object: 1. A Proverb. 2. The Interpretation. 3. The words of
the wise.


4. Their dark sayings. He shall gather from hence ability to understand not
ordinary sayings only, but the most difficult that can come from wise men.

1. Doct. That measure of knowledge is not sufficient for a man of greater
capacity, that may suffice one of meaner. Solomon that had so much knowledge,
yet thought he needed more, Eccl. 1.16, 17. Paul knew Christ well, yet desires
to know more of him, Phil. 3.8, 10.

Reason, 1. nI regard of God, an account of talents is to be given to him.
Greater account of greater talents, Matt. 5.15, 20.

2. In regard of himself. A great capacity carries a great defire of filling
it, else it were in vain.

3. In regard of others. There is a great expectation from men of great parts.
The eyes of all them that were in the Synagogue were fastened on Christ, Luke
4.20.

4. In regard of the things, which being known in part, allure us to know more.
Ignoti nulla cupido: No desire of what is not known. One profitable voyage eggs
the Merchant to another.

1. Use. It reproves such as have wit to know much, but use it not. Remain
Dunses, that might be Doctors, Heb. 5.12. More things are to be known, and what
we know, may be better known. Both afford more delight. Maxima pors eorum quae
scimus, est minima pars eorum quae ignoramus. Aug. The greatest part of the
things we know, is the least part of the things we know not.

2. Use. Put your capacity upon the tenters. The Clothier gets by it, and makes
more of the same cloth. Else ye shall not enter into your Masters joy, Matt.
25.21. but be shut out with the foolish Virgins, Mat. 25.10.

3. Use. Ye that be Ministers must stretch for it in point of knowledge. If ye
have not greater capacity then ordinary men, why take ye that calling? If ye
have, use it. It is enough for others to be full, ye must run over. It is
enough for others to save themselves from a crooked generation, Act. 2.40. Ye
must save your selves and others, 1 Timothy 4.16. That knowledge will not serve a
Lawyer, or Physician, that may serve a private Gentleman for his own state or
health. He enguges for no more. And I hope I shall need to say no more in this
Argument.

2. Doct. Reading Scripture without understanding, does a man no good. This is
the drift of Philip's Question to the Eunuch, Understand thou what thou
read? Act. 8.30. Else it will do thee no good. The Jews could not profit by
reading the Law, because the veil was not taken off their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.1, 4.

Reason 1. Because the words of Scripture are no charm, which works, whether
men understand it, or not.

2. Doing is required, which is more then understanding. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17.

Use 1. It condemns the practice of the Papists, who read the Scriptures in a
strange language. They are sure beforehand the people cannot understand them,
nor get any good by them.

2. It condemns the negligence of some, who think they do enough, if they cause
their children to read sometimes a Chapter, but take no care that either they
or their children understand it. If they should set bread before them, and not
let it be broken, or cut, they might starve.

3. Doct. A man may get knowledge enough out of Scripture to teach others. The
32 Psalm was written to teach others, as appears by the title, David's Maschil,
or Instructor. Hence comes that solemn charge for parents to instruct their
children diligently at home and abroad, at up-fitting and down-lying, Deuteronomy.
6.7. See the like charge, Psalm. 78.5, 6. The Scripture is a fountain of
knowledge, we may drink our selves, and bottle up for others. A Sea wherein are
fishes innumerable to feed us and others, Psalm. 104.25. And ships, that
traffic for all men's good, verse. 26. there. A rich Storehouse of all
knowledge, and a wealthy Treasury. Joseph's Storehouses and Solomon's
Treasuries had enough for multitudes.

1. Use. Let us bless God for the store that is in his Word. Who would not
praise him for plenty of money and provisions, that might serve for him, his,
and many more; or for a Fountain or Mine in his garden?

2. Use. Let us draw daily out of this Treasury. Though there be store of
knowledge, yet few are so wise to draw enough for themselves. Most think a
little enough. But if thou have enough for thy self, draw for others. Men give
not over their Trades when they have got enough to keep themselves, and theirs,
but desire to have to give, Ephesians. 4.28.

4. Doct. Hardest things in Scripture may be understood by labor. Many things
are interpreted ready to our hands. An Angel interprets the Vision to Daniel,
Dan. 7.16. So are the Stars and Candlesticks, Revel. 1.20. Isaiah's prophecy
of Christ, Act. 8.35. The sum of the Gospel, Act. 10.36.

Reason, 1. Because it is Gods aim in writing it, that it should be understood.
For he writ it for the people. I have written to him the great things of my
Law, Hos. 8.12. Not to the Priests, but to the people of Ephraim. And if they
to whom it is written cannot by labor and pains understand it, the pen of the
writer was in vain, Jer. 8.8.

2. God has left means in his Word to understand the hardest places, as
searching the original, coherence, parallel places; and plainer ones to give
light to the obscurer.

Use, 1. It incourageth us to seek to understand the hardest things in
Scripture, and not to be content with the easiest. So do all good Scholars in
their Arts, and all that intend to thrive in their Trades.

2. It shows what a shame it is, if we understand not plain places, that might
by labor understand difficult ones. Sure we shall never thrive by our Trade of
Christianity.

5. Doct. Wise men's words carry great weight with them. The words of the wise
are as goads, and as nails fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies, Eccl.
12.11. Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, Prove. 22.17. The
lips of the wise disperse knowledge, Prove. 15.7. The ground is, because every
thing works by an internal principle, whether it be Natural, Artificial, or
Reasonable. A fool cannot speak wisely, unless overruled he speak not of
himself, Joh. 11.51. A wise man will not speak foolishly unless unadvised.
Use. It directs us how to choose our society. Choose those by whom ye may get
most. Worldly men do so in the Exchange, Markets, and other times. He that
walks with wise men shall be wise, Prove. 13.20.

6. Doct. There are difficulties to be found in Scripture that need exposition.
In Paul's Epistles there are some things hard to be understood, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Not only high matters and expressions, but also Parables, wherein is one thing
spoken, another thing meant. And that to exercise men's wits. They had need of
good heads to find out the meaning. The Disciples ask and are showed the
meaning of the Parable of the Tares, Matthew. 13.36, 37. Wise men speak darkly
sometimes, ut occultentur sententiae eorum desidiosis, aperiantur studiosis;
that their sentences may be hidden from sluggards, and opened to studious
persons. All Gods oracles are dark to natural men. As the Resurrection to the
Sadduces. Ye err not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God, Ma^^ 22.29.
Regeneration to Nicodemus. How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter
the second time into his Mothers womb, and be born? Joh. 3.4. Living water to
the woman of Samaria. Sir, thou have nothing to draw with, and the well is
deep; from whence then have thou that living water? Joh. 4.11. The Gospel is
hid to them that perish, 2 Cor. 4.3. And in part unto godly men too. Now we see
through a glass darkly, now I know in part, 1 Cor. 13.12. The perfect
knowledge of them is reserved for them, till they come to the heavenly
University. But yet some things are harder then the rest. Use. Think no time
nor pains too much to understand Scripture. A Merchant spends store of both to
get pearls.

Verse. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge; but fools despise
wisdom and instruction.
In the former verses he had showed the uses, ends, and benefits of this Book,
and how much good the Reader may get by it, and commended it from the
excellency of the Work, and eminency of the Writer, to allure us to read it.
Now in this verse. he sets before us what this wisdom is, and who are capable
of it, and begins the first Proverb with the fear of God. After the
inscription, Solomon's counsel to his Son:

1. In general, in this verse.

2. In particular directions, to the end of the third Chapter.

For the words. The fear of the Lord. Fear of God [(...)] is used three ways
in Scripture.

1. For a fear of sinning against God, for fear of plagues here, and in hell.
This arises out of the consideration of Gods infinite power. It is called
servile or slavish fear, for slaves would offend, if they durst. So would
wicked men sin against God with an high hand, if his judgments did not scare
them. Thus the Israelites feared God, lest he should plague them, as he had
done the Egyptians, Exodus 14.31. And by this fear some of the Egyptians saved
their cattle in their houses, when other men's perished in the fields, Exodus
9.20.

2. For a fear (...) reverence, whereby a man sets up God in the highest place
of his heart, being willing to please him out of love, and more unwilling to
offend him then any other. This is called Fil^^l fear, and proceeds out of our
love to God, as childrens reverence to their Father does. So the word is used,
Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one to another.

3. For the true Religion, called by the Greeks (...) and (...), and by the
Latins, pietas; in English, piety or godliness. For it is a prime part of
Gods worship, that he be feared. It keeps the affections, thoughts, words, and
deeds in order. One of the Priests of Samaria, taught the people how they
should fear the Lord, 2 King. 17.28. that is, how they should worship him. That
which is called their fear toward God, Isa. 29.13. is styled their worshipping
of him, Mat. 15.9. In this place it is taken in the second sense.

(...), the Lord. That has his being of himself, gives being to all others,
and to his promises. It comes from (...), To be; and has a touch of all the
Tenses. Je of the Future, Ho of the Present, and Vah of the Preter-tense. He
that is, was, and is to come, Prove. 1.8. The eternal God.

(...), the beginning. It signifies,

1. A beginning in time, as the foundation is the beginning of the house. The
beginning of his Kingdom was Babel, Genesis 10 10. And therefore it signifies the
first fruits, because first gathered, though not always best. The first of the
first fruits of thy Land, thou shall bring into the House of the Lord thy God,
Exodus 13.19.

2. First in dignity. The chief of the things which should have been utterly
destroyed, 1 Samuel 15.21. Here it is taken in the second sense. The true fear of
God is the chief point of wisdom.

(...), of knowledge. See on verse. 2. Some interpret the passage thus: The
servile fear of Gods judgments makes men first look after knowledge, that
never cared for it before, as the needle makes way for the thread. August.
Others thus: The chief part of knowledge is that filial and aweful fear of God,
that makes men careful to please him, which tempers the servile fear with
love, as wine and water do well together for weak brains: Vinum nisi aqua
mixtum non bibit debile caput: A weak head drinks not wine unless mixed with
water. Beda. But I take Solomon's meaning to be, that all heathen wisdom is
but folly; but the choycest wisdom is the knowledge of the true worship of
God, that so he might make man to study the Scriptures where it is to be found.
All their former knowledge was but folly to this. The true Religion is better
then all of it.

But. This word is not in the Original, but added, to show an opposition to the
former part of the verse. which being not in direct words, must be supplied thus
out of each part. The chiefest wisdom is the knowledge of the true worship of
God, and therefore good men love it; but fools do not account it so, and
therefore despise it.

(...), Fools. Object. You set out this wisdom highly, but no body regards it.
Answ. None but fools despise it, who have no wit to judge aright of it. No
matter what account they make of it, unless they were wiser. Hence comes our
English word Evil. Fools here are evil men, and irreligious, as throughout
the Proverbs, and Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart, There is no God,
they are corrupt, etc. Either Idolaters that profess a false Religion, or such
as in show only profess the true. Such as want the chief part of wisdom,
though otherwise politic enough. He spoke in the singular number, verse. 5. A
wise man, etc. Here in the plural, Fools despise wisdom, etc. There are more
fools then wise men in the world. Men are naturally foolish.

Despise. The word (...) signifies,

1. To set light by a thing, or contemn it, or make little account of it. The
daughters of Zion have despised thee, 2 Ki. 19.21.

2. To scorn or highly disdain. Haman thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai
alone, Est. 3.6. Here it is taken in the first sense, for all irreligious men
are not scorners, Psalm. 1.1. but all despise true wisdom.

Wisdom. See on verse. 2. It is excellent, yet fools make no account of it.

And instruction. See on v. 2. They neither know the excellency of wisdom, nor
the way of true safety in the true Religion, nor will learn it of others.

Figures none, unless a Metaphor in Fools taken for irreligious men, that want
the best wisdom.

In the words note, 1. A commendation of Religion. 2. A description of fools.
In the first note, 1. The subject, The fear of the Lord. 2. The adjunct, the
beginning of wisdom. In the second note, 1. The agent, Fools. 2. The effect,
Despise. 3. A double object, wisdom and instruction.



The former proposition is famous, as being often used in Scripture, chapter 9.10.
Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10.

1. Doct. Religiousnesse, or a reverent fear of God is the best wisdom. Keep
therefore, and do them, for this is your wisdom, and your understanding in the
sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this
great Nation is a wise and understanding people, Deuteronomy. 4.6. This is the wisdom
from above, Jam. 3.17.

Reason 1. Because it brings a man to acquaintance with God. Others acquaint us
with trees, beasts, men, this with God. We are naturally strangers from God,
and have most need of acquaintance with him. False Religions fet up creatures
openly, and worship them. They changed the glory of the incorruptible God into
an image made like to corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts,
and creeping things, Romans 1.23. Natural men not truly religious, though bred
in the Church, make their own will, or honors, or wealth, or pleasures, God.
Men truly religious know God aright.

2. It teaches us how to converse with God rightly by true worship and
obedience. How can a man bred among clowns, know how to converse with a King at
Court?

3. How to come to live with God for ever, which no Art else can teach. A trade
is most esteemed that is most gainful.

Use 1. To show us the vanity of all false Religions, in which men cannot
reverence the true God in their hearts aright, because they conceive amiss of
him. In vain they worship, and worship they know not what. A great Politician
was wont to say, The best policy is to be an honest man. So the best wisdom is
to be truly religious, and to fear God. Heathen Sages, as Seneca and Socrates,
were wise in their generations, and had many excellent gifts, but they missed
of the main; like Alchymists, who miss of their end, yet find many excellent
things by the way. These Merchants found goodly pearls, but the pearl of price
they failed of, Matthew. 13.45, 46.

2. Use. To acquaint our selves with the Scriptures, where this true wisdom,
how to fear and reverence God rightly, is taught, and no where else. We are
sure those were writ by no private spirit, but came from the holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21. Private spirits and inward principles may be cross one to another, and
who shall judge then what is right? The Scripture. Hereby we know the spirit of
truth, and the spirit of error, 1 John 4.2. If they quote Scripture, they
confess the Scripture to be above them, as Marnixius justly derides the
Papists, who would prove by Scripture that the Church was above the Scripture.
If not, then it is so, because they say so; and all the world will laugh at
such a proof.

3. Use. To persuade Magistrates to set up, and to uphold true Religion, and to
encourage such as truly fear God, by continuing Ministers, and discouraging
such as oppose it. Such as quote Gallio's speech to shut Magistrates out of all
matters of Religion, may as well quote Rabshake's speech for a warrant to fight
against Gods people. Am I now come up without the Lord against this place to
destroy it? The Lord said to me, Go up against this Land to destroy it, 2 King.
18.25. For that is recorded in Scripture also. It is a poor proof that comes
out of the mouth of an Heathen man.

4. Use. Let all that would be truly wise, get the fear of God into their
hearts.

2. Doct. All being is from God. Therefore is he called Jehovah, hecause he
gives being to all creatures. Who else made the world, and all creatures at
first? Genesis 1. Of him, and through him, and to him are all things, Romans 11.36.
In him we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28.

Reason 1. Because nothing can make it self, being must be before Working.

2. None had a being before the world but God, therefore he must give being to
all.

3. There was nothing to make any thing of, and no creature can work without
matter. It argues an infinite power.

4. No creature can put life into any thing. Therefore all living things must
be from God, and what can dead things do?

Use 1. To praise God for our being, as long as it lasts here, and in heaven,
where our being will last to eternity. While I live, I will praise the Lord
(says the Psalmist) I will fing praises unto my God, while I have any being,
Psalm. 146.2. All creatures attribute blessing, honor, glory, and power to God
for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13.

2. To use all our gifts and parts in Gods service; for as we have those parts
from him, so likewise our very being, without which we could have had no parts,
nor comfort.

3. Doct. Things of greatest worth should be of greatest account with us. Covet
earnestly the best gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. Above all these things put on charity,
which is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14. These things speak and exhort,
Tit. 2.15. For the affections should ever follow the judgment well informed.
Use. It blames those that make most account of meanest things, and lose gold
for counters, eternal life for transitory pleasures. Such are worse then
beasts, who will not neglect grass and water for any thing.

4. D. Knowledge is a matter of great excellency. It is part of Gods image in
man. Col. 3.10. Husbands must dwell with their Wives according to knowledge, 1
Pet. 3.7. As light is in the world. What is all the world worth without the
Sun? What were all Aegypts pleasures and treasures worth in the three days
darkness? So is knowledge the comfort of the soul.

Use. Labor for it more then for riches. Spiritual things are more worth then
temporal.

5. Doct. Irreligious persons are in Gods account the fools of the world. For
they want Gods fear, as natural fools want wisdom. The foolish shall not
stand in thy sight, thou hate all workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.5. And Gods
enemies are called foolish people, Psalm. 74.18.

Reason 1. Because they have not wisdom enough to escape hell.

2. Nor to attain to eternal happiness.

Use 1. Envy not the policies and sleights of great men, and Statesmen, that
have no religion in them. The world may chronicle them for wise men, but they
are fools in Gods book. Tamar tells Amnon, though a Kings Son, Thou shall be as
one of the fools in Israel, 2 Samuel 13.13.

2. Be not proud of wit, or learning. If you have no true Religion, your wit is
good for nothing but to carry you to hell. When one commended highly Julian the
Cardinal to Sigismund, he answered, Tamen Romanus est, Yet he is a Roman. So
may ye say of the greatest irreligious Politician, Yet he is a fool. Lo, they
have rejected the Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9.

6. Doct. None despise heavenly wisdom, but such as know not the value of is.
Such as know not what they do, Luke 23.34. Had they known it, they would not
have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. The preaching of the Cross is
foolishness to men, yet Gods wisdom most seen in it, 1 Cor. 1.18, 23. Because
the excellency of it is so great, that it would allure men to look after it,
had they spiritual eyes to see it. It is so in other Arts also. Scientia non
habet inimicum, nisi ignorantem. Knowledge has no enemy but an ignorant man.
Who is, Asinus ad lyram, as unfit for learning, as an Ass to play upon an
harp. Use. Think never the worse of heavenly wisdom, because so many slight
it. The fault is not in the thing, but in their shallow brains. Who would
slight a jewel, because a fool presers his babble before it? Such are carnal
men, like Esau. A Mess of pottage is better then Canaan to them. Such fools
were the rich man, Luke 12. Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.

7. D. Wisdom it self, though excellent, is despised by many. Fools hate
knowledge, verse. 22, 29. And no marvel, for both God and Christ are despised
by such. He that despises you, despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, Luke 10.16. His wisdom is counted folly, 1 Cor.
1.25. Use. Let not us think much to be despised; Wisdom, Christ, and God are
despised, who have deserved much better of the Sons of men.

8. Doct. They that slight the means of knowledge, slight knowledge it self.
See v. 22, 23, 29, 30. We account so in outward things. We ask sick men
refusing physic, if they make no account of their lives? We tell idle persons,
they care not for riches. Use. It lies sore on the consciences of many, who
would be loath to think, they should answer for neglect of knowledge at the day
of Judgment, yet they must. Else why sit ye at home, and lose so many good
Sermons? your absence is a real sleighting of wisdom.

Verse. 8. My Son, hear the instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law
of thy Mother.
In the rest of this Chapter, and the two Chapters following, Solomon's words,
consisting of many exhortations and promises, do not well admit of any
division, but by the Chapters. In the rest of this Chapter, there is,

1. A commendation of domestical instruction, v. 8, 9.

2. A disswasion from hearkening to bad counsels, from v. 10, to v. 20.

3. Wisdoms exhortation to men, to follow her directions, from verse. 20. to
the end of the Chapter. In the first ye have,

1. An exhortation in this verse.

2. A promise in the next. For the exhortation, and first for the words.

My Son. See on v. 1. Hear. See on v. 5. Here it is taken for giving ear and
heart to parents instructions, believing or obeying them, according to the
nature of them. Instruction. The means to get learning. See on verse. 2.

Of thy Father, (...), a Father, from (...), to wish well; for parents
naturally bear good will to their children. Amor descendit, non ascendit. Love
descends, but ascends not. They are part of them, and their care is great for
them. The word is not always used for natural Parents, but sometimes for
Mosters, or elder persons, or men in authority, as Children for inferiors in
the fist Commandment, and elsewhere. Solomon was a Father, as a Ruler,
Teacher, natural Father. And it may be, that these Proverbs were written for
instruction to his own children, and so to be communicated by other parents to
their children, as King James writ his Basilicon Doron for his Son. Yet Solomon
chooses the name of a Father, rather then of a King or Master, to persuade
them to be the more willing to receive instruction from him, for Parents look
to their childrens good, when Masters and Kings, having not that natural band,
look to their own ends. Because Solomon took upon him principally to teach
young men, therefore he takes to him the name of a Father, showing withal that
he desires nothing more then their spiritual good.

And forsake not. Hearing and not forsaking, must be applied to the instruction
of both Parents, by the rule given in the last verse. For as a Child must not
refuse to hear his Father at first, so he must not be drawn away from the truth
or good learned by his Father afterward. And as he must not be drawn from his
Mothers counsels afterward, so he must not slight them at the first. Hearing
is to be given to the Father, because Children are more ready to hearken to
their Mothers, though the Fathers be for the most part best able to advise. And
not forsaking looks to the Mothers Law, because Children taken from the Mothers
care, and employed by the Father, are ready to slight her, and to forget what
she taught them in their childehood. (...) imports, not being drawn away by our
own corruption, or other men's persuasion from what we have learned of our
godly Mothers. Others read, pluck not up, but that comes of (...), and comes
short of the other, intending a man's own seduction by himself, and not so well
forbidding seduction by others also. Entisement is set down more plainly, verse.
10.

The Law. The teaching, (...), of (...), to shoot, or rain, or teach. Precepts
are dropped into young children, by pious Mothers by little and little, and as it
were sucked in with their milk, and fastened by often repeating. Such teaching
becomes Mothers and children. It is translated Law rather then teaching,
because it binds more, and children think themselves less bound to Mothers
then Fathers, because Mothers are more tender over them, and familiar with
them. Equals also may teach, but not command.

Of thy Mother. It is taken here for the natural Mother, for Solomon begins
with household instruction. Leave not the course of godliness wherein she bred
thee. Figures none.

Note 1. The Childs duty to his Father. 2. To his Mother.
In the first note, 1. The agent, My Son. 2. The act, hear. 3. The object, the
instruction. 4. The subject, of thy Father.


In the second note, 1. The act, and forsake not. 2. The object, the Law. 3.
The subject, of thy Mother.


He had begun with Religion and duty to God, verse. 7. next he requires duty to
Parents in this verse.

1. Doct. Next after the care of Religion, is the care of our duty to Parents.
Therefore God has placed the fifth Commandment in the beginning of the second
Table. Philo thinks it was written in the border of both Tables, Aben Ezra
places it in the first Table, but behind. Tindall conceives it was written in
the first Table, after the fourth Commandment; so that the first Table should
contain all duties to Superiors, God, and Magistrates, and Parents, etc. and
the second all duties to Equals. Diis and parentibus nunquam satis fit:
Aristotle. God and Parents cannot be sufficiently requited. The Heathen
punished injuries to God and Parents alike. Valor. l. 1. Qui dubitat, utrum
oporteat Deos revereri, aut parents, non indiget ratione, sed pari paena.
Aristot. Topic. l. 8. He that doubts whether God or Parents be to be
reverenced, needs not be confuted by reason, but by the same punishment. All
fatherhood is from God. Men are fathers of some, God of all in some sense or
other. Resisting them is in some sense resisting God, as resisting a Constable
is resisting the King or supreme Magistrate. Parents are chosen in the fist
Commandment to expresseall Superiors, rather then Magistrates or Ministers;
these are comprehended under Parents. The safety or ruin of Church and
Commonwealth depends upon them, for families are seminaries of both. Divine
right and natural, give Parents power over Children.

1. Use. To inform us of what great weight this duty is, both in the Text and
Decalogue set next after our duty to God.

2. To reprove disobedient Children. This sin is next to impiety against God,
and before sins committed against equals. Many have confessed at the Gallows,
that God justly brought them thither for disobedience to religious Parents. And
some have been troubled for their disobedience after their Parents death.

Object. Our Parents are testy.

Answ. Yet they must be born withal. Multa ex quo fuerunt commoda, ejus
incommoda aequum est far. Terent. We must bear with them by whom we get much.
Love thy Parent if he be kind, otherwise bear with him. Ames parentem, si
aequus est, aliter feras. Mimus. Servants must obey froward Masters, 1. Pet.
2.18. Much more Children froward Parents.

2. Doct. The beginning of Christian knowledge and piety arises for the most
part from domestical instruction. Hence Solomon had his. His Father taught
him, chapter 4.4. and his Mother, chapter 31. Timothy's says came by derivation from
his Grandmother, and Mother, 2 Timothy 1.5. He knew the holy Scriptures from a
child, 2 Timothy 3.15.

Reason 1. There are prayers and good examples used in godly families, which
are means of knowledge and grace, as well as the public Ordinances. Men that
fare well at home are fat, as well as they that feast abroad.

2. There be pull-backs from evil by discipline and correction, which bridle
our corrupt nature from evil, as godly exercises are spurs to good.

1. Use. It teaches us to live in good families, where godliness prevails.
Yea, and Children should be willing to leave irreligious Parents houses, to
live with godly Masters.

2. Parents should choose good Masters for their Children, and not altogether
look at trading. Place them where they may learn how to live in heaven as well
as here.

3. Bless God if he give you godly Parents or Masters. It is a great mercy.
Men do so for rich Masters, where they may live plentifully; or skillful ones,
where they may learn how to get an estate; how much more for such as teach us
true wisdom?

4. Make hay while the Sun shines. Make a good use of domestical instructions.
God has not given you good Parents or Masters for nothing. Ye may learn to be
wise your selves, and teach yours to be so, when God honors you with families
of your own.

3. Doct. Parents are bound to instruct their Children in piety. To bring them
up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. As Captains train up
their raw Soldiers, and exercise them in Arms. Train up a child in the way he
should go, Prove. 22.6. So did Abraham breed his Children, Genesis 18.19. And
David, Prove. 4.3, 4. Teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons, Deuteronomy. 4.9. The
like is required, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and 11.19.

Reason 1. Because men are much drawn by authority to give credit to what is
spoken. Men look more, quis dicat, who says; then quid dicatur, what is said.
Children will believe their Parents sooner then Brethren or Servants, because
they exercise the first authority over them. Afterward, when they grow wiser,
they will hear reason from an equal or inferior. Hence it is that Children and
ignorant persons follow authority, but wise men follow reason. The Samaritans
believe at first for the Woman's words, afterward for Christ's own sayings,
Joh. 4.39, ^2. So Augustine at first believed the Scriptures for the Churches
authority, afterward for their own. Divine authority is above all Reason. But
among humane authority Parents is the first.

2. It is most prevalent, because Children see their Parents love from their
youth. Parents therefore must not lose that opportunity of improving their
Childrens good opinion of them.

3. Young years are fittest for instruction, and those they spend under their
Parents. They are then easy to be ruled, and of quick capacity, not taken off
with vices and cares. They are like young trees, easy to bow.

4. The good taught then may abide with them all their life long. Quo semel est
imbuta recens, servabit odorem, Testa diu, Horat. The vessel keeps the savor
of what it was first seasoned withal, a long time. When he is old he will not
depart from what he learned young, Prove. 22.6. It is harder to infuse truth or
piety, when error or fin has taken possession first. It is a double labor,
first to empty the glass of filthy liquor, then to put in clean: first to pluck
up the weeds, then to sow good seed.

Use 1. Woe be to those Parents that neither teach their Children themselves,
nor yet put them to school; only they labor to get money for them, which their
ungrateful heirs spend to their own destruction in finfull ways. Deus
disciplinam parents jubet thesaurizare filiis, non pecuniam: Perennia
praecepit, non peritura confer. Salv. contra avarit. God bids parents to
treasure up instruction for their children, not money: He commanded to bestow
on them lasting things, not perishing.

2. It reproves such as marry before they know the grounds of Religion, and so
may have children before they know how to breed them. I have heard, that Horn
Bishop of Winchester, in Qu. Elizabeth's days, upheld a Minister that was
complained of for refusing to marry a young Gentlewoman for ignorance of the
grounds of Religion, saying that he would have suspended him if he had done it,
though he had a license from his own Officers; adding withal, What, should we
have families of Infidels? For how can they instruct their Children, that are
so ignorant of the first principles of Religion themselves?

3. It calls upon Parents to breed their Children well. How can they hearken to
their instruction, if they have it not? Themselves would condemn Parents that
should starve their childrens bodies; what are they then if they starve their
souls?

4. Doct. Children are bound to give credit to, and obey their Parents good
counsels. Come ye children, hearken unto me, Psalm. 34.11. The Children of Eli
hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because (or therefore, as Ps.
116.10. with 2 Cor. 4.13) the Lord would slay them, 1 Samuel 2.25.

Reason 1. Because they are the first teachers ordinarily, and therefore our
ears should be open to them. The Parliament hears and rewards the first
Messengers of good news.

2. They are the fittest teachers, for they seek the good of their children out
of natural love. Provide for them while they live, give them an inheritance
when they die, desire their salvation. They will commend good things to their
children out of love, Luke 11.13. Whereas Masters may do it out of respect to
their own peculiar profit. They require them not to lie or steal it may be,
but let them be profane or irreligious.

3. Parents can more commodiously instruct them, being still at hand to observe
their courses, and to resolve their doubts at any time.

4. They have experience, and know what is good for their children, who know
not what is good for themselves; and whom should they hearken to rather, then
to their own Parents?

Object. Parents may be Idolaters, and perswaders to be Papists. It is the
Popish argument to be of their Fathers Religion.

Answ. If they be such as Solomon was, wise and godly, they will not persuade
us to Idolatry. If they be Idolaters, we must not hearken to them.

Object. Parents may be wicked, and give ill counsel.

Answ. Yet it may be they may give good counsel to their children sometimes.
Parents that have been bad in their youth, may give good counsel to their
children in their age, for their own quiet. Etiam pudicam vult meretrix filiam:
A whore would have a chaste daughter. And we are bidden to follow their
precepts, not their examples, nor counsels neither, if they be naught.

1. Use. It shows the greatness of the sin of Children, that will not be
taught nor ruled by godly Parents.

2. Let Children hearken to such willingly, that they may obtain the Rechabiles
blessing, Not to want a man of their posterity to stand before God for ever,
Jer. 35.19. Children can hearken to their Parents worldly counsels, and
remember them, when they are dead and gone. Much more account should they make
of their spiritual advices.

5. Doct. Children must never be drawn from their Parents good instructions.
They must not forsake them if they live to be old, Prove. 22.6. Abraham's
Children and household after him, must keep the way of the Lord taught by him,
Genesis 18.19.

Reason 1. Because Parents good instructions are a treasure, and men are very
careful of their treasures. Not only to get, but to keep them till old age,
against a time of need.

2. There is much danger of losing this treasure. Thine own corruptions,
Satan's temptations, bad counsels, examples, like thieves, seek to rob thee of
it.

Use 1. Take heed of seducers, and all that would mislead thee. Too many now
have forgot their pious education, both by errors, and looseness of life,
whose Parents would scarce own them, if they were alive.

2. Ye that are children, lay up your Parents godly counsels, not in your
brains only, but in your hearts. Ye may have need of them in age and death.

6. Doct. Mothers must take pains to teach their children piety. Else how
should they obey their Mother? chapter 30.17. So did Solomon's Mother, chapter 31.1.
Mothers of good and bad Kings are named in Kings and Chronicles, as having a
share in their childrens goodness or badnesse, by their education. Our first
days are spent for the most part under our Mothers care, while our Fathers are
busied in their calling, about matters of the Church or Commonwealth. She
therefore should take advantage thereof, to teach us goodness.

Use. It condemns many fond Mothers, that are careful to provide all things
needful for their children, save only good education and instruction. They
lose an opportunity of doing much good to their souls. Children are more ready
to hear Mothers then Fathers, because they converse more with them, and they
are less stubborn, then when they are bigger, and come to their Fathers care.
We say, they speak the Mother Tongue.

7. Doct. Children must not slight their Mothers counsels. If they do, their
eyes shall be picked out by ravens and eagles, Prove. 30.17. Solomon records his
Mothers instruction, Pro. 31.1. as well as his Fathers, chapter 4.4. The fifth
Commandment requires honor to Mothers, as well as to Fathers, Exodus 20.12. A
foolish man despises his Mother, Prove. 15.20.

Reason 1. Because Mothers bear great affection to their children, and
therefore ought to be heard.

2. They endure most pain in breeding and bearing them, and take most pains in
nursing and tending them, in tender years, when they are least able to help
themselves.

3. Instruction is attributed to the Father, which is accompanied with
correction; but a mild law, such as good Subjects live comfortably under, or
gentle teaching to the Mother. She teaches more mildely.

Use. To blame children that will hearken to their Fathers for fear of
correction, but account their Mothers instructions as words of weak and doting
women, because they cannot or will not correct them. Though they be not so wise
as men ordinarily, yet love will teach them to give good counsel; and women
sometimes are wiser and better then their husbands, who may be won by the
conversation of their wives, 1 Pet. 3.1. And many are beholding to their
Mothers for their best instructions, who as sometimes they are better, so
oftentimes have more leisure then their husbands.

8. Doct. Mothers instructions agreeable to Gods Word, should be as a Law to
children. The same words are repeated, Prove. 6.20. Forsake not the law of thy
Mother. Disobeyers of Mothers must be punished as Law-breakers. She may
instruct well in precepts of life, though it may be not so fully in matters of
says. Now Laws concerning life are needful also.

Use. Let good children look upon their Mothers instructions, as Laws not to be
broken all their life long.

Verse. 9. For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains
about thy neek.
The reason to persuade Children to obey their Parents, and to encourage them,
follows. And Solomon being to teach children, or simple ones like to children,
takes therefore his argument from Garlands and Chains, that make a fair show in
the eyes of such persons, as suiting to their capacity and affections, to whom
he speaks. They are delighted in them, and they please the vulgar much. Thus
the Spirit of God accommodates himself to Childrens temper. They love shining
things.

For the words.

For. The word carries not always a cause with it, but a reason or motive for
the most part, and often by way of promise. So it is used, chap. 23.17, 18.
Fear the Lord, for surely there is an end, or reward. For so the word sometimes
signifies, and the sense requires it there. Know thou the God of thy Father,
etc. for the Lord searches all hearts, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

They. The instruction of thy Father, and law of thy Mother, verse. 8. Mothers
may help to prefer their children as well as Fathers.

Shall be. It is not in the Original, and therefore is written in lesser
letters, yet needfully added, for children must not look for such preferment or
respect while they are young, but when learned and of years. Harvest follows
Seedtime presently.

An ornament of grace. As, the note of similitude is wanting. They shall be as
an ornament of grace. See the like, Job 7.7. My life is wind; that is, my life
is as wind. Heb. An addition of favor, or joining of grace. Hence Levi had his
name. Now at this time my husband will be joined unto me; therefore was his
name called Levi, Genesis 29.34. But it must be an addition of ornament, not for
nothing, nor for infamy, but for honor, or at least for acceptance. To make
thee amiable or honorable before others, and comely in their eyes, as Noah
found grace in the eyes of the Lord, Genesis 6.8. As usemoney brings an increase,
and Conquerors had garlands given them.

Unto thy head, (...), to, or for thy head, as this particle is rendered. Psalm.
84. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah. This shows, that he means a garland or
crown, such as Kings and Priests used to wear upon their heads, the highest
member, and most looked at in token of honor, Zach. 3.5. and 6.11. The word
(...), signifies,

1. The head, which is the beginning or highest part of the body. Job 19.9. He
has taken the crown from my head.

2. The highest part of any thing which stands above the rest, as the head
above the other members. The top of the ladder reaebed to heaven, Genesis 28.12.

3. A Commander in war or peace, who is above the rest, and guides them by
reason, as the head does the members. Numb. 14.4. Let us make a Captain.

4. The beginning of a thing. In the beginning of the middlewatch, Judge. 7.19.

5. The chief part of any thing, as the head is in the body. Take thou also
unto thee principal spices, Exodus 30.23.

6. The sum of things, which is the head of number. When thou have taken the
sum of the children of Israel, Ex. 30.12. Here it is taken in the first
sense, for the head of the body.

And chains. Wise men were wont to wear chains, in sign of honor due to them
for their wisdom. Pharaoh put a gold chain about Joseph's neck therefore, Genesis
41.39, 42. Hence the Giants and Anakims had their names, from (...) Men samous
for strength, and either did, or were accounted worthy to wear gold chains, as
men of note used to do. Or it may be Anak their Father wore a chain, and they
might have their name from him. The Ishmaelites used to wear golden earrings
in token of honor, Judge. 8.24. And he says chains in the plural number, for
the more gold chains men wear, the greater is their honor.

About thy neck, Heb. for thy neck, as before, or throat, which is within the
neck, Heb. throats; that is, both sides of the neck or throat, or because it
consists of many roundels, like rings, one below another.

The sum of all is:

If for love to thy Father and Mother, and duty due to them, thou will not
hearken to their pious instructions, yet let this motive prevail with thee,
taken from that reward of approbation and honor, which good children attain
unto, that hearken to their Parents counsels. That will make thee excellently
adorned, like a man that has a crown on his head, and chains on his neck.

Figures: Two Metaphors. One taken from a Garland, or Crown on the head; the
other from a Chain on the neck, signifying popular approbation and preferment.
Thou shall be a man approved and honored.

Note 1. The coherence, by way of motive. For.

2. The sentence.

In it, 1. The cause, they shall be.

2. The effect, set out by two similitudes; one from a crown on the head, an
ornament of grace on thy head. The other from a chain on the neck, and chains
about thy neck. Both signs of approbation and honor.

1. Doct. Though God might always command, yet he often uses motives to
persuade. So in the preface to the Ten Commandments, and in the second, third,
fourth, and fifth Commandments, many motives are used from Gods power,
goodness, and promises. See the like Deuteronomy. 11. all over.

Reason 1. Because God deals with reasonable men, and so presses reasons.
Every thing is to be wrought upon in its own way, in ordinary course.

2. Because their own reason will condemn them, if they hearken not to God;
but if God gave no reason (as he need not) then must he condemn men out of
mere authority, which (though just) would seem harsh.

3. Because of Gods in finite goodness. He uses all means for the good of men.

1. Use. To show the justice of the condemnation of wicked men; they fin
against the light of reason.

2. To persuade us to hearken to God, who deals with us in so low a way, that
might have stood upon high terms, and given no reason for his command. Princes
use to say, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas: So I will, so I
command, and for a Law my will shall stand. Si regnas, jube: If thou be a King,
command. Senec. Med.

2. Doct. Though we owe God more then we can do for him, yet he woes us by
rewards. By temporal rewards, Deuteronomy. 28.1, etc. Delight thy self also in the
Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto
the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to pass, Psalm. 37.45. Psalm.
128. all over. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land, Isa. 1.19. Veluti pueris dant crustula blandi Doctores, elementa velint
ut discere prima. Horat. Sat. 1. As kind Teachers give little cakes to boys to
make them willing to learn their A. B. C. Eternal rewards are promised, Matthew.
10.41, 42. A crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. A crown of life, Revel. 2.10.
A throne to sit on, Rev. 3.21. The Spirit of God here accommodates himself to
Childrens temper, who love rewards. So should men be taken with Gods promises.

Reason 1. To show Gods freeness, who though he might require more duty out of
debt then we can perform, yet is pleased to reward our imperfect services; as
if a Creditor should give a thousand pound to one that owes him an hundred
pound, and paid but five pounds of it; or a Master give to a Servant that
failed in many things (though he were honest) treble his wages.

2. To work upon our self-love. He knows that we look at our selves naturally,
and he is willing to make use of this disposition of ours to encourage us to
his service.

1. Use. This shows how great a sin it is not to hearken to Gods voice. If he
required all out of debt, and gave no reward, it were injustice to deny him.
How much more when he offers so liberally? In so doing we justly deprive our
selves of the good promised, and perish eternally.

2. Use. Let us willingly hearken to God, who deals with us upon so fair terms,
as a City besieged yields gladly in extremity upon fair quarter, much more upon
great advantage and rewards offered. Moses had respect to the recompense of
reward, Heb. 11.26.

3. Doct. Harkening to Parents instruction, is a means to bring us to public
approbation. So it fared with Solomon himself. He got approbation by attending
to his Parents precepts, and advises his Son to seek it by attending to his.

Reason 1. Because the people observe the carriage of other men's children, as
well as of their own; and if they find them respective of their Parents good
counsels, they expect much from them, but little from disobedient ones.
Obedient children are comely in other men's eyes befide their Parents.

2. Because wisdom is gotten by hearkening to Parents counsels, and that makes
men acceptable to others. Keeping Parents precepts is grace unto the neck, chapter
3.21, 22. Wisdom made David esteemed as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 14.20. A man's
wisdom makes his face to shine, Eccl. 8.1. God who turns men's hearts
whithersoever he will, Prove. 21.1. makes wise men to be had in high esteem,
even of fools, as if they were crowns and chains.

Use. Let not children think themselves too wise, and despise their Parents
counsel, lest others set light by them. Whereas, if they hearken to it, men
will willingly cast their eyes upon them, and have an high account of them; as
Joseph pleasing his Father, had a parti-colored coat, that others might see
his Fathers great affection to him.

5. Doct. Hearkening to Parents instruction is a great means of preferment. As
in Joseph, who was the best, and best beloved Son of his Father. In well
ordered Cities all men may not wear crowns or chains, but Nobles, and
Magistrates, and men preferred for wisdom. Pharaoh put a gold chain about
Joseph's neck, Genesis 41.42. Belshazzar caused a chain of gold to be put about
Daniels neck, Dan. 5.29. And this wisdom comes often by Parents instructions.
Men will not prefer such to rule others, as would not be ruled by their
Parents. Wise men are Noblemen, they have God to their Father.

Use. Behold the reward of hearkening to Parents instructions, and be
encouraged so to do. Great honor follows it many times in this world, but sure
a crown of glory in heaven.

Verse. 10. My Son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
The Wise man proceeds in a very fit method; for having exhorted young men to
hearken to their Parents, now in the ten verses following, he warns them to
take heed of seducers, whereof for want of experience, and pronenesse to evil,
they are in great danger. Such seek to extinguish the good counsels of Parents
at home, by drawing them abroad to wickedness. For man's natural corruption is
ready to break forth, especially being solicited by others. Therefore he warns
young men to take heed of wicked men's company, counsels, and ways: Young men
are more apt to hear other men's bad counsels, then their Parents good; by
reason of ill disposition more powerful in them then natural affection.
Therefore he bids them cleave fast to the one, resist the other.

For the words.

(...), My Son. For this word see on verse. 1. and verse. 8. Herein Solomon aimed
principally at the good of his own children, yet gives this counsel to every
young man that shall hear or read these Proverbs, calling him his Son, as if he
spoke to him in particular, out of a paternall affection.

(...), If. If such a thing shall happen. If you meet with seducers, as it may
be ye may. Or when, as it is translated, Amos 7.2. When they had made an end of
eating the grass of the land. For there is no question but young men will meet
with enticers one time or other. Or seeing, as it should be translated, Est.
6.13. Seeing Mordecai is of the seed of the Jews. For it is sure he was so.

(...), sinners. Object. All men are finners born, and good men sin every day.
There is no man that sins not, 1 King. 8.46.

Answ. By finners here are meant gross sinners, as Luke 7.37, 39. such as live
in a course of sin without repentance. Such are forward to draw others to be
like them, but godly men seek to draw others to piety. So the word is used,
Psalm. 1.1. Nor stands in the way of sinners. And Joh. 9.31. God hears not
sinners. Such as make a trade of sin, 1 John 3.9. and 1 Samuel 15.18. The word
signifies to miss the mark. Every one could sting stones at an hairs breadth,
and not miss, Judge. 20.16. And secondarily, to miss the mark that God sets
before us in his Word. Not to act according to his Law. But here it signifies
not such as in some one act differ from the Law of God, but in the course of
their lives, and that willingly, wittingly, and grossly, and so miss the mark
of eternal glory, Phil. 3.14.

(...), Entice thee. Seek to persuade thee with fair words and rich promises to
take part with them in their wickedness, to the hurt of others. Malus bonum
vult malum esse, ut sit sui similis. Plaut. A bad man would have a good man
bad, that he might be like him. The word is used sometimes in a good sense, to
persuade men to good, and for their good. So some translate Genesis 9.27. God
shall persuade Japhet. And from this word Japhet had his name. But it is taken
most commonly in a bad sense, as here. Hence (...), a simple man, easily drawn
away, verse. 4. And hence comes Fatuus a fool in Latin.

(...), Consent thou not. A prohibition or charge, not to hearken to enticing
sinners. The word signifies to bear good will. Such as parents bear to their
children. Thence comes (...), a Father. See on verse. 8. And because men are
willing to hearken to such as they bear good will to, it signifies also to
consent. Sometime to good counsel, as verse. 30. Sometime to bad, as here. Say,
I will not do what ye persuade me to. Give a short answer, give not the least
ear or liking to their flattering persuasions. Be not ready to hearken to them
with thine ear, much less with thine heart, least of all to admit them into
thine hand, or act them. Keep thine ears from hearkening to them at first, as
David kept h^s tongue, Psalm. 39.1. and Job his eyes, Job 31.1. Be so far from
acting with them, that thou give no consent to them, nor keep no company with
them, Prove. 4.14. Be not won with their fair words, and large offers, but
rather resist their solicitations. A Meiosis, as in the third Commandment, not
holding him guiltless that takes Gods Name in vain, is holding him very
guilty, and punishing him very severely.

The sum of all is, as Solomon should have said; Ye young men, whom I love as
children, I know that wicked men will speak you fair, and make you large
promises, to persuade you not to hearken to my good counsels here, or such as
your godly Parents shall give you, and to draw you to their wicked ways; but
trust not to their promises, nor hearken ye to their counsels, for in stead of
making you rich and happy, they will make you miserable. Figures none.

Note 1. A general prescription in this verse.

2. Particular directions, to verse. 20.

In the first note, 1. The party spoken to, My Son. 2. The dehortation. And in
it, 1. The danger. 2. The way of preventing it. In the danger,
1. The agent, if sinners. 2. The effect, entice. 3. The object, thee.


The remedy is, consent thou not.

For the coherence: He had persuaded the young man before to open his ear to
his Parents good counsels, now he persuades him to stop it against the bad
counsels of finners.

1. Doct. Parents good counsels should keep out the bad counsels of finners out
of childrens hearts. Compare chapter 2. v. 1. with v. 12. and v. 16. there, and ye
shall see that hiding Parents commandments within us, is a means to keep us
from being hurt by the bad words of evil men or women. See the like, chapter 4.4,
14, 20, 24. and 5.1, 3, 7, 8, 9. and 6.20, 24. and 7.1, 5.

Reason 1. Because their parents should be deerer to them, then any other
whatsoever. And men are most ready to hearken to them, that are dearest to
them. Men are more ready to take notice who speaks, then what is spoken. They
who slight others speeches will regard friends words.

Use. Let children, when they are tempted to fin by others, recall their
Parents good counsels to the contrary. It will be a great preservative. Arms
laid up in peace are produced in war for good.

2. Doct. Such as undertake to teach others, must show forth Parents
affections. So does Solomon here, and verse. 8. chapter 2.5. and 3.1. and 4.1. And
David, chap. 5.1. and 6.1. and 7.1.

Reason 1. It is a winning way. Love wins more then authority. Therefore Paul
uses it to win the revolted Galatians, Gal. 4.19. My little children, of whom
I travel in birth again, until Christ beformed in you. See the like in Paul's
dealing with Philemon, Philem. v. 7, 8, 9, 19. He entreats that might command,
and promises payment to him that was more indebted to him, yea owed him his
own soul. St. John often uses this loving title, My little children, 1 John
2.1, 12, 13. and 3.18.

2. It is a stopping way to prevent objections. If it be objected, we disgrace
others, and bear them malice naturally, therefore they will not hear our
counsels; we may answer, Parents bear no malice to their children, and are
therefore worthy to be heard. If it be said, we seek our own, and not others
good, the same answer will serve, Parents do not so, but seek their childrens
good, and their counsels are for that cause not to be rejected.

1. Use. For Teachers. Let Ministers season their reprooss with fatherly
insinuations of affection, as Physicians give sugar after bitter pills. So let
Fathers, Masters, Friends, teach with parentall love, if they would do any good.

2. Use. Let young men regard such Teachers as show such affection. Assuredly
they speak for their good, what ever their corruption suggests to the contrary.

3. Doct. Though all men be finners, yet some remain in a sinful estate, and
so carry away the name from others. These are of two sorts:

1. All in their natural condition. While we were yet sinners, Romans 5.8. In
the flesh, chapter 8.8. In darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.4.

2. Gross sinners, as the Sodomites, Genesis 13.13. The men of Sodom were wicked,
and sinners before the Lord exceedingly. The sinners in Zion are afraid, Isa.
33.14.

Use. Get out of such a condition, both of natural and customary sin, or
rather keep out of the latter. Preservatives are better then healing physic.

4. Doct. Wicked men desire to make others as bad as themselves. So Harlots
do, Prove. 7.13, 14. The strumpet kisses the young man, and inveagles him with
fair words. So do drunkards. Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will
fill cur selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundant, Isa. 56.12.

Reason 1. Because some sins cannot be committed without company with any
content, as wantonness and drunkenness. Nemo facile peccat. No man will
easily sin alone. August Conf. l. 2. Infected persons are said to have a desire
to insect others.

2. That they may continue in sin the more boldly, when they have partners in
sin to side with them.

Use. When men tempt you to evil, look what they are. Ye will find them wicked
men themselves, and such as gallop toward hell, and would lead you thither with
them. This thought will dead their temptations.

5. Doct. Wicked men have a notable infinuating faculty to deceive others. See
the Harlots persuasions, Prove. 7.13, etc. and the Drunkards, Isa. 56.12. Both
cited in the former doctrine. So after the text, Thieves seek to draw in others
from hope of gain, and impunity.

Reason 1. They have oft-times ripe wits, and stretch all the veins of their
understanding to deceive.

2. They study how to be n^mble, and eloquent in deceiving. They make choice of
most alluring baits, as Fishers and Fowlers use to do. Fistula dulce canit,
voluerem dum decipit auceps: The pipe sings merrily, while the Fowler deceives
the bird. Flatterers like fishermen, and fowlers willingly set that before the
eyes of fishes and birds, which they think pleases them best. They know, that
otherwise they lose their labor. Petronius. The Serpent tempts Eve by fruit
pleasant to the eyes, Genesis 3.6. Sirens sing sweetly to deceive. The Dragon
bites the Elephants ear, and then sucks his blood. So wicked men hurt us by our
ears. Trap in v. 11.

Use. Labor to understand the drifts of tempters and deceivers, that ye may
not be carried away with their fair words and promises. Answer as Speusippus
Plato's Nephew answered a flatterer that praised him, Give over deceiving both
of us, draw not me from the knowledge of my self, and cease to heap cunning
maliciousness on your self. Nihil proficis, cum te intelligam: I understand
you so well that you cannot prevail. Elenard in Chron. Malum hominem blande
loquentem agnosce tuum laqueum esse: Take notice that a wicked man speaking
fawningly is a snare to thee. Seneca. So the strumpets words bring the young
man into a snare, chapter 7.23. Christ was offered all the Kingdoms of the world
by Satan, I yet hearkened not to him; neither do thou to Papists, nor gross
sinners, who offer offices or marriages to seduce. They are justly fooled, who
trust them.

6. Doct. Enticers will set upon such as have good education. Solomon was set
upon by his wives, 1 King. 11.4. His Son Rehoboam by his young counselors, 1
King. 12.8. And no marvel, for the Devil durst set upon Christ himself.

Reason 1. They trust to their own skill to deceive, as if none were metal
proof against it.

2. They judge others corrupt like themselves, though better bred. And they
guess shrewdly, for instruction cannot quite drive out natural corruption;
Tindar will take fire.

Use. Ye that have godly parents, expect seducers. They will soon set upon you,
to deprive you of your Parents good counsels. Churches and Families have such.
Praemoniti, praemuniti; forewarned, forearmed. Be not taken unawares.

7. Doct. Enticers cannot hurt us, if we consent not. Satan hurt not Christ,
Matthew. 4. Nor had hurt Adam and Eve, had not they consented.

Reason. Because thoughts of what is evil, are not evil thoughts, till some
delight or consent come. Ascending thoughts, to wit, from our corruption, are
sins; thoughts sent in, to wit, by Satan, are no sins, if they infect us not.
Andrews on the tenth Commandment. Christ could not but think what it was that
Satan tempted him to, yet sinned not.

Use. Deny consent, and no temptation can hurt thee; thou shall be free from
actual finning.

8. Doct. We must be firmly resolved against all solicitations to evil. So
Christ was, Matt. 4. and had Scripture ready.

Reason. Because they will else grow too hard for us. Trees are easiest pulled
up at first.

Use. Resist temptation at first, and then Satan will fly from you, Jam. 47 and
sin with him. Euticers are faeces Reipublicae, the dregs of the Commonwealth.
Cicero. The sooner swept away, the better. Majorem praedam in viduabus
blandimenta eliciunt, quam tormenta. Many proved unchaste by allurements, yet
many Widows and Maids endured the fire. August. de Verb. Dom. in Matthew. Hom. 19
fin. Avunculus tuus quaerit animam tuam, qui jam perdidit suam. Promisit magna,
sed ego majora; offert plura, sed ego plurima. Dimittes ergo pro terr^nis
coelestia, pro temporalibus aeterna? Bern. Epist. 2. ad Fulconem. Thy Uncle
seeks thy soul, who has already lost his own. He promises great things, but I
greater: he offers very many things, but I far more. Will thou then let go
heavenly things for earthly, eternal for temporary?

Verse. 11. If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk
privily for the innocent, without cause.
The Wiseman contents not himself to give general warning to the young man,
but comes to particulars. In which you may note:

1. The Robbers speech, to verse. 15.

2. The Wise-mans antidote, from thence to verse. 20. In the first he sets down
the particular allurements that wicked men use to draw others to evil. And
that in the tempters own words, to affect the young man the more. Robbers know
that young men are much discouraged with fear of danger, and difficulty of the
work, and therefore they labor first to dispossess them of these prejudices,
before they acquaint them with the gain to allurethem. And the Wiseman to make
them the more careful to avoid evil counsels, sets before them no mean
sinners, but Thieves and Robbers, who use to draw others to them, that they may
be the stronger to work wickedness. Not that such things are usually
propounded by wicked men at first, but they will come to them at last, if they
see young men willing to leave their Parents good counsel, to follow bad. He
sets this example before them, because it is easy to conceive what ways
thieves use to draw others to them, which young men having prodigally wasted
their own estates, are ready to hearken to, that without labor they may live
plentisully, as they did before. In this robbers speech note:

1. The plot they would draw them to act in, with some close arguments to drive
fear and shame out of them, to verse. 13.

2. Gain set before them to allure them, to verse. 15. So the Husbandman first
ploughs up weeds, then sows seeds. In the first note,

1. An argument from the safety of the attempt, v. 11.

2. From the easiness of the accomplishing it, v. 12.

For the first. Solomon propounds not the thing as Thieves would do to Novices,
for such gross language at first would make Novices afraid to join with them,
but rather shows whereunto their plots tend, and what they should say, if they
would speak plain. Yet he interweaves their arguments of safety, and facility.
For the words.

(...), If. See on verse. 10.

(...), they say. If they declare their meaning unto thee in words. So the word
is taken, Job 3.2. And Job spoke and said. It is also taken for commanding or
speaking impariously, Est. 1.10. The King commanded Mehuman, etc. For speaking
proverbially. As it is said to this day, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be
seen, Genesis 23.14. For thinking, or speaking in heart. The fool has said in
his heart, Psalm. 53.1.

Come with us. The Hebr. word (...), or rather (...) (for (...) is never read
in the Preterperfect tense, and therefore it is likely (...) comes of (...))
signifies,

1. Going about something, although a man walk not. And his Sons went and
feasted, Job 1.4.

2. Going on in a continued way, or walking. Laban went to shear his sheep,
Genesis 31.19.

3. The passage of ships, and other livelesse things. There go the ships, Psalm.
104.26.

4. Passing out of the world, or dying. Thou shall go to thy Fathers, Genesis
15.15. And he passes, Job 14.20.

5. Constancy in a condition. I go childlesse, Genesis 15.2.

6. It imports a course of life good or bad. Blessed is the man that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm. 1.1.

Here it is taken in the second sense. Come with us, or go with us to rob
others, and live by stealing. They show their forwardness to sin, not being
content to sin themselves, but soliciting others also. Thou shall not go alone,
nor be the first, but we will lead thee, who are accustomed to such courses. So
they seek to drive away the young man's s^^ame^astnesse.

(...) Let us lay wait. They call upon him to join with them. The argument is
taken from secrecy, to put away shame, or from safety. We will lie in
ambuseado, as Soldiers do in Woods unseen to catch enemies, and wild beasts
watching for prey. No man can there hurt us, prevent us, or reveal us, to bring
us to punishment. We will not openly set upon them, but work craftily for their
hurt, and our security. Young men are shamefast, as not used to such
wickedness; therefore secrecy is promised. They are fearful to fight in open
wars, therefore craft is added. We may be killed our selves if we set openly on
them, but we will prevent that danger by ambushments.

(...), for blood. The word signifies,

1. The blood of living creatures. Ye shall not eat any thing with the blood,
Levit. 19.26.

2. Things like blood in color. The Moon shall be turned into blood, Joel 2.31.

3. Murder, or blood shedding, because the life is in the blood, and departs
when the blood is shed. The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no
more cover her slain, Isa. 26.21. So it is taken here. And Deuteronomy. 17.8. Psalm.
5.6. Let us kill them to get their goods, Mat. 21.38. And to make them sure
that they may not reveal us.

(...), let us lurk privily. The same thing in other words, to show their
earnestness in persuading, and confidence that their plot must take. If we
cannot meet with him conveniently in the high way, we will wait in secret till
we can, Psalm. 10.8. and 56.6.

(...), for the innocent. It signifies primarily one clear from sin, or guilt,
or pure, not filthy or defiled with iniquity. But here is meant one that
carries himself fairly, goes quietly about his own business, not seeking the
hurt of any, nor fearing hurt from any, and so self-wary, and the more easily
oppressed. But this innocent man must be rich, to v. 13. Else nothing is gotten
by killing him.

(...), without cause. It signifies,

1. Without pay or reward, or for naught. Does Job fear God for naught? Job 1.9.

2. Without success, or in vain. I have not said in vain, Ezekiel. 6.10.

3. Without cause, or wrongfully. Thou movedst me against him to destroy him
without cause, Job 2.3. And so here, we will kill them, though they have given
us no cause to hurt them. The young man might object, They have not wronged us,
why should we kill them? No matter for that (say the Seducers) we shall get
wealth by it, v. 13. They sin out of covetousness, rather then out of malice.
It cannot signify in vain here, or without reward, for that became not the
seducers to speak, nor would not encouaage, but rather discourage the young man.

Figures none, unless a Prosopopeia, wherein Solomon speaks to them, as if the
thieves themselves were present, and spoke these words to the young man. And
shedding of blood for slaying. A figure of the cause for the effect.

Note 1. A preface, If they say.

2. The counsel it self, in three exhortations. In the first note,

1. The act, come.

2. The company, with us. In the second note,

1. The act, let us wait.

2. The object, for blood. In the third,

1. The act, let us lurk privily.

2. The object, for the innocent.

3. The answer to a tacit objection, without a cause.

Although they have given us no cause, yet let not that discourage thee. We
shall get wealth, let that encourage thee. For this cannot be an argument, Let
us kill them, because they have done us no wrong. Therefore it is a prevention
of an objection. For the coherence. Solomon not only warns young men in
general to take heed of seducers, but also acquaints them with their
particular persuasions beforehand.

1. Doct. Young men are in great danger of being drawn away to sinful courses.
They have great need of clensing their way Psalm. 119.9. See how the young man
is encountered with the wily allurements of the strumpet, chap. 7.7, etc.

Reason 1. Because they have not that grounded experience that others have, nor
are so able to look through shows into substances.

2. Because they are wilful and headstrong, and will follow their own lusts,
notwithstanding good men's persuasions. Solomon does not give leave to the young
man to walk in the ways of his heart, and in the sight of his eyes, Eccles.
11.9. but by an iconicall concession foretells their inclination, and therefore
God may justly give them over to be seduced, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12.

Use. Young men look about you. Young birds are caught with chafe. Take heed,
lest for despising your Parents good counsel, God give you over to hearken to
bad.

2. Doct. Wickedness will not be kept in in the heart, but will break out. The
fool has said in his heart, there is no God. And his deeds show it: They are
corrupt, they have done abominable works, Psalm. 14.1. So the transgression of
the wicked in his heart appears in that the words of his mouth are iniquity and
deceit, Psalm. 36.1, 3.

Reason 1. Because fin is like fire, if any fuel come to it, it will break
forth.

2. The devil blows the bellows by temptations.

Use. Take heed of the company of wicked men. Though they carry themselves
never so civilly for a time, yet their wickedness will break out. Tum tua res
agitur, paries cum proximus ardet: Look to thy self when thy neighbors house
is on fire. Men flee from insected houses. So should we from sinners.

3. Doct. Secrecy is a great bait to wickedness. The good man is not at home,
he is gone a long journey. A shrewd argument for adultery. Joseph's greatest
temptation was when there was none of the men of the house within, Genesis 39.11.

Reason 1. Because shame is a bridle to keep men from open wickedness. Many
are kept in by it, whom no counsel will keep from evil ways.

2. Because fear of punishment is a bit that keeps others from fin. Things
openly done will be questioned. (...). Aster. Conc. de Filio prodigo. There are
two strong keepers of youth, fear, and shame. Duo sunt custodes domestici nobis
a Deo dati, pudor, and timor. August. God has given us two keepers at home,
shame, and fear. Timor Domini est janitor animae: The fear of the Lord is the
dorekeeper of the soul. Bern.

Use. Take heed of secret solicitations to secret evile. The fear of God must
keep thee from these, as it did Joseph. Genesis 39.9. Set God always before thee,
Psalm. 16.8. Walk before him, Genesis 17.1. Be not worse then eye servants, who
will not offend in their Masters sight. Take the Heathen man's counsel. Suppose
Socrates, or some grave man before thee, when thou art tempted to any secret
wickedness. Yea, suppose God before thee. Quaecunque capessi, testes factorum
stare arbitrabere. Pros. Silius. Bell Pun. l. 15. What ^re thou go about,
think God a witness of thy actions. In omnibus, quae agis, Deum prasentem
cogites. Bern. Med. c. 6. Think God present in all thou do.

4. Doct. Covetousness makes men cruel. They say not, Let us lay wait for
wealth, but for blood, yet wealth was their aim. We will kill rather then want.
Ahab's covetousness brought Naboth to his end, 1 King. 21.4, 13. And Judas his
desire of gain made him betray Christ, Matthew. 26.15, 16.

Reason. Many do not kill men out of malice, but 1. that they may enjoy their
prey without resistance. 2. That they may not be discovered, and so punished.
Mortui non mordent. The dead bite not. They would find them out if they should
live.

Use. Take heed of covetousness. Though thou intendest only to cosen men of
their goods at the first, yet thou may be brought to kill Naboth for his
vineyard.

5. Doct. Wicked men have many secret devices to bring their wicked purposes to
pass. Esau resolves to kill his Brother Jacob after his Fathers burial, Genesis
27.41. Jezabel can undo Naboth by calling a Fast, 1 King. 21.9. For it is
their study day and night, Psalm. 36.4. Prove. 4.16.

Use. It teaches not to marvel that wicked men's plots prevail sometimes
against better men then themselves. We should rather wonder they do not always
prevail, they are so restless, and have so many ways to the Wood.

6. Doct. Wicked men promise themselves success of their mischievous plots.
They think they lurk so, as they cannot be prevented. Esau made no doubt of
slaying Jacob, Genesis 27.41. Saul made sure reckoning to catch David in Keilab, 1 Samuel 23.7. They think their Mine too deep for men to countermine, and look not
to God that can go beyond them.

Use. To show us how deeply sin is rooted in sinful souls, so that they dare
promise themselves good success, not only in lawful, but also in sinful
affairs.

7. Doct. Wicked men promise themselves impunity. They lie so close, that they
will have no witnesses to accuse them. And then they say, The Lord shall not
see, Psalm. 94.7. And they say, How does God know, and is there knowledge in the
most High, Psalm. 73.11. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they
commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall see them? Psalm. 64.5. Woe
unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works
are in the dark, and they say, Who sees us? and, Who knows us? Isa. 29.15.
Security is the cause of it. They persuade themselves that God and men are
blind. As the Ostrich hides his head, and then thinks all the body safe.
Struthiocameli stoliditas mira, in tanta reliqui corporis altitudine, cum
collum frutice occultaverit, latere se existimantis. Plin. l. 10. c. 1. Great
is the foolishness of the Ostrich, who though his body be very high, yet when
he hides his neck under a shrub, thinks he lies hid.

Use. Let Magistrates put them out of that conceit by doing justice on
Malefactors. Impunitas maxima est peccandi illecebra: Impunity i^ the greatest
bait to sin. Sparing some is cruelty to others. Henry the Eighth his fool, when
the King denied a pardon to a Gentleman that had killed two men before, told
him, that the Gentleman had killed but one, the King had killed the other, for
if he had hanged him for the first, the second had been alive. Bonis no^et,
quisquis malis pepercerit. P. Syrus. He that spares the bad, hurts the good.

8. Doct. Rich men, though innocent, are in danger. As Naboth, 1 King. 21. The
inheritance made the heir in danger of his life, Mat. 21.38. Their riches breed
them snares, Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator: An empty traveller may sing
before a thief.

Use. To condemn the immoderate desire of riches. Our throats may be cut for
them.

Verse. 12. Let us swallow them up alive, as the grave; and whole, as those that
go down into the pit.
The former argument to persuade our Novice to join in thest, and murder, and
unlawful surprise of other men's goods and lives, was taken from the safety of
the action. No danger. No man should see, to prevent it before, or to accuse
after. This argument in this verse is from the easiness of it. The Novice
might object, The work is difficult, the success doubtful. They answer, No.
It may be done without any trouble, with much ease, and little resistance. We
shall as easily overcome them, as dead men are put into the grave, or a sop
swallowed by a Dog.

For the words:

(...), Let us swallow them up, or we will or shall swallow them. Join thou
with us in the doing of it. They desire not only consent and approbation of
the work, but also assistance and help to effect it. Let us swallow them up as
wild beasts devour their prey, at a morsel; or as the greater fishes devour
the lesser, whole, and make no bones of them. Hereby is intimated,

1. The greedy desire of wicked men, to destroy others for their goods, as
beasts or fishes are greedy for their food, without which they cannot live.

2. The easiness they conceive of effecting it. They can destroy them as
easily as a Whale swallows a fish (as they think) that has power to resist or
escape.

3 The suddenness of the danger. The party shall be destroyed before he know
himself in danger, as a fish is suddenly swallowed.

4. The secrecy of it. None can tell what is become of that which is swallowed
up. No sign of blood shall be lest, nor any member, to avoid all suspicion of
murder.

5. The irrecoverablenesse of the loss. Things swallowed up are past recovery,
unless by miracle, as Jonas came out of the Whales belly. There will be then
no fear of revenge at all from them. By them he means the innocent parties, and
such as never did them any wrong, mentioned verse. 11.

(...), alive. This argues cruelty, to eat and devour living creatures, that
are sensible of their pain and loss. Dead carcasses feel not when they are
devoured. This cruelty is expressed lively, Psalm. 124.3. Then they had
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. The word
signifies,

1. Life. God breathed into man's nostrills the breath of life, Cen. 2.7.

2. Living, or alive. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living,
Psalm. 116.9.

3. Lively, or strong. The Hebrew women are lively, Exodus 1.19.

4. Men. Eve was the Mother of all living, Genesis 3.20. Not of beasts, but of men.

5. Beasts, for they live also. At the hand of every beast will I require it,
Genesis 9.5.

6. Moving things, that have no sense. A well of living watirs, Cant. 4.15.

Here it is taken in the second sense, for living or alive.

(...), as the grave. The word is sometime translated Hell. The wicked shall be
turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17. which is a receptacle for souls of wicked men
after death. Sometimes it is rendered the grave. I will go down into the grave,
unto my Son, Genesis 37.35. That is, the receptacle of dead bodies. And sure Jacob
meant not to go to hell, but into the grave, or state of the dead, for it is
likely he thought his Son was not buried, but devoured by wild beasts, as he
was told. It is taken directly for the Grave, Prove. 30.16. So it is taken here
for the Grave. We will not stay till they be dead. We will be their grave, and
hide them safe enough. It is not an allusion to Dathan and Abiram swallowed
alive by the earth, as some would have it, for thieves would not willingly
mention such a judgment. But the grave swallows dead men that they are no more
heard of, so will we swallow living men. And it may be an allusion to any that
are swallowed up quick, as multitudes have been upon breaches made by
earthquakes, and hanging hills overwhelming Towns, as lately in the Valtoline.
The name comes from (...), to crave or ask. For the grave is never satisfied,
but always craving for more carcasses. It never says, It is enough, Prove.
30.16.

(...). And whole. We will not hurt, nor maim them, nor cut off some members,
but swallow them all up at once. The word sometimes fignifies upright, or
undefiled. Blessed are the undefiled, or entire in the way, Psalm. 119.1. So
some read here. But that cannot be. For,

1. That is all one with innocent, verse. 11. And,

2. It suits not well with the words following, for most men go down into the
pit defiled.

(...), As they that go down into. That descend into the earth by burial; or
otherwise, by casualty, as some fallen into Marle-pits, and perished there, or
into Cole-pits, as Psalm. 140.10. It is true literally, for pits and graves are
in the bowels of the earth, and men are put down into them; or metaphorically,
because the estate of dead men is a lower condition, then of those that live on
the earth. A living dog is better then a dead lion, Eccl. 9.4.

(...), The pit. The word sometime signifies a pool dug to receive
rain-waters in those dry Countries, where water is wanting. A pit wherein there
is plenty of water, shall be clean, Lev. 11.36.

2. It signifies a pitfall dug to catch birds or beasts in. He made a pit,
Psalm. 7.15.

3. A hole or dungeon, whereinto offenders are cast. Unto the firstborn of the
captive that was in the dungeon, Exodus 12.29. Yet good men have been cast into
such places, as Jeremy into a dungeon, and Joseph into a pit.

4. A grave wherein dead men are cast. Thou have kept me alive, that I should
not go down into the pit, Psalm. 30.3. Some understand it the second way, of men
cast alive into some deep gulf, whence there is no recovery. Some in the fourth
sense of the grave. Either sense will serve, for the thing is the same. An
utter irrecoverable destruction is intended. They shall be like men cast into a
grave, or a deep pit, never to be seen any more. Mercer and some others
understand it of taking away their estates, not in part, but altogether, in the
midst of their prosperity. Which agrees (they say) with the verses following,
that speak of great riches to be gotten. But how does it agree with bloodshed
mentioned verse. 11. and v. 16? But our former interpretation suits well with
both. To kill them that they may have their goods. Figures. Swallow. A Metaphor
from great fishes swallowing the less. In the text note, 1. The actors, Let
us. 2. The act, swallow up. 3. The object, them. 4. The manner: 1. Alive. 2. As
the grave. 3. Whole. 4. As they that go down into the pit. Note from the
coherence.



1. Doct. Innocent persons are the object of bad men's wrath. Nocent Cain kills
innocent Abel. 1 John 3.12. Because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
righteous. Ishmael persecutes Isaac. He that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. Joab kills two men
better then himself, 1 King. 2.32. Pii ab improbis tanquam exprobrautes
aspiciuntur. Severus Sulpitius. The wicked look upon the godly, as upbraiding
them for their wicked courses.

Reason 1. Contraries seek to expel one another, especially the worst seek to
drive out the best, as darkness to expel light, and cold to drive away heat.
Wicked men are contrary to innocent persons in judgment, will, affections,
words, actions, use of creatures. They are both men, and the Logic rule holds
in them: Species to ti maxim sunt consentaneae, sibi dissentaneae. Particular
kinds agree very much in the general, and disagree as much among themselves
And therefore two contrary Kingdoms of Christ and Satan cannot agree.

2. Envy sets evil men on work to contemn inferiors, quarrel with equals,
hate superiors. Satan envyes God, wicked men envy good men's present state,
future happiness.

3. Shame sets them on work. Other men's good works shame their bad ones, in all
times, places, companies. Hoc tantum me male habet, quod justus ubique audit:
This only troubles me, that every one speaks well of him, and counts him a
just man. Spoken of Aristides by one that knew not his face, yet requested him
to write his name in a shell, to pass his vote for his banishment.

Use. Let us not marvel at insurrections against, and oppressions of good men.
If it be objected, that they give no cause, it is easily answered, Their
goodness or wealth is the occasion. Nec Milvo, nec Accipitri rete tenditur:
Men lay not nets for Kites or Hawks. Terent. But for birds that are harmless,
and good to eat. Da veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas: Men let Ravens go
free, and vex Pigeons with their censures. They often let go the offender, and
punish the innocent.

2. Doct. Wicked men's spleen is often against them that do them no wrong. What
wrong did David to Shimei or Saul? Mephibosheth to Ziba? Spleen overflows in
such, as poison in a Toad, that spits venom on him that treads not on it; and
fierceness in a Wolf, which sets on him that passes by, and thinks no harm.

Use. It shows a difference between wicked men and good. Ill men seek the hurt
of friends, good men forgive enemies. As dogs bite them that strike them not,
but sheep bite not them that strike them.

3. Doct. Evil men intend to go through with their plots. So did Jezabel in
the business of Naboth, without any thought of the danger of innocent blood.
So Judas betrayed Christ, without any thought of Christ's kindness in
preferring him to the Apostleship.

Reason 1. Their intention is frustrate else, as a Gardiners, if the tree bear
no fruit; or a Builders, if the house be not finished.

2. All their labor is lost also, if their plots take no effect.

Use. It shows us the corruption of our nature, that is not content to be
evil, think evil, plot evil, but is never quiet, till it act it. Joseph's
Brethren were never quiet till he was gone. They regarded not their Fathers
grief that would ensue.

4. Doct. Ungodly men are cruel men. Their very mercies are cruel, Prove.
12.10. A good man regards a beasts life, they care not for a man's, but kill
women and children, like Hazael, 2 King. 8.12, 13. They can dash the mother in
pieces upon her children, Hos. 10.14.

Reason 1. Because we are naturally so degenerate, that we are compared by God,
who best knows us, to the cruellest wild beasts. To Wolves, to Lions, and
Bears, Isa. 11.6, 7.

2. Because ungodly men have no fear of God to restrain their wicked
disposition. Therefore Abraham feared the loffe of his life in Gerar, because
he thought the fear of God was not in that place, Genesis 20.11. Therefore
Joseph's Brethren needed to fear no hurt from him, because he feared God, Genesis
42.18.

3. Because they are afraid to be revealed. (...). Mauritius de Phoca. Fearful
men are murderers.

Use. Marvel not then at insurrections, treasons, poysonings, cruel murdees.
There will be such as long as there be wicked men left in the world.

5. Doct. Wicked men could wish, that there were no footsteps left of their
iniquity. Such is the way of the adulterous woman, she eats, and wipeth her
mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness, Prove. 30.20.

Reason 1. Out of shame. They know others will condemn their wicked courses,
though they flatter themselves, Psalm. 36.2.

2. Out of fear, left they should be called to account, as many wicked men have
been strangely, and long after murders and wantonnesses committed.

Use. Let us be ashamed of those courses that wicked men themselves are ashamed
of, and will one day wish that themselves, and their sins were at the bottom
of the mountains.

6. Doct. Sinners want not patheticall expressions to draw others to sin. They
have honey words, and sugared baits. See the fawning speeches of the
Adulteress, Prove. 7.14 etc. and of the Drunkard, Isa. 56.12. For sin seen in
its own colors would be hated. Ill stuff will not off without a good gloss.

Use Do evil men want no pathetical expressions to move to sin? Let us then
bewail our barrenness to persuade to good. If sinners have their Come, verse.
11. should not Saints have their Come to the house of the Lord? Isa. 2.3.
Should we not incite, entice, whet, and provoke one another? Heb. 10.24.
sharpen, and extimulate? Prove. 27.17. rouse, and stir up each other to love,
and good works? 2 Pet. 1.13. God forbid. Yea, let us labor to go beyond them,
our cause is far better.

Verse. 13. We shall find all precious substance, and shall fill our houses
with spoil.
The Wise man having showed in the two former verses, how Thieves use to
dispossess Novices of fear of danger, and difficulty; now the train being
laid, they blow up the Mine, and set upon them with an argument of profit,
which they think is very prevalent with young men, and few have strength to
resist it. Men will hear no reason against their profit. When we have killed
the owner, we will enter into his possessions, and take away all he has,
Matthew. 21.38.

For the words.

(...). We shall find. The word signifies,

1. Finding without seeking. By accident, as we call it. I am found of them
that sought me not, Isa. 65.1. So did Saul find Christ, Act. 9.

2. Finding by seeking, or enquiry. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found,
Isa. 55.6. So Christ promises that seekers shall find, Mat. 7.7. Here it is
taken in the second sense. We shall find what we seek for, plenty of riches.
We shall not need to work hard for it, as they did. It will come easily, as
with one that finds eggs in a birds nest, Isa. 10.14. It is laid up already
for us, we need only to look it out, and take it. None will resist us when the
owner is gone. Finding here is obtaining by search. When we come into his
house, we shall find store of riches. They will offer themselves to us. What
other men wrought hard for, we shall get with little labor.

(...), All. Not all that is in the world, but of all sorts some. The word
imports variety with plenty. We shall have abundance of riches of all sorts. So
the word is used, Genesis 41.57. All Countries came into Egypt to Joseph, for to
buy corn. That is, some out of all or most Countries. So Mat. 4. Christ's
healing all sickness, is well translated all manner of sickness.

(...) substance Riches. Property of gold and filver. Wealth. So it is
translated, chap. 3.9. and 13.11. Honor the Lord with thy substanee. Wealth
gotten by vanity shall be diminished.

(...). Precious. The word fignifies,

1. Honor. The honor of his excellent majesty, Est. 1.4.

2. Precious, or rare. The Word of the Lord was precious in those days, 1 Samuel
3.1.

3. Precious in value, or of great price. With the precious stones, 2 Samuel
12.30. So it is taken here. We will leave mean things for poor thieves, and
seize upon the best for our selves. We will not take trifles, things of no
value, but the choycest things.

(...) We shall fill. When it is spoken of a vessel or place, it signifies
filling. Replenish (or fill) the earth, Genesis 1.28. When of a time, or word, it
signifies sulfilling. My days are fulfilled, Genesis 29.21. Here it it taken in
the first sense. We shall get store, not enough for necessity only, but also
to afford pleasure and delight.

(...) Our houses. The word comes from (...), to build. Houses grow no^, they
must be built b^ men's labor. We shall have enough to fill our houses with
utensils, and ornaments, and to keep us and all ours with ease, and without
that labor and pains that other men take. We will empty their houses to fill
ours with what we have taken out of them, and not leave stealing, till our
houses now empty be filled with good things. Every room shall have his stuff
and furniture. It is put sometime for a nest, the birds house. The sparrow has
found an house, Psa. 84.3. Sometime for the household, family, nation, or
posterity; as the house of Jacob, and of Judah. Ordinarily it is put for man's
dwelling place. Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, Psalm.
132.3. Hence comes the Chaldee word (...), to lodge, or pass the night. The
King passed the night fasting, Dan. 6.18. For men go abroad about business all
day, but lodge at home all night.

(...), Spoil. Properly it signifies, spolia, exuvias, cloths taken off a man's
body, or the skin off from a beast. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, Exodus
3.5. Figuratively, it signifies all things useful, taken from others by
violence, (as beasts take their prey) as household stuff, goods, etc. We will
not work for our living, but as enemies and wild beasts will live by prey.
Benjamin shall raven as a Wolf, in the morning he shall devour the prey, and
at night he shall divide the speyl, Genesis 49.27. And behold the servants of
David and Joab came from pursuing a troop, and brought in a great spoil with
them, 2 Samuel 3.22. The precious things mentioned before, might be silver, gold,
jewels. The spoil here may be other things taken out of the house, as
housholdstuffe, garments, cattle. Every word has an emphasis. We will take not
shadows, but substance; not ordinary, but precious; not a little, but enough to
fill our houses; not with some, but with all sorts to superfluity. And all this
got not by hard labor, but with ease, as things found. As conquerors, when
they take Cities, sack them, and carry away the spoil to enrich themselves,
Isa. 8.4.

It is as if they should have said, Thou art a young man, need many things
for thy pleasure. Join with us, and thou shall want nothing. Thou know not
how to labor, nor shall not need. We shall have abundance of all things with
ease, and without fear of loss of life, or credit, and without any fear of
danger. If an easy and free life do not move thee, yet think upon the
greatness of the prey, and that will certainly allure thee. This is the last
and greatest argument, the conclusion follows, verse. 14. Cast in thy lot among
us, etc.

Figures none. For Parts: Note two promises that wicked men make to themselves:
1. Of great things. 2. Of abundance. In the first note,


1. The subject, We. 2. The adjunct. And in it, 1. The act, shall find. 2. The
object. And therein, 1. The subject, substance. 2. The adjuncts, 1. Of quality,
precious. 2. Of quantity, all.



In the second promise note, 1. The subject, W^. 2. The adjunct. And in it, 1.
The act, shall fill. 2. The containing subject, our houses. 3. The object, with
spoil.



1. Doct. Gain is the cause of abundance of mischief in the world. Herein the
text it produces the loss of men's whole estates and lives. So are the ways
of every one, that is greedy of gain, which takes away the life of the owners
thereof, Chap. 1. Ziba's covetousness lost Mephibosheth half his estate, 2 Samuel 19.29. Gehazi's brought the leprofie on him, and his posterity, 2 King.
5.27. Judas his brought Christ to his death, and himself to hanging and hell,
Mat. 27.5. Act. 1.25. Simon Magus his brought himself to perish with his money,
Act. 8.20. Gain upholds idolatry, Isa. 41.6, 7. as making Images upheld the
Tradesmen of Ephesus, Act: 19.25. It upholds Sabbath-breaking, Neh. 13.15. As
also perjury, and murder of parents, at least in heart. Filius onte diem
patrios inquirit in annos: The Son thinks the Father lives too long to keep him
out of his inheritance. It is the cause of other murders also, as of heir,
Mat. 21.38. of adulteries, for whores are hired, Deuteronomy. 23.18. The Popes get
much by Stews at Rome. So theft and cousenage in the text are fruits of
covetousness. False witnesses are set on work by covetous persons, as against
Naboth, 1 King. 21.13. Desire of other men's goods proceeds from that root, 1
King. 21.1. So does idolatry. Matthew. 6.24. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Use. Take heed you set not up the Idol of gain in your hearts. A man that
rides a journey must not overload his horse, nor he that runs a race overload
himself. Gain will make good men sordid. Dulce lucrum e re qualibet: Gain is
good out of a dunghill. The Emperor Vespasian imposed a tribute upon Urine.
Sueton. in Vespas. c. 23. And Michael Paphlago the Greek Emperor, upon the Air.
Cuiac. observe. 10. c. 7. Gain made Balaam forwarder then his Ass to curse Gods
people. Those that count all good fish that comes to the net, in the end will
catch the devil and all.

2. Doct. Worldly things are very precious to carnal eyes. They are counted
the only good. Who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. Nebuchadnezzar knows no
other heaven but Babylon. Dan. 4.30. Is not this great Babylon that I have
built for the house of the Kingdom, and for the honor of my Majesty? Agrippae
and Barnice came with great po^^, Act. 25.23.

Reason 1. Because there is some proportion between worldly eyes, and carnal
objects. Men are naturally covetous.

2. They know no better things. They are blind in spiritual and heavenly
matters. He that never saw the Sun, would think the Moon a glorious creature.

Use. It teaches us not to marvel that young men are carried a way with
worldly objects, when old men, if carnal, are taken with them. They have
little, and need much to satisfy their lusts. No wonder then if they be caught.

3. Doct. Plenty is desired by ill men, not caring how they come by it. The
love of money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. Therefore must rich men weep and howl for the wiseries that come on
them, for their ill-gotten goods, Jam. 5.1, etc. The ways wicked men use for
gain prove it. They will swear, lie, put off had and light ware, use false
lights and measures, weights and witnesses, and cheating devices to deceive
others.

Use. Let us show that we are not such wicked men, by being content with a
moderate state, and not using ill means to get more. Else we shall consult
shame to our houses, by cutting off many people, and sinning against our souls,
Hab. 2.10. He that brings home a pack of plaguey clothes, has no such great
booty of it.

4. Doct. Wickedness will brag and boast. The devil offers all the Kingdoms
of the world to Christ, Matthew. 4.8, 9. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief,
O mighty man? Psalm. 52.1.

Reason 1. Wicked men hereby show forth the pride of their hearts, that are not
content to be evil, unless they boast and triumph over others.

2. That they may draw others to them, for great words and fair promises
prevail much with wicked men.

Use. Suspect bragging persons, that they intend to draw you to some evil.
Good men are modest. Bad men divide the Bears skin before the Bear be dead.
They often fall short of what they brag of, and lose life and all, when they
promise themselves and others great riches, as in the Powder Treason, and in
the invincible Navy in 88. and later Insurrections.

5. Doct. Wicked men care not, if all men be empty, so themselves be full.
Thieves will take away clothes and all, as from him that went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10.30. They crush the poor, Amos 4.1. They swallow
up the needy, and make the poor of the land to fail, Amos 8.4.

Reason 1. Because they have no love in them, but self-love. Like the
unrighteous Judge, that regarded no man, Luke 18.2.

2. As they know not what belongs to humanity, so much less to communion of
Saints. It is no Article of their Creed.

Use. It teaches us to look for little kindness from ungodly men. They are
strangers to their own blood. Friends can look for little from them, and godly
men for less.

^ Doct. Wicked men dream of no want nor crosses in their ungodly courses.
Satan's first temptation put such thoughts into Eves heart. Ye shall not die,
Genesis 3.4. Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry, Luke 12.19.

Reason 1. Because they have no sound forecast, but look only at the present,
as a foolish Merchant, having had one good Voyage, adventures all next time,
and loses all.

2. Because they are bewitched with lust and prosperity. Their eye is in their
heart, not in their head. They believe they shall not want, though they wasse,
because they would have it so.

Use. Build not on worldly prosperity. Least of all in bad ways, Psalm. 62.10.

Verse. 14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse.
Ye have heard the Thieves arguments and allurements before, now follows the
conclusion: Cast in thy lot, etc.

For the words.

Cast in, Heb. make to foll, (...). There are diverse ways of casting lots,
which seem to be hinted in Scripture. The first was by the casting of a dart or
arrow into the air, and the parties or things being divided, that on which, or
near which it fell, was taken. So (...) is used Josh. 18.10. Joshua cast lots
for them. And (...), to cast or shoot, Joel 3.3. to show the casting of it up,
as (...) Ezekiel. 24.6. Let no lot fall upon it. To show the falling of it down,
which did determine the controversy. So Jonathan was taken, 1 Samuel 14.42.

A second way was by a rod, which the Tithing-man had in his hand to strike the
tenth sheep, as it came out of the fold, for the Lord, to avoid partiality,
Lev. 27.32.

A third way was by putting names or stones into a man's lap, or a pot, and he
that drew out the right had the prize, as in our Lotteries. The lot is cast
into the lap, Prove. 16.33. As there is used (...), to cast in; so (...), to
come out. In the place where his lot falls, Numb. 33.54. Heb. comes out. And
(...), to come up. On which the Lords lot fell, Heb. came up. Lev. 16.9.

A fourth was by setting a stick or an arrow on end, to see which way it would
fall, as the King of Babylon did to know which way he should go, to Jerusalem,
or to Rabbah; though others think it was the first way, by shooting an arrow
upright, as if he would ask God, and be resolved by the fall of the arrow which
way he should go, Ezekiel. 21.21. Much like our casting Cross and Pile.

These different ways are reckoned up by some learned Writers, let the Reader
judge of them as he please.

Thy lot. The word (...) is taken,

1. For the thing cast up, or in, or set to determine the controversy. The lot
is cast into the lap, Prove. 16.33. The paper or stone is put in.

2. For the thing obtained by lot, be it land, office, wealth, etc. As, the lot
of Judah, Josh. 15.1.

3. For an estate got by labor, or from Parents, or otherwise, because things
were anciently divided by lot. Thou maintainest my lot, Psalm. 16.5. And so it
is taken here. For the young man tempted had not his means by lot, but by gift
or labor.

Among us, Heb. in the midst of us. Thou shall be put to no worse then we are,
nor fare no worse. There may be much ods in setting one before or behind, in
war or robbery, the safest place is in the midst.

Some interpret the words thus: Bring in thy goods to us, to make a joint
stock. We will be Partners. But Thieves need no stock to set up withal. Others
thus: Thou shall take that share of the prey that falls to thee. We will east
lots to avoid partiality. But that crosses the common purse in the end of the
verse. It is rather to be taken for joining with them in their trade, which was
as their lot, and brought in living, as others lived on their inheritances,
which at first were divided by lot. So lot is taken for a joint trade or course
of service or living. His lot was to burn incense, Luke 1.9. He had obtained a
part of this ministry, Act. 1.17. Join with us. We will have one way of
living, and that an easy one too, and live well upon it.

Let us all have, Heb. there shall be 'to all us. It rather should be
translated, We will all have one purse. We have a common stock already. If thou will live as we do, thou shall have as good a share of it as any of us, and
never want, while we be worth an halfpenny. So that it is their offer of a
share in the common stock with them.

One purse. Some derive (...), a purse, of (...), to number, or gather tribute.
For Tribute-money and other moneys are first told, and then put into the bag to
be kept. Hence come our English word Chest, such as we put money into. When he
says one purse, he does not mean but one, to restrain it, as Mal. 2.10. Have
we not all one Father? But a common purse, in which he should have as good a
share as they. They would communicate out of it alike to all. Our expenses
shall all come out of one purse. We will live in common, we will never quarrel
about division of shares, but fetch thence what we want. One purse here is the
same purse. And by a figure of the subject for the adjunct, the meaning is, The
same money shall maintain us all. It is an answer to a tacit objection which
the Novice might make. Ye are more then I, and acquainted with the trade, and
ye will expose me to the danger, as much and more then your selves, and give me
but a small pittance of the gain, as the Captains in war expose their soldiers
to most peril, but take the greatest part of the spoils to themselves. No, say
they, thou shall venture no farther then we, and live as plentifully as we upon
the common stock. All this while they say nothing of punishment, or loss,
which must be borne equally in partnership, because they feared it not, nor
would not speak any thing, that might discourage the Novice, but all that might
encourage him. As if they had said: Forbear not our company, because thou art
young, and not used to fighting. Though raw soldiers use to have but a small
share in the spoils, thou shall fare as well as we, that are thy leaders.

Figures. Lot for a Share in in their course of life. The cause for the effect.
Purse for money. The subject for the adjunct.

In the words note, 1. An invitation. 2. A promise. In the first note, 1. An
act, Cast in. 2. The object, thy lot. 3. The adjunct, among us.



In the second note, 1. The subject, we will have. 2. The adjuncts, 1 of
number, 2 of gain, one purse.


1. Doct. There is a communion of wicked men, as well as of Saints. When thou
saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have been partaker with the
adulterers, Psalm. 50.18. They assemble themselves by troops in the Harlots
houses, Jer. 5.7. Company of Robbers and Pirates trade as well as Merchants and
Citizens.

Reason 1. Because of likeness of nature and qualities. They are the seed of
the Serpent. Bad men combine with bad, as good with good. So wise men converse
with the wise, fools with fools, old men with old men, young with young. Birds
of a Father fly together.

2. Hope of gain unites them together. The more Partners drive a trade, the
more hope of large income. A cipher alone is nothing. A figure alone is little,
but figures and ciphers together make great sums.

3. Their common hatred of good men, and such as fear God. With this vice
ungodly men are tainted. The seed of the Serpent bears enmity to the seed of
the woman, Genesis 3.15. The rule is, Quae in aliquo tertio convenient, inter se
convenient: Those things which agree in some third thing, agree among
themselves. Husbands and Wives love their Children, and love one another also.
So wicked men hating Gods people, love one another the more.

4. Safety and impunity in wicked ways. They can the better bear out one
another in evil courses, because they are many. Vis unita fortior: Force knit
together is the stronger. Therefore hand joins in hand, that the wicked may be
unpunished, Prove. 11.21.

Use. Take heed with whom ye join in a league, or in society, for all
friendship is not good. There be brethren in evil, and they get a curse, Genesis
49.5, etc.

2. Doct. Evil doers are very ready to receive, yea to invite others into
their society. So did the Pharisees compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte, Mat. 23.15. So do Popish Idolaters, Drunkards, Adulterers.

Reason 1. That they may have encouragement in sin. Solamen miscris socios
habuisse dolores. It is a comfort to men in misery to have companions in their
grief. So it is a comfort to sinners to have partners in their sins. If their
sins be objected, Why? others (say they) are as bad as we. A yoke is easier
borne by two, then by one.

2. That they may have help to act sin. Some sins are not committed with
pleasure without partners, as drunkenness and adultery. Others not with ease
or safety, as theft and murder.

Use. It teaches us to bewail the wickedness of our nature, that are not only
naught our selves, but also content to spoil others at an easy rate. Merchants
will look for a joint stock, before they admit of partners. Sinners admit, nay
invite men to come in for nothing.

3. Doct. Much gain is gotten by unlawful means. Many men by covetousness set
their nest on high, Hab. 2.9. Riches are called Mammon of unrighteousness,
Luke 16.9. Because most commonly gotten by ill means.

Reason 1. Because of Gods forbearance, who suffers men's wits to work
strangely, and though by unlawful means, yet to raise a great estate.
Sometimes bastards prosper more then legitimate children, as Jephthah did,
Judge. 11.1. So ill means thrive sometimes more then good.

2. Out of Gods indulgence, who is pleased to give to bad men, who make no
conscience of bad means, a large portion, as intending them no more. Men of the
world have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14. The rich man in his life
time received his good things, Luke 16.25. So Abraham dealt with the Sons of
the Concubines, Genesis 25.6. And the Father with his prodigal Son, Luke 15.12,
13.

Use. Take heed how ye get riches. Tradesmen use once a year to cast up their
Books. Would they would then consider how they get the overplus. Thieves may be
rich. Little comfort in ill got goods. Children will spend it as fast. De male
quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres: Ill gotten goods joy not the third heir.

4. Doct. There is sometimes not only just, but also liberal dealing in
robbers among themselves. Have they not sped? Have they not divided the prey,
to every man a damoselor two? Judge. 5.30. Though they be false to others, they
will be honest among themselves.

Reason 1. To allure others to their society. Who might object, We must venture
life and blood, What shall we get? Answ. As much as we. I, but how will you be
true to me, that are false to others? They answer, We are not so among our
selves. We will be just and free to thee. Thou shall fare as well as the best
of us.

2. To cover their sin. Their smooth dealing among themselves is a fair Visard
to cover their harsh dealing with others.

Use. To blame those that would be thought to be honest men, and yet will cheat
their neighbors, friends, and kindred. Better dealing then this is to be found
among thieves, and robbers.

5. Doct. They that draw others to sin, speak the best, and hide the worst.
Jeremiah's enemies tell others of hope to prevail against him by slander and
reproaches, but never tell how God will protect his Prophet, Jerem. 18.18.
David's enemies encourage one another to rejoice in his ruin, never telling
that God would raise him up again, Psalm. 41.8.

Reason 1. Because this would spoil all the plot, Bad purposes prevail not,
where the issue is foretold.

2. Because else they should bewray their own folly, that will do things
themselves, and persuade others to do them, the inconvenience whereof their
own hearts know, and their own tongues witness.

Use. Take heed of those counsels gilded all over with fair pretenses. They
that mean well will tell inconveniences as well as conveniences. So does Christ
promise salvation to all believers, Joh. 3.16. Yet requires taking up the
cross, and following him with self-denial, Matt. 16.24. Believe not them that
talk much of wealth, and nothing of hell. Paena non separet, quos crimen
conjunxit. Vna poena implicet, quos unus amor in crimine ligat. Bern. Medit. c.
3. Let not the punishment divide those, whom the fault has joined together.
Let one punishment fold them up together, whom one love knits together in a
fault.

Verse. 15. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from
their path.
Ye have the Robbers reasons to allure the young man to their course, now
follow Solomon's reasons to dissuade him from joining with them. Herein note,
1. A dehortation in this verse. 2. The reasons, to verse. 20.


For the first, and first for the words:

My Son. See on verse. 1. and v. 8.

Walk not. A counsel just opposed to theirs. They say, Walk with us, v. 11.
(for it is the same word in the Original) he says, Walk not with them. Walking
argues a continued action. It is not taking a step or two. So in the literal
signification, Laban went to shear his sheep, Genesis 31.19. Ye shall go after the
Ark, Josh. 3.3. So in the figurative sense it signifies going on in a wicked
way. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, Psalm.
1.1. Walking then is continuing. Have not converse with them. Go not in the way
of evil men, Prove. 4.14. Accustom not thy self to do as they do. Sometimes it
signifies the course of livelesse things, as of a ship. There go the ships,
Psalm. 104.26. Here it is taken for joining with them in their wicked courses.

In the way. As the former word signifies a continuance, so this word (...),
signifies a distinct course from others, as the way to one Town differs from
the way to another. So in a literal sense. We went up the way to Bashan, Deuteronomy.
3.1. And in a figurative sense, for a distinct course of life, good or bad. The
Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish,
Psalm. 1.6. Some take it here, for not joining with thieves and robbers in their
unlawful courses. Others, for not joining with them in company or friendship,
for fear of infection, though they be employed about lawful things. Not to
delight in their company, unless nature, or our callings bind us, or hope of
doing them good. Much less have one stock, or common table with them, as they
would have thee do. Here it is taken in the first sense, as appears by the
next verse. Walk not in their evil ways with them, for they go to shed blood.
It comes from (...), to tread, because ways that men commonly walk in, are
more trodden then other parts of the earth. A foot-path, or highway is easily
discerned.

With them. With those robbers, that seek to draw thee to ill courses of life.

(...), Refrain, Set not a foot in their wicked ways. Be so far from
continuing in them, that thou do not so much as enter int them. Chapter 4.14. Enter
not into the path of the wicked. Or, it may be the same with the former, and
the thing doubled, to make the disswasion the more vehement. It may be
understood literally, Go not with them to rob, no not once. But rather
metaphorically. Do not so much as try their courses. Forbid thy foot to enter.
Suffer it by no means to do so.

(...). Thy foot. It may be taken literally, not to go in the way with them to
rob. Or metaphorically, not to use their affections (which are as the feet to
carry the soul to any thing desired) to spoil and rapine. So verse. 16. Their
feet run to evil. See the like, chapter 5.5. and 6.18.

(...), From their path. From going in it. It is used sometimes of a path in
Woods, where snares are laid to catch wild beasts. Shel. Jarchi. So Job 18.19.
A trap is laid for him in the way. If thou enter into their way, thou will be
taken either into a course of theevery, or danger, or both. Therefore follow
not their steps. It may be (...) may here signify a highway, and (...) a
foot-path. Neither go in their highways, nor by-ways, for robberies are
committed in both.

The sum of all is, as if he should have said, O my Son! sinners will entice
thee with these or such like words and promises, and lay such snares for thy
unexperienced youth; but remember that thou art my Son, and not theirs, and
therefore have more reason to hearken to me, who speak to thee out of a
fatherly affection. Hearken not therefore to their counsels, flatteries, or
promises. Show thy self so strange to them, that thou will not so much as enter
into their way, much walk in it.

For figures. The verse. is wholly metaphorical, taken from travelers, that
walk in one way to one Mart or Country for gain, as Merchants used to do in
those Countries, Genesis 37.28. So thieves rob together.

For the division of the words, note, 1. The person spoken to, My Son. 2. A
double exhortation:


1. Not to walk with them, or use their trade. And therein, 1. The act
forbidden, Walk not thou. 2. The object, in the way. 3. The adjunct, with them.


The second exhortation is to keep out of their way. And therein observe, 1.
The act, refrain. 2. The object, thy foot. 3. The subject, from their path.


1. Doct. Children should rather hearken to their Parents good counsel, then
to others bad. They must attend to their Fathers wisdom, that they may not be
seduced by the strange woman, chapter 5.1, 3. To their Mothers, rather then to
wanton women's, Prove. 31.1, 3.

Reason 1. In regard of the efficient. We are more engaged to Parents, then to
any other, for life, education, pains, and means.

2. Of the matter. The counsels are good that come from godly Parents, but bad,
that come from bad men or women. I give you good doctrine, Prove. 4.2. So says
Solomon to his Son. But the strumpet solicits the young man to wantonness. Let
us take our fill of love, chapter 7.18.

3. In regard of the form, or manner. Parents good counsels are given in love,
and come out of natural affection; bad men's counsels do not so.

4. Of the end, The former are for our good. The latter for our destruction.

Use 1. Behold another glass to see the wickedness of our nature. We are
readier to hearken to others, then to our Parents, to bad men, then to good
Parents; to bad counsels from them, then to good from Parents. We violate the
bands of nature, and grace. If we fall into misery by bad counsels, how can we
look our Parents in the face, or look for comfort and relief from them whose
good counsels we have slighted?

2. Doct. Young men had need to labor for knowledge to discern between good
counsel and bad. If he will cleanse his way, he must take heed thereto according
to Gods Word, Psalm. 119.9. Rehoboam lost his Kingdom for lack of such
knowledge. He forsook the counsel of grave men, to follow the advice of young
giddy heads, 1 King. 12.8. The Rechabites flourished by preferring good counsel
before bad, Jer. 35.18, 19.

Reason 1. Because they shall be often put to it. Where God has a Church, the
Devil has a Chapel. If Parents give good counsel, youths of our age, and such
as live by sin, will give bad. Young men stand between both as Hercules in his
dream, between Virtue and Vice, solicited by both. They had need therefore
weigh whose reasons be best, as a woman having many Suitors, had need be
careful which she takes.

2. There are fair pretenses for all sins. Gluttony is called the free use of
the Creature; Drunkenness, Good fellowship; Prodigality is called Liberality;
Covetousness, Thrift; Lust is entitled Love; Pride goes for Handsomnesse. It
needs a good Touchstone to distinguish between Gold and Copper, well guilt
over. No less skill is needful to distinguish between true and apparent good.

Use. Ye young men, think it not enough to seek for knowledge when ye grow
elder, the Devil will set upon you when ye are young. If you know not good from
evil, your corrupt nature will certainly lead you into evil. Take two
directions:

1. Weigh things by the light of Reason left in you. That will acquaint you with
many things in morality, and tell you, that theft, adultery, murder are naught,
else have ye no assurance of your own goods, wives, lives.

2. Look higher to the light of Scripture. That will inform you in many higher
things; yea, thoughts themselves. In a dark shop men will not be content with a
candle, but bring things forth to the daylight. Those things are sincere that
can bear the light of the Sun. There is need of knowledge and judgment to
approve things, or to discern things that differ, or that are excellent, that
men may be sincere, Gr. (...), Phil. 1.10. judged by the Sun. So men try wares.
And so the Eagle tryes her young ones, if they look upon the Sun, else she
throws them down for bastards.

3. Doct. Allurements to sin are no excuse for sin. Eve cannot justly lay her
fault on the Serpent, nor Adam on Eve, Genesis 3. God will take it off, and lay
the curse on them. Readiness provocation by the people would not bear him out for
his sin against God. He must lose his Kingdom, 1 Samuel 15.15, 26. The young
man, though solicited by the Harlot, Pro. 7.14, 21. yet has a dart strike
through his heart, v. 23. there.

Reason 1. Because allurers have no power to compel. They may and ought to be
refused. The will may be inclined, by convincing or cousening the
understanding, but cannot be compelled by Angel or Devil. Debilis est
adversarius diabolus; nisi volentem non vincit: The devil is a weak adversary,
he overcomes none but such as are willing to be overcome. God can alter it, but
not compel it.

It is a sign of folly in us to be allured by fair pretenses to that that
would undo us. He goes after her as a fool to the correction of the stocks,
Prove. 7.22.

Use. It condemns their folly, who lay their faults upon others, and look to be
pityed, because allured. As if a bird should say, I saw the corn, but not the
pit-fall; or a fish complain, that it saw the bait, but not the hook. Take heed
before ye fin. It is too late to complain after. Bought wit is deer.

4. Doct. Company excuses no man in his sins. This knew David, and therefore
would not come in company with ungodly persons, Psalm. 26.4, 5. And verse. 9.
there he prays, Gather not my soul with sinners. A good Gentlewoman troubled in
conscience when she was to die, cried out, O Lord, let me not go to hell, where
the wicked are, for Lord thou know I never loved their company here. God
objects it as a vice: thou have been partaker with adulterers, Psalm. 50.18.

Reason 1. Company cannot alter the nature of things. It cannot make good,
evil; nor evil, good.

2. There is choice of company, else were it a sore temptation to evil, if all
were bad, because man is a sociable creature.

Use. It blames those that lay the fault of their own naughtiness upon their
company. I had never been drunk or wanton, but that I fell into drunken or
wanton company. This is no excuse, yea although we have store of company in our
sinful ways. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.
Neither will company of great or wise men excuse us, for God has not chosen
many such, 1 Cor. 1.26. Nor of teachers. They may perish as workers of
iniquity, Matt. 7.22, 23. Nor of good men. It was no excuse to Barnabas his
dissimulation, that he had Peter's company, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13. Company may draw
our corrupt nature to sin, but cannot excuse us for sin. Take heed then of bad
company. Keep not company with bad men, no more then may be for thy good, or
theirs, or then Gods Law binds thee. Eagle, Hawke, and Raven, ravening fowls
might not be eaten in the time of the Law. It signified no incorporating into
wicked men's society. Their example will corrupt. Horses treading in the steps
of Wolves, catch much harm, and abate of their swiftness. Plin. Hist. l. 28.
c. 10. Claudum facit vicinus claudus: A lame neighbor may make a man lame. Dum
spectant oculi laesos, laeduntur and ipsi: Sore eyes make other men's eyes sore.
Ovid. Plato's friends did imitate his swelling or crookedness. Aristotle's
stammering was imitated. Alexander's shrill voice. Plutarch. Malus ipse fies,
si malis convixeris. Aristot. Moral. 9. Thou will be made evil, if thou
converse with evil men. Touch pitch, and be defiled. Sumuntur a conversantibus
mores, and ut quaedam in contactu corporis vitia transeunt, ita animus mala sua
proximis tradit. Seneca de ira. l. 3. c. 8. Manners are taken from those with
whom we converse; and as some diseases of the body are communicated by the
touch, so does the mind deliver her evil qualities to her neighbors.
Drunkards make more in love with wine, Wantons with women, covetous men with
money. As on the contrary, good company brings others to good, as a good soil
and air brings health. And wild beasts are tamed, being fed by men, and
conversing with them. If ye will sin with them, ye must suffer with them. Non
minus ardebit, qui cum multis ardebit. August. He burns no less, that burns
with company.

5. Doct. Continuance or walking in sin is dangerous. It brought destruction on
Priests and people, 2 Chr. 36.14, etc. and Hos. 11.2.

Reason 1. It is a sign of an hard heart to continue in sin. The mouth of the
conscience is stopped.

2. It makes the heart more hard still. Custom will make a man not start at
greatest sins. Consuetudo peccandi tollit sensum peccati: A custom of sinning
takes away the feeling of sin. They cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14.

Use. Break off fin by repentance, Dan. 4.27. Time past was too much for
finfull ways, 1 Pet. 4.3.

6. Doct. The very entrance into finfull ways is full of danger, like a
downfall. No stay till ye come to the bottom. Prove. 4.14. The young man is
there advised to pass away, and not to come nigh it, as men go far off from
infected houses, Prove. 5.8. Ye will hardly ever get out again. Like suretiship
set out by a man entering into the wide end of a horn, and sticking in the
narrow end.

Use. Keep out of evil ways, or get out quickly. Non diu tutus, qui periculo
proximus. Cypr. He is not long safe that is near danger. Nolo vicino Serpente
dormire. Fieri potest, ut me mordeat; fieripotest, ut non me mordeat: I will
not sleep near a Serpent; perhaps she may bite me, perhaps she may not bite me.

Verse. 16. For their feet run to evil, and make have to shed blood.
The Dehortation was in the former verse. the Reasons follow. That it might
appear that he had more weighty reasons to dissuade them, then the Thieves had
to persuade. Wherein note, 1. The arguments, v. 16, 17, 18. 2. A general
conclusion out of them, verse. 19.


The arguments are very strong, not only in their own weight, but quoad
hominem, fit to convince them, as being all taken out of their own confessions.

1. From the cruelty of their intentions, verse. 16. out of verse. 11.

2. From the causelesnesse, out of verse. 11. also. For they sought innocent
blood without cause.

3. From the craftiness of their plots, verse. 18. out of v. 11. From laying
wait, and lurking privily.

The conclusion follows, verse. 19. that not only Robbers, but also Cheaters,
and all other sorts of covetous persons will fall to shedding of blood in the
end.

For the words.

For. See on v. 9. This the word of coherence, and ushers in a reason of the
former dehortation. They may give thee good words, and color over their bloody
intentions, as if they meant only to enrich themselves out of other men's
estates, and not to meddle with their persons. But these are but figleaves.
They will not stick at blood, rather then lose their booty. Therefore join not
with them, for they are not only covetous, but cruel also.

Their feet. See on v. 15.

(...), Run. The word running intends not only aiming at it, as at a goal, or
prize, but also making haste to attain it, 1 Cor. 9.24. It signifies out of a
readiness of mind, and great desire of the prey, to make haste to obtain it.
The same words (all but one) are used, Isa. 59.7. Here feet run, but Psalm.
68.31. hands are said to run, or soon to be stretched out to God, to show the
great hasse of those Nations to embrace Religion. Their mischievous intention
is here amplified by the haste they make to effect it, and by their violent
prosecution of it. They hasten with both feet.

(...), To evil. It is taken sometime for evil of sin. I have done this evil
in thy sight, Psalm. 51.4. Sometime for evil of trouble. And that,

1. To themselves. Woe be to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his
house, Hab. 2.9.

2. To others. If it please my Father to do thee evil, 1 Samuel 20.3. So it is
intended here of evil to others, as appears by the words before, verse. 11. Let
us lay wait for blood. And by the words immediately following to the same
purpose. It may be meant either of rapine, or of murder. Both are evil.

(...), And make baste. This shows the meaning of the former word running.
Their feet are swift to shed blood, Romans 3.15. The word signifies,

1. To do a thing quickly, or speedily. Their sorrows shall be multiplied that
hasten after another God, Psalm 16.4.

2. To give a dowry to one. He shall surely endow her to be his wife, Exodus
21.16.

3. To do a thing rashly, as things done in haste lightly are. The counsel of
the froward is carried headlong, Job 5.13. Here it is taken in the first sense,
to set forth speed in accomplishing their evil designs.

(...), To shed. Not to let out some part of the blood for good, but to pour it
out abundantly, till one be dead; for the life is in the blood, Genesis 9.4.

Blood. See on verse. 11. Some understand it of their own blood. They rob, till
they come to the gallows. And sometimes falling out about dividing their prey,
they kill one another. Stobaeus tit. 10. de Avar. quotes Aristotle, saying,
that eight thieves falling out about the division of the prey, four of them
first killed the other four. Then two of them which were left, killed the other
two. Lastly, of the two yet left, one killed the other. There was no end of
slaughter, til one only was left. But here it is meant of others blood, as
appears by v. 11. and v. 18.

This is the first reason, and a strong and powerful one to dissuade the young
man from joining with them, or so much as entering into their way, because they
mind nothing that is honest, but breath out bloodshed, and horrible sins
against nature, which may make them and their courses justly odious to all men.
Few beasts will kill others of the same kind. Much less should men that have
reason. This is a very great wickedness. Therefore thou must not look so much
at the riches and spoils they promise thee, as at the gross evil they provoke
thee to, which even nature it self abhors.

Thus ye see the strength of Solomon's first reason to dissuade the young man
from joining with evil men in their sinful ways.

Figures. To shed blood. To commit murder. A figure of the cause for the effect.

Note 1. The coherence, For. 2. The sentence. And in it, 1. A general
accusation. 2. A particular. In the general, 1. The agent, their feet. 2. The
act, run. 3. The object, to evil.


In the particular, 1. The act, they make haste. 2. The object, to shed blood.


1. Doct. Good counsels must be backed with reasons. God must be praised by
righteous men, because it becomes them, and God deserves it, Psalm. 33.1, etc.
We must not fret at evil men, because they shall be cut off, Psalm. 37.1. So
Prove. 1.8, 9. and 3.1, 2.

Reason 1. To draw men's affections; for it is not enough to inform the
judgment. The will and affections are more corrupt then it. The Heathen woman
could say, Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor: I see and like the best,
but follow the worst. It is not the least work of a Teacher, to move the
affections. There may be light, but no life without this. What had the Sun been
good for, if God had made no living creature to behold it? Vela damus, quamvis
remige puppis eat. Ovid. Tide, and oars, and sails are needful on the water.
So are Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses in a Sermon.

2. To dead objections, and oppositions, as mud-wals dead bullets. The devil
will have something to object against all Theorical and Practical truths. We
must have some solid reasons to weigh down his seeming arguments.

Use. It shows the need, and justifies the practice of Ministers, in not only
laying down, but also backing truths with reasons, that they may work both on
head and heart.

2. Doct. There is no member of the body so vile or mean, but may be an
instrument of sin and mischief. Ye have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity, Romans 6.19. So many use their
throat, tongues, lips, mouth, feet, Romans 3.13, 14, 15. As birds use their beaks
and talons; wild beasts, their teeth, claws, and tails; tame beasts, their
horns and hoofs to do hurt. And men have eyes for adultery. As David, 2 Samuel
11.2. and ungodly men, Having eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. Others have
eyes for covetousness, as I saw a goodly Babylonish garment, etc. Then I
coveted them. And Ahab had eyes to covet Naboth's vineyard, 1 King. 21.1. Men
have ears ready to hear wanton songs, slanders, etc. Tongues for swearing,
lying, flattering, backbiting, called the third tongue in Chaldee, because it
hurts the speaker, hearer, and person spoken of. Hands to strike, kill, steal.
Feet to carry the whole body to mischief.

Use 1. It teaches us to bewail the spreading of corruption in us. It cannot
be enclosed in the soul, but runs over every member of the body. No Physician
can tell all the diseases of the eye, much less the sins of it.

2. It shows us our great account, that besides secret sins, have so many to
answer for in every member.

3. It calls upon us for suspicion of, and watchfulness over every member. Not
of the Eye, or Ear alone, but of all.

3. Doct. Wicked men have a great affection, desire, and pronenesse to
wickedness. As men have to those things they run after, who yet hate those
things from which they fly. Wickedness is sweet in his mouth, he hides it
under his tongue. He spares it, and forsakes it not, but keeps it still within
his mouth, Job 20.12, 13. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty man?
Psalm. 51.1. And sure men greatly affect what they boast of.

Reason 1. Because it is pleasing to their corrupt nature. The Iron follows the
Loadstone by a natural sympathy. So do wicked men pursue sinful courses.

2. Custom makes it dear to them. Men are pleased with customs without a
reason.

Use. Hence may we discern the vileness of our nature. It were a stain to it
to be drawn to sin, but to love that which is evil, and delight in it, and run
to it, without solicitation, argues a desperately corrupted nature.

4. Doct. Sin is truly evil and hurtful. I have done this evil in thy sight,
Psalm. 51.4. Evil shall hunt the violent man, to overthrow him, Psalm. 140.11.
Sin is evil by name, and evil by nature. For it is (...), a breach of Gods
Law, or an unlawful act, 1 John 3.4. It may be said of sin as Abigail speaks
of her Husband, Nabal (or fool) Is his name, and folly is with him, 1 Samuel
25.25. So evil is the name of sin, and evil is in it. It is the brood of that
evil one. It is evil before God whom it dishonors, and who cries out against
it. Before men, who make laws against it. Hurtful to others, as all fins
against the second Table, being hurtful to men's lives, wives, children,
states, liberty, credit. Sin will pull down Church and Commonwealth. It is
hurtful to our selves, bringing down many judgments on us. It is evil
privatively, depriving us of much good. Evil positively, inflicting much
sorrow. Evil spiritually, bringing spiritual judgments on the soul. Evil
corporally, bringing much pain to the body. Evil eternally, making soul and
body for ever miserable.

Use 1. Hate all sin, God is the object of love: Evil, of hatred. Ye that love
the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. Amat Deum? debes odisse quod odit: Love
thou God? then must thou hate what he hates. August.

2. Beware of acting sin. It is a disgrace to thee, and matter of danger.

5. Doct. Sinners are very nimble and industrious about sinful actions.
Jezabel quickly finds a way to get away Naboth's vineyard, 1 King. 21.7, etc.
And Judas to bewray Christ, Mat. 26.15.

Reason 1. From an internal principle of love of sin. Men are very nimble
about what they love.

2. From an external principle of custom. It is their trade, and men are very
nimble about their trade, that go dully about other things. They are in their
element. Elementum in loco suo non ponderat: An element is not weighty in its
own place. How swift is water in the river? How dull out of it?

Use. Marvel not at sudden villainies, as robberies, murders, treasons. Wicked
men are quick at such things.

6. Doct. Great sins are readily swallowed by ungodly men. As murder, and
oppression. Ahab can swallow Naboth's vineyard and life at a morsel, 1 King.
21. And Judas can digest the murder of Christ, and thirty pieces of silver to
boot, Matt. 26.15. Some are so wicked they can murder Father and Mother, 1 Timothy
1.9. Cain killed his own Brother, Genesis 4.8.

Reason 1. They see not the evil of them.

2. They foresee not the danger of them.

Use. Marvel not at great wickednesses, while there be wicked men in the
world. Fire will burn down, water overflow all before it.

Verse. 17. Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.
We come now to Solomon's second argument, to dissuade the young man from
joining with these sinners. And that is taken from the injustice of their
course. They wrong others without provocation by them, or merit of evil in
them. It may be the young man might object against the first argument,
peradventure they had just cause to take the rich men's lives, as well as their
goods. It may be that they have committed some great evil, or done them much
wrong. No, says Solomon, they had no cause at all to proceed so cruelly
against them neither for any wrong done to themselves, nor others. It proceeds
merely from their own covetous, and cruel disposition. They have given them no
more cause then the bird does to the fowler, to take away his life.

For the words.

(...), Surely. So it is translated. Surely we will return with thee, Ruth
1.10. And then it is an earnest asseveration of the truth of what is said. It
is as sure, thieves kill without a cause, as that fowlers kill harmless birds.
It may be read For, as it is, v. 9. and v. 16. And then it ushers in a second
reason, to dissuade the young man from joining with them, v. 15. because they
are unjust as well as cruel. For it cannot be a reason of the Thieves curelty,
mentioned v. 16. for they are not curel because they have no cause, but though
they have no cause.

(...), In vain. So our Translation and some others read it. Some take it to be
in vain in regard of the bird, which will take no warning, but will fly to the
meat, although it fall into the net. So will Thieves go on till they come to
the gallows, notwithstanding examples of others hanged before, or counsels of
friends. They will rob, though they be hanged, and for present content, they
will adventure suture ruin. Their eyes are dazeled with the fight of gain, so
that they see not the danger. Others take it to be in vain in regard of the
fowler, who is not always sure to catch the birds, for many times they spy the
net, and fly away. And this some apply to the Thieves alluring the young man.
They often miss the precious things they aim at, the owners espying their
evil intentions, and preventing them. Therefore join not thou with them, upon
hope of uncertain gain. Others apply it to the young man himself, as if Solomon
had said, If birds have wit to see and avoid snares, thou my Son being a
reasonable creature, should much more (especially being warned by me) see the
danger of these evil men's counsels, and not dare to join with them. But the
word should rather be translated without cause, as it is v. 11. As fowlers kill
birds taken in the net, though they never wronged them, that so they may feed
on them, so do these most unjustly kill them they rob, as ver. 11. and 19.
show. The one says, they lie in wait for them causelessly, and the other, that
they take away their lives. So the word is also used, chap. 3.30. Strive not
with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm. Object not, that they
will not be so cruel, though they be covetous, for though men's riches may do
them good, yet they have given no cause to take away their lives. No more has
the bird to the fowler. But as the fowler cannot feed on the bird, unless he
kill it, no more can they rob sometimes without killing.

(...), The net. It is taken,

1. Literally, for an engine to catch birds, beasts, or fishes. Ye have been a
net spread upon Tabor, Hos. 4.1.

2. For network, made like a net. Thou shall make for it a grate of network
of brass, Exodus 27.4.

3. For devices to entrap men. In the net which they hid is their own foot
taken, Psalm. 9.15. Here it is used in the first sense, yet the third intended
in the application of the similitude, as appears, v. 18.

Is spread. Laid abroad at length, that it may catch the bird, if it come
within the verge of it.

In the sight. Heb. in the eyes, (...) signifies,

1. The eye, in which is placed the Sense of seeing. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, Eccl. 1.8.

2. The sight which is by the eye. The heavens are not clean in his sight, Job
15.15. So here, where the bird either does see it, or may see it, if he will
look about him; or, where birds use to haunt.

(...), Of any. Not of every bird, but of any bird. So it signifies here, and
that without a negative particle with it. A thing not observed in Grammars and
Dictionaries. So Job 8.12. It withers before any other herb. For the word
see on v. 13. on the word All.

Bird. Heb. owner or possessour of a wing. That has a wing at command to fly
withal. Thus God distinguishes birds from beasts and fishes. A bird of the
air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter,
Eccl. 10.20. So the Owner is in the Original called the possessour of riches,
v. 19. And the Ram that had two horns, is called, The possessour of two horns,
Dan. 8.6. The Hebr. word (...), signifies,

1. An owner or possessor of a thing. The Master of the house shall be brought
unto the Judges, Exodus 22.8. that is, The owner or possessour of it. He that
dwells in it.

2. A chief or honorable man. The Priest shall not defile himself, being a
chief man among his people, Lev. 21.4.

3. An husband. If he were married, Exodus 21.3. Hebr. if he were the husband of
a wife.

4. An Idol, called Baal. He brought him up into the high places of Baal, Numb.
22.41.

5. A Lord. Call me no more Baali, that is, My Lord, as in the marg. Hos. 2.16.

6. An inhabitant. So it is rendered, The men of Shechem, Judge. 9.20.

Here it is taken in the first sense, for the possessour of a wing, that is, a
bird. The word (...), signifies,

1. A wing. Every winged soul after his kind, Genesis 1.21.

2. It is put for the swiftness of the wind, which seems to fly, it is so
quick, and carries ships away apace. He did fly upon the wings of the wind,
Psalm. 18.10.

3. For the utmost part of any thing. As,

1. Of a garment. They shall make them fringes in the borders of their
garments, Numb. 15.38.

2. For the sails of a ship, which are spread like wings, and make ships as it
were to fly. Woe to the Land shadowing with wings, Isa. 18.1. That is, sending
forth ships with sails, as appears v. 2. there.

3. For the wings of an Army. The stretching out of his wings shall fill the
breadth of thy Land, O Immanuel, Isa. 8.8.

4. The farthest part of the earth. From the four corners of the earth, Isa.
11.12.

5. The springing of the morning light, which begins far from us. The Sun of
righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, Mal. 4.2. Here it is used
in the first sense, for the wing of a bird.

Figures none, except eyes for sight. The cause for the effect.

Note 1. The manner of speaking, Surely.

2. The matter. And in it, 1. The subject, the net. 2. The adjuncts. 1 Is
spread. 2 Without cause. 3. The object. In the sight of any bird.


1. Doct. Variety of reasons are needful todisswade from evil. See how many
curses are threatened against it, Deuter. chapter 27. and 28.

Reason 1. Because of our privative unbeleef. We are hardly drawn to believe
any spiritual truth, and divine. O fools and slow of heart, to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken, Luke 24.25. A weak house must have many props,
else it will fall.

2. Because of our positive unbeleef. We are opposite to matters of faith and
holiness, and can reason strongly against our own salvation. We had need of
many bullets to beat down this sort.

3. Because of men's different dispositions. One affects wit, another credit,
another profit, another pleasure. All these must be wrought upon accordingly. A
fisher must have several baits for several fishes, worms for one, flies for
another, paste for another. One man is loving, another harsh; one stout,
another fearful; one fed with hopes, another affected only with things
present. Perswaders to good, or from evil, must proceed accordingly. Decet
veritatem, totis viribus uti suis, non ut laborantem: It becomes truth to use
all her forces, not as if it had much adce to uphold her self. Tertull. advers.
Marc. l. 3.

4. To confirm our selves in the truth, else we shall never work well upon
others.

Use. To persuade us to study the Scripture well, if we would be able to give
counsel to others to draw them to good, or from evil; for there is the
storehouse of truth, and abundance of reasons, and stronger then either nature
or art can afford, to work upon men's judgment, or affections.

2. Doct. Reasons brought to confirm truth must be solid ones. So Christ
confutes the Sadduces by a sentence out of the Law. I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living, Matt. 22.32. It is conceived the Sadduces believed only the five
Books of Moses, and therefore our Savior out of them brings his proof, that
could have brought plainer out of the Prophets, if he had pleased, as Dan.
12.2. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt. So he confuteth
the Pharisees, who maintained that a man might swear by the Temple, but not by
the gold of the Temple, by an undeniable argument; Ye fools and blind, for
whether is greater, the gold, or the Temple that sanctifies the gold? Matt.
23.17. So Paul reproves fornicators, in that they make the members of Christ
the members of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15. So he confutes communion with Idolaters,
because therein they have fellowship with devils, 1 Cor. 10.20.

Reason 1. Because nothing but truth should come from an informer, else he may
be a blind guide, and fall, and lead others into the ditch.

2. Reasons ought not only to be true, but also to bear up other truths. All
stones in a building should be firm, but especially the foundation stones. What
is a lying witness worth, or a beggarly surety? The Rabbis say of a weak
argument, (...), Your surety wants a surety. And the Logicians cry out,
Incertum per incertius: Ye prove an uncertainty by a greater uncertainty.

3. Else we cannot satisfy our selves. And how should a man think to persuade
others by that which persuades not himself?

4. Our reasons should not only satisfy others, but be so strong, that they
may convince them, and stop their mouths. A minister must be able by sound
doctrine both to exhort and convince the gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. Therefore their
reasons had need be strong.

Use. Let us weigh our arguments well in our own souls, before we present them
to others. So men measure their corn at home, before they bring it to Market,
that it may not fall short. Else we cannot hope to persuade others to good, or
dissuade them from evil, if our arguments prevail not first with our selves.

3. Doct. There is a world of injustice in the world. As in Heathen Niniveh.
The Lion did tear in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his
lionesses, and filled his holes with prey, and his dens with ravine, Nah. 2.12.
Woe to the bloody City. It is all full of lies and robbery, the prey departs
not, Nahum 3.1. So in idolatrous Israel, Ahab must have Naboth's vineyard, 1
King. 21. It is full of lying, killing, stealing, Hos. 4.1. In Judab also
professing Religion in David's old days. It is like Absalom had some color of
complaint, by reason of officers oppression. No man is deputed of the King to
hear thee, 2 Samuel 15.3. And in Israel, in Samuel's old days. His Sons turned
aside after lucre, and took bribes, and perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. Samuel
could say, Whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken, etc. 1 Samuel
12.3. But his Sons could not say so.

Reason 1. Because men have different humors, and affections; some spleenful,
some fearful, some covetous, some ambitious.

2. They have diverse degrees. Some are great, and think they may do what they
will with mean ones. Some low, and do wrong for need. They are poor, and steal,
Prove. 30.3. Some of a middle rank, who envy superiors, slight inferiors, and
wrong both.

Use. Let us be just in the midst of an unjust generation, as Noah was, Genesis
6.9. and as Paul would have the Philippians to be, Phil. 3.15. and as the
middle region of the air is cold, being between the upper region hot, as being
nearer the Sun; and the lower hot by reflection.

The net is spread. Fowlers have nets, and spread them to take innocent birds,
that they may be sure they may not escape.

4. Doct. Wicked men have cunning devices to do mischief. As Absalom, to get
away the hearts of his Fathers Subjects by flattery, 1 Samuel 15.3. And Ishmael
by tears to call them to Gedaliah, whom he had slain before, and so to kill
them, Jer. 41.2, 6, 7.

Reason 1. To expedite the business the sooner, that they may quickly effect
their desires. They long to be rid of their mischievous designs, as a woman
with-childe of her burden. Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, Psalm. 7.14. As
the Mathematician that made an Engine to convey a Ship into the Sea with one
hand, which others could not do with much help, was a cunning man. So have
wicked men curious fetches to hurt others.

2. To remove all impediments, which requires much skill.

Use. Take heed of ungodly men's plots. Use the Doves innocence, but with the
Serpents subtilty, Matthew. 10.16.

5. Doct. God has put some visible distinction between visible creatures.
Birds are distinguished from Beasts by wings. He made birds to fly in the air,
fishes to swim in the sea, beasts to go on the earth, Genesis 1.

Reason. To show Gods wisdom, that has set a several mark on all creatures,
in their several kinds.

Use. Let us in beholding the variety of the creatures, give God the glory of
his wisdom, Romans 1.20, 21.

6. Doct. Creatures have a lawful power over their members. A bird is Master
of a wing.

Reason. God gives them this power.

Use. Honor God then with your members. Yield your members servants to
righteousness unto holiness, Romans 6.19.

Verse. 18. And they lay wait for their own blood, they lurk privily for their
own lives.
Here the Wiseman proceeds to a third argument, to dissuade the young man from
joining with these robbers. The first was from their cruelty, v. 16. The
second, from their injustice, v. 17. The third in this verse. from their craft
and indirect dealing, to bring their wicked ends to pass.

For the words.

And, or So. For thus this word is translated, Pro. 25.23. The North Wind
drives away rain, so does an angry countenance at back biting tongue. It sets
forth a reddition to a similitude. So it may do here. As the Fowlers without
provocation, lay wait to kill the harmless birds, that they may devour them,
so robbers without provocation lurk privily to kill men, that they may deprive
them of their riches.

They lay wait. See on v. 11.

For their own. It may be translated their, or their own. And therefore the
word own is in a little letter, as not necessarily included in the Original
word. They that take it for their own, understand it thus. These robbers, that
are so solicitous to draw thee into their society think to undo others, but
indeed undo themselves in the end. They come to the gallows. They do as it
were hold a pistol with a dark lantern in their hand, and when they think to
kill others, shoot themselves to death. Quae rapina sublata funt, raptorem
rapiunt. Ab Ezr. Things unjustly snatched away, snatch away the snateher. Some
hold on the comparison, and read it their, not their own, and understand it of
the birds, which the fowlers are not content to take, but kill them also. And
they make the reddition, v. 19. But the best way is to read it their, and apply
it to the rich men whom the thieves would rob. And so it is a part of the
application. As Fowlers lay wait to kill birds, so thieves to kill men. The
reasons to enforce this interpretation, are these.

1. They that are to be killed are those whose blood they laid wait for, v. 11.
which was not their own, but such as they would rob. And swallow up alive, v.
12. And find riches in their houses, v. 13.

2. Because the other interpretation agrees not with the similitude, v. 17. for
fowlers run no danger themselves in catching or killing birds. No law lays
hold on their lives. So it should be a dissimilitude rather then a similitude.
Though fowlers get no harm by killing birds, yet thou shall perish with
murdering thieves, if thou join with them. But this agrees not with the words.

3. Because it agrees not with v. 19. They seek the life of the owners of those
riches, and not their own lives. To conclude, the dehortation is not taken
from the hurt that might befall the young man, if he join with them, but that
might betide others by his joining with them in their crafty ways, which will
not only be the loss of their estates, but of their lives also sometimes,
which the young man, not used to blood and fraud, would startle at in
likelihood, though the seducers used to it could shed blood without remorse.

Blood. See on v. 11. They lurk privily. See on v. 11.

For their own. Rather for their. That is, for to kill those whom they rob.
See before in this verse.

(...), Their lives. Heb. Their souls. The word signifies,

1. The breath. His breath kindles coals, Job 41.21.

2. The life, which cannot be without breathing. But flesh with the life
thereof, shall ye not eat, Genesis 9.4.

3. The soul, the cause and fountain of life. Man became a living soul, Genesis
2.7.

4. A living body. Let the earth bring forth the living creature, Genesis 1.24.

5. A man. The souls, that came out of the loins of Jacob, Exodus 1.5. That is,
the men.

6. The body of a man. He was laid in iron, Psalm. 105.18. Heb. His soul came
into iron. As in the marg. of your Bibles. Yet it was the body of Joseph only,
for his soul could not be bound in iron.

7. A dead car^ase that had once a soul in it. Whosoever touches any thing, that
is unclean by the dead, Lev. 22.4. Heb. by a soul.

8. The heart, mind, or desire of a man. Ye know the heart of a stranger,
Exodus 23.9. Heb. the sul.

9. For God himself, as the soul of man was taken for the man himself, in the
fifth signification. The Lord God has sworn by himself, Amos 6.8. Heb. by his
soul.

Here it is taken in the second sense, for the life, because as the breath is
the sign of life, so the presence of the soul is the cause of life, and the
absence of it the cause of death. Faulkeners if they catch birds in the net,
kill them. If not, they shoot them. So do robbers with men. They kill them with
the sword, or with the gun. Thus the Adulteress seeks a man's life, chapter 6.26.
and 7.22, 23.

Figures. Blood for life, and soul for life. The cause for the effect. The same
thing is doubled in diverse words, to show the certainty of it, that this is
indeed the intention of robbers, what ever they pretend to the young man. So
Pharaoh's dream was doubled, to show, that the thing was established by God,
and God would shortly bring it to pass, Genesis 41.32. And Kimchi on those words,
Isa. 1.2. I have nourished and brought up children, says, The doubling of the
word is to confirm the thing in diverse words, though the matter be all one,
(...) And such is the custom of the Scripture in many places.

For the division:

Note 1. The efficient, They, the robbers.

2. The act, lay wait, lork privily.

3. The object, for their blood, for their lives. To murder such as they rob.
It agrees with the former verse. thus. As fowlers lie hid themselves, and lay
their nets, where birds come, to catch and kill them, though they never hurt
them; so these robbers lie hid privily to entrap them that hurt them not, and
to kill them for their goods.

1. Doct. Similitudes rightly applied are of great use. They are much used in
the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. As by Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12.
Where Gods care of his is set out by the Eagles tender care of her young ones.
By the Prophets, Isa. 49.15, 16. which sets it out by the Mothers respect to
her young children. By Christ, Matt. 13. who take similies from Sea, Land,
Trade, Husbandry, to teach all sorts of men piety. By the Apostles, Jude v. 12,
13. where the like are taken from Bodies of men, Heaven, Earth, Sea.

Reason 1. Because they help the understanding much. For earthly things are
better known to us then heavenly. They are glasses, in which we may see better
things. The eyes convey much knowledge to the soul.

2. Similitudes help the memory, for things seen are tokens of things unseen,
as a thread on the finger of an errand. The act of memory lodges one thing in
one corner of the room, another in another.

3. They help the will. When we see the willingness of beasts to provide for
their young, it puts Parents in mind of their duty.

4. They help the conscience. A similitude helped David to see his sin quickly,
2 Samuel 12.1, etc. He could soon condemn him that killed his neighbors
Ewe-lamb, that would hardly else have condemned himself for killing his
neighbor, and abusing his Wife.

5. They help the affections. The attractive ones are helped by similies taken
from things liked; the abstractive by similies taken from things disliked.

6. They help to amend our lives. The Ant can teach the Sluggard to labor.

Use 1. Treasure up store of similitudes. All places afford plenty of them.
Sea, land, shop, house, streets, fields, are not barren. What can you do that
may not teach you some good lesson for your souls?

2. Be sure to apply them right, else they may do much harm. As that parable,
Mat. 18.23. where the Lords revoking his pardon, verse. 34. is applied to
falling away from grace, contrary to Christ's interpretation, verse. 35. God will
not forgive you, unless you forgive others. Simile non currit quatuor pedibus:
No similitude runs on four legs. If it agree in some things, it must differ in
others, else it were not the like, but the same. And what application can be
better, then that which leads to the scope of the propounder? Theologia
symbolica, non est argumentativa. Similitudes making nothing true, but
illustrate things that were true before. The absurdest thing in the world might
be proved by some similitude. As that Parents need take no more care for their
children, then the Ostriches do for their eggs, Job 39.13, etc. But what child
will allow of such a proof? Therefore apply similitudes carefully, lest ye run
into error.

Before, v. 11. they say, Let us lay wait, etc. Here Solomon affirms that they
do so.

2. Doct. A wicked man, as he persuades others to evil, so he acts it himself.
So Judah counseled to, and joined in the selling of Joseph, Genesis 37.26, etc.
Judas did the like in bringing Christ to his end, Matt. 26.14, 15.

Reason 1. To show their real approbation of the work. For it is pleasing to
their corrupt nature. They give bad counsel out of love to evil, as their
deeds declare.

2. To encourage others to mischief. For deeds draw more then words, examples
then precepts.

Use. To blame many, who give good counsel to others to be just, yet prove
unjust themselves; and to be patient, yet are impatient themselves. Like
Pharisees, they lay heavy burdens on men's shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their fingers, Mat. 23.4.

Fowlers have cunning pates to invent traps, and strong hands to lay them.

3. Doct. As wicked men have heads to invent, so have they hands to execute
mischief. So Ishmael contrived and executed Gedalia's death, and others, Jer.
41.1, etc. So did Joab, Atner's and Amasa's death, 2 Samuel 3.27. and 20.9, 10.

Reason 1. Because men's hands are naturally corrupt, as well as their heads.

2. Because else their plots will come to nothing, if their hands be not nimble
to execute, as well as their heads to invent.

Use. It reproves such as have good heads, and know well what they should do,
but find many rubs in the way, when they should go about any good duty. These
are sluggards, and cry, A lion in the way, Prove. 6.13.

New words come to be expounded in every verse.

4. Doct. Much pains is needful to understand Scripture aright. Continual
pains, Continue in them, 1 Timothy 4.16. Searching pains. Search the Scriptures,
Joh. chapter 5. verse. 39.

Reason 1. Because of the manner of writing Some things are plain, but other
things are figurative; as, I am the true vine, and my Father is the
husbandman, Joh. 15.1. Some direct, but others ironical; as, Rejoice, O young
man in thy youth, etc. Eccl. 11.9. Some like Islands and Promontories, as marks
of good example to guide; some like rocks, and quicksands, as stories of bad
example, to avoid.

2. Because Ministers which have more gifts then others, yet labor hard to
understand Scripture.

Use. Let us take pains to know the meaning of Gods Word, as Miners do, that
dig for gold, silver, or jewels; or men that draw water out of deep wells, even
out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12.3.

If open opposing will not serve to rob and kill, ambushes must.

5. Doct. Many snares are laid for innocent men. As for David by Saul, that he
might be killed by the Philistines, or any other way. So for Daniel, by the
Princes of the Kingdom by enquiring into all his ways, and by new projects,
Dan. 6.4, 5.

Reason 1. Because of the malice of ungodly men against them.

2. Because of their subtilty. If they were not malicious, they would not lay
snares for good men. If not subtle, they could not do it, to prevail.

Use. Judge not them evil, that have many snares laid for them. Nets are not
laid for Kites, but for Pigeons.

For their souls; that is, for their lives. For they cannot come at their souls
to hurt them.

6. Doct. The natural life depends upon the presence of the soul, 1 King.
17.22. The soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.

Reason 1. Because there is no life in the infant in the womb, till the soul
enter into it. This we call quickening in the Mother, a distinct act from
conceiving.

2. Life continues not, if the soul depart.

3. It ends then. Souls departure from the body brings death.

4. Continuance of life in the soul after the death of the body, shows, that
the life of the body depends upon it.

5. The souls returning at the resurrection brings life to the body.

6. It brings eternal life to it also. The soul continuing with the body to
eternity, that body then can never die.

Use. Be most careful of your souls. Then your bodies will live also. Else both
perish. No life without the soul. The body will live if the soul live. And the
body will live as the soul lives, happily or miserably to eternity. If the soul
be damned, say, Farewell all bodily comfort for ever. What is a man profited,
if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? Matt. 16.26.

Verse. 19. So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain, which laketh
away the life of the owners thereof.
Solomon's three arguments being handled, whereby he seeks to draw the young
man from bad company, and ill courses; now he proceeds to raise a larger
conclusion, to keep him not only from robberies, but from covetousness, the
root of it. He tells him, that not these gross sinners only, but all that are
covetous, will be drawn to shed blood, rather then to lose gain. Here in a
patheticall conclusion, all that has been said before, is shut up, with a
vehement acclamation, and applied to more then robbers and murderers, even to
all covetous persons. See the like collections or conclusions, with
enlargements. Psalm. 128.4. Behold, thus shall the man be blessed that fears
the Lord. Not only with precedent blessings of success and children, but with
consequent also, of the Churches peace, and lasting posterity, verse. 5.6. And
Psalm. 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case; yea, happy is that
people, whose God in Johovah.

For the words.

(...), So. The word signifies,

1. The foot, or lowest part of a thing. The laver, and his foot, Exodus 30.28:

1. A place, or office. Pharaoh shall restore thee unto thy place. Genesis 40.13.
Me he restored unto mine office. Genesis 41. ver. 13.

3. Right or true. The daughters of Zelophehad speak right, Numb. 27.9.

4. So. And that sometimes in the reddition of a fimilitude. As the heavens are
higher then the earth, so are my ways higher then your ways, Isa. 55.9. And
sometimes without a similitude. And it was so, Genesis 1.7. God effected what he
spoke. Some take it here as a reddition to the similitude, verse. 17. but it is
rather a conclusion of Solomon's disswasion of the young man from joining with
robbers and covetous persons, not in regard of the unhappy event likely to
befall themselves, but in respect of their cruelty to others, whom they deprive
of goods and life.

(...), The wages. It signifies,

1. A way or path in which men walk. Dan shall be a serpent by the way an adder
in the path, Genesis 49.17.

2. A company of traveller a going together in the way for safety, as the
Turkish Caravan^ do. A company of Iskmaelites came from Gilead with their
camels, etc. Genesis 37.25.

3. A custom or manner of doing, in which men are as constant as travelers in
their way. It ceased to be with Sar^h after the manner of women, Genesis 18.11.
Lest thou learn his ways, Prove. 22.15. And so it is taken in this place for
the constant customs of covetous men.

(...), Of every one. He does not say, of some of them, but of every covetous
person. Not a barrel better herring. For the word, see on v. 13.

(...). That is greedy of gain, Heb. that gains gain. That makes it his
greatest employment to thrive, and makes truth and equity to yield to gain. The
word signifies,

1. To cut, or wound. Cut them in the head, or wound them, says the marg, Amos
9.1.

2. To be covetous, or greedy of gain; for such will cut and wound others in
their bodies sometimes, as robbers do. So the word is used. He that is greedy
of gain troubles his own house, Prove. 15.27.

3. To finish a thing. When the Lord has performed his whole work, Isa. 10.12.
for covetous or greedy men are very defirous to finish their work.

Here it is taken in the second sense, and it is observed, that in that
signification it is never taken in a good sense, for a lawful desire, or
lawful gain, but always in an ill sense, for being so greedy of gain, that
they use unlawful means to get it.

Which. This word is not in the original. It may be left out, and read, He
takes away the life of the owners thereof. That is, the covetous man does it.
Some would read, It. That is, gain, or riches, for many lose their lives for
their wealth. But it is rather to be understood of the robber, or covetous man,
who will not only deceive or cosen, but also kill men for their money.

(...), Takes away. See on v. 3. on the word Receive. The Hebrews have no
compounds, and therefore the word signifies to take away, as well as to take.

The life. See on verse. 18.

Of the owners thereof. See on v. 17. Some understand it of the thieves,
intimating, that when they had gotten wealth, they should be never the richer,
it would bring them to the gallows. But it is rather to be interpreted of rich
men, whom they would cosen or rob; and if they find them too strong for them,
or likely to reveal them, then they will kill them. This agrees with all the
former verses, especially the eleventh. The word sometimes signifies an
husband that has right to his wife: So here it signifies lawful possessors,
that have right to their goods, and have only authority to dispose of them.

The sum of all is: They take away that which belongs to others (which they
have nothing to do withal) and the owners lives withal.

Figures. 1. Ways for Customs. A Metaphor.

2. A figure of the cause for the effect. Soul for Life. Mark, 1. The note of
coherence, So. 2. The matter. And therein, 1. The cause. 2. The effect.



In the cause note, 1. The subject, He that is greedy of gain. 2. The adjunct
of number, Every one.


The effect is set out, 1. In general, The ways. 2. In particular. And
therein, 1. The action, He takes away. 2. The object, The life. 3. The
subject, Of the owners. 4. The adjunct, Thereof. Of that gain, or those riches:



He says not, So is the way. But, so are the ways.

1. Doct. There are many wicked ways in the world. Three are mentioned, Psalm.
1.1. The counsel of the ungodly, the way of sinners, the seat of the
scornful. Many, Hos. 4.2. Swearing, lying, killing, stealing, adultery.

Reason. 1. From particulars. There are ways of error concerning God, his
Word, Christ, the Sacraments. Ways of impiety, as swearing, blasphemy. Ways
of injustice, as fraud, robbery, false sentences, false witnesses. Ways of
uncharitableness, not giving, not lending to the poor, not setting them on
work, or giving them less then their work is worth. Ways of gluttony,
drunkenness, and uncleanness.

2. Because there are diverse corrupt principles within, and devices, which
break out in evil ways.

Use. Let us be circumspect and careful to keep the right way, having so many
by ways before us. As a bird that has many snares, or a fish that has many
baits laid for it, had need be wary. If the devil cannot draw a man to
Atheism, he will draw him to Idolatry; if not to Profaneness, then to
Superstition; if not to Pride, then to base Flattery; if not to Covetousness,
then to Prodigality.

Of every one, etc.

2. Doct. As there are many evil ways, so there are many that walk in them.
These evil ways are not like the highwayes in the days of Jael, unoccupyed,
Judge. 5.6. All flesh had corrupted their way, Genesis 6.12. Many there be which go
in the way of destruction, Mat. 7.13.

Reason 1. From particular evil ways. Many walk in the way of Idolatry. All
the world wondered after the beast, Rev. 12.3. In the way of covetousness. All
seek their own, Phil. 2.21. Of wantonness. Every one neighed after his
neighbors wife, Jer. 5.8. Of deceitfulness. With a double heart do they
speak, Psalm. 12.2.

2. Because there is no way so bad, but it is pleasing to any wicked men; and
what men delight in, that they pursue.

Use. It confutes the Papists, that make Universality a note of the true
Church. It may be a note of their malignant Church, for many follow evil
ways. Major pars meliorem vincit. Seneca. The greatest part overcomes the
better. Nunquam cum rebus humanis tam faeliciter actum est, ut meliora pluribus
placerent. Senec. de vita beata. Men's affairs were never in so happy a
condition, that the best things pleased most men.

3. Do. Many in the world are greedy of gain. For from the least of them, even
unto the greatest of them, every one of them is given unto covetousness, Jer.
6.13. her Prophets have taken the treasure and precious things. Her Princes in
the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey to shed blood, and so
destroy souls, to get dishonest gain. The people of the land have used
oppression, etc. Ezekiel. 22.25, 27, etc.

Reason 1. Because it is the means of a comfortable life. Rich men can command
plenty of the best food, apparel, dwellings, Eccl. 2.4, etc.

2. It raises men to honor, and makes others to attend and observe them like
demigods.

Use. To teach us to labor to be free of this common disease, as men fly from
infected Cities. Let us not follow the swinge of the world.

4. There is a propriety of goods in this world. It appears in the parable of
the Vineyard. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? Mat.
20.15. And in the parable of the talents, The Master delivers unto the servants
his goods, Matt. 25.14. And because Parabolicall divinity proves not, look into
Act. 5.4. While it remained, was it not thine own? Render therefore to all
their dues, Romans 13.7.

Reason 1. The Law of nature confirms it. Beasts that live promiscuously have
common pastures. It is not fit for men so to do, that may marry, and have
children.

2. The Law of Nations. The Barbarians have distinct dwellings, and cattle.

3. The Law of trading by exchange, or money, confirms it, Genesis 23.16.

4. The Law of God, else were there no eight Commandment. No man could be
guilty of theft, if there were no propriety of goods.

Use. It affords us comfort in what we enjoy by Gods law and man's. Propriety is
a great comfort. Luther was wont to say, There was much divinity in Pronounes.
Men love some children better then others, because they are theirs. It is the
great comfort of godly men, that God is theirs. My work is with my God, Isa.
49.4.

5. Doct. Wicked men seek to break this propriety of goods. Ahab would have
Naboth's vineyard, 1 King. 21.

Reason 1. Because they envy any good that others enjoy.

2. They would live easily and plentifully.

Use. It blames those that take other men's goods where they come, without any
order from God or man.

6. Doct. Deceitful and covetous persons will kill others rather then lose
their prey. Ahab will kill Naboth for his vineyard, 1 King. 21.

Reason 1. Because of inbred covetousness.

2. Because of inbred cruelty.

Use. Take heed of giving way to deceit or covetousness, lest ye end in blood.
Love of gain will draw blood. Some expound all Solomon's counsel by way of
hurt to the evil doers, thus. My Son, go not in, nay enter not into their
ways, for though they devise mischief for others, they will bring evil on
themselves, and as fowlers oft-times lay nets to no purpose for birds, so will
they for others. Their craft will tend to their own destruction. They are
greedy of gain, and when they have gotten it, it will procure their ruin. But
it rather aims at the hurt of others, thus, My Son, take heed of their courses,
for they are cruel, and seek the hurt and death of others, and that unjustly,
without any wrong done them, and by crafty and subtle means. So will all
covetous persons seek the life of others, that they may get from them with
ease, what they have gotten with much labor.

For the first interpretation it is objected, that the net is said to be laid
in the fight of any bird, and therefore the meaning is, in vain, not without
cause. That is, the bird sees the danger, and escapes.

Answ. The meaning may be, nets are laid, where birds are. As in the first
Commandment, Thou shall have no other gods before my face; that is, before me.

2. Object. There is no antecedent to tell whose lives are meant.

Answ. The antecedent follows sometimes in Scripture language. As Psalm. 87.1.
His foundation is in the holy mountains. Whose? A. v. 2. The Lords. So here,
For their lives; that is, For the lives of the owners of those riches, which
they would take away, v. 19.

For the second interpretation, the words are the same with v. 11. There they
are clearly spoken of the lives of others, not of the robbers. So v. 16. They
lust to shed other men's blood, not their own. And the owners, v. 19. are those
whose blood and life is sought, v. 18. The former intimates no success, this
fignifies a bad event. The former to themselves, this to others. There being
more difficulty in the former interpretation, less in the latter, let the
indifferent Reader judge which is the better.

Verse. 20. Wisdom eryeth without, she utters her voice in the streets.
Solomon like a good Physician, having first showed the danger of the disease,
to make willing to take physic; and like a good Surgeon, having used
corrasives, now gives curing medicines, and lenitive plasters. Or, having
before given antitodes to keep men from ill courses, now he gives cordials to
encourage them to good. Having forewarned the young man to take heed of bad
company, now he brings in Wisdom inviting him to her school. So the Psalmist
first disswades them from ungodly ways, and then invites men to delight in the
Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.1, 2. First depart from evil, then do good, Psalm.
34.14. This is the way to dwell for ever^are, Psalm. 37.27. He had showed the
arguments of sinners before to seduce men, and answered them; now, that his
admonition might have the more weight, be by a Prosopopeia brings in Wisdom
her self to the confusion of foolishness and ignorance, soliciting him to good
ways. If the young man should say, that he desires nothing more then to avoid
the society of sinners, and follow the dictates of wisdom, but he is
discouraged by the difficulty of attaining it. No, says Solomon, it is easy
to attain, it is not hidden any where, nor far off to be sought after, but
offers it self to all, rich and poor, etc.

For the words of Wisdom note, 1. A preface, v. 20, 21. 2. The speech it self,
to the end of the Chapter.


In the preface note,

1. The beginning of Wisdoms proclamation. In the fields and villages, v. 20.

2. The progress of it in more public places, as in walled Towns and Cities,
v. 21.

For the words of this verse.

Wisdom, Heb. Wisdoms. For the word it self, see on v. 2. But why Wisdoms,
in the plural? Some think the reason to be, because it includes all true
wisdom in it, and all befide this holy wisdom is but folly. And because it
gives us diverse and many documents for the good of our souls. It contains many
things to direct us in faith and life. So seven Spirits are mentioned, Rev.
1.4. to set forth the manifold graces of Gods Spirit. Or, it is called
Wisdoms, because it is the most excellent wisdom, divine, heavenly wisdom,
which teaches us how to attain eternal life. So Behemoth is put for a great
beast, Job 40.15. Thus this word may be used here for principal wisdom. As
also chap. 9.1. Wisdoms has builded her a house. And Psalm. 49.3. My mouth
shall speak of wisdoms. Some would read, wisdom of wisdoms. So some read for
Behemoth, the beast of beasts, Job 40.15. And, Remember to remember to keep
boly the Sabbath day, in the fourth Commandment. And, The Song of Songs, Cant.
1.1. that is, the best Song, as appears by Gods choice, who preserved that when
all the rest were lost. Hereby is meant the highest wisdom, called by St.
James, the wisdom from above, Jam. 3.17. Wisdom is brought in here as some
great Lady or Princess, the word is feminine, calling on young men as her
growing Subjects, to hearken to her godly counsels. And the word is plural, as
God is called (...), and (...) in the plural number, to set out his state and
majesty, to may Wisdom. Others take it to be meant of Christ, the eternal
wisdom of God the Father. And so it is commonly interpreted, chapter 8.1. And may
be here. For he did cry before he was born, even in the days of Noah, 1 Pet.
3.19, 20. And he is called Wisdom here, because he is the eternal wisdom of
God, and also to fit the title to the matter. As God is called the Father of
mercies in promises, to comfort afflicted ones; and the just God in
threatenings, to scare sinners; and the Lord in commandments, to move to
obedience: so here, Christ may be called Wisdom, to counsel simple ones.

(...), Cries. The word signifies a strong cry, such an one as Soldiers use
to send forth in the beginning of a battle, or after a victory. Thus men cry
out in finging for joy, or weeping for sorrow; in prayer, or praise; in
teaching, or admonishing others, as here. She speaks not low, but loud, that
all men may hear, and to show forth her earnestness. It may be meant either of
this proclamation of Wisdom here, and in other places of Scripture left on
record to be published all the world over; or of Christ speaking by his
Ministers in all ages, and inviting men to look after saving wisdom.

(...), Without. Some take this to be all one with the words following, to
show, that Wisdom speaks, and that boldly to, in all places. But more
particularly the word signifies sometimes the streets of a City, which are
without in respect of the houses. Jeremy must have a piece of bread out of the
Bakers street, Jer. 37.21. Sometimes, the Country villages and fields, which
are out of the walled Towns, and lie open to all comers. The suburbs of the
City shall reach from the wall of the City, and outward, a thousand cubits
round about, Numb. 35.4. So here, for all other places are mentioned after.
Contrymen as well as Citizens may hear Wisdoms voice.

She utters, Heb. she gives. That is, she gives out, or puts forth her
voice. The Hebrews want compounds. For the word, See on v. 4. Wisdom, as she
speaks loud, that all may hear, so she speaks freely, plainly, and distinctly,
that all, even the meanest, may understand.

Her voice. The word (...), sometimes fignifieth a voice, or sound in general,
though not articulate. That there be no more thunderings, Heb. voices of God,
Exodus 9.28. Sometimes it signifies words distinctly spoken. In all that Sarah
has said unto thee, hearken unto her voice, Genesis 21.12. So is it used here.

(...), In the streets. The Hebrew word has its original from (...), to be
broad, as (...) in Gr. because streets of Towns and Cities are wide, for men,
horses, and carts to pass by one another. She cries not in a corner, or within
doors only, or in fields or villages alone, but in the streets of Towns and
Cities, where houses are nearer then in the Country, that so all men may hear,
City and Country ring of her instruction.

Figures. Wisdom, either a Prosopopeia, if it be meant of Wisdom it self: or
a Metonymie of the subject for the adjunct, if spoken of Christ, the fountain
of wisdom. Voice Heb. Sound. A Synecdoche of the general for the special. A
sound for a voice, which is the best sound. More is to be gotten by men's words
then by lowing of oxen, or bleating of sheep. The beginning of Wisdoms speech
in villages is in the beginning of this verse. The progress of it, 1. In
Streets, Cities, and Towns, in the end of this verse. 2. In other places there,
verse. 21.


In the beginning of the speech note, 1. The Crier, Wisdom. 2. The act,
cries. 3. The subject place, without.


In the Country Villages, and unwalled Towns. In her progress in the streets,
note, 1. The act, she utters. 2. The object, her voice. 3. The subject place,
in the streets.


1. Doct. Heavenly wisdom is worth the looking after. As things publicly
cried and proclaimed are worth taking notice of. Hence the search of it is so
much pressed, and the worth of it so much set out in this Book, chap. 2.2. and
4.5, etc. The hear, heart, voice must be used, as men do to get silver, and hid
treasures. This wisdom must be gotten, and not forgotten, and kept as the
principal thing.

Reason 1. In regard of the excellency of it. It excells all humane arts and
sciences, more then gold does iron.

2. In regard of the lasting of it. All objects of humane science perish, but
the object of heavenly Wisdom lasts for ever in another world.

Use. Choose these studies then. Discamus ea in terris, qua nobiscum maneant in
caelis. Hieron. Let us on earth learn those things which may remain with us in
heaven. It is a fools part to look after bables, and neglect serious things.
Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has
no heart to it? Prove. 17.16.

2. Doct. This heavenly wisdom is to be found only in Jesus Christ. In whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. The only
begotten, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh.
1.18. Neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son
will reveal him, Matt. 11.27.

Reason 1. Because as the Son of God he knew the Fathers will from eternity.

2. Because God spoke by him even before his incarnation, as in the delivering
of the Law. Christ's voice then shook the earth, Heb. 12.26. Therefore he is
called (...), the Word, or Speech, Joh. 1.1.

3. Because God has given him the Spirit beyond measure, Joh. 3.34. He has
more wisdom and holiness then any man or Angel. He is the most lively image
of God, Heb. 1.3. And a principal part of Gods image is knowledge, Col. 3.10.

4. All wisdom that others have in heavenly things is from him. Christ of God
is made unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. No Philosophy can teach is. They had good
Moral precepts, but wild ones in Divinity.

Use. Go to the right shop for heavenly knowledge. To Christ's school. Search
not on earth, for it is vain. Neither man, earth, nor sea can afford it.
Neither gold, silver, nor precious stones can purchase it, Job 28.12. Seek it
then from the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

3. Doct. God is very desirous men should get heavenly wisdom. Therefore he
cries loudly, earnestly, affectionately, Understand, O ye brutish among the
people, when will ye be wise? Psalm. 94.8. God has written to the people the
great things of his Law, and will be angry if they be counted as a strange
thing, Hos. 8.12.

Reason 1. Because as he gives light natural in creatures, and arts, so
supernatural in Scripture revelations.

2. He gives sight of such things ordinarily by reason, extraordinarily by
illumination, and common graces.

Use. To admire why men are poor in this heavenly knowledge, seeing God is so
willing men should have it. Who would starve where a Prince keeps open Court to
entertain all comers?

4. Doc^^ This heavenly knowledge is offered to the meanest. It is preached in
villages. The poor have the Gosp^l preached to them, Mat. 11.5. God has hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and has revealed them unto babes, Mat.
11.25. Bring in hither the poor and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind,
Luke 14.21.

Reason 1. To show that God respects no persons, Act. 10.34. A thing that
brings much hurt in the world.

2. To bind them the more to God, as a begger-woman without blood, or portion,
married to a King, is the more engaged to him.

Use. To persuade mean ones to get this heavenly wisdom. They cannot get Arts
perhaps for want of means of breeding. This is offered freely. Ho, every one
that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: Come ye, buy,
and eat; yea, come buy wine and milk without money, and without price, Isa.
55.1.

5. Doct. The way to this heavenly knowledge is plain, and easy. It is cried
about the streets. It is taught in all languages. Knowledge is easy to him
that understands, Pro. 14.6. That is, that gives his mind to understand it.
Parthians, Medes, etc. We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful
works of God, Act. 2.9, 11. It is taught by earthly similitudes, as in parables
abundantly, Matthew. 13.

Use. Seek earnestly for it then. The way is easy, and the end profitable.

6. Doct. Means of salvation are offered to great Towns. To Chorazin and
Bethsaida, Mat. 11.21. To Capernaum, Mat. 11.23. To Corinth, Act. 18.1, 4.

Reason 1. Because much good may be done there, as much fish may be caught in
the Sea.

2. God may have much work to do there. Therefore Paul must preach boldly at
Corinth, because God has much people there, Act. 18.9, 10.

Use. Bless God for the means here. The Gospel is more plentifully preached,
then in other places. Walk worthy of it.

Verse. 21. She cries in the chief places of concourse, in the ^^^^ings of the
gates, in the City she utters her words, saying,
The text is a part of the preface of Wisdoms speech. Her beginning in the
Country villages was set out in the beginning of the former verse. And her
progress to the streets of walled Town in the end thereof. Now follows her
further progress in this verse. And that, 1. To Market Towns. 2. To
Shire-Towns, or places of Judgment. 3. To Cities, or chief places in a
Kingdom or Nation.


For the words.

Wisdom like some great Queen cries out, calling her Subjects from bad courses
to good. (...), It is a most fruitful word, having abundance of significations
in the Scriptures.

1. It signifies to cry, or make a noise. Isa. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift
up thy voice like a trumpet. From the Hebrew word (...), comes our English
word, Cry.

2. To proclaim or publish a thing. I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before
thee, Exodus 33.19.

3. To exclaim, or cry out. I lifted up my voice and cried, Genesis 39.15.

4. To read. He read all the words of the Law, Josh. 8.34.

5. To impose a name. She called his name Reuben, Ge. 29.32.

6. To call one by his name. The Lord called Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.4.

7. To call upon, or pray to God. Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm.
50.15.

8. To call one to him. As they called them, so they went from them, Hos. 11.2.

9. To invite to a feast. To morrow I am invited to her with the King, Est.
5.12.

10. To call into judgment, or call to account. And the Lord God called unto
Adam, Genesis 3.9.

11. To meet with one. Joseph went up to meet Israel his Father, Genesis 46.29.

12. To happen, or come to pass unexpectedly. As I happened by chance upon
Mount Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.6. Here it is taken in the second sense, for proclaiming
or publishing, as appears by the speech following.

In the chief place, Heb. the head. For the word, see on v. 9. Here it is taken
for the chief place of meeting. Some would take it for an higher place, wherein
the Preacher stands above others, that he may be heard. But that agrees not
well with the rest, which all mention the place of the hearers, rather then of
the speaker.

Of concourse, Hebr. of tumults, or of such as make a noise, (...), In
Market Towns and Fairs, where great concourse of people is, and abundance of
noise and business. It is called a place of tumults and tumultuous persons,
because men speak not there by order, as in other meetings, but all will be
heard. The word is feminine, because women are frequent in Markets: But
principally, to hold on the Metaphor, and to make the hearers like the speaker,
for (...), wisdoms, was plural and feminine, v. 20 as (...), concourses, is
here.

In the opening of the gates.

1. Enquire what is meant by the gates. 2. What by the openings of the gates.
For the first, (...), of the gates. The word signifies,

1. The gate of a Town or City, where men go in and out for trading, and
therefore much people may quickly be gathered there to hear. And Hamor and
Shechem his Son came unto the gate of their City, and communed with the men of
their City, Genesis 34.20.

2. The Town or City that has gates, and lies not open to the fury of the
enemies. I will fan them with is fan in the gates of the land, Jer. 15.7. That
is, in the Cities, or walled. Towns.

3. The palce of Judicature, that used in those days to be near the gates,
that all comers in and out might be witnesses of the just proceedings there.
Thou shall bring forth that man, or that woman unto thy gates, Deuteronomy. 17.5. That
is, to be judged, as appears by the production of witnesses and execution of
justice there mentioned. So it is taken here, for places of justice, where many
meet to see justice done, and that both Citizens and Country people, goers in,
and comers out, and therefore should be ready to hear good counsel there. Seats
of Instruction may be where seats of Justice are.

For the second, (...), the openings. It signifies,

1. The opening of a gate, or door. Keep the doors of thy mouth from her that
lies in thy besome, Mic. 7.5. Reveal, not thy secret thoughts to her. The
entrance of thy words gives light, Psalm. 119.30. That is, the opening of them.

2. A door of an house or tent. Abraham sat in the tent door, Genesis 18.1. Here
it is taken in the first sense, for justice is done, when gates are open, that
all may hear; and not when the gates are shut, and the people kept out. As
soon, or when the gates are open, especially for judgment, Wisdom speaks, as
some would have it; but the place it self is rather meant, as in the rest of
the verse.

She utters her words, Heb. she says her sayings. She uttetereth what she
has to say, (...). What her words are, appears afterward; words of Reproof,
and of Instruction.

(...), In the City. The word comes from (...), to awake, or stir up, because a
City is a building awaked, as it were, or stirred up out of the dust, as a man
out of sleep. It is put,

1. For the City it self. The men of the City, even the men of Sodom, Genesis
19.4.

2. For the inhabitants of the City. The Lords voice cries unto the City, Mic.
6.9. Here it is taken in the first sense, for a City, or chief place in a
Kingdom or Nation. Some take it all to be meant of the same place. Wisdom
cries without in the skirts of the City, within in the Streets, Marketplaces,
Courts, and any other place in the City where people meet. But I cannot
restrain it to Cities alone, but rather take it to be an elegant gradation of
heavenly Wisdom revealing it self by several degrees, first in the Villages,
then in greater Towns, after that in Market Towns, then in Shire-Towns, and
places of Judgment; and lastly, in Cities, the chief places in Kingdoms and
Nations.

Figures. She. A Prosopopeia, bringing in Wisdom her self as some great Queen
speaking to affect the more. Men's own words affect far more then other men's
relations of them. So Judge. 9.8. the Trees are brought in speaking. Or the
adjunct for the subject. Wisdom for wise men, godly Prophets, Apostles,
Ministers, or Christ himself, as verse. 20. Head, for chief place. A metaphor,
for streets have no heads. Tumults, or tumultuous persons, for concourse; the
effect for the cause; concourse breeds tumults. Gates, for the places of
Judicature; the subject place for the adjunct business done there.

Parts. Note 1. The agent, She, Wisdom.

2. A double act, cries, utters her words.

3. A threefold place, in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of the
gates, in the City.

Saying, is added in other letters to usher in the speech.

1. Doct. Common reproofs should be public. Wisdom reproves in the chief
places of concourse.

Reason 1. That gross sinners may be ashamed. Private reproofs will hardly
work shame in them. Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
Tit. 1.13.

2. That others may fear, even the stoutest of sinners. 1 Timothy 5.20. Them that
sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear. It is good to strike the Dog
before the Lion.

Use 1. To reprove faint hearted Ministers, who are more afraid to reprove then
others are to sin. Wisdom reproves here openly, verse. 22. So did Elias reprove
King Ahab, and John Baptist King Hered. And the Prophets reproved sinful
people. So God commands, Show my people their transgressions, and the house of
Jacob their sins, Isa. 58.1. If Ministers reprove but faintly, and by the by,
sinners are so sound on sleep that they will not be awaked. Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them rather, Ephesians. 5.11.

2. To reprove open sinners, that cannot endure open reproof. They would be
content that we should damn themselves and us by silence. When I say unto the
wicked, O wicked man, thou shall surely die, if thou do not speak to warn
the wicked from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his
blood will I require at thine hand, Ezekiel. 33.8.

2. Doct. Common instructions should be public. So are Wisdoms, v. 23. Jesus
went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, Mat. 4.23. I ever taught
in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in
secret have I said nothing, Joh. 18.20.

Reason. 1. To show that we are not ashamed of the Gospel, but profess it
openly, Romans 1.16.

2. That we are not afraid to suffer for it, if we be called thereunto. This
was Paul's resolution, I count not my self dear unto my self, so that I may
finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God, Act. 20.24.

Use. It condemns the enemies of the Gospel, that can bear any thing better
then a powerful preacher. These are Bats and Owls, that cannot endure the
light.

3. Doct. No place is unfit to do good in. Wisdom cries in City and Country.
Christ went about doing good, Act. 10.38. He taught at Jacob's Well, Joh. 4.6.
Among the Samaritans, Joh. 4.40.

Reason 1. Because God is in every place, and looks for some good from us there.

2. Because we are allowed to do evil in no place.

Use. It shows the folly of ignorant people, who think they may do what they
will, except they be in a Church.

4. Doct. Ignorant persons are inexcusable. For Wisdom cries to them in all
places. He that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be
beaten with few stripes, Luke 12.48. Christ will take vengeance on them that
know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Reason 1. Because Wisdoms voice is every where to be heard. In Villages,
Towns, etc. Yea, in places of greatest concourse to make men inexcusable. As
proclamations are made in great Cities to bind a whole Kingdom or Nation,
because all come there to Market, or may hear of them by such as come there, so
that no man can pretend ignorance.

2. Because no man is so ignorant, but acts sometimes against knowledge.

Use. It takes away the foolish plea of the people, that under means of
knowledge excuse all their sins by ignorance. Christ will say to them at the
day of Judgment, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, O thou wicked
servant; Luke 19.22. Thou heardest my word, but would be ignorant, therefore
thou art justly condemned.

5. Doct. Men may be known by their words. Wisdom utters her words, words
befitting her, savouring of wisdom. A good tree must bring forth good fruit,
and a good man speak good words, Matt. 12.33, etc. A treasure of wise thoughts
is in a wise man's heart, and he is willing to vent it, Mat. 12.35.

Use. Be wary of your words if you would be well esteemed. For by thy words
thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned, Mat. 12.37.

6. Doct. All opportunities must be taken to do good. Preach the Word, be
instant in season, out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. Ester takes occasion at a banquet
to set on foot her Petition for the good of Gods Church, Est. 5.7, etc.

Use. Lose no opportunity of doing good.

Verse. 22. How long ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners
delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge?
Here begin the words of Wisdom, and last to the end of the Chapter. In which
there is, 1. A reproof or expostulation, in this verse. 2. An exhortation to
repentance, v. 23. 3. A promise to enforce it, Ibid. 4. A variety of
threatenings, from v. 24. to v. 33. 5. The conclusion, v. 33.


For the first, the reproof. Wisdom begins with a great deal of earnestness,
as willing to persuade. She out of a Motherly affection bewails men's continued
errors, and kindly invites them to reformation. See the like, Psalm. 4.2. O ye
Sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? How long will ye love
vanity, and seek after leasing?

For the words.

How long. Ye have continued too long in these wicked courses. It is high time
to think of returning to God.

Ye simple ones. Wisdom does not tell others of their simplicity, who may tell
them of it again, but falls directly upon them, and calls them simple ones to
their faces. Wisdom cannot flatter. She chides those that keep childish
manners, when they be men. The word signifies such as are easily drawn to
believe any thing that comes into their heads, or that others suggest to them,
though never so erroneous. The simple believes every word, Prove. 14.15. See
for the word on v. 4.

Will ye love. Will ye be carried away with worldly vanities, as men in love?
It is a weakness to be simple, one to be in love with ones own simplicity is a
madness. Mala sua amare malorum ultimum est: For a man to love his own evils
is the worst of all evils. Sen.

Simplicity. The same word as before. See on v. 4.

And the scorners. See on v. 6. upon the word Interpretation, where we showed
that the word signifies to interpret, to speak cloquently, and to scoff at one
in scorn.

(...), Delight in. Count it a thing very pleasing to them to scoff at
goodness. So the word is used, Genesis 2.9. Every tree that is pleasant to the
sight. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief, Prove. 10.23. or desire it for
themselves, as Josh 7.21. Then I coveted them, Heb. Then I desired them for my
self. As if they thought it portion or religion enough for themselves to be
able to scoff at others. The word may signify either way here, or include
both; for the things we desire, when we want them, we delight in when we have
them. Yet delight being a fuller affection then desire, it is well translated
Delight in.

Their scorning, Heb. scorning for themselves. The former is usually expressed
by the affix. And the latter sometimes is a Pleonasmus, so that scorning for
themselves is no more then scorning. As Genesis 12.1. Get thee out of thy
Country, is no more then Go out of thy Country. Or it may be read, Delight
themselves in scorning* But it cannot be read, Desire themselves in scorning.
And the charge is then more full. Men may desire some things that they dislike
when they come to pass. But delighting in a thing, argues full content and
pleasure.

And fools. So (...) is translated. A foolish man despises his Mother, Prove.
15.20. Elsewhere it signifies a star, called Orion. Which makes Arcturus,
Orion, etc. Job 9.9. Because as fools are very inconstant, scarce an hour
together in one mind, so that star brings uncertain weather. Here it is taken
in the first sense. Fools are such as have an habit of folly or wickedness in
them, because they seek not after knowledge, as being above their capacity or
belief. Such as know not tre^ wisdom, though learned otherwise. Men that are
not righteous, that is, right wise, as the Saxons writ it. So Cicero, one of
the wisest of the Heathen, is reported to cry out at his death. O me nunquam
sapieutem! Alas! I was never wise.

(...), Hate. The word signifies,

1. To hate so as to seek ones destruction. Esau hated Jacob, Genesis 27.41.

2. To contemn, as men despise things hated. If the later husband hate her,
Deuteronomy. 24.3.

3. To love one less then another. When the Lord saw that Leah was hated, Genesis
29.31. that is, loved less then Rachel, verse. 30.

Here it is taken in the first sense, for hating knowledge. For threce sorts of
sinners are here reproved in three several degrees, like steps of a ladder,
where men step from the one to the other, and each step argues greater
wickedness then the former. It is bad to love simplicity, worse to scoff at
piety, worst of all to hate knowledge.

(...), Knowledge. See on v. 2. and 4. Figure none. Note 1. The charge of
simple ones. 2. Of scorners. 3. Of fools.


In the first note, 1. The persons accused, ye simple ones. 2. The act, will ye
love. 3. The adjunct of time, how long. Which also is understood in the other
parts. 4. The object, simplicity. A thing unworthy of any love.


In the second note, 1. The persons indicted, and the scorners. 2. The act,
delight in. 3. The object, their scorning. To wit, of goodness, which should
be honored.


In the third note, 1. The persons complained of, and fools. 2. The act, hate.
3. The object, knowledge, which deserves love.


Wisdom had long forborne them, before she did thus sharply reprove them.

1. Doct. Reproof must not be sharp at first. Such was Peter's reproof, 1 Pet.
4.3. The time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all, apt
to teach, patient, 2 Timothy 2.24.

Reason 1. To try if gentle means will prevail. So Phyficians give gentle
purges first. Of some have compassion, making a difference, Jude v. 22.

2. To show our love to the persons reproved, that our words may work the more
with them for their good.

Use. It blames them that are all vinegar, and cannot mingle kind words with
reproofs, that put no difference between weak, and obstinate sinners. Non sanat
qui vulnerat, non monet qui mordet: He heals not that wounds, he admonishes not
that bites.

2. Doct. Sharp reproofs must follow, if gentle ones will do no good. So here
Wisdom calls them simple ones, scorners, fools. The Pharisees are sharply
reproved by Christ, Woe unto you Scribes, and Pharisees, hypocrites, Matthew.
23.13. Elymas by Paul, O full of all subtilty, and all mischief, thou child of
the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, etc. Act. 13.10.

Reason 1. Because of their long continuance in sin. A hand hardened by labor
must be struck hard, before it can feel. Custom in fin hardens.

2. Because they stop their ears against goodness. He that is in danger of
death, and will not open his mouth to take physic, must have it poured down
his throat by violence.

Use. It blames those that have no vinegar at all in their reproofs, that
mildely reprove greatest and longest finners. Eli broke his neck for dealing so
mildely with his Sons, that were so wicked.

Here are three sorts of finners mentioned one above another.

3. Doct. There be degrees of finners, some worse then others, though all in
their natural estate be in the way to Hell. There are ungodly, sinners,
scorners, Psalm. 1.1. There are empty clouds, withered trees, raging waves,
wandering stars, Jude v. 12, 13.

Reason 1. Because corruption spreads more in some then in others, by their
giving more way to it, as poison spreads in the body where the joints are not
bound.

2. Some are more restrained then others by outward objects of fear and shame.
A fierce horse may be kept in by a bridle.

3. Some are more violently tempted then others, and therefore sin more, as an
horse spurred will run fast.

Use. It reproves those that are Pharisees in religion, that thank God they are
not like other men, Luke 18.11. These have but Sodoms justification, they are
not so bad as Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.51.

4. Doct. We are by nature so simple that we love simplicity. Man is born like
a wild Asses colt, Job 11.12. The Laodicean Angel flatters himself in his
ignorance, Rev. 3.17. being spiritually poor, he thinks himself very rich.

Reason 1. Because our simplicity is our own, and men love their own children.

2. Because naturally we know no better. The Moon is a fine light to him that
never saw the Sun. Mantua was a brave City to the shepherds that never saw
Rome. Virgil. Eclog 1.

3. Because we look in a deceitful glass, that makes things look more
beautiful then they are. And so simplicity seems lovely to us.

Use. Let us bewail our natural condition, that not only are simple, but love
simplicity. To be sick is ordinary, to love sickness is unusual, yet we love
simplicity.

5. Doct. Some are so bad that they scorn and scoff at all goodness. So
Sanballat and Tobiah scoff at the Jews buildings, Neh. 4.2, 3. Peter
prophesies of scoffers in the last days, that should scoff at the very coming
of Jesus Christ to judgment, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Such scoff,

1. At good men, because the good lives of them condemn their bad ones. This
moved one to give his vote to banish Aristides, Hoc tantum me male habet, quod
justus ubique audit. This only troubles me, that every man counts him a just
man.

2. They scoff at good Ministers, because they reprove their sins, and so
perplex their consciences.

Use. Let us expect sco^^. Others had trial of cruel mockings, Heb. 11.36.
Isaac the heir of Abraham, and Son of the promife, could not escape. Ishmael's
mocking Isaac is called persecution, Gal. 4.29. No, nor Christ himself the Son
of God. They laughed him to scorn, Mart. 9.24. Scorners have a chair, Psalm.
1.1. but it is but a chair of pestilence, as the Vulgar Translation reads it.

6. Doct. Some grow worse yet, so that they hate knowledge it self. Every one
that does evil hates the light, Joh. 3.20. They say anto God, Depart from is,
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job 21.14.

Reason 1. Rati^ne acquisition is laboriose. Men are idle, and Ioth to take
panss for knowledge.

2. Ratione propriae impletion is venenosae. They are full of bad liquor, and
have no room for good.

3. Because they know not the worth of it, else would they love it, and choose
it, v. 29.

4. Because it will not let them sin freely, but raises whirlewinds in their
consciences. The evil doer comes not to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, Joh. 3.20.

Use 1. Wonder not if some will not be won by long and powerful preaching.
They hate knowledge.

2. Take heed of the height of evil. They shut reprovers out of doors, as
naughty boys do Schoolmasters. Glem. Strom. l. 7. This damns many. They have
both seen and hated both me and my Father, Joh. 15.24. Wisdom is accused by
bad men, but justified by her children, Mat. 11.19.

Verse. 23. Turn you at my repreof; behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you,
I will make known my words unto you.
Wisdom having searched into their sores, and discovered their diseases to
them in the former verse. does now apply plasters to them, which may heal them.
After a short rebuke of their folly and contempt, she administers good counsel
in an exhortation. Having showed them that they were out of the way, now she
shows them how to get in again. She had blamed them before for staying so long
in wicked ways. Now she bids them turn speedily. And this exhortation is
backed afterward with threats and promises.

For the words.

(...), Turn you, or return. The word signifies,

1. To return to a place from which one went away before. Abraham returned unto
his place, Genesis 18.33.

2. To return from anger, or to be friends with one. Surely his anger shall
turn from me, Jer. 2.35.

3. To repent or return to God, from whom we are all naturally gone astray. And
shall return unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 30.2.

4. To do the same thing again. Isaac dug again (Heb. returned and dug)
the wells of water which they had dug in the days of Abraham his Father,
Genens chapter 26. v. 18.

5. To make to return, or bring back. Then the Lord thy God will turn thy
captivity, Deuteronomy. 30.3.

Here it is taken in the third sense, for turning from the ways of folly to
the ways of true wisdom, from Satan to God. A similitude taken from
travelers that are gone out of their way, or from children, servants,
soldiers, or scholars, that run away from their governors, and undo
themselves. So Hagar fled from Sarah, and is bidden to return, Genesis 16.6, 9.

(...), At my reproof. The word signifies,

1. Verbal reproving in words. Thus she was reproved, Genesis 20.16.

2. Real reproving, that is, correcting. Oh Lord, rebuke me not in thine
anger; that is, as follows, chasten me not in thy hot displeasure, Psalm. 6.1.
Here it is used in the first sense for the words of wisdom in the former versi
or such like. Seeing years have not brought you to discretion, nor ye have wit
enough to return from your evil ways of your selves, do it at my reproof.

(...), Behold. She puts a note of admiration before the promise, because
abundance of grace, especially in them, who have lived long in wick ednesse, is
a thing worthy to be wondered at by all, as it is for a Virgin to bear a Son.
Isa. 7.14. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son.

(...), I will pour out. It signifies abundance of grace to be given, as a
fountain poures out plenty of water. It notes great fullness in wisdom, and
great affection to others. I will willingly pour it out of a full heart, as
water out of a fountain. So abundance of folly and evil is poured out of a
wicked heart. The mouth of fools pours out folly, Prove. 15.2. The mouth of
the wicked pours out evil things, Prove. 15.28.

(...), My spirit. It signifies,

1. The wind. There came a great wind from the wilderness, Job 1.19.

2. Vanity, a thing of no substance, empty like the wind. What profit has he
that has labored for the wind? Eccles. 5.16.

3. A corner, or place, or quarter of the earth, where the wind may blow. In
four quarters were the porters, 1 Chronicles. 9.24.

4. The breath of a living creature, which is kind of wind. Neither is there
any breath in their mouths, Psalm. 135.17.

5. A Spirit or Angel. Then a spirit passed before my face, Job 4.15.

6. The soul of a man. The spirit of Jacob their. Father revived, Genesis 45.27.

7. The life. Thou have granted me life, Job 10.12.

8. The Holy Ghost the third Person in Trinity. The Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters, Genesis 1.2.

9. The gifts of the Holy Ghost. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, Joel
2.28. So it is taken here for spiritual graces. All three Persons are closely
mentioned in this chapter The Father, called the Lord, verse. 7. The Son, called
Wisdom, v. 20. The holy Ghost, called the Spirit, in this verse. Some take it
for illumination only, and gifts of knowledge. So it agrees well with the
words, that follow. I will make known my words unto you. If ye hearken to my
reproof, I will tell you more of my mind. Ye shall know more of heavenly
truths. So that pouring out of the Spirit is emptying of the soul, declaring
what Wisdom thinks, which is worth the knowing. And I will declare it as
fully, as if it flowed out of a fountain. Others take it for sanctifying gifts
of the Spirit. The former agrees best with the words following.

Unto you. By making my mind known unto you. By my words.

(...), I will make known. By pouring out my spir it, and declaring my whole
mind unto you.

(...), My words. It signifies,

1. A word. Hear the word of the Lord, Isa. 1.10.

2. A thing. For things are revealed by words. The thing proceeds from the
Lord, Genesis 24.50. Here it is taken in the first sense.

Unto you, Heb. I will make you to know my words.

The sum of all is. If ye will turn from your foolish ways to hearken to me,
I will fill you with true wisdom.

Not that men have power to repent of themselves, but these exhortations of
Gods Ministers set home by Gods Spirit, are means to bring sinners to
repentance.

Figures. Turn. A Metaphor from men out of the way, that must return or never
come to their journeys end.

Pour out. A Metaphor from a fountain that poures out water abundantly.

My Spirit. A figure of the cause for the effect. The gifts of my Spirit, or
meaning of it.

Note. 1. An exhortation. 2. A promise to encourage them.


He begins with a promise here, and ends with another, v. 33. and fills the
middle with threatenings.

In the exhortation note, 1. An act, Turn you. 2. The motive to it, at my
reproof.


The promise is double,

1. Of the Spirit. 2. Of knowledge.

In the first note, 1. The word of admiration, Behold. 2. The agent, I. 3. The
act, will pour out. 4. The object, my Spirit. 5. The subject, unto you.


In the second promise note, 1. The agent, I. 2. The act, will make known. 3.
The object, my words. 4. The subject, unto you.


1. Doct. Ministers must show the way of healing, as well as the disease, Isa.
1.4. with v. 16, 17. Ab sinful Nation, etc. Wash you, make you clean, etc.
Hos. 10.9. with v. 12. O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah,
etc. Sow to your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy, etc. Romans 3.9. with
v. 21. We have before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under
sin. But now the righteousness of God without the Law is manifested, 1 Pet.
4.3. with verse. 7. The time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought
the will of the Gentiles, etc. The end of all things is at hand, Be ye
therefore sober, and watch.

Reason 1. Because else they should be like Job's friends, Physicians of no
value, Job 13.4. Who cares for a Physician, that only can tell him, he must
die?

2. They could else do no good to men by their Ministry. He that tells a man
he is in the wrong way, or that the enemy comes upon him, and cannot guide him
in the right way, or to a safe tower, does no good.

Use. Let Ministers teach men, as to cast off solly, so to hearken to Wisdoms
voice to come out of by ways and darkness, unto the right way, and light.
Else they are like him that snuffs a lamp, and puts in no oil.

2. Dict. Reproof may turn some, that would never turn of themselves. The
Angels speech made the Israelites weep, Judge. 2.1, 4. Peter's speech pricked
the Jews to the heart, and made them cry out, Men and brethren, what shall we
do? Act. 2.14, 37.

Reason 1. Because we are naturally in sensible of our dangers, as a man near
death ost-times feels no pain.

2. We are not inquisitive after ways of escaping, as a madman never seeks to
a Physician. No suspicion, no inquifition.

3. Reproof rouzes up men's consciences, and makes them look about them, as a
roaring canon wakes a man out of a dead sleep.

4. It enflames their affections, and makes them to look after salvation. As
pain felt makes a man look after a Physician, that slighted him before.

Use. Let us highly esteem of reproofs (it may be we should have gone on
sleeping to hell else) So did David, Psalm. 141.5. Let the righteous reprove me,
it shall be an excellent oil. Giving ear to reproof is the high way to wisdom.
The ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise, Prove. 15.31.

3. Doct. Wonderful gifts are given by Gods Spirit. Therefore Wisdom faith,
Behold. See a catalogue of them, 1 Cor. 12.4, etc. Act. 2.17. etc. Gises of
knowledge, wisdom, healing, miracles, tongues, prophecy. See Abraham's
admirable faith, Heb. 11.9, 10. He had Canaan, yet like a stranger looked for
heaven. See Job's strange patience, Job 1. Wonder at David's hearty
thankfulness, whereof the Psalms are witnesses, and Solomon's vast wisdom set
out in his rare Proverbs. These could not grow in the Wilderness of corrupted
nature, and therefore must come out of a garden planted by Gods Spirit.

Use. Acknowledge God in the gifts of his servants. Nature, Art, Experience,
cannot produce those admirable effects, and gifts, which some men have
attained. Though days may speak, and multitude of years may teach wisdom.
Yet, there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding, Job 32.7, 8.

4. Doct. Abundance of spiritual gifts are given to believers. A fountain is
poured out on them. The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life, Joh. 4.14. This well is opened, Joh.
7.39. This spoke he of the Spirit which they that believe on him should receive.

Reason 1. Because the persons are many, yea many thousands. An hundred forty
and four thousand Israelites, besides an innumerable company of believing
Gentiles, Rev. 7.4, 9. And if every one had but one several gift, they must
needs be many.

2. Every one of these has many gifts, as knowledge, holiness,
righteousness, meekness, sobriety, patience, magnanimity, faith, hope,
charity, etc. All then must needs mount to an huge sum.

Use. Pray for abundance of spiritual gifts, they are the best treasure. Lose
nothing for asking.

5. Doct. They that will turn to God, shall not want the plentiful help of
Gods Spirit to direct them. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 7.17. The
Spirit of truth shall testify of me, Joh. 15.26.

Reason 1. Because they will pray for Gods Spirit, and God will give the Spirit
to them that ask it, Luke 11.13.

2. Because God is so free, that he gives the Spirit to them that go away from
him; as to Paul, Act. 9. Much more will he give it to them that return to him.
Christ that seeks the lost sheep, will give his Spirit to the returning sheep.

Use. It encourages men to turn to God, for then they shall have his Spirit for
their Instructor, Sanctifier, Comforter.

6 Doct. The Spirit and the Word must go together to guide. Both are joined in
this verse. The comforter shall bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever
I have said unto you, Joh. 14.26. The Spirits must be tried, whether they be of
God, 1 John 4.1. How shall that be known? By hearing Gods Word. Hereby know we
the Spirit of truth, and the spirit of error, 1 John 4 6.

Reason 1. Because else contradiction, untruth, double dealing, is put upon
God. For if his Word say one thing, and his Spirit another, he contradicts
himself, and must needs speak falsely in one of them, for contraries cannot be
true. If it be day, it is not night. If a man bid his servant before men to do
one thing, and whisper the contrary in his ear, Is not this double dealing?

2. Because there is no other sure way to distinguish between a true speaking
and a false speaking Spirit.

Use. It reproves those that cross the Word under pretense of the Spirit, and
revelation, and so set God at daggers drawing with himself, and make him
inconstant to say and unsay. God in his Word bids read the Scriptures, hear the
Word, says, Paul the great Apostle knew but in part. Men deny all these by the
Spirit. A lying spirit must it needs be, that contradicts Gods plain Word. To
the law, and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20.

Verse. 24. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hand,
and no man regarded.
In the two last verses, Wisdom has persuaded wicked men to repentance by
expostulations, exhortations, and promises; now she declares the miserable
estate of wilful persons, with comminations, menaces, and threatening. Seeing
notwithstanding the plenty of means, many would not get knowledge, Wisdom
threatens great mischiefs to them, and shows the cause to be their rejecting
wholesome counsels, diligently given to them. Here is a threesold threatening,
and all very sore.

1. Wisdoms derision of them in their miseries, verse. 24, 25, 26.

2. Her denying audience and help to them in their extremity, verse. 27, 28.

3. Self-destruction, without hope of repair, verse. 29, 30, 31, 32.

In the first threatening note, 1. Their obstinacy in finfull ways, verse. 24,
25. 2. Their heavy punishment, v. 26.


In the first she opposes their unkindnesse to her kindness, in four
particulars. Two in verse. 24. The other two in verse. 25.

In the first opposition note, 1. Her call, and 2. their relusing to come in.

In the second, Her stretching out her hand, and their disregarding it.

In the third, Her giving good counsel, and their despising it.

In the fourth, Her reproving them for their-evill ways, and their rejecting
it. She had been every way kind to them, and they were every way ungrateful
unto her.

For the words.

(...), Because. This word does not give a reason of what went before, but of
what follows after, to wit, of the destruction of ungodly men, spoken of v. 26.
It is a word used only in retribution of good or evil. Because thou have done
this thing, etc. in blessing I will bless thee, etc. Genesis 22.16, 17. Because
thou have defiled my Sanctuary, etc. I will also diminish thee, etc. Ezekiel.
5.11. The cause of the judgment is set down first, that Wisdoms kindness to
them, their unkindnesse to her, and the justice of their destruction might the
more sully appear, and so God get glory. So David gives glory to God, Against
thee, thee only have Isinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that thou
might be justified when thou speekest, and be vleer when thou judge, Psalm.
51.4.

I have called. See on verse. 21. There it siguified crying, here it notes
out-calling or inviting to come to Wisdom, that they might be instructed by
her, and obey her precepts.

And ye refused. Ye refused to come to me, that ye might hear, learn, and obey.

(...), I have stretched out. The word imports,

1. Holding out, or stretching out a thing at full length. I will redeem you
with a stretched out arm, Exodus 6.6.

2. To decline, or go downward. My days are like a shadow that declineth,
Psalm. 102.11. For shadows grow longer in the declining of the day, and then
suddenly vanish away. The day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are
stretched out, Jer. 6.4. Here it is taken in the first sense, for stretching
out.

(...), My hand. The word signifies,

1. That member of the body so called. Thine hand upon thine head, Jer. 2.37.

2. Strength, or power. When he sees that their power is gone, Heb. their
hand, Deuteronomy. 32.36.

3. Counsel and advice. Is not the hand of Joah with thee in all this? 2 Samuel
13.19.

4. A stroke or plague. Withdraw thine hand far from me, Job 13.21.

5. A place. Thou shall have a place also without the camp, Deuteronomy. 23.12.

6. Power over a thing, or poffession of it. Behold he is in thine hand, Job
2.6.

7. Action, which for the most part is done with the hand. He that has clean
hands, Psalm. 24.4.

8. An instrument, for the hand is the instrument of many actions. From men
which are thy hand, O Lord; or with thy hand, Psalm. 17.14.

9. Bounty. Besides that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty, 1 King.
10.13. Heb. hand. For men give with the hand.

10. Labor. Which is done by the hand. If a stranger wax rich by thee, Heb. if
the hand of a stranger get; that is, if he thrive by his labor.

The word is taken here literally, but the phrase is figurative. Stretching out
is literal, and hand is literal, yet stretching, out the hand is figurative.
So in the Sacrament of the the Lords Supper, This is my body, Mat. 26.26. This
is literal, and my body is literal, yet this is my body is a figurative
speech. The figure is not in the words severally, but in the joining of them
together in a sentence. Stretching out the hand imports,

1. To strike, or punish, for men stretch out the hand to give the greater
blow. I will also stretch out my hand upon Judah, Zeph. 1.4.

2. To call one to us. I stretch out my hands unto thee, Psalm. 143.6. As we
call on God to come to help us in our miseries, so Wisdom calls simple ones
here to come to her for help and instruction. As if she had said, Ye were as
deaf men, or men far off, that could not hear my voice; therefore I gave you a
figne to come to me. The meaning is, I left no outward means of calling you
uneffected.

And no man reguarded, Heb. and there was no regarder. Not, that none at all
did hearken to Wisdoms voice, but the generality did not. So Joh. 3.32. No man
receives his testimony. They that attended to it were as none in comparison of
the multitude who slighted it, or none of you regarded it.

Figures. Stretching out the hand, for beckening one to us. A figure of the
figne or adjunct, for the thing signified, or subject.

Note two charges in this verse.

In the first note, 1. The call. 2. The refusal. In the call note, 1. The
illative particle, Because. 2. The person calling, I. 3. The act, have called.



In the resusall note, 1. The persons resusing, and ye. 2. The act, refused.


In the second charge note, 1. The invitation. 2. The rejection.


In the invitation note, 1. The party inviting, I. 2. The act, have stretched
out my hand.


In the rejection note, 1. The party rejecting. And no man. Every one, or most
men rejected Wisdoms invitation. 2. The act, regarded. They gave no heed to it.


1. Doct. Threatenings follow lost exhortations and reproofs. Because Wisdoms
words are not regarded in this verse. therefore she threatens, verse. 26. This
method is observed, Deuteronomy. 8.11. with verse. 19. Destruction is there threatened
to those that forget Gods words. See the like, Deuteronomy. 11.26. where a blessing
and a curse is set before the people, according as they prove obedient or
disobedient.

Reason 1. Because God is willing to use many means of ture before he destroy
finners. The axe is laid to the root of the trees, before they be cut down,
Mat. 3.10. This is Gods method, to exhort, dissuade, threaten, before he
destroy.

2. He will not fight before he proclaim war, nor come as an enemy cowardly
before warning given, or behind a man's back. He threatens Nineveh before he
would destroy it, Jonah 3. Cur minatur Deus, antequam puniat? Sc. ne puniat.
Chrysostom. Minatur, ne caedat: He threatens that he may not strike. August.

Use. It is good to know Gods method or manner of proceeding in his Court, as
well as men's in their Courts. Men know not else how to prepare for trial, or
prevent danger, Threatening is the last help, if men slight that, the threatened
judgment will follow. Else God were not true, neither would his threats be at
all regarded.

2. Doct. Gods judgments never come without a cause. They never did so, as
appears,

1. In Gods letting man lose his image, who had so shamefully abused it. So
rebellious Citizens lose their privileges.

2. In laying the curse on man and his posterity. The ground is cursed for
Adam's fin, Genesis 3.17. So traitors and their posterity are tainted in blood,
and their lands confiscated.

3. In the destruction of the old world by the flood. The cause was, because
the earth was filled with violence, Genesis 6.13.

4. In the destruction of Sodom by fire and brimstone from heaven, because
their sin was very grievous, Genesis 18.20.

5. In Jerusalems destruction by the Romans, for killing the Prophets, Luke
13.34, 35.

6. In the ruin of the seven Churches of Asia, Rev. 2. and 3. Neither will
Gods judgments ever fall on any without just cause. The fall of Babylon will
be very just. Rev. 18.24. For in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth. So will the destruction of
Antichrist and Popery be most just, for deceiving many, Rev. 19.20. The end of
the world, and loss of all worldly comforts, Luke 17.26, 27. Hell it self will
justly fall upon unmerciful men, that relieve not the poor, Mat. 25.41, 42.

Use. Let us give God the glory of his justice in all his judgments. So does
the Psalmist sing, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments,
Psalm. 119.137. So the Emperor Mauritius confessed in the same words, when he
saw his children murdered before his face, and was himself after them to be
slain by Phocas. Many can do it in general, and for judgments on others, that
are loath to do it in their own case in particular. But Gods people stick not
to shame themselves, to honor God. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us confusion of faces, Dan. 9.7. The Lord is righteous, for I have
rebelled against his commandment, Lam. 1.18.

3. Doct. God calls us to repentance many ways.

I. By verbal ways; as,

1. By admonitions, showing us, we are out of the way. Ye have not obeyed my
voice. Why have ye done this? Judge. 2.2.

2. By reproofs, chiding them for their fin^. He makes them worse then Oxen and
Asses, and calls them a sinful nation, with other opprobrious names, Isa. 1.3,
4.

3. By dehortations, calling them from their finfull ways. Wash you, make you
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil, Isa. 1.16.

4. By disswafions, urging them by reasons to forsake their sins. I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God: wherefore turn
your selves, and live ye, Ezekiel. 18.31.

5. By threats terrifying them. I will not drive them out from before you, but
they shall be as thorns in your sides, Judge. 2. v. 3.

6. By promises alluring them. I should soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned my hand against their adversaries, Psalm. 81.14.

II. By spiritual ways. As,

1. By checks of conscience. Their conscience bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing one another, Romans 2.15.

2. By monitions of his Spirit. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: if any
man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with
him, and he with me, Rev. 3.20.

III. By real ways. As,

1. By examples. I ^btained mercy for a pattern to them which should hereafter
believe, 1 Timothy 1.16.

2. By judgments on others. Aholah is delivered into the hand of her enemies,
that Abolibah might be warned, Eze. 23.9, 10, 11. So Gods judgments on the
rebellious Israelites in the Wilderness are examples to us, upon whom the ends
of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. Belshazzar must be slain, because he knew
what befell his Father, yet repented not, Dan. 5.22.

3. By judgments on themselves. I have diminished thine ordinary ^ood, and
have delivered thee unto the will of them that hate thee, Ezekiel. 16.27.

4. By mercies. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love, and I was
to them, as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto
them, Hos. 11.4.

Use. Let us bewail the desperateness of our natural condition, whom none of
those calls will draw to God.

4. Doct. Many refuse Wisdoms call. Three grounds to one are naught, Matt.
13.4, etc. The invitation to the heavenly Kings Sons wedding is slighted by
those that were invited. But they made light of it, and went their ways, one
to his farm, another to his merchandise, Matthew. 22.5.

Reason 1. Because some are in love with their own inventions. This evil
people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in the imagination of their
heart, Jer. 13.10.

2. Because others are in love with worldly pleasures, profits, or preferments.

Use. Let us not follow the multitude in refusing Gods call. Say not, I will
not be fingular. Why should I regard it more then they? I shall escape as well
as my neighbors. Consider who calls. God, who is great and good, can and will
prefer thee. He may say more truly then Balak, Did I not earnestly send unto
thee to call thee? Wherefore came thou not unto me? Am I not able indeed to
promote thee to honor? Numb. 22.37. Consider to what he calls. To holiness,
which is most commendable; to happiness, which is most profitable. Follow
holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.

5. Doct. We are by nature far out of Gods way. A call will not be heard, nor a
beck regarded. They are all gone aside, Psalm. 14.3. They are all gone out of
the way, Romans 3.12. The Ephesians were once without God in the world, Ephesians.
2.12. Yea, the Fathers of the Patriarchs were Idolaters, Josh. 24.2.

Reason 1. Because we are gone clean out of hearing. We regard not Gods Word.

2. We are gone clean out of fight, which is further out of the way, for men
cannot hear so far as they can see. We regard not Gods works.

3. We are gone far in the ways of the world. The further in a by-way, the
further out of the highway.

4. We are gone far in the ways of Satan. The further men go in a contrary
way, the further are they out of the right way.

Use. Let us bless God the more for bringing us into the right way, when we
look upon other men's dangerous errors. Such were some of you, 1 Cor. 6.11. Yea,
all of us: We our selves, also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. Tit.
3.3. Such we should have been still, if God had not wonderfully reclaimed us.
Insult not then over others, but pity them, and pray for them, and thank God
heartily for reducing you.

6. Doct. The generality of men regard not the fignes, whereby God calls them
to repentance. They regard not outward means, as rain and fruitful seasons,
Act. 14.17. Jer. 5.24. nor the sending of Christ to save them. He was in the
world, and the world knew him not, Joh. 1.10. Not only strangers, but Jews
refused him. He came to his own, and his own received him not, Joh. 1.11.
Neither do the most receive the Gospel preached. The wise Athenians mock at it,
Act. 17.32.

Use. It informs us of the unsafenesse of following the generality. Most men go
in the broad way, and will lead their followers to hell. Wide is the gate, and
broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat, Mat. 17.13.

Verse. 25. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my
reproof.
Wisdom proceeds in setting down the cause of the great judgment threatened,
v. 26. which was obstinacy and perverseness in them, illustrated by her kind
dealing with them, and their ingratitude toward her, and contempt. This was
set out in two particulars in the former verse. Her call, and their refusing to
come; her beckening, and their disregarding. In this verse. it is amplified by
two more. She not only calls and beckens, but also gives good counsel, which
they set at naught. And when that was slighted, she chid and reproved them, as
she had just cause, but they would none of that neither.

For the words.

(...), But, Heb. And. Yet it is often translated But, and carries with it an
oppofition to what went before, with an aggravation. As chapter 10.14. Wise men lay
up knowledge, but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction. See the like,
chapter 12.12. and in most verses of that Chapter. So here, though ye refused to
come to me when I called you, and would not hearken when I made fignes to you,
yet I neglected nothing fit for me to do. I might have let you go on and
perish. But I was mo^e careful of you, then ye were of your selves. I came to
you, and gave you good counsel, which ye despised. Yet, I went further and
reproved you, but ye would not regard it neither. See more on chapter 2.22.

(...) Ye have set at naught. The word signifies,

1. To reject a thing, as esteeming it not worth the looking after, or
receiving. Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction, chapter
13.18.

2. To go back from a thing spoken, as if it were not worthy to be performed. I
the Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it; I will not
go back, etc. Ezekiel. 24.14.

3. To make one naked, and liable to shame, fit to be contemned. Aaron had made
the people naked unto their shame among their enemies, Exodus 32.25.

4. To revenge and destroy men, as esteemed not fit to live any longer. Praise
ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel, Judge. 5.2.

5. To make to cease, or to be idle Wherefore do ye Moses and Aaron let the
people from their works? Exodus 5.4.

Here it is taken in the first sense for rejecting a thing as vile. The Latins
call it despicere, to look down upon a thing as beneath us, lying on the
ground, and not worthy of a look from us; as on the contrary, suspicere, to
reverence, is to look up at a thing, as above us, and worthy of reverence from
us. We set a thing at naught, when out of contempt we never look after it.
Others press the word further, to the deriding of good counsel, but I doubt
whether the word will carry so much or no. And there be other words for that,
as (...), verse. 22. (...), verse. 26. Yet this implies more than bare refusing;
ye counted it of no value at all.

All. See on chapter 1.13.

My counsel. Some take it for advice, how to do well; and reproof, for
disswasion from evil. But Counsel here is to be taken for all the wholesome
precepts and admonitions given by Wisdom, whether to do good, or avoid evil.
And reproof is chiding men for not hearkening to counsel. I would by my
counsel have kept you from much evil, and done you much good. I showed you
how to escape hell, and attain heaven. But ye regarded not my counsel at all,
though given for your good. It is a fault to refuse good counsel given by any,
though by a simple man; but a greater fault to refuse Wisdoms counsel, which
always gives good counsel. It is a fault to refuse any of Wisdoms counsels, a
greater to refuse all.

And would none of, Heb. would not have. That is, ye rejected it, or ye
resolved not to obey it. Meiosis. Some stretch it further, to refusing to hear.
But the word properly signifies, to rest in a thing as well pleased with it,
and being willing to follow it. And here is intimated the not liking of
Wisdoms reproof, and resolving not to be amended by it. And this is more then
slighting it, or counting it a thing unprofitable.

My reproof. Neither counselling nor chiding would mend you. For the word see
on v. 23.

The sum is. Ye despised all my wholesome counsels which I gave you for your
good, and continued in bad ways that tend to destruction, that you might spend
your time unprofitably, and take no pains to get wisdom, and therefore ye must
needs perish.

Figures none. In the third charge note, 1. The note of oppofition, But. 2. The
parties accused, Ye. Ye simple ones, scorners and sools, v. 22. for all these
were guilty. 3. The act, have set at naught. 4. The object, counsel.
Aggravated, 1. From the giver, my. Wisdoms counsel. 2. From the extent, all.
Not some only. This is a great slighting of Wisdom, as if she spoke foolishly
always, and were not worthy to be heard at any time.



In the fourth charge note, 1. The note of conjunction, which shows it to be a
new charge, And. 2. The act, would none of. Ye utterly refused it. 3. The
object, my reproof.


1. Doct. Good counsel is profitable to men in it self. Else would not
Wisdom have blamed men for slighting it. Therefore Christ gives it to the
Angel of Laodicea. I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, etc.
Rev. 3.18. David praises God for it, though given him by a woman: Blessed be
the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee to meet me this day; And blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33. It is profitable,

1. To inform our ignorance. For no man knows always what is best for himself.
A stander by may see more then a Soldier, and give good warning.

2. To cure our heedlesnesse. Many of the faults of Gods servants come from
hence, and may by others good counsel be prevented.

3. To repair our falls; for we lie in sin sometimes till we be admonished by
others. Nathan tells David of his sin before he thought of repenting, 2 Samuel 12.

4. To comfort our souls. As it is an ease to let out our sorrows, like corrupt
matter, into our friends bosom, so to receive oil of consolation from them.

Use 1. It should make us willing to give good counsel. This they may give
that have no silver nor gold, and it is worth giving. And then may we say as
Peter in another case, Silver and gold have I none, but that which I have (good
counsel, which is better) give I unto thee, Act. 3.6.

2. It should make us willing to take good counsel. We would take good money
of any, why not good counsel, which is far better, though given by mean men?

3. It shows us the excellency of the Ministry, whose main end is to give good
counsel to miserable men, yea the best counsel. We love them that will show us
the way to live with comfort here, much more should they highly be esteemed,
that teach us the way how to live for ever. How beautiful are the feet of them
that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? Romans
10.15. It is also one of Christ's titles, he is called, Counselor, Isa. 9.6.

2. Doct. Though good counsel be very profitable, yet are some so bad, that
they will not take it. So Elie's Sons hearkened not to the voice of their
Father, 1 Samuel 2.25. So Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men, 1 King.
12.8.

Reason 1. Because of love of sin. Men love not them that speak against their
friends.

2. Because of custom in fin. This stops men's ears to good counsels.

3. For pride of heart. They think it a disparagement to be guided by others,
as if they were not wise enough to guide themselves.

4. For prejudice. Either they that counsel them are inferior, and so thought
not wise enough, nor good enough to advise; or such against whom they have
taken displeasure, and so think they speak out of ill will; or else they are
aged, and would have them grave before their time (as in Terence, Volunt nos
illico nasci senes; They would have us old men, as soon as we are born.) Or
lastly, they are Ministers, and would bring all under their girdle.

Use. Let us like good counsel the better, because many despise it. The
greater part are seldom good husbands for the world, much less for heaven.
Wicked men's despising Gods law, made David love it the more. They have made
void thy law, therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine
gold, Psalm. 119.126, 127.

3. Doct. It is a dangerous condition not to hearken to good counsel. Elie's
Sons not hearkening to the good counsel of their Father, was a sign the Lord
would stay them, 1 Samuel 2.25. So says the Prophet to Amaziah, I know that God
has determined to destroy thee, because thou have not hear^ened to my counsel,
2 Chr. 25.16.

Reason 1. Because it lays a man open to spiritual evils, a^ to hardness of
heart. My people would not hearken to my ^^yce, so I gave them up unto their
own hearts lust; and they walked in their own counsels. Psalm. 81, 11, 12.

2. It ^ayce a man open to temporal evils. So says Jeremy to Zedekiah, If
thou will not go forth to the King of Babylons Princes, th^n shall this City be
given into the hands of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and
thou shall not escape out of their h^^^, Jer. 38.18.

3. It brings death here, as it did to good Josiah. He was warned to avoid the
danger, but would not, 2 Chronicles. 35.21, etc.

4. It brings eternal death, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. They that obey (...) the Gospel,
must perish for ever.

Use. It reproves those that not only are naught of themselves, but also so bad
that they are past all good counsel. They lay themselves open to many rocks
and quicksands. Their condition is very bad, and well-nigh desperate.

4. Doct. Reproof, although it seem rough, is very profitable. David desires it
as an excellent oil, Psalm. 141.5. Paul requires it for a good end, Rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, Tit. 1.13.

Reason 1. Because it is a glass to show us our sins, when we cannot see them
our selves, nor admonition will not make us look into our selves. If a Fathers
telling will not serve, he must chide.

2. It is a bridle to keep us from sin for time to come, when no warning will
serve. For it carries anger with it in the reprover, and shame in the reproved.

Use. Let us not be offended at reprovers, but love them. Reproofs may work,
when promises, exhortations, admonitions will not.

5. Doct. Though reproof be very profitable, yet many regard it not. Vzziah was
wroth, when reproved by the Priest, 2 Chr. 26.19. The Jews regarded not
Isaiah's reproof, Isa. 1.4, 5. Asa was wroth with the reproving Seer, and puts
him into prison, 2 Chr. 15.10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate, Amos
5.10. Ahab cries out to Elijah, Have thou found me, O mine enemy? 1 King.
21.20. Nulli grata reprehensio. Reproof is a bitter pill, it goes down with few
men.

Reason 1. Because it is a kind of disgrace unto them, and an accusation of
folly. Had they done well, they needed not to have been reproved.

2. It crosses their decrest sins, and men cannot abide to be crossed in what
they love.

Use. Let us show our selves wise men, by looking rather, what is profitable
for us, then what is pleasing to us* Intemperate persons feed on ill meats, and
die; sober men forbear, and live. So must we in spiritual things. Look on
reproofs as profitable, look off the bitterness of them, and be amended by
them.

6. Doct. It is a dangerous condition to reject all reproofs. Poverty and shame
shall be to him, that refuses instruction, but he that regards reproof shall
be honored, chapter 13.18. If the ear that hears the reproof of life, abides
among the wise, Prove. 15.31. then he that rejects it, must dwell among fools.

Reason 1. Because then Gods Word has delivered them over to Gods sword, which
is very sharp. If Gods Word be sharper then any two edged sword, Heb. 4.12.
(which yet can kill a man) how sharp is Gods sword then?

2. Such a man may take David's oath safely, As the Lord lives, there is but a
step between me and death, 1 Samuel 20.3. Nothing but some heavy judgment
between him, and hell. Little else likely to recover him. He is like a man at
Sea, some three inches from death.

Use. It blames them that think they are safe, because no reproof will stir
their conscience. This is their misery, not their liberty. No Canon will make a
dead man afraid, yet a living man is far better. No danger will fright a mad
man; yet a man in his wits is in a far better condition. Hearken then to
reproof, that ye may live in safety.

Verse. 26. I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your sear
comes.
The causes of their miseries were expressed before, the grievousnesse thereof
is expressed in these words, and those that follow. They should be
comfortless, helpless, and ruined. God would show himself righteously
unmercifull to them. They had despised calls, becks, counsels, reproofs, and
God would despise them in their miseries.

For the words.

(...), I. The Pronoune is added in the Original, for Emphasis sake, which
else needed not, as being included in the verb. I, even I will laugh. Not only
men your enemies, but (which is far more grievous) I the wisdom of God will
deride you.

(...), Also. It imports a proportionable revenge. Ye scorned good counsel, and
I will laugh at your calamity. This particle doubled, imports,

1. A distribution. Neither by Prophets nor by dreams, 1 Samuel 28.15.

2. A conjunction of two things together. Both the Prophet and the Priest, Jer.
14.18.

3. A comparison of things in a way of likeness or equality. As Babylon has
caused the slain of Israel to fall; so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all
the earth, Jer. 51.49.

4. An augmentation or increase of a thing. Neither heretofore nor since thou
have spoken unto thy servant, Exodus 4.10.

(...), Will laugh. The word signifies,

1. Slighting of a thing. He scorneth the multitude of the City, Job 39.7.

2. Smiling upon one in good will. If I laughed on them, they believed it not,
Job 29.24.

3. Jesting or being in sport. Whether he rage, or laugh, Prove. 29.9.

4. Dariding or laughing to scorn. He that sits in the heavens shall laugh;
the Lord shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2.4. So it is taken here. Some by
Gods laughing understand the pleasure that God takes in the execution of his
justice upon wicked men. But it rather intimates Gods strange carriage toward
them, then any content in God. The anger of Wisdom comes from upbraiding unto
threatening. Some take it for not pitying them in their misery, as men pity not
those whom they laugh at. For God has no face to laugh. Ridere Dei est nolle
hu^anarum afflictionum misereri. Greg. Moral. l. 9. c. 15. Gods laughing is not
pitying men's afflictions. A similitude from Men. It is a misery to be in
trouble, but a double misery to be laughed at by them who only can help. Others
take it for deriding or slighting their counsels or projects for delivery, and
leaving them helpless. Others take it for bringing them into so miserable a
condition, that they should be a derision, and made a laughing stock to all
men. But this is somewhat far fetched. It is taken here for forsaking them
utterly, and having no more compassion on them, then men have on one going to
execution, when they laugh at him, and make sport at his torments.

At, Heb. In. But sometimes it notes the object or cause of a thing. That they
die not in their uncleanness, Lev. 15.31. it, for their uncleanness. So here
God will laugh, not only in the time of, but at their calamity. Your trouble
shall be my joy.

Your. Your calamity, who refuse all good counsel.

Calamity, (...). The word literally signifies a cloud, or mist, as in a dark
day. There went up a mist from the earth, Genesis 2.6. Figuratively, it signifies
calamity and affliction, which is uncomfortable and troublesome, like a foggy
misty day. The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hastes
Jast, Jer. 48.16. So here it fignifies affliction so sore that it darkens men
like a cloud, and affords them no light of comfort, or hope of delivery.

(...), I will mock. The meaning is, that as he that mocks another casts his
former courses in his teeth with contempt, so God in their miseries will cause
them to think of all their evil ways with shame. This is a further addition
to their misery.

When, Heb. (...), in the coming of.

(...), Your fear. The word signifies,

1. Fearing, or the act of fear. The fear of the Lord fell upon all the
Kingdoms, 2 Chr. 17.10.

2. The person feared. Jacob swear by the fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis 31.53.

3. The thing or evil feared. Be not afraid of sudden fear, Prove. 3.25. So it
is taken here. Wicked men are afraid of trouble, death, loss of goods, and
life; and all these things shall come upon them. Which because it will be
terrible unto them, and make them sore afraid, it is called by the name of fear
it self. So Job 39.22. He mocketh at fear.

(...), Comes. The word signifies,

1. Coming to a place. When we came to the Inn, Genesis 43.21.

2. When it is spoken of the Sun, it signifies the setting of it. Because the
Sun was set, Heb. came, Genesis 28.11.

3. When spoken of a Woman, it signifies carnal copulation. A modest
expression. After David had gone in to Bathsheba, Psalm. 51. in the title.

4. When it is spoken of days, it signifies old age. Abraham was old, and well
stricken in age, Genesis 24.1. Heb. come into days. See the marg. there.

5. When it is spoken of words, it signifies the fulfilling of them. Where is
the Word of the Lord? let it come now, Jer. 17.15.

6. When it is spoken of Corn, and Fruit, it intimates the gathering of them.
Ye bring in little, Hag. 1.6. Heb. ye have made little to come.

7. When it is spoken of a congregation, or society of men, it notes admission
into, as a member to enjoy all the privileges of it. A Moabite shall not enter
into the congregation of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 23.3.

8. When it is spoken of a Covenant, it signifies making of it, or accepting of
it. Which had entered into the covenant, Jer. 34.10.

9. When of going to Fathers, it signifies dying. Thou shall go to thy Fathers,
Genesis 15.15.

10. When it is joined with going out, it signifies administering an office in
the Commonwealth, Church, or Family. Which may go out before them, and which
may go in before them, Numb. 27.17.

11. When it is spoken of a thing without life, it notes the coming to pass of
a thing. There came a great wind, Job 1.19. So here. When those things ye fear
shall come upon you.

Figures. Laugh at, a Metaphor taken from Scorners. Calamity, a Metaph. from a
Mist. Mock, a Metaph. Fear, a Metonymie of the adjunct for the subject. Comes,
a Metaphor from living creatures.

Note a double threatening in this verse.

In the first note, 1. The word of coherence, Also. 2. The agent, I. 3. The
act, will laugh. 4. The cause, or object, at your calamity.


In the second note, 1. The act, I will mock. 2. The adjunct of time, when your
fear comes. In the time of your misery.


1. Doct. God pays wicked men in their own kind. Ye slighted my counsels,
and I will slight your miseries. The old world was destroyed by a flood of
water, for a flood of sins. Sodom by fire, for fiery lust. Egyptians children
slain, for slaying the Israelites Children. Joseph's brethren hardly used for
using him so. So they confess that was the cause of their distress, Genesis
42.21. So Adonibezek that cut off the thumbs and great toes of threescore and
ten Kings, had his own cut off, and confesses, As I have done, so God has
requited me, Judge. 1.7. So Shallum and Pekah Kings of Israel, flew their
predecessors, and were slain by their Successors, 2 King. 15. As David defiled
Vriah's Wife, so Absalom defiles his Concubines, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11.

Reason 1. That God may clearly declare his own justice before all men.

2. That men may clearly see their own fin written, as it were in their
punishment.

3. That men in greatness and power may take heed of wronging others, lest God
should set up others to pull down them.

4. To set a pattern of doing justice before Magistrates, as God did in his
Law. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. Eye
for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, etc. Exodus 21.24.

Use. It serves to teach men that complain of hard dealing from others, to look
back and see if they have not dealt ill with others in the like kind.
Ministers complain of peoples not hearkening to them: Have they hearkened to
God? Magistrates complain of Subjects breaking their laws: Have they not broken
Gods law? Parents complain of Children slighting their words: Have not they
slighted Gods Word? Masters cry out of the falsehood of Servants: Have not they
been false to God? Let such as are guilty, give glory to God, who has paid
them in kind. (...)? Euripid. Orest. Should not they that act heavy things,
suffer heavy things? Non est injuria pati, quod prior feceris. Sen. de ira, l.
2. c. 30. (...). It is fit a man should suffer what he does. Pindar. Nom. 4.
See Isa. 33.1. Qui praedam vult esse merito fit praeda: He that will eat the
prey, deserves to be made a prey. Aug. in Ps. 38.

2. Doct. God himself will show himself an enemy to ungodly men. His anger will
consume obstinate sinners. Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Upon the wicked he shall rain
snates, fire and brimstome, and a horrible tempest; this shall be the portion
of their cup, Psalm. 11.6.

Reason 1. Because God hates wicked men, and that heartily also. The wicked,
and him that loves violence, his soul hates, Psalm. 11.5.

2. He denounces a perpetual war against them. The Lord has sworn, that the
Lord will have war with Amalek, from generation to generation, Exodus 17.16.

3. Nothing will sat is fi^ him but their utter destruction. I will utterly put
out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven, Exodus 17.14.

4. After their death he will never be reconciled to one wicked man, no not to
eternity. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.

Use. To reprove such as flatter themselves in their wicked ways, under hope
of mercy from God, while they continue in those ways that God hates. Who would
have so wise and powerful an enemy? Nothing can follow but nertain
destruction. For our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12.29.

3 Doct. God will take no more pity of wicked men in their sorrows, then men
that laugh at other men's miseries. I will dash them one against another, even
the Fathers and the Sons together, says the Lord. I will not pity, nor spare,
nor have mercy, but destroy them, Jer. 13.14. He bids his servant lay load on
Babylon: Reward her even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double,
according to her works; in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double,
Rev. 18.6.

Reason. 1. Because God is immutable. He hates wicked men, and cannot affect
them, if they live and die so. It is against his nature.

2. His decrees concerning the end of wicked men are for eternity. He has
preordained all their misery, and cannot alter.

Use. It shows the vileness and venomous nature of sin, and abominablenesse of
it, that provoken the great God, that has more pity in him then all Angels and
men, so to be displeased, that when the creature shall be in misery, he will
let it abide so for ever, and show it no more pity in hell then they that laugh
at men in their miseries. Quod Deus loquitur cum risu, tu legas, cum fletu: If
God laugh, thou have good cause to cry. August. It makes God merry at his
creatures misery, who otherwise delights in mercy, Mic. 7.18. Trap.

4. Doct. God will cast wicked men's sins in their teeth in their miseries. Ye
have forsaken me, and served other gods; wherefore I will deliver you no more.
Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time
of your tribulation, Judge. 10.13, 14. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him
will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 10.33.

Reason 1. Not that God will vouchsafe to speak to them in hell, but will cause
all their sins to come into their memory; which is as much as if he from heaven
told them of them, Psalm. 50.25.

2. Not only their memories shall bring them to their remembrance, whether
they will or no, but God will also sit in their consciences, and check them to
eternity. The conscience shall never lose his force. Excuse it cannot in hell,
therefore it will accuse for ever.

Use. Think of this ye that live in sinful courses, your fins will never be
obliterated. God will upbraid you to eternity. Men are ashamed to be mocked a
few days; how much more for ever?

5. Doct. Wicked men live in fear. Through the fear of death they are all their
life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15. I will send a faintness into their
hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase them, Lev. 26.36. A
dreadful sound is in his ears, Job 15.21.

Reason 1. Because they think every thing threatens death to them, which
besides the pain of it, is the Iosse of all good had and hoped for.

2. Their conscience tells them of, and makes them fear evil after death, even
hell it self.

Use. See now if many wicked men be not gross hypocrites. They speak stoutly,
and brag, as if they were the most fearlesse men in the world; yet God that
knows their hearts, pronounces them timorous creatures. Tuliius Hostilius
worshipped Fear and Palenesse. Lact. Institut. Cataline was afraid at any
sudden noise. Salust. Richard the third, after the murder of his Nephews, could
never sleep in quiet. Daniel Chron. Nor Charles the nineth after the Paris
Massacre. Thuan. These Tyrants became more terrible to themselves then ever
they were to others. Trap.

6. Doct. That which wicked men fear, will certainly come upon them. The Romans
did come and destroy Jerusalem, as the Jews feared, Joh. 11.48. The fear of the
wicked it shall come upon him, Prove. 10.24. I will bring their fears upon them,
Isa. 66.4.

Reason 1. Death will certainly come, which is most terrible to wicked men.

2. Hell will certainly come, with which their conscience frighteth them here.

Use. It shows the gross self-flattery that is in ungodly men. They make us
believe they fear not evils, and are confident they will never come on them,
but they are deceived in both. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant
with death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, it shall not come unto us: Your covenant with death shall
be disanulled, and your agreement with hell shall not stand, when the
overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it,
Isa. 28.15, 19.

Verse. 27. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as
a whirlewind, when distress and anguish comes upon you.
Wisdom comes now to a second judgment to be denounced against fools, that
despise instruction. And that is helplesnesse. They shall cry to her for help,
but all in vain. She will not hear, v. 28. The judgment is set down,

1. By the cause of their crying, to wit, the greatness of their misery, and
grievousnesse of their punishment, in this verse.

2. By the fruitlesnesse of it. They should cry in vain, and to no purpose,
verse. 28. The cause of their cry, and grievousnesse of their punishment, is set
out by sour similitudes.

1. From an enemy or flood, that sweeps all away.

2. From a whirlewind, which none can resist.

3. From bands that gird in a man, and pain him so as he cannot get out, or
from a besieged City.

4. From a disease that cleaves to a man, so that he cannot be rid of it. For
the words.

When your fear comes. See on verse. 22. it is called their fear, because they
should have feared it, or did fear mischief in general, though they went not
the right way to work to prevent it. Hereby is meant especially death, for many
wicked men fear not hell, though that be most to be feared. See on verse. 26.

(...), As desolation. The word signifies an utter laying waste of a Country in
war by an Army of Soldiers, who lay heaps upon heaps, and leave not a stone
upon a stone, Matt. 24.2. or by a flood or storm coming with a great noise and
violence, and suddenly carrying all before it. Therefore shall evil come upon
thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises, and mischief shall fall upon
thee, thou shall not be able to put it off, and desolation shall come upon thee
suddenly, which thou shall not know, Isa. 47.11. They came upon me as a wide
breaking in of waters, in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me, Job
30.14.

And your destruction. The same word that was transsated calamity, v. 26.

Comes. See on v. 26. This v. expounds the end of the last verse. before.

(...), As a whirlewind. Suddenly, and irresistibly, and with a terrible noise,
and fragor. It comes from a word that signifies to be consumed, or ended. It
sets out a violent wind, that blows all away before it like chafe, and
consumes it. Hereby is intended death taking away all those lovely things,
which men have been so long working for, and gotten with so much sweat. Sudden
death like a grievous whirlewind will blow them out of the world. Some take it
for a tempest at Sea, that rises suddenly after a long calm, when men are
secure, and lifts the waves up and drowns the ship. Aquila takes it for an
earthquake; and that suddenly shakes the earth it self, and throws down
Houses, and Castles, and swallows up men alive in the bowels of the earth.
However, it sets out an unlooked for, and unavoydable judgment.

(...). When distress comes. It comes from a word that betokens to keep in,
straiten, or besiege a man or a City, so that men have not room enough to
breathe, or to get things necessary, Isa. 29.2, 3. It imports any great grief
or trouble of mind, whereby the heart is as it were straightened, and kept in,
and oppressed. When ye are so distressed with troubles, that ye are straightened
like men in a narrow way, in great danger, yet finding no way to get out.

(...), And anguish. It comes from a word that fignifies cleaving fast to one,
like a disease that cannot be parted from the body, though it pain a man sore.
An evil disease (say they) cleaves fast unto him; and now that he lies, he
shall rise up no more, Psalm. 41.8. It may be meant of bodily pain. Some think
that both these words signify the same thing, and two words of the same
signification are used to heighten the signification, and to signify extreme
trouble, great fear and grief shall accompany your Iestruction and death. As if
one word were not sufficient to set out the horror of it. See the like, Job
14.10, 11, ^^. Where death is set out in diverse phrases. So many words and
similies are used here to show the grievousnesse of their destruction. It is
called fear, because it will make them sore afraid. Desolation suriously
breaking in upon them. Destruction making an end of them. A whirlewind blowing
away not only light things, as chafe, but also blowing down trees, houses,
and strong buildings. Anguish and distress grievously afflicting both soul and
body, and all to show how sharply God will proceed against impenitent sinners.
As if an enemy came with a noise to destroy a City, or a great house fell by a
hideous earthquake, with a terrible noise, or a ship sunk in a raging storm, or
the corn were smote down with hail, or floods overran all the fields: So
terrible will the destruction of wicked men be.

Upon you. On you simple ones, scorners and fools, v. 22.

Figures. Comes, Befalls you. A Metaphor, attributing a living action to a
dead thing, as Job 1.19. There came a great wind from the wilderness.

The misery to come upon these wicked ones, is set out, 1. Literally. 2. By
similitudes.


In the first note, 1. The object, When your fear. 2. The act attributed to it,
comes.


The similitudes are taken, 1. From a Country laid desolate, as desolation. 2.
From things thrown down by a tempest. And in it, 1. The misery, and your
destruction. 2. The act, comes. 3. The manner, as a whirlewind.



The third fimilitude may be taken from a body straightened, or a City besieged,
when distress.

The fourth from a painful disease cleaving to a man, And in it, 1. The evil,
anguish. 2. The act, comes. 3. The object, upon you.


As if it came down from heaven by the hand of God, who will lay on load as an
enemy invading you.

The points we shall handle, shall be only of the conditions of wicked men's
destruction, as they naturally arise out of the former similitudes. Enemies lay
a place desolate quickly. Tempests soon throw down trees and houses.

1. Doct. The destruction of wicked men shall be sudden and unexpected. Sodoms
destruction was in a Sun-shiny morning when they expected comfort, but were
soon destroyed. Genesis 19.23, etc. The Israelites in the Wilderness were
destroyed while the meat was in their mouths, Psalm. 78.30, 31. So the old World
was unexpectedly destroyed. They did eat, they drank, they married wives, they
were given in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark, and the
flood came and destroyed them all, Luke 17.27. Nebuchadnezzar's casting down,
came suddenly, Dan. 4. and Belshazzar's death, Dan. 5. When they shall say,
Peace, and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Reason 1. Because their sins hinder them, and blind them so, that they cannot
see the danger, till it be upon them.

2. Their businesses hinder them, and leave them no time to think of danger.

3. Their pleasures so content them, that no fear of alteration can sink into
them many times, and then lightly danger comes.

4. Their hearts will not let them think of danger, but soon cast out such
thoughts, lest they make them melancholy.

Use. 1. Let not wicked men flatter themselves. Danger may be nearest when they
think it farthest off. It is more terrible to perish suddenly then by degrees.
Trees, houses, ships, that are strong are suddenly overthrown by a rising wind.
As the whirlewind passes, so is the wicked no more, Prove. 10.25. Thou breakest
the ships of Tarshish with an East wind, Psalm. 48.7.

2. Let them prepare for a better condition. They know not how soon they may
lose this. Who would live a Tenant at will, that may get a Lease of years, or a
Fee-simple? Make sure of heaven quickly, and then all will be well.

2. Doct. The destruction of wicked men is irresistible. Who can refist a
strong invading enemy, or a whirlewind? And what will ye do in the day of
visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye
flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? Isa. 10.3. Therefore shall
evil come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises, and mischief
shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off, and desolation
shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou shall not know, Isa. 47.11.

Reason 1. Because their destruction comes from God, whose power and wisdom no
man can resist.

2. He can go beyond all their power and wisdom, though the greatest that is
or can be in any or all the creatures.

3. He can disappoint all their friends, and all supplies.

4. He can set all creatures against them. And how can the strongest creature
resist all other in heaven, earth, and hell?

Use. It shows the great misery of ungodly men, they cannot resist destruction.
If an enemy come into a Land, or besiege a City, if there be force enough to
resist, destruction will not follow; else all will be laid waste. Wicked men
cannot resist God, therefore they must needs perish.

3. Doct. The destruction of wicked men shall be total, or universal. An
enemy lays all waste, Cities, Houses, Gardens. A whirlewind or flood sweeps
all away.

Reason 1. It appears in particulars. Their credit will be gone. Not only
their good name shall decay, but their name it self shall be lost, as a rotten
thing stinks and wears away. The name of the wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7.
Their goods shall be gone. Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee; then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? Luke 12.20.
Yea, Cujus eris tu? Whose shall thou be? says Bernard. Their life shall be
lost. Whosoever shall save his life (by sinful ways) shall lose it, Mat.
16.25. Yea, their soul and all shall be lost. What is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.

2. By the causes of it. Their fins are universal. Their thoughts, words,
deeds, altogether sinful. Humors that run over all the body, make all the
body sick. They sin against all Gods commandments, and that wilfully and
constantly, and therefore must perish wholly.

Use. Let wicked men labor to get out of this condition. A man would be loath
to live in a trade wherein he should get nothing, more loath to live in a
calling wherein he were sure to lose all, and spend his stock. This is the
wicked man's condition, get out of it, else ye perish totally.

4. Doct. The destruction of wicked men will be irrecoverable. Such was the
destruction of those two rich fools, Luke chapter 12. and 16.

Reason 1. Because they are carried clean out of the world. Here a man may be
poor one day, and rich another; after this life, poor once, and poor for ever.

2. They are carried to hell immediately after death, and out of hell is no
redemption.

Use. Take heed of impenitency, lest it bring you to irrecoverable punishment.
Bajazet the great Turk could say, Resipiscentia sera nulli unquam profuit: Too
late repentance never did any man good. Men inclining to a dropsy or
consumption, will seek for cure before it grow incurable. Repent in time, lest
ye perish for ever. Ad Deum redeundum, aut per Deum pereundum. Return to God,
or perish by God.

5. Doct. The destruction of wicked men will be miserable. Such was the
destruction of old Babylon, Jerem. 49.25, etc. A sword upon men and beasts.
Such of new Babylon, Rev. 18.7, etc. Torment, death, mourning, famine, etc.

Reason 1. Because it is helpless condition. Evil men cannot help others, if
they would, for they are in the same danger, and need help themselves. Good men
would not help them if they could, because they are Gods enemies, devoted by
him to eternal destruction.

2. It is a comfortless condition. No ease or comfort will be afforded to
them. Not a drop of cold water to cool the tongue, Luke 16.24.

Use. Let us bless God, that frees us from so great a destruction, which we
have deserved as much, yea more then many that are in hell. Should not we
praise God for deliverance from so a great a destruction, who are in the same
condenmation? Luke 23.40.

6. Doct. The destruction of ungodly men is lamentable. Jeremy takes the
destruction of the people so to heart, that he wishes his head a fountain of
waters, and himself in a wilderness, to weep his belly full alone, without
interruption, Jer. 9.1, etc. Kings and Merchants must weep and lament for the
downfall of Babylon, Rev. 18.9, 11. See the truth of it in two glasses, one
here, the other hereafter. The one in the Egyptians, who had dominatered over
the Israelites, yet at last the Israelites see them swimming dead on the Sea,
Ex. 14. The other in hell, where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched, Mar. 9.44. This causes weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12.

Use. Remember the woe to them that laugh now, their state shall be lamentable,
Luke 6.25. Wicked men's joy terminates in this world. Better weep for sin here,
then for punishment in hell.

Verse. 28. There shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me early, but they shall not find me.
Wisdom having set out their misery before, now removes all help from them in
their misery. And their anguish is increased by the fruitlesnesse of their
prayers. A sad condition to be miserable and helpless, yet a most just
punishment, that they that would not hear God, should not be heard of God. Ye
heard the cause of their crying in the last verse, extremity of misery, now ye
have the fruitlesnesse of it in this verse.

For the words.

(...), Then, In that moment when they see their destruction coming upon them.
I called in their prosperity, and they would not hear. They shall call in their
adversity, and I will not hear. There is both an Emphasis in that particle, and
an Antithesis. Now I call, and they will not hear. Then they shall be glad to
call to me, but I will not hear. When their hearts are full of distress and
anguish, then their tongues shall be compelled through extremity of torment and
danger, to cry to me.

They. They, who have thus slighted me. Which slighting Wisdom takes so
unkindly, that she will no more speak to them in all the Chapter. Only, she
tells other men what shall become of them. She speaks not in the second person,
as before, but changes it to the third. No more ye, but still they; speaking at
a distance, as if they were unworthy to be spoken to directly any more.

Shall call. They shall pray for help. For the several significations of this
word, See on v. 21.

Upon me. Whom they would not hear before.

But. See on v. 25.

(...), I will not answer. This word signifies,

1. To speak, or begin a speech. And Job spoke and said, Job 3.2.

2. To cry out, or speak aloud. And the wild beasts of the Islands shattery,
Isa. 13.22.

3. To sing. Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving. Sing praise, Psalm. 147.7.

4. To speak for or against one, or bear witness. Thou shall not bear false
witness, Exodus 20.16.

5. To hear what is said, or regard it. Behold, I ery out of wrong, but I am
not heard, Job 19.7.

6. To give an answer to what is said. Then answered Bildad, Job 8.1.

7. To grant what is desired, which is a real answer. They cried, but there
was none to save them; even unto the Lord, but he answered them not, Psalm.
18.41.

8. To be afflicted. I was greatly afflicted, Psalm. 116.10.

Here it is taken in the seventh sense. I will not grant what they pray for, so
that they shall pray to no purpose, and without success. And none else can
help them, therefore their case is desperate, and they must needs perish, being
forsaken both of God and men.

(...), They shall seek me early, Heb. They shall seek me in the morning. For
then comes the light, by the benefit whereof things sought for may be found
out. They shall seek me not coldly nor faintly, but as diligently, as men that
rise betimes in the morning, as soon as they can see, to seek somewhat lost.
The greatness of their distresses shall make them to seek me quickly, very
diligently and carefully, they shall spare for no pains, they shall break their
sleep in the morning to do it. So diligent men use to seek things they would
find. So the Israelites went early in the morning to seek for Manna. They
shall seek me diligently, as men that begin in the morning betimes, and hold on
till night.

But. See on v. 25.

They shall not find me. They shall not find me gracious and merciful unto
them in the time of their perplexities. Seeking here is praying, and finding is
speeding. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
near, Isa. 55.6. Ask, and it shall be given unto you; seek, and ye shall find,
Mat. 7.7. For the word, see on v. 13.

Figures. Call upon me. A figure of the general for the particular. The
meaning is, Pray to me.

Answer. I will not grant what they ask. The same figure as before. For a man
may answer and deny. Seek me early, Pray earnestly to me, as men seek good
things lost. So shall they pray fervently to me to deliver them. A Metaphor.
Not find me, Not have their desires of me, nor be satisfied, as men are that
find what they seek for. A Metaphor.

Note a double threatening.

In the first note, 1. Man's call. 2. Gods refusal.


In man's call note, 1. The adjunct of time, Then. 2. The act, shall they call.
3. The object, upon me.


In Gods refusal note, 1. The person, but I. 2. The act, will not answer.


In the second threatening note, 1. Man's endeavoring. 2. Gods rejecting.


In man's endeavoring note, 1. The persons, They. 2. The act, shall seek early.
3. The object, me.


In Gods rejecting note, 1. The parties, They. They that seek me. 2. The act,
shall not find. 3. The object, me.


1. Doct. Affliction makes men seek to God, that slighted him before. So the
Israelites did, Their cry came up unto God by reason of the bondage, Exodus
2.23. When they were smitten down by their enemies they would pray, 1 King.
8.33.

Reason 1. Poena aperit oculos, quos culpa tenebat clausos. Greg. Men are dull
sighted in prosperity, and quick sighted in adversity.

2. Because they know not where to get help else. As the prodigal child, when
none else would relieve him, thought of returning to his Father, Luke 15.16,
17. Wicked men will try all ways ere they will seek to God, he is their last
refuge.

3. Suspicion begins to work when trouble begins to come. Wicked men are often
called Fools in this Book. Fools fear nothing, till they feel something, and
then they fear more then needs.

4. Conscience then begins to terrify them, setting fin before them in its
colors, with death and hell attending it, Rev. 6.8.

Use. 1. To mitigate our sorrows in our afflictions. They bring some good. They
have honey as well as a sting. They oftentimes drive men to God. Foelix
necessitas quae cogit ad Christum: Happy necessity that drives men to Christ.

2. To condemn those that keep aloof from God even in affliction. Men may keep
out at Sea in a calm, but they that keep out in a storm are desperate. So are
such as call not on God in trouble. Seamen will pray in a storm, that swear in
a calm.

2. Doct. Prayer is an invocation or calling upon God. Call upon me in the day
of trouble, Psalm. 50.15. They call not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.4. A man that in
want or trouble calls upon his neighbor for help, 1 sees that he needs help, 2
desires to be helped, 3 sues to another for it, 4 to one that is able. So do we
in prayer, confess our want, defire relief, sue to God for it, who is able to
deliver us, Heb. 5.7.

Use. It instructs us in the nature of prayer. It is not with Papists or
ignorant persons, mumbling over words we understand nor, but spreading our
wants before God, and suing for supply. O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for
me, Isa. 38.14.

3. Doct. God will not give ease to them that never call on him but in trouble.
They cried, but there was none to save them; even unto the Lord, but he
answered them not, Psa. 18.41. Though they cry in mine ears with a loud voice,
yet will I not hear them, Ezekiel. 8.18.

Reason 1. Because they had no acquaintance with God before. Men look after
their acquaintance in time of trouble, not after strangers, that have no
dependence on them.

2. Because they look merely after their own ease for the most part, and have
no love to God, else they would have regarded his service in their prosperity,
Hos. 7.14.

Use. It teaches us to get interest in God betimes, even in prosperity, to
follow Solomon's counsel, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth. We would be glad to have God to hear us in the troubles of old age.
Let us then be mindful of him in youth.

4. Doct. Affliction makes men earnest in prayer. In their affliction they will
seek me early, Hos. 5.15. When he slew them, then they sought him, Psalm. 78.34.

Reason 1. Because affliction is compared to fire. When thou walk through
the fire, Isa. 43.2. and fire will heat. So does affliction heat men's
affections.

2. Because they find much need of help, which in their prosperity they felt
not. A beggar will pray earnestly.

Use. It condemns our cold prayers both in fasts and other times in these sad
days. If ye will not pray earnestly now, when will ye? Wicked men will rise in
judgment against you. They pray earnestly in trouble.

5. Doct. Prayer is a seeking of God. Neither do they seek the Lord of hosts,
Isa. 9.13. Seek ye the Lord, Isa. 55.6.

Reason 1. He is as it were lost when he does not help us. God is departed from
me, and answers me no more, 1 Samuel 28.15.

2. He may be found an helper upon entreaty.

Use. No marvel if many never found God. They never sought him by hearty
prayer in all their lives, and must quite lose him at their death.

6. Doct. There is a time when God will not be found of some men, though they
seek him earnestly. Though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto
them, Jer. 11.11. When ye make many prayers, I will not hear, Isa. 1.15. Then
shall they cry unto the Lord, but he will not hear, Mic. 3.4.

1. For the time. 2. For the persons.
For the the time. That is twofold:

1. After a time of long calling on them to return, yet slighted by them. He
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayer shall be
abominable, Prove. 28.9. Yea, true repentance then, though it may deliver from
the curse, yet sometimes not from the cross. God would destroy Jerusalem for
Manasses his sins, though he repented, and Josiah reformed, 2 King. 23.26.

2. After this life. It is too late to cry for mercy in hell. Not a drop of
water to be gotten, Luke 16. God hears not impenitent finners here, much less
in hell. Here is time of repentance, there none. The door of mercy is shut up
for ever by death, Mat. 25.10. When the golden time of life is gone, no trading
for souls health. No physic after death. For the persons, they are,

1. Impenitent sinners. God hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. Prayer and
repentance must go together, else no audience.

2. Unbelievers. The Word without faith does no good No more does prayer. An
unbeliever must not think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord, Jam. 1.7.

3. Hypocrites, that have no religion, but in show, and pray accordingly. Will
God hear the hypocrites cry, when trouble comes upon him? Job 27.9. Sure he
will not.

4. Uncharitable men. A father will not hear them that are cruel to his
children.

Use 1. It teaches us to take heed of putting off repentance. We may be in
hell in a moment; or God may be so offended with our peevish ways, that he
will not give us true repentance, nor hear us. A great revenge. It would vex a
man that his friend would not hear him in extremity. If we follow not Gods
instruction in our prosperity, he will not follow us with help in our misery.
He that meant to say, Lord have mercy on me, cried out at his death, Horse and
man, and all to the Devil. Perkins government of the tongue.

2. Let us hearken to God in our prosperity, that he may hearken to us in our
extremity, else we perish eternally. Quid aequius? quid justius? non
respeximus, non respicimur; non audivimus, non audimur. Salv. What more equal?
what more just? we regarded not, we are not regarded; we heard not, we are not
heard. I speak unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear;
this has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyest not my voice. The
wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go into captivity;
surely then shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness, Jer.
22.21, 22. To conclude, God will hear a penitent sinner at any time; yea, even
at the hour of death, as he did the penitent thief; but he often denies true
repentance to those that slight the means of grace, and always denies audience
to those that cry not with their hearts to him, when they howl on their beds
for corn and wine, Hos. 7.14. Let not then an impenitent sinner ever presume,
nor a penitent despair.

Verse. 29. For that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the
Lord.
We are come to the third judgment denounced, wherein Wisdom first sets down
the causes of the judgment, v. 29, 30. Secondly, the judgment it self, v. 31,
32.

For the first, Wisdom repeats the former just causes, to justify her
accusation, yet with some elegant change of words and order, to affect the more
with the variety of them, and to drive the causes of their ruin the more home
to their hearts, that at length they might repent and prevent it. An usual
thing in humane judgments, that the sentence may appear to be just. The Clerk
reads the causes of the condemnation, and the Judge oftentimes repeats them.
Their plagues are fearful, therefore Wisdom would have the causes of them
well known. If any man should ask, Why Lord art thou so inexorable and hard
toward them? The answer may be in the text, For that they hated knowledge. So
the words may look backward and forward. Thus he shows that they did justly
perish, and were justly neglected. Four causes mentioned before are here
repeated. The two first in this verse. The two lastin v. 30.

The first in this verse. is hating knowledge, mentioned verse. 22.

The second in this verse. also, is not choosing the fear of the Lord,
intimated, v. 7.

The third in verse. 30. is rejecting Wisdoms counsel, mentioned v. 25.

The fourth in v. 30. also is despising Wisdoms reproof, mentioned likewise v.
25. And in an elegant order. For,

1. Knowledge is to be gotten.

2. The fear of the Lord.

3. Good counsel to be hearkened to, for direction of life.

4. Reproof to be regarded when we sin, that we may reform. For the words.

(...), For that, Heb. In stead of that. For their sin they shall be punished.

They hated knowledge. See on v. 2, 4, 22.

(...), And have not chosen. To wit, in their prosperity; when they might and
should have done it, they did refuse to do it, or despise it, as v. 24, 30.

The fear of the Lord. See on v. 7.

Figures none. Four causes of judgment are here set down. Two in this verse.
Two in the next.

In this verse. 1. Hating knowledge. 2. Not choosing the fear of the Lord.


In the next, 1. Refusing counsel. 2. Despising reproof.


In the first note, 1. The word of coherence, For that. 2. The act, they hated.
3. The object, knowledge.


In the second note, 1. The act; and did not choose, 2. The object, The fear of
the Lord.


The same things having been spoken of and handled before, verse. 7, 22, 25. I
shall only insist upon some generals.

1. Doct. Repetitions in Scripture are useful. Compare Phil. 3.1. with Phil.
4.4. Rejoice in the Lord, rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. I
will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance. I think it meet as
long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance,
2 Pet. 1.12, 13. The same thing repeated in two verses.

Reason 1. They are great helps to the memory. Often reading imprints them deep
there. Therefore in the Gospels, the same Histories, Miracles, Precepts, and
Doctrine of Sacraments, are repeated. The same things are often found in the
second Epistle of Peter, and Jude.

2. They are great helps to the understanding, because of some different
expressions and additions. As in the doctrine of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper some things are added, 1 Cor. 11. which are not in the Gospels.

3. They are great helps to the affections. Every new reading with delight
works more love, or joy, or sorrow, or fear. The oftener men view what they
love, the more they like it.

4. They are great helps to practice. The more we see things in Gods Book, the
more desirous we are to see them in our lives.

Use 1. It reproves the queasie stomachs of the people, that had rather hear
falsehoods under a glittering color of new truths, then the same things
inculcated on their souls, though never so sound. They like the same meat again
and again, especially if the sauce and dressing differ a little, and why not
then the same points of religion?

2. It calls upon Ministers to press the same truths. Religion follows not new
fashions, as Clothes do. Hence come errors, for want of a good foundation.
Plantas saepius adaquare conducit. Primas. Gardeners often water their plants
with the same water. God lays down the reasons now the second time, why he
destroys these ungodly men.

2. Doct. God cleers himself abundantly in his Word, of the destruction of
ungodly men. Had not God cause to destroy the old World? See Genesis 6.11. The
earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. God
examines the cause of Sodom, and condemns them justly, Genefis 18. So he deals
with Israel, 2 King. 17. with Judah, 2 Chr. 36. with the Church of Ephesus,
Rev. 2. with Laodicea, Rev. 3.

Reason 1. Because sin the cause of it, is from us, and not from God. He
neither compels, nor counsels, nor allures, nor consents to it, but forbids it,
and threatens to punish it. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9.

2. It is justice in God to punish sin, and not cruelty, as in a Judge to
condemn murderers.

3. God foretells their destruction in his Word, and by his Ministers.

4. He uses many means to prevent it. By mercies, judgments, ordinances,
checks of conscience.

Use 1. It blames those who lay their dishonor upon Gods head. He will lay it
back on theirs, as Solomon did Joab's murder, and Shimei's curse. Their blood
shall return upon the head of Joab, 1 King. 2.33. The Lord shall return thy
wickedness upon thine own head, 1 King. 2.44. God will say, as Paul, I take
you to record, that I am free from the blood of all men, Act. 20.26. In
Sin Offerings, the persons hand that brought it, was to be laid on the head of
it, and not the Priests, to show that God was not the cause of death, but the
sinner.

2. Give God the glory of his judgments public, or particular, on others, or
our selves. He smites not without a cause. Say with the Church, The Lord is
righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment, Lam. 1.18. I will bear
the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Mic. 7.9.
Knowledge is put before the fear of God as a foundation.

3. Doct. There is no fear of God where there is no knowledge. Who knows the
power of thine anger? according to thine anger, so is thy fear, Psalm. 90.11.
Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5.2.

Reason 1. Because knowledge is the light of the soul. Men cannot work without
light. Nor affections do their part without knowledge. Ignoti nulla cupido. Men
love not, desire not, fear not, hope not, without knowledge of the object.

2. Knowledge is the guide and mover of the soul. It shows arguments to fear
God, as well as whom to fear. So the great wheel of the Jack makes the rest to
go; if it be still, the rest are so. There is then no fear of God without
knowledge.

Use. No marvel that many are so destitute of the fear of God. They dare swear
and lie. They are Ignoramusses. They know not Gods power, else they durst not
do it; nor his goodness, else they would not do it.

4. Doct. Many care neither for the knowledge nor fear of God. Israel does not
know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1.3. The unjust Judge did not fear God,
nor regard man, as himself confesses, Luke 18.4.

Reason 1. Because knowledge and the fear of God are difficult to obtain. There
are so many things to be known, and so high above Nature, and Art, that they
are not easily reached. And the fear of God is harder to get then knowledge.
For many get the one, and never come to the other.

2. They cross our corruptions, and curb them. The fear of God keeps men from
many sins, to which their corrupt nature would lead them. Joseph would not
wrong his Brethren, for (says he) I fear God, Genesis 42.18. But so did not I,
because of the fear of God, Neh. 5.15. Joseph lacked not power nor opportunity,
only Gods fear kept him back. Knowledge flies in men's faces after they have
sinned. Ignorant men are quiet after sin, because they know not that they have
done amiss.

Use. Be not offended at hard usage from ungodly men. They want knowledge. Had
they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.
Sure they want the fear of God, and then no good usage is to be expected from
them. I thought surely the fear of God is not in this place; and they will slay
me for my wives sake, Genesis 20.11.

5. Doct. Knowledge should be the guide of our choice. Now we believe, for we
know that this is indeed the Christ, Joh. 4.42. We believe, and are sure, that
thou art that Christ, Joh. 6.69.

Reason 1. It appears in credendis, in things to be believed. How can men
without knowledge tell what to believe of the World, or of the Church, or of
the world to come?

2. In agendis. In things to be done. How can men tell what is to be done
toward God, men, themselves, if they have no knowledge?

Use. We see here the sad condition of an ignorant man. He must needs be an
Infidel, and injurious to God and man, for he knows not what to believe or do.
Knowledge is the eye of the soul. A blind man knows not, which way to take.

6. Doct. They that choose not piety must be damned, as well as they that hate
knowledge, and they that refuse Wisdoms counsels and reproofs as well as
either. My people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me:
So, I gave them up unto their own hearts lust, etc. Psalm. 81.11, 12. And what
could follow then but damnation? Christ will come in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Reason 1. Because these things stop up the way to heaven. Want of piety and
the fear of God keep them out. So does refusal of good counsels and rebukes.
And he that goes not to heaven, must go to hell.

2. They shut them up in the way to hell, and leave them no breach, whereat
they may get out. Some men begin to be frighted with the fear of God, when they
think of his power, or judgments. Others, that have no such thoughts, are
drawn out by the counsel of others that are escaped. Others that slight
counsel, are moved with reproof. These slight all, and perish.

Use. Think not your selves in a good condition, because ye are not the worst
of men, and hate not knowledge. Such as fear not God, nor regard counsel, nor
reproof, must perish also. Though ye put not out the light, nor cast away
physic, yet ye get no good if ye use it not well.

Verse. 30. They would none of my counsel, they despised all my reproof.
The third and fourth cause of the following judgments are set down in this
verse. which was all, but one word, interpreted before in v. 25. And in the
translation there also is another word, the same in sense. Setting at naught,
and despising, intend the same thing, though they be different words in the
Original. A little alteration there is. There counsel is despised and reproof
refused; here counsel refused and reproof despised. To show that wicked men do
both refuse and despise both counsel and reproof, and so are in a desperate
condition. For the words, see on v. 25. Their sin is aggravated, and rises by
degrees, to show the justice of their punishment. They not only rejected
knowledge, but also the fear of God; and not that only, but also his counsels;
and not that only, but also his reproofs. What remains, but that they eat of
the cursed fruits of their own labors?

There is but one word new to be expounded, (...), they despised, which imports
a contempt of a thing upon a light account of it. They had a small estimation
of Wisdoms reproof, and therefore would not be mended by it, and so are
inexcusable. Let Wisdom chide, if she would, they cared not for it, but would
do as they list.

Figures none. Note 1. The third cause of the judgment. 2. The fourth.


In the third note, 1. The act, They would none of. 2. The object, my counsel.


In the fourth note, 1. The act, They despised. 2. The object, all my reproof.


The particular doctrines have been handled on v. 25. For the words are the
same in effect, and well-nigh in syllables. The general ones are to be seen on
v. 26.

Verse. 31. Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices.
The complaint was renewed in the two former verses. The commination follows.
The cause there, the effect here. In their misery note,

1. The effect, in this verse.

2. Another cause, v. 32. Seeing ye have such an obstinate mind, and hard
heart, that ye would admit of no cure, what remains, but that you be filled
with those evils which your sins have deservedly brought upon you? God cleers
his justice by a common proverb then in use. It is just that men should eat out
of their own work, and reap what they sow. This proverb by way of similitude
shows, that as it is just and equal that Planters or Plowmen should eat of the
fruit or grain which they have labored for, or sown; and if they have great
increase of fruit, or sown much corn, or taken much pains about either, that
they should be partakers of the labors of their hands plentisully; so it is
just with God, that these should feel much sorrow and confusion, which their
dissolute lives, and froward hearts deserve. They shall have plagues answerable
to their fins, and bear the punishment of their evil counsels. For the words.

(...), Therefore. So it is tranflated, Job 35.16. Therefore does Job open his
mouth in vain. And Prove. 6.34. Therefore he will not spare. Because they were
sufficiently admonished, yet would not hearken unto me, but followed their own
lusts, and walked in vanity, they shall see what they shall get by it, when
their sins have brought irreparable losses upon them, when they shall be
forsaken of me, as I was of them. As they have gone their own ways, so they
shall suffer the woeful issue of them, because they refused my counsels and
corrections.

(...), They shall eat. The word literally fignifies devouring of meat, as
Exodus 34.28. He did neither eat bread, nor d^ink water. Metaphorically it
fignifies devouring any thing else; even by senseless things, as by the fire,
The fire of God has consumed the sheep, Job 1.16. By the sword, Shall the
sword devour for ever? 2 Samuel 2.26. By the earth, The land eats up the
inhabitants thereof, Numb. 13.32. Also it is used for receiving things brought
upon men by their own ways, or procured by their works, be they good or bad. A
man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth, Prove. 13.2. Thou shall eat the
labor of thine hands, Psalm. 128.2. So here. They shall receive a just reward of
their wickedness. They shall eat as they baked, drink as they brewed. They
that sow the wind of iniquity, shall reap the whirlwind of misery.

(...), Of the fruit. Not part of it, as this particle is used of the fruit of
the tree, ye shall not eat of it; Genesis 3.3. but feed upon it to the full, as
follows in this verse.

(...), signifies, 1. The fruit of a tree. Of the fruit of the tree, Genesis 3.3.

2. That which proceeds from, or comes forth out of another thing, or is caused
by it, be it good, as chapter 8.19. My fruit is better then gold. Give her of the
fruit of her hands, chapter 31.31. Or be it bad, I will punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, Isa. 10.12. I will bring evil upon this
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, Jer. 6.19. And so here. They shall
have evil fruit of evil ways. They shall be abundantly punished for
forsaking my counsels, and following their own. They shall be left to
themselves till they perish, Psalm 81.12.

Of their own way. See on verse. 15. They have promised themselves much
pleasant fruit out of their evil ways, but they shall find themselves
deceived in the end, and find bitter and deceitful fruit far other then they
expected. They shall bring destruction upon themselves by following their own
counsels, that would not be saved by following mine.

(...), And be filled. The word properly signifies to be satisfied. In
satisfaction there are two things, fullness and content. Therefore the word
(especially when it is applied to evil things) fignifies fullness alone; for no
man is content with misery, but he may be as full of it to his endless sorrow,
as they are of good things, who are fully satisfied with them. They shall be as
full of those evils, their sins bring upon them, as a man well filled is of
meat. They despised the pleasant fruits of wisdom, and shall feed on the
bitter fruits of sin.

With their own devices, (...). It signifies devices, counsels, or
consultations. Though they could never make an end of inventing and practifing
evil, yet they shall be squatted at last, and surcharged with the evil
effects thereof.

Figures. Eat, Receive. A Metaphor from Meats.

Fruit, Effect. A Metaphor from Trees.

Way, Practice. A Metaphor from Travelers.

Be filled, Hebr. satisfied. A figure of the effect for the cause.

Devices, for evil devices. A figure of the general for the special. As,
Isa. 1.8. They shall be as wool. That is, as white wool.

Here are two similitudes to set out these men's miseries. The first is taken
from Eating. The second from Fullness.

In the first note, 1. The word of coherence, Therefore. 2. The persons, they.
3. The act, shall eat. 4. The object, of the fruit of their own way.


In the second note, 1. The act, Be filled. 2. The object, with their own
devices.


1. Doct. Sins bring miseries upon men. Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have
reaped iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of lies, Hos. 10.13. He that sows
iniquity shall reap vanity, Pr. 22.8. And that,

1. In a moral way, when God punishes men according to their sins. The
Israelites are slain, while the meat which they Iusted for, was in their
mouths, Numb. 11.33. What more just, then that men should reap that they sow?

2. In a physical or natural way. And that,

1. When fins breed diseases, as drunkenness breeds dropsies; gluttony,
surfets; wantonness, foul diseases.

2. When God leaves men to their own foolish courses, which ruin them.

Use 1. Let no man accuse God or others for his troubles or condemnation. His
own sins bring them upon him. Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso: No man is hurt but
by himself. Qui nolunt regi a prudentia Dei, necesse est, ut regantur ab
imprudentia sua, and in multos errores, mala, damna labantur: They that will
not be ruled by Gods prudence, must of necessity be ruled by their own
imprudence, and fall into many errors, mischiefs, damages.

2. When troubles come upon us, let us look back to our fins, yea to the fins
of our youth, that we may be humbled for them, as David was, Psalm. 25.7.
Remember not the sins of my youth. And Job, chapter 13.26. Thou make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth. Harvest follows long after seed-time. So
may misery after sin.

The sins mentioned before were not about matters of Justice, or Morality, but
of Religion.

2. Doct. Sins in matter of Religion bring heavy judgments on men, yea on
whole Nations. How costly was Idolatry in the Judges days? It made Gods people
slaves to Canaanites, and many oath adversaries. What cost Jeroboam's Calves,
Ahab's Baal, Israelites Idolatry? Loss of the Kingdom, and Captivity, 1 King.
17. The like effect had Judas slighting Gods Prophets, 2 Chr. 36. The seven
golden candlesticks were ruined by impiety, Rev. 2. and 3.

Reason. 1. Because duties of Religion more nearly concern Gods glory,
therefore such sins more highly offend him, as being not against his image
only, but against himself, not mediately, but immediately.

2. Because Gods honor is of more weight then man's good; for God is far
greater then man, and we far more engaged to him, then to any man.

Use 1. It discovers how different men's judgments are now adays from Gods,
how little love they have to God, how much self-love, that would have the least
sin against man punished by the Magistrate, but not the greatest against God.
They are like the Turks, who whip men for speaking against God, and kill them
for speaking against Mahomet, saying, God can revenge himself, Mahomet cannot.

2. Take heed of impiety. Moral men may condemn injustice more, but God
condemns impiety most.

3. Doct. Constant and continual evils come on sinners. See variety of
judgments one in the neck of another, Lev. 26.18, etc. Gods hand is still
stretched out against them, Isa. 9.12, 17, 21.

Reason. 1. Because evil men are constant in sin. Now evil of sin is not
barren. It breeds evil of punishment. Raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede
paena claud^: Sin was never so quick-footed, nor punishment so lame, but that
the latter could overtake the former.

2. God is constant in justice. If they sin still, he will punish still. A thief
must be punished the second and third time, as well as the first.

Use. It shows us, that fools and wicked men are not in vain confounded in this
Book of the Proverbs, and the words promiscuously used. What are they but fools
that heap sorrows on their heads, by continuance in sin, and will not give over
till they perish eternally?

4. Doct. Wicked men drive a trade of sinning. They walk, stand, fit in wicked
ways, Psalm. 1.1. They commit sin daily, as working in a shop, 1 John 3.8.

Reason. In a trade are two things considerable. Constant labor, and
expectation of gain. Walking for health is no trade, nor expectation of gifts
is no trade. A wicked man labors constantly in sin. He may stumble on a good
action, as a good man on a bad, but his head and heart both labor in sin. Gain
he looks for from it. His Motto is, Dulcis ^dor lucri e re qualibet: Gold smells
well, though raked out of a dunghill. He can gain by wantonness, oppression,
lying, flattery, etc.

Use. Here is an help to judge of our estate. Is our way a way of sin, or of
goodness? We must not try our selves by one act, either to clear our selves
for one good act, or to condemn our selves for one bad one. Our course of life
must clear or condemn us.

5. Doct. Abundance of troubles shall come upon wicked men. The back-slider in
heart shall be filled with his own ways, Prove. 14.14. Many sorrows shall be
to the wicked, Psalm. 32.10.

Reason 1. Their fins bring on them store of spiritual evils, as shame, grief,
despair, wherewith the mind is overburdened, as the flomach overprest with
meat, and made fick of a surfeit.

2. Bodily evils, as diseases, pains, etc.

3. Their ill life brings an ill death, violent or despairing.

4. Wicked men cannot be filled with sin here, but they must be filled with
misery in hell. A way of sin here, and a way of eternal sorrow there.

Use. It declares to us what is the portion of sinners. They take great content
in sinful ways, as if they were the only free and happy men; but their end
will be misery.

6. Doct. Ungodly men have many devices to undo themselves. So Achitophel and
Judas were wise enough to hang themselves.

Reason 1. Because God overpowers them in their own way, and beats them at
their own weapons, and takes them in their subtilty. He countermines, and
voyds their mines. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, 1 Cor. 3.19.

2. Because their Wisdom is imperfect. They know not how to prevent all
dangers.

Use. See the misery of wicked men. Their wittends to self-destruction.

Verse. 32. For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them.
Wisdom having in the former verse. set out the effect; to wit, the destruction
of ungodly men; here she concludes her threatenings with another cause of it.
This verse. gives a reason why wicked men shall be so horribly and inevitably
destroyed. And therein both expounds the former verse, and gives answer to a
secret objection. It might be demanded, Who are they that shall eat of the
fruit of their labors? The answer is in the text, simple ones and fools, that
turn away from Wisdoms instructions. It might be further demanded, But how
shall they eat of the fruit of their labors? The answer is in the Text again,
They will slay them, and bring them to destruction. But then it may be
objected, Wicked men thrive most, and they that slight Wisdoms counsels, grow
richest. The answer is ready, It may be so, but yet it will turn to their
destruction in the end, as the Ox to be slain, goes in the best pastures. The
Sunshine of prosperity ripens the sin of the wicked. Bernard calls it,
Misericordiam omni indignatione crudeliorem. A mercy that he had no mind to;
as being worse then all cruelty. What good is there in having a fine Suit with
the plague in it? As soon may a man miscarry upon the soft sands, as upon the
hard rocks.

For the words.

For. It gives a reason of what was said before. See on v. 9. They cannot
justly complain of my severity, because they themselves are the cause of their
own ruin. They will not be taught how to escape it, though they have not wit
enough of themselves to do it. Others read it But, as it is translated, chapter
9.18. But he knows not that the dead are there. And then they understand the
former verse. thus, God will suffer wicked men to eat of their labors, and
prosper for a time, but will destroy them in the end by their own prosperity.
The former reading agrees best with the scope, which is near threatening.

(...), The turning away. Some take it to be meant of turning away from God and
goodness, to error, and wickedness of life. Others take it for their turning
away from seeking after heaven to look after the world. So Demas forsook Paul,
having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. Others take it for turning away
from Wisdoms counsels given before, which they are charged withal, v. 25.30.
An unwillingnesse to be taught by Gods Ministers. And that agrees well with
what went before. When men will not be taught by Gods Ministers, destruction
follows.

(...), Of the simple. See on v. 4.22.

Shall slay them. Shall destroy themselves.

(...), And the prosperity. The word fignifies quietness and abundance, which
uses to follow peace.

Of fools. See on v. 22.

Shall destroy them. Shall lay them open to death, temporal and eternal. This
is Scripture language. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die,
Genesis 2.17.

Figures. Turning away. A Metaphor from a Traveller that misseth his way.

Shall slay them. Shall be the cause of their death. A Metaphor from an
Executioner. So also in Destroy them.

Wisdom sets down two causes of their destruction.

The first is an averseness to instruction.

The second is, love of prosperity. These two concur in most sinful men, and
had before punishment answerable set down, to wit, Gods not hearing them, and
their destruction.

In the former note, 1. The word of coherence, For. 1. The act, the turning
away. 3. The agent, of the simple. 4. The effect, shall slay. 5. The object,
them.


In the later observe, 1. The cause, And the prosperity of fools. 2. The
effect, shall destroy them.


1. Doct. God is content to give a reason of his judgments, though he need
not. Here are two things to be proved: 1. That God need not give a reason of
his judgments. 2. That God will give a reason of them nevertheless.


For the first. God need not give a reason of his judgments. Who shall say
unto him, What do thou? Job 9.12. O man, who art thou that replyest against
God? Romans 9.20. The Potter need give no reason why one piece of clay is made a
vessel of honor, and another of dishonor.

Reason 1. Because God is of supreme authority. Superiors need not give account
to Inferiors of their proceedings: Inferiors must to Superiors.

2. He is in infite in justice. No doubt but his judgments are all just,
though men do not always understand the reason of them. A man may be
misinformed, or judge amiss out of passion, but God cannot.

For the second. God will give a reason of his judgments, though he need not.

Reason 1. Because of his love to man, being willing to inform him of his
proceedings. God will not hide his proceedings about Sodom from Abraham,
because he shall have a great posterity, and will acquaint them therewith, and
so bring much glory to God, Genesis 18.17, 18.

2. For man's good, that he may bring him to repentance. How shall the Child
mend, if the Father tell him not why he strikes?

3. That God may clear his own justice.

Use 1. It ets out Gods goodness plainly before our eyes, who being above all,
yet is pleased to make men acquainted with the reasons of his proceedings.

2. Let us make good use of this information. Let us observe the reasons of
Gods judgments, recorded in Scripture, that we may avoid the like sins, and
prevent the like judgments, for God is as just now as ever. Did he punish Adam
and Eve for disobedience, Cain for murder, the old Word for violence, Sodom
for Iuxury? He will punish others for it now. They are examples to us, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. Did he not spare Noah, nor
David, when they sinned against him? neither will he spare his offending
children now. Let us then be wise, and be ware.

2. Doct. They are simple that do not hearken to heavenly instructions, v. 22,
23.

Reason 1. Because they are made acquainted with the greatest danger to their
souls, that can be, and yet will not avoid it. If a man were told of a pit in
his way, out of which there were no escaping, and would for all that run into
it, were he not a simpleton?

2. The way to attain greater good then all the world can afford them, and that
for eternity, is made known unto them plainly, so as they cannot deny it, and
yet will not look after it: As if a man were showed an easy way to get a
Kingdom, and yet would live a beggar. Is not such a man very simple?

Use. It shows the great distance between Gods judgment and man's. Many of
those that are of great account for wit and policy in the world, God accounts
to be very simple, and so they will prove in the end. They must prove so, that
will not hearken to the counsels of the God of Wisdom.

3. Doct. Not hearkening to good counsel brings destruction. They despised
Gods words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, till there was no remedy. Therefore he brought upon them
the King of the Chaldeans, who slew their young men with the sword, etc. 2 Chr.
36. 16, 17. They east thy Law behind their backs. Therefore thou deliveredst
them into the hand of their enemies, Neh. 9.26, 27.

Reason 1. Because it brings many temporal judgments upon men. God will set
the brand of his displeasure, and their disobedience, upon them, in letters of
blood.

2. If it bring not viol nce upon their bodies, yet it brings both body and
soul to perdition for ever. No man can invent a way to heaven. If he will not
then go the way that God has revealed, he mustiperish.

Use. Let this drive men to hearken to good counsel. If the odious name of
simple ones will not do it, let fear of eternal wrath open our ears and hearts.

4. Doct. Men in prosperity will seldom hearken to good counsel. I spoke unto
thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear, Jerem. 22.21. Woe to
them that are at ease in Sion, Amos 6.1. The Prophet had little hope to do
good on them.

Reason 1. Because they think they are good enough already.

2. They think they shall continue so, and look for no change. Because they
have no changes, therefore they fear not God, Psalm. 55.19. David said in his
prosperity, I shall never be removed, Psalm. 30.6.

Use. Let rich men take heed, and not think themselves too good to hearken to
good counsel. They are in more danger then meaner men. Their ears are stopped
with their wealth.

5. Doct. Prosperity and folly go often together. Rich Nabal was a fool both in
name and nature, 1 Samuel 25.25. God calls the rich man fool, Luke 12.20.

Reason 1. Because wealth is not always gotten by wisdom. It may come by gift
or favor of Princes, or by inheritance, or by painful servants, as Laban's by
Jacob's pains, Potiphar's by Joseph's.

2. Because rich men are from their youth cockered by parents, and flattered by
others, which keeps them from the knowledge of the truth. Therefore said the
Philosopher, Great men learn nothing so well as to ride well, because the horse
will not flatter.

Use. Do not imitate rich men because of their wealth. They may be fools for
all that, and then why should wise men be guided by them? An Ape of a Fool is
very ridiculous. Prosperity and folly are well joined together, for where is
most wealth, there often times is least wisdom.

6. Doct. Prosperity is the ruin of many. As of those two rich men, Luke
12.16. and 16.19.

Reason 1. It often makes men let go piety, and then as boys learning to swim,
they let go their bladders, and sink. Quando hoc incautis non fuit ad
disciplinam, quod ignis ad ceram, quod solis radius ad nivem, vel glaeiem:
Prosperity to unwary persons is like fire to wax, or the Sun beams to snow or
ice. Bern. de Consideratione, l. 2. c. 12. Magnus est qui incidens in adversa,
non excidit a sapientia, nec minor cui praesens faelicitas si arrisit, non
irrisit. Ibid. He is a great man, who falling into adversity, falls not out of
wisdom; and he is no less, on whom present felicity smiling, mocks him not.

2. It is harder to bear prosperity well, then adversity. The Dutch Proverb is,
The feet must be strong that carry prosperity. (...). Xenoph. Cyropaed. It
seems to me an harder thing to bear good things well, then bad; for the latter
make many a laughing stock, but the former makes all men wiser. Peacocks let
down their proud feathers when they see their black feet. Hannibal's Army
having overcome the troublesome Alps, was spoiled by the Italian dainties.
Tribulatio probat unam patientiam; prosperitas vero omnes virtutes examinat.
Anselm. in Sentent. Adversity tryes Patience only, but Prosperity examines all
virtues.

3. Prosperity lays men open to many sins. To injustice in getting it. Qui
agit semper faeliciter, inique agit. Euripides. He that does always
prosperously, does unjustly. Quam grave onus homo faelix insipiens! nam
stultitia germana est iniquitatis. Aeschylus. How great a burden is a rich
fool? For foolishnes is sister to iniquity Fortuna quem nimium fovet, stultum
facit. Whom fortune cockers, him she makes a fool. Mimus. And our Savior calls
riches the Mammon of iniquity, because hardly gotten without it, Luke 16.9. It
is often abused to sensuality. One rich man cries, Soul take thine ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, Luke 12.19. The other was clothed in purple, and fine
linen, and fared sumptuously every day, Luke 16.19. It makes men secure.
Living long in prosperity, they neither foresee, nor seek to prevent their
ruin. It hardens men in sin, as it did Pharaoh.

4. It brings Gods judgments upon them. Noverca virtutis prospreitas; sic
bajulis suis applaudit, ut noceat. Convivis suis ab initio propinat dulcia, ut
cum inebriati fuerint, let hale vulnus admisceat. Chrysol Prosperity is the
Step mother of virtue. She so applauds her porters, that she hurts them. She
gives her guests pleasant cups at the beginning, that when they are drunk, she
may give them a deadly wound. So Amnon was slain, when his heart was merry with
wine, 2 Samuel 13.28. Is he happy that is strong to kill himself, or that runs
fast, and climbes high to break his neck? Like those that eating of the juice
of some poy sonfull herbs, die laughing. It hastens and heightens judgment.

Use. Dote not on prosperity, lest ye desire your ruin. I may say to you, as
Christ to the two Disciples, with their Mother, Ye know not what ye ask, Mat.
20.22. Are ye able to bear that burden? Rather use Agur's prayer to God, Give
me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with food convenient for me, Prove. 30.8.
Many might have sailed safe to the shore, if they had not put out their top and
top-gallant. Keep then the golden mean, and be safer.

Verse. 33. But who so hearkneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and shall be quiet
from fear of evil.
Wisdom having sent forth three sore threatenings to terrify ungodly men from
following their vain and dangerous ways, now concludes her speech with a
comfortable promise to persuade them to hearken to her wholesome counsels.

For the words.

(...), But. It often signifies And, and joins like things together. But
sometimes it is a note of opposition, as verse. 25. See there. The prosperous
condition of those that hearken to Wisdoms wholesome counsels, is opposed to
the ruin of those that despise them.

Whosoever hearkeneth. See on v. 5. Here it is taken for regarding Wisdoms
counsel, and obeying it.

Unto me. To me Wisdom, and those counsels that I have given, or such like
other given in Gods Word, or by his Ministers agreeable to it.

Shall dwell. Shall perpetually abide in safety. As a man that lives quietly in
his own house.

(...), Safely. Free from danger, or confidently. Free from fear; as follows.
Knowing he shall be safer and therefore need fear no evil. After that he has
hearkened to my counsel, and gotten wisdom according to my advice, God will
keep him safe within the compass of his protection. He shall be out of danger
of destruction.

(...), And shall be quiet. The word signifies,

1. One that is quiet outwardly, and inwardly, in state, and mind. One dies
in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet, Job 21.23.

2. One that lives securely in sin, and fears no danger, though he have cause.
Woe to them that are at ease in Sion, Amos 6.1.

3. One that is proud and insolent, for prosperity and quietness makes men
secure and proud. The scorning of those that are at ease, and the contempt of
the proud, are joined together, Psalm. 123.4. Here it is taken in the first
sense, for a good security or quietness.

From fear. See on v. 26. He shall lead a most quiet life, being free not only
from evil it self, but from the very fear of it. He shall not need so much as
to fear adversity.

(...), of evil. Sometimes it fignifies evil of sin, which is committed by
man. Man's thoughts are only evil continually, Genesis 6.5. Sometimes evil of
punishment inflicted by God. Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord
has not done it? Amos 3.6. So it is taken here. He shall need fear no hurt at
all. Figures none.

Note 1. The condition required. 2. A double promise.

In the condition note, 1. The word of opposition, But. 2. The person, who so.
3. The act, hearkeneth. 4. The object, unto me.


In the first promise note, 1. The thing promised, Shall dwell. 2. The adjunct,
safely.


In the second promise note, 1. The good promised, And shall be quiet. 2. The
object, from fear of evil.


1. Doct. All men shall not be in a safe condition. There is no peace, says my
God, to the wicked, Isa. 57.21. When they shall say, Peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes upon them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Reason 1. Because many remain yet in their natural condition, as children
unregenerate, and there is no safety in being born subject to Gods wrath, Ephesians.
2.3.

2. Many are drencht deeper in that estate of condemnation, by innumerable
actual sins, as young men who follow the lusts of their own eyes, and consume
the cream of their time in vanity.

3. Men are deeper in it then they, as men that have made some show of
goodness, and afterward either return with Demas to the world, 2 Timothy 4.10.
or with the dog to the vomit, or the sow to the mire, 2 Pet. 2.21.

Use. Let us examine our selves whether our condition be safe, or no. There is
no safety to be had, unless we be reconciled to God by Jesus Christ. It is not
wit, nor wealth, nor strength that can save thee, nor multitude of friends.
Only Christ can shelter thee from Gods wrath. He shelters none but his own
members, and that not in profession only, but in truth. Ciphers in his
Arithmetic, neither advance themselves nor other numbers. Try if thou be a
true member of Christ by these notes:

1. If thou have another heart, as Saul had, when God made him a King. That
heart becomes not a member of Christ, that became a limb of Satan.

2. What have thou done or snffered to honor Christ? This was the Philippians
mark. Your sufferings are unto you an evident token of salvation, and that of
God, Phil. 1.28. They must look for no spoils, that will not fight for their
General.

2. D^ct. Wisdoms counsels are worth hearkening to. Hitherto tend Wisdoms
earnest persuasions, verse. 22, 23. ch 9.4. In both which places simple persons
are earnestly solicited to give audience to Wisdoms precepts. Hitherto tend
her sweet promises of communicating excellent and right things, chapter 8.6. and
9.5.

Reason 1. Because they are safe. There may be danger in following other
counsels. None in following Wisdoms. It is in Religion as in the State; folly
ruling overthrows it, and not wisdom. The foolish Pilot overthrows the ship,
not the wise.

2. All safe things are not honorable, but Wisdoms counsels are like
Achitophel's, as if a man had enquired at the oracle of God, 2 Samuel 16.23. or
like Solomon's wise sayings, which men came from far to hear. And there came of
all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all the Kings of the earth
which had heard of his wisdom, 1 King. 4.34.

3. All things honorable are not profitable. Many die honorably in fighting for
their Country, that get nothing by it; but Wisdoms ways are profitable also.
Godliness is profitable to all things, having promise of the life that now is,
and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. Wisdom brings happiness, and many
particular comforts, Prove. 3.13, etc. We see wise men thrive in Trades, when
fools spend their patrimony.

4. All things profitable, are not comfortable, as Matches made for money, but
Wisdoms counsels are comfortable also. Her ways are ways of pleasantness,
and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17.

Use. Let us open both our hearts and ears to such counsels as these scattered
in the Book of God, the fountain of wisdom. We are too prone to hearken to
foolish counsels, as Absalon was to give ear to the unsafe counsel of Hushai,
2 Samuel 17.14. And to the sinful counsel of Achitaphel, to go in to his Fathers
Concubines, 2 Samuel 16.21, 22. The whole world foolishly hearkens to the
unprofitable counsel of some idle ringleaders at the Tower of Babel, Genesis
11.4. The Jews to the uncomfortable counsel of their Captains, to go back into
Egypt, Jerem. 43.5. Let us for time to come, rather hearken to Wisdoms
counsels, which are safe to the Soul, honorable to the Body, profitable to the
State, comfortable to the whole man. And of such counsel we shall never need
to repent. It is strange that the World should call, and men run; the Devil
call, and men fly; but when God calls, they will not creep.

3. Doct. Constant safety is prepared for good men. Trust in the Lord, and do
good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed, Psalm.
37.3. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them,
Psalm. 119.165. Thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
Yea, thou shall see thy childrens children, and peace upon Israel, Ps. 128.5,
6. For I, says the Lord, will be a wall of fire unto her round about, Zec. 2.5.

Reason 1. Because they have a guard of Angels set about them by God. He shall
give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, Psalm. 91.11.

2. God himself is their guard. He that dwells in the secret place of the
most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. Who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Use. Let us learn spiritual policy in these dangerous times. Who would not be
glad to be safe in these storms? Follow Wisdoms counsel. Labor for piety, and
thou shall be safe.

4. Doct. Quietness also is the portion of Gods servants. When he gives
quietness, who then can make troubles, Job 34.29. 1. Quietness outwardly, if
God see it fit for them. O that thou had hearkened to my commandments! then
had thy peace been as a river, Isa. 48.18.

2. Quietness inwardly. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans
5.1. Quietness in life. The meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace, Psalm. 37.11. Quietness in death. Mark
the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is peace,
Psalm. 37.37. In the grave, which is their bed. He shall enter into peace; they
shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness, Isa. 57.2.
After death for ever. None can pass the great gulf between them and hell, to
molest them, Luke 16.26. They rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13.

Use. Woe to those that seek to disquiet the people of God. They go about to
cross Gods will, and he will cross theirs.

5. Doct. A good man need not fear any trouble. Thou shall not be afraid of
destruction, when it comes, Job 5.21. Thou shall not be afraid of the terror
by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day, Psalm. 91.5. He shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. This
fearlesnesse proceeds,

1. From some inward principles. A good man may be like a ship at Sea, in such
a storm, that he has no anchorroom abroad, nor haven near, all that sustains
him must be within: As,

1. An equal and proportionable ballancing by ballast, or goods. So a good man
may have peace of conscience, which may make him fearlesse. He that knows
himself at peace with God, what need he fear the wrath of all the creatures?
Such may glory in tribulation, Romans 5.3. and take delight in them, as in sweet
smelling roses.

2. The skill of the Ship-master makes them not to fear. God gives spiritual
wisdom to his, how to carry them in and get out of any trouble. Wisdom only
can teach men how to keep an eternal Sabbath of rest in the soul.

3. Labor of ship-men is needful to preserve the ship. Except these abide in
the ship, ye cannot be saved, Act. 27.31. So God gives spiritual courage and
grace to his, to hold up their heads in all troubles.

2. From outward helps: As,

1. Gods protection. I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and
none shall make you afraid, Lev. 26.6. They know that God who has undertaken
to deliver them, has many ways to do it, and they rest upon that, and are
quiet and fearlesse.

2. He has a guard of Angels about him. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear him, and delivers them, Ps. 34.7. But it may be
objected, that good men have a passion of fear as well as others, and at some
times are afraid of troubles. It may be answered, that because no man can
perfectly obey Wisdoms counsels, they best in infirmity may be perplexed, but
not quite overcome with fear; they will recover, Fides non tollit omnem
dubitationem, sed vincentem. Faith takes not away all doubting, but prevailing
doubting. Scotus in Sentent. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, Pr. 10
9. Perfect freedom from fear is reserved for them in heaven. Wicked men dwell
in fear, as strangers; good men in hope, as inhabitants. Further it may be
objected, Good men had need to fear troubles, for the world hates them, and
does often persecute them. Answ. Troubles may befall a good man, but he need
not fear any hurt by them. Surely in the floods of great waters, they shall not
come nigh unto him, Psalm. 32.7. They can detract nothing from his felicity. He
shall be happy in prosperity and adversity. Trouble shall not be evil to him,
but do him good, and lead him to good. For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory,
2 Cor. 4.17. It may be God may sometimes try his servants, but ordinarily they
change their manners, before God changes their prosperity. Fortunam sui cuique
fingunt mores. Cornelius Nepos in vita Pompeij. Every man's manners carve out
his own condition. Fortune is a constant wife to good men, and an inconstant
strumpet to bad men, said Heathen Plutarch. Apophthegm. She is nailed to good
men, not well fastened to bad men. Evil men's troubles will be endless, good
men's not so.

Use. Behold a great encouragement to hearken to Wisdoms counsels, and to be
pious. We shall attain to a condition that need not fear any troubles. I will
not fear, though the earth be removed; and though the mountains be carried into
the midst of the Sea. Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though
the mountains shake with the swelling thereof, Psalm. 46.2, 3. Si fractus
illabatur orbis, Impavidum ferient ruinae. Horat. A godly man's Ark is pitched
within, and without, tossed it may be, but not drowned; shaken, but not
shivered. No Kingdom in the world, no Empire has such a privilege.

6. Doct. Trouble is evil in it self. The years wherein we have seen evil,
Psalm. 90.15. Shall there be any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done
it? Amos 3.6.

Reason 1. Because it is evil to the body, helping to confume it by diseases.

2. It is evil to the soul, helping to vex it with grief and disquietnesse. It
makes a man cry out, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
disquieted within me? Psalm. 43.5.

Use. Let us bless God our heavenly Physician, that turns our troubles to our
good, and makes an antidote of poison.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. My Son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with
thee.
Solomon having before in the words of Wisdom threatened obstinate finners with
destruction, now in his own words falls to instruct such as are tractable. Now
that these things are spoken in the words of Solomon, and not of Wisdom,
appears by the title given to the young man in this verse, My Son. Which is
also given him by Solomon, chapter 1.8. But never by Wisdom in all this Book. And
by chapter 3. v. 13. He says, Happy is the man that finds wisdom. If Wisdom
had spoken, she would have said, that finds me.

In this Chapter the Wiseman shows,

1. How to get true wisdom, to verse. 5.

2. What good is gotten by getting it, to the end of the Chapter. And that, 1.
Positively, from v. 5. to v. 10. 2. Privatively, from thence to the end. And
this latter,


1. By preventing danger from bad men, from v. 10. to verse. 16.

2. From bad women, from v. 16. to the end.

For the first thing, the way to attain true wisdom, it is, 1. By getting a
docible mind, v. 1. 2. By learning it of them that are wise, v. 2. 3. By
prayer to God for it, v. 3. 4. By our own studies and endeavors, v. 4.


To return to v. 1. And first for the words.

My Son. See on chapter 1.1, 8. It is a title often repeated to beget attention and
obedience.

If thou will receive. See on chap. 1.3. If thou will bring with thee a willing
mind to learn of me, and to receive my words into thy understanding, will, and
affections. So Lira interprets it of a Scholar, docible, and willing to learn.
Hugo Cardinalis takes it for a Metaphor from the earth, which being plowed and
opened, receives the seed into it, and brings forth corn. So does a docible
Scholar. As on the contrary, Petrarch. Dialog. 41. speaking to a Schoolmaster
that had or might have an undocible Scholar, says, Discipulum indocilem babes?
Perdis operam, littus aras, semina projicis, natura non vincitur. Terrae aridae
colonus es? Solve boves. Quid te torques? Have thou an indocible Scholar? Thou
loosest thy labor, thou throwest away thy seed, nature cannot be overcome. Art
thou a tiller of a barren ground? Unloose thy oven. Why vexest thou thy self?
The word argues a greediness of hearing, as the dry earth gasps for rain, and
drinks it in greedily, Heb. 6.7. Others read it, If thou will buy my words. So
the word (...) is used, She considers a field, and buyeth it, Heb. takes it;
to wit, by purchase. For what men buy, they may lawfully take, chapter 31.16. Now
wisdom is bought by time and labor. Metrocles dicebat res alienas pecunia, ut
domum, and vestem, and alia; disciplinas autem emi tempore, atque labor.
Metrocles said, that other men's goods were to be bought with money, as houses,
and garments, and other things; but arts were to be bought with time and
labor. Laert. l. 6. c. 6. It argues a greedy desire of knowledge, sparing for
no cost, time, nor labor to attain it. Ab. Ezra expounds it thus, Thou shall
be my Son, if thou will receive my words. But it is better to draw the
coherence to verse. 5. thus, If thou will receive my words, etc. then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, etc.

My words. See on chapter 1.21. Some understand it of the words in the foregoing
Chapter. But it includes all spoken by him in this Book.

And hide. Lay them up safe in thy heart, and memory, as men lay up treasures,
v. 7. Or, at husbandmen hide their corn in the earth to fructify. Or, as men
lay up jewels they would have kept. There is no safer place to keep good
counsel in, then the chest of man's heart and memory. Then will it not be
forgotten.

My commandments. Such as I have received from God, and enjoined thee. These
they must hide in their memory, that Satan beguile them not of the knowledge of
them, but they may be ready for practice upon all occasions, as money in a
Treasury, or victuals in a Storchouse.

With thee. Not from others, for thou must teach them, but lay up the knowledge
of them for thy own use. Some things are so dear to us, that we will not trust
our chests with them, but carry them always about with us. So must we do with
wise precepts. Maximus reports that Euripides the Philosopher seeing a young
man buying many Books, said, Non arcae, O adolescens, sed pectori: O young man,
these are not to be put into thy chest, but into thy breast. Communium Sermonum
17. I have heard that famous Buchanan, King James his Master, when a Germane
Doctor coming into Scotland, desirous to see him, and observing his few books,
and great learning, saluted him thus, Salve Doctor sine libris: God save you
Mr. Doctor without books; going into Germany afterward, and seeing in that
Doctors Study a multitude of books, and thinking him little learned, retorted
bitterly, Salvete libri sine Doctore: God save you books without a Doctor.
Intimating, that few books well read, were better then many never looked upon.
He is the first in the ship of fools, that buys many books, and reads them
not. To this purpose Solomon seems to speak to the young man here, as if he had
said, I have and will do my part to fill thee with good instructions, see thou
do thine in receiving them into thine heart, and keeping them there.

Figures. My Son, a Metaphor. For Solomon meant others to be taught by him, as
well as his Sons.

Receive. A Metaphor from the earth receiving seed.

Hide, a Metaphor from treasures locked up.

In the text there is, 1. Avi ditas auscultandi. A greedy desire of hearkening.
2. Assiduitas memorandi. A daily care of remembering.


In the first note, 1. The person spoken to, My Son. 2. The act required, if
thou will receive. 3. The object, my words.


In the second note, 1. The act, And hide. 2. The object, my commandments. 3.
The subject place, with thee.


Observations. My Son. This word is often repeated, because good children use
readily to receive their parents counsels, as judging them always to come out
of love.

1. Doct. Men soonest hearken to counsels that come out of good will.
Therefore, your. cunning Orators, before they propound the matter they would
urge, make a plausible preface first, to catch the hearers hearts. See how
Abigails counsel wrought on David, 1 Samuel 25.24. He blesses God for it, and
blesses her, v. 32, 33. there. Paul's counsel to the Corinthians wrought in
them sorrow to repentance, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9.

Reason 1. Because all suspicion of malice (which taints good counsel like a
dead fly) is taken away.

2. All fear of disgracing us, is likewise gone. We conceive that these cannot
dwell in a loving heart.

3. Love has a sympathizing power. If it be in the heart both of the speaker,
and of the hearer, it draws as the Loadstone does the iron. Magnes amoris amor:
Love is the Loadstone of love.

4. Love has a creating or begetting power. It is a fruitful tree, and can
beget love where none was before.

Use 1. It shows us a reason why some men's counsels will not be swallowed.
There is too much vinegar in them, little sign of love.

2. Let Ministers like wise Physicians, temper their bitter pills of reproof
with sugared affections. Many look more at the good relish of physic, then at
the event of it.

2. Doct. A docible mind must first be got by him that will be wise. The
Apostles Christ's best Scholars show it, by asking much. Why speak thou to
them in parables? Mat. 13.10. Declare unto us the parable of the tares of the
field, Mat. 13.36. And Nicodemus asks, How can a man be born when he is old?
Joh. 3.4.

Reason 1. Because else the work will go on very difficultly, like plowing on
rocks, or as the Egyptian chariots, when the wheels were off. God took off
their chariot wheels, that they drove them heavily, Exodus 14.25.

2. The work is as good as half done, where a docible heart is. Pour in
knowledge, and the vessel will receive it.

3. Dociblenesse of heart will make a man painful. Desire of knowledge sets a
capable soul, and body on work.

4. It will bring a greater progress, then a greater capacity in one not
willing to learn, can produce. As in schools, boys of mean parts, and great
desires, get more learning then others of stronger parts, and less desires of
it.

Use 1. It shows us, why many get no good by many good Sermons, they have no
heart to it. It is hard rowing against the stream. Why is this? A price in the
hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing be has no heart to it, Prove. 17.16.

2. Get a docible heart, else all your own pains and your Teachers is lost.

3. Doct. Good counsels not received do no good. The Word must be received with
meekness, Jam. 1.21. Else it profits not. The Corinthians had not been saved
by the Word that Paul preached, had they not received it, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2.

Reason 1. It appears in natural things. The earth bears no corn, if it
receive not the seed. In Civil things also. Men expect no gain where they put
in no stock. In Medicines, Physic cures not, if not received.

2. Because two things are required to make good counsel profitable, that it be
good, and rightly applied. Good meat not eaten nourishes no more then bad.

Use. Be careful to receive all good counsel, or look for no good from it. A
man that would learn to paint, or build, when he hears a good Workman discourse
well of such works, goes aside, and takes a tool, and draws a draught of it. Do
thou so in Divinity.

4. Doct. Knowledge is very necessary. My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge, Hos. 4.6. Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa.
1.3. Solomon calls often on us to embrace it. Heathens prized it above all
outward things. Pro scientia emenda, omnia vendenda: All is to be sold to buy
knowledge. Plato. The wise Merchant sold all to buy the pearl of price, and
made no ill bargain, Matt. 13.46. All things prove unprofitable or hurtful to
him that knows not how to distinguish good from evil, as he that knows not
meat from poison, may soon perish. Woe unto them that call evil good, and good
evil, Isa. 5.20.

Use. Pity those blind souls, that prefer all things above knowledge. Their
money will perish with them.

5. Doct. Words of truth are worth laying up. Mary kept all these things, Luke
2.19. Let thine heart retain my words, Prove. 4.4.

Reason 1. Because they are precious like jewels, or seed hidden in the earth.

Because of the good that comes by them. They show the way to eternal
happiness.

Use. Let us bewail our loss that have lost so many jewels for lack of laying
up. We do not so with gold and silver. We leave them not on the benches, but
lay them up in chests, that they may be safe and forth coming when we have need
of them. To receive words of truth, and not hide them, is to take them with the
one hand, and throw them away with the other.

6. Doct. Man's heart is the best place wherein words of truth may be hid. Thy
Word have I hid in my heart, Psalm. 119.11. His Mother kept all these sayings in
her heart, Luke 2.51. For there they are safest.

Use. Lay not up then holy instructions in a chest of silver, but in the
cabinet of thy heart. So will thou find them when thou have need of them.

Verse. 2. So that thou incline thine ears unto wisdom, and apply thine heart
unto understanding.
We are now come to the second way of getting heavenly wisdom; namely, by
learning it of them that are able to teach it.

For the words.

So that. This shows a dependence on the former words. Thou must be so willing
to learn, and remember that thou employ both ear and heart to get knowledge.

Incline thine ear, Heb. to make thine ear to hear, or regard. So that there is
no color for Popish Commenters to descant of humility, as they do, and how it
fits men to get wisdom. The word has no such notion in it. And if it were
Incline, yet that were token of humility, but of careful hearkening. Here is
nothing meant but applying the ear, not to hear only, but also diligently to
hearken and attend to things taught. As a Musician bows his ear to tune his
Lute, and the hearer afterward, not in sign of any humility, but to hear the
better. Yet the following word, (...), may seem to look that way, but that also
signifies stretching out the heart to hear, rather then bowing it down. Others
think it imports lifting up the ear to attend, as wild beasts quick of hearing
do upon a sudden noise. It argues unwillingnesse to lose a word of Wisdoms
instructions, and quickness to hear. Others, as Piscator reads it, If thou
incline, taking If out of the former verse. and so carry the word straight on to
the reddition in the fifth verse. and make this verse. to have no dependence on
the first, and the things altogether several running into the fifth v. as
several rivers into the Sea, to be swallowed up there. But the first way
answers best to the Heb. text, yet may there be several means to attain
wisdom, although the first be an help to the second, as the lower steps in a
ladder help to mount up to the higher.

Thine ear. The word (...) in the Original, comes from a word that signifies
to hear, which is the proper function of the ear. And it signifies,

1. The ear, the instrument of hearing. Moses put of the blood upon the tip of
Aarons right ear, Lev. 8.23.

2. The act of hearing. Thou shall read this Law before all Israel, in their
hearing, Heb. in their ears, Deuteronomy. 31.11. Here it is taken in the first sense.

Unto wisdom. See on chapter 1.2.

And apply, Heb. Bow down. For man is naturally proud, and scorns to stoop to
instruction. Omnes nati sumus in monte superbiae: We are all born in the
mountain of pride. Eucherius. And as foolish as the wild Asses there, Job
11.12. Or, stretch out. For we are by nature far short of it, and unwilling to
hear of it. For the word, see on chap. 1.24. on the word stretched out. It may
import a willing attendance on instruction, rather then humility.

(...), Thine heart. The word is taken,

1. For that fleshly member, which we call by that name. Joab thrust three
darts through the heart of Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.14.

2. For the middle of any things, because the heart lies in the midst of the
body. Thou have cast me in the midst of the Seas, Jonas 2.3.

3. For the soul it self, which brings life, and resides first and last in
the heart. David's heart smote him, 1 Samuel 24.5.

4. For the thought of the heart. It may be my Sons have cursed God in their
hearts, Job 1.5.

5. For the affection. Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thine? 2 King.
10.15.

6. For knowledge or understanding. He that hears reproof, gets
understanding, Heb. gets an heart.

Here it is taken in the third sense, for the soul it self, which must be
applied in hearing, as well as the ear, and is more needful also for learning.

To understanding. The same thing in diverse words. Heavenly knowledge is set
out in many terms in this Book.

The sum is: That thou may enjoy this excellent treasure, thy ears both of
body and soul must be taken off from worldly and transitory things, and fully
set to get true wisdom. The one will do no good without the other. Both
together by Gods blessing may attain it.

Figures. Apply, a Metaphor from corporal things that are applied to their
objects by bowing them down, or stretching them out. So much the Hebr. word
imports. But the soul cannot be applied to learning in that corporal way; but
in a spiritual way, by giving heed to what is taught.

For the parts. Two means of attaining spiritual wisdom, are here prescribed.

1. An outward one. Inclining the ear. 2. An inward one. Applying the heart.
In the first note, 1. The act, So that thou incline. 2. The subject, thine
ear. 3. The object, unto wisdom.


In the second note, 1. The act, And apply. 2. The subject, thine heart. 3. The
object, to understanding.


1. Doct. The ear must be first employed in hearing, if we would get knowledge.
Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell in Jerusalem, be this known unto you,
and hearken to my words, Act. 2.14. As if he had said, All I shall speak will
do you no good, except ye hearken to it. Who has ears to hear, let him hear,
Mat. 13.9.

Reason 1. In general, because the ear is one fit instrument of learning from
others, what our eyes cannot teach us. Auris sensus disciplinae: The ear is the
sense of learning. Arist. Ethic.

2. In particular. It is a quicker way of learning by hearing, then by any
other sense, or any labor of our own. A man may teach that in a quarter of an
hour, for which he has studied many days. Else Schools and Sermons were
needless.

Use. Think not scorn to learn of others. Bless God for thine ears. Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. Man is like the Heart, of which Aristotle lib. 9.
de Histor. Animal. writes, that when he pricks up his ears he quickly hears the
least sound, but when he hangs them down, he is deaf, and taken and killed. So
men stretching out the ear to hear, hear quickly, and escape, when dull and
deaf ones perish.

2. Doct. The ear does no good, if the heart attend not. My Son, forget not my
Law, but let thine heart keep my commandments, chapter 3.1. Else hearing helps
not. Let thine heart retain my words, keep my commandments, and live, chapter 4.4.
God opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul, Act. 16.14.

Reason 1. Because it makes no change in man, if the word strike not on the
heart. And without a whole change, no salvation is to be expected. Except a man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3.

2. Else there will be no belief of the Word, nor submission to it, without
which it does the soul no good. The Word preached did not profit them, being
not mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4.2.

Use. Be sure to bring attentive hearts, as well as attentive ears. Be not
hypocrites. Give not bodies without souls. Be not like the pillars of the
Church, to be present, and get nothing. If the heart be not drawn off the
world, no good comes by the Word.

3. Doct. We must not rest in hearing, till we come to complete wisdom. As
Preachers are to preach for the edifying of Christ's body, till it be perfect,
Ephesians. 4.11, etc. So are we to hear, till we have attained to perfection of
knowledge; that is, all our life long we must give heed to the sure word of
prophecy, until the day dawn, and the daystar arise in our hearts.

Reason 1. Because then, and not till then, ye understand things aright, 2 Pet.
1.19.

2. Else all your labor is lost.

Use. Be no more removed from Gods ordinances, then the Sun is from his course.
So Valerius Maximus, l. 5. commends Fabritius and Pyrrhus, that the Sun might
as soon be turned out of his way, as they out of the way of justice or virtue.

Verse. 3. Yea, if thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for
understanding.
The third help to get true wisdom follows, and that is, earnest prayer unto
God.

For the words.

(...), Yea. This word here adds an Emphasis to this means above the former. As
if he had said, A docible nature is good, and instruction of men; but both
these cannot beget knowledge without Gods blessing. Prayer therefore must be
added. So this particle adds increase. Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield
one Bath, Isa. 5.10. and Psalm. 21.3. where it should be rendered, yea thou
preventedst him. Thou not only gave him what he desired, v. 2. but much
more, verse. 3. See more of this word, chapter 1.9. on the word For.

If. See on chapter 1.10.

Thou cryest. See on chapter 1.21. Some understand this of an earnest desire of
knowledge, as a Child has of the breast, when he cries for it. Others
understand it better of prayer to God, which also includes the former.

After knowledge, or for knowledge, as it is translated in the end of the verse.
for understanding. And that is nearer to the Hebr. text. For the word, see on
chapter 1.2. on the word know.

And liftest up thy voice, Heb. give or utterest thy voice. See on chapter 1.20.

For understanding. See on verse. 2.

Figures. Cryest. Liftest up thy voice. Synecd. generis. If thou pray. For a
man may cry and speak loud, and yet not pray. Hereby is meant the particular
earnestness of a man in prayer for wisdom. The same thing is set out in two
several expressions. to show the necessity of prayer for wisdom, and
earnestness that should be in it.

In the first expression note, 1. The aggravation, Yea. 2. The act, if thou
cryest. 3. The object, after knowledge.


In the second expression note, 1. The act, And liftest up. 2. The subject, thy
voice. 3. The object, for understanding.


As if Solomon had said, Though humane instruction and a docible disposition be
needful to get wisdom, yet they are not sufficient to get it. God must be
fought to for a blessing.

1. Doct. There is more help from God to get wisdom, then from men. Every
good, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights, Jam. 1.17. And sure wisdom is one. I have planted, Apollo watered, but
God gave the increase, 1 Cor. 3.6. I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to
profit, Isa. 48.17.

Reason 1. Because God is the principal cause, men but isntrumental. The
chief builder in making a house, and the chief Pilot in guiding a ship, afford
most help, and deserve most praise. The Husbandman can cast seed into the
ground, but God must quicken it.

2. Because some grow wiser then their Teachers, therefore God gives them the
overplus of wisdom. Men cannot give what they had not. Such a Scholar was
David, I have more understanding then all my Teachers, Psalm. 119.99. And
therefore, David prays so often in that Psalm, that God would teach him.

Use. Give God the praise, if thou get much wisdom. Look not with the Swine to
the earth where the acorns lie, but up to the tree where they grow.

2. Doct. Prayer must be used for the getting of knowledge. So did Solomon,
Give thy servant an understanding heart, 1 Kin. 3.9. So St. James bids us. If
any man of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, Jam 1.5.

Reason 1. Because we are not able to root out the thorns, and dispel the
clouds of errors in our hearts, which will hinder the good seed of the Word.

2. We are not able to bring in the light of truth. Pray then to God to do it.
It grows not in Natures garden, else we need not ask it, nor God would not bid
us ask, if he meant not to give it, for he is not covetous to promise much, and
give little.

Use. Add prayer to diligence. Sine open divina vacillat humanum studium.
Without Gods help man's study faints. Valor. Max. Pray before Sermon, and after,
for a blessing.

3. Doct. Prayer for knowledge must be earnest. We must cry, and lift up our
voice, as if our voice were consecrated to that work only. We must ask, seek,
and knock for it, Mat. 7.7. The need is great and the benefit will be
answerable.

Use. Add fire of vehemence to your incense of prayer for wisdom. A cold
Suitor speeds not in the Court of heaven. Wilson.

Verse. 4. If thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid
treasures.
The Wiseman is now come to the top of the Ladder, which does bring us to true
wisdom. The lowest step was a docible heart, v. 1. The next, humane
instruction, v. 2. The next above that, prayer to God, v. 3. The last, study
and painful endeavor through Gods blessing to obtain it in this v. We must not
lie in a ditch, and cry, God help. We must not so trust to our prayers, that we
give over our endeavors.

For the words.

If. See on chap. 1.10.

Thou seek her. If thou use all diligence, labor, care and cost to find
wisdom, as men do to find things they have lost, or have need of. This word
intimates,

1. A loss or want of something. Else men seek not for it.

2. A knowledge of this want or loss. Else men fit still.

3. Some goodness indeed, or in our opinion, in the thing lost or wanting. Men
are or should be content to lose what is evil.

4. Some benefit to our selves in it. Else few will seek it, though good in it
self.

5. An earnest desire to find it. Else men have no heart to seek it.

6. A constant enqu^ry after it, wheresoever there is any hope to find it.
Else we seek in vain. So it is in seeking after wisdom, we must want it, and
know that we want it, and see good in it, and that to our selves, and seek it
earnestly and constantly, if we would find it.

As silver. The word (...), comes from a word which signifies to desire,
because all men desire money, and it can help them to all outward desirable
things, if they be to be had, as meat, drink, clothes, etc.

1. It signifies silver in the oar, or lump. The silver is mine, Hag. 2.8.

2. When it is joined with words of number, it signifies silver coined, or
money made of silver. Four hundred shekels of silver, Genesis 23.16.

Here it is taken in the first sense. For the seeking here spoken of, is not
taken from covetous men, toyling to get money, but from Miners digging for
silver oar, as the words following declare. This may be taken either for men's
care in digging in diverse places, till they find a vein of silver, or for their
labor in digging to the bottom, when they have found it. So when men want
knowledge, they will wander from Sea to sea, and from the North even to the
East, they will run to and fro to seek it, Amos 8.12. Many will run to and fro,
that knowledge may be increased, Dan. 12.4. From one Book to another, from one
Sermon to another, and they will be diligent in the use of all good means, till
wisdom be found out. They know, that surely there is a vein for the silver,
Job 28.1. Yet they are not satisfied with that, but enquire further, Where
shall wisdom be found? Job 28.12. It may well be, that seeking for a mine may
be meant by this first part of the verse. Cunning men, when they see springs
issuing from the bottom of mountains, know by the sand, or by the taste of the
water, where silver mines are. So must men guess by goodness of doctrine and
life, where wisdom is likelyest to be gotten. Men are not content to seek in
one place for a mine, but if they speed not there, they dig in another. So must
we for wisdom.

And searchest for her. The word (...), signifies searching in general, which
yet is somewhat more then seeking. A man may seek that looks only in some
likely places, but searching is looking in every room and corner of an house.
They shall search thine house, and the houses of thy servants; and it shall be,
that whatsoever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and
take it away, 1 King. 20.6. This was a through search indeed, so must the
search of knowledge be. Now there is no way to search for silver, but by
digging. Miners dig on, till they have got all the silver out of the mine. So
must we dig for wisdom as long as we live, for the vein of it is bottomless.

As for hid treasures. Not hid in the chests, which thieves hunt after, nor in
the ground, to be saved in times of war from the enemy, which Soldiers search
for, but in Mines, in the bottom of the earth, which men dig deep so. Such
pains should we take for wisdom.

Figures. Seek, Search. Metaphors from men that hunt up and down for things
missing. It intends to set out our continued pains, which we should take to get
heavenly wisdom.

Here are two similitudes.

The first taken from Miners care to find veins of silver.

The second from their pains in digging it out of the earth.

In the first note, 1. The act, If thou seek her. 2. The manner of performing
it, as silver.


In the second note, 1. The act, And searchest for her. 2. The manner, as for
hid treasures.


1. Doct. Heavenly wisdom is of great price. Like silver, and hid treasures.
More to be desired then gold; yea, then much fine gold, Psalm. 19.10. Yea, then
jewels, or precious stones, Job 28.16, etc.

Reason 1. Because as wisdom is more excellent then riches, or strength, so
heavenly wisdom far exceeds all other wisdom; yea, the most curious Arts. All
things that excel other in their kind, are of greatest price. Best books are
dearest: Scholars know it. Best food is dearest: Citizens know it. Best clothes
are dearest: Gentlemen know it. So should the best knowledge be of best
account. All the earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom, 1 King. 10.24.

2. It is most useful. Other wisdom tends to, and ends in the comforts of
this transitory life, for to get houses, food, apparel, which must perish.
This wisdom looks after eternity.

Use 1. To prize this above all other Arts. Things of greatest price should be
most prized, and of highest account with us.

2. To take most pains for it, as men do for things that are of greatest price.
Scholars take great pains in the University for one Art. So do Tradesmen in
the shop for one Trade. How much more pains should we take for the chiefest
wisdom?

2. Doct. Heavenly wisdom is far remote and hidden from us. As mines buried
deep in the earth. It is hid from the eyes of all living, etc. Job 28.20. It is
to the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23.

Reason 1. Because it is beyond our invention. Many witty things have been
invented by men, but no man so wise, that could ever stumble upon the way to
heaven. No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, Joh. 1.18.

2. It is beyond our apprehension. Sense and reason without illumination cannot
conceive of divine truths manifested to us in Scripture. Thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes, Matthew.
11.25. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.14.

Object. The commandment is not hidden from us, neither far off.

Answ. It is near in regard of Gods revelation, though not in regard of our
acceptance, as the Sun shines on a blind man, that sees it not.

Use. Bless God for any measure of heavenly truth made known to thee. He gave
both light and sight.

3. Doct. We must search for the means of obtaining heavenly wisdom. As they
that will dig for silver, must get Mattocks, and Spades, and find out mines.
Come, and see, Joh. 1.46. The people follow Christ by shipping to be taught,
Joh. 6.24.

Reason 1. Because God does not work by miracle now, as he did, when he gave
tongues, and healing power, Act. 2.3, 4.

2. Because wisdom grows not every where. Non omnis fert omnia tellus.
Several Lands have several Herbs, Trees, living Creatures.

Use. Seek to live under godly Ministers, where Gods Word drops like dew from
Sion, to make the valleys fruitful. There are the Indies, where mines of
golden truth are to be found. And men spare for no cost to travel to the
Indies, nor fear no peril.

4. Doct. We must use the means when we find them. So men dig when they have
found a mine. Cornelius is at cost to send to Joppa for Peter to instruct him,
as God enjoined him, Act. 10.32, 33. The next Sabbath day came almost the whole
City together, to hear the Word of God, Act. 13.44.

Reason 1. Because God has appointed them. And his will is a law to us, to use
them, although we had no need of them, or thought other means better, as Naaman
thought his Syrian rivers better then Jordan, 2 King. 5.12.

2. Because we have great need of them, and cannot attain true wisdom without
them.

Use. It cries down those that cry down Gods ordinances. They had need put this
text out of the Bible. It will be a strong witness against them else at the
day of judgment. Men will dig in Gold mines, yea in Coal mines, while any
thing is left. They can never dig the Scripture dry. But men of this generation
are wiser for the world, then for heaven.

5. D. We must take pains in the use of the means of knowledge. So do men in
digging for silver. We must watch daily at Wisdoms gates, and wait at the
posts of her doors, chapter 8.34. Give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13.

Reason 1. Because worldly men take so much pains for wealth, which is not to
be compared to knoweldge. Miners take great care, study, pains, and are at
great cost; and spend much time to get gold and silver out of the earth, and
afterward to purge it from the dross. Merchants are at much cost, and run many
dangers by storms and Pirates to get gain. All their heart runs after it. So
should ours after wisdom. Omnis cupiditas in illam tendatur. We should seek it
with as vehement desire, as covetous men seek after money. Not that
covetousness is to be commended, but that we should be ashamed not to seek
after wisdom so earnestly, as they do after riches. See how patiently they
that love money, labor and sweat for it, forbear pleasure, and delight, take
all occasions of gain, avoid all occasions of loss. And we do not so much for
heavenly wisdom, which is far better. For riches diminish by use, wisdom
increases. So Christ's coming is set out by a theeve's in the night, 1 Thessalonians.
5.2. We are spoken to here after the manner of men, Romans 6.19. For wisdom
should be sought with more diligence then riches.

2. Because though God could give it us without our labor, yet he will not,
that we may the more esteem it, being hardly gotten. So Husbandmen, Shepherds,
Gardiners, Laborers, Inkeepers, Merchants, learn Languages, Arithmetic, incur
many dangers. Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes, Impiger extremos
currens Mercator ad Indos. Horat. The greedy Merchant runs to the Indies
through sea, rocks, and fires to avoid poverty. The unjust Steward cannot dig.
It requires no great skill, but is too great a labor for him, Luke 16.3.

3. Because we must not fodere only, but effodere; not only dig, but dig out.
All the Diggers labor is lost, if he dig not till he dig the oar out of the
ground. Yea, men dig till they dig it all out. So must we labor till we attain
the height of knowledge.

4. The pleasure and profit will answer all the pains. It brings happiness and
better profit then merchandise of gold and silver, chap. 3.13, 14. It will make
amends if a man sell all he has for it, Matthew. 13.44. The fruit is answerable
to the labor. The treasure answers the Miners pains, and fills him with joy,
when his labor is done. He fares the better for it all his life long.

Use. Let us be ashamed that we have taken no more pains in the use of the
means to get heavenly wisdom. We may say of Knowledge, as Simonides said of
Virtue, Fertur in rupibus aditu difficilibus habitare: It is reported to dwell
in rocks hardly accessible. Sudor ante virtutem positus: Sweat goes before
virtue. Clem. Strom. l. 4. A man must climb or dig for it, if he will have it.
Worldly men dig where they have hope of a Mine, though with much uncertainty.
We may be ashamed of doing so little, where there is certainty of finding
wisdom. Viscera terrae extrahimus, ut digito gestiatur gemma, quam petimus.
Quot manus afferuntur, ut unus niteat articulus? Simili studio, industria,
constantia, sapien iae inquisitioni incumbendum erat. Plin. l. 2. c. 65. We
draw out the bowels of the earth to get a jewel we desire to wear on a finger.
How many hands are worn out, that one finger may shine? The like study,
industry, constancy, should we use in searching for wisdom. We may then
marvel at, and bewail our slothfulness in seeking wisdom, who all our life
long are so diligent to seek for wealth.

6. Doct. We must be constant in our pains in the use of the means of getting
wisdom. So are men unweariable in digging for treasure. This Book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night, Josh. 1.8. The blessed man meditates in Gods Law day and night, Psalm.
1.2.

Reason 1. Because the Ministers are to preach constantly. Preach the Word in
season, out of season, 1 Timothy 4.2. And if Schoolmasters must keep hours, it is
fit Scholars do so also.

2. We shall not be perfect in knowledge while we live, no not if we had
attained to Paul's stature. We should know but in part, till that which is
perfect come, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. And we must not give over means, till we attain
to a full measure of knowledge. As a sick man gives not over physic and diet,
till he be fully recovered.

Use. Let such take it to heart, who have found sweetness in Gods ordinances,
and now find none. Where is their constancy? Qui thesaurum effod^nt in mundo,
licet infinitas capiant divitias, non prius absistunt. quam totum exhauserint.
Non enim ut multa tollant, sed ut nihil relig^uant haec eos praecipue cura
tenere solet. Multo magis hoc nos in divinis facere thesauris opertet tamdiu
effodere quoad totum exhauserimus apparens. Apparens autem dixi, quoniam omnia
exhaurire non datur. Chrysostom. in Homil. super orat. Annae. They that dig out
treasures in the world, although they get infinite riches, yet cease not till
they have drawn the Mine dry: For this is their chief care, not to get out
much, but to leave none behind. Much more should we do thus, dig so long, till
we draw out all that appears. Now I say that appears, because no man has power
to draw out all. Arborem quam summa conspicis viriditate laetari, nisi fimo and
humore subterraneo foveatur, continue exarescet, nec viror corticis quicquam
valet, nisi virtus stipitis humorem continuum sibi trahat. Sic and homo,
quantumcunque in sapientia virescat, si novum humorem continue sibi non trahat
per studium, acquisita viriditas faciliter exarescit. Cassiodor. l. 2. The tree
which thou see enjoy the most greenness, unless it be continually cherished
with dung, and underground moisture, will be dried up; neither is the
greenness of the bark worth any thing, unless the force of the trunk draw
moisture to it continually. So a man, how green soever he be in knowledge, if
he draw not daily new moisture to himself by study, his greenness gotten will
easily be dried up. The cause why many get not saving knowledge, is, because
discouragement makes them give over labor. But seek and ye shall find, Matthew.
7.7. Plantin the curious Printers Motto was, Labor and constantia: By labor
and constancy.

But what are those means that we must use to get knowledge?

Answ. Light and sight. So in worldly things, light of the Sun, and our eyes
must be used to distinguish objects. The light is manifold:

1. Of Creatures, which must be used by observation of Gods power, wisdom,
goodness characterised in them. Romans 1.20. The invisible things of God are
seen from the creation of the world.

2. Of Scriptureused by reading. Nihil invenitur, nisi quod per viam suam
quaeritur: Nothing is found, unless sought in the right way.

3. Of the Word preached, used by hearing.

4. Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, used by receiving.

5. Of good parts given to others, used by conference.

6. Of principles in our selves, used by meditation.

The fight is twofold. As the body has two eyes, so likewise has the soul.

The first is Reason, whereby man must seek to understand all the former means
of knowledge truly.

The second is Illumination, whereby he is made able to understand such things
as Reason could not reach. This is the cleerer eye of the twain.

These must be continually poring upon the former grounds, that we may
understand the words of Wisdom. These are the means to attain true wisdom, a
docible mind, instruction by others, prayer to God, and diligent study. Where
all these are joined, there is no doubt of good success. Use them all then,
and fare well: one tool will never build an house.

Verse. 5. Then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
knowledge of God.
The way to true wisdom has been set down before, now follow the benefits of
it, to allure us to take pains, and observe the former directions to get it,
and those are set down, 1. Pofitively, to verse. 10. 2. Privatively, to the end
of the chap.


For the first. It contains promises of good things to be gotten by searching
for wisdom. After the precepts and instructions, follows the promise of good
success to every one which is tractable, and persuaded to observe the
directions proposed. Here is promised, 1. Wisdom to direct us how to carry our
selves toward God, v. 5, 6, 7, 8. 2. Toward men. v. 9.


In the first part note, 1. The things promised, verse. 5. 2. The reasons why we
may expect them. 1. From Gods liberality, v. 6. 2. From divine instruction, v.
6. also. 3. From his plentiful provision, v. 7. 4. From his defense of them
against errors and follies, v. 7. also. 5. From his direction in matters of
truth, v. 8. 6. From his preservation of them that are his in practical duties
of Religion, v. 8. also.



The sum is: They shall understand how to know and fear God aright, because
God will give them light and fight, and store of it; and power to avoid errors
in judgment and practice, and to keep truth and piety. For the things promised
in this verse.

For the words.

Then. When thou have used all the former means. But if thou go any other way
to seek true wisdom, then God has appointed, thou art sure to go without this
heavenly treasure. For the word see on chapter 1.28.

Thou shall understand. See on chapter 1.6.

The fear of the Lord. See on chapter 1.7.

And find. See on chapter 1.13.

The knowledge. See on chapter 1.4.

Of God. The word (...), comes from a word that signifies power. For all power
is from God. It is used,

1. For the true God. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth,
Genesis 1.1. And it is the first name that is given to God in Scripture.

2. It is attributed to Idol, and false gods, as the picture of a man is
called a man. So are they called gods, because they seem so to men, though they
be utterly unworthy of that name, and have no divine power in them at all. All
the gods of the Nations are idals, Psa. 96.3. They have cast their gods unto
the fire, for they were no gods, Isa. 37.19.

3. It is put for the images of the true God. These be thy Gods, O Israel,
Exodus 32.8. The Galf was made for an image or representation of the true God,
as appears by what sollows, which have brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt. Such were Jeroboam's Calves, not Images of Bual, but of the true God, 1
King. 12.28.

4. For the Angels, which are nearest to God in glory and power, far excelling
all earthly and bodily creatures in both. Thou have made him a little lower
then the Angels, Psa. 8.5.

5. For men that come nearest to God in state and power, especially Magistrates
and Judges. I have said, Ye are gods, Ps. 82.6.

6. It is used to set out the greatness or excellency of a thing, though
unreasonable, in that wherein it excells all other things of the same kind,
and so comes nearer to God then they do. Nineveh was an exceeding great City,
Hebr. a great City of God. Here it is taken in the first sense for the true
God, for the knowledge of other gods will do us no good, without the knowledge
of him, but hurt rather. Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after
another God, Psa. 16.4.

The sum of all is: That he which conscionably uses all the former means,
shall experimentally be acquainted with true piety and religion, and soundly
seasoned with an holy illumination, and made judicious in Scripture truths, and
matters of faith; so that he shall be well able to discern between light and
darkness, between truth and errors, in measure competent for his salvation.

Figures. The fear of the Lord Syneed. Speciei. Hereby is meant true religion
and piety, which besides the fear of God requires many other graces, but this
is one of the principal, and put for all the rest.

Find. A Metaphor from Seekers. The benefits to be gotten are two.

1. The fear of God. 2. The knowledge of God.
In the first note, 1. The time, Then. 2. The act, thou shall understand, 3.
The subject, the fear. 4. The object, of the Lord.


In the second note, 1. The act, And find. 2. The subject, the knowledge, 3.
The object, of God.


Here the Ifs end, and the sentence is completed thus: If thou do all the
former things, thou shall have heavenly knowledge.

Then, is to be taken,

1. Inclusively, when thou have used all the former means, thou may expect it.

2. Exclusively. Never look for it, till thou have used them all.

1. Doct. Men that conscionably use all means of getting true wisdom,
appointed by God, may expect good success from him. So did Solomon speed, who
records his Fathers instructions, from chapter 4.4. to chapter 9. end, and his Mothers,
chapter 31. He also used study, and gave his heart to it, Eccl. 1.13. He prayed for
it, 2 Chr. 1.10. and so got a great measure of it. Meditate upon these things,
give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all, 1 Timothy 4.15.

Reason 1. Because else Gods promise is void, and then his truth will be
questioned. Men may fail of performing promises, for want of wit to foresee
inconveniences, and power to effect what they say. But God wants neither.

2. The means appointed by God would be slighted. Who would ever study Law or
physic, if after all his pains he could not attain to the profitable knowledge
of them?

Use. Let this encourage you to study for true wisdom. Here is a fair promise,
God will not fail us, if we take pains to get wisdom. Many of the people
foolishly complain, that they cannot know the way to true wisdom. Great
Scholars cannot agree upon it. Sure if they sought as diligently by reading the
Scriptures and Prayer, and other good means, as they and others labor for
wealth, they would find wisdom. The rich young man came to Christ, as defirous
to learn, yet preferring his wealth before true wisdom, went without it. When
men see Merchants return home rich, and Husbandmen have great crops, they are
encouraged to those Trades. So should we be encouraged to seek wisdom by what
others have got. Try the means, and let what you get encourage you to seek for
more; as men work still, and harder in their Trades, when gain comes. Solomon
finding his Ophir trade for gold to thrive, 1 King. 9.28. sent thither every
three years, 1 King. 10.22. So let us be encouraged by what we have got
already, to get more wisdom.

2. Doct. There is no expectation of attaining true wisdom, without a
conscionable use of all good means. The Kings of Israel could not obtain true
wisdom, nor the wicked Kings of Judah, because they used not the means
prescribed to them to cause the Law to be written out for them, and to read
therein all the days of their life, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.

Reason 1. Because God will not bless their labors, that go not his way. They
may as well expect strength without food, health without physic, warmth
without clothes or fire, crops without plowing or sowing.

2. God will cross those that go their own ways to get wisdom. For they
ascribe to themselves a power above God, and a wisdom suitable, that pull down
his way to set up another.

Use. It shows us a reason why many have not true wisdom, because they seek it
not in Gods way, and God will not give it in theirs. They have no mind to learn
it, hear seldom, pray seldomer, never study.

3. Doct. Much wisdom is needful to find out the true religion. Timothy from
a child had learned the holy Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, etc. Jam. 3.17.

Reason 1. Because it is high above us; sense nor reason cannot reach it.

2. There are many shows of false religions to deceive us. As voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels; a show of wisdom in will worship, etc.
Col. 2.18.23. All is not gold that glisters.

Use. Marvel not that men are so ready to embrace false religions, Popery,
Idolatry, Herefie. It is for want of true wisdom. They think themselves wifer
then they are. Vainman would be wise, though man be born like a wild Asses
colt, Job 11.12. The name here given to God is Jehovah, which signifies being.

4. Doct. We must look upon God as the fountain of all being. In him we live,
and move, and have our being, Act. 17, 28. Of him, and through him, and to him
are all things, Romans 11.36.

Reason 1. Because this will be glorious to God when we see him in all things.

2. It will be pleasing to us, as to men, to read their genealogies; and to
children, to see their parents love in their clothes, victuals, etc.

3. It will be profitable to others, and keep us from wronging others. He who
made them, will right them.

Use. Let us, as see God in our being, so praise him while we have any being,
Psalm. 146.2.

5. Doct. The knowledge of God is worth the finding. Let him that gloryeth,
glory in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord, Jer.
9.24. I count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8.

Reason 1. Because Acquaintance with good men brings much good; much more with
God, who can do us more good then all the creatures can.

2. Heaven is not to be had without it. This is life eternal, that they might
know thee the only true God, Joh. 17.3. No admission to live in a palace
without the owners acquaintance. Heaven is Gods palace.

Use. Woe be to them that seek so much to get acquaintance on earth, but never
look after acquaintance with God. They may seek it when it is too late. When
they come to die, and would scrape acquaintance with God, he will say, I never
knew you: Depart from me, Matt. 7.23. Therefore acquaint thy self now with him,
and he at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, Job 22.21.

6. Doct. We must look upon God as most powerful. God has spoken once; twice
have I heard this, that power belongs unto God, Psalm. 62.11.

Reason. Because we may have need of more then a created power, which is not to
be found but in God.

Use. When men overpower you, look up to Gods power. This may ease your
spirits.

Verse. 6. For the Lord gives wisdom; out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding.
Here are the two first reasons, why they which conscionably use all the former
means, shall attain true knowledge. And they are taken from Gods liberality in
giving wisdom inwardly to make the soul see the truth, and his outward
instruction of things fit to be discerned by that wisdom wrought in the soul
within. God gives fight and light. Both are necessary, and both from God.

For the words.

For. See on chapter 1.9. Some the these words to the third v. as giving a reason
why we should pray to God for knowledge; because he is ready to give it. Others
knit it to the sourth v. thus, by way of qualification. Though thou must use
all diligence to get heavenly wisdom, yet know, that all thy wit and labor
cannot reach it, but God must give it to thee, or thou will never have it. But
it is best to knit it to the verse. immediately before. If any man should say, I
despair of getting heavenly wisdom. My pains cannot reach it, and God will not
hear my prayers. Bolomon answers in the text, Despair not, for God is as ready
to give, as thou art to a^k it.

The Lord. See on chap. 1.7. God gives true wisdom inclusively. He can do it.
And exclusively. None else can do it.

Gives, Heb. will give; to wit, if thou pray and labor for it, as before. For
the word see on chapter 1.4.

Wisdom. See on chapter 1.2.

Out of his mouth. The word (...), or (...), signifies,

1. That member which we call the mouth of the body. They have months, but they
speak not, Psalm. 115.5.

2. The manifestation of ones mind by speech, or words which come out of the
mouth. According to thy Word shall all my people be ruled, Genesis 41.40. The word
is in Hebr. thy mouth.

3. The wound top of a well, or garment, or vessel, which is like a mouth. A
great stone was upon the wells mouth, Genesis 29.2.

4. The edge of a sword which devours or destroys men, as the mouth does meat.
And they slew Hamor, and Shethem his Son with the edge (Heb the mouth) of the
sword, Genesis 34.26.

5. The end or corner of a place. The house of Bael was full from one end to
another, Heb. mouth, 2 King. 10.21.

6. A part or portion, as the mouth is a part of the face. By giving him a
double portion, Heb. mouth, Deuteronomy. 21.17.

Here it is taken in the second sense for the manifestation of truth by God in
his Word, or by his Ministers.

Comes. It is not in the Original, but added by the Interpreters fitly to
make up the sense, and therefore it is printed in smaller letters.

Knowledge. See on chapter 1.4.

And understanding. See on verse. 2. of this chap. Some take wisdom, knowledge,
and understanding, to be all one here. As if the wise man bore so great
affection to it, that he could not name it often enough, nor find words
sufficient to express the worth of it. Baine distinguishes them thus, By
Wisdom is meant the knowledge of heavenly things; by knowledge, things
needful to be known here in the world; by Understanding, discretion to carry
our selves well among men. But it is most likely, that they are Synonymas, and
intend no more but knowledge of what we should believe, and how we should carry
our selves religiously, and so it answers well to the former verse. and gives a
good reason to confirm it. Thou shall understand, because God gives wisdom,
etc.

Figures. Gods mouth is put here for his revealing truth.

1. By a Metaphor, attributing a mouth to God, and speaking of him after the
manner of men, although he have no body, nor bodily members.

2. By a Metonymie of the cause for the effect. Hereby is meant Gods revealing
his will, as men do by their mouths make their mind known, yet in another way
more befitting Gods spiritual essence, by a sound from Heaven, or by Angels,
or by his Servants, Prophets, and Ministers; or inwardly, by his Spirit.

Note 1. Gods liberality. 2. His instruction.


In the former observe, 1. The word of coherence, For. 2. The person spoken of,
the Lord. 3. The act, gives. 4. The object, wisdom.


In the latter note, 1. The two gifts, knowledge and understanding. 2. The way
of bestowing by divine information, comes out of his mouth.


1. God gives the soul eyes by illumination.

2. He gives light by revelation. We shall see the fruit of our labor in
searching for heavenly wisdom, for God will give it.

1. Doct. What we cannot do in search of true wisdom, God will supply. So he
taught Moses and Daniel what Egyptian and Chaldean wisdom could not teach
them. So he taught David what his Teachers could not. So he confesses, I have
more understanding then all my Teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation,
Psalm. 119.99. So he taught Solomon more then any of the children of the East,
or all the Wise men of Egypt knew, 1 King. 4.30. So he would teach the
Philippians, what they could not teach one another. If in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, Phil. 3.15.

Reason 1. Because of Gods mercy, He will not leave his servants in the suds.
If he will have birds fly, he gives them wings. If he give an heart to seek for
wisdom, he supplies by his Spirit where means fall short.

2. Because of Gods glory. He will perfect the work, that he may have the
honor of the whole. Jesus is the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2.
He will not lose his glory for men's imperfections, but will supply what is
wanting.

Use. This may encourage Gods people to labor for wisdom. If aboy willing to
learn had a Schoolmaster, that would say to him, Study hard; when you stick, I
will help you out. My head is better then yours. Would he not study? So do ye.
God will supply what ye want.

Use 2. When ye stick at difficulties, pray to God to resolve you. He will help
you out of the ditch.

2. Doct. Wisdom is a free gift: If a man ask wisdom of God, it shall be
given him, Jam. 1.5. I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, says
God to Solomon, 1 Ki. 3.12.

Reason 1. A part ante, from our condition before. We have no spiritual
wisdom naturally, nor strength that can get it, nor wealth that can purchase
it. We are born fools, and dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.

2. A part post. We can give no requital to God, who gives it. We cannot
teach him wisdom. Who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his
counselor, or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again? Romans 11.34, 35. Neither can we with all our wisdom, no not, when we
are in heaven, add any thing to Gods happiness, who is perfection it self.
Poor Apprentices, when they get skill in their Trades, may help to make their
Masters rich. We cannot do so to God.

Use 1. To teach us to receive wisdom being a free gift. There is none among
us, which would not only think himself to be out of his wits, if he should
refuse a thing, which he could not want, but also would judge himself most
unthankful, if he did not receive it with hearty thanksgiving, when it was
freely offered him. We would hardly purchase heavenly wisdom, if we will not
receive it of free gift.

2. To teach us humility. If we get true wisdom, let us not attribute it to
our own strength, nor crow over others. Fishermen got it, when Pharisees could
not.

3. Doct. Wisdom comes from the Lord alone. Hither the Apostle James sends us
to beg it. If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that gives to all
men liberally, and upbraideth not, Jam. 1.5. Solomon prays to God for it, and
obtains it of God, 1 Kin. 3.9, 12. If (as a learned man says) that all
profitable learning in the world came out of Adam's mouth at first, as from a
most wise teacher and fountain; how much better may the same be said of the
only wise God? Jude v. 25. who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in
working, Isa. 28.29.

Reason 1. The Law, the most complete rule of life came from him. No Laws of
Solon, or of the wisest men come near it. No man could find out such.

2. The Gospel is from him alone. As he gave the Law by Moses, so the Gospel by
Christ, Joh. 1.17. Angels could not have found out a way to satisfy Gods
justice, and save us.

3. All prophesies are from him alone. The Word of the Lord that came unto
Hosea, Hos. 1.1. The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, Rev.
1.1. None can tell things to come, but God.

Use 1. Let us then not trust to the rivers, but go to the fountain for waters
of wisdom. You may learn humane wisdom from Plato and Aristotle, but divine
wisdom is not to be sought in the books of Heathen writers, and Infidels, but
in those books which come out of Gods own mouth. Solomon sends us thither for
it, from whence he had it himself. Origo fontium, and fluminum omnium mare est:
virtutum, and scientiarum, Dominus Jesus Christus. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 13. The
original of all fountains and rivers is the Sea. The original of all virtues
and sciences, is the Lord Jesus Christ. Ad sapientem pertinet considerare
causam altissimam, per quam certissime de aliis judicatur, and secundum quod
omnia ordinari oportebit. Aristotle. It belongs to a wise man to consider of
the highest cause by which he may most certainly judge of others, and according
to which all things must be ordered. Non Chaldaeorum institutio, sed divina
gratia pueros intelligentes fecit. It was not the instruction of the Chaldeans,
but Gods grace which made the young men wise. Theodor. in Dan. 1.17.

2. Take notice that our wisdom is not from our selves, but from God. It is
not in our power to get it. Be not then proud of thy wisdom, as if God were a
debtor to thee for using thy wisdom to his glory. He has paid thee
beforehand, he gave thee thy wisdom, and if thou use it to his glory, he will
pay thee again with eternal glory. Proud persons then must be dumb, unless
they make Solomon a liar, who says, The Lord gives wisdom. What wisdom then
soever we have, we must not praise our selves for it, as if we were something
more then others, which are void thereof: but without advancing our selves, we
must confess with St. James, that every good, and every perfect gift is from
above, and comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. Otherwise we
should well deserve to hear, Who makes thee to differ from another? And, what
have thou, that thou did not receive? Now, if thou did receive it, why do
thou glory as if thou had not received it? 1 Cor. 4 7.

4. Doct. All manner of heavenly knowledge is from God. God, who at sundry
times, and in diverse manners, spoke to our Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. Flesh and blood has not
revealed it unto thee, but my Father, which is in heaven, Mat. 16.17.

Reason 1. Because none can teach us to know God, but God himself. Who can
consider of the highest cause, but by influence from the highest cause? Who can
see the Sun, but by influence from the Sun?

2. We cannot know heaven but by Gods revelation. As we know not what is in the
Indies, but by relation of such as dwell or have been there.

3. We know not the way to heaven but by Gods direction. Men's brains may make a
ladder to climb to Kingdoms, but Jacob's ladder, where God stands at the top,
can only reach to heaven.

Use. Try your wisdom, whether heavenly or no, in divine things, by the
original of it. The conscience is troubled with the guilt of sin; God sets
Christ's blood alone before thee; Papists set merits, works of supererogation,
Popes pardons, to help cleanse it. Gods way is the best. The soul is oppressed
with filth of sin. God offers his Spirit to cleanse this soul stable. Papists
talk of whippings, abstinence from flesh, yet are many of their votaries,
homines, quos si vel foeno pasceres, lascivirent. Erasmi vita. Men that would
be wanton, if they eat nothing but hay.

5. Doct. Gods Word and Ministers must be regarded in the search of wisdom. To
the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me,
Joh. 5.39. Quench not the Spirit. Despise not prophesyings, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19, 20.

Reason 1. Because the Scriptures are the fountains of heavenly wisdom.

2. They are the touchstone of divine truths. Spirits must submit to be tried
by them, 1 John 4.1, 2.

3. The Ministers are the conduit-pipes through which God ordinarily sends
forth the waters of heavenly knowledge.

4. They are Goldsmiths, that know best how to use the touchstone of the Word
to try truths. It is their study and their trade.

Use 1. To show us the vanity of those men who trust to revelations and their
own Spirits, in stead of Gods; and slight the Scriptures, and despise the
Ministers. Certainly they are far from true wisdom.

2. To exhort us to read the Scriptures diligently, and to hearken to Gods
Ministers reverently. For though men must use their own endeavors to get true
wisdom (else praying to God for it is but mocking of God) yet they cannot by
any labor of their own attain it. Therefore must our ears and hearts be
inclined to our Teachers, v. 2. By them does God open his mouth to give us
wisdom. We should then resort to the preaching of the Word, not slackly, or
for custom sake, as hypocrites, superstitious persons, and Idolaters do, but
to the end that we may receive and learn wisdom of God, through his grace and
goodness, whereby we knowing him, may walk in his fear. It is promised as a
blessing, Thine eyes shall see thy Teachers, Isa. 30.20.

6. Doct. Inward capacity, and outward discovery come both from God. He gave
Solomon wisdom to comprel^end many things, which others could not understand.
He gave M^ses knowledge of the Creation of the world.

Reason. He gave man eyes to se^ withal, else he could not have had any
comfortable view of the excellency of the creatures. He placed the Sun and Moon
in the firmament, else eyes would have done no good. Much more is there need of
Christ's help for spiritual light and sight. Quod lux est videntibus and visis,
id Deus est intelligentibus and intellectis. Thalasstus in Hecatontade. That
which light is to them that see, and to things seen, the same is God to
understanding men, and things understood.

Use. Seek both of God by his revelation of the truth in his Word, and
illumination to conceive it in the preaching of it by his Spirit. Else no sound
wisdom is to be gotten, nor no spiritual light nor sight.

Verse. 7. He lays up sound wisdom for the righteous, he is a buckler to them
that walk uprightly.
The two next reasons follow, why right searchers shall obtain true wisdom.
The one from Gods plentiful provision. The other from his protection from
errors.

For the words.

He lays up, Heb. he hides. He had said before that wisdom must be sought
like an hidden treasure, now he shows where it is hidden, not with men, nor in
the bowels of the earth, but with God. Men lay up treasure, God lays up
wisdom, and that in Christ, in whom are all the treasures hid of wisdom and
knowledge, Col. 2.3. And who is the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. Now, God does
not hide it to deprive men of it, but that as a treasure he may keep it safe,
and bring it out to give to his children, as they need it. And it shows withal
that God has abundance of wisdom, enough to serve himself, and all creatures,
because he lays it up as men do riches, who have much more then they have
present use of. And he lays it up for the good of his, as he does goodness. O
how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee!
Psalm. 31.19. So it is ready and at hand for them upon all occasions. So we keep
things carefully, that we lay up for our children. As the men of China do hide
matter to make China dishes, in the earth, to make portions for their children.

Sound wisdom. The word (...), signifies,

1. Essence, or being or substance of a thing. Hence may come the Greek word
(...). That they are double to that which is, Job 11.6. How have thou
plentifully declared the thing as it is? Job 26.3. Thou dissolvest my
substance, Job 30.22. And so it stands in opposition to that which is not. So
riches are described, Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? chapter
23.5. Heaven only has a foundation, earth has none, but is hanged upon
nothing. Abraham looked for a City which has foundations, Heb. 11.10. But God
hangs the earth upon nothing, Job 26.7. Wisdom has solid substance in it,
and true worth, whereas opinion only sets the price upon all outward things.

2. The word signifies working or operation, which is an effect of essence.
Things must be, before they can work, and are to small purpose, if they work
not. God i^ excellent in working, Isa. 28.29.

3. Wisdom, which is one of the most excellent things that have a being. Keep
sound wisdom, chapter 3.21. Other things pass away, when it remains and supports
many things besides. Sapientia essentiae appellationem sortita est, quod sit,
atque ad omnem aeternitatem duret. Ab. Ezr. Wisdom has got the name of
essence, because it is, and endures to all eternity. It is also learned from
things that have a being, and is excellently seen in them. Some take it in the
first sense, and interpret it of that glorious being which God reserves for the
righteous in heaven. But it is best to understand it of sound wisdom, which is
said to be Gods gift in the former verse. God is not like a bad Father, which
wastes his goods, but like a provident one, who lays up treasure for his
children.

For the righteous. He had showed before what God gave, namely, Wisdom. Now he
shows to whom he gives it, not to all, but to the righteous. He lays it up for
them that will make a good use of it. Rectus est, qui suam voluntatem divinae
conformat volens de omni re id quod Deus vult eum v^lle. Ambros. He is right,
who conforms his will to G^ds, willing in every thing that which God would have
him to will. It may be translated, For the upright. So, gladn^sse for the
upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11.

He is a buckler. The Lord, mentioned before verse. 6. Others read, which is a
buckler. To wit, sound wisdom, mentioned in the beginning of this verse. The
former is the better. God as a shield sets himself between his, and all
dangers, especially spiritual. It might have been objected, The godly are
subject to many dangers and errors. The text answers, God will be their buckler
to stand between them, and what might hurt them. The Hebr. word (...), comes
from a word that signifies to cover and defend. A Buckler defends men against
blows and weapons. It signifies,

1. A shield or buckler, literally, such as are used in wars. Was there a
shield seen? Judge. 5.8. There the shield of the mighty i^ vilely cast away, 2 Samuel 1.21.

2. By a Metaphor it signifies a protection or protector from dangers. I am thy
shield, Genesis 15.1.

3. Rulers, who are the protectors of the people. Her rulers (Heb. her shields)
with shame do love, Give ye, Hos. 4.18. The shields of the earth belong unto
God, Psalm. 47.9.

Here it is taken in the second sense, and so God protects his from innumerable
dangers, and so does Wisdom also. But it may better be understood according to
the coherence, that God will be a buckler to defend them against all sophistry
and errors that would wound their souls, and rob them of that wisdom which God
has laid up for them. There is no want with God, neither is he sparing in
giving wisdom to his. As he lays it up plentifully for them, so he will bring
it out plentifully to them, and make it a buckler to keep them safe from all
hurt of errors, especially such as might endanger their salvation.

To them that walk. See on chapter 1.15.

Uprightly, or aright. Whose lives and actions are sincere and agreeable to
Gods Word.

Figures. He lays up. A Metaphor from parents laying up treasure, or portions
for children, 2 Cor. 12.14.

A buckler. A Metaphor from War, wherein Soldiers use bucklers to prevent
wounding.

To them that walk. A Metaphor from Travelers, to set out a constant course of
piety.

Note 1. Gods provision.

2. Gods protection.

In the former note,

1. The person, He; that is, the Lord.

2. The act, lays up.

3. The object, sound wisdom.

4. The subject, for the righteous.

In the latter observe,

1. The benefit, He is a buckler.

2. The persons to whom, to them that walk uprightly.

1. Doct. God has store of wisdom. His understanding is infinite, Psalm.
147.5. O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God,
Romans 11.33. Men have store of gold that can spare it to treasure it up. So has
God of wisdom.

Reason. It appears,

1. By Gods works. Of Creation. In wisdom have thou made them all, Psalm.
104.24. Of Providence, in upholding the world, wherein there are are so many
contrary dispositions in all sorts of creatures, that threaten ruin to it.

2. In his Writings. The Law and Gospel, Old Testament and New, the best books
in the world, if men's eyes were open to see the mysteries of them. Open mine
eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law, Psalm. 119.18.

3. In his Scholars. Bezaleel and Aboliab filled by God with understanding in
all manner of curious works, Exodus 31.2, etc. David by Gods Word made wiser
then his enemies, teachers, ancients, Psalm. 119.98, etc. The Prophets,
Apostles. We count them best Schoolmasters, and wisest, out of whose Schools
come rare Physicians, Lawyers, Divines. All learned men come out of Gods
School. His is the heavenly Academy.

Use. Let us admire at Gods infinite wisdom, and seeing our own small store,
let us submit our judgment to his in all things, for he is wisest. It seems
strange to flesh and blood to be saved by the Cross of Christ. It seemed so to
Jews and Greeks. Christ crucified is unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto
the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. That is, to all the wise men of the
world. For the rest of the world had little learning then, and were counted
Barbarians. Let us look for salvation no way else but from the Cross of
Christ. It seems strange to us, that death should be destroyed by death, yet it
is eafie to God. It seems no less strange, that God should work by contraries.
Yet he does so. He brings light out of darkness, and leads many to heaven
through an hell of conscience. It seems strange to us that we should be fick or
poor, when others are well or rich; but God in his wisdom sees some good in it
to us, which we see not. Let us therefore be patient.

2. Doct. God provides wisdom for others. Parents, as they provide food and
apparel, so also they lay up portions for their children. God has wisdom
sufficient for himself to guide the world, and lays up enough to make others
wise. He lays it up,

1. In the Creatures. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows his handy work, Psalm. 19.1.

2. In his Word. These. are written, that ye might believe that Josus is the
Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his mine,
Joh. 20.31.

3. In the Sacraments. They are mysteries, 1 Cor. 11.23, etc.

4. In Christ. He is made of God unto us wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.30. And of his
fullness we all have received, and grace for grace, Joh. 1.16.

5. In the government of the World. He brings down great men, disappoints their
plots, delivers his people, Exodus 15.

6. In the government of the Church. He makes his people to increase under
persecution, as the Israelites did in Egypt, Exodus 1.12. Sanguis Mirtyrum
semen Ecclesiae. The blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church.

7. In Heaven. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor.
2.9.

Use. Despair not of getting store of knowledge, if ye dig where and how God
appoints. We are ill keepers of wisdom. Adam soon lost it. Therefore God keeps
it for us. Otherwise it would soon be lost out of the world. Witness barbarous
times. Seek therefore for true wisdom in ^ste Creatures, by Observation; in
the Word, by Auscultation; in the Sacraments, by Meditation; in Christ, by
Supplication; in the World, by Contemplation; in the Church, by Consideration;
in Heaven, by Premeditation.

3. Doct. Upright men shall not want necessary wisdom. God has laid up store
for them. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self, Joh. 7.17. What man is he that
fears the Lord? him shall be teach in the way that he shall choose. The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will show them his
covenant. Or, as your marg. reads, And his covenant to make them know it, Psalm.
25.12, 14.

Reason 1. Because God is liberal, and like to great Princes, uses not to give
one gift alone unto his Favorites. They give riches and honor. He gives
righteousness and wisdom. He blesses us with all spiritual blessings, Ephesians.
1.3.

2. Because he knows, that they will use it well. To such children as use
clothes well, and other gifts, Parents give more. So does God.

Use. It comforts Gods people. They have an heart to do well, but often
complain, that they cannot understand what is right in many particulars. Be of
good comfort, God that has given thee that heart, will give thee convenient
knowledge.

4. Doct. God will keep his from dangerous errors. So he kept the Antiochians
by the Apostles and Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.1, 2, 31. The Galatians, by
Paul's Epistle, Gal. 1.8, etc.

Reason 1. Because God would not be dishonored, nor have his way nor himself
be evil spoken of by them. A Father had rather any should think ill of him then
his children.

2. He would not have them perish. Men may perish by damnable errors, as well
as by wicked lives, 2 Pet. 2.1. A Father would not have his children take such
courses as should lead them to the gallows. God has more care to keep his from
hell.

Use. Let us praise God for keeping us free from the damnable errors of the
time about God, his Word, Resurrection, into which others run greedily. It is
not our care, but Gods, that keeps us pure.

5. Doct. True wisdom is a great means to keep men from errors. So some read
it, which is a buckler, meaning wisdom. By them is thy servant warned, Psalm.
19.11. What to do? To take heed of errors, which himself sees not, verse. 12.
Beware, lest ye be led away with the error of the wicked. How shall we avoid
it? By growing in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet.
3.17, 18.

Reason. Because wisdom takes away those things that make us go out of the
way. As,

1. Ignorance of the right way. This makes a Traveller take the wrong way for
the right. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, Matt. 22.29. Wisdom removes
this, and shows us the right way.

2. Darkness. He that knows the way best, may err in the dark. So may Gods
servants in difficult things, not so clearly revealed in Scripture. Here also
wisdom helps them out.

Use. It discovers to us a way how to discover errors, and avoid them, which is
by getting wisdom. Verum est index sui, and obliqui. Truth discovers what is
right, and what it wrong. Men that have true weights at home, weigh things they
buy, and are not cousened by false weights abroad. So wise men weigh opinions
by the Scripture, and are not deceived.

6. Doct. Uprightness both of heart and life is needful for them that would
be kept from errors. Witness David's preservation, and Solomon's failing in
religion.

Reason. Because God takes no care of keeping such who deny him heart or life.

Use. Behold another means of keeping you from errors, that may endanger your
salvation. Get upright hearts and lives, and ye shall be safe.

Verse. 8. He keeps the paths of judgment, and preserves the way of his
Saints.
Here are the two last benefits, or reasons, why such as use the right means,
shall attain to the knowledge of God; to wit, Gods direction in matters of
judgment, and preservation in matters of practice. He not only shows that God
will give that wisdom to his servants, which he has laid up for them; but
also what good fruit it shall bring forth in them. God provides sound wisdom
for good men, which is a buckler to defend them, that they may walk safely in
good ways, and God preserves them therein.

For the words.

He keeps. Some understand it of God in regard of himself, that he always
does justly in what he does. Others, of God, in regard of his people. He keeps
them in right ways, and will not suffer them to err to perdition. But the
words are, To keep the paths of judgment; that is, God lays up wisdom in
store for them, and gives it them, and gives withal understanding to discern
errors, that they may judge rightly of divine truths, and not go astray from
them.

The paths. The rules of truth. See on chapter 1.19.

Of judgment. See on chapter 1.3. Yet to handle it more fully, the Heb. word
(...), signifies,

1. The Law, or Word of God, by which judgment is to be given. The judgments
of the Lord are true, Ps. 19.9.

2. The suit or case to be tried in judgment. Moses brought their cause before
the Lord, Numb. 27.5.

3. The sentence past in judgment. They gave judgment upon them, 2 King. 25.6.

4. The crime or cause of that sentence. They whose judgment was not to drink
of the cup, Jer. 49.12.

5. The punishment inflicted by virtue of the sentence. So shall thy judgment
be, 1 King. 20.40.

6. Justice, which ought to be in every sentence. Which executes judgment for
the oppressed, Psalm. 146.7.

7. The instruments of executing the sentence, or judgment. When I send my
four fore judgments upon Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 14.21.

8. The Judicial Law of God. Remember the Law of Moses, with the statutes and
judgments, Mal. 4.4.

9. Wisdom and discretion, which are very needful in judgment. The Lord is a
God of judgment, Isa. 30.18.

10. Moderation, which is very requisite in judgment. Else, Summum jus, summa
injuria: The highest Law, the highest injury. O Lord, correct me, but with
judgment, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing, Jer. 10.24.

11. Righteous promises. Quicken me according to thy judgments, Psalm. 119.156.

12. The rite, custom, or manner of doing a thing, which should be done with
judgment. How shall we order the child? Heb. What shall be the manner of the
child? Judge. 13.12. that is, How must the child be bred?

13. The form or show of a person or thing. What manner of man was he? Hebr.
What was the manner of the man? 2 King. 1.7.

14. Right or title to a thing. This shall be the Priests due from the people,
Dent. 18.3.

15. A pattern, according to which a thing is to be made. And thou shall rear
up the Tabernaele, according to the fashion thereof, which was showed thee in
the Mount, Exodus 26.30. Here it is taken in the first sense, God keeps his in
paths of truth agreeable to his Word.

And preserves. The word (...), signifies,

1. To preserve by keeping out of sin or trouble. Keep me from the snare which
they have laid for me, and the grins of the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 141.9.
Thy visitation has preserved my life, Job 10.12.

2. To keep in prison. Am I a Sea, or a Whale, that thou set a watch over
me? Job 7.12. Keep this man, 1 King. 20.39.

3. To watch exactly, what is done by our selves, or others. I will keep my
mouth with a bridle, Psalm. 39.1. All my familiars watched for my halting, Jer.
20.10. Here it is taken in the first sense, to keep from sin or danger.

The way. See on chapter 1.15. Here is meant the business, or undertaking, or
practical course of Gods Saints.

Of his Saints. It comes from a word that signifies mercy in the Original,
(...), from (...). Some gives this reason, because men come to be Saints by
Gods mercy, not by their own merits. Which is most true. But the word (...),
signifying actively such an one as shows mercy, as (...), such as do justly, it
may rather be that they are so called, because they are merciful like God. Be
ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful, Luke 6.36. Hence
comes (...), a Storke, a bird kind to her aged parents.

Figures. Paths. Way. Metaphors from Travelers.

Note 1. Gods direction. 2. His preservation.


Note in the former, 1. The person, He. 2. The act, keeps. 3. The subject,
the paths. 4. The adjunct, of judgment.


In the latter note, 1. The act, And preserves. 2. The object, the way. 3. The
subject, of his Saint.


1. Doct. There is a certain path of truth. This is life eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh.
17.3. This path in Scripture is more sure, then if God should speak from
heaven. There was a voice from heaven. But there was a more sure word of
prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.17, 19. Written statutes are more sure directions then
words of Princes.

Reason. 1. Because else there is a necessity that all the world may be
deceived. If there be no certain knowledge in seeing or hearing, where there is
no obstacle, then no man can tell whether another man be a man or a beast.

2. There is no comfortable converse with God, if we know not what to believe
of his Mercy, Justice, and other attributes. He that comes to God must believe
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb.
11.6. There is no pleasing a man without knowing his qualities.

3. There is no escaping hell without a certain rule of truth; for our nature
being corrupt, and there being many ways of error leading to hell, no man can
escape damnation.

4. No more getting heaven then getting a Port at Sea, if there be no certainty
in the Compass.

Use. It shows the wildness of those that plead for liberty of conscience for
all errors. As if a man should inform the State that there were no certain way
to London, and petition that all men might go at all adventures, and no man be
tied to go the ordinary way, but every one go what way he thinks to be nearest,
over hedges and ditches, and over men's grounds and gardens. Ye will say this
were injurious to men. But are not heresies and blasphemies more injurious to
God? Are not men's consciences as corrupt as their wills and affections? Why then
should not others petition for liberty of will and affections, to love whom
they will, and hate whom they will? The best is, that the Text tells us, that
God keeps his in the way of judgment. If men will not keep theirs within their
bounds, God will keep his. However, there is a right way, and men ought to
labor to keep themselves and theirs in it.

2. Doct. Good men must keep in the sure way of truth. We have also a more sure
word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19.
Beware, lest ye be led away with the error of the wicked, and fall from your
own steadfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17.

Reason. 1. Because of divine illumination, God shows the ways of error, that
we may avoid them, as Mariners take notice of rocks at Sea.

2. Because of divine direct on. He guides them in the right way, like a tender
Father. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, Romans
8.14. God gave the Sun that men should see to avoid wrong ways, and follow
right.

Use. It reproves all Gallio's followers, that look after right and wrong, but
not after truth and error; after the world, not after heaven. Sure if God give
light, he looks that men should make use of it.

3. Doct. Heavenly wisdom is given to men by God to that end, that men may
keep in the way of truth. To this end the Comforter (which is the holy Ghost)
shall teach you all things, Joh. 14.26. He is therefore called, the Spirit of
truth, Joh. 15.26.

Reason. So it is in all the senses. Eyes are given to distinguish colors,
Ears to distinguish sounds, Nose to distinguish smells, Palates to distinguish
tastes, Hands to distinguish hard things from soft. Much more is heavenly
wisdom given us to direct in the way of truth.

Use. To reprove such as boast of heavenly wisdom, illumination, revelation,
and yet maintain gross errors, contrary to Scripture, that set Gods Word and
his Spirit together by the ears. Woe be to those eyes that pronounce light,
darkness; and call darkness, light: and to those palates, that call bitter,
sweet; and sweet, bitter, Isa. 5.20.

4. Doct. There is a right way for the Saints to walk in. That thou may walk
in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous, Verse. 20. I have
led thee in right paths, chapter 4.11.

Reason 1. Because else it were worse living in Gods Kingdom, then in any
other Kingdom. For all Kingdoms have rules of safety, and of living.

2. God should be in a worse condition then the meanest Master of a family. He
should have no certain service.

Use. Let us keep in the right way of the Saints. All other ways, though never
so specious, lead to hell. Therefore a cloud of witnesses that have walked in
this way to heaven is set before us, Heb. 11.1, etc. and 12.1.

5. Doct. God only can keep us in the right way. He will keep the feet of his
Saints, 1 Samuel 2.9. Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not,
Psalm. 17.5.

Reason 1. Because he only can give light in his Word to discover the right
way.

2. He only can give sight to discern it by his Spirit.

3. He only can give might to walk in it, and to keep our feet from stumbling;
otherwise Gods people would soon go aside on the right hand, or on the left,
and soon fall into the way of sinners.

Use 2. When we are at a stand in the way for want of any of these, pray to God
for direction and help. When all our strength and friends fail us, God will
direct us. He sent food to Elijah, because the journey else would have been too
great for him, 1 King. 19.7.

2. Comfort your selves that have so good a guide, and so strong a keeper to
guide and keep you in the right way. Well may they walk uprightly, that are so
strongly supported. Gods hand is ever under his, they cannot fall beneath it.

6. Doct. Gods Saints are merciful people. So was Cornelius, one that feared
God, and gave much alms to the people, Act. 10.2. So was Zacheus, when he was
converted, The half of my goods I give to the poor, Luke 19.8. A strange
alteration, from covetousness to liberality, as well as from wickedness to
holiness.

Reason 1. Because of our renewed nature, that takes away hardness of heart in
part, and makes us pitiful, as the heaven is, that drops showers on the earth,
and looks for nothing back again.

2. They love to be like their God, who makes his Sun to rise on the evil,
and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and on the unjust, Mat. 5.45.

Use. I would make an use of trial, but I scarce dare. I am afraid, if every
one that hears me now, should faithfully try his estate, which he knows, laying
it in one balance, and his good deeds in another, and God should hold the
scales, as one day he will do, we should find but a few Saints. Many would be
found in Belshazzar's condition, too light, when they are weighed, Dan. 5.27.
Our abundance and finenesse in food and apparel, compared with the wants of
the poor, would condemn us. In the Law, the Ministers had the tenth of men's
profits: Now Ministers, Schools, Poor, Churches Education of our own children
in learning, have it not. Our note of Saints now is to rail upon carnal men,
and do duties outwardly, and hold fast our purses. God amend it. They are
hypocrites and no Saints, what show of holiness soever they make that are not
merciful. Pure religion and undefiled, is to visit the fatherless and widows
in their affliction, Jam. 1.27. The sentence at the last Judgment, is
according to men's merciful or unmercifull carriage, Matthew. 25. and they that
show no mercy now must look for none then, Jam. 2.13.

Verse. 9. Then shall thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and equity;
yea, every good path.
In this verse. the second benefit of Wisdom is set down, to teach us how to
carry our selses wisely toward men. Having spoken largely concerning the
former, and backed it with reasons, now he briefly propounds the latter, it
being more easy to know how to carry our selves toward men, then toward God.

For the words.

Then. See on chapter 1.28. These words must depend upon the first 4 verses, as the
former Then, v. 5. did.

The sum of all is, When thou have used all the former means, then thou shall
know how to carry thy self toward men, as well as toward God. Others knit it
to the words following, Then shall thou understand, etc. when wisdom enters,
etc. But that particle (...), uses to follow, as chapter 1.28. not to go before:
and there is another reddition to that, v. 10. understood, v. 11. Then
discretion shall preserve thee. Also, the mark in the beginning of v. 10. in
our Translation, shows that the Interpreters conceived the sentence began
there; and these words v. 9. depended on the words before.

Shall thou understand. See on chapter 1.6.

Righteousness, and judgment, and equity. For these words, see on chap. 1.3.
and for judgment, see on verse. 8. of this cha. We must do things lawfully,
discreetly, and equally.

Yea every good path. A genus to the rest, and sum of all delivered in the
conclusion, or an etc. as if he had said, In a word, if there be any good path
that comes not within the compass of these, yet thou shall understand it. That
I may comprehend much in few words, thou shall not only know the former
particulars, but all honest ways, how to carry thy self toward men. For wise
carriage to God was promised before, v. 5. Thou shall increase in knowledge,
and grow from the knowledge of those good things, to know all else needful of
that kind.

For the word Every, see on chap. 1.13. on the word All.

(...), Good. It signifies,

1. That which is right and just. See thy matters are good and right, 2 Samuel
15.3.

2. That which is profitable. Houses full of all good things, Deuteronomy. 6.11.

3. That which is pleasing. Do what is good in thine eyes. 2 Samuel 19.27.

4. That which is full, and complete. Thou shall be buried in a good old age,
Genesis 15.15.

5. That which is joyful and delightful. A festival. We come in a good day,
1 Samuel 25.8.

Here it is taken in the first sense, for right and just ways.

Path, (...). It signifies properly a Wheel-track, and because such are found
in paths or ways, therefore it signifies so too. In a Common the way is
discerned by wheel-tracks. Thou shall see the tracks wherein godly men have
gone before thee, as a man may see the track of a Cart-wheel. It may be read,
every path of good.

Figures. Path, or Wheel track. A Metaphor.

Note. 1. The adjunct of time, Then.

2. The act, thou shall understand.

3. Three particular objects, righteousness, and judgment, and equity.

4. One general object, containing all the rest of that kind, that may be
imagined, yea every good path.

Then. When thou have painfully and carefully used all the former means.

1. Doct. Pains must be taken to know how to carry our selves toward men.
Therefore the Apostle gives many directions to that end, Romans 12.15, 16, 17,
18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14, 15. See the places.

Reason 1. Because there are many commandments which concern duty to men, as
all the second Table, wherein are more commandments for number then in the
first. So careful is God for man's good.

2. There are many duties in every commandment that concerns men, as fear of
offending unjustly, loving carriage, good example, counsel, liberality,
patience, etc.

3. There are many faculties of the soul, and members of the body to be
employed in every duty, as the Understanding, Will, Affection, Tongue, Hand,
Foot.

4. There are many objects of duty to man. All sorts of men, friends, enemies,
strangers. Men of all conditions, rich, poor, wise, foolish, whole, sick. In
all things that concern them, to help them in their souls, bodies, states,
chastity, good name, contentedness. And what pains is sufficient to understand
all these particulars?

Use. It serves, 1. To blame those who think all men should please them, and
take no care to give content to others. These shorten Christ's sum of the
second Table, and make it, Thou shall love thy self. And leave out thy
neighbor.

2. To reprove them that take no care to breed their children, so as they may
know how to carry themselves toward others, but rather bear them out in
wronging other men.

2. Doct. God will give such wisdom to those that seek it, that they shall
know how to carry themselves toward others. So God taught Joseph how to get
respect among strangers, in Potiphar's house, in the prison, and in Pharaoh's
Court, Genesis 39.4, 21.22. and 45 16. God taught David how to get the favor of
the people, 1 Samuel 18.5, 6.

Reason 1. Because God loves concord among men. See how he commends it, and
sets it out by excellent similitudes, of precious ointment, and dew, and
pronounces a blessing upon it, Psalm. 133. There can be no concord, where men
know not how to offer right, nor suffer wrong.

2. God would have the praise of it, both of giving it, and of the fruits of
it. Men agree not well whom God joins not in affection.

3. All the comfort of the Commonwealth depends upon men's good carriage one
toward another.

4. The Churches good depends upon the good carriage of every member, even of
the meanest, as the Bodies do, 1 Cor. 12. God would have Church and
Commonwealth to flourish, if men's sins hinder not.

Use 1. To reprove such as seek not this wisdom from God, but carry themselves
proudly, and look that all men should do duty, and more then duty to them, but
care not so much as to take notice of any respect they owe to others, or showed
to them by others. They are far from Job's mind, who did not despise the cause
of his Man servant, or of his Maidservant, when they contended with him, Job
31.13.

2. To blame such as have this wisdom given them from God, to carry themselves
wisely and well toward others, but bring up their children so fondly, that
they neither know what they owe to their parents, nor to any else. These ruin
their parents estates, and prove the ruin of Church and Commonwealth. Such
cannot look that God should give wisdom to them or theirs, nor look that any
man should regard them.

3. Doct. Nothing is better then wisdom, it is here promised as a great
favor, and blessing. It is worth asking, Jam. 1.5. It was Solomon's great
request, 2 Chr. 1.12.

Reason 1. Because it will help at a dead lift, when all humane power fails, as
the poor man's wisdom did help to save the City, Eccles. 9.14, etc. So a poor
wise woman delivered the City Abel, when all the strong men in the Town could
not do it, 2 Samuel 20.16, etc.

2. It will guide us to heaven, which no power nor force can reach.

Use. Let us with Solomon make it our great request to God to give us wisdom.
We have more need of it to get to heaven, then he had to rule a Kingdom already
gotten. Let other men pray for wealth, let us pray for wisdom.

4. Doct. Many things are required to good carriage toward men.
Righteousness, judgment, and equity. Some things required of the people, some
of the Pharisees, some of the Soldiers, Luke 3.10, etc. Some dues to
Magistrates, some to People, Romans 13.1, 7, 8.

Reason 1. In regard of different persons, which look for different duties.
That will not befit an equal, that fits an inferior; nor a superior, that
fits an equal; nor a stranger, that fits an enemy; nor a neighbor, that fits
a stranger; nor a friend, that fits a neighbor.

2. Knowledge alone serves not, but Will and all the Affections are to be
employed in counsel, observance, etc.

Use. It reproves such as never study Ethics, the Scripture is full of them.
How can they expect that others should behave themselves well toward them, when
they know not how to carry themselves as becomes them?

5. Doct. Men must grow from knowledge of some good duties to knowledge of
others. They must go on till they know every good path. Grow in grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. That ye may
grow up, into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.

Reason 1. Because else Gods ordinances are bestowed in vain upon them, as soil
upon Cornfieldsd, Gardens, and Orchyards, where nothing grows.

2. All our labor is lost in reading, hearing, meditating, and conferring; as
a Scholars pains are lost that grows not in learning.

Use. Look to your growth more then to duties performed. See if they bring
increase and profit. Else you drive a poor trade.

6. Doct. Our carriage to others must be just and right in every thing. That we
may say with Samuel, Whose Ox have I taken? or, whose Ass have I taken? or,
whom have I defrauded? etc. And may be like Ananias, who had a good report of
all the Jews that dwelt in Damascus, Act. 22.12. The grace of God teaches us
to live justly, Tit. 3.11, 12.

Reason 1. Because one spot blemishes a whose garment, or fair face. So one
wilful failing disgraces a man's whole life.

2. One miscarriage lays a man open to punishment, and all his former good
actions cannot free him; as one murder lays a man open to death, though free
every way else.

Use. Be watchful over all your ways all your life long. David is tainted for
his unkind carriage to Mephibosheth. Let good men take warning thereby.

Verse. 10. When wisdom enters into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant
unto thy soul.
The Wiseman having formerly showed the good that Wisdom would do to us to
encourage us to get is; now he shows, what evil it will keep us from, when we
have got it. And that, 1. In general, v. 10, 11. 2. In particular.


1. To keep us from hurt by the society of bad men, from v. 12. to v. 16.

2. Of bad women, to the end of the chap.

For the general; note,

1. The persons that are to be kept from hurt by Wisdom. They are such as
cheerfully entertain it, v. 10.

2. The preservation it self, v. 11.

For the first. For the words.

When. Some read it Because. Intimating, the cause of their preservation to be
the ready receiving of wisdom, and so make the words to depend on the former.
Thus it is used chapter 1.9. But it is rather to be read when, and referred to the
latter, and shows the difference in point of preservation from sin, between
wise men and fools. So it is used, Deuteronomy. 7.1. When the Lord thy God shall bring
thee into the Land. And the reddition, v. 11. confirms it, Then discretion
shall preserve thee.

Wisdom. See on chapter 1, 2.

Comes. S^e on chapter 1.26.

Into thine heart. See on v. 2. of this chap. It must not enter into the head
alone, but into the heart also.

And knowledge. See on chapter 1.2, 4.

Is pleasant. It signifies such a pleasure as men take in beholding beautiful
objects, which ravish the soul, and carry it away captive. It is translated
beauty, Psalm. 90.17. Let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us. Hence Naomi
had her name, Ruth 1.20. Call me not Naomi (that is, pleasant, or beautiful)
but call me Marah (that is, bitter) when knowledge shall appear so bright and
lovely to thee, that thou receive and retain it in thy heart and soul, with
wonderful pleasure and delight, as the palate delights in sweet meat.

Unto thy soul. See on chapter 1.18. upon the word Lives. For the word is the same
in the Original. But here it is taken for the soul, the fountain of life.

Figures. Enters. A Metaphor from a stranger coming into the house, and
joyfully entertained by the Master of the house, for his excellent parts, and
the good that may be gotten by his society.

Is pleasant. A Metaphor from the content the eyes take in beholding beautiful
objects, or the palate in pleasing meats. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord
is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.3. So it is with the soul, when it begins to see the
beauty of wisdom, and take delight in it.

Note 1. The similitude of a stranger entertained.

2. Of a delightful object fed upon.

In the former note, 1. The stranger, When wisdom. 2. The entertainment,
enters. 3. The entertainer, into thine heart.


In the latter observe, 1. The object, And knowledge. 2. The feeding on it, is
pleasant. 3. The feeder, unto thy soul.


1. Doct. Men are naturally void of heavenly wisdom. Man is born like a wild
Asses colt, Job 11.12. The Gentiles had their understandings darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart, Ephesians. 4.18. Neither are we any better, being
all by nature ( Paul and all) children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2.3.

Reason 1. It appears in our carriage our thoughts are vain. The Lord knows
the thoughts of man, that they are vanity, Psalm. 94.11.

Obj. But his words are better.

Answ. No. Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used
deceit, the poison of Asps is under their lips. Their mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness, Romans 3.13, 14.

Obj. But their deeds are better. The Heathen man said, Musa jocosa mihi, vita
pulica tamen: Although my muse do jest and sport of chastily, my life's not
short.

Answ. Their lives are answerable to their thoughts and words. They are all
gone out of the way, they are together become unprofitable, there is none that
does good, no not one, Romans 3.12.

2. It appears in their business. In worldly things they are born foolish.
Nemo nascitur artifex: No man is born an artificer. Much more foolish are they
then in heavenly things, which are further above their reach.

Obj. But in things of God which most concern them, I hope they are wise.

Answ. No. The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Object. But in matters that concern their salvation, they are wiser. Sure they
will not damn their own souls.

Answ. They are no wi^er in such matters. All have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God, Romans 3.23.

3. In their several ages. In childehood they mind nothing but vanity.
Childhood and youth are vanity, Eccl. 11.10.

Obj. It may be for want of wit they may follow their pleasure then, but their
manly age will reclaim them.

Answ. No. Then the world takes them up, profit drowns them. There are many
thorny grounds in the world. In whom the care of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and they become unfruitful, Man.
13.21, 22.

Obj. But old age will surely teach them more wisdom.

Answ. They, will learn none but the wisdom of the flesh, which is enmity
against God, Romans 8.7.

4. The cause of it proves it. The loss of Gods image by Adam's fall, which
makes us born without that wisdom, which Adam had by Creation.

Use. Let this humble us. Let not fools be proud of wisdom that have none.
That have foolish thoughts, words, deeds, in worldly, spiritual, heavenly
things; in youth, manly age, old age. And cannot without grace be any thing but
fools, being born so. Remember Agur's speech, Surely I am more brutish then any
man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the holy, Prove. 30.2, 3. Apply this to your selves.

2. Doct. We cannot attain to true wisdom by our own strength. We cannot
force it into our hearts, it enters of it self. Every good gift, and every
perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights, Jam.
1.17. The wisdom that is from above, etc. Jam. 3.17.

Reason 1. Because those grounds that we have cannot reach it. Our ladder is
not high enough. Sense, reason, common principles, humane instructions cannot
attain unto it.

2. We have not the wings that should mount us up to this heavenly knowledge;
to wit, revelation and illumination. (...), dilabitur sapientia, non in hortulo
nostro nascitur. Plantam hanc implantet Pater coelestis necessum est, condus
promus, and thesaurarius coelestis in penum nostrum reponere debet. This
wisdom slides down from abroad, from without, and from above, it grows not in
our little garden. It is necessary that the heavenly Father plant this plant in
us. The heavenly Butler and Treasurer must lay it up in our storehouse.

Use 1. This should lay us yet lower in our own eyes. Though we be born without
saving knowledge, yet if we could get it of our selves, it were something. Many
a man born foolish for the world, poor, mean, yet by Art improving Nature,
proves worldly wise, rich, great. But we cannot get heavenly wisdom so.

2. Get it of God by prayer, and go out of your selves, else ye will never
attain it, as being naturally blind and unable to see the way to heaven, Rev.
3.17.

3. Doct. It is not enough that wisdom come into the head, unless it come
into the heart also. So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thine heart to understanding, verse. 2. of this chap. Let thine heart keep my
commandments, chap. 3.1. Let thine heart keep my words, chap. 4.4. His mother
kept all these sayings in her heart, Luke 2.51. God opened the heart of Lydia,
that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul, Act. 16.14.

Reason 1. Because else truths will not be regarded, nor affected.

2. They will not be remembered, nor retained.

3. Neither will they be applied nor practiced. In effect neither affections,
memory, nor life will do their part.

Use. Let us then receive heavenly truths into the heart with joy, that we may
be wise. Let us set open the doors of our hearts to let in the King of glory,
Psalm. 24.9. It is not enough that truth come into thine ears by hearing, or
touch thy heart by understanding, but it must enter into it by pleasing
admission, and be received in love, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. Wisdom must enter into
thee, as a man into his own house. Ab Ezr. taking possession of all the
faculties of thy soul. Thou must not only conceive aright of truth, but
willingly receive it. There is an Emphasis in the word Entering, or coming in.
Man's heart is a dark labyrinth. It is hard for the light to come in, but very
useful. It is needful for all the corners of the soul. The Soul (says
Macarius Hom. 5.) is a great shop, wherein are many rooms and ware houses.
There is the Trade of upright dealing in justice, etc. Every affection keeps
shop by it self, and is very unruly. Much wisdom is needful to direct every
one, as much light in every corner of a shop. The outward light of the world
may serve to direct the body, but wisdom must direct the soul. Salazar.

4. Doct. Knowledge is better then all outward riches. He does not say, riches,
or honor, but knowledge is pleasant. This dying David especially commends to
living Solomon. Thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy Father, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.

Reason. It will stand by us at death, when all outward comforts forsake us,
and must be left.

Use. Labor more earnestly for it then for riches or honor, for which worldly
men take so much care and pains.

5. Doct. There is much pleasure and delight in knowledge. Gods judgments are
sweeter then honey and the honeycombe, Psalm. 19.10. How sweet are thy words
unto my taste! yea, sweeter then honey to my mouth, Psalm. 119.103. Pleasant
words are as an honey comb, sweet to the soul, and health to the bones, Prove
16.24.

Reason 1. Because it gives wonderful satisfaction to men's expectation. And
such things are pleasing to men.

2. It eases a man's mind in the mids of worldly cares and businesses. It is as
a Noah to Lamech: This same shall comfort us concerning our work, and toil of
our hands, Genesis 5.29.

3. It sweetens all worldly crosses, which are very bitter to fools. It brings
in Christ to help bear the burden.

4. It sweetens all worldly blessings, by teaching us how to use them aright. I
know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where, and in all
things I am instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry; both to abound, and
to suffer need. I can do all things, through Christ which strengthens me,
Phil. 4.12, 13.

Use. We may well wonder then, why knowledge, which is so sweet in it self, is
so bitter to many, and they will take no pains to get it. Surely it is not
entered into their hearts. They are yet carnal. To good men it is sweeter then
all worldly comforts. Fables and Tales are pleasing to others, but Gods Word
and knowledge to these. It is like honey to them, and outward comforts like
gall, in comparison of it. As when a man has taken honey, other things are
bitter to him. Exercise makes that sweet to one man, which is bitter to another.

6. Doct. Knowledge will raise up a drooping soul. The sight of the Sun much
rejoices dulled spirits; the knowledge of Gods Word much more. The Law of the
Lord is perfect, comforting the soul. The statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart, Psalm. 19.7, 8.

Reason 1. Because trouble of mind comes from a double ignorance.

1. We are ignorant of our nature, as if we were not subject to change. Not
only Rivers, but Seas ebb and flow.

2. We are ignorant of the nature of things, who take things to be hurtful,
that are not. Non sunt omnia mala, quae hominibus videntur mala. Nauta queritur
silere ventos; mundum non laedit tranquillitas. Arnob. All things are not
evil, which seem evil to men. The Mariner complains, that the winds lie
still; yet still weather hurts not the world. Homines perturbantur non rebus,
sed opinionibus. Si mors malum esset, Socrati ita videretur. Epict. cap. 10.
Men are troubled, not with things, but with opinions. Had death been an evil,
it would have seemed so to Socrates. Me occidere possunt, sed ladere non
possunt. Ibid. cap. 78. They may kill me, but they cannot hurt me.

2. Knowledge gives grounds of comfort from the sugar of Gods promises, of
profit, strength, singular deliverances.

Use. Love this knowledge better then ever ye did. What good will all the world
do you, if ye have troubled spirits? Knowledge only can lay these storms.

Verse. 11. Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee.
Now for the preservation it self of those persons that receive and entertain
wisdom, in this verse. They shall be delivered from many spiritual and
corporal dangers, which foolish men fall into, and they themselves are subject
unto, by reason of the remainder of sin in them, and allurements of others,
both men and women. As if he had said, God shall give thee such wariness and
understanding of the true nature of things, that thou shall be careful to keep
thy self from all evils which would weaken thy whole life, by means of
pot-companions, and st^umpets, who will continually be ready to set upon thee
in thy young and slippery age, to undo thee, if they can. This preservation is
a great benefit.

For the words.

Discretion. See on chapter 1.4. It imports a careful examining things in the
mind before we do them, that we may avoid evil. The Syriack reads, a good
thinking; that is, to think well beforehand, whither thou go, and what thou
do, shall keep thee from going and doing amiss. Cogito, quasi coagito. Notat
sereitatem. Beeman. To think, is to bring thoughts trgether in the mind. It
notes seriousness. Such is the care of the Wife, how she may please her
husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. She casts this way, and that way, how she may give
content. So every wise woman builds her house, chapter 14.1. She studies in every
business how to set every thing in order. So the Carpenter studies how to set
every thing in joint.

Shall preserve thee. As a buckler keeps from wounds, v. 7. or as a guard which
Princes and great men are wont to have about them, for the safety of their
persons. Their souls shall be as safe as the bodies of those great ones, who
have a Band of men always waiting on them. Or, as Cities that have a strong
garrison to keep them from danger of assaults by the enemy. Discretion shall
preserve thee from all enemies and disasters.

Understanding. Careful examination will give thee understanding to see what
is fit to be done, and what to be avoided For the word, See on v. 2.

Shall keep thee. See on v. 8. It shall keep watch and ward over thee. It
brings del^ght and safety. The same thing spoken in the beginning of the v. in
other words, for assurance, and to enlarge our affections to wisdom, as if no
words could sufficiently set out this benefit of preservation by it, and to
urge us to entertain it, and rejoice in it, as in a most beautiful spouse. If
we so do, it will show us the way how to be free from sinful courses.

Figures Preserve thee. A Metaphor from persons or Towns kept by a guard. Who
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. The word
signifies kept as with a band of Soldiers in a garrison. The same benefit is
twice inculcated.

Note 1. The preserver, Diseretion and understanding.

2. The act, shall preserve, shall keep.

3. The person preserved, thee. He that joyfully entertains it, and takes
pleasure in it, shall be kept by it.

1. Doct. Men are subject to many dangers till they get wisdom. He goes after
her straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the
correction of the stocks. Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird
hastes to the snare, and knows not that it is for his life, chapter 7.22, 23.
Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; then, whose shall
those things be which thou have provided? Luke 12.20.

Reason 1. Because their reputation is in danger, and men had as leeve lose
their life as their credit, if they be generous. Folly will give occasion of
disgrace.

2. Their goods and essate will be in danger, which is a great loss. How many
lose them by folly, breaking out into unseemly words and deeds?

3. Their body and life is in danger, which are dearer then credit and goods.
Skin for skin, yea all that a man has, will be give for his life, Job 2.4. Is
not the life more then meat, and the body then raiment? Mat. 6.25.

4. The soul is in danger, and lies open to eternal misery. Therefore sin
which damns the soul is called folly. He had wrought folly in Israel in lying
with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done, Genesis 34.7. And wicked
men that go to hell are chronicled for fools all over this Book of Proverbs.
And this is the greatest danger of all. What is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16.26.

Use. It discovers to us the cause of many troubles and calamities in the
world, want of wisdom to prevent the occasions. I say, not of all, but of
many, for Gods servants are often persecuted without a cause, and for trial of
their graces; yet we may do well to attribute our sufferings to our folly, as
David did. My wounds stink and are corrupt, because of my foolishness, Psalm.
38.5.

2. Doct. Young men are most in danger of allurement. For he speaks to his Son
all along, verse. 1, 2, etc. He that is seduced by the Strumpet, is said to be
among the youths, chapter 7.7. Such are most subject to walk in the ways of their
heart, and in the sight of their eyes, Eccl. 11.9.

Reason 1. Brcause they are more subject to be set upon by strumpets, riotous,
thieves, as having least gravity to keep such off. My Son (a young man) if
sinners entice thee, chapter 1.10. Old men they will not set upon so soon. Nay, the
thought of an old grave man present might keep men from secret sins; as the
Heathen man said, Think Socrates or Plato sees thee, and thou will not commit
folly.

2. Young men have least wit and experience to resist such temptations, and
therefore Solomon writ his Proverbs to teach the young man knowledge and
discretion, chapter 1.4.

3. Because old men want fuel for many sins to be kindled by temptations and
allurements. They cannot exercise wantonness, riotousness, robbing, killing,
for want of bodily strength. The grassehopper to them is a burden, and desire
fails, Eccl. 12.5. They cannot taste what they eat and drink, nor hear the
voice of singing men, or singing women, 2 Samuel 19.35. Old men have seen the
mischief that falls upon evil courses of life, and therefore are not easily
drawn to them. Old birds will not be caught with chafe.

Use. Take heed young men, you think your selves strongest, and you are
weakest, your strength and heat of blood will soonest draw you to folly: for
lust is strongest in young men, by reason of natural heat. Therefore Paul bids
Timothy, Fly youthful lust, 2 Timothy 2.22. Be not proud and careless, but
humble and watchful.

3. Doct. When men get discretion and knowledge, they will be free from many
enormities, into which others fall. So the prodigal Son, who fed on husks
before, when he came to himself, found bread enough in his Fathers house, Luke
15.17. So the Angel of Laodicea, might be freed from blindness, poverty, and
nakedness, if he would follow Christ's counsel, Rev. 3.17, 18. Truth has a
freeing power. Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, Joh.
8.32.

1. Because Satan is daunted by repulses, as he was by Christ. Then the devil
leaves him, Mat. 4.11.

2. Wicked men give over soliciting, when they see it cannot prevail, as
Joseph's Mistress did, who though she brought him to prison, could not bring
him to adultery, Genesis 39.

3. Because men seeing the ugliness of sin, grow more wary, and so escape
snares. A blind man sees no rubs in the way, but follows his guide carelessly.
He that sees, looks at stumbling blocks, and goes beside them.

4. God watches over such, and men that have a guard are free from many
dangers, into which others fall. If a Rulers word has power, Gods Word has
more.

Use. It shows a reason why some escape those sins and dangers, that lay hold
on other men, and themselves had formerly incurred; because they have got more
discretion and true wisdom. They were once in much danger, now they are more
free.

4. Doct. Wisdom is a great antidote and preservative against evil. When thou
go, it shall lead thee; when thou sleep, it shall keep thee; and when
thou walk, it shall talk with thee, chapter 6.32. Wisdom may keep thee from the
strange woman, chap. 7.5.

Reason 1. Because wisdom shows the right end we should aim at, the right
means to attain that end, and the fittest time to use those means. And all
these help to preserve us from sin, judgment, evil practices; from dangers,
corporal, spiritual, and from hell it self.

2. It teaches a man how to make use of all times; of time past, else you lose
your life; of time present, else ye live ill; of time to come, else ye lie open
to all dangers. Whosoever keeps the commandment, shall feel no evil thing; and a
wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. Because, to every purpose
there is time and judgment; therefore the misery of man is great upon him,
Eccl. 8.5, 6.

Use. Make use of this wisdom in careful watchfulness for your own
preservation. Ye are encompassed with a thousand dangers. Ye are naturally
careless, watchfulness will keep ye out of them. Thinking often of peril, is
the way to prevent peril. Other virtues are armed soldiers in the field,
ready to fight for the souls safety. Wisdom is the Watchman or Sentinel of the
soul, to foretell danger. Salazar. Where wisdom enters not into the heart,
there are no saving thoughts, nor counsels, whereby men may be safe; for the
inconstancy of man's mind is wonderful, and the blindness and frailty of it
great. Men think more frequently of vain and pernicious things, then of honest
and godly, unless wisdom be present, which may supply hearty and heavenly
thoughts, which may shut up the entrance against our enemy; as follows in the
next verse. To deliver thee from the way of the evil man.

5. Doct. Preservation from sinful ways is a great benefit and blessing. So
it is promised here as a choice mercy. I withheld thee from sinning against me,
therefore suffered I not thee to touch her, Genesis 20.6. It was a great mercy of
God to keep Joseph from adultery, Genesis 39.10. David found not so much favor
from God, 2 Samuel 11. Tibi deputo peccata, quae non feci. To thee (O Lord) I
impute it, that I have not committed such and such sins. Aug.

Reason 1. In regard of good men's account, who set a great price upon it, and
pray earnestly for it. So does David, Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth,
keep the door of my lips. Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice
wicked works with men that work iniquity; and let me not eat of their dainties,
Ps. 140.4.

2. In regard of evils prevented, as Gods frowns, pangs of conscience,
diseases, troubles, hell.

3. In regard of the cost of recovery. It cost Christ his heart blood to
recover Gods favor to sinners. It will cost us many prayers and tears, as it
did David, Psalm. 51.

4. In regard of the scandal of our sins, whereby others may be drawn to hell,
and which all our following good works will not wipe off.

Use. Let us bless God, if we see others fall into gross sins, and our selves
kept from them, as we would do if all the houses about us were infected, and
ours kept free. Rahab escaped when Jericho was destroyed. An antidote is better
then a cure. It saves much pain both of disease and healing. Men must be made
more sick ere they be healed. It is no small matter of little importance that
is here promised, but safety and rest, which all the world cannot give us,
though it stood armed round about us to defend us. Then give God great praise
for it.

6. Doct. There is need of understanding and care to keep us from evil. I
said, I will take heed to my ways, Psalm. 39.1. Thy word have I hid in my heart
that I might not sin against thee, Psalm. 119.11.

Reason 1. There is need of much understanding. Else we may think, that we do
very well, when we do very ill. I verily thought (says Paul) with my self,
that I ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act.
26.9.

2. There is need of great care, else knowledge is in vain. Knowing men will
sin negligently, or wilfully, if care be wanting.

Use. Provide these two wings still, and care to flee from evil. A watchman
must both wake and watch. So must we spiritually, if we will escape sin.

Verse. 12. To deliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that
speaks froward things.
Here begins the deliverance from dangers that may come to us by evil men's
society. The benefit is propounded in the beginning of this verse. The evil
man's way from which he is to be delivered, is set out by diverse effects.

1. In his words, in the end of this verse. 2. In his works, v. 13. 3. In his
affections, v. 14. 4. In his obstinacy, v. 15.
For the words.

To deliver thee. The Heb. word (...), signifies,

1. To spoil a man or take his goods from him. All the riches that God has
taken from our Father, Genesis 31.16.

2. To take away a man from trouble, or deliver him. And delivered our houses;
Exodus 12.27. So here.

From. So (...) is translated, From the hand of all his enemies, and from the
band of Saul, Psalm. 18. in the title. Sometimes it is out of. He has delivered
me out of all trouble, Psalm. 54.7. Here it may be understood either way.
Wisdom is good to deliver men from ill ways, that they fall not into them;
and to deliver them out of them, when they are fallen into them; to keep them
out, or bring them out. But it is best to understand it in the first sense, as
it is translated. For it is a greater mercy to be kept out of ill ways, then
to be brought out of them. As it is a greater favor to be kept in health, then
to be healed. It agrees also best with the scope of the place, which is, to
keep young men from entering into evil ways.

The way. See on chapter 1.15. It signifies their wicked courses of life, which as
a wrong way leads to a bad end. Wisdom will keep us from following bad
example, and delighting in the company of bad men, and so getting hurt by them.
From walking in their way with them, or after them. From joining with them in
sin, or doing the like sins.

Of the evil man; that is, of evil men. The singular for the plural; as is
expressed, v. 13. Who leave the ways of uprightness, or of evil; that is,
from all evil ways, or from the evil way; that is, from evil courses. As
appears by what follows by way of explanation in the words following. For the
word, see on chapter 1.16.

From the man. (...), signifies,

1. A man by kind opposed to a beast, either male or female. Whether it be
beast or man, Exodus 19.13.

2. A male, or a man opposed to a woman. There was a man in the Land of Vz,
Job. 1.1.

3. An Husband, opposed to a Wife. She gave also to her Husband, Genesis 3.6.

4. A great man, or a valiant man. Art not thou a valiant man? 1 Samuel 26.15.

Here it is taken in the third sense, for a man opposed to a woman, v. 16.

That speaks. That is, so full of wickedness, that he cannot keep it in, but
it breaks out in his words.

Froward things. Contrary to what he should speak. Cross things to truth,
holiness or righteousness. That gives such untoward counsel as is mentioned,
chapter 1.11. Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, etc. Whereby men are seduced
to evil. Words tending to the subversion of Gods honor, and man's good,
temporal and eternal, whereby men are perverted. Such as speak distorted
words, as if the upper lip stood where the nether lip should.

The sum is, as if Solomon should have said, Unless wisdom enter into thy
heart as a keeper, how can thou conversing amongst men, who for the most part
walk in an evil way, be freed from the grossest errors, or most corrupt
manners of them that speak perverse things, seeking to infect others by their
subverting persuasions. Thus some do in matters of opinion. Also, of your own
selves shall m^n arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them, Act. 20.30. Others do the like in matters of practice. Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we die, 1 Cor. 15.32. Discretion then, and understanding
deliver us from evil men's ways, and words of perverse men; not by taking us
out of the world, but by not suffering us to believe their evil words, or to
follow their lewd courses.

Figures none.

Note 1. The deliverance. 2. The description of the person, from whom he is
delivered.


In the former observe, 1. The act, To deliver. 2. The object, thee.


In the description of the person from whom he is delivered; note, 1. The
danger, from the way. 2. The cause, of the evil man. 3. The effect, from the
man that speaks. 4. The object, froward things.


1. Doct. Young men are in danger of bad company. This lost Rehoboam his
Kingdom, 1 King. 12.8. He consulted with the young men that were grown up with
him, and which stood before him. This was the undoing of the prodigal Son. He
wasted his substance with riotous living, Luke 15.13.

Reason 1. In respect of the sociablenesse of their nature, which puts them
forth to seek for company, as soon as they are fit for action. Adam could not
be alone. Man loves to give, and to receive. Homo est animal politicum: Man is
a sociable creature. Arist. Now, most are bad, and that makes men for the most
part to light on bad company.

2. In respect of the necessity of their callings. He must buy, sell, trade
with others. His own calling cannot furnish him with all things needful. Now
many are bad in all callings, and the skilfullest workmen oftentimes most given
to drinking, by which others are spoiled that trade with them.

3. In respect of the band of their relations. Husbands, Wives, Parents,
Children, Kindred, may be naught, and with them they must keep company, because
they owe duty to them, and so may more easily be corrupted by them, then by
strangers, whom they less love. Jezebel A^ab's wife, stirved him up to work
wickedness, 1 King. 21.25.

4. In respect of the corruption of man's nature. The young man is corrupt
himself by nature. Therefore David calls on a young man to cleanse his ways,
Psalm. 119.9. So are all others. And like will to like.

Use 1. Choose good company at first. So did David. To the Saints that are in
the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16.3. I am a
companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy precepts, Psalm.
119.63. Much good may be gotten by the company of such, for soul, body, estate,
and credit.

2. Refuse all bad company, as far as thy calling and relations will permit,
else thou will burden them in their sins, and learn to be like them.
Constantius the Arrian Emperor, desired the orthodox Christians to join with
the Arrians, not only in worship, but also in society. They answered, Arriani
sunt mortui in delictis, and non possumus vivi cum mortuis conjungi: The
Arrians are dead in sins, and we that are alive may not be joined with the
dead. Scultet. in Lucif. Caral. p. 376. Nazianzen persuades his Brother
Cesarius to come out of Julian's Court, where he had an office, lest he did
(...), smell of the smoke, if not be burnt with the fire. He might be tainted,
though not perverted.

3. In conversing with such evil men as thou art tied to by calling or
relation, go not beyond thy bounds. Take heed of their sins. Be more ready to
do them good then to get hurt by them.

2. Doct. Young men are in danger of bad example. Joseph not old, had learned
in Egypt to swear by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42.15. Therefore old women must
be a pattern to young, and Titus in all things must show himself a pattern of
good works, Tit. 4.7.

Reason 1. Because there is a multitude of bad examples in the world, in young
men like them, in grown men, in old men. Among many snares one may take.

2. They are more ready to be won by examples, especial of great ones, then by
precepts, prohibitions, promises, threats. The other Jews dissembled likewise
with Peter, insomuch that Barnabas was also carried away with their
dissimulation, Gal. 2.13.

3. Young men are more ready to be led by example then others, because they
know their own want of experience, and presume upon the knowledge of the
ancient. I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom, Job 32.7.

Use 1. Be wary whom ye imitate. Do not imitate wicked men, nor civil men, but
men truly godly.

2. Be wary how ye imitate them. Not in their infirmities, but take St. Paul's
counsel. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.
Follow them no further then the rule of Gods Word leads them.

3. Doct. Young men are in danger of bad counsel. Thus Amnon was drawn to
execute his wantonness by the counsel of Jonadab, 2 Samuel 13.3, 5. Therefore
Solomon advises his Son to take heed of bad counsel. My Son, if sinners entice
thee, consent thou not, chapter 1.10.

Reason 1. Because evil men will be continually provoking them to evil, for
they desire to make others like unto themselves; as some say, that infected
persons desire to infect others.

2. Wicked men are subtle, and can allure young men by flattering words, and
crafty speeches, which like sugar go down quickly.

3. Evil men can take all advantage of time, place, disposition, occasions to
seduce young men, and therefore are the more likely to prevail. They will
dissuade them from fearing God, or trusting on him; and then all fear and hope
being gone, young men may be easily drawn to any evil.

Use 1. Let young men labor to get heavenly wisdom, that they may be able to
distinguish good counsel from evil. Else they cannot be safe.

2. Let them take heed of being familiar with bad men. What can be looked for
from them, but bad counsel? What from a bad tree, but bad fruit? A corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit, Mat. 7.17.

4. Doct. It is a great blessing to be kept out of evil ways. I withheld thee
from sinning against me, says God to Abimelech, therefore suffered I thee not
to touch her, Genesis 20.6. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of
the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, Psalm. 1.1.

Reason 1. Because it keeps us from all the danger of the way, as he that
scapes a theevish way, scapes robbing.

2. It prevents the danger in the end of the way. In the world, a man may have
a foul way to a profitable Market. In the sea, he may have a stormy passage to
a gainful Mart. Here the end is always like the way, good or bad.

Use. Praise God that ye escape errors and sins that others fall into. So ye
escape way-dangers, and end-dangers, that are eternal.

5. Doct. God sets characters on men whose ways should be avoided by us. Two
notes are set out in the text, evil Livers, and evil Teachers. Such as walk
in evil ways, and such as speak froward things. So bad men are described,
They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy, there is none that
does good, no not one, Psalm. 14.3. And so bad women are set out, She is loud
and stubborn, her feet abide not in her house. Now she is without, now in the
streets, and lies in wait in every corner, chapter 7.11, 12.

Reason. God does this,

1. For the good of his people, that they may not be deceived by them, whereof
they are in great danger. If it were possible they would deceive the very
elect, Mat. 24.24.

2. To make wicked men inexcusable. They might have known those that mislead
them, and have avoided them. For God gave them plain characters of such in his
Word.

Use. Let us study the characters of ungodly men set out in Gods Word, not to
imitate them, but to take heed of them, as Seamen seek to know rocks and
quicksands.

6. Doct. Some are so shameless, that they will give most lewd counsel. So do
thieves. Come with us, let us lay wait for innocent blood, chapter 1.11. So do
oppressors; Come, and let us cut them off from being a Nation, Psalm. 83.4.

Reason 1. Out of natural inclination to undo^ others, as Pirates are said to
hang out false lights on rocks and sands, to draw ships thither, that they may
have the spoil of them.

2. Out of pride of their own wit, that they may brag they have misled others.

Use. Take heed of such counselors, count them wicked men, and hearken not to
their words. Take Solomon's counsel, Crase my Son to hear the instruction that
causes to err from the words of knowledge, Prove. 19.27. Old men have been
drawn away by bad counsel, as Solomon by his Wives, 1 King. 11.4. Joash was
drawn to Idolatry after Jehojadah's death, 2 Chronicles. 24.17, 18. Julian is said
to be drawn to Aposta^^e by Libanius. Young men then, and unsettled, had most
need to take heed of bad counsel. Thoughts are not mentioned in this
description, because we know them not. We must judge of men by their words and
deeds, and embrace, or shun them accordingly.

Verse. 13. Who leave the paths of uprightness, to walk in the ways of
darkness.
The Wiseman now comes to the second note of wicked men, whose ways are to be
avoided, and that is wickedness of life. Neither does he set them out by any
one kind of sin, but by such general symptoms as are common to all wicked
men, that all wicked ways may be discovered. He shows his great care of our
salvation, in continuing still to show from what persons and from what dangers
God does deliver the children of wisdom.

For the words.

Who leave. He changes the number, and puts it into the plural, to show that
there are many such wanderers in the world. The word imports an utter forsaking
of good ways, and having nothing to do with them, as a Whore that forsakes her
Husbands house, and sets up a Stews, v. 17.

The paths. See on chapter 1.19.

Of uprightness. The known and beaten ways of equity agreeable to divine
Laws, and the Law of Nature. For the word, see on v. 7.

To walk. See on chapter 1.11. on the word Come.

In the ways. See on chapter 1.15.

Of darkness. Ways of uprightness are well opposed to ways of darkness,
because they are in the light, and ways of darkness are crooked. By ways of
darkness here are meant ways disagreeable to Gods Laws and Nature, whether
errors of judgment, or wickedness of life, as appears by what was said before
of the contrary ways of uprighenesse. The word (...), signifies,

1. Darkness of the night opposed to the light of the day. When it was dark,
Josh. 2.5.

2. The grave, the dark habitation of dead bodies. A land of darkness, Job
10.21.

3. A secret place, where men cannot see what is done, no more then in the
night. In a dark place of the earth, Isa. 45.19.

4. Afflictions, which make men sad, and fearful, and ignorant, how to get
out, as in a dark night. He believes not that he shall come out of darkness,
and he is waited for of the sword, Job 15.22.

5. Ignorance and sin, which is the night and darkness of the soul. The people
that walked in darkness, Isa. 9.2. So it it is taken here, as appears by the
opposition to the paths of righteousness.

Figures. A Metaphor from Travelers in the whole verse. who leave the
highways that are light some and right, to go through dark and crooked ways.
Now because many men are so cunning to hide their fins with fair colors,
therefore Solomon gives further marks by which these Imposters may be known,
that men may avoid them.

Note 1. The highway forsaken. 2. The by-way entertained.


In the former note, 1. The act, Who leave. 2. The object, the paths. 3. The
adjunct, of uprightness.


In the latter observe, 1. The act, To walk. 2. The object, in the ways. 3.
The adjunct, of darkness.


1. Doct. Many are out of the right way. Some have not the knowledge of God, 1
Cor. 15.34. The Apostle says more elsewhere. They are all gone out of the way,
Romans 3.12.

Reason 1. Because natural ignorance and corruption misleads many. Fire will
burn if it meet with fuel.

2. Worldly pleasures mislead them. Baits take the fish, though there be hooks
to catch them.

3. Profits will carry men away. Piracy thrives at a cheaper rate then
Merchandise. Pleasures last but our lives. Profits last to childrens children.

4. The Devils sleights mislead thousands. Swords may be kept off with
bucklers, bullets with mud-walls. No keeping off Miners. Satan works all under
ground. Countermining is uncertain, unless we could see where Satan digs.

Use. Take heed whom ye follow. Major pars meliorem vineit: The greater part
overcomes the better part. Most are bad, if ye look on Persons, Families,
Towns, Nations. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.

2. Doct. Some are so quite out of the right way, that they have clean lest it.
Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord, and all Israel with him, 2 Chro. 12.1.
Demas has forsaken me, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10.

Reason 1. To begin where we ended in the reasons of the last point. The
Proverb is, He must needs go, whom the devil drives. Satan (like a skillful
General in the War) if he once scale the walls, plunders the City, lays siege
to the Castle, gives not over, till he take it, that so he may command City and
Country.

2. Because God has forsaken them, when they leave the ways of
righteousness. He was wont to chastise them, while they kept the way, because
they slipped sometimes; but if they once go out of the way quite, then he will
chastise them no more, but let them have a joviall journey to hell. So he says
by his Prophet, I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom,
nor your spouses, when they commit adultery; the people that does not
understand, shall fall, Hos. 4.14. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will
revolt more and more, Isa. 1.5. Nulla poena, maxima poena: No punishment is the
greatest punishment. Greg. Magn.

Use. Take heed of giving over the ways of piety. It is likely thou will never
return, God will forsake thee, and the Devil drive thee. If the sheep go out of
the fold, ten to one, he never returns. Wolves will devour him, or ditches
drown him.

3. Doct. Gods ways are right ways, in which men may walk safely. I have led
thee in the right paths, chapter 4.11. The opening of my lips shall be right
things, chapter 8.6. Therefore Gods way is called the way, Romans 3.12. And, the way
of peace, Romans 3.17. Intimating, that there is no other safe way, nay none
worthy of the name of a way.

Reason. 1. There is no way leading to the right end but this, to Gods glory,
and man's eternal salvation. Men's inventions lead to hell, not to heaven. All
such are lying ways, Psalm. 119.163.

2. It brings joy and comfort, when other ways bring sorrow and trouble. The
children of Israel said unto the Lord, We have sinned, Judge. 10.15. This
confession came from them when God had delivered them into the hands of their
enemies, for their Idolatry, v. 6, 7. there.

3. Gods servants have prayed to be directed in it; and they know best of all
the world, which is the best way. Teach me (O Lord) she way of thy statutes,
Psalm. 119.33.

Use. Let us keep in Gods way, else we lose much labor, and in the end are
disappointed of our hope, which is a double vexation.

4. Doct. Many prefer bad ways before good. They hated knowledge, and did not
choose the fear of the Lord, chapter 1.29. Brethren, be ye followers of me; for
many walk as the enemies of the cross of Christ, Phil. 3.17, 18.

Reason 1. It appears in particulars. Let us anatomize the world. Substract
Heathen, Turks, Jews, Papists; and among Protestants, Atheists, Heretics,
Blasphemers, Ignorant ones, Worldly profane ones, Hypocrited. All these prefer
bad ways before good. Tell me then what is lest.

2. It appears by the ground of it. All are naturally foolish, none wise but
those few that are enlightened from heaven. Turn a company of fools to seek a
way they know not, the most will take the worst ways, for they look at the
breadth and pleasure of the way, not at the end. They consider not that broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be that go in it; but
narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Mat.
7.13, 14.

3. Because there are more bad ways, then good, and it is hard to distinguish
them.

4. Because bad ways are more pleasing to our natural corruption then good.
As on the contrary, Gods ways are irksome to our corrupt nature, wherein a man
must as Hierom speaks, interficere in se radicem suam, and mortify his own
root in himself.

Use. Judge of your ways ye should walk in, not by your company, but by the
goodness of them. Keep not company with others in foul and sinful ways. Men
will not walk with their friends in the dirt, but in fair ways.

5. Doct. Wicked men do continue obstinate in evil doing. They walk in the
counsel of the ungodly, and stand in the way of sinners, and fit in the seat of
the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. So did Pharaoh till he was drowned in the sea. I knew
that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass,
Isa. 48.4. That cannot cease from sin, 2 Pet. 2.14. They wax worse and worse, 2 Timothy 3.13. So did Ahaz, 2 Chr. 28.22.

Reason 1. Because they are natural to them, and come out of internal,
corrupt, and fleshly principles, as folly is to a fool, which makes him
constant in foolish actions. Though thou should bray a fool in a mortar among
wheat with a pestil, yet will not his foolishness depart from him, chapter 27.22.

2. Because custom, which is another nature, hardens him in it. As many men
cannot sleep without a pipe of Tobacco at their mouths, so wicked men take no
rest till they do mischief, chapter 4.16. Yea, some care not for sleep, but are so
constant in their evil, that they fit up all night to game and drink. See the
power of custom. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or the Leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil, Jer. 13.23.

Use 1. To call upon us to beware of lying long in any known sin. It will
harden the heart, recover thy self speedily by repentance. Shall they fall, and
not arise? shall he turn away, and not return? Jer. 8.4. Peccatum, quod per
poenitentiam non deletur, suo pondere trahit aliud: Sin not repented of, draws
on other sin. Greg. Mag.

2. To teach us constancy in good duties. It is a shame that wicked men should
continue in sinning, and we be inconstant in well-doing. We know that their
work is in vain, yea hurtful, but ours profitable, 1 Cor. 15.58. Other
creatures are constant in their ways; Sun, Moon, Stars keep their course;
Fishes swim in the water, Birds fly in the air, Fire burns, Wicked men sin.
Should we only be inconstant in good ways?

6. Doct. Ways of sin are ways of darkness. The fool walks in darkness,
Eccl. 2.14. They are called, the unfruitful works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11.

Reason 1. Because men choose the night wherein to commit adultery, and to be
drunk, 1 Thessalonians. 5 7.

2. Because sinners fall into dangers before they be aware. In the day men can
see stumbling blocks, and avoid them; in the night they cannot.

3. Because they that walk in sinful ways, err and go out of the right way,
for want of spiritual light to direct them. He that walks in darkness
knows not whither he goes, Joh. 12.35. We would be angry with them that
should lead us out of the right way, more angry if they lead us into a Wood, to
be robbed by thieves. So sin misseads us into woody, shady, perilous ways.

4. Because they lead men into eternal darkness, into outer darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 8.12.

Use 1. Take heed of sinful ways, they may seem good, but they are stark
naught. Wicked men, Noctem babent in oculis. Seneca. They have night in their
eyes. They are like Owls flying in the dark, whom all birds whoot at when they
see them in the day. So should we show our dislike of ungodly men in their
ungodly ways. Men love not to walk abroad in the dark night, then they lie in
bed and sleep. Sinful ways are worse then dark nights. Therefore set not a
foot out of door toward them, much less walk in them, but bid them adieu for
ever, that ye may be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col.
1.12.

Verse. 14. Who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the frowardness of the
wicked.
The third note of a wicked man follows, which is the expression of his
affections in the content he takes in doing evil, and joy in sinful courses.
The Wiseman counts them wicked, who are grown to such an height of impiety,
that they take pleasure in the many and great sins they have committed; or do
commit and triumph in gross sins done by them, or by others at their
persuasion, or in their sight or hearing. This disorder of affections much
aggravates the naughtiness of their words and actions. They not only do
evil, but come to it with much desire, and practice it with much delight. Men
that have not only a disposition to do evil, but an habit also, and are
hardened in sin. This is the reason why they leave good ways to walk in bad,
because they delight in doing evil. In the former chap. verse. 10, etc. he
disswades the young man from sinning for profit; here he warns him to take heed
of sinful pleasures. He had before set out the pleasure wisdom brings to keep
us from the pleasures of sin. It is not enough that they do any mischief, but
they rejoice in doing those things that nature and reason forbid. They are in
the dark, v. 13. and see not their danger. Yet rejoice they in their deeds of
darkness. This aggravates their blindness, as well as their wickedness. For
the words.

Who rejoice, Heb. rejoicing. They plot, and practice sin with great delight,
and without control of conscience.

To do. The Heb. word (...), signifies,

1. To work, make or do a thing. God saw every thing that he had made, Genesis
1.31.

2. To bring forth corn or fruit, or buds, or branches, or the like. In the
seven plenteous years, the earth brought forth by handfuls, Genesis 41.47.

3. To dress or prepare. He took the Calfe which he had dressed. Genesis 18.8.
M^phibosheth had not dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, 2 Samuel 19.24. The
Priest shall prepare his burnt-offering, Ezekiel. 46.2.

4. To keep or observe. The children of Israel kept the Passover, Josh. 5.10.

5. To get or procure. Of that which was of our fathers Jacob has gotten all
this glory, Genesis 31.1. My power and the might of mine hand has gotten me this
wealth, Deuteronomy. 8.17. Here it is taken in the first sense for Doing.

Evil. See on chapter 1.16.

And delight. With so great delight, that they cannot keep it in, but show it
externally in gestures by leaping, dancing, etc. The former word rejoicing
intimates the inward joy of the mind: this word delighting sets out the
declaration of it outwardly in the body. Lira.

In the frowardness. See on v. 12. Heb. Frowardness, that is, Froward actions.

Of the wicked. Of the wicked man. For it is singular in the Original. Figures
none.

Note 1. Their internal joy in sin. 2. Their external triumph.


In the former note, 1. The act, rejoicing. 2. The object, to do evil.


In the latter observe, 1. The act, delighting. 2. The object, in the
frowardness. 3. The subject, of the wicked man.


1. Doct. Neither profit, nor pleasure should draw us to sin. Pleasure could
not draw Joseph, who slighted his Mistress her temptation, Genesis 39.9, 10. Nor
profit draw Peter, who despised Simon Magus his money, Act. 8.19, 20. Neither
the pleasures, nor treasures of Egypt could move Moses to forsake Gods people,
Heb. 11.25, 26.

Reason. Because all the pleasures, and profits of the world cannot
countervalle the miseries that follow sin.

1. In regard of measure. The pleasures and profits of the earth are small, not
great, short, not full. Never any man enjoyed all the world so, as to make use
of all pleasures and profits in it. And if he had all, and could use all, it
would not bring so much comfort, as there is misery in hell What is a thousand
pound to a thousand millions? What is a river to the Sea? What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.

2. In purity. These profits and pleasures are mixed with losses and sorrows.
Never any man found it otherwise. But there is no mixture of profit, or
pleasure with hell torments. Nothing but comfort for Lazarus in heaven: nothing
but torment for the rich man in hell, Luke 16 24.25. What is water intermixed
with wine to pure wine? or rather, what is it to deadly poison? What is gold
ore to gold purified by the fire? or rather, what is it to perpetual fetters
of iron?

3. In durance. These worldly comforts, and gain last but for a time. Finem
habent autuum, aut suum. Augustine. Either they have thy end, or their end. Hell
torments have no end. These shull go away into everlasting punishment, Mat.
25.46. Who would live a King for a year, to be in a cauldron of scalding Lead
ever after? What is a Lease to a fee simple? What is time to eternity?

Use 1. It condemns such as are bewitched with the pleasures of the world, and
seek to glut themselves with them in sinful ways. Sampson, whom no force
could overcome, was overcome by a Dalilah. This makes men careless of
themselves, and of all others. Let their souls, bodies, states, wives,
children, neighbors, sink or swim, be saved or damned; God be pleased or
displeased, all is one. What care they, so they may follow their pleasures? We
should remember that of Cyprian, De bono pudicit. Voluptatem vicisse volupt as
est maxima. Nec alla major est victoria, quam ea quae de'cuplditatious
refertur. To overcome pleasure is the greatest pleasure. Neither is there any
greater victory then that which is gotten over pleasure.

2. It reproves such as follow the world so close for gain, that they will have
it by hook or by crook, and so run themselves upon manny rocks of sorrows. So
they fill their souls with cares, and fears, while they live. Men's in terrenis
occupata semper est in angustiis. Bern. De modo been vivendi. Cap. 8. A mind
employed in earthly things, is always in straits. They fill their bodies with
labor day and night, trouble themselves, and all theirs, and go to hell for
ever. The world is the sea, profit the wind, the soul the ship easily drowned.

2. Doct. Delight in sin draws men from good ways to bad. As it did Sampson
the strongest man, and Solomon the wisest.

Reason 1. Because it drownes all pleasure men take in good ways, as water
quenches fire.

2. It sets men on fire to follow bad ways. So many go from thirst to
drunkenness. It is as a sport to a fool to do mischief, Chap. 10.23.

Use. It shows us the reason why some that have made a show of goodness grow
very bad scandals to Religion, grief to themselves, and to all their friends
that fear God. Delight in sin has made them cast off all goodness, and wallow
in all wickedness. Facilis descensus Averni; It is easy to go down to hell.
They that run down a steep hill, cannot stay till they come to the bottom.
When men cannot have their pleasure in a lawful way, it is but an easy step
over the bridge to unlawful things. Hircum lex non sacrificat, praeterquam
propter solam malorum ablegationem, quandoquidem voluptas est vitii metropolis.
Clem. Strom. l. 7. The law did not sacrifice a Goat, except only for the
putting away of evils, because pleasure is the metropolitan City of vice.

3. Doct. Pleasure of wisdom should kill pleasure of sin in us. Wherewithal
shall a youngman cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto according to thy word,
Psalm. 119.9. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee, Psalm. 119.11.

Reason. Because wisdom affords us many daggers to stab sin to the heart. As
prohibitions, which if we regard God our Kings authority, are very prevalent.
Threatenings, which if we regard the power of God our Master, have great force
to kill sin in us. Promises, which if we regard the affection of God our Father
are very persuasive not to offend him. Directions how to avoid sin, which if we
regard God our Physician, will prevail with us to prevent sin, which is
hurtful to soul and body.

Use 1. It shows us why many take so much pleasure in fin. Because they have
no pleasure in wisdom. Therefore wicked men are called fools frequently in
Scripture.

2. Let us take so much delight in spiritual duties, that it may kill the
pleasure of sin in us. Carnis amor spiritus amore superatur, desiderio
restinguitur, Hieron. The love of the flesh is overcome by the love of the
spirit.

4. Doct. Many delight to do evil, and take fingular pleasure in committing
sin. They sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken
away, unless they cause some to fall. They eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of violence. Chap. 4.16, 17. Woe to them that devise iniquity,
and work evil upon their beds: when the morning is light, they practice it,
because it is in the power of their hands. And they covet fields, and take them
by violence; and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man, and his
house, even a man and his heritage, Mic. 2.1, 2. It is a sport to a fool to do
mischief, Prove. 10.23. When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest. Jer. 11.15.
Some have pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 2.12.

Reason 1. Because of their great desire of sinning. They are like a woman with
child, at no case till they be delivered of their wicked projects by word or
deed. And then they are full of joy, when their lust is satisfied, like a
longing woman, that has what she longs for.

2. Because they find sin pleasing to their corrupted nature. In most sins
there is fleshly pleasure, earthly profit, or worldly honor, which delight
carnal men, as the bait does the fish.

3. Because of custom in sinning, which makes harsh things pleasant, and
brings a vicious habit which causes delight in sin. Signum habitus-generati
est delectatio in opere, Aristot. Ethic. 2. The sign of an habit gotten is
delight in the work.

4. Because of ignorance. They walk through dark ways, v. 13. and know not
whither they go. For if they did look upon the punishments to which their
sinful courses tend, they would stop their steps, and correct their harmesome
mirth by wholesome tears.

Use. Here is a note of trial to discern our spiritual estate. Wicked men
rejoice in sin; good men sorrow more for sin, then for troubles, as being more
offensive to God. Ahab is sick till he have Naboths Vineyard, 1 King. 21. Good
men rejoice in doing good, like their Savior, whose Meat it was to do the will
of him that sent him, Joh. 4.34. Wicked men are like them that are drawn in by
cheaters, and lose all their money at play: or like the Grasshopper, that sings
merrily a while, and then dies with hunger and cold. Of such an one says
Nazianzen, Oblectorque malis, mortemque in pectore fixam Rideo Sardonico risu.
I am delighted in evils, and laugh at death by a Sardonian (or deadly)
laughter. There is a certain herb, the juice whereof being taken makes a man
laugh till he dies; the like is also said of some touching certain poisonous
spiders, that the leap and dance till they die, Eusebius. Emisse. These cannot be
merry, unless the Devil be their play fellow. Sed-melior est tristitia iniqua
patientis, quam laetitia iniqua facientis, Augustine. But better is the sadness
of him, that suffers unjust things, then the gladness of him, that does
them. It ye be such, flatter not your selves, but be assured ye are wicked men.

5. Dect. Many triumph in their evil deeds, and brag of them. Many man's glory
is in their shame, Phil. 3.19. Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, O mighty
man? Psalm. 52.1.

Reason 1. Because they have no good to boast of. And men are naturally proud,
and would boast of something.

2. Because they go beyond others in wickedness. Simeon the Sorcerer gave
out, that himself was some great one. Act. 8.9.

Use. It teaches us to bewail the madness of those men, that brag of their
wicked exploits, how many they have made drunk, etc. They show their joy
herein by leaping, dancing, and other outward signs. How can they choose but be
mad, that boast of such things, as godly men are ashamed of? Tale est quod
facimus, quale cum rident phrenetici. Nulla verior miseria, quam falsa
laetitia. Bern. That which we do, is like the laughter of a frantic man. There
is no greater misery then false joy. Non dolere quod peccaveras magis offendit
Deum, quam quod ante peccaveras. Chrysostom. Not grieving that thou have sinned,
offends God more then that thou had sinned before.

6. Doct. Many love to have others take notice of their sins. Absolon went in
unto his Fathers Concubines in the sight of all Israel, 2 Samuel 16.22.

Reason 1. Because they think their sinful courses to be a credit to them,
showing, that they dare do that, which others dare not.

2. Because they would have others know, that they fear no punishment from God
or man, like the unrighteous Judge, Which feared not God, neither regarded man,
Luke 18.4.

Use. Of all men in the world take heed of those, Trust not them, that will
betray themselves to eternal wrath. They will not be afraid to ruin you to
eternity.

Verse. 15. Whose ways are crooked, and they froward in their paths.
It is no wonder, that wicked men go in crooked ways. Where else can they go
that leave the right way, which turns not aside to the right hand, nor to the
left? It is as if the wiseman should have said, Let no man think that he may
converse with them, and yet go aright in the ways of uprightness. It cannot
be wisdom only will free thee from hurt by wicked men, and from walking in
their crooked ways. The last mark of a wicked man is set down here in the
text, which is obstinacy in evil paths. Here is a gradation. Every step
exceeds the other. Ill words are naught, v. 12. Ill deeds are worse, v. 13.
Boasting of sin worse, v. 14. Obstinacy worst of all, v. 15. Such are
desperately incorrigible.

For the words.

Whose ways. See on chapter 1.19.

Are crooked. Swarve from the right rules of Gods word, and being compared with
it, are found not to be strait.

And they froward. The word signifies going backward, or out of the way.

In their paths. See on v. 9.

Figures. A metaphor from travelers, who obstinately go on, and persist in
wrong ways.

Note 1. The wickedness of their ways. 2. Their obstinacy in them.


In the former note, 1. The subject, Whose ways. 2. The adjunct, Are crooked.


In the latter observe, 1. The adjunct, And they froward. 2. The subject, In
their paths.


1. Doct. The Scripture delights much in metaphors. Cains sin is like a dog
lying at his door, watching for his going out to devour him, Gen 4.7. Jotham
sets out the unkindnesse of the Israelites to his father Gideon, in preferring
Abimelec a bastard before his lawful sons, by the trees setting a bramble to
rule over them, Judge. 9.14, 15. Jehoash compares Amaziahs proud desire, to a
thistles desire to marry his son to the Cedars daughter, 2 King. 14.9. The
progress, and profit of the Gospel preached, is by Christ compared to seed
sown in a good ground, corn among tears, fishes taken in the net, bread
leavened, treasure hid in a field, a pearl of price, Mat. 13. The difference
betwixt Gods people under the law and under the Gospel, is set out by
Allegories, of Sarah, Hagar, Sinai, Sion, Gal. 4.14. etc. The flying and
killing of Kings, and great persons under the similitude of Islands, and
mountains vanishing away, Rev. 16.20.

Reason 1. Because this is a great help to the understanding, as spectacles to
the eyes. By worldly things which we know, we are taught heavenly things, which
we know not.

2. It is a great help to the memory. Things that we forget (as we are very
ready to forget things belonging to the souls good) are brought to our mind
upon the fight, and hearing of those metaphors.

3. It works much upon the affections. Many outward things are very pleasing to
us. By comparing spiritual things to those things we love, and take comfort in
in the world, our affections are drawn higher. Therefore God is called a Father
and an husband.

4. It works upon the conscience. I am Gods servant, child, wife. When I see
the carfulness of mine to do duty to me, my conscience smites me, and tells
me, I am not so careful to do duty to God.

Use 1. It condemns the Papists, who in many points to confirm their
erroneous opinions turn metaphors into a literal sense. As to prove that
children, who die unbaptized, cannot be saved, they interpret that Joh. 3.5. of
outward water in Baptism, which is spoken of the Spirit washing away the filth
of sin like water. To prove the corporal presence of Christ's body in the Lords
Supper, they quote, This is my body, overthrowing the nature of the Sacrament,
taking the figne quite away, and destroying the nature of Christ's body by
making it to be in many places at once. So that there is neither Sacrament, nor
Christ's body. To establish their feigned Purgatory, they interpret 1 Cor. 3.13.
of natural fire, which is spoken of the trial of men's works by the judgment
of Christ at the last day, when all men's works shall be revealed, as gold is
tried by passing the fire, and when their Purgatory will be at an end, as
themselves confess. To establish prayer to Saints, they urge the custom of
Kings Courts, wherein men come to Kings by Nobles, not considering that Kings
are ignorant, and in danger, and soon wearied by many addresses, and therefore
must be informed, protected, eased by them, that are about them; but God need
not. Yea they drive men from reading Scriptures, because of these metaphors
taken from humane affairs, which God put in of purpose to draw men to it. So
Mr. Fox in Latimers life, mentions a Priour in Cambridge that dissuaded men
from reading the Scriptures, lest reading Luke 9.26. and 1 Cor. 5.6. Plow-men
looking back, and Bakers leavening the bread too little should despair. To
which Latimer answers, If a painter should picture a Fox in a Pulpit, in a
Friars coul, no Clown that should see it, would imagine, that the Painter
thought a Fox could preach, but intended to signify Friars did preach like
Foxes.

2. Let us labor to apply Metaphors aright, and then we shall profit by them.
When we read Joh. 15. see what sap we receive from Christ the spiritual vine,
and whether we be his sheep. And so in other parables.

2. Doct. The same thing is set out by diverse similitudes in Scripture. As the
progress of the Gospel, Matthew. 13. Our union with Christ by a Vine, Joh. 15. a
Graffe, Romans 11. a Body, 1 Cor. 12.

Reason 1. Because variety is very pleasing. Many different strings make good
music.

2. It is very profitable. A fisher had need of many baits. If one take not,
another may.

3. Man has many affections, and some outward objects work more upon love and
joy, others upon sorrow and hatred, others upon fear, others upon confidence.

Use. In every thing that concerns thy soul, make use of such similitudes in
Scripture as may most affect thee. As of the love of Mothers, when thou
doubtest of Gods favor. The store of sap the vine gives to the branches, may
comfort thee, when thou feel little grace in thee, and art grieved for it.
And so may thou make use of other similitudes, according to thy need.

3. Doct. Wicked ways are crooked ways. Such as turn aside to their crooked
ways, Psalm. 125.5. They have made them crooked ways, Isa. 53.8.

Reason 1. Because they differ from the rule of Gods Word, which is a most
straight rule for all men's actions, and from which men ought not to bow neither
to the right hand, nor to the left.

2. Men's own affections bow their ways and make them crooked. No wit of man
can decypher the innumerable crooked paths, to which men's crooked affections
lead them.

3. Men's minds are bowed by earthly things, and then their ways must needs be
crooked. Therefore the Apostle bids us, Set our affections on things above, and
not on things on the earth, Col. 3.2.

Use 1. Let us loath wicked ways because they are crooked. Many men go aside
like the Sea-crab. As the Wagoner seeks by-ways to avoid hillocks, lest he
overturn his wagon: so wicked men seek perverse ways to avoid dangers. Yet such
are self-condemned, for every man would have a straight way, that he may the
sooner be at his journeys end. We like not crooked arrows, measures, bodies.
The woman bound by Satan was bowed together till Christ made her straight. Luke
13, 11, 13. Satan has made many crooked in their ways. How justly may God say
to such as the Crab in the Fable did to the Serpent, when he had given him his
deaths wound for his crooked conditions, and then saw him stretch himself out
straight, At oportuit, sic vixisse: It is too late now, you should have lived
so.

2. Let us take heed of apostasy, and backsliding, for then we are sure to
walk in crooked ways. Such are all gone aside, they are altogether become
filthy, Psalm. 14.3. They are turned aside like a deceitful bow, Psalm. 78.57.
Some there are that go back from the good things which they have practiced.
They have heard the Word, now they are proud; and above ordinances. They have
prayed in their families, now they follow the world. They have been sober, now
they haunt Taverns. They have been just, now they have learned to cheat and
deceive. Others go from their former profession, and turn Papists, and
Separatists from Gods people, forsaking Gods ordinances, that were formerly
dear unto them. Others go from their promises, from their vow in Baptism, and
cleave to the world, and Satan; their National covenant, promising reformation
of themselves and their families, they are yet unreformed. Others go back from
the duties they owe to God, as the duties of piety, sobriety, justice, which
had they never practiced, professed, nor promised, yet are they due to God by
their Creation, and neither man's Fall, nor Redemption can free them from them;
nay, Heaven will not to eternity. Let gross wicked persons then (drunkards,
adulterers, swearers, etc.) view their ugly condition. If we should say, they
were turned Papists, Jews, Turks, Heathen, they would be angry; Apostata's and
backsliders are as bad, although they cast not off the vail of Religion. They
will continue in their crooked ways, unless God deliver them miraculously.
Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them,
but they have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder
then a rock, they have refused to return, Jerem. 5.3. Evil men, and seducets
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13. Custom
in sin hardens them. How hard a thing it is for men to do good, that are
accustomed to do evil, see Jerem. 13.23. No words will alter them. Some take
Gods covenant in their mouth, that hate instruction, Psalm. 50.16, 17. No blows
will mend them. When they are stricken, they will revolt more and more, Isa.
1.5. No kindness will reduce them. God used all loving means to reclaim the
Israelites, but they refused to return, Hos. 11.4, 5. No marvel then that Gods
Ministers lose many exhortations bestowed on many of their people. It is not
because they exhort not aright, but because the people are refractary,
resolving not to amend, though their courses be damnable, and they like resty
Jades, go backward when they are spurred; precepts, examples do no good,
Ministers and friends are disheartened from dealing with them, as finding them
incurable. So men thrust through the heart discourage Physicians and
Surgeons. Men had need have no society with backsliders, unless nature or
their vocation require it, and then also they had need beware of hurt by them,
for they are desperate.

4. Doct. Obstinacy in sin is a great height of wickedness. So God accounts
it. I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow
brass, Isa. 48.4. So he punishes it. If ye will not for all this hearken unto
me, then I will punish you seven times more for your sins, Lev. 26.18.

Use. Repent of sin quickly, lest ye grow obstinate. Wounds not healed at first
grow incurable. Obstinacy in sin breeds hardness of heart, and that leads to
eternal destruction. Be warned, beware, and be saved.

Verse. 16. To deliver thee from the strange woman, even from the stranger which
flattereth with her words.
The deliverance from evil men was described before; now follows the
deliverance from evil women, which are as dangerous to him, if not more, in
regard of their crafty allurements. Men presented unlawful gain, chapter 1.11.
Women offer unlawful pleasure here.

Note 1. The deliverance, v. 16, 17, 18, 19.

2. A general application of good that may come, when counsels of evil men
and women are forsaken, v. 20, 21, 22.

In the deliverance there is,

1. A description of the party that endangers the young man, v. 16, 17.

2. Of the danger if they be overcome, v. 18, 19.

The party is described,

1. By her condition, v. 16. She was a strange woman, and a stranger

2. By her conversation.

1. In her flattery, v. 16. 2. In her falsehood to her Husband, v. 17.
For the first, and first for the words.

To deliver thee. The coherence stands thus: When wisdom enters into thine
heart, v. 10. understanding shall keep thee, v. 11. To deliver thee from the
strange woman, etc. To snatch thee out, as out of the hand of an enemy, or the
paws of a Lion, as David was delivered, 1 Samuel 17.37. or as a brand out of the
fire, as Joshua was, Zec. 3.2. For the word, see on v. 12.

From the strange woman, (...), a woman; from (...), a man. She shall be called
woman, because she was taken out of man, Genesis 2.23. Because she had her body
out of his, and therefore should be an helper to him in piety, and not an
hinderer. By a strange woman here is meant the adulteress, which being another
man's Wife, God has forbidden thee to touch or use as a Wife, and in that kind
should be a stranger to thee. So a strange God, Psalm. 81.9. is one whom we
ought not to worship. Strange fire was such as ought not to be used in
Sacrifices, Lev. 19.1. So men may dwell in a City, and yet be strangers for
trade, if they be not Free men.

Even from the stranger. This is another word in the Original, and often
signifies a woman of another Nation. For commonly strumpets were odious, and it
is likely that few Israelitish women would be such, being so branded. There
shall be no whore of the daughters of Israel, Deuteronomy. 23.17. It may be strangers
took the more liberty to be naught there, because Israelitish women durst not.
And if any of Israel lived so lewdly, they were esteemed as Gentiles, and that
was a good argument to move young men to avoid them. Some bring in unmarried
women that set up naughty houses for gain. But that is contrary to v. 17. which
speaks plainly of married women.

Which flattereth with her words, Heb. which makes her words smooth. Like
butter and oil, which will easily go down, Psalm. 55.21.

The sum is:

Heavenly wisdom, if thou embrace it, will give thee knowledge and strength,
not only to see and avoid the snares of evil men, but also to keep thee out
of, or bring thee out of the nets of wicked women, which are no less dangerous
to young men unexperienced, and prone to lust, through the corruption of
nature. Yea, and the more pernicious, because women are more skillful in
sugared words and have drawn away the wisest and strongest men, as Solomon and
Samson.

Figures none, unless a Metaphor in the word Making smooth. As in smooth paths
men stick not, but go on cheerfully, without any rub or let, so strumpets study
to compose their words, that the young man that has beauty to satisfy their
lust, may stand at nothing, but readily hearken to their Sirens Songs.

1. Doct. There is a medicine in Scripture for every disease of the soul.
Before there was a prescript against the venom of evil men, now, an Antidote
against the poison of evil women. The weapens of our warfare are not carnal,
but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.4, 5. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of
the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart, Heb. 4.12.

Reason 1. Because the Scripture is Gods Word, who is the catholic Physician
of the soul. Physicians keep prescripts for the cure of all diseases in a book.
Apothecaries have medicines in their shops for all maladies. The Scripture is
Gods book and shop. It is Gods Armoury, in which are spiritual shields,
swords, and all manner of weapons to deal with all manner of enemies. See the
whole armor of God described, Ephesians. 6.13, etc.

2. An induction of particulars will prove it. See a shield against the three
great Idols of the world. Love not the world, neither the things that are in
the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world, and the world passes
away, and the lust thereof, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. Against pride in particular.
God resists the proud, Jam. 4.6. And they cannot escape whom God will ruin.
Against covetousness. More is lost then gotten, if a man could get all the
world, which never any one yet did. For, what is a man profited, if he shall
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or, what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26. Against voluptuousness. See the rich man in
hell, Luke 16.23. All his wealth could not keep him out.

3. There is a fence against several degrees of sin. Against evil thoughts.
Men's thoughts will accuse one another in the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men, Romans 2.15, 16. Against evil words. Every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of Judgment. For by
thy words thou shall be condemned, Matthew. 12.36, 37. Against evil deeds. This
Joseph knew, saying, How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
Genesis 39.9.

4. There are many remedies for the same sin. As, prohibitions, examples of
good men avoiding it, threatenings against, and judgments upon such as do it.
As, against Blasphemy. It is forbidden in the third Commandment, Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. It was avoided by Job. When his
Wife bids him, Curse God and die: Job said unto her, Thou speak as one of
the foolish women speaks, Job 2.9, 10. It was threatened and punished. He that
blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death. And so was
the Blasphemer, Lev. 24.16, 23. Sabbath breaking is forbidden in the fourth
Commandment. In it thou shall do no manner of work, etc. It is avoided or
prevented by Nehemiah's care, Neh. 13.15, etc. He forbids it, and threatens
punishment. The like is, Ezekiel. 20.13. My Sabbaths they greatly polluted; then I
said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the wilderness to consume them. It
was punished by the Babylonian Captivity. Until the Land had enjoyed her
Sabbaths; for as long as she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, 2 Chronicles. 36.21.
God made the land keep Sabbath, because the people would not. Murder is
forbidden in the sixth Commandment. Thou shall do no murder. Avoided by David.
He would not kill Saul when he had him in his power, 1 Samuel 24.4 6. Threatened.
Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.6. Punished
in Joab, 1 King. 2.31, 34. Adultery is forbidden in the seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not commit adultery. Avoided by Joseph, Genesis 39.9. Threatened with
destruction, Prove. 6.37, etc. Punished in Zimri and Cozbi, Numb. 25.8.

Use 1. Let us observe our dispositions, and tentations, to seek for prevention
or fit cure. Else the medicine may be unfit for the sore, and do no good.

2. Observe those places of Scripture that make against those sins to which
thou art most inclined or tempted. So men in Gardens and Apothecaries shops
pick out what will cure their diseases.

2. Keep them in thy mind, as men do medicines for their own infirmities in
their houses, to be ready in time of need. A man may die that has his medicine
to seek.

4. Apply them when corruption or temptation works; as Christ did, Mat. 4. who
had a place of Scripture ready to repel every temptation of Satan.

2. Doct. As we are in danger of evil men, so likewise of evil women. So was
Joseph in danger of his Mistress, Genesis 39.7. And the young man in danger of the
Harlot, Prove. 7.7, 10.

Reason 1. Because of their loose and wanton carriage, which is a bait to take
men's natural corruption, and suell for that fire.

2. Because of their impudent solicitations, which may work on them that never
intended wantonness, as fire may take an house in which it was not kindled.

Use. If you see light and wanton carriage in women, come not in their company.
Hurt ye may get much, good ye can expect none. Either sin or a prison may
follow, as in Joseph's case.

3. Doct. It is good for men to know all things dangerous for their souls.
Therefore many fins are reckoned up, as Idolatry, adultery, cruelty, etc. Ezekiel.
18.11, etc. Swearing, lying, killing, stealing. etc. Hos. 4.2, etc.

Reason 1. Because they all are hurtful to the soul.

2. A man can never be safe else. If one seen sin be escaped, another unseen
will lay hold on him.

Use. Labor to know all sins, that thou fall into none. As a Mariner observes
all rocks and sands at Sea, and a Traveller marks all stones and holes in the
way, to avoid them.

4. Doct. The danger from evil women is great. By means of an whorish woman a
man is brought to a piece of bread; and the adulteress will hunt for the
precious life, chapter 6.26. Dalilah deprives Samson of the eyes of his body, Judge.
16.19, 21. Strange women deprived Solomon of the eyes of his mind, 1 King.
11.1, 4.

Reason 1. Because as good women are modest, so Whores are unsatiable in
filthiness. Witness the stews in other Countries, where men go in all the
day long to one woman.

2. As good women are most tenderly affected, so are wicked ones most cruel.
It is observed, that where-women are in company, murder follows robbery.

Use. Come not near women noted for wickedness. Be wise, and see danger in
their faces, and escape it. Foolish men fear no danger in adultery, till they
feel it. It is a trodden path, and therefore they think it safe. Why then should
the Wiseman tell us, that God gives us wisdom to keep us from the evil
woman, if there were no danger? Believe God, and escape the evil woman.

5. Doct. There is a propriety of Husbands and Wives one to another, which no
power on earth may violate. Therefore other men's Wives must be strangers to us.
So they are called, chapter 5.3. and 6.24. and 7.5. So Joseph accounted of his
Mistress. My Master has kept nothing back from me, but thee, because thou art
his Wife, Genesis 39.9.

Reason 1. Because else adultery were no sin, no more then theft, if there were
no propriety in goods.

2. Else no man had a right in his Children, or at least could not know his
right, if he had no propriety in his Wife.

Use. Infringe not this propriety. Remember that all but thine own Husband and
Wife are strangers to thee. To this end,

1. Refrain thy looks from thy neighbors wife. Adultery begins at the eyes. It
creeps into the heart at those windows. Say with Job, I made a covenant with
mine eyes, why then should I think on a maid? Job 31.1. Commit not adultery
with a woman in thine heart, by looking on her, to lust after her, Matthew. 5.28.

2. Keep thy tongue from soliciting her to sin. Say not as Amnon to Tamar,
Come lie with me, 2 Samuel 13.11.

3. Thy hands from laying hold on her, as Amnon did on Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.11.

4. Banish her out of thy thoughts, as the tenth Commandment bids, Thou shall
not covet thy neighbors wife. So shall thou not wrong thy neighbors bed, nor
infringe his propriety.

6. Dect. Strumpets are full of flattering speeches. See the Harlots alluring
words, chapter 7.14, etc. and Dalila's, Judge. 16.6, 10, 13, 15.

Reason 1. Because they liveidly, and have time to study fine words.

2. Because they seek by flattery to accomplish their base ends.

Use. Take heed of being overcome by their smooth language. They will tell
thee, they love none else, and that they cannot be hired by others, and that
they will die for thee. But they love thy wealth or beauty, and will leave
thee, when they fail. The Dutch Proverb is, The Vintner hangs not out his bush
for one guest. Balaam persuades the Midianites, Vt non viri sed multeres cum
Israelitis certarent, quae armorum vice corporis venustate, and verborum
illecebris essent praeditae. Theod. That not their men but their women should
fight with the Israelites, who in stead of weapons were endued with bodily
beauty, and entising words. And these got the victory, and made Israel to sin,
and brought the plague upon them, Numb. 31.16. Such women's lips are nets; their
hands, bands; words, cords to draw a man, as a fool to the stocks, or an ox to
the slaughter, chap. 7.22. Be wise, and fly from the strange woman, though her
lips drop as an honey comb, and her mouth be smoother then oil, chapter 5.3.

Verse. 17. Which forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the covenant
of her God.
We are now come to our second note, Her falsehood to her Husband. Lest any
Israelite should conceive that he did not offend, unless he dealt with
idolatrous Heathen women, now he expounds what he meant by a strange woman.
Another man's Wife, that dealt unfaithfully with her Husband.

For the words.

Which forsakes. The word signifies forsaking or failing one that is committed
to our charge, or to whom we are tied by any bands to be helpful. See on v.
13. upon the word Leave. She forsakes her Husband, either by taking other
Lovers to her privily, or seeking them abroad, or by leaving her Husbands
house, and living from him, that she may more freely follow her lusts.
Pot^^har's Wife, had Joseph hearkened to her, had forsaken her Husband in
affection, though she had stayed in the house with him. The Harlot ( chapter 7)
kept in her Husbands house, though she took advantage of his absence ( v. 19.)
there. Few so impudent, as quite to leave their Husbands, for then all the
world would take notice of their lewdness: but many deal falsely with them
underhand.

(...), The guide. It comes from a word that signifies to teach, for teachers
are guides. A guide of the blind, and a teacher of babes go together, Romans
2.19, 20. And women are required to learn of their Husbands at home, who are
their guides, 1 Cor. 14.35. The guide here is the Husband. The head of the
woman is the man, 1 Cor. 11.3. Now we know, the head guides the body. Some
understand it of God, who is called the guide of Judah's youth, Jer. 3.4. And
so they draw the words to Idolatry, which rather set out adultery, as appears
by the words before and after the text. And this aggravates the sin of the
adulteress, showing that she is not only unfaithful, but also disobedient,
rebellious, and unthankful, in disobeying her ruler and guide.

Of her youth. The word contains infancy, childhood, youth, all our time till
25 years of age. But it is put for the time when they are first marriageable,
and married young. And the Husband is called the guide of her youth, because
she chooses him to guide her, and promises to be guided by him, which
guidance she has most need of in her younger years, and he is set over by Gods
appointment, as a guide, and therefore she ought to be guided by him. Here is
meant the first Husband, to whom she is first married, and first love uses to
be strongest. And she that will be false to him to whom she first gave her
heart, will make no scruple to be so to any succeeding Husband. So a Husband
loves the first Wife best commonly, being taught to rejoice with the wife of
his youth, chapter 5.18. Affection is hottest in youth. Virgins use to be more
ready to preserve faithful love, as Virgin-wax is purest. Yet this unchaste
young woman leaving her guide and Husband, to whom she was married being a
young Virgin, follows the adulterer. Magnum impudicitiae, and impudentiae
argumentum. Bain. A great argument of impudicity and impudence.

And forgets. Negligently, as the word imports.

(...), The covenant. It comes from a word which signifies to choose. It is an
agreement between two choosing one another, and tying themselves by covenant
one to another upon such terms as both parties like.

Of her God. Whom she professes to worship. For Solomon writes to the people
of God. For the word, see on v. 5. It is called the covenant of God,

1. Because God instituted marriage.

2. Because God is a witness of the mutual promise of fidelity which is made
in marriage, and takes especial notice of the breach of it, to punish it,
although the husband know it not. The Lord has been witness between thee, and
the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously; yet is she
thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant, Mal. 2.14. The sin of the
adulteress is aggravated by every word. She not only fails in her duty to her
Husband, but forsakes him, and deals falsely with him. She forsakes her guide
that took care of her, and that in her youth, when she had most need of a
guide. She quite forgets not only a promise but a covenans, and that solemnly
made, not only in the sight of men, but of the great God, the instituter of
marriage, witness of the contract, whereby she bound her self to cleave to him
only so long as they lived together, the judge and the avenger of the breach.
But now without regard of the love and benefit past, or of the strong binding
covenant of God she breaks thus shamefully out, not only to the endangering of
her own soul, but of them also that are allured by her. The young man also is
here by strong reasons moved to take heed of her; for though she might flatter
him, and profess much love to him, yet questionless she that had been false
to her Husband, her first Love, and durst violate the covenant of her God,
would never be true to him, but make use of him, till she had wasted his body
and estate, and then leave him.

Figures none.

Note 1. Her sin. 2. The aggravation of it.


In the former note, 1. The act, Which forsakes, 2. The object, the guide. 3.
The adjunct, of her youth.


In the latter observe, 1. The act, And forgets. 2. The object, the
covenant. 3. The adjunct, of her God.


1. Doct. There is no trusting of them that will fail God and their near
friends. If Absolon abuse his God, and in duty fail his Father, 2 Samuel 15. the
people that follow him perish. So in Adonijah. What got Joab and Abiathar by
following him? 1 King. 2. Naboth is condemned by two false witnesses that dealt
unjustly with God and him, 1 King. 21.10.

Reason. Because they that have broken the greater bands, will not stick at the
lesser. If they fail God, they will fail men for their advantage. If they sail
friends, much more strangers or enemies. Qui semel verecundiae limits
transilierit, graviter fit impudens: He that once is gone beyond the bound of
shamefastness, becomes very impudent. Tully. If Samson can carry away the
gates of Gaza, he will make no bones of the beam and web, Judge. 16.

Use 1. It reproves such as keep company with those who are notoriously false
to God, and their parents, or nearest friends.

2. Those who employ such in businesses of weight. What good can they expect
from them? They will be left in the lurch.

3. Those that marry such persons. If they knew their falsehood to God or their
Parents before, it is in vain to complain afterward of their falsehood to them.
Who will pity them?

2. Doct. No bridle will keep in wantonness where it reigns. Neither fear of
God, nor loving Husband in this verse. None will serve Tamar but Judah her
Father in Law, Genesis 38. None will serve Amnon but his Sister Tamar, 1 Samuel 13.
None will serve Her^d but Hered^as his Brother Philip's Wife, Matthew. 14.
Neither Fathers counsel, chap. 5. nor Mothers, chap. 31. will keep Solomon
from strange women, 1 King 11. The incestuous person must have his Fathers
Wife, 1 Cor. 5.

Reason. Because where lust reigns, it overrules all civil and natural
bands, as a great river overflowing hides all the neighboring streams. Such to
satisfy their lusts, regard not friends, kindred, parents, children. See Pope
Alexander's strumpets Epitaph.

Conditur hoc tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re
Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Within this Tomb Luerece by name,
Thais indeed, here lies,
Pope Alexander's Daughter, Wife,
Daughter in law likewise.
Use. We need not marvel then to hear of Adulteries, Incests, Sodomies in the
world, where lust is let loose it breaks all bands.

3. Doct. Many arguments may be given against Adultery. Two out of the text.
Unkindnesse to her Husband, and falsehood towwards God, which shall be handled
severally. Add the breach of the Marriage-band, which should be a strong band
to chastity. She should go to no man's bed, but to her Husbands. But Adulterium,
quasi ad alterum, or ad alterius torum. Beeman. To another man, or to another
man's bed. The wanton never wants one, though her Husband be never so near. Add
also the defiling of her own body, which is a great infamy; the diseases that
follow that sin, the wants when all is consumed upon lust, death by partners
rage, or others violence; the disgraceful name of Bastards stamped upon
children, and Hell it self in the verses following.

Use. Let these things scare men and women from Adultery, and bring such to
hearty sorrow and repentance in time, who are guilty of it, lest they eternally
destroy themselves and others. Many think adultery to be but a small sin, but
they forget these many arguments against it. Let us remember the dangers, and
take heed.

4. Doct. Adultery in a Wife is a great wrong to the Husband. Every one neighed
after his neighbors wife, Jer. 58. The wrong done to God by Idolatry is set
out by this similitude. Thou have gone a whoring from thy God, Hos. 9.1.

Reason 1. Because it wrongs him in his greatest propriety, dearer to him then
friends or children.

2. It breaks the greatest obligation, for he is her guide. If he leave her,
she is in perpetual danger. Her lovers having satisfied their lust will leave
her.

3. It may put the Husband to labor to provide for other men's children, and is
not that a great injury?

Use. Let women when they are tempted to wantonness, think what wrong they do
their Husbands. So great, that though they may repent, and be pardoned by God,
yet they can never make their Husbands amends. This is a sovereign antidote
against Adultery.

5. Doct. The Wise should be guided by her Husband. Wives submit your selves
unto your own Husbands, Ephesians. 5.22. See the same words, Col. 3.18.

Reason 1. Because the Husband is the guide, as in the text.

2. He is the head, and the body must not rule. It were a monster in nature to
see the body placed above the head

Use. Let Wives be content to be subject. A man that being sober overturns the
ship, and drowns the passengers, is not fit to guide it when he is drunk. If
innocent Eve missed Adam, Wives now in the state of corruption are not fit to
guide, but must be guided.

6. Doct. An adulteress sins against God, as well as against her Husband. She
breaks the seventh Commandment, where God forbids it, and separates those whom
God the author of marriage has joined together, and join them together, and
joins them together whom God has separated.

Use. Let Wives think of this, and of Joseph's carriage to prevent adultery;
saying, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9.
And if they be guilty, let them say with David, Against thee have I sinned,
Psalm. 51.4. And repent, that they may be saved.

Verse. 18. For her house enclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.
The Wiseman proceeds to show the greatness of the mercy of preservation from
evil women by the greatness of the danger, from which men are kept thereby.
That is, from death it self, which is most terrible in the thoughts of wanton
persons, and which, if often thought of, would keep them from wanton courses.
This danger is set out,

1. In the kind of it, in this verse. Death. omnium terribilium
terribilissimum: The most terrible of all terrible things.

2. By the irrecoverablenesse or hardness to return, v. 19.

For the first. That the young man might see Solomon's counsel was not in vain,
he sets down the great mischief that befalls such as follow the Harlots ways,
and enter into her house. And how great evils he shall escape that comes not
there; is set out by the disorders of her house, and deadly ways of them that
live there.

For the words.

For. This is no reason of the last verse. why she wrongs her Husband, and sins
against God. She did not do it that she might perish her self, and undo
others, but that she might satisfy her own lust and covetousness. But those
words depend upon the beginning of v. 16. to show the young man what a great
mercy of God it was to keep him from the strumpets acquaintance, and by
consequence from utter destruction. The Genevah translation reads surely. As
the same particle (...) is translated, Surely in vain the net is spread, etc.
chapter 1.17. And then it is an absolute sentence; as if he had said, Make account
of nothing else, but utter ruin, if once thou enter into her house, and join
in her ways. Bain reads, seeing. And so ties it to the following v. as giving
a reason why few return; to wit, because her house leads to death; as if he had
said to the young man, If thou will not hearken to me, but wilt enter into the
Harlots house, thou will find death there, and a great difficulty of returning.

Her house. The filthy manners, and wicked conversation used in her house. For
the word, see on chapter 1.13. Some understand it of the strumpet her self, which
leaving her husbands poor house, lives with some adulterer in a stately house,
or hires one to entertain her lovers, and thinks to live gallantly there; but
leaving her Husbands house, hastens to the grave, the house of darkness; and
forsaking the covenant of her God, goes to eternal darkness. But it is rather
a caution to the young man to take heed of coming into her house, because he
shall find nothing there but death and destruction.

Enclineth, Heb. boweth downward. Not only tends that way, but with a descent
and humiliation, and laying low. There is in her house a road-way to death and
hell, and that downward, as men go down an hill apace, not staying till they
come to the bottom.

Unto death. It brings speedy death unto men, both of soul and body.

And her paths. See on v. 9.

Unto the dead. It comes from a word that signifies to heal, or cure, by an
Antiphrasis, because the dead are past skill and cure of the Physician. So a
mountain, mons a movendo, because it moves not. And a Wood, lucus a lucendo,
because it wants light. Wantonness takes men away from among the living, and
brings them to the dead in body and soul, which have dyed before them, either
by a natural death, or by such like wanton courses as these men take. Death
and the dead here must include both spiritual and temporal death, the grave,
and hell. For it seems not a sufficient reason to keep men from adultery, and
from Harlots houses, that they must die, for this is common to all men. A man
may say, as mockers do, Let us commit adultery without any fear, for nothing
shall befall us which does not befall the chastest men. They must die as well
as we. It must needs therefore include hell also, unless we should interpret
it of a violent or early death, which often befalls adulterers, and may scare
others more then hell. For the one they see; the other, they believe not. Many
murders attend on adultery, and ruin of whole families. Others translate it,
unto the giants. As the word is used, Deuteronomy. 2.11. which also were accounted
giants. And then it comes from (...), to heal, because they are strong and
stout, and need no Physician; or (...) to be faint or weak, because the very
sight of them makes others faint as if they had the pangs of death upon them.
And by these giants some mean the devils, the tormentors of adulterers in hell;
others understand men of great might, and great rebels against God, such as
those in the old world, who abused their strength to wickedness and
wantonness, whose bodies are now in the grave, and souls in the deepest place
of hell. To both which places adulterers must descend, to keep such wicked
wretches company in eternal misery, whom in their life they have imitated in
sinful courses.

The sum is: That all the courses that are used in the house of the
adulterers tend to death both of body and soul; that so the young man, if he
love the safety of his own soul and body, should take heed of coming there.

Figures. Her house. The sins committed in her house. The subject for the
adjunct. Her paths. A Metaphor from Travelers, often used in this Book.

Note 1. The hurt gotten in her house. Death.

2. The bad company it brings men to. Dead, and damned men, worse then to bring
men among Lazars in the Hospital.

In the former observe, 1. The word of coherence, For. 2. The cause, her house.
3. The effect, inclines. 4. The object, unto death.


In the latter note, 1. The way, And her paths. 2. The end, unto the dead.


1. Doct. Much hurt is gotten by conversing with lewd women. If Samson were
alive, he would tell you how by Dalilah's acquaintance he loft his strength,
liberty, sight, lise, besides the danger of his soul. Solomon would inform you,
how he fell from God to Idolatry by such company, and how thereby his posterity
lost the greatest part of their Kingdom.

Reason 1. Because nothing can be expected from creatures but what their nature
yields. Fire will burn, Seas drown, Ravenous birds feed on carcasses, Wild
beasts devour them. Evil women are naught. Evil trees bring forth bad fruit,
not good, Mat. 12.33, 35. All the household of the adulterers, and all her
ways, tend to death temporal and eternal, as in the text.

2. All men and women speak according to their disposition and employment.

Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator,
Enumerat miles vulnera, pastor eves.
Of Winds the Seaman, of his Bulls
The Plowman speaks, his Wounds
The Soldier reckons, of his Sheep
The Shepherd talk propounds.
A covetous man speaks of bargains, a voluptuous man of games, a proud man of
titles, an angry man of injuries, a strumpet of wantonness. Evil communication
corrupts good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33.

Use. Letus observe the carriage of women, and if we evidently see wantonness
in their words and deeds, set a cross upon their houses, with Lord have mercy
upon them, as over houses infected. Cum foemina semper esse, and non cognoscere
foeminam plus est, quam mortuum suscitare. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 65. To be
always with a woman, and not to know a woman, is more then to raise up a dead
man. Touch not pitch, lest ye be defiled. Ye have fire enough in your own
natures, seek not fuel abroad. The young man when he grows acquainted with
strumpets, hopes to spend his days merrily in fine houses, and is suddenly
carried to death and hell. He looked for a storehouse of pleasure, fine
gardens, etc. and behold desolation. The Heathen man could say, Nolo tanti
poenitentiam emere: I will not buy repentance so deer. And the Proverb is,
Caveat emptor, Let the buyer beware. It serves then to admonish us to take heed
of haunting the company of Harlots, lest we defile our selves, and consent to
their filthiness. We would not willingly come near a rotten and ruinous house,
lest it should fall, and bruise or kill our bodies. There is more reason to
avoid the company of Harlots, whose society may not only break our bones, but
eternally damn our souls.

2. Doct. Many miseries attend upon adultery. It cost the Israelites and the
Benjamites deer, the loss of many thousand lives, and almost the destruction
of an whole Tribe, Judge. 19. and 20. and 21. It cost David deer, 2 Samuel 12. The
loss of his child, the abuse of his wives, a lasting sword on his house,
besides the rape of Tamar, and rebellion of Absolon and Adonijah, with the
murder of Amnon.

Reason 1. Because it was death by Gods Law, and so it is now by ours. Lose
life and lose all comfort.

2. It is infamous all the world over. No modest persons care for joining with
adul torous families.

3. It breeds many quarrels between the Husband and the Adulterers, Wives, and
Strumpets, Adulterers one among another, and Strumpets also.

4. It brings many murders. The adulterers will hunt for the precious life,
chap. 6.26. The Husband enraged will kill the Adulterer, chapter 6.34, 35.

5. It brings bastards, which is a disgrace to posterity.

6. It procures disinheriting of Children, when men suspect their Wives want of
chastity.

7. It breeds diseases in the body, and shameful ones too, as characters of
that wickedness.

8. It brings poverty on the state, by Gods curse, or the Whores covetousness.
For by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of bread, chapter 6.26.

Use. Think of the many mischiefs that attend upon adultery, when thou art
tempted to it. A needful theme, for we naturally look not at sin, as it is in
it self, but as it is to us, not in its odious and filthy nature (as we should
do, though no danger followed it) but in its hurtful effects, which is to
fear the smoke more then the fire. Yet so to look at it, may be profitable to
keep us from the fin; if not, for hatred of it, yet for fear of the ensuing
mischiefs. Think with thy self, there is great danger and much wickedness in
adultery, else God, which is so merciful, would never punish it with a double
death, temporal and eternal. Remember that all conversing with strumpets tend
to destruction. And though she speak flattering words, yet shameful death
follows adultery, as well as theft or murder. In Adrian's Gymnasium, or place
of exercise, Venus is set forth as the ancientest of the Destinies, not
spinning the thread of life, but cutting it asunder.

Quid Venus est quaeris? est antiquissima Parca,
Filaque mox resecans, at neque nens eadem.
Thou ask what Venus is? She is
The ancient'st Destiny,
That quickly cuts the threads of lise,
But knits them not truly.
Plutarch writes of a Temple inscribed, Saerum Veneri homicidae: Sacred to
Venus the Man-stayer, Chrysostom on Psalm. 50. says What is an whorrsh woman,
but a sepulcher? and the common burying place of mankind is her house. And in
Rome, because old Harlots were not permitted openly, they harbored in caves of
earth, called Fornices, from whence the word Fornication comes; and in this
regard, it is fitly sald in the text, Her house enclineth unto death, and her
paths unto the dead. To the grave, an hole in the earth, where the dead are
laid. A dark place fit for sin, and fit for punishment. Terence calls Harlots
Cruces, because they crucify men. Venery is deaths quickest Harbinger. Pope
John 12. being taken with an Adulteress, was stabbed to death by her Husband.
A^xander the Great, and Otho the third lost their lives by their lusts. But how
many (alas) by this means have lost their souls? fleshly lusts do in an
especial manner fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. And nothing has enriched
hell so much (says one) as beautiful faces. Let the young man think on these
great examples, and tremble.

3. Doct. Wantonness shortens men's dayer. Give not thy strength unto women,
nor thy ways to that which destroys Kings, Prove. 31.3. The adulteress will
hunt for the precious life, chapter 6.26.

Reason. 1. Because it wastes a man's strength, and when strength fails, life
will fail. If fuel decay, the fire goes out. And thou mourn at the last, when
thy flesh and thy body are consumed, chapter 5.11.

2. It breeds noisome diseases, which oft-times prove incurable.

3. It has gluttony and drunkenness for companions, which alone can shorten
men's lives, much more accompanied with wantonness. Plures gula, quam gladio
periisse certum est. It is an undoubted truth, that more perish by the throat
then by the sword.

4. Strumpets kill men in private, either for their money which they have about
them, or for want of money, when all is spent, lest they should be a burden to
them on whom they have spent it.

Use. Let us quench lust with this water. If our life be gone, all is gone. Men
are at great cost to preserve life by physic. They forbear many pleasing
meats, and keep a diet. But no physic nor diet will keep an adulterer long
alive. Strumpets will waste more then those helps can do good. If they do not,
yet may the Magistrates sword, or Gods judgment do it. The King of Babylon
caused Ahab and Zedekiah to be roasted in the fire, because they have committed
villainy in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors wives, Jer.
29.22, 23.

4. Doct. He that will escape an Harlot must keep out of her house. Had not
Joseph been in Potiphar's house, he had not been in his Mistrisses danger, Genesis
39. Joseph scapes by getting him out of the house. The young man (Prove. 7.) is
undone by going into the Harlots house.

Reason 1. Because her house is full of baits, chapter 7.16, 17. Fine fare, and
ornaments.

2. It has locks, and keys, and private opportunities of sinning.

Use. If ye know such houses, keep out of them. Strumpets like Cocks, crow on
their own dunghills. They count all their own that comes within their doors.
Keep out then, and be safe.

5. Doct. The house of uncleanness is the gatehouse of death. Come not near
the door of her house, lest thou give thy years unto the cruel. chapter 5.8, 9. Her
house goes down to the chambers of death, ch 7.27.

Reason 1. In respect of spiritual death. For what life of grace can be
expected in a stews?

2. In respect of corporal death, and that many ways, as ye heard before. The
Strumpets house is the Devils armory, wherein are weapons of all sorts to
destroy men, for the devil was a murderer from the beginning, Joh. 8.44.

3. In respect of eternal death both of soul and body. Her house is like Sodom.
If Lot go not out of it, he must be burned with fire and brimstone. His
condition that converses there, grows still worse and worse. His soul is dead,
his body will be soon dead, and then no space for repentance, and so he dies
eternally.

Use. Pity those gallants that pity not themselves, that go from their own
houses into naughty houses, and from thence to the grave and hell. Out of a
lesser and temporary fire into a greater, and eternal.

6. Doct. Adulterers go downward. Her feet go down to death, chapter 5.5. And
questionless her adulterer goes down with her. Let not thine heart decline to
her ways, for she has cast down many wounded, chapter 7.25, 26.

Reason 1. Because they go downward in their strength, as was showed before.

2. In their estates. For much is spent upon strumpets, to the impoverishing of
themselves and theirs.

Use. Let such repent quickly, lest they go so low that they never get up again.

Verse. 19. None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold on the
paths of life.
The wounds gotten in the Harlots house which are deadly, were set out in the
former v. The ordinary neglect of them, and irrecoverablenesse, is set out in
this v.

For the words.

None. Not only her self, but also all her customers are in danger of
perishing. Hebr. not all, which in Scripture language is none. As Psalm. 143.2.
In thy sight shall no man living be justified, Heb. not every one living. See
more on chapter 1.24. on No man. Some of the ancientest have hence concluded, that
adultery is an unpardonable sin. But they forget, that all manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, save only the sin against the holy
Ghost, Mat. 12.31. Not none of any condition, or none of all simply (though the
word be used both these ways in several places) but none in comparison, or
very few. So few return from adulterous courses; that in respect of them which
do not return, they are as none. So, None calls for justice, Isa. 59.4. There
is none that calls upon thy name, Isa. 64.7. That is, very few do so. He
compares them which are given to adultery, to Soldiers that go into the war,
and there place and thrust themselves so forward, that they are slain. We say,
All the City went to see such a sight; that is, the most of them. It may be
some could not, and others would not. We know that David did repent of
adultery, but we read of few more that did it. Some understand it, that none do
or can return by their own wit, or strength, have they never so good natural
parts; but by Gods extraordinary grace some may and do return. But the former
interpretation is better.

That go unto her. That go in unto her to commit adultery with her. A modest
expression of a secret or foul action, frequent in Scripture. Jacob went in
unto Leah, Genesis 29.23. David had gone in unto Bathshebab, Psalm. 51. in the
title. Or, that go into her house to converse familiarly with him. Or, that go
into an untimely death by wantonness. Or, figuratively, that fall into her
sinful ways, and so are spiritually dead. She that lives in pleasure is dead
while she lives, 1 Timothy 5.6. That interpretation of few returners from
adultery, is best, because he had spoken before of the sinful and deadly
courses used in her house, v. 18. And now he intimates that her snares are like
lime-twigs, they hold fast all that converse with her in her house, and so
fast, that very few or none think of returning. So that this verse. is an
explication men, because they are so bewitched with the unlawful pleasure ^ of
her house, that they scarce ever think of leaving those finful ways while they
live. For the word Go, see on chapter 1.26. on the word Comes.

Return again. Some understand it of returning to prosperity. Gods judgment
follows them for the most part, and wastes them, and their estate, to the
consumption of both. But it is rather meant of returning by repentance, leaving
those sinful paths of death to walk in the good ways of life, as follows in
this v. For the word, see on chapter 1.23. on the word, Turn.

Neither take they hold of; or, touch. They come not near them, or at least
will not cleave inseparably to them.

The paths. See on chapter 1.19. on the word Ways of life. That lead to life. To a
prosperous life here, or an happy one in heaven. This v. answers an objection
that might have been made against the precedent verse. Some may say Adultery is
not so deadly a sin, as you would make it. You threaten death, but we will
repent before we go out of the world, and so help all. This is a common
objection. But who does so, says the Wiseman? Ye shall find very few or none
that repent, if ye observe their courses, for commonly Adulterers go on
impenitently till death.

Figures. None. That is, very few. Hyperbole.

Take hold. A metaphor from such as lay fast hold on a thing to keep it, for
men lay not hold on ways with their hands, but walk in them with their feet.
It argues seriousness, and constancy.

Paths. A metaphor from travelers.

Of life. A metony my of the effect or adjunct, that bring life or are signs
of it. with a Synecdoche of the general for the special. Life for eternal
life.

Note 1. Their not returning.

2. Their inconstancy, if they begin to look back, they fall into a relapse.

In the former note, 1. Their easy entrance, None that go in unto her. 2.
Their hard returning, return again.


In the second part observe, 1. The act, Neither take they hold. 2. The object,
of the paths of life.


1. Doct It is an hard thing for an Adulterer to repent. The prodigal son
leaves not his harlots, till all be spent, nor returns to his Father, till
swines meat be denied him. Luke 15. Sampson and Solomon very hardly returned,
if ever.

Reason 1. Because of the flattering tongues of strumpets, who have fine words
at command to keep young men with them. The harlot has such arts, and arms to
hold them in, that her prisoners seldom break prison. They are so bewitched
with the flatteries, and Sirens songs of Adulteresses, that they cannot see
their own filthiness: or if in part they do see it, yet the harlots flattering
charms are so strong, that they cannot leave them, as many have confessed, The
harlots heart is snares, and nets, and her hands as hands. Eccl. 7.26. An where
is a deep ditch, and a strange woman is a narrow pit. Chapter 23.27. It is as hard
then for the Adulterer to get out, as for a man fallen into a narrow deep pit,
out of which it is as difficult a thing to come up, as for a dead man to come
out of the grave. So says Chrysostom, It is as hard a thing to convert an
whoremaster, as it is to raise one out of the grave, that is dead and buried.

2. Because of those carnal delights wanton houses afford, as dainty fare,
pleasing music, lascivious pictures, decked chambers, etc. Such baits as they
that have tasted of them, by reason of their corrupted nature, stick so fast to
her, that they know not how to leave her. They so glut themselves with the
thoughts of their unlawful pleasures, that no reproves can sink into their
heads. They are like unto the deaf Adder, that stops her ear, which will not
hearken to the voice of charmers charming never so wisely Psalm. 58.4, 5.

3. Because of man's natural unsatiablenesse in finne, which drives him from
one degree of wickedness to another.

4. Because they are become slaves of sin, boared, as it were, through the ear
to serve sin for ever. The Devil still stirs them up to to the remembrance of
their former sinful pleasures to lead them to further flavery.

Vt ferrum magnes, sic carnalem trahit Agnes.
As loadstone is by iron drawn,
So carnal men by strumpets taken.
5. Such are dead in sins and trespasses. The harlots house is a grave. It is
an hard thing to come out from thence. The resurrection of the dead is a
miracle. So is it for a man entangled to get out of an harlots house.

6. Because Gods curse follows such men, women and courses.

Use. Take heed then of Adultery, and lewd houses. The strumpets house is like
the Lions den.

Onmia te adversum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
We see all footsteps forward go
To thee ward, none returning fro.
Amor celerem habet ingressum, tardum regressum. Love (or rather, lust) has a
quick entrance; but a slow return. Theophrastus. Thou will be so bewitched,
that when thou art old, and past acting such sins, thou will delight thy self
with thinking and speaking of such things as thou haft done, and so die in thy
fins without Repentance in a contemplative Adultery, which is a kind of acting
over their former fins. Thou will have thy sins still sticking in thy bones,
and they will be like a wood burnt down, the smoke and stink whereof still
remains. This sin makes men sottish like brute beasts, Whoredom, and wine, and
new wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.11. Who so commits Adultery with a
woman, lacks understanding, Chapter 6.32. Seeing then there is so great peril in
Adultery, and so much difficulty in returning, it is safest to keep out at
first. Who would go that way out of which scarce ever any man returned?

2. Doct. Few return from adulterous courses. Most go on till a dart strike
through their liver, Chapter 7.23. It may be one man of a thousand may return,
Eccles. 7.28.

Reason Because of the hardness of returning proved in the former doctrine.
Few men adventure on hard things, as to travel to remote parts, to be
excellent in Arts and Sciences.

Use 1. If any have entered into this course, let them think of a speedy return.
The further men travel in dirty ways, the worse to go back. Burning and mad
lusts will in time so blind thy heart, that without great and rare grace, thou
can not repent. Better then to be of the number of the few, that repent; then
of the many, that perish.

2. Let such as have returned from Adulterous courses, heartily bless God for
his especial grace and favor in reducing them. Thou could not return of thy
self, but by Gods helping and restoring grace, so great was the weight of thine
in quity to keep thee under in impenitency. Attribute not therefore the praise
of thy return to thy self, but to Gods grace. Only see that thy repentance be
true. For many will profess repentance when they think they shall die, that
prove as bad as ever when they recover. Such repentance is far from a true
repentance.

3. Doct. The destruction of Adulterers without repentance is certain.
Whoremongers must have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone. Rev. 21.8.

Reason 1. Because all sin is mortal, and without the cure of repentance will
bring men to hell.

2. Because God will be avenged for the abuse of his image, and Temple by
wantonness, unless men submit and reform.

Use. Here is a cooling card for wantons. They look at their presant pleasure,
not at their future pain. Fools look at things present in the way: wisemen
foresee things future in the end. A green way to a robbing place, a calm
passage to a rock, or quick sand is perilous. A riotous person wallowes in
pleasure, and dies in a prison. Let Adulterers think of their end, and they
will have little pleasure in their sin.

4. Doct. The destruction of impenitent adulterers is general as well as
certain. Wheremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.4. That may he
said to them, that is said to impenitent sinners, Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish, Luke 13.3, 5.

Raason. Because the destruction of such is certain, as was proved in the
former point. And then it must needs be general. If it be certain, that man
must die, then all men must die, except God extraordinarily dispense with some.
But this he never did to any impenitent sinner. If it be true, that man has a
reasonable soul, then every man has so, though fools and mad men make little
use of it. So if it be certain, that impenitent adulterers perish, then it is
general, and all such must perish.

Use. Let no man stand upon privileges of birth, wit, wealth. If he be an
impenitent Adulterer he must die. Let no man presume upon repentance. He may be
killed in the act, as Zimri and Cosbi were, Numb. 25.

5. Doct. No hope of comfort from God here, or hereafter for wanton persons
till they repent. Not here, They were as fed horses in the morning: every one
neighed after his Neighbors wife. Shall I not visit for these things? says
the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jer.
5.8.9. Not hereafter, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Fornicatours and Adulterers shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And God accounts them such till they repent of
their filthiness.

Reason. Because they live in a way of rebellion against God; and by
consequence make themselves Gods, following their own will in all things.

Use. Let Adulterers give over their trade. Who will follow a course of life,
that he were sure to have no comfort of in life or death?

6. Doct. There are cross ways in the world, paths of life and paths of
death. Crosse-wayes and gates Wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction. But strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads unto life, Mat. 7.13, 14. There is a way of sinners, and a law of the
Lord, Psol. 1.1, 2. Some walk in the one, and some in the other.

Reason. Because the ends are fully opposite. Eternal weal, eternal woe.
These shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life
eternal, Mat. 25.40. And sure the same ways cannot lead to so different ends.
They are not suitable to them.

Use. Let secure persons take heed. They think all shall go to heaven, none to
hell. But they are deceived; most go to hell. The strait way is hardly found,
and by few: the broad way easily, and by many. Mat. 7.13, 14.

Verse. 20. That thou may walk in the ways of good men, and keep the paths
of the righteous.
So much for the deliverance: Now for the general application of all for the
good that will come to those that avoid the society of evil men and women.
Which is,

1. Set out in this verse to be a preservation in such ways.

2. Illustrated, 1. By the benefit of such ways, verse. 21. 2. By the miseries
that contrary ways bring, v. 22.


For the first in this verse. This is the last part of the Chapter, wherein
Solomon having before exhorted the young man to the study of wisdom, now
shows the last benefit of it. The end of our study of wisdom should be to
walk in good ways. The benefit of all spoken before is here summed up
together. So that this verse depends upon v. 11, 12, 16. in this manner wisdom
will deliver thee from all evil ways, words, men, and women, that thou may
more freely converse with good men in good ways, whereby much good may be
learned.

For the words.

That. It teaches us, that Solomon's end in teaching men how to get Wisdom to
avoid all the former inconveniences, was not that they should be idle, but that
they should go on in good ways without interruption or encumbrances. So the
word is used, Josh. 4.24. That all the people of the earth might know the hand
of the Lord, that it is mighty: that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever.

That thou may walk. See on chapter 1.15.

In the way. See on chapter 1.15.

Of good men. That thou may follow the godly, and virtuous examples of
Patriarchs, and Prophets, and others that fear God and walk in his ways.

But, Where shall we find these good men? Our blessed Savior tells us, There
is none good but one, that is God, Mat. 19.17.

We answer, God'y men though they be not perfectly good, but have many
imperfections, yet being sincere are good in Gods account. For men are counted
good or bad in Scripture language, not according to some particular act, but
according to their constant course and scope.

And keep. See on v. 8.

The paths. See on chapter 1.19. on the word ways.

Of the righteous; or, Of the just. The word is taken,

1. For one perfectly just, that is not guilty of any sin before God. How
should man be just with God? Job 9.2. God has made man upright, Eccl. 7.29.

2. For one just or righteous in his own opinion, or the opinion of other men.
He that is first in his own cause seems just, chapter 18.17.

3. For one truly just, though not perfectly, who intends in all things to deal
justly and righteously with God and man. And this is the common acception of
the word in Scripture, for there are none perfectly just upon earth. So Neah
was a just man, Genesis 6.9.

4. For one just in some particular cause. They turn aside the just for a thing
of naught. Isa. 29.21. She has been more righteous then I, Genesis 38.26. Here it
is taken in the third sense, for one truly just and righteous, though not
perfectly.

Figures. Walk, ways, paths, Metaphors from travelers.

Keep. A metaphor from Watchmen, arguing care and constancy in walking in Gods
ways. For men do not use to stand still to look upon ways, but to go on in
them. Therefore the same thing is set down in two different expressions of
walking in, and keeping Gods ways.

In the former note, 1. The act, That thou may walk. 2. The object, in the
way. 3. The subject, of good men.


In the latter observe likewise, 1. The act, and keep. 2. The object, the
paths. 3. The subject, of the righteous.


1. Doct. Men cannot walk in good ways, unless they leave bad. It is as hard
for men accustomed to do evil, to do good, as for an Ethiopian to change his
^kin, or a Leopard his spots, Jer. 13.23. No man can serve two Masters. Ye
cannot serve God, and Mamnon. Mat. 6.24.

Reason 1. In general. Because good and evil being contraries the one will
keep out the other. So cold keeps out heat, and heat keeps out cold till it be
overcome. Foul water in a bottle keeps out good wine, till it be poured out.

2. In particular. Evil thoughts keep out all thoughts of doing good. The mind
like the Smith can hammer but one iron at once.

3. Evil words draw from good actions, and corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.33.

4. Evil deeds, and practices keep from good courses. They give a double
impediment,

1. By satisfying corrupt nature they steal away the affection from all good.

2. By employing it in evil they leave no time for good, for men by nature
never have pleasure enough in fin.

Use. 1. For discovery. It shows us a reason, why many are strangers to all
good ways, because they are verst in evil, and cannot leave it. Can an
husbandman look for a crop if he plow not up thorns and thistles? Can a
Gardener look for good herbs, if he weed not his Garden? Will not Ivy, if it
be let grow, overtop and kill trees? No marvel then, if evil doers follow not
that which is good.

2. For direction. Let us by leaving evil ways seriously show, that we intend
to do good. When one pulls down an old house, men think he means to build a new,
not else, though he talk often of it. Who will believe, that a man means to
live soberly, or chastely, that daily haunts Taverns, and wanton places?
Pythagoras his letter Y showed, that men going alike in their childhood,
afterward, if they followed evil, forsook good; (...). Ceasing from evil is
the beginning of motion to virtue, Chrysostom. (...). Alienation from evil is an
appropinquation to good, Chrysostom.

2. Doct. It is not enough to avoid evil, but we must also do good. Cease to
do evil, learn to do well. Isa. 1.16, 17. Depart from evil, and do good.
Psalm. 34.14.

Reason 1. Because forsaking evil is but a foundation for a greater building,
and no man can dwell in a foundation.

2. Justice in all Commonwealths requires as many good offices, as doing no
harm. So also in Gods Church.

3. God gives us wisdom as to direct us how to avoid evil, so to do good: and
that is the principal office of wisdom; else none should be the better for it.

4. The reward for avoiding evil is but privative, escaping misery: but the
reward of doing good is positive, eternal happiness. A beast, nay a stone
goes not to hell.

Use. Here is a lesson of spiritual ambition to teach us not to be content
only to leave sin, but to be in love with good ways. Not to be not miserable,
and avoid hell, but to lay up for our selves treasures in heaven, Mat. 6.20.

3. Doct. One chief and principal end of wisdom is weldoing. Keep therefore,
and do them, for this is your wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.6. These Commandments the Lord
commanded to teach you, that ye might do them. Deuteronomy. 6.1.

Reason 1. Because else no blessing attends upon our knowledge, no more then
upon a man that knows what is good to preserve his life, and by neglect
thereof dies. So do knowing, and not doing men lose heaven. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17. Not else.

2. Because a curse follows upon knowledge without practice. Cursed is he that
confirms not all the words of this Law to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. That servant
which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to
his will, shall be heaten with many stripes, Luke 12.47.

Use 1. To blame those, that use their knowledge to do evil, they can never
get good by it, but the more harm. They only know how to undo their souls.
So the Adulterer has wit to b^naught, which others want. (...). Apollodorus.
And let the door be shut with bars. But no workman can make the door so
strong, that a cat, or an Adulterer cannot enter. So the Adulterer takes
advantage of day and night. In the dark they dig through houses, which they
had marked for themselves in the day time, Job 24.16.

2. To exhort us to make the best advantage of our knowledge for well doing.
Then we hit the mark, otherwise we miss it. This is the conclusion of this
Chapter, and shows the end of the former Precepts of avoiding hurt by bad men,
and women, that we might do good. Artium omnium finis est been viverdi
disciplina, quam vita magis quam literis nobiles sunt secuti. The end of all
arts is the discipline of living well, which noble personages have followed
more in life, then in learning. Tusc. qu. l. 4. Optimus quisque maluit facere,
quam dicere. Every excellent man had rather be doing, then talking, Salust. At
Athens a grave man coming into the Theater, no man rose to give him place,
though they knew, they ought to have done it by the City law. The Lacedemonian
Ambassadors being there, the old man coming toward them, they rise, and give
him the chief place. At which the people gave a great shout, and one of the
Lacedaemonians to their shame spoke thus, Ergo Athenienses, quid sit rectum
sciunt: at illud facere ex toto negligunt. Belike then the Athenians know, what
is right: and yet altogether neglect to do it, Valor. l. 10. c. 5.

4. Doct. Wisdom not only shows a man how to avoid evil, but also how to do
good. If thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, then shall thou understand
righteousness, and judgment, and equity, yea, every good path, Chapter 2.29. I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life,
that both thou, and thy seed may live, That thou may love the Lord thy God,
and that thou may obey his voice, etc. Deuteronomy. 30.19.20.

Reason 1. Because it perfectly shows us the difference between good and
evil, that we may not mistake the one for the other. So cannot natural
principles, civil education, nor moral Philosophy.

2. It shows us the means of escaping the one, and pursuing the other, what
occasions are to be avoided, or taken, what help to do both is to be had from
Gods word and Spirit.

Use. Let us labor to get this true wisdom. Men give much money with their
children, and children serve many years to learn a Trade to avoid poverty, and
get wealth. We then should spare for no cost nor labor to get true wisdom to
direct us to fly all evil, and do all good.

5. Doct. It is safer to imitate good men, then bad. Looking unto Jesus the
author, and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God, Heb. 12.2. Follow the faith of your teachers, considering
the end of their conversation, Heb. 13.7.

Reason 1. Because the way of good men, is better then the way of bad men. A
fair way of piety excels a dirty way of licentiousness.

2. Their end is better. Heaven is far better then hell. Remember, There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, Romans 8.1.

Use 1. To condemn those that follow the worst persons, where they live. If
but one drunkard, or strumpet in a parish, others will follow them, not
regarding such as live better, whose conversation is in heaven. Phil. 3.20.

2. Show that ye have the same spirit by following godly men, and walking in
their ways, that so ye may come to the same blessed end the salvation of your
souls. And why should thou not rather follow the example of Abraham, Job,
Joseph, David, then of Ishmael, Esau, and other profane persons? Sheep will not
follow wolves, but they will follow one another. So do thou follow good men to
heaven, rather then bad men to hell.

6. Doct. Good example sometimes prevails to draw others to piety. The people
served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that
outlived Joshua, Judge. 2.7.

Reason 1. Because shame is taken away by good examples going before.

2. Fear is taken away. If a man see another go over a frozen river, he dares
go over the ice.

Use. Set the best examples before you to imitate. Prudentis viri est magna
mensurase metiri, atque ad excellentium virorum imitationem se componere.
Nazianzen Epist. ad Nicobul. It is the part of a wiseman to measure himself by
a great measure, and to compose himself to the imitation of excellent men.
Ignari locorum cum solertibus viarum iter adoriri gestiunt. Ambros. Offic. l.
4. c. 47. They that know not the places desire to travel with such as are
skillful in the ways. Columbam avolantem sequuntur omnes, equum generosum totum
armentum, ovem totus grex. Chrysoft. de continent. Josephi. All the doves
follow one, that flies away, all the drove follows a generous horse, all the
flock follows one sheep. So should we follow the choicest examples for
goodness.

Verse. 21. For the upright shall dwell in the land: and the perfect shall
remain in it.
The Chapter is concluded with the reward of good and bad men. In this verse is
set out a gracious promise to encourage men to walk in upright ways. In the
next a threatening to discourage them from bad ways.

For the first.

Here is a motive to follow the righteous, and not the wicked, by an argument
taken from that which men naturally most desire, long life upon earth, together
with an establishment in our possessions, and not through Gods judgments to be
wasted, and decay in our estates, and so come to poverty, or to die
ignominiously, and not to live out half our days. Withal he shows that we are
not good and righteous, except we walk uprightly and sincerely.

For the words.

For. See on chapter 1.9.

The upright. See on v. 7.

Shall dwell in the Land. Solomon speaks after the custom of the Old
Testament, wherein God purposing not so fully to reveal spiritual and heavenly
things and blessings to his people, as now, did secretly shadow them under
earthly comforts, and encourage his people to obedience by such promises. As in
the fist Commandment long life is promised to those that honor parents. So
many temporal blessings are promised to such as obey Gods Law, Deuteronomy. 11. and
28. By dwelling in the land, is meant long life, and health, and strength, and
plenty of all good things in that Land of Canaan that flowed with milk and
honey. It is not bare dwelling there that is promised, but accompanied with all
things fit, commodious, comfortable and profitable. This is that safe dwelling,
promised chapter 1.33. And this God performed to the Jews, while they worshipped
him aright; and when they fell to. Idolatry, he sent them captives to Babylon.
So that this v. shows who shall be kept from evil; to wit, just and upright
men. Yet some enlarge this promise to fignifie grace here, and glory in heaven,
shadowed under the type of the Land of Canaan. Others take it more largely then
for that Land, intimating, that ordinarily in any parts of the earth, where
godly men live, God usually blesses them, unless he please to correct his
people for their fins, or to try their graces, or to call them out to bear
witness to his truth. If it be objected, that godly men suffer hardship and
hunger here; it may be answered, that in that estate they enjoy great
tranquillity, content, and felicity, as seeing God in all, and depending upon
him for help. It is well with them for the present, and it will be better
hereafter. Heaven will make amends for all. If it be further objected, that
good men sometimes live less while on earth then others; it may be said, that
God makes them abundant amends in heaven, in the land of the living. If it be
further urged, that this is no encouragement to godliness, because wicked men
have as much, and oftentimes more in the earth, then godly men have; I answer,
that these may have more comfort in what they have, as having not only a
civil title, but a spiritual one also, and so shall never be indicted as
usurpers at the day of judgment.

(...), The land, or earth. Which laft word may well come from it, the letters
are so like. It signifies,

1. That part of the world, which is opposed to heaven, containing Sea and
Land, wherein men dwell, and beasts and fishes lodge. The earth is given into
the hand of the wicked, Job 9.24. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof, the world, and they that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1.

2. The dry part of the world, opposed to sea and rivers. The earth is full of
thy riches, so is this great Sea, Psalm. 104.24, 25.

3. Some particular Land or Country. In the Land of Vz, Job 1.1.

4. For the inhabitants of the earth, or of some Land or Country in it. The
earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth also was filled with violence,
Genesis 6.11. For the transgression of a Land many are the Princes thereof, Prove.
28.2.

Here it is taken in the third sense, for the dry land, or more particularly
for the Land of Canaan, wherein Solomon dwelt, and of which he spoke; the
plenty and comfort whereof they well knew to whom he spoke, and might be much
encouraged thereby to obedience.

The perfect. See on chapter 1.12. on the word whole. Hereby is meant such as are
perfect in heart, and sincere; and also perfect in parts having all needful
graces in them, as a child has all members, that a man has, though not so
large. For as for perfection of degrees, none on earth has attained to it.
Shall remain in it. They shall not only find an abiding place there, but also
when adulterers, and other wicked livers shall waste their estates, and shotten
their days by their sinful courses, and so be gone out of the land by death
or exile, they shall live quietly and prosperously in it. An opposition to v.
18. and 22.

Figures none.

Note. 1. A comfortable dwelling promised to the righteous.

2. A constant abiding, even when others are cut off.

In the former note, 1. The word of coherence, For. 2. The persons, the
upright. 3. The act, shall dwell. 4. The object, in the Land.


In the latter observe, 1. The persons, And the perfect. 2. The act, shall
remain. 3. The object, in it.


1. Doct. The Scripture gives many encouragements to men to walk in good ways.
As,

1. Precepts. All the ten Commandments, the most exact rule of a godly life,
that ever was.

2. Exhortations. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the mercies of God, Romans
12.1. Who would not be persuaded, when God himself exhorts by his Ministers,
that might command?

3. Examples of the excellentest men that ever lived on the face of the earth.
See store of them recorded and commended, who lived before Christ's incarnation,
Heb. 11. Apostles afterward. Yea, Christ himself the example of examples. Be
ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1.

4. Rich promises. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
Land, Isa. 1.19. Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, Mar.
5.5.

4. The Gospel, which shows us a second and greater ground of of godly life,
then the Law or Creation did. The grace of God, that brings salvatien has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, etc. Titus 2.11,
12.

6. It sets out the help of the Spirit. Some walk after the Spirit, and are led
by the Spirit, Rom 8.1, 14. Without this help we might utterly despair of
walking in good ways. We could no more do it, then a man could choose, or walk
in a fair way in the world, that had not a soul or spirit in him to direct him.

7. Gods acceptance is there set out. Our best actions are sinful. God likes
not such. And if they may not be accepted, who would lose his labor to do
them? Cornelius his prayers and almsdeeds, were come up for a memorial
before God, Act. 10.4.

8. Gods commendation. This is more then acceptance. When a Father proclaims
to others what a good Son he has, it shows abundance of love in him, and
encourages the child to please him. So God does animate us, I know thy works,
Rev. 2.2, 9, 13, 19.

9. Gods preservation of us in good ways, when our hearts are set upon them,
and we are ignorantly in danger. So he kept Abimelech from touching Sarah, Genesis
20.6.

Use. It should encourage Christians to be more careful of their ways then
all the world besides. We should be brighter then others, as the stars are
brighter then the firmament. Heathen have few encouragements in comparison of
us. Turks have not much more. Jews want the New Testament. Papists may not read
the Scriptures. We have all encouragements to good ways. Let us therefore say
with the Psalmist, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32.

6. Doct. When wicked men are cut off, God sometimes spares the good. The truth
will appear, if you compare this v. with the next. And also in Noah's
deliverance from the Flood, and Lot's in Sodom. When the wicked are cut off,
thou shall see it, Psalm. 37.34.

Reason 1. To show Gods special care and providence over them. Joseph's
parti-colored coat, and Benjamin's large mess, were signs of special love.

2. To draw men to piety. We are in part carnal. Abraham has Canaan and a
numerous posterity promised him, to encourage him in piety.

Use 1. If we be preserved when others perish, let us acknowledge Gods favor
to be the cause of it. We had sins as well as they, and deserved to be cut off
as well as they.

2. Let us be encouraged to piety. If there be any way in the world to escape
judgments, this is it. Landlords do not use to turn their tenants out of
doors, while they keep covenants. Good men are said to inherit the earth, bad
men only to possess it.

3. Doct. Uprightness is expected of those that expect Gods blessing. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace, Psalm.
37.37. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Psalm.
97.11.

Reason 1. Because God hates hypocrifie. It is most contrary to the God of
truth.

2. He hates evil ends.

3. He hates self ends in men, who should all serve his ends.

4. He hates by-ends, when men aim at any thing that tends not to his glory.

Use. Try if ye be sincere. Else your hopes are like spiders webs, Job 8.13,
14. Try it by these notes. An upright man is he,

1. To whom nothing is displeasing that God has done.

2. To whom God is pleasing in all the good the man himself does.

3. To whom God is not displeasing in any evil, that he suffers.

4. That does not resist God his Father, when he goes about to mend him.

5. That baleeves God his Father in all he promises.

6. That lays all his sins upon himself.

7. He that attributes all his good deeds to God.

8. He that directs his will by Gods will, as the Clock is ordered by the
Sun-dial.

9. He that does all good from the heart.

4. Doct. Perfection is expected of them that look for Gods blessing. Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father, which is in heaven is perfect, Mat.
5.48. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way, O when will thou come unso
me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart, Psalm. 101.2.

Reason. Because all perfections are required of such as expect happiness. As,

1. Perfection of sincerity. This was proved in the former point. A fincere man
is a perfect man. An hypocrite is but a picture of a man.

2. Perfection of parts. Every saving grace must be had and used. So a child
is a perfect man. A defective monster is not.

3. Perfection of integrity. When our obedience is universal to all Gods
commandments.

4. Perfection of degrees. That is required intentionally, and shall be given
us actually, before we come to heaven. So a child is not a perfect man, till
he come to his full growth.

Use. Be like good trees, sound within and without, in root, body, branches,
and grow higher toward heaven still. Else look for no blessing from God.

5. Doct. God often gives good men a comfortable and quiet continuance in their
habitations. As to David, after his troubles from Saul and Absolon. To Solomon,
for a long time.

Reason 1. That they may have the more time to serve God, and do good. A
breathing time, that the Churchet having rest, may be^ed fied, and walking in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, may be multiplied,
Act. 9.31.

2. That they may have the more encouragement to do it. Men's spirits are down
in trouble, and have enough to do to suffer patiently. They are freer for
action in quietness. Where God looks for suffering, he puts not to action.

Use. Bless God for the quietness and comfort we have had in this City in all
these dangerous times, both for soul and body. Other parts, both beyond Sea,
and in this Land, have not been dealt so bountifully withal. He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt
so with any Nation; and as for his judgments, they have not known them. Praise
ye the Lord, Psalm. 147.19, 20. We have also had so much agreement between godly
men of different judgments, as is scarce any where else to be found. Let God
have the praise, as we have the comfort.

6. Doct. God many times makes good men thrive upon earth. As Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob.

Reason 1. That it may appear that God does not grudge earth to those to whom
he will give heaven. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Romans 8.32.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you, Mat. 6.33.

2. That they may have the more means to glorify God, having the larger
talents.

Use. If God give any good man wealth and prosperity, let him use it well, that
he may give a good account of it. He is but a factor. He must honor his Master,
if he will enrich himself. This Gods bounty requires, and he that does so, may
look for comfort from God.

Verse. 22. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it.
If fair means will not serve, foul must be used. The Wiseman having given a
promise to allure, now concludes with a threatening, to drive such as will not
be drawn. The Writer proceeds in a right method; and having spoken many things
of the differing ways of godly and wicked men, now he concludes with their
different ends. So he does, chapter 1. only he puts the end of wicked men first.
The turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools
shall destroy them. But who so hearkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and
shall be quiet from fear of evil, chapter 1.32, 33.

For the words.

(...), But, Heb. And. It is used sometimes as a figne of connection.
Righteousness, and judgment, and equity, verse. 9. Sometimes as a sign of
opposition. But ye have set at naught all my counsel, chapter 1.25. Sometimes of
assimilation. As a man pleads for his neighbor, Job 16.21. Sometimes of
augmentation. I am their song; yea, I am their by word, Job 30.9. A proverb or
byword is more, and goes further then a song.

Here it is taken by way of opposition. Good men shall flourish, and bad men
perish in the end.

The wicked. Restless and unquiet people. Such as are always doing mischief.
The Heb. word (...), comes from a word that fignifies motion, or unquietness.
Who then can make trouble? Job 34.29. The wicked are like the troubled Sea,
Isa. 57.20. Ahab, and such like wicked men, accuse Gods people for troublers of
Israel, 1 King. 18.17. and of the City, Act. 16.20. and of all the world, Act.
17.6. But they may answer with Elijah, that wicked men are indeed the troublers
of themselves, and of the world, 1 King. 18.18.

Shall be cut off. As a bough from a tree, so that it shall grow no more.
Adulterers, and such like evil doers shall be destroyed. It signifies an
untimely death, as a bough cut off before it withers. They shall be taken away
in the midst of their prosperity, and that suddenly.

From the earth. Not only out of that Land, but out of all the world. For the
word see on, v. 21. on the word Land.

And the transgressors. The word signifies treacherous dealers. They have dealt
treacherously with thee, Jer. 12.6. So it is also translated, Isa. 21.2. and
24.16. For transgressors, that go beyond the bounds that God has set them,
deal treacherously with God, to whom they owe all subjection.

Shall be rooted of it. If cutting them off will not serve to terrify others,
God will root them out, or pluck them quite out of the earth, and destroy their
posterity also.

Figures. A Metaphor from a Tree, in the words cutting off, and rooting out. If
a wild tree, and offensive grow in a garden, and the Gardner cut off the top
of it, if it send forth new sprouts, as bad as the former, he digs up the root
it self. So does God deal with wicked men. He takes them away; and if their
posterity follow their courses, he proceeds to root out the whole name and
family. Cut off, Rooted out, Metaphors from Trees.

Note 1. Gods judgment on wicked men. 2. On their memory and posterity.


In the former observe, 1. The word of opposition, But. 2. The subject, the
wicked. 3. The adjunct, shall be cut off. 4. The object, from the earth.


In the latter note, 1. The subject, And the transgressors. 2. The adjunct
shall be rooled out of it.


1. Doct. God will sometimes in this world, put a difference between good men
and bad. Then shall ye discern between righteous and the wicked, Mal. 3.18. So
God made a difference between the Israelites and the Egyptians, in the
darkness, and death of the firstborn, and at the Red sea, Exodus 10. and 12.
and 14. So did he distinguish between the Israelites and Canaanites in rooting
out the one out of the Land, and planting the other in it, Josh. 10, etc. So he
put a difference between Micaiah and Zedekiah, when the one durst show his
face, and the other hid his, 1 King. 22.24, 25. Between Jeremiah and Pashur,
when one was a comfort to himself and his friends, and the other a terror to
both, Jer. 20.4. Between Ahaz and Hezekiah; the one made a prey to the enemy,
the other delivered from Senacharib, 2 Chronicles. 28.5. and 32.21.

Reason 1. That men may see that there is a God. While they see no difference
between good and bad men, they think there is no overruling God. The Heathen
man confesses it. Solicitor nullos esse putare Deos: I am solicited to think
there is no God. Ovid. In a Commonwealth, or in an Army, where no difference
is made between good and bad people and soldiers, men think there is no
Magistrate or General there. So in the Church. But when God puts a difference,
they cry out, Verily he is a God that judges in the earth, Psalm. 58.11.

2. That men might see by this fore-running providence, a pattern and proof of
the general judgment to come.

Use. When God shall do so with us, let us acknowledge Gods mercy to us. He
might destroy us like wicked men. Are there not with you, even with you, sins
against the Lord your God? 2 Chr. 28.10. See Gods distinguishing mercy in it,
and proclaim it.

2. Doct. Wicked men are restless in evil. The wicked are like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt, Isa. 57.^0. He
devises mischief upon his bed, he sets himself in a way that is not good,
he abhors not evil, Psalm. 36.4.

Reason 1. Because they have a body of sin in them, which has many active
members upon earth, fornication, uncleanness, etc. Col. 3.5. A fountain will
run, and fire will burn.

2. They have objects of sin in the world in abundance, in all places, to feed
their eyes, ears, and all their senses. A fountain will run, if it find a
river. Fire will burn, if it meet with fuel.

3. God has not healed wicked men by his sanctifying Spirit: Bad humors will
work in men's bodies, till they be purged away. And the more purged away, the
less they work.

4. God is pleased sometimes not to restrain wicked men, but to let them run on
to their own perdition, and the hurt of many others. So an unruly horse with
the bridle out of his mouth runs furiously, till he overthrow himself, and his
rider.

Use 1. Marvel not, that men are never weary of sinning. The drunkard is never
weary of the Alehouse. The adulterer of places of wantonness. Is it marvel
that birds fly, or fishes swim? why else have they wings or fins?

2. Let us be provoked to be restless in good. Else wicked men the children of
this generation restless in their ways to give themselves content, are wiser
then we, that profess our selves to be the children of light, Luke 16.8. And
the Queen of Sheba, who came so far to hear Solomon's wisdom, will condemn us
at the day of judgment, Matt. 12.42.

3. Doct. Wicked men lives are often cut short by their wicked courses. Bloody
and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55.23.

Reason 1. Drunkenness breeds dropsies, gluttony breeds fevers, wantonness
foul diseases, all murderers, and shorten men's lives, as the flood drowned many
young men in the world. When the strength of the body is worn by drinking and
whoring, men must die. All the Physicians in the world cannot put in new marrow
into dead bones.

2. Trouble of conscience sometimes ends their days. Sin of betraying his
Master made Judas hang himself. Spira would have killed himself, and did waste
his body to death for his Apostasy. Some in our times have ended their days
in pangs of conscience for sin.

3. By Gods just judgments, who like a Gardener pulls up weeds, roots out
unfruitful trees, and like a wind blows out the candle; or like a storm,
lodges the corn before it be ripe.

4. By enemies, and those often of their own stamp. One drunkard kills another
in his drink, even his nearest friend, as Alexander murdered Clitus. One
adulterer kills another, because the strumpet loves him better.

Use 1. Gaze not too much at the prosperity of sinners, lest thou be tempted to
do like them. The common people are like boys, who when they see knaves upon
the stage, gorgeously apparelled, and acting Kings, think them happy, and could
wish to be like them; but they consider not the poverty and misery that may
befall them, when they are stripped of their gay clothes. So the common people
are bewitched with the riches of sinners, not confidering they may die, or lose
all before their age.

2. Grudge not at their prosperity. They may die sooner then meaner men. Every
plant (says our blessed Savior) which my heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted up, Mat. 15.13. Who would be a flourishing tree, to be rooted
out? or an ox fatted, to be killed? A brutish man knows not, neither does a
fool understand this. When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the
workers of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever,
Psalm. 92.7. They shall be cut off certainly, suddenly, utterly. Tum fere
auferuntur a terra, cum maxim velint vivere. Then are they for the most part
taken away from the earth, when they are most desirous to live in it. Baine.
When they have feathered their nest, and reckon upon long life, as the fool in
the Gospel, Luke 12. God will destroy them, when they least look for it.
Therefore, Fret not thy self, because of evil doers, neither be thou envyous
against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down like the
grass, and wither as the green herb, Psalm. 37.2.

4. Doct. Transgressors deal treacherously with God. The treacherous dealer
deals treacherously, Isa. 21.2. The treacherous dealers have dealt
treacherously; yea, the treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously, Isa.
24.16. They are all adulterers, and an assembly of treacherous men, Jer. 9.2.

Reason 1. Because they fail in the trust committed to them, as a Servant or
Steward deceiving his Master is treacherous. So was he that had received one
talent, though he had not spent it, because he did not improve it. Thou wicked
and slothful servant, etc. Mat. 25.26.

2. Because they act against their trust, which is an higher degree of
treachery. As if a Servant or Steward should rise up against his Master, in
stead of obedience. So Judas is called the traitor, Luke 6.16.

3. Because they betray Gods honor, as much as in them lies. An Ambassador is
treacherous, that dishonors his Prince in stead of honoring him.

4. Because they labor to undo Gods Church. Is not a servant treacherous,
that should go about to poison all the family? So are wicked men, endeavoring
to ruin the Church by bad counsel and example.

Use. Let us hate all sinful courses. Treason is odious. Men that love the
Treason, hate the Traitor. God hates both it and them. Many fair promises are
made by men to Traitors, but an Halter or an Axe is their end. So Satan
promises much to sinners, but will bring them to hell.

5. Doct. Sin roots out the posterity of wicked men. He shall neither have Son
nor Nephew among his people, nor any remaining in his dwelling, Job 18.19. So
it did Jeroboam's. His posterity must lose the Kingdom, and his good Son must
die, 1 King. 13.34. and 14.10, etc. So Ahab's numerous posterity must die for
his Idolatry, 2 King. 10.7, etc.

Reason 1. Because sin goes by propagation; and no wonder then if the Serpents
brood be cut off. We kill young Snakes for the poison they have from the old
ones.

2. Sin goes by imitation. If children of godly parents will imitate other men
in evil, rather then their parents in good, no wonder if children of ungodly
parents be evil like their parents, and perish with them. We read not of one
good among all the Kings of the ten Tribes. All were idolatrous, like their
predecessors.

Use. Hate sinful courses, which God so much hates, that he will punish them
in children to the fourth generation; as in the second Commandment. And no
wonder if God hate finfull courses, as being contrary both to his nature and
will. Let us therefore show our love to God, in hating what he hates. Ye that
love the Lord, hate evil, Psalm. 97.10.

6. Doct. If men will not for their own sakes forsake sin, they should do it
for their childrens sake. God promises good to children, if their parents be
obedient. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and
keep my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their
children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Therefore they must take heed they bring not
evil on their children by disobedience. Manasseh brings destruction on
Jerusalem after his death, though he repented in his life. Surely at the
commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight
for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did, 2 King. 24.3. And Ahab
brought Gods judgment on his posterity, though he humbled himself. See thou
how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I
will not bring the evil in his days, but in his Sons days will I bring the
evil upon his house, 1 King. 21.29.

Reason 1. Because much evil may come on our posterity for our sins; as
hereditary diseases, poverty, losses, crosses.

2. Our affection is great to our children. We prefer them before friends, and
many times before our selves. Why then should we do any thing to hurt them?

Use. It teaches us to bewail the madness of those parents, that are so fond
of their children, that they love the ground the better they tread on, and yet
live in those sins that shorten their childrens days, and lay them under
ground before their time by nature. They give them bad examples, and no
correction for their sins, and so are accessory to their ruin. Let us be
wiser, and give good example and correction to our children, and then may we
look to see much good of them. Which God grant to all godly parents, through
Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior, Amen.

CHAP. III.
VER. 1. My Son, forget not my law, but let thine heart keep my commandments.
THe order of Solomon is to be observed; he had formerly exhorted the young man
to seek after Wisdom, and showed him what evils it would preserve him from;
now he gives him some directions how to practice what he should be taught, and
shows what good he should get by it: He had dissuaded him from cruelty in the
first Chapter, and from adultery in the second; now he persuades him to piety
and equity in this Chapter: and lest the keeping of so many precepts imposed
upon the young man, should trouble him, he promises in general, and afterward
interlaceth in particulars, diverse promises of good and sure rewards, to allure
him to audience and obedience. Solomon had a flood, or a wood of words, a Sylva
Synonymorum, and therefore urges the same things with elegant variation of
phrase, as a Father often inculcats the same things daily in other words to
affect his child the more, that so, what works not upon him at first, may at
last. The two first verses are a general preface to the rest of the Chapter,
wherein is, 1. an exhortation in the first verse: 2 ly. a promise to set it on,
Verse 2.

For the words, My Son, see on Chap. 1.18. He often uses the amiable name of a
Son; intimating, that he speaks not as an Enemy, nor a Neighbor, or Friend, or
Master, or King, but as a loving Father to his beloved child: And well might he
call the hearer or reader his Son, on whom he had bestowed so many godly
instructions, and whom he goes on to instruct still, like a Father.

Forget not. See on Chap. 2.17. Let my law stick fast in thy memory; whatsoever
thou forget, either children, business, or whatever else is deer unto thee, be
sure thou forget not my Law: sooner forget music and singing, as the godly
Jews would rather forget them, then Jerusalem. Psalm. 137.5.6.

My Law. See on Chap. 1.8. Here it is taken for those good instructions Solomon
gave, and which are written in this book; therefore he calls it his Law, which
being agreeable to Gods Law, his children were tied to observe. So Gods law is
called Moses Law, Mal. 4.4. This book is a Law how to guide our life,
containing many excellent practical instructions.

But. See on Chap. 1.25.2.22. an opposition between keeping and forgetting.

Let thine heart. See on Chap. 2.2. The heart here may be taken for the memory,
which is the chest of the soul; or rather for the will, which is King in the
Soul, and to which the understanding is councellor, and the affections are
servants.

Keep. See on Chap. 2.11. Keep them both in memory, and life. He speaks not of
a bare remembering, but of a practical keeping also, showing, that it is not
profitable for us to have them in our heart, unless we also exercise them in
our conversation. The sum is, that we must remember these precepts to keep and
do them, Deuteronomy. 7.12. For remembering the law in the heart without practicing it
in the life, will not bring the blessing annexed, Ver. 2. Length of days, etc.
Thou must remember them so, that thou hearcily practice them, and that thy
heart not only have the knowledge of them ready upon all occasions, but also be
ever studying for occasions, and how to do them.

My commandments. See on Chap 2.1. Thou must not only look to this book in
general, but have respect to every particular direction in it, that concerns
thee; then shall thou be like Zechariah and Elizabeth, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blamlesse, Luke 1.6. And may conclude
with the Psalmist, Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect unto thy
commandments, Psalm 119.6. The sum is, as if Solomon had said, Thou have
heard, O my Son, that thou art not able by thine own pains and study to get
Wisdom, but thou must get teachers, and accommodate the ears both of thy soul
and body to their words; yet is not this enough to make thee wise, but thou
must also retain those instructions in thy memory, ready for practice when
opportunity shall be offered.

Figures none. Note. 1. A prohibition. 2. An Exhortation.


In the former note. 1. The person spoken to, Myson. 2. The thing forbidden.
Forget not. 3. The Object. My Law.


In the latter observe.

1 The opposition, or rather augmentation. But, Or, it may be read, Yea, See on
Chap. 2.22. Be so far from forgetting, that thou remember to practice my
Commands on all occasions.

2. The agent, Let thine heart.

3. The Act. Keep.

4. The object. My Commandments.

1. Doct. Great affection ought to be in a teacher. He must look upon his
hearers, as upon his Children. This is Paul^ tone, My little Children Of whom I
travail in birth again. Gal. 4.19. Wherefore? Because I love you not! God
knows. 2 Cor. 11.11. I will glad^y spend, and be spent for you, though the
more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. 2 Cor. 12.15. Spoken as by an
indulgent Father. This is John's tone, My little Children, these things write I
unto you, that ye sin not. 1 John 2.1. This is Christ's own tone, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as an
hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. Mat. 23.37. Like
a tender Father complaining of an unthrifty son, We were gentle among you, even
as a nurse cherishes her children says Paul. 1. These. 2.7.

Reason. 1. Because else his Ministry shall never do any good. His directions
will be slighted, his promises thought flatteries, his reproves disgraces, his
threatenings, fruit of malice.

2. He does else not imitate God, who has more reason to take state; yet
teaches his with his abundance of sweetness.

Use 1. To reprove such teachers, as seldom converse with those, whom they
take charge of, and show small affection to them. It is fit Ministers should
study. They can never dispense the bread of life well, if it be not well baked.
A Physician must study: Yet if the one visit not, nor converse lovingly with
his people, nor the other with his patients, they will do little good.

2. It blames the critical sort of the people, who say, if a Minister be
familiar, and cheerful with those, whom he teaches, he loses repute,
discredits himself, and his calling. At indignus tu, qui diceres tamen. But yet
it becomes not you to say so. Would you have your teachers strange to you? what
comfort then can ye take in them, or what good will ye get by them.

2. Doct. Great respect in an hearer ought to be toward a teacher. As in a son
to a Father. Solomon spoke Proverbs, as well as writ them, and so had teachers,
as well as readers. He spoke three thousand Proverbs. 1 King. 4.32. That of
Paul proves it, cited out of the Prophets, as being the Doctrine of the old,
and new Testament. How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things! Romans 10.15. Such good respect
Paul found from the Galathians. Ye received me as an Angel of God, even as
Christ Jesus. I bear you record, that, if it had been possible, ye would have
plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me. Gal. 4.14, 15.

Note. 1. The end, why such respect should be showed to our teachers.

2. The manners how.

For the first. The reasons are.

1. For Gods cause, because they are his Ambassadors, and for the time of
teaching represent his person.

2. For our sake, we will else not regard, nor get good by their words.

3. For their sake, that they may not be discouraged in their office.

4. For others sake, that our example may draw them to learn of them.

For the second. The manner how we must respect them.

1. By due respect to their persons, by reverencing them, and esteeming them
very highly in love for their works sake. 1 These. 5.13.

2 To their preceps by obedience; Obey them, that have the rule over you, for
they watch for your souls. Heb. 13.17.

3. By speaking well of them, I ought to have been commended of you. 2 Cor.
12.11.

4. By dealing kindly with them, Let him that is taught in the word,
communicate unto him that teaches in all good things, Gal. 6.6.

Use 1. For complaint of neglect of teachers, by their hearers. An heathen
Prince seeing Gods Ministers set at the bottom of the Table by a Christian
Emperor, said, He would never be of that Religion, where the teachers were
contemned.

2. Let men show all due respect to their teachers, especially in st^nding fast
to truth taught by them, that they may be encouraged to teach Gods truth still.

Doct. 3. Precepts of Parents and Teachers, agreeable to Gods Law, ought to be
regarded. Solomon spoke and wrote both as a Father, and as a teacher, and he
did regard his fathers instruction, Chap. 4.4. his Mothers, Chap. 31.1. and
Agurs, Chap. 30.1. It seems he regarded them well, that left them in writing
for us.

Reas. 1. Because Parents should be teachers, and not breed their children like
brute beasts.

2. Because teachers supply the defect of Parents, taking upon them to instruct
us, when our parents cannot, for want of time or ability.

Use 1. It reproves ungracious children, that slight the wholesome counsels of
their own Parents; sure they will never regard any others instruction.

2. It blames unprofitable scholars, that make their parents cost, and teachers
labor in vain.

Doct. 4. Such precepts ought never to be forgotten. Let thine heart retain my
words, decline not from the words of my mouth. Chap. 4.4, 5. Remember the Law
of Moses my servant. Mal. 4.4

Res. 1. Because Oblivio Matter, aut proles ingratitudints Senec. de beneficiis.
Oblivion is the mother or child of unthank fullness. Men remember what they
think worthy of thanks, and forget other things; and thankfulness will cause
them to remember benefits. 2. It is the stepmother, or hinderer of spiritual
profit: No good is gotten by things forgotten. Sicut in unoqu^ que opere matter
est constantia, ita universae doctrinae invenitur oblivio noverca. Boet. do
discipline. Scholar.

Use Think it not enough to learn good things, unless you remember them. It
availes little to hear good instructions, except ye keep them in memory: it is
not sufficient to talk of Gods word with the mouth, unless we remember it in
the heart. Who among you will give ear to this, who will hearken and hear for
the time to come? Isa. 42.23. Say as Cenis to her Lady Antonia, Frustra Domina
jussisti, haec enim, atque caetera ^mnia, quae mihi imperas, it a semper in
memoria habco, ut ex ca deleri non possint. You need not, Madam bid me do your
business, for these things, and all other which you command me, I have them
always so in my memory, that they cannot be blotted out of it. Deo or as
another, Jussa mihi tam velle sequi, quam posse, necesse est. It is as
necessary for me to be willing, as to be able to keep your commands. As the Ark
kept the two Tables, and the Pot, the hidden Manna; so should we keep godly
precepts in our hearts; else are we like many cunning Artists, that get much,
yet live poorly, because they can keep nothing.

Doct 5. Such precepts ought to be put in practice. All the commandments which
I command thee this day, shall ye observe to do, Deuteronomy. 8.1. The words of
Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, are performed. Jer.
35.14.

Reas. 1. Because they are good seed for a spiritual crop; and men will be
careful to preserve seed corn, else they may starve. 2. Because they are
lights to direct our steps, not only to see the way, but how to walk in it. Thy
word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Psalm. 119.105. Men go
not in the dark without a lanthorn.

Use. Draw out into practice what ye have learned by your parents and teachers.
If a man had the Philosophers stone, if he used it not, he would have no gold.
A known medicine helps not, if not taken; keep then good precepts actually, as
well as cordially: in deed, as well as in heart; they that do not so, forget
them, or at least keep them not: delight thy self with keeping them in thine
heart, and honor thy God with observing them in thy life.

Doct. 6. Such precepts must be practiced heartily. Thou Solomon my son, know
thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a
willing mind. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Servants, obey in all things your Masters
according to the flesh, not with eye service, as men-pleasers, but in
singleness of heart, fearing God: And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to
the Lord, and not unto men. Col. 2.22, 23. Ye have obeyed from the heart the
form of Doctrine, which was delivered you Romans 6.17. (...) Reason. 1. Because
the heart is the fountain of life. Dead services please neither God, nor men.
It is like the speaking of Parrots. Acceptable service to God must be
reasonable service. Romans 12.1.

It is like the Fountain of joy, and comfort, and therefore where it is not,
men can have no comfort in any thing they do.

Use. See where your hears are, when ye do what Parents, and Teachers advise
you. If ye do it unwillingly, it is not thankworthy.

VERSE 2. For length of days, and long life, and peace shall they add unto
thee.
THe Exhortation was in the former Verse. The promise to encourage us to
obedience is in this. That men might with more courage endeavor to obey
Solomon's wise directions, God joins the reward to the work, and promises those
things, which all men, but especially young men most of all desire, and long
for, and are most dear to men of tender years, to wit, a long, quiet, and happy
life. Some distinguish the three things promised thus, That by length of days
should be meant a life on earth as long as may be drawn out by any strength of
nature. By long life, or years, of life eternal life in another world. By
peace, peace of conscience. But they may rather be understood thus, By length
of days may be understood a life that lasts long. By long life, or years of
life an healthful life. By peace a prosperous life.

For the words.

For. See on Chap. 19. A reason of the former Exhortation.

Length of days. They bring a long life to a man, not beyond the time
appointed by God, but as God has determined, so by his blessing he gives long
life to those that obey him. This is understood of bodily life here which the
Law also promises in the first commandment. The word (...) Day in Scripture is
used.

1. For a natural day, confisting of 24 hours. Neither eat nor drink three
days. Est. 4.16.

2. For an artificial day opposed to the night. The greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night, Genesis 1.16.

In the plural for a long day, and circular, till that day come again a full
year. This man went up out of his City (...) From days to days: which ver.
7, is (...) year by year.

4. For a certain time, especially to come. In that day shall this song be sung
in the land of Judah. Isa. 26.1.

5. For a time of trouble. Remember, O Lord the children of Edom in the day of
Jerusalem: who said, Raze it, Raze it, even to the foundation thereof. Psalm.
137.7. Their day is come, the time of their visitation. Jer. 50.27. Here it is
taken in the first sense for natural days.

And. See on Chap. 2.9.22. on the word But long life. Heb. Years of life. For
life see on Chap. 2.19. Lest any man should think, that long life may be
miserable, he says not years of sickness, or weakness, which are but
puttings off, or rather years of death, but years of life, that is of health,
and strength. Non est vivere, sed valere vita. It is not worthy the name of a
life barely to live, but to be in health, and strength. So a life in Heaven is
called eternal life, whereas a life in Hell which lasts as long, is called the
second death.

And peace. Lest any thing should be wanting to a long, and healthful life,
peace is added. And well too, for the shortest life is best without peace? By
peace is meant prosperity, riches, liberty. So the Hebrews use the word. And he
said unto them, Is he well? And they said, He is well, Heb. Is there peace to
him? There is peace. Genesis 29.6, Go see, if it be well with thy brethren? Heb.
See the peace of thy brethren. Genesis 37.14. And indeed prosperity is the fruit
of peace: adversity of war.

Shall they add to thee. They shall prolong the years of thy life, health, and
wealth. Not forgetting, but observing Gods commands will do all this. The sum
is, If thou slight not my commands, but observe them, thou shall have a long,
healthful and prosperous life. Long life without health is troublesome, and
health without other comforts of life cannot give content.

Observe.

Figures none. 1. The word of coherence. For.

2. The benefits. Length of days, and long life, and peace. A long,
healthful, and prosperous life.

3. The means of procuring these is obedience. Shall they add unto thee.

1. Doct. God might have required full obedience without rewards, yet he
promises large ones. That he might require it without reward, appears in the
preface of the commandments. Obey, for I am Jehovah, that gave thee thy being,
Thy God, in covenant with thee, That brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. A
great benefit. Out of the house of bondage. A great deliverance. That he will
give full rewards, appears in the end of the second, and fifth Commandments.
Forsake Idolatry, and worship me aright; For I show mercy to thousands of them,
that love me and keep my Commandments. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother, that
thy days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. So he
promises Abraham to be his shield, and exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1. For
the first part, That God may require obedience without any reward, appears

1. Because he is not any way indebted to us for our obedience. He has all of
himself, and nothing from us. Nor gets no addition of happiness by our
obedience.

2. We are indebted to him for all the good things we have, as Life, Health,
Food, Goods, World Heaven; we have all from him, and that of free grace. And it
is strange for a debtor to require money of his creditor; we cannot then merit
any thing from him, that cannot add any thing to him; neither does he need any
thing. He that merits of another, must some way supply his wants. Sacrifices
could not do it. And if they could do it, he need not take them of us that owes
all the cattle of the World. Psalm. 50.9. etc. And if God did need, how should
we supply his wants, that cannot supply our own for soul or body? He that
cannot keep his own Family, cannot relieve others.

3. Because God is absolute Lord over all, and may command what he list
without rewarding any creature in Heaven or in Earth. For the second, that yet
he will give a full reward, appears.

1. Because he is merciful, and stands upon his honor. And where justice will
give no reward, mercy will. So Fathers promise many things to their children,
to encourage them to do their duty: Here is long, and healthful years, and
prosperity; and what needs a man more in this life?

2ly. Because God is faithful, and has promised a full reward to every good
action, so that mercy and truth appear in it, though justice require it not.

Use 1. To acknowledge, that if God bless us in soul or body, it is of his
free grace, not of the merit of our obedience. He might by his right over us,
require service without pay: yet he is so merciful, that he will not. So a
father may look for duty freely from a child, yet he provides for him, and
gives him an inheritance,

2ly. Let this encourage us to duty: we owe it to God, therefore do it; we
shall have a full reward, therefore do it cheerfully: this is a double band,
kindness uses to work more upon men's spirits, then duty; so let it do with
us toward God. This encouraged Moses, he knew he deserved nothing, yet, had
respect unto the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.26

Doct. 2. Gods rewards are such, as men like well, ordinarily. He gives his
people a land of brooks, fountains, wheat, barley, wines, fig trees, etc. Deuteronomy.
8.7. A land that had goodly houses, many herds of greater cattle, many flocks
of lesser, much silver and gold, etc. Deuteronomy. 8 etc.

Reas. It appears, 1. in the particulars in the Text, God promises long life,
peace, and plenty, what would man have more for his body? who loves not all
these? Men love long life; for that end they are choice in meat, drink,
apparel, baths, physic, they spare for no cost; so do worldly men dote on
peace and plenty. These God promises. 2ly. it appears by the prayers of men; no
doubt they pray for what they love best, and God often gives it, as he gave
wisdom to Solomon to guide a great Kingdom, when he prayed for it. 3ly. By
Gods aditional gifts to Solomon, as honor, and riches, which he asked not, yet
could not but like well, when God gave them. So he gives a comfortable earthly
passage to them, that seek for heaven: seek ye first the Kingdom of God and
his righteousness, and all these things shall he added unto you. Mat. 6 33. Who
likes not a good way, to a good end? It is a double mercy.

Use. Be careful to please God, and trust him for rewards; he will give such as
thou likest, and can no where else get: Gods precepts well kept, will be in
stead of Diet, Physic, Guard, and other means of preserving life: If other
means fail, God will preserve by these.

Doct. 3. Long life is a blessing. God gave Abraham a good old age, Genesis 25.8.
The hoary head is a crown of glory, etc. Chap. 16.31. It is a sweet mercy, and
generally desired. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days,
that he may see good? Psalm, 34.12. As if he had said, every man naturally does
desire it. Men love life, and abhor death! With long life will I satisfy him,
Psalm. 91.16.

Reas. 1. Because life it self is a blessing, therefore the continuance of it
is so.

2ly. Because God promises it to his servants, as in the fifth commandment;
and God uses to promise good things, and threaten bad: And this promise Wisdom
uses, as conceiving it will much work upon the spirits of men; for by me thy
days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be incrcased. Chap.
9.11.

3. It is a type of heaven, which had it all the perfections of joy it has,
yet were it not lasting, it could not afford full happiness.

4. It is a resemblance of Gods eternity, who is called The ancient of days,
Dan. 7.13.

5. Short life is accounted a curse. God theatens Eli, that there should not be
an old man in his house, 1 Samuel 2.31. Sure then the contrary is a blessing.

1. Obj. How is it a blessing, when wicked men often live long.

Ans. It is a blessing in it self, and to good men, who have the more time to
serve God; though it may be none, yea, a curse to wicked men, who may sin the
more, and have the more pain in hell.

2. Obj. Good men often have it not, but die soon, as Josiah.

1. Ans. It is in perilous times, when it is better to die, then to live. From
henceforth, blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. It might
have been a blessing to live long, before in the time of the Churches
prosperity, but not then, in the time of her persecution, then the righteous
are taken away from the evil to come, Isa. 57.1.

2. If in other times God take them away, they lose not, but get by it; they
get by death a longer, and an happier, yea, an eternal life.

3. Obj. Men may live long in misery, and that is a curse rather then a
blessing.

Ans. God will give his servants prosperity with their long life, if he see it
fit for them; if not, he will turn their afflictions to their good. We know that
all things work together for good to them that love God. Romans 8.28. A
Physician can make an healing medicine out of poison, so can God make
afflictions profitable to his.

Use 1. It shows the folly of many men, who would have long life, yet look not
after heavenly wisdom, the means of continuing life: Such show themselves to
be fools, as by adultery, drunkenness, quarrels, kill themselves, or are
killed by others, because they follow not wisdom, and holy directions; they
might live longer, if they lived wisely, and godlily: Such complain in vain of
shortness of life, which they bring on themselves.

2. It teaches us not to complain for the troubles of old age, but to bless
God for the comforts we have seen, more then others in the length of our days.
Remember that God has set the one over against the other. Eccles. 7.14. Sicut
nun hirunde non facit ver, nec una linea Geometram: sic nec una dies, vel breve
tempus reddit hominem foelicem. Recuperus. As one swallow makes not a spring,
nor one line a Geometrician, so neether one day, nor a short time makes a man
happy.

Doct. 4. Health in our days is a great blessing also. So it is promised, It
shall be health to thy navil, and marrow to thy bones. verse 8. They are life
unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh, Chap. 4.22.

Reas. 1. Because it gives a man much comfort in body, business, and society
of friends; yea and in Soul also, for the Soul has a fellow-feeling of the
bodies joy or sorrow, in regard of the near conjunction of them.

2. From the contrary, because sicknesses, and diseases are threatened as
crosses and sometimes as curses. See Deuteronomy. 28.29. etc. The leprosy of Naeman
shall sleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for evers. 2 Kings 5.27.

3. Because health fits us for duty to God and men, sickness makes us
unserviceable to both.

Use. To inform us, that we may lawfully pray for health; because in it self it
is a blessing. Spiritual blessings are best worth asking, yet temporal not to
be despised.

5. Doct. Prosperity also is a blessing in it self, the Devil confesses it to
be so to Job. Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is
increased in the land. Job. 1.10. Abraham's servant confesses it in his Master.
The Lord has blessed my Master greatly, and he is become great: and he has
given him flocks, and herds, and silver, and gold, and menservants, and
maidservants, and Camells, and Asses. Gen, 24.35.

Reason 1. Because it is a gift of God. I will give thee riches, and wealth,
and honor. 2 Chronicles. 1.12.

2. He has given it to some of his choicest servants, as to Abraham, Joseph,
David, Solomon.

Use. Abuse it not to luxury, or oppression. To be naught thy self more freely,
or to hurt others more powerfully. Remember outward prosperity is Gods gift,
use it then to Gods honor, and bless him for it. Take heed it proves not as
Tertullian calls it, Campus quo ambitio decurrat. A field, in which ambition
may run his course.

6. Doct. Long life, health, prosperity are sometimes the rewards of well doing
and obedience. If ye be willing, and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
Land. Isa. 1.19. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments? then had thy
peace been as a river. Isa. 48.18 That is, thy prosperity; as was showed in the
exposition of the Text.

Reason. 1. Because of Gods bounty, who besides Heaven often gives comforts to
his here.

2. Because of man's frailty, who is by prosperity much encouraged to obedience,
and discouraged by the contrary.

1. Object. Godly men oftentimes live but a while, and in much pain, and and
poverty.

Answ. Besides what was said before on the third Doctrine,

I answer. 1. That their obedience is but in part, and the reward is answerable.

2. Promises of outward things are but conditional. And God by short life, or
sorrows keeps them from corruption, or persecution, and trouble.

3. God gives them a longer, and better life in Heaven. So God verifies his
promise with advantage. As if a man should promise twenty shilling a week for a
year, and at the first months end void the bargain, and give the party a
thousand pound. What cause had the receiver to complain, either of falsehood in
the promiser, or of loss to himself.

4. Their short life have more sun-shiny days, and true, and spiritual
comforts there, then any wicked man's long life. Summer fruit may be as ripe as
winter fruit, though gathered some months before.

Use. 1. It blames those, who think, that the study of wisdom and piety,
shortens their childrens days. They say, they are too wise, or too good to
live long. Such bring up their children foolishly, and impiously, and so
shorten their days, which they would prolong.

2. It encourages us to get wisdom and obedience. Ungodly men think, there is
no better way in the world to make them live long, then to be merry, and to put
away sorrow by letting slip the bridle to all manner of concupiscence: but let
us remember, that a long, healthful, prosperous life is the reward of
obedience, and live accordingly.

VERSE 3. Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write
them upon the Table of thine heart.
NOw follow particular duties to be performed to God and Man, enterlarded with
many excellent promises and rewards for encouragement to obedience. And first
the wise man begins with two duties to men, setting the Exhortation to mercy
and truth in this Verse, and the encouraging promise in the next.

For the words.

Let not mercy and truth. These two are often enjoined together in Scripture: and
it is pity, that they being so nearly joined in themselves should ever be
separated. Sometimes they are jointly attributed to God. His mercy is
everlasting, and his truth endures to all generations. Psalm. 100.5. His
merciful kindness is great toward us, and the truth of the Lord eudureth for
ever. 117.2. Sometimes to man. Mercy and truth preserve the King. Chap. 20.28.
When they are attributed to God, then Gods mercy is showed in promising or
giving man any good, that deserves nothing but ill of him. His truh is showed
in performance of his promises: When they are spoken of man, then is mercy seen
in giving freely to the poor, who deserve nothing of us, yea to enemies, who
deserve ill of us. Truth is manifested in doing what we owe by promise, or debt
to men. Misericordia est gratia, qua ex nostro libero animo benefacimus alteri,
non ex debito, non ex passione. Veritas, qua exclusa omni fictione adaequamus
facta dictis, verba cordi, cordebitis: Gratia, qua gratuita, veritas, qua
debita exhibemus. Cajeetan. Mercy is favor, whereby out of our own free mind
we do good to another man, not out of debt, not out of passion. Truth is that
virtue, whereby shutting out all feigning, we do equal our deeds to our words,
our words to our haart, our heart to our debts. Grace (or mercy) is, whereby we
give free things; Truth, whereby we pay (or restore) things due to others. Some
interpret the Text here of Gods mercy and truth, and that two ways.

1. So carry thy self, that God may deal mercifully, and truly with thee. But
this cannot be the sense. For though a man may so carry himself, that God will
not deal mercifully with him; yet he cannot carry himself so badly, that God
will not deal truly with him, for that were a blemish to God. If he be upright,
God will perform his promises to him: if not, God will execute his threatenings
upon him: whichsoever God does, he shows forth his truth.

2. By way of promise, not of exhortation. And they read it, Mercy and truth
shall not forsake thee. And they tie it to the former words, if thou forget not
my Law, etc. then God will deal mercifully with thee, and perform all his
promises to thee. But

1. This crosses the ordinary sense of (...) for a prohibition, and that
without need.

2. The words following are imperative.

3. In the first and second Verses ye have a prohibition, and promise. This
method is also observed in the verses following: and most likly so here in this
Verse, and the next. The word (...) signifies.

1. Mercy or favor, All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth. Psalm. 25.10.

2. By the contrary it is taken for reproach, or dishonor. Sin is a reproach to
any people. Chap. 14.34. So (...) signifies to bless, and curse: and other
Hebrew words admit of contrary significations. (...) Truth comes from a word,
that signifies to be firm, and stable; for truth will abide, when all lies
fail. And the Hebrew word for believing, comes from the same root, for truth is
worthy to be believed, and relied upon. This is a faithful saying, and worthy
of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15.

Forsake thee. See on Chap. 2.17. An Hypallage. Forsake not thou them, for then
will they forsake thee. A great elegancy in it, intimating.

1. That their forsaking us is more then our forsaking them. Our forsaking them
may come out of our weakness, but their forsaking us comes out of our
wilfulness, and hardness of heart, in not entertaining them.

2. It sets out the easiness of the loss of them through our corruption.
Fugax est natura boni, Good things naturally fly away.

3. It sets out our great need of them. Neque vero dixit, ipsas ne deseras, sed
ne deserant te, ostendens nos esse, qui illarum egea^us, non ipsas nostri,
Chryso^t. Hom. 1 in Philip. For he does not say, Forsake not thou them, but let
them not forsake thee, showing, that we have need of them, but they have no
need of us.

4. It imitates our great care, and pains needful for the retaining of them.
They are easily lost, but hardly kept. An Hawk must be well tamed, before he be
let fly: else he will return no more. These graces must be as carefully kept
as providently gotten, like riches. Non minor est virtus, quum quarere, parta
tueri. It is no less virtue to keep wealth, then to get it. Non dicit, semel
facias, aut secundo, aut tertio, neque decies, neque centies, sed perpetuo, Non
deserant te Chrysostom. He does not say, Be careful once, or twice, or the third
time, no nor ten times, nor an hundred times, but take care perpetually, that
they forsake thee not. And both mercy, and truth must be kept for ever.
Difficile est simul nos misereri, and sapere. Sen. It is an hard task for us to
pity, and be wise both together. Else mercy may lie to do good, and truth may
reveal without cause, what may do hurt. Therefore join both, as God does, Mercy
and truth are met together. Psalm. 85.10. Else Gods mercy would save all, or his
truth damn all.

Bind them. The word (...) signifies.

1. To bind one thing to another, as a yoke is bound about an Oxes neck. Thou
shall bind a stone to it. Jer. 51.63.

2. To bind men together in love. His life is bound up in the lads life. Genesis
44.30.

3. To bind them together in a plot, or conspiracy. The servants of Amnon
conspired against him, 2 King. 21.23. Here it is taken in the first sense for
putting them, and the neck together, yet not without a figure, as will appear
anon. By them is not meant the Law, and Commandments. ver. 1. But Mercy and
truth, as in this.

About thy neck. See on Chap. 19. Hereby is meant.

1. To have them fast, so that they may not be lost; as men tie their Jewels
about their necks.

2. To have them ready to use, when occasion is offered, as a jewel about the
neck, that has virtue in it, is at hand for use.

3. To keep some external memorialls to put us in mind of these virtues upon
the beholding of them, as jewels on the neck, may put us in mind of
businesses, being ever in fight.

4. To delight in them, as men do in jewels which they hang about their necks.

5. To count it an ornament to us to deal mercifully, and truly with others.
The children of Nobles, when they were little, were wont to wear some jewel
about their neck, that they might be known to be of high birth. So should we
make our heavenly parentage known by works of mercy, and truth.

And write them upon the Table of thine heart. Have them in perpetual all
remembrance, as things not written in Tables of stone, as Moses Law was, but in
thy heart, as in a Table of perpetual memory, as Gods Law was written at first
in Adams heart, and as we write in our Tablebooks those things, of which we
would keep a precise memorandum. They should be most dear unto us. So Queen
Mary said, They that should rip her, should find Callis at her heart. Some have
the images of their dearest friends in form of an heart, which they hang upon
their breast the seat of the heart. So mercy and truth should have so deep an
impression upon the understanding, that they never go out of the memory. Some
understand by binding them about the neck, speaking of them, and teaching them
to others, for the throat is the instrument of speaking. And by writing them on
the Table of the heart th'inking of them, and remembering them. But the former
interpretation is more solid.

For heart. See on ver. 1. and on Chap. 2.2. Here is one thing set out by
diverse similitudes in an eminent gradation like three steps of a ladder one
above another. Mercy and truth are compared.

1. To companions, that must not depart from us.

2. To a chain about the neck, which is nearer then a companion.

3. To a thing written in a Tablebook, which is nearer to the book, then a
chain, that hangs loose about the neck.

Figures. A double metaphor, wherein keeping mercy and truth, or exercising them
outwardly is compared to tying a gold chain about the neck for Ornament. And
retaining them in the heart is compared to things written in a Tablebook, that
they may not be forgotten.

Note 1. The duty set down plainly. 2. Figuratively.


In the former note.

1. The double subject. Let not mercy and truth. 2. The adjunct. Forsake thee.
In the latter note.

1. The fimilitude from a chain. 2. From a Tablebook.
In the first observe.

1. The act, Bind them. 2. The object, about thy neck.
In the second, note

1. The act, write them. 2. The object, upon the table of thy heart.
Doct. 1. Duties to men are to be made conscience of, as well as duties to God:
See the first enjoined, the second conjoined. Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the
first and great commandment, and the second is like unto it, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. Mat. 22.37, 38, 39. Though the Pharisees did duty
to God, yet are they blamed for neglect of duty to men. Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make
long prayer; therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation. Mat. 23.14.

Reas. 1. Because God has a care of the preservation of his Image; In all the
world, no creature so like God, as man.

2. God made laws to that purpose, as good rulers make laws, not for their own
honor only, but for their subjects peace and wealth also.

3. God appointed Magistrates to execute those laws, to be custodes utriusque
tabulae, keepers of both tables: And he gave to them more honor and power then
to other men, for that purpose.

4. He himself will punish those wrongs done to men, at the day of judgment,
which his deputies do not punish here, and will punish them also for not doing
it.

Use. To condemn hypocrites, who profess religion, but want humanity: of such
the beloved Apostle says, If a man say I love God, and hates his brother, he
is a liar. And this commandment have we from him, that he who loves God, love
his brother also. 1 John 4.20.21.

Doct. 2. Mercy and Truth should always go together. If ye will deal kindly and
truly with my Master, tell me, Genesis 24.49. Lie not one to another. Put on
bowels of mercies. Col. 3.9.12.

Reas. 1. Because both are ornaments to us: Men wear lace on good clothes, so
does mercy adorn truth.

2. both are profitable to others: sometimes truth alone ties us to do good to
other men, when we are by duty or promise, engaged to them: but certainly
mercy will supply others wants, where no particular engagment is.

3. The want of the one, buries the commendation of the other; such an one is a
merciful man to the poor, but there is no truth in him, no man can build upon
his word; such a man is very just in all his dealings, but as hard as flint; he
has a good estate, but the poor fare never the better for it.

4. Both are together in God, else could we look for no favor from him, nor
expect the performance of any promise made by him for we daily give him cause
to break them all.

Use 1. To blame such as brag of one of these, but want the other; one brags of
his charity to the poor, and thinks at his death he must needs go to heaven for
it, though he got all his wealth by fraudulent dealing: Another boasts of his
just dealing, no man can say, black is his eye, though no poor man ever tasted
of his cup: One is no sign of salvation, when the other leads to hell. In
Logic, Conclusio semper sequitur partem debiliorem, The conclusion always
follows the weaker part. So here, hell claim her own.

Use 2. Be not content with one of these alone, make a marriage of them in your
heart, and life: Those whom God has joined together, let no man put assunder;
then may you say with David, I will sing of mercy and judgment, unto thee O Lord
will I sing. Psalm. 101.1.

Doct. 3. Good must be done to them to whom we owe nothing. This is to be a
true neighbor in Christ's judgment, and men's; Which now of these three think
thou says our Savior to the Lawyer) was neighbor unto him that fell among the
Th^eves? And he said, he that showed mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, go
thou, and do likewise, Luke 30.36.37. Give to him that asks thee, and from
him that would borrow of thee, turn not thou amay. Mat. 5.42. This must be done,

1. For the creatures sake, we are Gods creature, so are they, God would not
have us neglect them, we should not do it.

2. For man's sake, they are not beasts, but men, as well as we; and while we
are men, we may need others: no man can stand wholly on his own bottom.

3. For Gods sake, who requires it, and to whom we can show no other real
requital, for he needs not us, nor ours, but enjoynes us to do good to others
freely, for his sake.

4. For pitties sake, every faculty of the soul must be exercised, else it is
in vain placed there.

Use. To condemn hard hearted persons, who say to the poor, What do I owe you?
These are Cains generation, who taught them their lesson long since. Am I my
Brothers Keeper? Genesis 4.9. And they may expect Cains reward, A fugitive, and a
vagabond shall thou be in the earth. Genesis 4.12.

4. Doct. Truth is required in all our dealings. Abimelech expects it from
Abraham. Swear unto me here by God, that thou will not deal falsely with me.
Genesis 21.23. God likes it, and abhors the contrary. Lying lips are abomination
to the Lord, but they that deal truly, are his delight. Chap. 12.22.

Reason. 1. Because then we shall be like God, who never breaks his word,
though those he deals withal, deal falsely with him, as the best of men do.
This is his glory, let us imitate him, and it will be our credit.

2. All men will be willing to deal with us, if they find truth in our words,
and deeds. Else they will more willingly deal with poorer men.

Use This serves to cry up the forgotten trade of truth, when men seek evasions
to avoid contracts, and if themselves see but a finger of gain, care not for a
handful of truth.

5. Doct. We should have outward mementoes of our duties to men. This heap be
witness, and this pillar be witness, that I will not pass over this heap to
thee, and that thou shall not pass over this heap, and this Pillar to me for
harm. Genesis 31.52. Paul's chain put him in mind of Onesiphorus his kindness.
He was not ashamed of my chain. 2. Tim. 1.16.

Reason. 1. The creatures may put us in mind of it. See how kind Heaven i^to
Earth, that affords it shine, and showers to ripen the fruits of it; yet gets
nothing by it. Grass feeds beasts; beasts feed us.

2. Men's faces, and habits put us in mind of true, and merciful dealing with
them. The poores rags, and pitiful words, other men's kind looks and
carriage mind us of both.

Use Make use of such glasses, as these. How can ye look up to the Heaven, or
down to the Earth, or the rags of the poor, or faces of the rich, and yet
deal falsely, or harshly with others.

6. Doct. We must be hearty in duties to men. Is thine heart right, as my heart
is with thy heart. 2 King. 10.15. The soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul
of David. 1 Samuel 18.1.

Reason. 1. We would have men deal so with us: we care not for their outsides.

2. We can then give a good account, not to men only with whom we deal, but
also to God, who knows, how we dealt with them.

Use. To blame such as do good offices, but unwillingly, grudgingly, and as it
were by constraint. These are dead, and heartlesse kindnesses. Such forget,
that God loves a cheerful giver. 2 Cor. 9.7. And therefore must not look for
any reward from him.

VER. IV. So shall thou find favor, and good understanding in the sight of God
and man.
THE wise man having pressed two duties, that go against the hair in our
corrupted nature, mercy, and truth, now he urges them with promises of rewards
often inculcated elsewhere, and suitable to the things required. He that
shows mercy to men, shall find mercy with God. And he that deals truly with
men, shall have understanding, how to manage his affairs wisely in the world:
or to join them together. He that deals mercifully, and truly, shall be loved
of God, and esteemed wise among men. These are two spurs to the former two
duties. For the word

So. Heb. And. See on Chap. 2.9. and on ver. 22. there on the word But.

Shall thou find. Heb. Find thou. The imperative for the future. The commanding
phrase for the promising. So, Keep my Commandments, and live. Chap. 4.4. That
is, And thou shall live. For where God promises, mercy, there he commands a
blessing. Psalm. 133.3. And all creatures must help to bring it. Thus the Poets
speak also, Si faetura gregem suppleverit, aureus esto Virgil. If thy flock
bring forth abundantly, be thou a golden (or, rich) man. That is, thou shall be
so. So on the contrary the future, or promising tense is put for the
Imperative, or commanding. Thou shall have no other Gods. That is, Have not.
For Gods command ties us, as much as man's promise ties him. For Find. See on
Chap. 1.13. Some read it, And find favor. As if wisdom did admonish men to
seek for favor by those virtues.

Favor. See on Chap. 1.9. on the word, Grace. Thou shall find comfort,
kindness, liking, good acceptance. As men by their comely personage, or wise
carriage, or good offices find savor with Princes.

And good understanding. Thou shall be esteemed a wise man. The Nations shall
say, surely this great Nation is a wise, and understanding people. Deuteronomy. 4.6.
For Good. See on Chap. 2.9. For understanding. See on Chap. 13. on the word
Wisdom.

In the sight. Heb. In the eyes. See on Chap. 11.17. Of God. See Chap. 2.5.

And man. (...). Signifies.

1. A man in general. Man that is born of a woman. Job. 14.1.

2. It was the name of the first man, that ever was. Adam knew his wife. Genesis
4.1. Here it is taken in the first sense, yet collectively, man for men; as
often else where. The last words admit of a threefold sense. Some understand
them thus, Thou shall know how to carry thy self well in all offices to be
done to God, or man. But that is only toward God, and man. In the sight of
them is more. As in the first Commandment, Thou shall have no other Gods in my
sight. It is a greater fault for a woman to lie with an adulterer in her
husbands sight, then else where. Others thus, God, and man will favor thee,
and acknowledge, that thou have carried thy self wisely. Others thus, Thou
shall have good success: For that the word will also bear. God will be so
gracious to thee, and men so friendly, that thou shall thrive wonderfully, and
men shall take notice, and bear witness of it. The second way is best, and
most agreeable to the common use of the original word. The sum is, if thou
exercise mercy and truth toward men, God, and men will favor thee, and
approve, and bear witness of thy great understanding.

Figures. A metaphor in Find. Thou shall obtain it, as men get things they
find. Another metaphor in the eyes, or sight of God. For God has no eyes, yet
will he take notice of it, as men do of what they see. In the eyes of men, that
is, in their sight: for men take notice of those things that come within the
reach of their eyes. The meaning is, they will look upon thee with delight: a
metonymie of the cause for the effect.

Note. 1. The things promised which are two. 1. So shall thou find favor. 2.
And good understanding.

2. The large extent of them, in the sight of God and man. Some things please
men, that offend God; other things please God, that offend men: thy ways shall
please both. This is a great, but a rare blessing.

Doct. 1. Good things cannot be too often inculcated. This is familiar with
Solomon in this book of the Proverbs, to urge the same things, though with some
variety of words. My son, hear the instruction of thy father. Chap. 1.8. My
son, if thou will receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee. Chap.
2.1. My son, forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my commandments. Chap.
1.3. This course is approved by Saint Paul. To write the same things to you, to
me indeed is not grievous, but for you it is safe. Phil. 3.1.

Reas. 1. Because of the dullness of our apprehension; matters of truth and
holiness may be spoken often, before we understand them.

2. Because of the deadness of our affections, that have no love to either,
naturally.

3. Because we are more forgetful of good things, then of other.

Use. It condemns the niceness of men, that cannot endure to hear old
fundamental truths often pressed, but are so pleased with new things, that they
run into old errors: a Minister must bring forth old things for matter, new for
manner. Every Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is like
unto a man that is an house-holder, which brings forth out of his treasure
things new and old. Mat. 13.52. Brethren, I write no new commandament unto you,
but an old commandment, which ye had from the beginning: the old commandment is
the word, which ye have heard from the beginning. Again, a new commandment I
write unto you, which thing is true in him, and in you, because the darkness
is past, and the true light now shines. 1 John. 2.7.8.

Doct. 2. God gives fit rewards. For good carriage to men, he gives favor with
men: For Nebuchadnezzars service in taking Tirus, God gives him the land of
Egypt. Son of man, Nebuchadnezar, King of Babylon, caused his army to serve a
great service against Tyrus. Every head was made bald, and every shoulder was
peeled: yet he had no wages, nor his Army for Tyrus, for the service that he
had served against it. Therefore thus says the Lord God, behold I will give the
land of Egypt unto Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages of
his army. I have given him the land of Egypt for his labor, wherewith he
served against it, because they wrought for me, says the Lord God. Ezekiel.
29.18, 19.20. Those that honor God with their increase, God will give to them a
greater increase. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits
of all thine increase, so shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy
presses shall burst out with new wine. verse 9, 10. of (...) Chap.

Reas. 1. To allure men the more to do good offices; suitable wages makes a
servant diligent.

2. To show Gods great approbation of them, by the likeness of the rewards to
the duties.

Use. Observe the proportion of your rewards to your duties, see Gods mercy and
wisdom in it, and give him glory.

Doct. 3. Mercy and truth find favor with God. So did Joseph, Moses, David,
Christ.

Reas. 1. Because they are a part of Gods image, and that he likes, where ever
he finds it: God does good to all, he keeps his word, and likes them that do so.

2. Though God get no good by them in us, yet his Church does: sometimes his
people need mercy from men, sometimes truth in performances, and upright
dealing in those with whom they have to do. This God counts as done to
himself. In as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me. Mat. 25.40.

Use. Let us be encouraged to deal mercifully, and truly with all men: If
others, or they with whom we deal regard it not, God will, we shall have great
need of his favor in death, and judgment, if we will not see what need we have
of it now.

Doct. 4. Mercy and truth will find favor with Men. The former examples prove
it.

Reas. 1. In regard of men, they love to be dealt mercifully and truly with all
themselves, even they that deal not so with others, and therefore they commend
it in others, and think well of them, and wish well to them out of self-love,
as many an Adulterer likes a chaste Wife: And as other men, so especially they
that get good by our merciful, and just dealing, will favor us, and speak well
of us.

2. God will incline men's hearts to favor such, as deal mercifully and truly;
yea, oftentimes God, who gives credit, and fashioneth men's opinions, and
enclines men's hearts as he please, makes strangers, heathens, yea enemies, that
use to hate all religion and goodness, by nature, and have particular quarrels
with the persons of godly men, makes them, I say, to commend godly men, for
their mercy and truth, and sometimes to do them much good. Thus Sau^^ ^lents,
and confesses David's innocence. Thou art more right^ous then I, for thou have
rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil. 1 Samuel 24.17. This Ezra
blesses God for; Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers, which has put such a
thing as this into the Kings heart, and bath extended mercy unto me before the
King, and his counselors, and before all the Kings mighty Princes. Ezr.
7.27.28.

Use. Behold a second motive to merciful and true dealing: O, say they, men will
not do so to us. We answer, they should do so, and if God see it fit, he will
make them to deal so with you.

Doct. 5. Mercy and truth teach a man how to direct his ways before God. It is
seen in the Centurion, He loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue.
Then Jesus went with him. Luke 7.5.6. And in Cornebus, who was a devout man,
and one that feared God, which gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God
always. Acts 10.1, 2.

Reas. 1. Because these things are pleasing to God, though done to men, and
therefore he teaches such, how to carry themselves wisely before himself also.

2. Because there is a chain of graces, and they love to go together. Like will
to like.

Use. Lo a third motive to be merciful, and true dealing: wise carriage before
God is to be got, as a reward of it. And that is a great mercy, such an one, as
all people may wonder at, and and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and
understanding people. Deuteronomy. 4.6.

Doct. 6. Mercy and truth teach a man how to direct his ways before men also.
So they taught David. They taught him to behave himself wisely, so that He was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's
servants. 2 Samuel 18.5. So it taught Joseph. When they heard that Joseph's
brethren were come, it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants. Genesis 45.16. His
good carriage got this respect to himself, and his. So did Abraham's among the
Canaanites. Thou art a mighty Prince among us: in the choice of our Sepulchers
bury thy dead. Genesis 236.

Reason. 1. Because they conduce much to direct us in our carriage in the world.

2. The want of either makes men noted for folly in their affairs.

Use. See a fourth argument to merciful and true dealing. They that care not
for obeying God, yet would with Saul be honored before the people. Mercy and
truth will be a good means to bring this honor from men, as giving us the
serpents subtlety with the doves innocence.

VERSE 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart: and lean not unto thine own
understanding.
HEre follow certain precepts concerning our carriage to God, with promises
annexed to some of them. In this Verse trusting in God, is commended to us: and
self-confidence the contrary to it, is forbidden. For the words.

Trust. Put confidence in God, and rest on him, and repose thy self on this
fatherly providence for deliverance from all evil, and the fruition of all
good here, and hereafter. Trust may be opposed to doubting, and fear, and so
may intimate not only relying on God, but waiting with assurance of a good
event, especially if we wait upon the right person, and that upon good grounds.
Some writers make a coherence here. Some of them tie it to the first verse, as
if it had respect to the keeping of the Law, thus, Do not be afraid, that by
reason of thy weakness thou can not keep Gods commandments; neither think on
the other side, that thou can know them by thy natural wit, or do them by
thy natural strength: but trust in the commander, and he will make thee able
in some good measure to do what he enjoines: others knit these words to the
third Verse. Because thou art not able to keep mercy and truth, trust in God,
and he will make thee able: others tie it to the fourth verse. Show that thou
have good understanding indeed by trusting in God, and not in thine own
wisdom. Others to the words following, If thou trust in God, and not to thine
own wit, thou will wisely and readily perform all the duties following to God,
and man. But it is better to take the words without any coherence according to
the former interpretation. Believe that God will not fail thee in any
necessity; but thy own wit may; and act accordingly. Some restrain this
trusting in God to matters of salvation, but that is too strait, for we must
trust in God for earth, as well as for Heaven.

In the Lord. Heb. on the Lord. Not in any creature. Faith, and confidence
shoud have no meaner object, then God. For the word see on Chap. 1.7.

With all. See on Chap. 1.13.

Thine heart. Not in word only, but in truth: not in part, but wholly. Not
partly on Gods care, and partly on thine own wit; but altogether on him. For
Heart, see on Chap. 2.2.

And lean not. As a man leans upon a staff to support him from falling.
Presume not upon thine own wit. Trust not to it.

Unto thine own understanding. Think not thy self so wise, that thou know
all means of providing good things, or freeing from evil. Some restrain it to
carnal wisdom, which is corrupt, and sinful. But it reaches also to natural
wit, deep reach, and policy: which though it may lawfully be used, ye^ must it
not be rested upon, so as to disparage Gods overruling providence. He mentions
only wisdom, or understanding, because men are more ready to lean to that,
then to strength or riches. Yet these are excluded all so figuratively here,
and expressly in other places of scripture from being objects of our confidence:
neither must a man rest on any of them any more, then on understanding. And
less reason to trust on them, for wit can do no more in war, or peace, then
strength, or riches. For the word see on Chap. 1.2. The sum is, Take heed thou
be not high-minded, because of men's favor, nor arrogate too much to thy self,
because of thy subtle pate: but think meanly of thy self, and trust in God, not
faintly, nor in part, but with thy whole heart, and soul.

Figures. 1. A metaphor from an old, or sick man leaning on his staff, who
else must fall intimating, that if all our trust be not in God, we are sure to
perish. Lean not, etc.

2. A figure of the part for the whole, The understanding for all things, that
men use to rely on, besides God.

Note. 1. An injunction.

2. An inhibition.

In the injunction observe.

1. An act. Trust.

2. An object. In the Lord.

3. The manner, With all thine heart.

In the inhibition note.

1. The act prohibited. And lean not.

2. The Object. To thine own understanding.

1. Doct. Our happiness is not from our selves, but from God. Else needed we
not trust in him. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy
help, Hos. 13.9. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God, that shows mercy. Romans 9.16.

Reason. 1. It is not from our selves.

1. Because our unhappiness is from our selves, therefore our happiness is
not. No Foun tain can both yield falt water, and sweet. Iam. 3.12. A bad
husband that wastes all, cannot make himself rich.

2. We irrecoverably undo our own selves in regard of our own help. We are not
like a man, that makes himself lame, or sick, and may heal himself again, but
like a man that puts out his eyes, or kills himself, who cannot recover his
sight or life. It is from God.

1. Because no earthly creature can give happiness. Nil dat, quod non hab^t.
Nothing can give what it has not. If the conduit pipe has no water, it can
give no water.

2. No heavenly creature can give it, for they are like standing pooles,
top-ful of water, not like well-springs running over. Therefore God must give
it, or we can never have it.

Use 1. Seek not for happiness in any thing in your power, as in honor,
wealth, pleasure: this is but to wash a black. Moor.

2. Seek to God for it, if you desire it, you must mount above earth and
heaven, and sue to the throne of Grace for it, or never have happiness.

Doct. 2. God is the only object of safe confidence. O Lord of hosts, blessed
is the man that trusts in thee. Psalm. 84.12. Put not your trust in Princes,
nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help. Happy is he that has the God
of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Psalm. 146.3, 5.

Reas. 1. Because all other confidence may fail us in some cases; as in
deliverance from sin, pangs of conscience, hour of death and hell: put men or
angels to it, they are at a stand, they can go no-further then natural
strength, fense, or reason will reach, and all these are infinitely short in the
former cases: if they had power, yet would fail sometimes, they might be so
provoked, they would not do what they could, nor what they promised.

2. There is no case, in which God cannot, or will not help his: He need not
fail his, because he is omniscient, and omnipotent: He will not, because he is
merciful and true; we are certain, that God will not, nor cannot go against his
promises of provision, and protection, and deliverance, made to his, for he is
the infallible truth, and no power can let him to keep promise: He is the
Almighty, who says, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. Isa.
40.10.

Use 1. Let us not trust in wit, wealth, strength, friends, good intantions,
merits; all these will fail us in things that concern this life, or a better:
As no man can pass the Sea, without a light ship, that can sail over the
waters, for if he walk on them, he will be drowned; so no man can escape perils
of soul and body by his strength, he must have Gods spirit to make him light,
that he may walk on these waters. Macar. Hom. 44.

2. Let us take notice, that all our strength is in God, in whom we may
securely trust, and not in our own prudence, or ought else. Among the first
precepts of wisdom, humility is commended, and confidence in God, whom to
have always before our eyes, and to call for his help is the highest wisdom,
as on the contrary, to lean to our own prudence is the greatest folly. For what
have thou that thou did not receive? 1 Cor. 4.7. Let us use means, but place
all our trust in God, when all means in heaven and earth fail us, he will supply
us. If a man had a ship with sails, mariners, all provisions needful, yet if
the wind fail, he cannot go on in his voyage. If that serve, worse tackling will
serve. So nothing can do good without Gods blessing, any thing will do good with
it. Basil. Hom. de spirit. Sanct. Deo dante nil potest livor, eo negante nil
potest labor. Greg. Naz. If God give, envy cannot hinder, if he deny, labor
cannot further. Elinandus, Lib. 4. mentions a tree, which protected creatures
from Dragons while they were under the shadow of it, but when they went out,
they were devoured. An emblem of Gods providence. He that dwells in the most
secret place of the most high, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
Psalm. 91.1. Valerius Maximus, lib. 3. c. de fiducia, reports, that one telling
a soldier, going to war against the Persians, that they would hide the Sun
with their Arrows, he answered, We shall fight bast in the shade. Trust God
for deliverance from troubles, and supply of help, when all means fail, he
never fails his: confidence is the least, and yet the best we can render to the
Lord; for hereby we acknowledge his sovereignty, and as it were, set the crown
upon his head, if we put trust in his shadow. Judge. 9.15. Remember then that of
the Prophet, In quietness, and in confidence shall be your strength. Isa.
30.15. And that of the Psalmist, They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount
Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever. Psalm. 125.1.

Doct. 3. God must be rested on heartily. My heart trusted in him. Psalm. 28.7.

Reas. 1. Because God knows the heart, which men does not.

2. If we only make shows of trusting in him, he will only make shows of
helping us, but fail us, as we do him. He will do to men as they believe. Mat.
8.13.

Use 1. To show us that there are but a few that trust in the Lord as they
ought, for the greatest part of the World, set their hearts on other things, by
reason of their ignorance of the insufficiency of all creatures, and contempt
of Gods word, which abundantly sets forth the sufficiency of the Almighty. The
heart rules our words and deeds, and therefore an heartlesse profession of
trusting in God is to no purpose.

2. Look that your confidence in God be hearty, and sincere, else look for no
good from God; if you question his sufficiency, or fidelity, you shall get no
good by either.

Doct. 4. God must be rested on entirely, and universally. Blessed is the man
that makes God his trust. Psalm. 40.4. Thou art my hope O Lord God, thou art my
trust from my youth. ^^al. 72.5. To such as trust in God wholly, God is made
their trust, and is their trust.

Reas. Because God will have all or none, as in our love, which must be with
all the heart, all the soul, and all the mind. Mat. 22.37. And with all our
service, Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Mat. 6.24. So with all our confidence,
and in all things: He will allow no partner, but will be trusted in alone, and
will not give kis glory to another, Isa. 42.8. nor have his sole-sufficiency
questioned.

Use. See your confidence be not divided, part on God, part on men; such a
confidence may keep you from the Lions, 2 King. 17.25. but it cannot keep you
out of hell. An house built partly on firm ground, partly on sand, or propt on
one side, not on the other will fall. To trust on God then, is to be unbottomed
of thy self, and of every creature, and so to lean upon God, that if he fail
thee, thou sinkest.

Doct. 5. Selfe-confidence cannot stand with trusting in God. Solomon makes an
opposition here between leaning on our understanding, and trusting in the Lord.
Say not in thine heart, my power, and the might of my hand has gotten me this
wealth. But Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives
their power to get wealth. Deuteronomy. 8.17.18. Cursed be the man that trusts in
man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the Lord. Jer.
17.5.

Reas. 1. Because it undermines our trust in God. For while we think we have
help in our selves sufficient, we think it needless to look for help from God.

2. It opposes trusting in God; selfe-confidence is an act of pride, trusting
in God is an act of humility. We conceive God an enemy naturally, and who will
trust in an enemy?

Use. It shows us the way that ruins many, that we may avoid it; they trust
in themselves, and cannot help themselves; and God will not help them, because
they trust not in him.

Doct. 6. It is a dangerous thing for the wisest man in the world to trust in
his own brain. Witness Achitophel, whose policy brought him to hang himself, 2 Samuel 17.23.

Reas. 1. Because it is a staff of reed, which will both fail and hurt; as a
man, or house falling, when staff or props fail, are left helpless, and hurt
themselves or others.

2. This was the great cause of Idolatry, leaving scripture direction, and
leaning to selfe-understanding. A refined Idolatry, Saint-worship came in from
Court-state.

Use. Take heed of this Rock of being selfe-conceited, as if thou thoughtst thy
self the wisest man in the world, and all events of thine actions depended on
thy brain: What a vanity, madness, dangerous error is it, for a man, mortal,
subject to a miserable life, changeable in Soul and body, laden with so many
sins, in danger of so many temptations, and corruptions, and eternal pains, and
by nature destitute of understanding, to trust to his own skill? He must needs
fall, the fairest blossoms of men's endeavors wither, and the unproblablest
things come to pass, where men trust to their own wisdom: One says of
General Counscels, they seldom were successful, because men came with
confidence, leaning to their own understanding, and seeking for victory rather
then verity. Take then the Apostles counsel, Become a fool that thou may be
wise, 1 Cor. 3.18. A purse full of counters must be emptied, before it can be
filled with gold: A vessel must have water powered out that is in it, before it
can be filled with wine: a Table Book must be cleared of all unprofitable
scriblings, before learned observations can be written in it. Thou must cast
off all self-confidence, before thou can depend on divine providence: Thou
must pull down thy proud sails of self-confidence: else they will sink thee in
a sea of misery.

VERSE 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.
COnfidence on God was required in the last Verse, and that in the heart. Here
homage to God is required, and acknowledgement of him in all our ways. And an
encouraging promise is added of better success, then we could otherwise
expect. God will direct our paths to a better end, then we look for. For the
words.

In all. See on Chap. 1.13. Not in some one way, but in all.

Thy ways. See on Chap. 1.15. Here is meant the actions of our life, in which
we continue, and go on, as travailers in their way. It is seldom used for
thoughts, which are internal, or words, but for deeds, or courses of life in
scripture phrase; Yet is God to be acknowledged in them also.

Acknowledge him. See on Chap. 1.2. on the word, Know. For those whom we will
not acknowledge, we make the world believe, we know them not. Some understand
it of acknowledging God in the beginning of our works, or in the contriving of
them. To acknowledge him, as a Catholic enjoyner, or director, and not to dare
to go about any thing not agreeable to his word, nor in any way disagree able.

To take notice what God appoints to be done, and how, and to what end, and to
proceed accordingly, and commit the success to him, as a servant, or
letter-carrier does his business appointed, not taking care whether it be
likely to prove well or ill. Others understand it of acknowleding God in the
progress of our works. And that either as a perpetual overseer, which will
keep us from evil, and encourage us to good. So God bids Abraham, walk before
me, and be thou perfect. Genesis 17.1. Or as an enabler, without whom we can do
no good, nor get no good by what we do, and therefore pray to him for strength
to do what we undertake, and a blessing upon it: others interpret it of the
success of our works, if it be good, then to acknowledge God the giver of it,
or rewarder. If bad, then to acknowledge God the revenger, if we did ill, or
trier of our graces, if we did well, and speed ill. Under these heads come the
many interpretations of commenters. It is hard to say precisely, which is
intended. I conceive, Not the first, because he speaks not of the preparations
for our journey, but of the journey it self. Nor the last, for that is the end
of the way, not the way it self. Nor the first part of the second
interpretation taking God as an overseer. But the second part of it, looking to
him for all strength, which is a greater acknowledgment of him, as it is more
to enable one to do the work, then to look on, while he does it. Also it
agrees well with what went before. Trust in him only, and no way to thy self,
and so acknowledge all strength to be in him, and seek to him for it. It agrees
well with what follows.

And. That is, Then, when thou have so done, thou may boldly expect a good
issue from him of all thou do according to his will. So this particle is
translated, Then he is gracious unto him. Job 33.24.

He shall direst thy paths. For paths see on Chap. 1.19. on the word ways.
Some understand this of informing men, what they may lawfully do, and what
not. But it is better interpreted of relation to the end. He will make thy
ways to prosper, and give a comfortable success: So that here is not a bare
reward, but a suitable one. Acknowledge thou all thy strength to come from God,
and pray to him to assist thee, and he will bless thy labors, that thou shall
effect more then thou could expect.

Figures. Direct thy paths. A metaphor from a guide, that leads an ignorant man
in a right way to the place, to which he would go, but knows not, how to get
thither.

Note. 1. A precept.

2. A promise.

In the precept observe.

1. The Act. Acknowledge.

2. The Object. Him. The Lord mentioned, ver. 5.

3. The Adjuncts.

1. Of quality. In thy ways.

2. Of quantity. In them all.

In the promise note.

1. The blessing, Gods direction. And he shall direct.

2 The objects, Man's ways. Thy paths.

1. Doct. A good man's life is a journey. It appears by Peter's charge. Dearly
beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts,
which war against the soul. 1 Pet 2.11. It appears also by Paul's profession,
Brethren I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one thing I do,
forgetting those things, which are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things, which are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.13, 14.

Reason. 1. In regard of the beginning of it. It begins as soon as grace is
wrought in the heart. Then comes the first step of our spiritual journey; Paul
converted went immediately about this journey, and conferred not with flesh and
blood to delay him.

In respect of motion. He is ever moving from one good duty to another, as a
traveller from one Town to another.

3. In regard of progress. He grows in knowledge, and grace, as a traveller
daily shortens his journey.

4. In respect of strangeness. Men marvel at a strangers habit, and carriage,
and he at theirs. So in piety. Wicked men think it strange, that godly men run
not with them into the same excess of riot. 1 Pet. 4.4. And godly men marvel
as much at the extravagant courses of wicked men. Paul and Barnabas seeing the
indolatry of the Lystrians rent their cloths, and cry out, saying, Sirs, why do
ye these things? Act. 14.14, 15.

5. In regard of peril. Strangers are exposed to dangers every where. So are
godly men. The Lystrians, that would have worshipped Paul as a God, presently
after at the persuasion of the Antiochians, and Iconians stone him. Act. 14.19.
He might well then by experience say, We must through much tribulation enter
into the Kingdom of God. Act. 14.22.

6. In respect of the aimed-at end, which is some rich, fair, or mart by the
traveller, Heaven by the godly man.

Use 1. Let us resolve to bear all the inconveniences of the way, wants, and
affronts. The end will pay for all.

2. Let us mind our end, and be diligent in our way, that we may be at rest,
and in happiness. So a merchant labors and travells in his youth to have
rest, and wealth in his' age.

2. Doct. A good man has many good actions of several good kinds to do. So a
traveller has fair paths, and foul, green, stony ways, and good store of
each to travel over. Rem. 12. All over contains several duties. The Gospel
teaches us to live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world.
Tit. 2.11.12.

Reason. 1. Many duties to God are to be done, as praying, hearing Gods word,
etc.

2. Many to our selves, as ruling our appetite, and anger.

3. Many to our fellow-travellers the Saints by the use of our spiritual, and
temporal talents.

4. Many to strangers, as worldly men, through whose Country we travel. We
must observe the rules of equity, and charity.

Use 1. Make no account of an idle life on earth. Many actions admit little
rest, as in Governors in War, and peace. An husbandman plows, harrows, sows,
gathers corn, threshes it, finds somewhat to do all the year long.

2. Please thy self with variety of employments. Go from private duties to
public, from common to holy. Thou shall have rest enough in Heaven.

3. Doct. A good man must look up to God for strength in his actions. Make me
to go in the path of thy Commandments. Incline my heart unto thy testimonies.
Psalm. 119.35, 36. Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth: keep the door of my
lips. Psa. 141.3.

Reason. 1. Because the Fountain of all strength is with God. We are too weak
to think of a good work, much more to effect it. This is to acknowledge God in all our ways, when we confess we can do nothing without him, and therefore
must in all things depend upon him, pray to him, and trust in him. Iansenius.

2. Because then we may look for good success, and not else. for God being
neglected will cross and blast our strongest endeavors.

Use 1. Be frequent in prayer to God for a blessing, though thy businesses be
never so well contrived. Else thou will not thrive. If God drive not the
Chariot of the soul, the horses the affections will be too unruly for any man
to guide.

2. If any thing succeed well upon thy hearty prayer, and faithful endeavors,
acknowledge help found from God. So Paul; when he looks upon any good done by
him, straitway cries out, Not I, but the grace of God, which was with me. 1
Cor. 15.10. Let such thoughts be the ballast of the ship to humble thee in
great atchievments. So the Be carries what she gathers, or else little stones
upon her wings, that the wind blow her not away. So Paul and Barnabas call men
off from worshipping them to worship God. Act. 14.15. Ambros. Gregory on Revel.
3.10. sets out well the humility, and thankfulness of the Elders, Sibi
victorias non attribuunt, sed totum Deo ascribunt, qui vires ipsis ad vincendum
suggessit. They do not attribute their victories to themselves, but ascribe all
to God, who, gave them strength to overcome Pliny reports, that the Roman
General after a Victory, brought in his Garland, and laid it in Jupiters lap
in the Capitol. David does the like, speaking of his great preparations for
the building of Gods Temple, Who am I, and what is my People, that we should be
able to offer so willingly after this sort? for all things come of thee, and of
thine own have we given thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. He ascribes all to the true God.
Non magnum est humil^m esse in abjestione, sed magna prorsus, and rara virtus
humilitas honorata. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 33. It is no great matter to be humble
in a low estate, but it is certainly a great, and a rare virtue for men in
honor to be humble. Non mirum est, si ventus pulverem secum ferat, and rapiat;
Nos pulvis sumus. Anselm. de solitudine. No wonder, if the wind carry and
snatch away the dust with it. We are dust.

4. Doct. A good man must seek for strength from God, not in some of his
actions alone, but in all, even in the least. Without me ye can do nothing.
Ioh. 15.5.

Reason. The strength to do the least things is from God, even to breath. He
gives to all life, and breath, and all things. Act. 17.25. And he can take it
away, when he please, and so spoil all our actions. His breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. Psalm. 146.4.

Use. It reproves those, who pray not to God for a blessing on their ordinary
labors. Only they seek unto him in difficult cases, when they are at their
wits end, as Seamen pray in a storm. Psalm. 107.27, 28. It may be they pray not,
before they work, and therefore God lets them be forty years, as the Israelites
in the Wilderness, about that which might be done in forty days.

5. Doct. Such as seek for Gods help may expect Gods blessing. Cail upon me in
the day of trouble. I will deliver thee. Psalm. 50.14. Jabez called on the God
of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my
coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou would keep me
from evil, that it may not grieve me. And God granted him, that which he
requested 1 Chronicles. 4.10.

Reason. 1. He will make thy ways right.

2. He will make them full, and complete.

3. He will make them successful.

Use. See the reason, why many men's ways prosper not. They go on in their own
strength. God is not in all their thoughts. Ps. 10.4. So Pharaoh went
desperately into the Sea, and was drowned. Ps. 136.15. They seek not for
strength from God, and God will not bless them.

6. Doct. The chief director of our ways for good is God. I have raised him up
in righteousness, and I will direct his ways: he shall build my City. Isa.
45.13. I will direct their work in truth. Isa. 61.8.

Reason. 1. Because the wisest man in the world cannot direct his own ways so,
as to make them always succeed well. O Lord I know that the way of man is not
in himself: it is not in man, that walks, to direct his steps. Ier. 10.23.

2. God has wisdom enough to guide us through all difficulties.

Use. Do nothing without Gods direction in his word. A man that had an house to
build, would in all things follow the direction of a skillful workman, lest he
lose his cost. So let us follow Gods guidance. Else all our labor is lost.
None desires to go astray out of his way, except he be first gone out of his
wits. Every man will rather take a guide to directhim the right way, and give
money to that end. If we be careful to acknowledge God in our ways, we shall
not wander out of them, for we shall have a trusty guide, who offers himself
freely in the Text, to direct our paths. God led the Israelites through the
wilderness, not the shortest but the safest way; So will God do for all them
that make him their guide. The Athenians conceived that their Goddess Minerva
turned all their evil counsels into good to them: the Romans thought their
Goddess Videlia set them again in the right way, when at any time they were
out. All this, and more then is undoubtedly done by the true God, for all that
commit their ways unto him, and depend upon him for direction and success.
Then may we conclude, This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our
guide even unto death. Psalm. 48.14.

VER. 7. Be not wise in thine own eyes, fear the Lord, and depart from evil.
IN this verse is a scale of duties, consisting of three steps, Man's forsaking
his own wisdom, leads him to the fear of God; and the fear of God keeps him
from sin. A promise of health follows in the next verse; for the words, Be not
wise, See on Chap. 1.5. In thine own eyes. See on Chap. 1.17. on the word
sight. For the phrase, being wise in our own eyes, is being so in our own
conceit, as the Doway Bible reads it; and it comprehends these particulars
under it, that a man should not think himself sufficiently wise, so as by that
he should be able to guide himself in all his actions, to know what is right,
what wrong, what success will follow, good, or bad, and that he has a deeper
reach then other men, and is able to dive into the greatest matters. Solomon
does not say, be not wise, for then should he contradict other scriptures, and
himself too, that bid us labor for wisdom; his meaning is not then, that we
should not seek to understand scripture, and to be able to give a reason of all
we do, and know, when we judge aright of things, and when not; for that were to
make a man a beast, but that he should not think himself wiser then other
godly men, nor at any time oppose his own wisdom to God, and take heed always,
that his judgment be not blinded by natural ignorance, or self-love, it
differs a little from leaning to our own understanding. Verse 5. This is the
cause, that the effect, we lean to our own understanding, because we are wise
in our own eyes. This is in the judgment, that in the affection of confidence;
this is Theorical, that is Practical. There may also be a Meiofis in it: think
meanly of thy self, take notice of thine own ignorance, and think other men
wiser then thy self.

fear the Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

And depart. The word signifies, to turn away from a thing which a man dislikes.

From evil. It is put, 1. for evil of sin, which is the cause; 2. of trouble
which is the effect: He that avoides the first, shall escape the last; the first
is here meant. See more on Chap. 1.33.

Figures. In thine own eyes. 1. A metonymie of the cause for the effect. In
thine eyes; that is, in thy sight. So it is translated, Chap. 1.17. in the
sight of any bird. Heb. in the eyes; as the margin there shows: and so it
might have been translated here. 2. A metaphor. In thy sight: that is, in thy
judgment. For the judicial faculty is the eye of the Soul: The Soul passes
sentence on things by judgment, as the body by sight: so Gods eyes are on good
men, though poor. I will look to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit.
Isa. 66.2. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous. Psalm. 34.15. So are
David's. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land. Psalm. 11.1.6. It
signifies approbation. Depart. A metaphor from a traveller, that being in a
wrong way, leaves it, to go in a right path: So must we leave those sinful
ways, in which we walk naturally. Note, 1. A lesson of humility; 2. of the
fear of God; 3. of avoiding evil. In each of these is an act, and an object; in
the first, the act is, Be not wise, the object, in thine own eyes. In the
second, the act, Fear; the object, the Lord. In the third, the act, And depart;
the object, from evil.

Doct. 1. A good man should look into his own condition, to know the truth of
it; else, he may soon think better of himself, then there is cause. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.

Reas. 1. Because there is a difference of men's conditions, else no need of
search: Some are in the broad way to hell, others in the narrow way to heaven.

2. We are all naturally in the worst condition, and should therefore take
notice of it, and seek to get out of it.

3. It may be doubtful whether we be out of it or no, because of the likeness
between common and saving graces. There is in wicked men sometimes, some kind
of repentance, and faith. There is a way which seems right unto a man, but
the end thereof are the ways of death. Chap. 14.12. Try which is right.

4 It is a difficult thing to discern, for a wicked man may go far in outward
performances, and forward profession.

Use 1. To tax all such as have no mind to look into their spiritual
condition; they are forward to cast up their books to know their temporal
estates, and upon every distemper to advise with the Physician, for their
bodies, for fear of a disease breeding in them; only the poor soul is
neglected: we fear such as eat and drink any thing, and have no regard of diet,
that they will be sick; and such as love not to look into their debt-bookes,
that they will be bankrupts: So we may fear, that they are yet in their natural
estate, that look not whether they be out of it or no.

2. To exhort us to be more diligent to search out our spiritual, then our
worldly, or bodily condition, that we may not be deceived in our selves. To
move us to seek to know our spiritual condition truly, let us think of these
motives.

1. That the spiritual estate is best; we look more after health then wealth,
because the body is better then the estate; the Soul is much more better then
the body.

2. Because it is a more lasting estate. Every man prefers a see-simple, before
a lease: Heaven lasts longer then any feesimple, infinitely more then it does
beyond a lease. Follow then Master Greenhams counsel, Of all prisoners, often
visit thine own soul.

Doct. 2. A good man should not think highly of himself. David did not; he
professed as much before God; Lord, my hear is not haughty, nor mine eyes
lofty; neither do I exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high
for me. Psalm. 131.1. He would keep none such in his house. Him that has a high
look, and a proud heart will I not suffer. Psalm. 101.5.

Reas. 1. Because an high conceit of our own wisdom and parts, cannot stand
with the fear of God, which is required in this verse: And therefore this it
set before it, as a removal of a great let of it, which i^ self liking; It will
never agree with Gods fear, which among other grounds, arises out of the sight
of our own vileness, compared with Gods greatness and Majesty: such an opinion
then of our own wisdom would make us rebels against God, and disobedient.

2. It cannot agree with departing from evil, which also is required in this
verse, for it makes men secure in their actions, not trying them before hand,
whether they be good or evil, because we trust too much to our own wisdom, and
so bring them not to Gods Law to be examined, which is the only true
touchstone. Also it will make a man seek out witty shifts and devices, to
excuse his sins, that so he may continue in them. So the Pharisees had their
Corban to bring in gain from children by neglect of Parents. Mark 7.11.12.

3. It shows and upholds ignorance in a man. It shows it, because wisemen
discern their ignorance, but fools see it not. Menedemus aiebat multos
navigare Athenas, qui primum essent sapientes, deinde fieri sapientiae
amatores, deinde Rhetores, postremo idiotas. In Philosophia quo magis
profeceris, eo minus turgebis fastu. Plutarch. ut a Maximo citatur. Sermon. de
ignorantia. Menedemus said, that many sailed to Athens, who first were wise,
(to wit, in their own eyes) and after that became lovers of wisdom, then
Orators, and last of all Idiots (they faw their own folly, which they could
not discern before.) In Philosophy, by how much the more you profit, the less
will you swell with pride. It upholds ignorance, because he that thinks
himself wise, thinks it a base and unbeseeming thing to learn of others.
Familiariter domestica aspicimus, and semper judicio favor officit; puto multos
potuisse ad sapientiam pervenire, nisi putassent se pervenisse. Quis unquam
sibi ipsi verum docere ausus est? Quis inter blandientium, adulantiumque
positus greges plurimum tamen sibi ipsis assentatus non est? Senec. de ira.
lib. 3. c. 36. We look familiarly at things at home, and favor always hinders
judgment. I suppose that many might have attained to wisdom, had they not
thought they had attained it already. Who ever durst teach himself truth? Who
being placed among the flocks of fawning and flattering companions, has not
yet most of all flattered himself? And therefore Solomon here desiring to have
his precepts regarded, persuades the young man not be wise in his own eyes.

4. It is the cause of all errors and heresies, the broachers whereof are
observed in Ecclesiastical histories to be learned men, proud of their wisdom,
and in his qui sibi credunt, Demon saepe propheta fit. Climachus. Grad. 3. In
them, that believe themselves, the devil oftentimes becomes a Prophet. Many
professing themselves to be wise, became fools. Romans 1.22. Therefore
Chrysostom compares the heart of a man wise in his own conceit, to a
labyrinth; his own good opinion of himself leads him into it, but there are so
many wanderings and turnings of error in it, that he knows not how to get out
of it. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in Epist. ad Romans

Us. 1. To reprove such as are guilty of this overweening conceit of their own
wisdom, and so sooth up themselves in ignorance and evil. Nunquam satisfacit
arti cui semper artificium satisfacit. He never does things well, that is
always pleased with what he does. This cursed self-love infects our souls with
the dangerous plague of pride. Every man, though a fool, thinks himself wise
naturally; this engenders in him a great contempt of other men. Bis desipit qui
sibi sapit. He is twice a fool that thinks himself wise. This self conceit
spoils all. Socrates was esteemed the wisest of men, because he said, hoc
scio, quod nihil scio; This I know, that I know nothing. Consilii satis in me
mihi. I know well enough how to advise my self, may be the proud fools posy.
He that will be wise must become a fool that he may be wise. 1 Cor. 3.18. Intus
existens prohibet alienum A conceit of wisdom, bars out wisdom. Socrates was
wont to say, if a crier should call all Tailors, and Shoo-makers in a company
to rise, they would rise, and other tradesmen would sit still; but if he should
bid all wisemen rise, no body would sit still. The heathen man, Cicero could
say, Est illud maximum animo ipso animum videre; It is the greatest matter by
the soul it self, to see the soul. As it is an hard matter by the Suns light to
see the Sun, it is easier to discern other things by it. Simonides hearing a
man brag of his wisdom, bid him remember that he was a man. Take the Apostles
counsel then, Be not wise in your own conceits. Romans 12.16. Fear the woe of the
Prophet, woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their
own sight. Isa. 5.21. In the next Verse. He sends forth another woe against
drunkards. Woe unto them, that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink. Isa. 5.22. As if men selfconceited were spiritually drunk.
Remember that of Augustine, Qui sibi placet stulto placet. He that pleases
himself, pleases a fool.

Use 2. Labor to cure this pride, and self-love, that makes thee think highly
of thy self. To this purpose,

1. Measure thy thoughts by Scripture, that is, thy wisdom by Gods. Then thou will see, that thou art a fool.

2. Distrust thine own judgemnt, and be willing to hear other men's of every
thing propounded. Moses was taught by God, yet was he content to hear Jethro;
and think thou, that thou have need to hear no body? He is wise in his own
eyes, who hearkens not to those, that rightly admonish him.

3. Examine thine actions past. Respice velut in speculo actiones tuas, ut
bonas augeas, and ornes, malas corrigas, and retractes Bias. Look back upon
thine actions as in a glass, that thou may increase, and adorn the good,
and correct, and retract the bad. Then will thou not be wise in thine own eyes.

3. Doct. A good man should think very meanly of himself, and of his own
wisdom. So did Paul, We know in part, we see through a Glass darkly. 1 Cor.
15.9.12. So did Agur, Surely I am more brutish then any man, and have not the
understanding of a man. Prove. 30.2.

Reason. Because as in natural things men are not born workmen, so much less
in Divinity, and things of God. Men that are quicksighted in other things, are
bleareyed in these. The best has cause enough to think lowly of themselves.

Use. Acknowledge then your own ignorance, and be humble.

4. Doct. A good man must nourish the fear of God in his soul. The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of knowledge. Chap. 1.7. See this Doctrine more largely
handled there. And unto man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom. Job. 28.28. This is true wisdom, and who would not be wise?

Reason. 1. Because there is abundant cause in God, why we should fear him. He
is to be feared, for his truth, justice, power, wisdom, greatness goodness.

2. Much good comes to us by it. It guides us aright in our journey to Heaven,
as a rider guides the horse, or as a Pilot guides the ship, and prevents ma^^
dangers in the way, as a watchman on a Tower. It is in the heart of the Text
here, and is a way to make us think meanly of our selves, as it did Joseph, It
is not in me. Genesis 41.16. And it will also keep us from evil, as it did to
Joseph, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God. Genesis 39.9.

Use. See ye always fear to offend God. A reverend and religious man had
written in his study, Noli peccare: Nam Deus videt, Angeli astant, diabolus
accusabit, conscientia testabitur, infernus cruciabit. Sin not; For God sees,
Angels stand by, the Devil will accuse, thy conscience will bear witness,
Hell will torment thee. Blessed is the man that fears always. Chap. 28.14.
Carnal security is naught in worldly affairs, but worst of all in matters of
religion. If ye fear him not here in time, ye must feel him in Hell to eternity.

5. Doct. A godly man must take heed of every sin, and make a total departing
from evil. Depart from evil. Psalm. 34.14. Cease to do evil. Isa. 1.16.

Reason 1. Because it is the beginning of true obedience to avoid disobedience,
as of wisdom to get away foolishness. Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia
prima Stultitia caruisse: Virtue it is to fly vice, and the beginning of
wisdom to be without folly. (...) Basil. The be ginning to the receiving of
good things is the departing from evil things. If men can keep their unruly
affections from doing evil, they will be ready to do good. Fight then daily
against sin, for this is an honest, and necessary War.

2. It is a notable proof, and effect of the fear of God, if it be general,
so that we endeavor to refrain from all evil in thought, word, and deed.

Use. Take heed then of those baits, that lead thee to thy former sins, or any
other, lest thou be ensnared, and fall into new sins, or relaps into old.

6. Doct. We naturally choose sinful ways. Else the wise man would not bidus
to depart from them. In time past ye walked according to the course of this
Would. We all had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh
fulfilling the desires of the flesh. Ephesians. 2.2, 3. The Gentiles walk in the
vanity of their mind, and have given themselves over unto lasciviousness to
work all uncleanness with greediness. Ephesians. 4.17.19. We our selves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. Tit. 3.3.

Reason. 1. Because we have no better light to guide us, then corrupted reason,
which is but moonshine at the most, and cannot serve well for curious works
becoming the day.

2. Because even then also our corrupt affections oversway our judgments, and
lead us to many evils, which the light of nature condemns.

Use. Let us be always suspicious of our selves in all our ways. Naturam
expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Nature will return, though driven out
with a pitchfork. Quo semel est imbut a recens servabit odorem Testa diu. What
savor the Vessel receives at first, it will keep long, Corruption will strive
with grace, and sometime overcome it: Therefore take heed of sinful ways
betimes, lest ye repent too late.

VERSE 8. It shall be health to thy Navell, and Marrow to thy bones.
THE promise follows to encourage us to the performance of the duties in the
last Verse before. Some conceive it to be meant of spiritual health and
strength, that under bodily health should be covered, and signified a right
disposition of the soul. Others think prosperity of a man's estate to be
shadowed out by it. I take it plainly for a promise of bodily health, for such
did God give to his people plentifully in those younger times of the Law,
whereas the Gospel is more full of promises of spiritual things. Some join
this promise to Verse 5, 6, 7. as if God should promise those that acknowledge
him in all their ways not only to direct them in right paths, but also to
give them health and strength to walk wisely in those paths. But they must
remember, that this promise is made to other good duties. Verse 7. The sum is,
humility, fear of God, and avoiding evil will bring bodily health. For the
words.

It shall be, or So there shall be. The former directions observed, shall bring
health, and strength. (...) Health. A recovery, or preservation from all
sicknesses, and infirmities, which the want of those former duties had, or
might bring upon thy body. So the word signifies, coming from another word that
signifies to heal, as health does in English. It shall be healthful to thee.

To thy navil. The child is nourished by the navil in the womb, and it knits
the upper and lower parts together, and plasters laid to it, cure many
maladies, especially in little children. By the navil here may be meant all the
internal soft parts of the body; as the heart, liver, lungs; if these be well,
the body is likely to be in health, and strength; else it is sickly and weak.

And marrow. Heb. Watering and moistning. For dry bones without marrow argue
weakness, full ones argue strength.

(...) To thy bones. The bones are the supporters of the body, if they fail all
falls, as the house falls with the pillars. And as the bones grow bigger or
longer, so does the body Albert, l. 16. de anima libus, especially if those
bones be full of marrow, as in great fat Oxen. Aristot. lib. 4. de animal. But
when the bones are full of wind, not of marrow, then they break in pieces.
Avicen. So sickness comes. By the bones here may be meant, all the harder and
firmer parts of the body. The bones have their names from strength, for indeed
they are the strongest parts of the body; or by the navil may be meant the
external part, the flesh of the body, which is knit together by the navil, as
with a button; and by the bones, the internal parts unseen, and by health in
the navil, the health of the whole body; by marrow in the bones, the strength
of it. The sum then is, that the former virtues mentioned, verse 7. will keep
the whole body in perfect health, for when both these parts are well, all is
well: For our health depends upon the tender parts, which are vital, and the
bones, which are the pillars of the body. So the strength of Behemoth, is in
his navil, and in his bones, His force is in the navil of his belly, his bones
are as strong pieces of brass, his bones are like bars of Iron. Job 40.16.18.

Figures. It shall be health and marrow. It shall procure health and strength. A
metonymie of the effect for the cause, Navil, and Bones, for all the tender and
hard parts of the body. Synech. Membri. or for the whole body, of the outward
parts, whereof the navill is the center, and of the inward, whereof the bones
are the circumference,

Note. 1. A promise of health.

2. Of strength.

In the first,

Note. 1. The gift, It shall be health.

2. The object, To thy navil.

In the second,

Note. 1. The gift, and marrow, that is, strength; for without it, the
strongest bones consume.

2. The object, to thy bones.

Doct. 1. A godly life is the best Physic to preserve the body in health and
strength. Alas, ficknesse came after his distrusting God, and sending the gold
of the Temple to Benhadad, and imprisoning the Seer, 2 Chronicles. 16. How should
one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the Lord had shut them up? Deuteronomy. 32.30. If thou will give ear to
the commandments of the Lord, I will put none of those diseases upon thee,
which I have brought upon the Egyptians for I am the Lord that heals thee.
Exodus 15.26.

Reas. 1. Because it is the safest Physic to prescribe: there may be danger in
purges, and vomits, they may kill in stead of healing. But there is no danger
in a godly life, no such man ever miscarried.

2. It is the easiest to take by them that are godly. My yoke is easy, and my
burden is light. Mat. 11.30. To some natures pills go so hardly down, they will
rather adventure a dying then take them: But to good men, Gods Physic is very
pleasing.

3. It works kindliest: some physic works so strongly, it makes men deadly
sick, before it heal them; this pleases a good man in the working, he likes
the very motions and endeavors of good.

4. It is the surest in operation. Sin hinders bodily Physic, and many a
poor man fearing God, recovers of dangerous Sicknesses without it.

5. It is the best Physic. Some things are good Antidots, that are not good
recoverers: Some things good cordials, that are not good purges, and so
contrary. This is all, Antidotes, Purges, Cordials, Cure, and all; it supplies
all to the body to many a poor godly man, that cannot go to the cost of
Physic, yet through Gods mercy this heals them.

6. It makes the most lasting cure; it may be bodily Physic may work more
speedily, but the party may fall into a relaps and die, but this cure lasts
longest, and in the end cures for good and all. Job marvailes at the fat and
strength of the wicked. Job 21.7.8. Wherefore do the wicked live, become old,
yea, are mighty in power? etc. So does Asaph. Their eyes stand out with
fatness. Psalm. 73.7. etc. Yet he saw, they were set on slippery places, etc.
verse 18. There is great odds between a Bullock, kept well for labor, and an
Ox fatted for the slaughter; and between a body fat and flourishing by good
meat, and an other swelled with tumors by bad. So Joshua and Caleb died in
Canaan in a good old age, who obeyed God, when thousands of Rebels died in the
Wilderness.

Use 1. To reprove those that spend much money in Physic, and yet overthrow
the health and strength of their bodies by sinful courses: they forget the
Text, A godly life is health to the navil, etc.

2. To persuade us to use this new prescript for bodily health: Most men love
to try new medicines; yet this new (perhaps to us) is as old as Solomon, and
has found many a probatum est, both in Scripture, and in after times.
Physicians need not be angry with me for this prescript, for God would have
their art used also, but this never to be neglected. There is none of us, but
if we were assured the Physicians potion would heal, would take it, though
troublesome and hard. We are wont to say, There is nothing but I will do it, so
I may recover health. Use this direction, and thou shall be sure either to have
health here, or happiness in heaven.

Doct. 2. Health is a great blessing. It is the first question we ask
concerning our friends, Art thou in health my brother? 2 Samuel 20.9. Is he well?
Genesis 29.6. It is the answer to the same question, Thy servant, our father is in
good health, Genesis 43.28.

Reason. 1. No other earthly comfort is pleasing without it. We take no
content in friends, children, wealth in sickness.

2. The contrary shows it. Great and lasting diseases are very burdensome.

Use. Praise God for it, that thou lie not groaning in thy bed sick of the
stone, or gout, or some other painful disease, but art able to go about thy
business, and take comfort in thine. Remember it is a great mercy and
undeserved; be thankful for it, and walk worthy of it.

3. Doct. Bodily strength is a great blessing. It is commended in David's
worthies, and in Sampson.

Reason. 1. It serves for a man's own defense. The weakest goes to the wall.

2. For the defense of our Country, which would be overrun by cruel enemies,
if stout soldiers did not defend it.

Use. It is then lawful to pray for strength of body, so it be with
submission to the will of God.

4. Doct. The more full our health, and strength is, the greater is the
blessing. His hand was restored whole as the other. Mar. 3.5. Immedintely the
man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked. Ioh. 5.9. Are ye angry at
me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day? Ioh. 7.23.

Reason. Because it is so in all blessings spiritual, and corporeal: The
greater measure, the greater blessing, if not abused.

Use Let such as have complete health, and strength, endeavor to do God more,
and greater service, then weaker men. Else have they a greater account to give
of these Talents.

VERSE 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first fruits of all
thine increase.
IN this Verse is a costly commandment for the maintenance of Gods worship more
heavy then the former, because it touches the purse. And lest men should think
that the way to beggar themselves, as many do, he adds a suitable reward.
Verse 10. a great, and unlooked for increase. So much does Gods judgments
differ from man's.

For the words.

Honor. Show that due respect thou owe to God. Our cost for Gods worship must
not be done for by-ends, or that we may get glory, but that God may be
honored. And indeed, though God need it not, nor we can add nothing to him
thereby; yet God counts himself honored not only by our humble confession of
our own folly, and confidence in his bounty spoken of before, but also by using
those outward means, which God gives us, to maintain his worship, and service.
In maintaining whereof seek his praise, not (thine) else he accounts, thou
do not honor him, but thy self.

The Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

With thy substance. With thy wealth. For the word see on Chap. 1.13. Bain an
English man, a Cambridge Scholar, but professor at Paris accurately
distinguishes between (...) substance, and (...) increase. The former
signifies Wealth, as Gold, and Silver, which we do not use immediately for
food, or apparel; and increase intends the yearly income of corn, cattle,
fruit. All these are Gods blessings, and God must be honored with them all.
But it must be thy substance; not other men's, gotten by thy labor, or by gift,
or inheritance, not by defrauding or oppressing others.

And with the first fruits. See on Chap. 1.7. on the word Beginning. It is the
same word (...) in the original. It may be taken for the first, or for the
best of our crops, or Harvest.

Of all. Not of some. See on Chap. 1.13.

Thy increase. For the word see on the words before in this Verse. With thy
substance. Some bring in here giving to the poor, and the vulgar Bible very
boldly adds it in the Text, Dapauperibus, Give to the poor of the first of all
thy corn, or fruits. But the translator forgot, that all the first fruits were
for Aaron and his sons, and for them to eat, Numb. 18.9, 10. And the poor might
no more eat of them, then the rich. And here it is worth the noting, that the
Doway Popish English translation, the Ape of the vulgar for the most part here
leaves it, and reads, Give to him, that is, to the Lord. Here it is meant of
Leviticall dues at the time of the writing of it, as tithes in the beginning of
the Verse, and first fruits in the end of it. And by the rule of equity
requires cost for the maintenance of Gods worship, and the furtherances of it
under the new Testament. For by these is God more immediately honored, then by
giving to the poor. Thus men do homage to God in paying dues to Gods Ministers
required by the Laws, where they live, and by gifts to pious uses in their
life, or at their death.

Figures none. Note. 1. An Act. Honor.

2. The Object. The Lord.

3. The matter, wherewith God is to be honored, which is double.

1. With thy substance.

2. With the first fruits of all thine increase. In which observe.

1. The Subject. Of thine increase.

2. The Adjuncts.

1. Of quality. With the first fruits.

2. Of Quantity. All.

1. Doct. Men must be at cost to maintain the service God. Bring ye all the
tiths into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house. Mal. 3.10. See
David's resolution; I will not offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my God of
that, which does cost me nothing. 2 Samuel 24.24.

Reason. 1. Because we owe so much to God: Had not he given us bodily members,
and put life into them, and given us reason to guide them, we could never have
been rich. A prentise owes his Wealth originally to his Master, that taught him
his trade, or to his friends, that stocked him. So we owe ours to God, that
gives us life.

2. Because this is a real confession, that we have all from God by a second
donation, who as he gives strength, so he blesses our labors. We cannot make
the Sun to shine, nor rain to fall upon our ground to make our corn grow. All
our labor, and cost is lost, unless God make his Sun to rise, and send rain.
Mat. 5.45. God in the Law had the first fruits, and the tenths afterward to
show, that he gave strength to man, and beast to plow, and sow, and to the
earth to bring forth. He gives rain, both the former, and the latter in his
season: he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of harvest. Jer. 5.24. Quae
Dei dono accepimus, ad Dei cultum refer debemus, et in ejus opere consumere,
quae ejusdem sumpsimus largitate. Salv. contra avar. l. 1. What we have
received of Gods gift, we must use for Gods worship, and spend that in his
work, which we have gotten from his bounty. Sicut a deo est, quicquid habemus
et sumus, ita in Di cultum expendere debemus. Hilar. As all we have, and are,
is from God, so we ought to expend it on Gods worship. Husbandry, and
Merchandice without Gods blessing are in vain; he gives wind and weather. Deo
negante non proficit labor, eo dante non officit livor. Greg. Nazian. If God
deny, labor cannot further, if be give, envy cannot binder. The Apostles fish
all night in vain, til Christ come, and then they catch a great draught. Luke
5.5.6. Give God then of his own, and make David's confession withal, Of thine
own have we given thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.14. Yet God in mercy calls it ours, to make
us show our love to him as freely, as if it were our own, we give.

3. Because hereby we shall show, that we are willing to give all to God again:
for he that out of love gives much to God, would give all if need so required:
So did the primitive Christians. Neither was there any among them that lacked,
for as many as were possessors of lands, or houses, sold them, and brought the
prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the Apostles feet,
and distribution was made to every man according as he had need. Acts 4.34, 35.

4. Because it is pleasing to God, to see, that we not only give him good
words, but also of our goods: This argues real and strong love to God.

Use 1. To reprove such as will part with nothing for religion, or the service
of God to uphold it; for pleasure, or friends, they will part with any thing,
nothing for God. Si usus rerum cuipiam alterius beneficio tribuatur, isque
imemor illius avertere ab eo proprietatem conetur, noune ingratissimus omnium
hominum, atque infidelissimus judicetur? Sic nos, si usum a Des bonorum
habentes, cum proprietate spoliare conemur. Salv. l. 1. contra avar. If the use
of things be allowed to any man by the benefit of another, and he unmindful of
his benefactor, should endeavor to take away the propriety from him, may he
not be judged the most ungrateful, and unfaithful of all men? So may we, if
having the use of good things from God, we seek to spoil him of his propriety
in them. If a Tenant refuse to pay his rent, he is turned out of doors: So
may, God reenter, if we refuse to maintain his worship. We must lose all when
we die, why do we not leave some to God while we live, before he take all away
by death, which is no thank to us? Let us imitate the Stork, which (as
travelers report) throws one of her young ones down the chimney, for rent to
her Landlord. Worldlings are so wise in their own conceit, that they think it
a good point of policy to pay as little as they can, toward the upholding of
religion; yea, it may be none at all, nor any offerings of a freewill; they
hold, that all is well spared, that is kept back this way, and a great loss to
them and theirs which is given.

Use 2. To exhort us, to be careful for time to come, to be at cost for Gods
service, while we live. Motives ye had before, add that of the Jews (...) No
me at, no law. And that of Chrysostom, take away the oil, and the lamp will
out. particu^lars will follow.

1. We should be free toward the maintenance of Schools and learning. They
that cannot read nor write, how can they know, or teach others how to worship
God? His book is sealed to them, gifts of tongues are ceased, they do not
pretend any thing to them, who claim other extraordinary gifts. Julian the
Apostate is thought to have done more hurt to the Christian Religion, by
forbidding the children of Christians school-breeding, then other heathen
Emperors by fire and faggot.

2. Toward the maintenance of Universities, which stand in stead of the
schools of the Prophets, mentioned 2 King. 2.3.

3. Toward the maintenance of Ministers: these are they whom God trusts with
all his public work, Prayer, Praise, Word, Sacraments; they are taken off from
worldly affairs, to attend on these: Gods public worship sinks, if they sink.
The Papists were very forward to give to maintain Masses, men are not so
forward now to give to maintain Sermons.

4. Toward necessaries for Gods service, as Books, Bread, and Wine, etc.
Sacrifices were much more costly in the old Testament, yet freely and willingly
given by Gods people.

5. Toward Churches and meeting places, where Gods people may conveniently meet
to serve him: these things ought to be done, though no law of man require it,
and in a greater measure then man's law requires; besides enjoined offerings,
God expected free will offerings in the law. It is a shame to see how forward
Papists were to maintain Monasteries, and idle Friars. Inania pondera terra,
the empty burdens of the earth, and how backward. Protestants are to maintain
Gods worship; what men do in this kind, must be done willingly, and cheerfully,
else God regards it not. A cipher added, makes one to be ten. The good-wil of
the poor widow makes her two mites to be more in Christ's account, then the rich
men's great gifts. Luke 21.2.3.

Doct. 2. It is an honor to God for men to be at cost for his service. The
Temple built by Solomon, is said to be built for the name of the Lord God of
Israel. 1 King. 8.20. As niggardliness, in offering the blind and lame in
sacrifice dishonours God, Mal. 1.7.8. so liberality for his service honors him.
Contrariorum contraria est regula, Contraries have contrary rules.

Reas. 1. Because it brings honor to God immediately, for it is an act of
homage, or acknowledging his power over all things in the world.

2. Mediately by maintaining Gods Worship and Ministers, by which he is daily
praised and honored.

Use 1. To reprove such as are niggardly toward pious uses; they not only
hinder religion, but also dishonor God: He can get no good, if we be never so
liberal in this kind, honor is all he looks for from us, and if that be
denied him, he gets nothing by us.

2. To teach us in all our cost for Gods service, to look at Gods honor, not
at our own; his glory should be our principal intention. To encourage us
hereunto, consider, that God takes it as an honor, when we are at cost for his
service, though it be out of his own, and will reward it, as if it were ours,
and as if he got much by it, who indeed gets nothing at all.

Doct. 3. Our cost for Gods service must be out of our own goods, that God has
given us. David says to Ornan, I will not take that which is thine for the
Lord, nor offer burnt offerings without cost. 1 Chronicles. 21.24. Thou shall not
bring the hire of an where into the house of the Lord thy God for any vow.
Deuteronomy. 23.18. Gods service must be maintained out of goods lawfully gotten.

Reason. 1. Because else we do not maintain Gods service our selves, but force
others to do it.

2. Because it is not thank-worthy to give of another man's, no more then to be
patient in deserved troubles. 1 Pet. 2.19.20.

Use. It condemns the cost of many bestowed on Churches, and Lectures, when
they die, out of goods gotten by oppression all their life long. Men cannot buy
out cosenage by giving part to God, I the Lord hate robbery for burnt offering.
Isa. 61.8. When the Athenians demanded money for sacrifices, Pho^ion pointed to
an usurer, to whom he ought money, and said, Puderet me, si v^^is accessiones
cede^em, huic autem sua non readerem. Recuperus. I should be ashamed to add to
your offerings, and not pay this man his own. De substantia aliorum tollere,
and Deo inde afferre non crit utique offerre, sed more latronum Patrocinium
alterius quaerere, and velle Deum violentiae socium facere. Chrysoft. Hom. 43.
To take out of other men's substance and offer thereof to God, is not at all to
offer, but as thieves do, to seek the Patronage of another, and to be willing
to make God a partner in our violence. Eleemos^nam Deus detestatur, quae de
Lachrym^s alienis praestatur. Quid enim praestat, si unus benedicat, ubi plures
maledicunt? August. L. de verb. Dom. God hates an alms, which is given out of
other men's tears. For what gain is it, if one bless, where many curse?

4. Doct. The cost bestowed on Gods worship must be out of all our profit.
Abraham gave Melchizedec tithes of all. Genesis 14.20. Let him that as taught in
the word, communicate unto him, that teaches, in all good things. Gal. 6.6.

Reason. Because all the good things we have come from God: and therefore his
service should fare the better for all.

Use. It reproves those, that care not how little they give for pious uses
living, or dying. They have forgotten above half their lesson. They should
honor God, not with some, but with all their substance. Such as can spend all
on Hawks, Hounds, and Harlots, leave nothing to maintain Gods worship.

5. Doct. God must not lose his part of our first profit. Whatsoever is first
ripe in the land, which they shall bring unto the Lord, shall be thine. Numb.
18.13. So says God to Aaron his Priest.

Reason. Because it is good to remember God in the youth of our gain.

Use. It condemns those, that will give nothing to good uses, till they die,
They are like swine, that never do good alive, and dying give every one a
pudding.

6. Doct. The cost bestowed on Gods service must be out of the best of our
good: All the best of the Oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the wheat,
the first fruits of them, which the, shall offer unto the Lord, have I given
thee. Numb. 18.12. Abe^ brought the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat
thereof, and the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering. Genesis 4.4.
First fruits were most dear, and precious as the first born.

Reason. 1. Because that God, that gives the best, is worthy of the best.

2. To show our willingness in giving to God. Men that willingly send presents
to their friends, send of the best.

Use. To reprove such as think the worst good enough for God, and good uses. Ye
brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; Mal. 1.13. God
requires the best: the world is ungrateful, and hardly affords him the worst
to maintain his worship. They think Gods Ministers are indebted to them for
means, when God says it is his, and men owe it to him, and he requires it for
his Ministers, and worship. The Apostle makes the people the greater debtors,
If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great matter if we shall
reap your carnal things? 1 Cor. 9.11.

VERSE 10. So shall thy barnes be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall
burst out with new wine.
IN this Verse is the suitable, yea, exceeding reward of those, that to their
cost maintain Gods worship. It contains an answer to a secret objection. Many
men are timorous, and fear, lest by this liberality, they should hinder
themselves, and theirs, and not have enough left to maintain them in a
comfortable fashion, and so may be much hindered, yea, it may be want
necessaries for themselves, and after much hard labor for posterity, leave
little to their children. The text answers by adding a sweet promise suitable
to the duty. It shall be so far from diminishing your estate, that God will
fill your barnes, and Winepresses, so that ye shall receive far more then ye
give away. Fear not what shall become of you, your Wives, and Children, God
will give you much more to leave them. Thou needst not suspect, that thy pious
liberality, will bring thee to want: it will rather increase thy wealth, and
fill thee with all things needful, and comfortable. Seeing God cannot well be
honored in the way, that he has appointed without cost, and no charge goes so
near a carnal heart, as that which is spent to maintain Gods worship, by
reason of that natural strangeness, and emnity that is between God us, and
God gives us encouragement to bear this cost by a promise of a greater reward
hyperbolically set out, intimating, that we shall be so far from being
impoverished by it, that we shall grow richer, and have as much corn, as our
barnes can hold, and so much wine, that oue Winepresses, and Vessels cannot
hold it, and other comforts answerable; and this is the sum of this Verse.

Now for the words.

So. Heb. And. Te meaning is Therefore, or for that reason, as that particle
often signifies, and Lira well hints upon the text. Se on Chap. 2.22. on the
word But.

Shall thy barnes. The receptacles of thy Corn, Barnes, or Granaries.

Be filled. More then formerly, so that thine eyes shall see that thy cost
bestowed upon God is not in vain. For the word see on Chap. 1.13.

With plenty. With abundance of Gorn, so that both thine eye and thy belly
shall be satisfied, and thy family plentifully nourished. In a word, Thou shall
have a very plentiful Harvest.

And thy Presses. Thy Winepresses, wherein the grapes are trodden to scruze out
the Wine.

Shall burst out. They shall be so full, that they shall run over. Thou shall
have so great a vintage, that thy Presses, and tubs shall not be able to hold
thy wine. The wine shall burst out of the presses for abundance. The word (...)
signifies

1. To break down a thing, as a wall or the like. A time to break down. Eccl.
3.^.

2. To break out, or make a breach. Hence Pharez had his name. How have thou
broken forth? this breach be upon thee. Therefore his name was called Pharez.
Genesis 38.29.

3. To break forth into plenty, or multitude, as a river overflowing the banks,
or a man having many children. The flould breaks out from the inhabitant,
Job. 28.4. And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shall
spread abroad (Heb. break forth) to the West, and to the East, and to the
North, and to the South, Genesis 28.14.

4. To break out by way of urging, or compelling another. And he urged him. 2
King, 5.28. Here it is taken in the third sense for breaking forth into plenty.

(...) With new wine. It has its name in the original from a word, that
signifies to expel, or possess, for it drives all the wit out of the
drunkards head, and takes possession of the fort of his heart.

Figures. Plenty. Heb. Satifaction, which comes from plenty. A figure of the
effect for the cause. Burst out. That is, run forth, as things do, that break
out. A figure of the cause for the effect. Here is a double promise.

1. Of a plentiful Harvest.

2. Of an abundant Vintage.

In the former note

1. The Subject. So shall thy barnes

2. The Adjunct. Be filled.

3. The Object. With plenty. To wit, of corn, which uses to be lodged in
barnes.

In the latter, note 1. The subject, and thy presses. 2. The adjunct, shall
burst out. 3. The object, with new wine.


Doct. 1. To do, pay, or give what God appoints, is not the way to impoverish
men, but to enrich them. This in general, if man obey Gods commandments,
appears by the blessings following, Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc. whereof these things are
part.

1. If men do what God requires, they lose not by it, as in not hoarding up
corn to make it dear, but selling it. He that witholdeth corn, the people shall
curse him, but blessing shall be on the head of him that sells it. Prove.
11.26. Vox populs, vox Dei, the voice of the people is Gods voice in this kind,
and God will curse them also.

2. In paying dues, and not denying, or putting men to trouble to sue for them.
Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, and I will rebuke the devourer for
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall
your vine cast her fruit before the time in the field, says the Lord of hosts.
Mal. 3.10.11.

3. In giving. The righteous shows mercy, and gives, for such as are blessed
by him, shall inherit the earth. Psalm. 37.21, 22.

Reas. 1. Because of Gods command, who does not use to command his to their
loss; or if to temporal loss, yet he requites it in grace, or in glory. There
is no man that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother,
or wife, or children, or lands for my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall
receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters,
and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to
come eternal life. Mat. 10.29.30.

2. Because of Gods promise, which he never fails to perform, in that kind, or
a better, as in the place last quoted.

3. Experience proves it; we see many blessed outwardly, that are conscionable in
these things, and many undone, that do otherwise.

Use. It condemns those that make no conscience of hoarding up corn, till it
be naught, to the endangering of many men's lives, whose blood they must needs
be guilty of, and though it be the blood of poor men, yet God will require the
blood of poor men, as well as rich: When he makes inquisition for blood, he
remembereth them, he forgets not the cry of the humble. Psalm. 9.12. And such
also are here condemned, as care for paying no debts without suits, nor to part
with any thing for the poor: Oh, say they, what shall our wives and children do,
if we be so free and conscientious? Ans. God will give thee much more: So the
Prophet answers Amaziah, asking, What shall we do for the hundred Talents? the
Lord is able to give thee much more then this. 2 Chronicles. 25.9. All creatures
have gotten much by him, no creature ever lost by him.

Doct. 2. To maintain Religion, and Gods worship with cost, does not impoverish
men, but enrich them. Witness David's costly preparations for building the
Temple, and Selomons great charge in building it. The Jews daily cost in
sacrifices increased rather then diminished their cattle. Since the people
began to bring the offerings into the house of the Lood, we have had enough to
eat, and have left plenty; for the Lord has blessed his people, and that which
is left is this great store. 2 Chronicles. 31.10.

Reas. 1. Because this cost to maintain Gods worship, is a sanctified usury, it
is a disposing of money in a lawful way, with expectation of great gain: other
usury is unlawful, and often hurtful, this is lawful and profitable.

2. Ic is a blessed usury; for as in giving to the poor, men lend unto the
Lord, Prove. 19.17. so in maintaining Gods worship, God is the borrower, and he
uses to pay with increase. Vile est, quod datur, ubi tam grande est, quod
recipitur, That is of little worth which is given, where so great a reward is
received. Salv. contra. avar.

3. It is a politic usury: Gods servants must be wise as serpents. Mat. 10.16.
This is the wisest way to bestow money, and brings in greatest increase, Gods
glory must be our chief end herein, but we may also expect Gods blessing on
our trading in this kind; and Gods people are the more likely to trade with us,
and do us good, if we be at cost for Gods service: which they like as well as
we: but this must be an inferior end, least of all regarded.

Use. To exhort us to exercise this blessed usury, and to think nothing lost,
that is lent to God. Riches and tithes have the same letters in Hebrew, they
differ only by a stop on the top of a letter, as appears in the Hebrew proverb
(...), pay tithes that thou may be rich. Augustine speaking of those who had
their corn smitten with blasting, and mildew, who would not willingly pay their
tithes, says, Reckon now, O covetous wretch: nine parts are withdrawn from
thee, because thou would not give the tenth: And he adds this reason, Dei
enim justa consuetudo est, ut si es decimam non dederis, tu ad decimam
revoceris, novem partibus sc. detractis. For this is Gods just custom, if thou will not give the tenth to him, thou shall be brought to the tenth, nine parts
being taken away. So Landlords enter on all, when their rent is not paid. Men
take care how to use their money to their best advantage by sea, or buying land
or cattle, or by usury, an easy trade: thy best trade will be to maintain Gods
worship; the Jews have a proverb to this purpose, to wit, (...) T. these are the
hedge of riches. Pirke Aboth. cap. 3. Fig. 13.

Doct. 3. Abundance of good things follow upon cost bestowed on Gods worship.
Bring ye all the Tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine
house, and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open
you the windows of heaven, and power out a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it. Mal. 3.10.

Reas. 1. Because God has abundance and gives accordingly. Fountains abound
in water, and therefore communicate it more freely then standing pooles. It
becomes great men to give largely, though receivers deserve it not.

2. God will show hereby what a great price he sets upon his worship, when he so
liberally rewards the furtherers of it.

Use. Observe ye that are large in giving to pious uses, how God deals with
you; I doubt not but ye will find it in your books at the years end, if no
sinful course of life make obstructions.

Doct. 4. Provisions of all sorts attend upon this cost. See the place quoted
before, Mal. 3.10.11.

Reas. Because God is both able and willing to bestow all sorts of good things
on them that love and maintain his worship.

Use. Observe what variety of good things God bestows on you for upholding his
worship, and be thankful.

VER. 11. My Son, despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither be weary of
his correction.
HEre is an answer to to an objection, that might be made out of the former
verse. It might be said, good men have not always the plenty you speak of,
they are many times in want and poverty. A. Then must they be patient, if wants
and crosses come upon them from God, for it is for their good: If God do not
prosper, but cross us, we must not be offended. Before Solomon had taught his
son the doctrine of reverence, to have higher thoughts of God then of himself,
Verse 5, 6, 7. here he teaches him the doctrine of patience; he had before
persuaded him to show real thankfulness to God in his cost for Gods worship,
Verse 9.10. now he moves him to show his real patience in bearing crosses from
God: That precept belonged principally to rich men, that want nothing; this to
poor men, that live in want, or to such as are otherwise afflicted by the hand
of God. For the words.

My son. A kind appellation to pierce the deeper into our hearts. To whom will
he hearken that will not hearken unto his father? For the word, see on Chap.
1.18.

Despase not. Count not slightly of it, but observe well for what end it is
sent; seek not to cast it off with contempt, and hatred, count it not a burden
insupportable. Some serve God in prosperity, and leave him in adversity:
Therefore the wiseman exhorts him, whom he had before taught how to live in
prosperity, not to faint in adversity, that so when infirmity, or poverty, or
the like trial comes, he may not lose that piety which he seemed to have in
his tranquillity.

The chastning. See on Chap. 1.2. on the word instruction: the same word in the
original signifies both, and it belongs equally, to a loving father to
instruct, or correct, as occasion is offered.

Of the Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

Neither be weary. Faint not under the burden of Gods correction; let it not be
like meat upon the stomach, that overcharges it, and the man is never well,
till he be rid of it, and can endure no more of it.

Of his correction. Remember it is but correction, not wrath. See on Chap.
1.25. on the word Reproof, for it fignifies both: The sum of this verse is, as
if Solomon had said to the young man, My son, God will give thee prosperity, if
thou obey him: but if God shall see it fitter for thee to give thee ficknesse
for health, and dry bones for marrow, and make thee full of pains, and
weaknesses, do not make a light account of his correcting hand, neither if thou
think his stroke to be too long, or heavy, be thou offended with him, but bear
it patiently

Figures none. Note. 1. The Exhortation in this verse.

2. The reason enforcing it, verse 12.

In the former observe

1. The person spoken to. My son.

2. The speech, wherein note a double exhortation, or rather dehortation. And
in the former.

1. The act dissuaded. Despise not. 2. The Object. The chastning of the Lord.
In the latter note.

1. The Act forbidden. Neither be weary. 2. The Object. Of his correction.
1. Doct. Arguments, or titles of love should often be repeated. My little
Children. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Brethren. 1 Ioh. 2.7. Beloved. 1 Ioh. 4.1.7.11.

Reason. 1. Because of all arguments they are the most pierceing. They go from
heart to heart. They will work, when arguments of terror will not.

2. Because as they quickly pierce the affection, so they last till death in
the memory, and work love back again, as the sunbeams beating on a wall
reverberat, and cause heat in the air near it.

Use. 1. To blame strangeness, and sharpness of carriage in Christians,
especially in words, when reproves, and admonitions savor rather of height of
spirit, then of love. Little good comes by them.

2. To teach all superiors, Ministers especially to breath forth words full of
affection, especially to those, that are godly, though differing from them in
matters of lesser moment. Loving carriage is glue, it will unite. Strangeness
is a thaw, of a severing quality, and will breed enmity.

2. Doct. Afflictions come from God. Shall there be evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? Am. 3.6. The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty
men in the midst of me: he has called an assembly against me to crush my
young men; The Lord has trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a wine
press. Lam. 1.15.

Reason. 1. Because some are such as none else can inflict, as the plague, and
deadly diseases, the infection of the air, pangs of conscience.

2. Because none else can bring any affliction on us without his leave. Satan
cannot touch any thing of Jobs without a commission from God. Job. 1.12.2, 6.
Nor the devils enter into swine, if Christ permit not. Mat. 8.31, 32.

Use 1. It taxes worldly men, who in their afflictions look altogether unto
outward means, not eying God the striker, neither do they come to him for
remedy. If they be sick, they blame their diet, or the air, and seek only to
the Physician for help. If they be wronged, they blame their neighbors, and
fly to the Lawyer for help. If they be impoverished, they blame their
oppressors, and fly to their rich friends for relief, but least see God in
their affliction, upon whom they should most of all look. Therefore afflictions
rather do them hurt, then good. They make them full of spleen against the
instruments: they work confidence in men; but do not humble them before God,
nor make them amend their ways. The end is like to be miserable. Afflictions
are burdens, and whom they do not bow, they break: look up then to the first
mover in troubles.

2. It teaches good men in all their afflictions to look up to God. This will
make us patient. Weak Christians, when they see wicked men prosper, and godly
men afflicted, are tempted with impatience, as appears at large. Psalm. 73. This
Verse is an Antidote against such temptations. We must receive afflictions
from the hand of God with all patience, as from him, that does all things
justly. This will make us cheerful in afflictions also, if we remember, they
are Gods Physic to cure the diseases of the soul. Every wise man takes Physic
willingly, as overloooking the bitterness of the pill, and fastening his eyes
on the health ensuing. So should we do in afflictions sent by God. O servum
illum beatum, cujus emendationi Dominus instat, cui dignatur irasci, quem
admonendi dissimulatione non decipit. Tertullian, in lib. de Patientia. Oh
blessed is that servant, for whose amendment God is earnest, with whom God
vouchsafes to be angry, and whom he does not deceive by concealing admonition.

3. Doct. Afflictions are ordinarily chastisements for sin, There is no
soundness in my flesh because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my
bones because of my sin. Psalm. 38.3. When thou with rebukes do correct a man
for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth. Psalm. 39.11.

Reason. 1. In respect of God, that he may show forth his dislike of sin
really, not in words alone, but in deeds. If he should never smite sinners,
both they, and others wouldthink, he liked their sinful ways. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence: thou thoughtst, that I was altogether such
an one as thy self. Psalm. 50.21. To drive them out of this foolish conceit, God
threatens to reprove them, to make them see their sins, and to tear them in
pieces, if they repent not. ver. 21, 22. there.

2. In respect of sinners, that they may be brought to repentance, as the
prodigal child was by want. Luke 15.

Use. Take your afflictions then as corrections. Look not upon them always, as
trials of grace, lest ye be proud: but ordinarily look at them, as
chastisements for thy sins, and be humbled. Ransack thy life, look what thou
have done amiss, confess with forrow, give glory to God, and amend. So shall
thy afflictions be both instructions, and corrections. Wheresore does a living
man complaint a man for the punishment of his sins. Lam. 3.39.

4. Doct. Such chastisemenes must not be slighted. Behold happy is the man,
whom God corrects: therefore despise not thou the chastning of the Almighty.
Job. 5.17. See the words of the text quoted. Heb. 12.5.

Reason. 1. Because then God, himself is slighted, and his power, and justice
contemned. God is to be feared in the least of his works, yea, in his word. He
has a whole forest of rodds to correct them withal, that sin against him, if
few, or small ones will not work upon us.

2. Because they come out of love, and love tokens should not be despised: The
father strikes not the child to break a limb, or an arm, or to kill him, but
to beat down his stubborn heart, not to make him run away, but return.

Use 1. To reprove such as slight, not only men's blows, but Gods: Some take no
notice of any judgment that lights upon them, as coming from God, but by
chance, and therefore regard it not; they say with the Philistines, It was a
chance that happened unto us. 1 Samuel 6.9. Others attribute it to inferior
causes, and think them easy so be avoided, forgetting, that they have to do
with the mighty God; others are senseless, and think it a goodly thing to bear
out a cross by head and shoulders, as if they were armed against all Gods
arrows: of these a man may say with Austin, Perdidistis fructum afflictionis,
meserrimi facti estis and pessime permansistis. De civit. Dei. l. 1. c. 33. Ye
have lost the fruit of affliction, ye are made very miserable, and ye remain
very bad. These are past shame, fear, or sorrow: especially, men are senseless
in lesser blows, which devour like a moth insensibly; and sometimes in
greater. Jonah could sleep in a storm. Drunken men feel no blows, these are
spiritually drunk.

2. Let us not slight Gods corrections, as things of no force or use, but
rather stoop at the first, and least blow, and fear the very shaking of his
hand at us; else we cause God as it were to lose his labor in nurturing of us.
A child is graceless that sheds no tears, when he is corrected. It argues want
of grace in us, if we melt not when God himself corrects us. A great man's
anger is feared, Gods wrath is much more to be feared.

Doct. 5. Gods chastisements are for our correction and good. Before I was
afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. Psalm. 119.67. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Psalm.
119.71.

Reas. 1. It is for our good here, to draw us from sin to repentance. Foris per
flagellum tundimur, ut intus in templum Domini disponamur. Greg. Past. We are
beaten with the scourge without, that we may be made the Temple of God within.

2. It is for our good hereafter, that we may not perish eternally. When we are
judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the
world. 1 Cor. 11.32.

Use 1. Be not over-fearful of afflictions; there may come more good to thy
Soul, then by prosperity. Bitter physic is better then sweat-meats.

2. Here is ground for an exhortation to patience, a virtue very needful in
this old age of the world, in which one breach follows another, like waves in
the Sea; we are all impatient by nature, but grace should make us patient, when
for our good we are corrected.

Doct. 6. We must not be weary of afflictions, though they be great and
frequent. Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners, lest ye be
weary, and faint in your minds; ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving
against sin. Heb. 3.4. Thou have born and have patience, and for my names-sake
have labored, and have not fainted. Rev. 2.3.

Reas. 1. Because we are Gods creatures. He has supreme and absolute power
over us, and therefore may lay on us what he will. Say with the Jews, We are
the clay, and thou our potter. Isa. 64.8.

2. Fainting makes us unfit for all good duties, either of religion or of our
callings: we can do nothing truly good, or acceptable to God, without
cheerfulness. A weary man cannot walk or work with comfort, his spirits are
spent already.

Use 1. To reprove such as are weary and faint under afflictions, some bear
little ones, or great ones a while, and then give over; some utterly despair of
help, and conclude they are quite undone; others mur mur against God; others
seek freedom by unlawful means, as Saul by a Witch. All these faint under
Gods hand, and sin against him. This is the other extreme, we heard before that
some made light of afflictions, and slighted them; now we see that others
despair and sink under them. Non quia dura, sed quia molles patimur. Not
because the things are hard, but because we that suffer are tender. Seneca.
Though it be profitable for us to be arflicted, yet our flesh is impatient, and
desires nothing but pleasure and ease, and so discourages us under affliction,
as if God intended to destroy us: the Devil tells us as much, and we are ready
to believe him. But we should not forget the exhortation, which speaks unto
us as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord, nor
faint when thou art rebuked of him. Heb. 12.5.

2. Resolve still to bear while God afflicts, remember it is for correction,
not for confusion: And that we are naturally impatient, and had need of
patience, which as Nazianzen calls it, is Nervus animae, the sinew of the soul.
Say with Tertullian, Totus mundus mihi pereat, dum modo patientiam lueis
faciam: Let me lose all the world, so I may get patience. Lib. de patientia. If
that shrinks, all fails; if afflictions, like waves of the sea, come rouling
one in the neck of another, expostulate not with God, but pray, and wait for
deliverance: be such as the Apostle bids you to be, Rejoicing in hope, patient
in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer. Romans 12.12.

VER. 12. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a father the son, in
whum he delights.
BEcause as it is a hard thing to part with our substance for God, so it is as
hard, if not harder, to endure Gods correcting hand, which we are always ready
to suspect to come out of hatred; therefore Solomon takes away that thought,
and assures us, that such corrections come from Gods love, and tend to our
good. For the words.

For. See on Chap. 1.9.

Whom the Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

Loves. See on Chap. 1.22.

He corrects. The word (...) signifies,

1. To reason a case by arguments, and answers. How forcible are right words?
But what does your arguing reprove? Job 6.25 Should he reason with unprofitable
talk? Job 15.3.

2. To convince, confute, or reprove such as are in the wrong. Do ye imagine to
reprove words? Job 6.26.

3. To correct, or scourge one for sin. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger,
neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure. Psalm. 6.1. And in that sense it is
taken here. See more on Chap. 9.7.

Even as a father. See on Chap. 1.8.

The son. See on Chap. 1.1.8.

In whom he delights. With whom he is well pleased.

The sum of the verse is, as if Solomon had said, Thou must not despise, nor be
weary of Gods correction, because it comes not out of anger, but from abundance
of love. For as a godly Father seeks by correction to amend his child, or a
wise Physician to cure his patient by bitter potions, so does God use by
afflictions to keep every one in order, whom he loves, or to call him back, if
he have sinned, lest he grow worse, and lose the comfortable sense of Gods
favor. For as Parents according to the flesh use to correct their children
according to their offense, when they neglect their duty, or do evil, so does
God exercise his children with crosses, that they may not be proud; or live
loosely, but more warily, and wisely for time to come.

Figures none. Note 1. The truth nakedly set down.

2. By Smilitude.

In the former note 1. The word of coherence. For. 2. The Agent. The Lord. 3.
The Act. Corrects. 4. The Patient. Whom he loves.


In the latter note. 1. The Note of similitude. Even as. 2. The Corrector. The
Father. 3. The corrected set out. 1. By his relation. The Son. Not the servant
only.


2. By his Fathers affection. In whom he delights, Abraham must offer Isaac,
whom he loves. Genesis 22.2. God offers up his Son Christ, in whom he is well
pleased. Math. 3.17. Though God chastise his children sorely, yet he takes
pleasure in them.

1. Doct. God gives reasons of his proceedings, that need not give any at all.
So in the preface to the commandemens. Exodus 20.1. etc. Ye must obey, for I am
Jehovah, that gave you your being, I am your God, in convenant with you, and I
showed my love to you in bringing you out of Egypt.

In the second Commandment God reasons from his jealousy to idolaters, and his
kindness to true worshippers, and their posterity long after them. For I the
Lord thy God, am a jealous God visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third, and fourth generation of them, that hate me: And she
wing mercy unto thousands of them that love me; and keep my Commandments. In
the third Commandment he argues from his judgments on such as abuse his
name. For the Lord will not hold him guiltless, that takes his name in vain.
In the fourth from his liberal allowance of six days to us for our own
occasions, who may well therefore afford him one in seven. Six days may thou
labor, and do all thy work. For so indeed it should be translated, being a
permission, not a command: for labor in our callings belongs to the eighth
Commandment. And from his own example, who after six days work rested one
day. For in six days the Lord made Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and all that in
them is, and rested the seventh day: Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh
day, and hallowed it. In the fifth Commandment from the good that comes by
honoring Parents; A long, and comfortable life, which all men desire, That thy
days may be long in the land, which the Lord thy God gives thee. There are no
reasons given for the rest, because man's reason can tell him, that his own
life, the comfort of his marriage, his estate, his credit, his content are
wrapped up in them.

Reason. 1. That God may work upon man's judgment, that so if his command will
not work upon man's will, as it should, reason may convince their judgment.

2. That he may work upon their affections. Upon their love by recording former
benefits, and promising more, as to David, I anointed thee King over Israel,
and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, And I gave thee thy Masters
house, and thy Masters wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of
Israel, and of Judah, and if that had been too little, I would moreover have
given unto thee such, and such things. Wherefore have thou despised the
Commandment of the Lord. 2 Samuel 12.7. etc. Kindness breeds love. God works
upon fear by judgments, and threatening more. Upon hatred by seting out the
ugliness of sin, and the hurt it brings on all the World, and in particular on
our selves. Upon confidence by setting out his great power, and infinite mercy,
which are the two main Pillars of confidence

Use To lament our wretched sinful disposition, that have by nature so far
cast off Gods sovereignty, that he is, as it were forced to use reasons to
persuade us to obey his Commands, which we should do without any reason given.
Yea, which is more, that we will not be persuaded by a world of reasons laid
down in scripture, but remain disobedient: who would keep a servant that
neither of himself, nor by persuasion would be obedient? God keeps thousands of
such in the World. Yea, the best of men are guilty of disobedience to the
Commands of God against duty, and known reasons. David knew, that though he
were a King, yet he might not commit adultery, nor murder, and therefore is
said not to be ignorant of, but to despise Gods Commandment. 2 Samuel 12.9. And
it cost him dear. He paid for it in both kinds by the sword, and the abuse of
his own Concubines. Let every one of us lay it to his own heart, and mourn for
his own known disobedience.

2. Doct. Teachers should not only inform, but persuade also. So Paul exhorts
wives to do their duty from their subjection to the husband, as to the head,
and from the Churches exampl^. Wives submit your selves unto your own husbands,
as unto the Lord. For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is
the head of the Church, and he is the Savior of his body. Therefore as the
Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be unto their own husbands in
every thing. Ephesians. 5.22. 23, 24. Husbands are pressed to their duty from Christ's
example. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved the Church. Ephesians.
5.25. From marriage union. So ought men to love their wives, as their own
bodies. Ephesians. 5.28. From leaving Parents for a wife. For this cause shall a man
leave his Father, and Mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they two
shall be one flesh, Ephesians. 5.31. Children are urged to their duty from right, and
Gods promise. Children obey your Parents in the Lord: for this is right. Honor
thy Father, and Mother (which is the first Commandment with promise) That it
may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the earth. Ephesians.
6.1.2.3. Servants from reward. Servants be obedient to them, that are your
Masters, etc. Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall
he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond, or free. Ephesians. 6.5. 8. Masters from
their account to God. And ye masters do the same things unto them, forbearing
threatening, knowing that your Master also is in heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him. Ephesians. 6.9. See the like duties pressed with
reasons, Col. 3.18. and 4.1.

Reas. 1. That the hearers may be brought to believe what is taught, which bare
information will not do.

2. That they may be brought to obey it; persuasive arguments are weights to
draw to obedience.

Use. Think not much that Ministers do not coldly deliver divine truths, but
earnestly press them, it were easier for them to do otherwise, but ye have
need of it, and it is for your good.

Doct. 3. Correction comes from Gods love. Thou shall also consider in thine
heart, that as a man chastneth his son, so the Lord thy God chastneth thee.
Deuteronomy. 8.5. As many as I love, I rebuke, and chasten. Rev. 3.9. You only have I
known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I punish you for all
your iniquities. Ames 3.2.

Reas. 1. God does it to prevent much evil that might otherwise befall them,
and that is a sign of love, as not correcting is of hatred. I will not punish
your daughters when they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit
adultery, therefore the people that do not understand shall fall. Hos. 4.14. So
a tender father by timely correction keeps his children from untimely ends. A
Physician keeps his patient from death, by putting him to pain. Gregory the
great afflicted with the gout, and other bodily infirmities, cries out, In hoc
mi^i placent, quod nihil in ho^ mundo placere permittunt. Herein they please
me, in that they suffer nothing in this world to please me. By correction, God
keeps his children from many sins, or brings them to repentance. Est in eo, qui
corripitur a Domius aliquid, quod displicet, id sc: propter quod eum castigat,
et quod emendatum cupit. Jansen. in Text. There is in him, that is chastned by
the Lord, something that displeases God, to wit, that for which he corrects
him, and which he would have amended. God also by correction, keeps his from
eternal perdition. Afflietions are a bridle, that keeps the horse from
falling, and the rider from breaking his neck: So does God by them, keep his
children from many sins, that might bring on them speedy destruction. The child
of God may say to God with Augustine in Psalm. 98. Et cum blandiris, pater es,
and cum caedis, pater es. Blandiris, ne deficiam, caedis, ne peream. Both when
thou strokest, and when thou strskest, thou art afather: Thou strokest, that I
should not faint, thou strikest that I should not perish. And on the same
Psalm. Illi Deus irasciter quem peccantem non flagellat. Nam cui vere propitius
est, non solum donat peccata, ne noceant ad futurum seculum, sed etiam
castigat, ne semper peccare delectet. God is angry with him, whom he does not
scourge for sin. For whom he favors indeed, to him he not only forgives sins,
that they may not hurt him in the world to come, but also chastens him, that he
may not delight to be always sinning.

2. God corrects his children to do them Good; hereby he exercises and
increases many graces in them, as faith, and patience: he also fits them for
glory hereafter, as soldiers by pains and perils are fitted for spoils, and
trophies; and Merchants passing through many storms get riches to live on in
their old days. For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.

3. That God may take more delight in them, when the dross of their corruption
is purged away by the fire of affliction, and they made wiser, purer, and
better. So a tender father sends his son beyond Sea, that he may come home
better bred, and be deerer to him.

4. It appears by Gods loving expression of himself to them, and smiles
afterward, like a kind father, showing that his heart was with them before,
though he frowned and smote them; he makes them to know, that he is the health
of their countenance, and their God. Psalm. 43.5. That he has dea't bountifully
with them, what ever they thought of him in their afflictions. Psalm. 116.7.

Use 1. To reprove many good people, who as they take too much liberty in
prosperity, so are too much dejected in adversity, as if God had quite
forsaken them. Duos habet filies pater, alter peccat, et non caeditur, alter
simulac movet ad peccandum, caeditur. caeso haeredit as servatur, alter
exhaeredatus dimittitur. videt pater eum non habere spem, et dimittit eum
facere quod vult. Augustine. in Psalm. 93. A father has two sons, the one sins,
and is not smitten, the other, as soon as he moves to any sin is smitten: the
inheritance is kept for him that is smitten; the other is sent away
disinherited: the father sees him hopeless, and lets him loose to do what he
list. Servus offendens dominum non flagellatur, sed dome ejicitur. Filius autem
patrem offendens flagellatur, sed e domo non pellitur. Augustine. contempl. l.
2. c. 21. The servant offending his Master, is not scourged, but cast out of
doo^s; but the son offending his father, is scourged, but not turned out of
doors.

Use 2. Let us look upon afflictions as tokens of Gods fatherly love, and then
we shall bear them comfortably, and get much good by them. This meditation will
be oil to mollify the pain of our afflictions: think with thy self, God
corrects me for my sins, but lets others perish in their sins: What a mercy is
this? Gods love is sweet to his children, even when they suffer the bitterness
of his chastning; the most tender father smites sometimes. David confesses,
that God had afflicted him in faithfulness. Psalm. 119.75. The less reason we
have to murmur at Gods correcting us, the more certainly we know that
corrections are a pledge of his fatherly love toward us, for he corrects the
son, quem unice diligit, whom he loves above the rest. Qui excipitur a numero
flagellatorum, excipitur a numero filiorum; He that escapes affliction may well
suspect his adoption. Theophylact. So says the Apostle, If ye be without
chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards, and not sons.
Heb. 12.8.

Doct. 4. Gods proceedings may be seen in ours, he deals with us, as we do with
our children. Hence comes it, that the names of men in office are given to God;
he is called a Judge: Judges right such as are wronged, and punish such as do
wrong. He is called an husband I; husbands love their wives, yet be angry with
them for their miscarriage. He is called a father; fathers correct their
children for their faults, yet are tender over them, when they are sick, He is
called a Master; Masters employ their servants, and provide for them.

Use. Let the world be our looking glass, to see Gods way in the commendable
courses of our superiors, for our direction in prosperity, and consolation in
adversity.

Doct. 5. Pac^^^^ cerrect their dearest children, else they love them not. He
that spares his rod, hates his son, but he that loves him, chastneth him
betimes. Chap. 13.24. They can do it, though they love them, yea they do it
because they love them: So they force them to take bitter pills for their
health, and regard not their tears.

Use. Children must not think their parents love them not; because they strike
them; but commend their wise love, that strike them for their good.

Doct. 6. Correction, and dilection may go together. See the place quoted for
the proof of the last Doctrine.

Reas. Because both are for the child's good.

Use. To reprove fond Parents, who think it want of love to strike offending
children.

VER. 13. Happy is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that gets
understanding.
THough this book of the Proverbs afford not every where a fit coherence of
several verses, yet where it may conveniently be had, it is not to be
neglected. Solomon had before persuaded to patience under Gods afflicting hand;
now to persuade the more to it, he tells us, it is one way to get both wisdom
and happiness: as if he had said, faint not under affliction, for it is not an
happiness to be free from affliction, but to get wisdom: What though thou
suffer chastisment, and that be bitter unto thee? if thou get wisdom by it,
thou art happy; yet it must not be restrained to that way alone, for there are
other ways by which wisdom may be gotten besides afflictions, as prayer,
reading, hearing, meditation, conference, consideration of Gods works: which
way soever a man get true wisdom, he is happy, and not unhappy, though it be
by afflictions, he has not only made a saving, but a gaining bargain. Solomon
had before given some particular precepts of wisdom, and now to stir up our
souls to seek earnestly after it, he sets out the praises of it, as being able
to bring men to true happiness, which they most desire, and no worldly wealth
or greatness can bestow upon them. How blessed wisdom makes a man, may
appear, by many promises going before, and many following after. The worth of
wisdoms gain is largely set out, comparatively in the verses following, it is
better then silver. Object. Thereare more precious things then silver in the
world. Ans. It is better then fine gold. Object. Yet Jewels and pearls may be
better then that. Ans. She is more precious then Rubies. Object. There may be
better things then Rubies, though we know them not. Ans. Desire what thou
can, thou can desire nothing so good as wisdom. Then he sets out the
praise of wisdom simply without comparison, it brings long life. Object. what
is a long poor life worth? Ans. She brings riches withal, Obj. Many a rich man
is sordid and despised. Ans. She brings honor also. Object. Many have all
these, yet live sadly by reason of sickness and pain. Ans. Her ways are
pleasant. Object. war spoils all comfort. Ans. All her paths are peace.
Object. yet death will take away all these. Ans. She is a tree of life.
Therefore I conclude as I began, with the happiness of the man that finds
wisdom: only I add this qualification, if he retain her, when he has found
her. For the words.

Happy. Or O the happiness of the man, etc. He begins his commendation of
wisdom with an exclamation, and admiration of the good it brings to men, which
Gods people wonder at, though others be blind and Iee it not: he had spoken
great things of the benefits of wisdom before, ver. 2. as bringing along
comfortable and peaceable life; but here he speak in higher language, it will
bring happiness, which is an affluence, or rather confluence of all good
things, and that for eternity. A man that has some good things may want other
to content him. If a man had all things that are good for him, but for a time,
fear of loss will afflict him, while he has them, and his grief will be the
greater when they are lost, by reason of his former experience of the
sweetness of them. A wise man is happy here, spe, in hope, he shall be happy
hereafter, re, in deed. He does not say, blessed is the wise man, but speaks by
a circumlocution, blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding. So he compares the wise man to a man not left rich by
his parents, but grown rich by Gods blessing on his labors. Men count them
happy, that are grown rich by their own industry; God counts them happy that
labor for wisdom and do obtain it.

Is the man. Heb. Adam. For the word see on Verse 4. It is taken from the Earth
to put man in mind of his base Original.

That finds. Though the word sometimes signify to find a thing by accident
without looking after it, yet here it rather signifies getting it by labor, as
was noted before, and appears by the end of the verse. And Solomon's scope is to
persuade men to labor for it, because of the worth of it in it self, and the
good it brings to us. For the word, see on Chap. 1.13.2.5.

Wisdom. True, and heavenly wisdom, not humane acts, and sciences: they cannot
make a man happy. One may have much insight in them, and yet go to Hell. For
the word, see on Chap. 1.2. By wisdom here may be meant Jesus Christ the wisdom
of the father, as Chap. 8.

And the man. The same word in the Original, that was before.

That gets. The Hebrew word (...) signifies to draw out a thing, that lay
hid before, as desires out of the heart by effecting them. Further not his
wicked device. Heb. Draw not out. Psalm. 140.8. Or corn out of a Granary. That
our Granaries may be full affording all manner of store. Psalm. 144.13. or
drawing forth good will in the heart to plentiful relief with the hand. If
thou draw out thy soul to the hungry. Isa. 58.10. Some understand it here of
increasing knowledge, and drawing out some further truths out of those grounds
we know, by reason, or consequence. Others of drawing it forth into words to
instruct others. Others of drawing it forth into deeds by practice. But it is
rather to be understood of bringing it forth by study out of Gods word, and
works, wherein it is hid, as water in a well, or a treasure in the earth.

Understanding. See on Chap. 2.3.

Figures. Two Metaphors. One from finding a thing by enquiry, the other from
getting a thing by labor. Both show, that travail, and pains are to be used
to get wisdom. It will quit cost, nay, bring great advantage.

Note. 1. The Adjunct. Happy. Happinesseis a thing that all men desire, but
most men miss.

2. The Subject, set out.

1. In General. Is the man. 2. In particular by two similitudes. 1. From
seekers.
And therein note 1. The Act. That finds. 2. The Object. Wisdom. 2. From
traders. And therein see. 1. The Act. And the man that gets. 2. The Object.
Understanding.


1. Doct. Wisdom may be gotten out of Gods corrections. It is good for me, that
I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. Psalm. 119.71. Blessed
is the man, whom thou chastenest, O Lord: and teach him out of thy law.
Psalm. 94.12.

Reason. 1. Because it teaches us many things concerning God. And therefore it
is called by Patianus in Paraen. ad poenit. Re pertorium divinorum, and
inventarium cognitionis Dei. It is an Index of divine things, and an inventary
of the knowledge of God.

1. It is a repertory, or index of a Book, whereby the good things in the book
are readily found. Else men may seek long enough, and turn over the whole book,
and yet miss what they seek. So affliction brings to us many things of God, of
which in prosperity we take no notice. An Almanac also is a kind of repertory,
whereby men on the Earth see the Eclipses, and course of the Sun and Moon in
Heaven. So we in affliction see many things of God.

2. It is an Inventary. Lawyers require an Inventary of men's goods, wherein all
particulars must be written, that they may the better judge of their estates.
Afflictions make us look out, what good things there are in God for us to make
use of, in time of need. And

1. They show us Gods wisdom, and omniscience, that can find out our secret
fins, and chastise us for them. This Judah confesses, God has found out the
iniquity of thy servants. Genesis 44.16.

2. They show us Gods holiness, that cannot endure iniquity, but will chastise
his dearest children for sin.

3. Afflictions show us Gods justice, that will punish men for sin.

4. His power, that can punish the greatest sinners.

5. His mercy, that brings many to repentance by afflictions, that they may be
saved. So the prodigal son was brought home to his sathers house. Luke 15.1.

6. His truth, that so makes good all his threatenings by his judgments.

2. Affliction teaches us some good things concerning our selves. As

1. That we are sinful: We think our selves very good in our prosperity for
want of examination, Affliction is a glass, that makes us see the ugliness of
our sins, and to loath, and leave those sinful courses on which we formerly
doated.

2. That we are foolish, and like unwise children, that will not leave doing
evil, till we be whipped. They make us say with David, My wounds stink, and are
corrupt, because of my foolishness Psalm. 38.4. And so afflictions compel us
to go to God, in prayer to teach u^, what he would have us to do, and to
enable us to do accordingly.

3. Afflictions teach us some good things as in regard of others. As

1. That they must not be condemned for wicked men, because they are afflicted,
for then must we go to Hell for company

2. That they shall be pitied, and relieved in their sorrows, as we would be
in ours.

Use 1. It teaches us to bear afflictions patiently, looking more at the good,
that comes by them, then the pain, that comes from them. No chastening for the
present seems joyous, but grievous: nevertheless afterward it yields the
peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. Heb.
12.11. So sick men, and wounded bear pills, and incisions in hope of recovery.
Although we be afflicted, yet if we be withal instructed, it is well. Vexatio
dat intellectum. Bought wit is dear. It may then be best prized. Schola crucis
schola lucis. Gods house of correction is his school of instruction. They do
well together, though seldom joined by men. (...). Correptiones correctiones.
Passions are instructions. Chastisements are corrections.

2. Let us take special notice, what good we get by afflictions: what we know
more of God, of our selves, or of others, and sin no more lest a worse thing
come unto us. John 5.14.

Doct. 2. Wisdom is to be admired. In God, O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge, of God. Romans 11.33. In men. When the Queen of Sheba
had seen Solomon's wise orders in his house, there was no more spirit in her. 1
King. 10.4. etc.

Reas. 1. We admire things for their nature, if it be more excellent then other
things, it takes off our eyes from them to view it, and our mind to consider
it: So the shining. Sun is more excellent then grass or flowers, we can see no
beauty in them but by it. Thus wisdom is admirable, it can do more then wealth
or strength, in taking towns, finding out secrets, guiding Souls to
happiness.

2. We admire things for their species or kind, if they be more excellent then
other things of the same nature: so we admire heavenly lights, Sun, Moon,
Stars, more then earthly, as Fire, Glow-worme, Candles: So we must admire
heavenly light in Gods word, more then all skill of Arts, though they also be
good, and useful in their kind.

3. We admire things more then others, according to their degree, though they
be of the same kind: among heavenly lights we most of all admire the Sun,
because it exceeds the Moon and Stars in brightness: so must we admire true
wisdom most, where there is most of it, as in ancient Professort, grave
Ministers, godly Magistrates, etc.

Use. It reproves our folly. We admire to see a poor man to have wit to get a
great estate, or a mean man to get honor by the wars, but we make no accouut
of such as abound in heavenly wisdom, therefore we get little or none of it
our selves, for intelligentiasapientiae admirationem ciere solet, and admiratio
desiderium ejus investigandae, et investigatio adeptionem parit, et adeptia
fruitionem, et ista fruitio beatos facit in suprem^ sort humani fastigit
constitutos. Recuperus, Understanding uses to stir up admiration of wisdom,
and admiration breeds a desire of searching for it, and searching breeds
obtaining, and obtaming brings forth fruition, and this fraitton makes men
happy, being placed in the highest condition of human preferment. Let us no
longer then measure a man's worth by his wealth, but by his wisdom: praise not
him that sells lead, and buys gold, but praise him that parts with money for
heavenly wisdom.

Doct. 3. What ever men think, God thinks wise men happy. Who so finds me,
finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord. Chap. 8.35. Finding wisdom,
is like finding treasures, yea, like finding life, without which treasures are
nothing worth; yea like finding Gods favor, without which, life is nothing
worth.

Reas. 1. Because Adam was both wise and happy before his fall, and foolish and
miserable after it.

2. Because there is no way to get true happenesse again, but by getting true
wisdom.

Use. See the folly of men; some count rich men happy, that enjoy such
treasures, as come within the compass of the senses; but happy is that people
whose God is their Lord. Psalm 144.15. Or rather, as it should be read, whose
God is Jehovah; For other Gods cannot make them happy. Si quid in opibus beatum
foret, illis dii carere nollent. If there were any happiness in riches, the
Gods would not want them. Seneca p. 74. Si ad naturam vivas, nunquam eris
pauper, si ad opinionem, nunquam dives, idem ep. 61. If thou live according to
nature, thou will never be poor, if according to opinion, thou will never be
rich. Others place happiness in honor or pleasure, but God places it in true
wisdom. Si honor beatos efficit, ubicunqu: est dignitas, ibi esset beatitudo.
At hoc falsum. Boet. de consol. l. 3. pros. 2. If honor make men happy, then
wheresoever dignity is, there should be happiness: But this is false. The
conclusion easily follows, therefore honor brings not happiness.

Doct. 4. Man should often think of his base beginning. God rubs up his memory
so soon as he had sinned, Dust thou art and unto dust shall thou return. Gen
3.19.

Reas. 1. Because it is a means to humble us, whereas looking upon us in our
height, will make us proud. A beggar extolled, and forgetful, will easily lift
up himself above others.

2. It is a means to make us thankful. A man raised from great poverty to great
wealth, is the more thankful, if he look upon his former wants.

Use. It reproves those, who neither of themselves are willing, nor that others
should mind them to think of their mean original. What! tell a strong man he
was once as weak as dust; or a beautiful woman, she was once as foul as dirt.
This is petty Treason. But they shall know it, when they come to die, though
now they will not.

5. Doct. Wisdom is hid from u^naturally. Professing t'emselves to be wise,
they became fools. Romans 1.22. This was spoken of the wise Philosopers among
the heathen.

Reason. 1. Because it is a punishment of the fall: We lost our wisdom, as we
did our holiness.

2. It appears by the variety of worships in the world, and the foolishness of
many of them: some worshipping storckes, and stones, and some the Devil, that
he may not hurt them.

Use. Pity poor ignorant creatures, that are wise to the World, and can get
great estates, but are fools to God. Luke 12.20, 21. And such were once not
some, but all of you. Therefoe have compassion on others.

6. Doct. Much pains must be taken to get wisdom. See much to this purpose on
Chap. 2, 3, 4. and on Chap. 4.1.

Reas. 1. Because of the worth of it. Impiger extremos currit mercator ad
Indos. The diligent Merchant runs to the utmost Indies for Gold. But wisdom is
more worth then all treasures, as will appear, when we come to the following
verses.

2. Because of the difficulty of attaining it. Which appears in that, there are
so few truly wise in the word.

Use Double your files. Be diligent in study of heavenly wisdom. And because
your strength cannot reach it, draw it out of the Fountain of Gods word by
study, and beg it earnestly of God in prayer. So shall ye be both wise and
happy.

VER. 14. For the Merchandise of it is better then the Merchandise of silver:
and the gain thereof then fine gold.
THE good that comes by wisdom is set out.

1. Comparatively by preferring it before the best trading and commodities in
the word. ver. 14, 15.

2. By the effects of true wisdom. ver. 16, 17, 18. In the former it is
preferred.

1. Before silver and gold. ver. 14.

2. Before rubies, ard all desirable things. ver. 15. The men of the world
think their happiness to consist in store of gold, and silver. But God
accounts it to be in wisdom, to which merchandise being compared, whereby pure
silver, and shining gold is gotten, ought to be had in no account.

For the words. For. See on Chap. 1.9.

The merchandise of it. The profit, that is gotten by it, or with it, as
Merchants lay out their money to get gain by it, and by the commodities
purchased with it. Merchandise is one of the most profitable trades in the
World, and the dearer the commodities, in which Merchants trade, the greater is
the gain. Therefore the gain gotten by wisdom here is compared to the richest
merchandise, yea, preferred before it to draw men's affections to pursue more
eagerly after spiritual, and heavenly wisdom. Ths word (...) fignifi^s a going
about or compassing of Sea or Land to get wisdom, as Merchants do for gain. So
the Pharisaicall Merchants did to get a Proselyte. Math. 23.15.

Is better. See on Chap. 2.9. on the word. Good.

Then the Merchandise. See before in this Verse.

Of Silver. See on on Chap. 2.4.

And the gain thereof. It is translated, Increase. ver. 9. For Merchandise
brings greater income, or increase, or benefit, then husbandry.

(...) Then fine gold. The word comes from cutting in the Original, either
because gold is, as it were, cut out of the Earth at first, or else because
after it is purified by the fire it is cut to make rings or Coin.

Figures. Two Metaphors. One in Merchandise: The other in gain. Merchants lay
out their money for gain: so may wisdom be improved to singular benefit.

Note. 1. The Trade.

2. The gain of it. Both set out by a comparison from precious things. A silver
trade is very profitable; a trade of wisdom is more profitable. Gold is
excellent; yet more is gotten by wisdom.

1. Doct. Men naturally seek still for increase of what good things they have.
So it is intimated in the text, that they who are wise, having obtained some
wisdom desire to increase it, as he that has gotten some worldly wealth by
Merchandise, desires the same way to increase it. God shows it by Parables
taken from men, as of the Vineyard. Isa. 5.1.1. etc Good fruit was looked for
from it. Of the talents Luk 19.11. Gain was expected thence.

Reason. 1. Because God has put into all living creatures a natural principle
of desire of increase, and growth, as in trees, and beasts.

2. Man has more help to put this principle in practice by the benefit of
reason.

Use. It condemns those that care not for increase in heavenly wisdom. It is an
ill sign, that nature is strong in them, and grace weak. We would grow in the
world, but not toward Heaven. We cross Solomon's scope here, which is to
persuade us to labor for increase in true wisdom.

2. Doct. Wisdom drives the greatest trade in the world. More to be desired
are (wisdoms precepts) then gold, yea, then much fine gold. Ps. 19.10. Wisdom
is better then rubies: and all the things, that may be desired, are not to be
compared unto it. Prove. 8.11.

Reason. 1. Because it trades in greater commodities, then any Merchant. In
souls of men, the last, and greatest commodity mentioned, Rev. 18.12, 13. one
whereof is more worth then a world, and the loss of it not to be recovered by
the gain of the whole world. Math. 16.26. when the quintessence, and spirits
are drawn out of herbs. and flowers, what are they good for? and how
comfortable and profitable are those extracted spirits? So men's souls are
immortal, their bodies without them are but dead carcasses.

2. This trade extends it self further, then any trade in the world. Silver
will pass in all Countries, Trades, Professions: Merchants can trade with it
by sea, and land, and all the world over. But wisdom trades in Heaven, and
Earth. We by it trade with God by prayer, he with us by heavenly inspiration.

Use. To persuade all to become wisdoms scholars. If any man could tell you of
a trade, that would in time put down all other trades, every man would be for
it. This trade will do it. Jesus Christ will put down the four great Empires of
the world, and wisdom will put down all worldly affairs in the end.

Doct: 3. Wisdom brings more profit then any worldly riches. My fruit is
better then gold (says wisdom) yea then fine gold, and my revenues then
choice silver. Chap. 8.19.

Reas. Because it brings better things then riches can. We esteem the goodness
of things by their own worth, or our esteem, or desire, or their effects. The
profit of wisdom is better then of riches.

1. In its own value. Nil aliud sunt aurum, et argentum, quam terra rubra and
alba. Gold and silver are nothing else, but red and white earth. Bern. Wisdom
is as much better then these things, for which men fight so stoutely, and which
they seek to obtain with such huge labor, as the good things of the soul are
better then outward things.

2. In men's esteem and account it is better, if they be wise. A dunghill Cock
may prefer a barley corn before a pearl, a Jeweller will not.

3. In regard of desire: it is more desirable, and should be more desired then
any thing in the world.

4. In regard of the effects of it.

1. It can quiet a man's mind, which no wealth can do. Rich men have many cares,
and griefs; Crowns are crowns of thor^^s, nothing but wisdom can give
tranquillity of spirit, and poize the ship of the soul in all tempests.

2. It affords a ladder to climb to eternal things, like Jacobs ladder, that
did reach from Bethel on earth, to Bethel (Gods house) in heaven. Men with
their money may perish, Act. 8. so may houses, stuff, fields, friends; but
unperishable things may be gotten by wisdom, no possession then, how large
soever, no store of gold or silver is comparable to wisdom.

Use. To engage us yet further in the search of true wisdom. We shall be rich
in God. Et quem ille divitem fecerit, nemo pauperem faciet. Cyprian. Epist. ad
Donatum. And whom God makes rich, no man shall make poor. Si aliqua amisistis
ga^dia, negotiatio est aliquid amittere, ut majora lucremini. Tertul. ad
Martyrs. cap. 2. If ye have lost some joys, it is a good trading to lose
somewhat, that ye may get greater matters. If men undergo so many labors,
griefs, wants, dangers of life for seeming riches, and gilded pearls, what
should we do for true riches? Si tanti vitrum, quanti verum margaritum? Tertul.
in Scorpiac. cap. 4. If glass be so dear, what is the true pearl? Sure that is
worth much more. We should think it no labor to take pains for wisdom. (...),
says a Father, while we gain, we feel no pain. Sing a song of profit, and men
will hearken. The Jassians in Strabo, delighted with the music of an excellent
harper, ran all away as soon as the marken bell rang, save a deaf old man, and
he went away also as soon as he heard of it. What is gold and silver, but the
guts and garbage of the earth? And what is all the pomp and glory of the world,
but dung and dogs meat? Phil. 3.7, 8 labor then more for wisdom, then for the
choicest silver, or for the finest gold, and be rich to eternity.

VER. 15. She is more precious then Rubies, and all the things thou can
desire, are not to be compared unto her.
THe wiseman in the former verse had preferred wisdom before silver and gold.
But some man might object, precious stones may be better then wisdom. No,
says Solomon, wisdom is of greater price then they. It might be further
objected, there may be more desirable things in the world then Rubies, though
we know them not, and they may be better then wisdom. He answers, nothing can
be more desirable then wisdom, of all things that can be imagined. For the
words.

She is more precious. Of greater value. For the word, see on Chap. 1.13.

Then Rubies. A precious stone of great price, and account, of a ruddy color.
It is likely our english word Ruby, comes from rubedo, redness in Latin. Her
Nazarites were more ruddy in body then Rubies. Lam. 4.7. If the mountains were
pearl, the huge rocks, rubies, and the whole globe a shining chrysolite, yet
all this were not to be named the same day with wisdom.

And all the things thou can desire. Heb. And all thy desires. That is, all
that thou can desire; or, any thing that thou can desire, be it the
choicest thing in the world. So (...) is used without a negative particle added
to it, though not observed by any Grammarian, or dictionary, that I have met
withal. Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird. Prove. 1.17.
It withers before any herb. Job 8.12. So that it is a climax from one
particular thing desirable to another still better, and better; but not a
general sum of all things desirable. By desire here is not meant the act of
desiring, but the thing desired, as the translation intimates. So faith is put
for the thing believed, and hope for the thing hoped for: What is the faith
once delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. But the Doctrine of the Gospel, the
Object of faith? And what is the hope laid up for us in Heaven. Col. 1.5. but
the glory of Heaven, the object of hope?

Are not to be compared unto her. They are not equal to her, much less of
greater value. The value of things is best known by comparing them together.
Wisdom will appear to be better then whatsoever is laid against it. Figures.
Desires. Things desired. A figure of the adjunct for the object. Wisdom is
preferred

1. Before jewels.

2. Before all other desirable things in the world, if there be any thing
better then jewels.

1. Doct. Jewels and pearls are of great account among men. One may be better
then a merchants estate. The merchant sold all he had to buy one pearl of
great price. Mat. 13.44, 46. Therefore are they called precious stones. Rev.
18.12.

Reas. 1. Because of their beauty. They are of diverse colors, and very
specious.

2. Because of their virtue. They are good to stench blood, and heal diseases.

3. Because of their price. A little silver is worth more then much coin. A
little Gold then much silver. A precious stone then much Gold.

Use. Let us see and admire Gods power, and wisdom, that has put so much
beauty, virtue, value into a little stone. A fly is more wonderful then an
Elephant. It has eyes, wings, body, feet in a little compass. In artificial
things many faces in a cherry stone are most admired, and such like other small
things. It is a wonder to see so much virtue within a little glass of strong
waters. Give the great God all the glory.

2. Doct. The best things in the world are not comparable unto wisdom, How much
better is it to get wisdom then gold? and to get understanding rather to be
chosen then silver? Chap. 16.16. See Job 28.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. verses.

Reason. 1. Because wise men have really so esteemed wisdom, and parted with
all for it, as in the parables of the treasure, and pearl. Math. 13.44, 45,
56. and in Paul's account, and practice, who had suffered the loss of all
things for it. Phil. 3.7, 8. They would not cast away outward comforts, if they
looked not for better in so doing. Ye took joyfully the spoiling of your goods,
knowing in your selves, that ye have in heaven, a better, and an enduring
substance. Heb. 10.34.

2. Because it loses nothing by communicating to others. The more money we
give, the less we have: but it is not so in communicating wisdom. It is like
the Sun, that has given light to all men since the world began, and is as
bright still, as ever it was. Hence comes the Arabian Proverb, Get Wealth in
measure, but wisdom without measure. Get as much wealth as may serve for this
life, but get wisdom in infinitum.

3. Because it cannot be taken away from us, as wealth, honor, pleasures may:
and therefore while we have it, we are both rich and happy. Omnia mea mecum
porto. All mine I carry with me, said Bias, giving a reason, why he carried
none of his goods out of his Country, as counting nothing his own, but his
wisdom, which the Enemies could not take from him.

4. It alone can satisfy the soul. Wealth, and all worldly comforts cannot
give content. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he
that loves abundance with increase. This is also vanity. Eccl. 5.10. Wisdom
contains all treasures virtually in it self. Rich men have not all good
things. Concupiscentia plus long stimulatur ab his, quas nondum peperit, quam
parts expletur. Salazar. Concupiscence is more stung with the things it has
not gotten, then satisfied with what it has. But men may say with David, I
have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches. Psalm.
119.14.

Use. To condemn the folly of those men, who endanger life, and soul for
transitory wealth, and neglect that which is far more precious then any riches.
This argues blindness, and blockishnesse. For such men see not that wisdom is
more worth seeking, then all sublunary comforts. Delights, and riches are
perishing comforts, and nothing in comparison of heavenly wisdom.

Doct. 3. Nothing can be imagined that is comparable to wisdom. So Solomon
thought, who being put to his choice, desired nothing else of God. 2 Chronicles.
1.7. etc. So Paul thought, who desired not to know any thing save Jesus Christ
the wisdom of the Father. 1 Cor. 2.2. A man may desire meat, drink, silver,
gold, yea his fancy can imagine new worlds, but all is not comparable to true
wisdom.

Reas. 1. Because none of those things man can imagine, or devise, or desire,
can free him from Hell. No ransom can do it, nor force. It is a warning from
Heaven must direct us how to escape Hell: Who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come? Math. 3.7. Sure none but God.

2. No such thing can show us the way to Heaven. Only true wisdom out of Gods
word can do it. The scriptures only can make a man wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy
3.15.

Use. Cease desiring, and imagining how to find out means of happiness in the
World, and labor for true wisdom, which only can make thee happy. A diver
that stops his breath longest, gets most pearls; so he that breaths least for
the world, gets most wisdom.

VER. 16. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor.
LEst any man should think, that wisdom were needy and beggarly her self, and
could not bestow upon her fellows the riches promised, she shows now, that she
knows, what humane infirmity most needs, and what men most desire, and has in
a readiness to bestow on them. Thou fear death, poverty, dishonor. Wisdom
has long life, riches, honor to bestow upon thee, if thou entertain her.
Wisdom, or the Lord Jesus Christ is here set out unto us like some stately
Queen, sitting on a Throne with both hands full of good things to reward her
faithful servants. The particular rewards shall be expounded in the words.

Length of days. A long life, see on Verse 2. This is the first thing
promised, because it is the principal; and riches and honor are but
accessaries, and can afford no comfort, if life be taken away, and but little,
if life be short. And therefore also it is said to be in the right hand, as the
principal gift she has to bestow. Men most of all desire long life, and
riches and honor in the second place; they could be content to live, though
poorly, though in pain, rather then to die; they desire long life more then
riches, and fear death more then poverty. There is no merchandise in the world,
how good soever, nor pearls, how precious soever they be, that can assure us
of long life. But the greatest traders are most afraid to die, as having more
to lose then other men; and their death is more desired then other men's: yea,
many lie in wait to kill them, for their riches: But wisdom will bring long
life with it.

Is in her right hand. This is said to be in the right hand, because the right
hand is preferred before the left, and that for these reasons.

1. Because it is ordinarily, and in most men the strongest, and nimblest.

2. Motion begins at the right hand. Porters lay their burden on the left
shoulder, because the right leg moves first. Aristot. de gressu animal.

3. The right hand is for defense, we fight with it.

4. It is the place of honor. Bathshebah was set on Solomon right hand. 1.
King. 2.19.

5. It is used as a token of faithfulness, we give it in marriage and
contracts.

6. It is used to set out good success, as the left hand for bad. Saepe
sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix. The Raven often fortold left handed
(that is, bad) things from the hollow Oak. Though in the Greek (...) the left
be used, for good success. It seems the fashion of those countries was to
prefer the left hand, as Xenophon reports, who says, they used to place their
guests at the left hand, as being nearest the heart. Now in the Law, earthly
comforts were types of heavenly: So was long life to an obedient child in the
fifth commandment a type of heaven, else it were but a small blessing to live
long here, and then go to hell for ever. Longitude dierum ^ter^itas est, Non
enim hic aliquid longum esse potest in tanta brevitate. Length of days is
eternity. For nothing can be long here in so much brevity. Recuperus. With long
life will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation. Psalm. 91.16. In senseless
creatures, long continuance is but a continuance of being,, not of comfort, as
in man, but not in rocks; the one is aeternitas, the other aeviternitas. (...),
Isid. Pelus. l. 3. ep. 149 Eternity is eternal life. (...) is used.

1. For a right hand. Though Coniah were the signet upon my right hand. Jer.
22.24.

2. For power and strength, which is exercised commonly with the right hand.
Thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the enemy. Exodus 15.6.

3. For the South; because a man standing with his face to the rising Sun, has
the south on his right hand: And southern countries are more fertile, northern,
on the left hand more barren. Omne malum ex Aquilone. All evil out of the
North. The North, and the South, thou have created them. Psalm. 89.12.

4. For Oaths or Covenants, which were confirmed with the right hand. Their
right hand is a right hand of falsehood. Psalm. 144.8. That is, they kept no
covenants. Here it is taken in the first sense.

And in her left hand. Riches and honor are said to be in wisdoms left hand,
because though useful, yet not so useful, or good, as life it self. The word
(...) signifies

1. The left hand. Toward Isreal's left hand. Gen 48.13.

2. The North, because it is on the left hand, if ones face be toward the
rising Sun. On the left hand of Damascus. Genesis 14.15. that is, on the North
side of it. Here it is taken in the first sense.

Riches. Money, and lands, and temporal possessions. These also are types of
all sufficiency in heaven, as Canaan, the land flowing with milk and honey was.

And honor. The word (...) signifies respect from others: it comes from a word
that signifies to be heavy, or weighty, for honor, as it arises from the
weight of good qualities in men, so it adds weight to men persons, and makes
them of greater account then others; and this also may be a type of heavenly
glory. Yet good men oftentimes neither have long life, riches, nor honor.
Temporal promises are conditional, and to be performed, as they may stand with
Gods glory, and our good, and what is wanting, shall abundantly be made good in
heaven. Wisdom does not bestow these earthly blessings always on her
followers, yet oftentimes she does: wisdom is the ready way to obtain these,
and many thereby come from a poor and low estate, to a plentiful and high
condition, and enjoy it long in this world. The sum of all is, God rewards
his with both hands, promising eternal life, and competent means in this life.
Christ, the wisdom of the Father is immortal, he has overcome death, and
with his immortal hand, holds forth immortality to us. If thou will have
riches and honor, be wise, and he will hold out his left hand and bestow them
on thee, if they be fit for thee.

Figures. The whole verse is metaphorical in the principal scope of it, though
verified literally to some wise and good men: It intimates, that as a Queen
has greater or lesser rewards for her servants, so has wisdom for hers: For
she has no right hand nor left, but diversity of gifts, some greater, some
lesser, some in this world, some in the world to come.

Note. 1. The greater gift.

2. The lesser.

In the former observe

1. The gift. Length of days. Long life.

2. The worth of it, Is in her right hand. It is a right handed gift.

In the latter, note

1. The gift it self, which is double, And riches, and honor.

2. The value of it, In her left hand. It is a left handed gift, useful, but
of lesser value then the former.

Doct. 1. Many good things attend upon true wisdom. This is proved in this
Chapter, from Verse 14. to verse 18.

1. Comparatively, it is better then silver, yea then fine gold, yea then
Rubies, yea then any thing imaginable, or desirable.

2. Particularly, she brings long life, and riches to sweeten that, and honor
to make it more acceptable, and pleasantness to comfort against crosses, and
peace for quiet enjoyment of what we have; and life after death, when all
worldly comforts fail.

3. Summarily. It brings happiness, which contains all good things in it. So
he concludes. ver. 28. as he began. ver. 13. with happiness attending on true
wisdom, if it be not only laid hold on, but retained.

Reason. Many good things attend on wisdom.

1. By way of concomitancy. As beads, and pearls hang many on one string, and
many lesser attend upon one greater, so other good things are joined with, and
attend upon wisdom.

2. By what way of efficiency. Wisdom has a plotting head. If any good thing
be to be had, it will find it out, and reach it.

3. By way of remuneration from God. So God rewarded Solomon's desire of wisdom
with riches, and honor. 2 Chronicles. 1.7. etc.

Use. Who would not enjoy many good things? Go then the nearest way to the
wood: get true wisdom. He that knew, what would be dear, need be a Merchant
but a year. If one told you of a commodity would make you rich, ye would get
store of it quickly. Do so of wisdom.

2. Doct. Wisdom brings long life. See on ver. 2. and on ver. 8.

Reason. 1. Because wisdom foresees, what is profitable to prolong, or
hurtful to shorten men's days, and carefully provides the one, and avoids the
other.

2. Because it rules our unruly passions of fear, grief, anger, which overrule
many men, that want wisdom, and bring them early to their grave, by murderers,
robberies, wantonness, gluttony, drunkenness, surfets, palsies, gouts,
plurises, Apoplexies, and afterward send them to Hell for ever. But wisdom
makes men stout, cheerful, patient, which virtues help to prolong men's days.

3. Because it teaches a man temperance, and moderation, in the use of meat,
and drink, which keeps men from surfeit, and is the mother of health, and long
life. Experience shows, that temperate men live longest.

4. Because of Gods promise of long life to such as are wise, as in the text.

Use. Let this particular mercy also stir us up to seek after true wisdom.
Long life is a sweet mercy, and generally desired Seek it in the ways of
wisdom. Folly brings many to untimely ends.

3. Doct. Wisdom brings riches also. Abraham Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David were
both wise, and rich.

Reason. 1. Because wisdom teaches a man to make conscience to labor in his
calling, which is the high way to riches. He knows that God requires it, and
his family, the Church; and the Commonwealth.

2. Gods blessing follows it. For when he gives one blessing, he gives another.
If he give wisdom, he can afford riches.

Use. To blame those, that would be rich, but care not for being wise. Wisdom
can make men rich; but riches cannot make men wise. It is often observed, that
the elder brotheri carry away the land, and the younger the wit. So God divides
his gifts, when he please. They that seek money before wisdom, count learning
the way to beggary. But God reckons otherwise.

4. Doct. Wisdom brings honor also. We see it in Joseph, who for his wisdom
was made ruler over the land of Egypt. Genesis 41.38, 39. And Daniel for the same
reason was made ruler over the whole Province of Babylon. Dan. 2.48.

Reason. 1. Because God has cut out such, and stamped them for honor, which
he will not give to fools, that know not how to use it, or to carry themselves
suitably. Honor is not seemly for a fool. Prove. 26.1. He will do hurt with it,
as a stone in a sling. Prove. 26.8.

2. God causes great men, and states to advance such, for they know, they will
be fit instruments for their service, and the public good.

3. Good men will honor wise men, who know best, what belongs to honor.

Use. To blame those who look not after that honor, that wisdom brings, but
seek to get honor by baseness, flattery, and humouring others in sinful
ways. This honor hangs on a rotten bough. It will surely fall. Seek rather by
wisdom to get honor, which will last for ever.

5. Doct. Long life is better then riches, or honor. Therefore it is mentioned
as the greatest promise. With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my
salvation. Psalm. 91.16. This crowns all the former mercies mentioned in that
Psalm. This is commended in good men at their death, when no mention is made
of riches, or honor: Abraham died in a good old age, an old man, and full of
years. Genesis 25.8. It is there doubled, yea, trebled in different expressions as
a singular mercy, never to be fogotten.

Reason. 1. Because long life is the basis, and foundation of the comfort of
both the other. Riches and honor do little good, or bring little comfort,
where life is short. Life is an internal principle, without which there is no
comfort in external things, no more then to a jewel set in gold.

2. Because long life may be comfortable without either riches or honor. Many
live very cheerfully too, and in old age, that never had any great means, or
preferment.

Use. To comfort us against the crosses, and infirmities of old age. Many are
dejected, because they are not so much respected, nor so rich as others. Think
with thy self, long life is better. These could do thee no good, if life were
gone, and thou may have comfort without them.

6. Doct. Riches and honor are blessings in themselves, though by many abused.
They are wisdoms gift. Riches, and honor are with me. Chap. 8.18. They are
Gods gift. I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honor. 2 Chronicles. 1.12.

Reason. 1. Because they are reckoned up amongst those blessings, that God
gives to them, that obey him. Them that honor me I will honor. 1 Samuel 2.30.
It comes in among blessings promised to Gods obedient people. Deuteronomy. 28.2. etc.

2. The contraries are reckoned amongst Gods curses. See Deuteronomy. 28.17.33.44.

Use. To reprove those, that turn blessings into curses: Of whom we may say, it
had been good for them, if they had never been rich, nor honorable. There is a
sore evil which I have seeen under the Sun, namely, riches kept for the owners
thereof to their hurt. Eccl. 5.13. And the like had Solomon observed concerning
honor, There is a time', wherein one man rules over another to his own hurt
Eccl. 8.9. Such riches and preferment be far from Gods people. Amen.

VER. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness: and all her paths are peace.
HEre is another motive to get wisdom: would thou go in pleasant ways, and
live in peace, and quietness? All wisdoms ways are such. The man who gets
wisdom, gets true happiness, and delight. When Merchants go by Sea, or
passengers by land, they are glad, when they find fair way, and a quiet
passage. They desire not to be staid, nor hindered in their journey, but to go
at ease without any disturbance, which yet sometime they miss. But such as
walk wisely, find ways of pleasure, and peace. These words are fitly knit to
the former, for long life, and riches, and honor are not sufficient to make a
man happy. He may meet with many occasions of sorrow, and of War, and trouble,
which may make his life very uncomfortable. Here therefore Solomon adds to the
former blessings, pleasure, and peace, to show, that nothing is wanting to a
wise man. He had commended wisdom before ex part termini, from happiness in
the end: now he commends it ex part medii, from the comfort of the way. The
allective power of wisdom is set out in this verse, the conservative in the
next.

For the words.

Her ways Her precepts, or the walking in them. For the word see on Chap. 2.13.

Are ways of pleasantness. Very pleasant ways, and such as men may walk in
with delight, like green fields full of flowers, the pleasure whereof makes a
man forget his weariness, and come to his journies end, before the be aware.
They are no way tedious, though they be never so long. Wisdom is the true Naomi
(for so the Hebrew word sounds) whose beauty may allure all to it: but never
will be turned into a Marah, bitterness, as she was. Ruth 1.20. For the word
see on Chap. 2.10.

And all. Secon Chap. 1.13. Or Any. Take which of them you will, even the
hardest, you cannot choose amiss: it will bring peace. See on Verse 15.

Her paths. See on Chap. 1.15.

Are peace. Are paths of pea^^, that a man may walk in peaceably, and that lead
to true and lasting peace; thereby is meant, that they are not only pleasant,
but also safe and prosperous. Many pleasant ways on earth may be unsafe, as
robbing ways, and many safe ways unpleasant, as dirty ways; but wisdoms
ways are pleasant and safe. Kabvenaki. For the word, see on Verse 2.

Figures. A metaphor in ways, and paths, which signify a constant course.

Note 1. A promise of comfort.

2. Of peace and prosperity.

In the first note.

1. The subject, whose ways are comfortable. Her ways. Wisdoms ways, not
follies.

2. The adjunct showing what they are, Are ways of pleasantness. Not
profitable only, but delightful also.

In the second observe.

1. The Subject. And her paths. That is, the paths of wisdom.

2. The Adjunct of quantity. All of them.

3. The Adjunct of quality. Are peace. They are peaceable, and prosperous.

1. Doct. Nothing is wanting to a man truly wise. This text with the coherence
proves it abundantly: what would a wise man have? would he have long life? Here
it is. If riches, here also. If honor, it is ready for him. If pleasure, it is
at hand. If peace, it is prepared for him. If health, lo here it is. If
happiness it self, the wise man offers it first and last. Verse 13.18.

Reason. 1. Because of Gods favor. Wise men are Gods favorites. And what may
not Princes favorites have in a Nation.

2. Because of Gods promise to such as walk uprightly, as wise men do, that no
good thing shall be withheld from them. Ps. 84.11. To such as fear him, There
is no want to them. Psalm. 34.9. And that wise men do. The fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom. Chap. 1.7. Lions, strongest creatures shall lack and
suffer hunger; which if the world afford food, they will not do: but they that
seek the Lord (as all truly wise do) shall not want any good thing. Psalm.
34.10. They can lack nothing that can God give.

3. Because of their capacity, and industry to get good things. If any know
how, and be willing to take pains to get good things, wise men do. They lie
not in a ditch, and cry God help. They know, that will not do it.

Use. Here is a further encouragement to labor for wisdom. Who would not be
in such a state to want nothing that is good? Jacobs condition is better then
Esaus in the original, and better then your translation makes it, which makes
them both alike, for in it both say I have enough but in the Hebrew. Esau
says, (...) I have much, Jacob says (...) I have all. Genesis 33.9.11. And so he
had indeed for he had God, and all. An unwise man may have many good things; a
wise man has all.

2. Doct. Wisdom has ways of her own. So had wise Solomon strange ways to
the Queen of Shebah. She admires them. 1 King. 10.5. And Christ had strange
ways to the Jews, who much strange at them. Matthew. 11.9.

Reason. 1. It appears in humane wisdom. The ways of Lawyere, Physltians,
Mathematicians, Archiects, are strange to others.

2. And principally in heavenly wisdom. Her ways are strange to Philosophers,
whose rules reach but to morality. Strange to Heretics, who set up themselves,
not God by all their practices, and opinions. Strange to carnal Gospellers,
who must have pleasure, or profit with profession of religion. Strange to
Hypocrites, who would be accounted godly, though they be Atheists in heart.

Use. Here is a touchstone to try, whether we be truly godly or no. Are our
ways sinful, and worldly, or holy, and heavenly. This will try us. We must
not be watermen in religion, loook one way and row another.

3. Doct. One wise action suffices not, but all must be guided by wisdom;
Else we shall shame our selves. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary
to send forth a stinking savor: so does a little folly him, that is in
reputation for wisdom, and honor. Eccl. 10.1. It was Jehus shame, that when he
had destroyed Baal out of Israel, he departed not fnom the sins of Jeroboam the
son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 2 King. 10.28, 29.

Reason. 1. Because no man shall be tried at the day of judgment by any one
act, but by the course of his life: so good men judge of men's estates here. An
Hospital built cannot save a murderer from the gallows.

2. Many foolish actions outweigh one wise one; a fool may speak or do wisely
sometimes, yet is not therefore deemed wise.

Use. Here is a second trial of true wisdom, if it appears not sometimes, but
in the course of our lives, not in some one action, but in all, or in the most:
one Swallow makes not a Summer, nor one good Apple, a good Apple Tree.

Doct. 4. There is much true delight in wisdoms ways. My yoke is easy, and
my burden is light. Mat. 11.30. More to be desired are they then gold, yea then
much fine gold; sweeter also then honey and the honey comb. Psalm. 19:10. Some
ways are pleasant in the passage, but bitter in the end, others foul in the
passage, but comfortable in the end; wisdoms ways are pleasant in both.

1. In the way, and that 1. Spiritually. And therein.

1. Because they are wrought in God, and by Gods strength all along. John 3.21.
Principium, vector, dux, semita, terminus idem. God is the beginning, carier
on, guide, way, and end of good men's actions: No marvel then if he give them
comfort in them.

2. They are lovely in themselves, and have in them all things that may afford
true delight, but nothing loathsome to raise dislike; sinful foolish courses on
the contrary, have much in them to affright, nothing to delight.

3. They have nothing truly difficult in them, though they may seem to men to
have. Smooth ways have nothing in them to make men stumble, yet men may slip
by carelessness in the smoothest way. Here is no offering up of children in
Gods ways, which the heathen did to false Gods: yea, it is now smoother then
the Jews way was in the old Testament; no painful Circumcision, nor extreme
costly Sacrifices, no thousands of Rams, nor ten thousand rivers of Oil. Mic.
6.7.

4. They have pramium ante praemium, a reward beforehand. Much comfort in wise
actions, while they are in doing them, as in praying, singing, giving, etc.
some degree of comfort follows every good action, as heat follows fire, as
beams of light, and influences come from the shining Sun. The heathen found
some comfort in moral actions, Christians may find more in spiritual
employments. In keeping of them there is great reward. Psalm. 19.11.

2. As in spiritual, so in temporal things, wise men find much comfort in
their ways, when fools bring sorrow upon themselves. Likewise in the end, as
well as in the way, wise men find comfort; yea, more in the end then in the
way: the hope of heaven makes the way comfortable, although it should be
tedious in it self, and meet with many rubs.

Use. This should encourage us, not only to seek to know wisdoms ways, but
also to walk cheerfully in them, in despite of all discouragements.

If any object, it is difficult to get the knowledge of those ways, and much
more difficult to walk in them.

The answer is, there is pleasure in them as well as profit, and that will make
them easy and delightful. Omne tulit punctum, quimiscit utile dulci. Join
profit and pleasure together, and men will never talk of difficulty. Now wisdom
makes a marriage of profit with pleasure; her ways may seem difficult at
first, by reason of the corruption of the flesh, but when the first brunt is
over, they prove easy and pleasant, whereas the ways of folly are pleasant at
first, and bitter at last. Let us therefore admire at wisdoms ways, get the
knowledge of them, practice them, and rejoice in them.

Doct. 5. Peace attends upon wisdoms ways. Mark the perfect man, and behold
the a pright, for the end of that man is peace. Psalm. 37.37. Now none but men
truly wise, are perfect, and upright.

Reas. 1. They bring inward peace of mind, and quietness: Men's own follies do
more distract them, then other men's malice, or plots against them. God gives
wisemen quietness of mind, both in prosperity and adversity; it is contrary
with worldly men, they have no rest in their minds, nor are not pleased in any
condition, but godly wisemen are quiet in every estate.

2. They bring outward peace: wisdom teaches men how to avoid occasions of
quarrels, by which foolish men are ruined.

3. They bring peace with God, which is best of all, for it brings men to the
knowledge of Christ, the only reconciler of God and man, and so affords that
peace, which the world cannot give. Ioh. 7.27. and which passes all
understanding. Phil. 4.7. and so drives all storms out of the conscience,
assuring believers, that they have peace with God. Romans 5.1. And that there is
no condemnation to them. Romans 8.1.

4. Peace with our neighbors. For it teaches us to give every one their own.
And what ground have they then to quarrel with us? yea, if they do us hurt, it
teaches us to do them good. And this is the way to quench all fire of
contention.

5. It shows us the way to eternal peace by Christ our Savior, that we may
walk on quietly to Heaven, while others contend for inheritances on Earth. Thus
it brings peace external, internal, eternal, and makes not only the end
pleasant, but also the way. And as travelers in their weary journeies comfort
themselves not only with thoughts of rest at night, but also with comfortable
objects in the way, so do men truly wise joy here in the thought of Heaven
hereafter.

6. They are ways prescribed by God, who is, The God of peace. Heb. 13.20.

1. Object. How can wise, and godly men have external peace, when all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12.

Answ. 1. They have not always times of persecution, but sometimes peace.

2. God gives them such a valiant spirit, that they overcome all opposition, as
the Martyrs did the fire.

2. Object. How can they have internal peace, when as long as they live, they
have civil wars within? The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other, so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would. Gal. 5.17.

Answ. 1. These wars tend to peace: yea, they are a sure token of eternal
peace, in the end: for there is no such combat in the souls of wicked fools.

2. In the midst of these wars there is peace with God: and then these
conflicts may be counted as nothing, as when a man has peace with Giants, and
is at war with Pigmies.

3. Ob. But how can they be sure of eternal peace in the end; when God
sometimes frowns upon them, and they are forced to cry out, Has God fogotten
to be gracious? Psalm. 77.9.

Answ. This is but sometimes, when God will correct, or try them. But he brings
them back again, and makes them to say. This is mine infirmity, O the years of
the right hand of the most high! Psalm. 77.10. This is more passionate, and
emphaticall, then to add, But I will remember, as the Translation do.

4. Ob. But we are always in danger of temptations. We walk between two
extremes of sin, and are waylaid by Devils, and ungodly men, like travelers,
that pass between two Countries at war one with another, where the ways are
full of robbers. How can our ways then be peaceable, walk we never so wisely?

Answ. They are peaceable, not that they free us from all opposition; But

1. Because they keep us safe in the midst of all opposition. Country-Villages
are subject to plundering in war, but strong Castles are safe, so long as they
want not provision, not ammunition.

2. Because they lead us to a quiet end for ever, when these storms are all
gone, and over; who ever perished in these ways? A whole world died by foolish
ways, as in the flood, when Noah walking in these ways escaped. Genesis 6.13, 14.

Use. To show us the vast difference between godly, and fleshly wisdom. The
former brings lawful pleasure, and certain peace. The latter brings sorrows,
and troubles upon men's minds, bodies, estates here, and for ever by their own
plots. True wisdom goes no where, but all her ways are strowed with pleasure,
and walled in with peace.

6. Doct. No way of wisdom breeds trouble in it self. See David's wisdom in
ordering his for the preventing of trouble in his family, in the City, and in
the Land. Psalm. 101. It may be by accident trouble may attend on the wisest
ways by reason of corruption in others, and our selves, for wisdom is
imperfect in us, and them, but that comes not from wisdom, but from lack of it.

Reason. 1. Because the ways of wisdom are just ways

2. They are merciful ways. Justice and mercy bring not troubles naturally,
but injustice and cruelty.

Use. See the cause of all our troubles, want of wisdom. Bewail it, and beware
for time to come.

VER. 18. She is a tree of life to them, that lay hold on her, and happy is
every one, that retains her.
SOlomon goes on to set out the commendation of wisdom, that he may allure men
to seek the more earnestly after her. He had set out her excellency by silver,
gold, pearls, She is silver to poor men, gold to Noble men, and Pearls to
Princes. Aeneas Silvius. See Acts and Monuments in the end of the reign of
Henry 6.2. Edit. Now he sets out wisdoms excellency

1. By comparing her to the tree of life.

2. By promising happiness to them, that get, and keep her. For the words.
She. Wisdom spoken of ver. 13. and compared to a rich, and beautiful Queen.
ver. 16.

Is a tree of life. Like to a living tree, that brings forth store of pleasant
fruit to delight and preserve the life of the eaters. Or more particularly, as
most writers agree, it is an allusion to the tree of life in Paradise. Genesis
2.9. which was a sign to Adam, that he should live for ever. Genesis 22. and that
in health, strength, and comfort upon Earth, if he sinned not. So wisdom
restores us to that we lost in Adam, eternal life, but in a better place in
Heaven. The word (...) signifies.

1. Dry wood, such as we burn. Behold the fire and the wood. Genesis 22.7.

2. A tree, from which wood uses to be cut. He shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of water. Psalm. 1.3.

3. A stick, or table of wood to write on. Take thee one stick, and write upon
it. Ezekiel. 37.16.

4. An Idol of wood. Saying to a stock (or, wood) thou art my Father. Jer. 2.27.

5. A pair of gallows. Pharach shall hang thee on a tree. Genesis 40.19.

6. A wooden vessel. In vessels of wood. Exodus 7.19.

7. The staff of a spear. The staff of whose spear was like (...) a weavers
beam. 2 Samuel Sam. 21.19. Here it is taken in the second sense for a green and
fruitful tree. (...) Life is the d^all number, for there is a life here, and a
life in heaven, as (...) waters above the firmament, and below, and (...) the
heavens starry and aerie.

To them that lay hold upon her. The word (...) signifies a fa^ laying hold on
a thing, as ones own, and as not willing to let it go.

And. Or Then. Or Therefore. A conclusion drawn from the former words. If she
bring eternal life, then without question all that retain her are happy.

Happy. He shall walk on prosperously, for so much the word imports.

Is every one that retains her. Heb. They that retain her, he is blessed. A
participle singular, with a plural. That is, every particular man of them is
happy. See the like, Numb. 24.9. Blessed is he that blesses thee. Wisdom does
not only preserve men's lives, as a tree of life, but also makes men happy: but
this happiness is not to every one, as fruit does not do good to them that
that look on it, or touch it, or smell to it, but that gather, cat it, and
digest it: So wisdoms fruit does no good to them that seek it slightly, or
think a little enough but to them that take pains to get, and care to keep it,
that will not let her go till they have sound out the depth of her creasure,
that observe all her commands, even the least, and persevere in so doing to the
last. The word (...) signifies sometimes to lay fast hold, so as not to part
with a thing. Judgment and justice take hold on thee. Job 36.17. Sometimes to
uphold a thing. Thy right hand upholdeth me. Psalm. 63.8. Here it is taken in
the first sense, for laying fast hold on wisdom, as meaning never to part with
it: It cannot be taken in the second sense for upholding wisdom, for it upholds
us, not we it.

Figures. A metaphor in the Tree of life. Wisdom is like it in the good fruits
thereof. As also metaphors in laying fast hold on it, and retaining it, or
locking it up fase, that it may not be lost, as men lock up fruit and treasures.

Note. 1. A description of the excellency of wisdom: 2. The happiness of the
possessore of it.


In the former note.

1. What she is, She is a tree of life. 2. To whom she is so, To them that lay
hold on her.
In the latter, observe

1. The adjunct, And happy. 2. The subject, Is every one that retains her.
Doct. 1. Scripture must be understood by Scripture. Wisdom is not only a
living tree, but a tree that not alone signifies continuance of life, as the
tree of life did, Genesis 2.9. but also brings eternal life. So the one text
gives light unto the other. A wise man is as it were restored into Paradise in
this life, Erat Adae in lignis caeteris alimentum, in ligno vitae sacramentum
sapientiae, Adam had aliment in the other trees, but in the tree of life he had
a Sacrament of wisdom, says a learned writer.

Reas. 1. Because they were written by an infallible spirit, and therefore the
writers could not err in giving their own meaning, or the meaning of one
another.

2. None have an infallible spirit now, and therefore the best may err in
interpreting some place of Scripture.

Quest. How can we interpret Scripture by Scripture?

Ans. 1. By consulting with the original. As if children differ about their
fathers legacy, Non itur ad tumulum, sed curritur ad Testamentum, They go not
to the Tomb, but run to the Testament. Optat.

2. By observing the coherence with what goes before, and what follows; as we
pick out the meaning of a friends letter by the Scope of it, and by the rest of
the words.

3. By parallel places, as by comparing diverse letters to one purpose.

4. By plain places or grounds of religion, to interpret the rest, that are
built thereupon, as we do in Logic and other Arts.

Use 1. To blame the Papists, who submit the sense of the Scriptures to
Fathers, Councels, and to the Pope singly.

2. To teach us to use this help in difficult places, and not to allow of any
sense of any place of Scripture, not agreeing with other Scriptures. So about
Baptism, Go teach all nations. The original is, Make Disciples of all
nations, Mat. 28.19. And that by Baptizing, as follows in the words, and
Teaching follows afterward, verse 20. So that this place makes nothing
against Infants baptism. So about the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.50. is pleaded
against it, yet all the Chapter before and after pleads for it. The Apostle
says there, Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God: His meaning
is, mortal, and corruptible flesh and blood cannot come to heaven, till it be
changed: so he expounds himself in the end of that Verse, and the Verse
following, Neither does corruption inherit incorruption. And, We shall all be
changed. Thus John 14.28. is brought to disprove Christ's divine Nature Christ
says, My father is greater then I: This must be understood of his human
nature, for in regard of his divine, the Apostle says, He thought it no
robbery to be equal with God. Phil. 2.6. The Jews understood this, that He
made himself equal with God. John 5.18. which had been blasphemy indeed, had
not he been true God. So for excluding bread out of the Lords Supper, Mat.
26.26. This is my body, is cited by the Papists; but it must be understood
figuratively, not literally: The meaning is, this is the sign of my body; for
Paul calls it bread, when it is eaten, 1 Cor. 11.26. God cannot contradict
himself.

Doct. 2. Wisdom affords true nourishment: Not for a time, as fruits of trees
do, but for ever; therefore it is compared to milk for babes, and strong meat
for men. Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. And to milk again. 1 Pet. 2.2.

Reas. 1. Because it shows how to get, and dress food for the body.

2. How moderately to exercise the body, without which food will not digest.

3. How to keep a cheerful mind, without which, food will not be profitable to
the body, nor nourish it.

4. It shows how the soul may be nourished by justification, through the blood
of Christ, without which it pines away under the sense and of guilt of sin, and
of the wrath of God.

5. How it may be nourished by sanctification, that so all sins, which are as
obstructions, being killed, all the graces of Gods Spirit may be increased in
us.

6. How it may be fullfed to glorification, where it shall need no more food.

Use. Labor for this true wisdom, as men do for food to nourish them: This
is to be found in the word of God. Let others despise the scripture (as Aenaeas
Silvius speaks of councills) so may we say of Gods word, call bread stones, if
you will, so you give it me to nourish me. Acts and Monuments, in the end of
the reign of Henry the sixth. All the labor of man is for his mouth. Eccles.
6.7. Men plow, sow, plant, work, for bodily food; why should we not labor more
for wisdom, that will feed the body here, and the soul to eternity? Praeclare
Plato beatum ait, cui etiam in senectute contigerit, ut sapientiam, verasque
opiniones assequi possit. Cic. 5. de finibus. Plato excellently says, He is
happy that in his old age can attain wisdom, and true opinions.

Doct. 3. Wisdom makes a perfect cure. The leaves did heal the nations. Rev.
22.2. The Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.

Reas. 1. Because it cures hereditary diseases, which Physicians cannot, as the
darkness of the mind, perverseness of the will, crosnesse of the affections,
received from our Parents.

2. It cures infectious diseases, as sinful courses received from others, by
bad counsel or example.

3. It cures the thoughts of the heart, which no law of man, nor Physic can do.

4. It cures the tongue and words, and teaches how to speak wisely and
profitably.

5. It cures the life, and teaches how to avoid temptations, and provocations
to sin.

6. It cures the body too from some diseases here by Physic, and other good
means, and perfectly at the Resurrection: Then, God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall be any more pain, for the former things are passed away. Rev.
21.4.

Use. Praise God for communicating this wisdom to you in his word, especially,
if ye have found good by this course of spiritual Physic already, it is Gods
work, and he will finish it.

Doct. 4. Wisdom does good to none, but to those that get it fully, and firmly.
As fruit of trees does no good to them that seek it only, or touch it; so the
fruit of wisdom to none but those that eat, that is, obtain it; that seek it
not slightly, or think a little enough, but that take pains still for more:
not that look over the precepts as men look over an Almanac, but as men
seriously study good books, John Baptists, and Christ's preaching did no good,
but to them, that regarded it. We have piped unto you, but ye have not danced,
etc. Mat. 11.17. Paul's Gospel is hid to them that are lost. 2 Cor. 4.3.

Reason. 1. Because there must be a conjunction of things, before there can be
an operation of the one upon the other. The soul must be infused into the body,
before it can work on the body to make the tongue to speak, the foot to go,
the hand to work. A man must be married to a woman before he can take care for
her, as for a wife. So must wisdom be joined to the heart, before it can work
on heart, soul, or body.

2. Because it is so in all other gifts of God. A man cannot be liberal, to
whom God gives no riches, nor fight stoutly, to whom God gives no strength, nor
do any good with wisdom, or get any good by it, to whom God gives it not.

Use. See the cause, why many get no good by the word of wisdom so long
preached to them; Because they lay not fast hold on it. They hear many sermons,
but regard them not. The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed
with faith in them that heard it. Heb. 4.2. Seed grows not, if the ground
receive it not. Rain does no good, till the earth be softened.

5. Doct. Wisdom must not only be received into the heart, but retained there,
as seed in the ground, till it bring forth fruit. They are the good ground, who
having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience. Lu. 15.
Many showers, and sun-shines must come, before the Corn be ripe: The word must
abide like a graft in a tree Jam. 1.21.

1. Reason. Because things work not at first. Trees must grow before they bring
fruit. Meat must be digested before it nourish. So must wisdom be retained, and
gotten to a habit, before it can work well.

2. Because when it is left, it leaves working, as meat when it is ^^st out
upward, or downward.

Use. To blame those, that entertain wisdom, but retain it not, give it a good
countenance, and reject it, use it as a stranger, afford it a good meal, and
turn it out of doors. So do the Heretics, Apostates, Worldlings, men above
ordinances, for sure Gods ordinances are full of wisdom.

6. Doct. Such as not only receive wisdom; but retain it, are happy indeed:
Blessed is the man, that hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the
posts of my doors. For who so finds me, finds life: and shall obtain favor
of the Lord. Chap. 8.34, 35. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants
which stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom. 1 King. 10.8. Wisdom
does good to them, that will not let her go, till they find out the depth of
her treasure.

Reason. 1. Because true wisdom, and happiness are inseparable They are so in
God. They are so in the Creature. Adam, while he was wise, was happy, His folly
did undo himself, and the world. Solomon was happy, till he dealt unwisely,
and was gulled by silly women. When Solomon was old, his wives turned away his
heart after other Gods. 1 King. 11.4. Therefore God rent his Kingdom from his
Son, verse 11, 12. there.

2 Because such are Gods instruments to make others happy, and that not by
accident, but out of an earnest desire in themselves. And God will reward them.

3. They have Gods word for it. They that be wise, shall shine as the
brightness of the Firmament. Dan. 12.3. That Word that made a world of
nothing, and all the comforts wise men have in it, can make wise men happy.

4. They have God himself for their portion, who is the Fountain of all
happiness. How can he want water, that has a perpetual fountain? David was
wise, and claimed this portion. O Lord I said, Thou art my portion in the Lord
of the living. Psalm. 142.5.

Use. 1. To reprove such as lay a claim to happiness, but without a ground, as
they that despise wisdom, or that brag of it, but have it not, or have cast it
off. They may be rich; they cannot be happy.

2. To exhort us to take the right way to true happiness. Studiously to seek
true wisdom, and carefully to keep it, as the richest jewel in the world.
Though thou be despised by the world, as a poor snake, or contemptible
caitiffe, yet God counts thee wise, and will make thee happy.

VER. 19. The Lord by wisdom has founded the Earth, by understanding has he
established the heavens.
IN this Verse and the next, Solomon flies high, and commends wisdom from
working by it, and from the things which he wrought. As if he had said, what
need I say more in commendation of wisdom? The whole world, which ye see, was
made by it. Here he shows, how it comes to pass that wisdom makes men happy.
It was that, whereby God made the World, and therefore he can make men happy by
it. Great things were attributed to wisdom before, but greater here. As if
Solomon had said, O young man, thou have heard many things in commendation of
wisdom, now hear more, and greater, that thou may be the more inflamed with
the love of it. It is not a wisdom found out by men, as the Philosophers
imagined, who thought all wisdom depended upon their precepts, and might be
gotten by humane industry. The wisdom, whereof I speak, is far antienter then
the world, for the very foundations of the world were laid by it. Think not
then this wisdom a thing feigned in the brains of men, and perishing with
them, and therefore to be despised, but look upon her, as upon Jesus Christ the
eternal son of God and Creator of the World together with God the Father.
Solomon does not now set out wisdom by benefits to us, as before, but by the
majesty thereof, and the greatness of the works, that God does by it. Among
which the making of Heaven, and Earth, and all things therein is exceeding
commendable: But it may be objected: Solomon had before commended wisdom, as it
is in men: why does he now sore so high from wisdom in men to wisdom in God,
there being so vast a difference? The wisest man on Earth is but a fool to God,
and must never expect by his wisdom to do such great things, as God has done.

I answer. 1. Because Solomon's intention was to commend wisdom in general, be
it in the Creator, or in the Creature.

2. Because wisdom in man has some resemblance of that wisdom, that is in
God, though it be far short of it.

3. Because it is a little stream coming from that infinite fountain of wisdom
that is in God, yet not materially, for God has never the less, but
effectively, as wrought in us by it. When a man has commended the stream, and
showed the virtues of it, it adds to the credit of it to show the fountain,
whence it comes, and the admirable effects thereof: So it is a commendation to
man's exquisit wisdom, to show, that it comes from the infinite wisdom of God,
by which heaven and earth were made.

4. To prove it may well guide a man in all his affairs in the world, and make
him happy (as Verse 18.) seeing it comes from that wisdom by which God made all
things, the settling of solid things, as heaven, and earth, are set down in this
verse, and of liquid things, as waters, and rain, Verse 20.

For the words.

The Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

By wisdom. See on Chap. 1.7. Wisdom may be understood as of an attribute of
God, for his infinite wisdom was used in the creation of the world: But it is
better to understand it of Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the father, By whom all
things were made, and without whom, was not any thing made, that was made. Joh.
1.3.

Has founded. Has laid the foundations of the earth so sure, that though it
hang in the midst of heaven, yet it subsists of it self, remains unmovable,
and upholds the rest of the world. It is like the rock upholding the house.
Mat. 7.24, 25. The earth is the lowest of all the elements, the center of the
rest, upholding them all without any thing under it, to uphold it. Thus men and
beasts have room, where they may live and breath: though it have no foundation,
yet it stands as fast, as if it had a strong foundation, answerable to the
greatness of it. The words may admit a double sense, either that God did at
first by his infinite wisdom, so justly poise the earth, that it should be
upheld by its own equal weight, and have no inclination to move upward,
downward, or aside; or else, that Gods power immediately still without any
thing wrought in the earth at first, upholds it, as a sure foundation, and
makes it a lasting foundation to uphold all the visible world. God by his
infinite wisdom so placed the earth as a foundation, that should never remove
out of his place, lest the foundation failing, the rest of the building should
fall and perish.

The earth. Not only the body of the earth, but also all the creatures that
are, or live in it: for it is opposed to the heavens. He mentions the earth
first, because it is the center of the heavens, and therefore says, he has
founded it: But he is said to stablish the heavens above, which have the earth
for a foundation beneath. For the word, see on Chap. 2.22.

By understanding. God uses diverse words to the same purpose, to show, that
all kind of wisdom is in God, and his Christ. For the word, see on Chap. 2.2.

Has he established. So fitted all the parts of heaven, that they continue
fast together, and each observe their several motions, as Planets, fixed
Stars, first mover in their places, Orbs, or Spears. This must be
understood of the visible Heavens, the beauty whereof we see, and admire at
Gods wisdom in it. For unto us, The heavens declare the glory of God, and the
firmament shows his handy work Psalm. 19.1. This word (...) is translated,
fashioning. Did not one fashion us in the womb? Job 31.15. To wit, by fitting
and framing all the members of the body in the womb: He covered the earth as it
were with a roof, the heavens he adorned with many Stars: He has not made
the heavens unmovable like the earth, but unweariable in their motion, and not
subject to diminution, or dissolution. This shows Gods infinite wisdom, for
palaces built by men fail.

(...) The heavens. The starry heavens, so it is used, Genesis 1.14. Let there be
lights in the firmament of the heaven. Though sometimes it be put for the Air,
for there are fouls of heaven mentioned as well as stars of heaven, Genesis
1.20. I find not the Hebrew word used at any time in the old Testament, for the
invisible heaven, which was not then so plainly made known, although the Greek
word in the new Testament be so used, Our conversation is in heaven. Phil.
3.20. That is, heavenly, like the carriage of Saints, and Angels there: It
has its name in Hebrew from (...) and (...) There are waters. And it intimats
two kinds of waters, one in the heavens above, the other in the earth beneath,
which also may be intimated by (...) being the duall number, and by (...) of
the duall number also, two visible heavens, Starry, and Airy.

Figures. Founded. A metaphor, for the earth has no foundation under it, but
God has made it as fast, as if it had a strong foundation to uphold it. Earth.
For the earth and all things in or on it. The part for the whole. So likewise
in the word Heaven. The part put for the whole, comprehending stars and all.

Note. 1. The foundation of the earth. 2. The establishment of the heavens.


In the first observe 1. The Agent. The Lord. 2. The instrument. By wisdom. 3.
The Act. Has founded. 4. The Object. The Earth.


In the second note 1. The Agent. He. 2. The Instrument. By understanding. 3.
The Act. Has. established. 4. The Object. The Heavens.


1. Doct. The world had a beginning In the beginning God created the Heaven and
the Earth. Genesis 1.1. Through faith we understand, that the worlds were framed
by the word of God. Heb. 11.3.

Reason. 1. Because the world could not make it self, and the refore the maker
must needs be before it. Causa prior causato. The cause is before the thing
caused. A builder must needs be before a house in time.

2. Because it is compounded of Heaven, Air, Earth, Sea, Stones, Trees, Beasts,
Men, Angels. Bodies are compounded of the Elements. Souls of faculties.
Empires of diverse people. A garment sewed together, had a beginning.

3. Because the world is mutable in all parts of it. Sometimes the Sun shines
in Heaven, sometimes the Moon, sometimes the stars, sometimes none of them are
seen. The air is sometimes clear, sometimes stormy. The Sea sometimes calm,
sometimes tempestuous. The Earth sometimes dry, sometimes wet. Kingdoms one
while in peace, another while in war. Living creatures one while well, another
while sick. All mutable things had a beginning: Who can change that which is
eternal?

4. Because it will have an end, as appears in the parts of it. Fishes, Birds,
Men die. Sea eats up Earth, Beasts; Earth expells Sea by man's art, and labor.
Some things had a beginning, which by the mercy, wisdom, and power of the
Creator shall be kept from having an end, who gives to all Creatures durance
long or shorter, as he please. To men for their generations. To stars to the
worlds end, to Angels, souls of men, and their bodies also after the
resurrection for eternity. But nothing that has an end, was without a
beginning It could not be at first without him, that can take the being of it
away, when he please. If it were from eternity, it can keep it self to
eternity.

Use. 1. It confutes those, who think the world to have been from eternity.
Their own bodies may teach them the contrary.

2. It confutes those that think not the world formally, but materially to be
from eternity. I say with Tertullian, Quod non lego, non credo. What I read
not, I believe not. Of it self it could not be so, being a dead thing: By God
it could not be made so; For every thing has his being before it produce any
other thing. It were dishonorable to God to have any thing eternal beside
himself. It would take away from him the credit of making the world, or at
least of making it out of nothing, which is a divine privilege. Singular
privileges are chiefest ornaments. It is some derogation, that others can do,
what we can. The Magicians were put to filence by lice, and confessed, This is
the finger of God. Exodus 8.19. And this opinion will help to bring in the form
from eternity too. For? some form it had, if it had a being: and who can alter
the form of that which is eternal. And so by consequence God made not the
world. And scoffers will grow more bold, and say, All things continne, not as
they were from the beginning of the Creation. 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. But as they were
before the Creation from eternity.

2. Doct. The wolrd was made by God. Where wast thou, when I laid the
foundations of the Earth; Job 38.4. By the word of the Lord were the Heavens
made: and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. Ps. 33.6.

Reason. 1. Because it was not from eternity, as appears by the changes in it.

2. It made not i^ self. That were a contradiction. It could not be in fieri,
and facto; made, and to be made both at one time. It must then work before it
be.

3. There was none else before the world was, to make it but God only. If an
house be found in an Island, wherein never any man, but one was, he must needs
build that house.

4. None else had wisdom enough to do such a work, if there had been men, or
Angels before the world. As no beast could build the foresaid house, if there
had been many in the Island.

Use. Give God the glory of it, and of all the comforts ye enjoy here, or shall
in heaven.

3. Doct. God shows wonderful wisdom in making the world. O Lord, how
manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm. 104.24. To
him, that by wisdom made the Heaven. Ps. 136.5.

Reason. 1. Because he made this spacious world out of nothing. The wisest man
in the world, or Angel in Heaven cannot work without matter. But God made the
whole world of nothing; Only his infinite wisdom could do such a work.

2. That excellency, that is in the world shows the Makers infinite wisdom.
What is the most curious picture of a man, beast, tree, star to the thing it
self? Like a dark shadow to the shining Sun. So low do men's best works lie
below Gods. This shows, that the foolishness of God is wiser then men. 1 Cor.
1.25. For that work of God, in which he shows least wisdom, argues more, then
that wherein the wisest man in the world shows most.

3. Because of the variety of these excellent works, both of several kinds,
and of several dispositions in each kind. Stars, Rivers, Trees, Beasts, Men,
Angels, Hills, Valleys, what thosands of each? No created wisdom can number
them, much less make them. How many thousands of men are in the world? yet
every face differs from one another.

4. Because of their excellent order. The stars are above our heads to give
light, the air about us to breath in, the Earth under us to tread on. Several
grounds for corn, pasture, gardens, orchards. What not?

Use. 1. Let us in the view of the creatures not only take delight in the
fight, and use of them, but also take notice of the wisdom of the Creator,
and praise him for it. The Earth is a College built by God, that in it we may
study his wisdom The Heavens a Commonwealth or Kingdom established by him. The
Sun the King, the Moon the Queen, the Stars the Nobility, Clouds the commons,
Spheres the Provinces. So we see a man's wisdom in his works and books, and God
shows us his in the Heavens, and in his Law. Psalm. 19.1, 7. Comparata omnia
creata ad Deum, sicut artificia ad artificem. Recuperus. All created things
compared to God, are as artificial works to the cunning workman. As they show
the workmans wisdom, so do these Gods, Yea, much more. For if we admire a watch
made by the art of man for the rare workmanship, and frame of the wheels and
their motions, how much more should we admire the wisdom of God in making the
glorious lights of Heaven with their revolutions, without which no watch could
exactly measure time? And in the variety of earthly creatures, without which
our lives could afford us no comfort?

2. Use. Take heed of finding any faults in the works of God. They were all
made in wisdom, though thy shallow brain cannot reach them.

4. Doct. God upholds the Earth strangely. The world is established, that it
cannot be moved. Ps. 93.1. No man can tell whereupon the Foundations of the
Earth are fastened. God poses Job with this question. Job 38.6. and may pose all
the world. They must answer with him, God hangs the Earth upon nothing. Job.
26.1.

And that 1. Because there is nothing above it, or under it to uphold it. It is
the lowest Element: and the Heavens above cannot uphold it.

2. Because it is above the power of nature to do it, or to know how it is done.

Use. When we tread on the earth, let us take notice who upholds it, and makes
it able to uphold us. No creature can do it The earth would sink under us, if
God did not strangely uphold it for us. Give God the glory then of your
sustentation.

5. Doct. God preserves the heavens, and heavenly creatures in their motion. It
is God, that in them has set a Tabernacle for the Sun to run a race. Psalm.
19.4, 5. Thou make the outgoings of the morning, and of the evening to
rejoice. Psalm. 65.8.

Reason. 1. Because the Heavens, and the Sun, Moon, and stars have no principle
of life in them, whereby to move themselves, much less of reason to direct
them in their various courses.

2. Because no creature, either man or angel, has wisdom or power enough to
do it.

Use. Take occasion from the daily motion of the heavenly bodies to bless God;
our spirits are comforted, and bodies directed by them, they are watches to
keep time for us, God keeps them in their motion, else would they deceive us,
and deprive us of their light and comfort.

Doct 6. All manner of wisdom is in God. It is expressed by diverse words in the
Text, Wisdom, and Understanding. We may well cry out with the Apostle, O the
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God. Romans 11.33.

Reas. 1. His word shows it to us, in which are the grounds of all arts and
sciences, and higher things then they.

2. His works show it, none has wisdom to do the like.

Use. Be humble, and see thine own folly: be thou never so wise, thou art but a
fool in respect of God, thou want some wisdom, he has all: Thou may say
of thy wisdom, as David of his age, Psalm. 39.5. My wisdom is nothing before
thee. Verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah.

VER. 20. By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop down
the dew.
GODS infinite wisdom was set out in the former verse, by the higher parts of
the world, the heavens, and by the lower, the earth; or, as was mentioned in
the former verse, by settling solid substances there, and liquid ones here, and
by ordering the two middle elements, air, and water.

For the words.

By his knowledge. Not by our knowledge of God, as the word is taken for our
knowledge of Christ, Isa. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many. But by Gods own wisdom. The words are varied, to show the plenty
of scripture language. Here is Gods wisdom, understanding, knowledge. For the
word, see on Chap. 1.2.4.

The depths. Some understand this of the springs and rivers, that break out of
the earth continually, and run into streams, through many countries, and those
oftentimes are strangely brought out of rocky hills, God wisely and wonderfully
opening a passage for them, being of themselves weak, and unable to pass
through such difficult places, others understand it of the flood, which indeed
was not a work of nature, but of God, who cause all the fountains of the great
deep to be broken up. Genesis 7.11. But it is best to understand it of the works
of God at first, Genesis 1.9. in making room for the Sea, and for the rivers, that
men might live on the dry land: for he speaks here of works of creation, as
founding the earth, establishing the heavens, making the sea, rivers, and
clouds: all this was done at the beginning of the world. It is a description of
the great channels made at first, to hold all the waters, and the waters of the
sea and rivers are included. So Gods wisdom is set out in stable and remaining
things, as the earth, heaven, waters, clouds, which abide, and do not succeed
one another, as men, beasts, trees do, whereof we may see the same that Adam
did (...) signifies

1. The whole inferior globe of earth and water. Darkness was upon the face
of the deep. Genesis 1.2.

2. The waters in the sea, or sea it self. The fountains of the great deep
were broken up. Genesis 7.11.

3. Great misery and trouble, which drownes men in despair, as it were in the
bottom of the sea. Deep called unto deep. Psalm. 42.7.

4. A thing that cannot be found out, no more then the bottom of the sea can be
found out. Thy judgments are a great deep. Psalm. 42.7. Here it is taken in the
second sense, for the sea and channells of waters.

Are brokon up. Heb. Cleft. So that it seems at first the earth was circular,
and fully round under the water, till God made, as it were, clefts for the sea,
and rivers.

(...) And the clouds. They have their name from thinness in the Original,
because they are so, and therefore Gods wisdom is the more seen in them, in
that they hold the rain, till God send a commission to power it down upon the
earth: Yet sometimes the word is put for the skies, wherein the clouds are. 2 Samuel 22.12.

Drop down Or Which drop down. See the like addition, Psalm. 104. Bread which
strengthens man's heart. And the sense requires it: for Gods wisdom is not
here commended for causing the clouds to rain now, but for making them at
first, which are still so useful to us, as well as heaven, earth, sea: An act
of creation, not of providence. The clouds supply the dryness of unwatered
places; vapors drawn up from the waters, or moister places of the earth, fall
down in rain to moisten the drier parts of the ground; and they are said to
send it down by drops, for the comfort of the earth, and not to power it down
in streams to drown it, as in the deluge. So the Hebrew word (...) signifies to
drop down like a still.

(...) The dew. It has its name from covering, because it covers the earth: It
is taken for moisture falling from heaven. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew
that descended upon the mountains of Zion. Psalm. 133.3. It may comprehend
moderate rain also, and gentle showers, that do good to the earth.

Figures. Two figures of the part for the whole, one in Depths, for all waters
below, the other in Dew, from all profitable moisture coming from above.

Note 1. The making of these.

2. Of the clouds.

In the first note 1. The efficient, By his knowledge. 2. The effect, The
depths are broken up.


In the second observe

1. Another effect of Gods wisdom, And the clouds. Lest earthly moisture should
be wanting, God has provided a storehouse above, to supply the dryness of
the earth.

2. The effect of these clouds, which are yet profitable in dropping down the
rain gently, for the grouth of herbs, trees, etc. Which drop down the dew, for
so it should be read, as was observed before.

Doct. 1. The scripture often presses the same things by various expressions.
At Christ's Incarnation, God was manifested in the flesh. 1 Timothy 3.16. The word
was made flesh. John 1.14. Of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is
God over all, blessed for ever. Romans 9.5. In him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily. Col. 2.9. So in the sacrament of the Lords supper, Take
eat, this is my body. Mat. 26.26. The bread which we eat, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. As often as ye eat this bread,
ye show the Lords death until he come. 1 Cor. 11.26.

Reas. 1. To show the plenty of wisdom, and great variety of words, which are
in the scripture, we much commend Orators, that can express themselves
variously to the same purpose.

2. To show the truth of Scripture-principals, not only in their concord, but
also because they who understand not one expression, may understand another.

3. To work upon men's affections, we are so dull, that once speaking will not
raise them up, neither will often speaking in the same words do it, but rather
dull us more, as meat often dressed the same way, pleases not the palate, but
in different ways, and diverse sauces, it pleases well: so do diverse
expressions, for somewhat more may be perceived in the one, then in the other.

Against 1 Timothy 3.16. God manifested in the flesh, it may be objected, so it
may be, though Christ were not incarnate.

The answer may be out of John 1.14. The word was made flesh.

Ob. So it may be, though Christ be not God.

Ans. Romans 9.15. He is God over all, blessed for ever.

Ob. It may be he is not essentially God for all this.

Ans. Col. 2.9. In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

So for the Sacrament. Ob. 1 Cor. 11.26. it is called bread, and bread will do
our souls little good.

Ans. Mat. 26.26. It is Christ's body spiritually.

Ob. Then belike the bread is turned into Christ's body.

Ans. No, it is but a remembrance of it. 1 Cor. 11.26.

Ob. A remembrance of a thing past does little good.

Ans. It is a communication of his body, and the benefits thereof. 1 Cor. 10.16.

4. To affect several men, which have several tastes; that dressing of meat
pleases one man, which pleases not another, that bait takes one fish, which
takes not another, that expression prevails with one man, which prevails not
with another.

Use. Let us read the Scriptures with delight, in which is so much consent in
truth, with so many various expressions. Diverse men, at diverse times, and in
diverse places, writing in diverse expressions, yet delivering the same truths.
Here is utile dulci profit mixed with pleasure to alure the understanding reader.

2. Doct. God parted the Earth, and the water at the beginning. The one was
within the other, till God separated them. Let the waters under the Heaven be
gathered together into one place, and let the dry laud appear: and it was so,
Genesis 1.9. Thou coveredst the Earth with the deep as with a garment: the waters
stood above the Mountains. At thy rebuke they fled, etc. Psalm. 104.6, 7.

Reason. 1. Because Earth and Water being dead things, could not part
themselves so as to be confounded no more.

2. There was none else living then to make that separation. Light only was
created, and that might drive away darkness, but could not drive away waters.
Neither had it heat sufficient to dry it away, that cannot now dry up the
Sea, though gathered into the body of the Sun.

3. Had there been Angels, or men then created, they had not had strength
sufficient to drive away the waters from off the face of the Earth.

4. Neither had they had wisdom enough to know where to imprison them, and keep
them from returning.

Use. Let us acknowledge Gods goodness in this separation. It is long since it
was done, but we enjoy the benefit of it this day. As may appear by villages
drowned in the Sea.

3. Doct. Gods great wisdom appeared in this separation of the waters from the
Earth. O Lord how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou made them all.
Psalm. 104.24. When God had divided the waters from the earth, God saw that it
was good. Genesis 1.10. There is a particular acknowledgement of the goodness of
that separation there.

Reason. 1. Because God shows great wisdom in all he does, yea, when men think
he works foolishly. The foolishness of God is wiser then men. 1 Cor. 1.25.

2. Because thereby he provided a subsistence for men, and beasts, which cannot
walk upon the waters without a miracle, as Christ did on the Sea. Math. 14.25.

3. He provided for their breathing in the air, which they could not do in the
water.

4. For their continuance of life, which the water would soon have taken away.

Use. Let us admire at Gods wisdom, that could find a way to do that, which
neither men nor Angels could do, to disperse such huge waters, and to make
places to receive them, and keep them in, that they turn not again to cover the
Earth. Ps. 104.9. The Philosophers themselves were forced to confess this to
be a work of Divine wisdom. Much more should we cry out with the Apostle, O the
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom, and knowledge of God! Romans 11.33.

4. Doct. God made the clouds to be receptacles for ascending vapors. They are
Gods clouds, as an house is his that builds it. He binds up the waters in his
thick clouds. Job 26.8. They are the bottles of Heaven, that hold the rain
there. Job 38.37.

Reason. 1. Because God made all other parts of Heaven: and who then should
make the clouds but he? So he that builds the walls of the house, lates the
cross beams to bear up chambers.

2. Because we see the clouds dark, and full before rain, like a woman with
child, and after it a clear Heaven, like a woman delivered.

Use. Bless God, that befides the waters below has provided another
storehouse above, that may supply the earth, when moisture fails it. Else were
it a great labor to water the earth with our feet, as they were forced to do
in Egypt. Deuteronomy. 11.10. Else must the corn and herbs perish.

5. Doct. God makes the clouds to send down rain: Who canseth it to rain on the
Earth, where no man is? Job 38.27. Thou visitest the Earth, and waterest it;
Thou makst it soft with showers. Ps. 65.9, 10.

Reason 1. Because he provides it, and lodges the afeending vapors in the
clouds; as in the former doctrine.

2. Because he only has the key to open the clouds, as well as to shut them.
Optatus finding fault with the Donatists for swearing by men, bids them to call
upon those men by whom they swear to bring rain. Hereby it might appear,
whether they were Gods or no, and might be sworn by, or no.

Use. Bless God, that unlocks his storehouse, and gives rain in time of need,
and does not keep his treasure to the hurt of others, as covetous men do.

6. Doct. God shows his wisdom in sending seasonable rain. He gives both the
former, and the later rain in his season. Ier. 5.24. I caused it to rain upon
one City, and caused it not to rain upon another City. Am. 4, 7.

Reason. 1. In the regard of the thing it self. He knows the Earth to be dry
and cold, and therefore he causes the Sun to warm it, and the rain to moisten
it. Math. 5.45. Therefore is God said by his knowledge, or foreknowledge to
send the rain, or make the clouds, that send it, as knowing what need the earth
has of it.

2. In regard of the time. He sends it, when the Earth most needs it. Former
rain to bring forth the corn out of the Earth, and latter rain to bring forth
the latter crop, hay, or grass. An hermit being asked why his little ground
thrived more then another greater, who prayed for rain, and fair weather,
when he thought it needful, answered, because I pray to God, who is wiser then
I, to send such weather, as he please.

3. In regard of the manner. That it should drop down softly like water out of
a still. For if it should come violently, it would not refresh, but destroy the
fruits of the Earth, as sometimes at Sea it has fallen so violently, that it
has sunk ships.

4. In regard of the measure of it, in sending what is needful. Else lasting
rain is a judgment, and causes dearth.

Use. Pray to God for rain when ye need it and praise him, when ye have it in
convenient time. As the key of the womb, of the grave of the earth is his, so
is also the key of the clouds. He gives rain wisely. Trace his wisdom by steps
in the former Verse, and this. See how steadfastly the earth is settled, so that
it upholdeth great buildings, and high Mountains without removing. See how the
heavenly bodies keep their course without shaking or weariness. See how the
sea keeps her bounds without drowning the land. See how the clouds drop down
rain yearly, and make fruitful seasons. Then say with the Psalmist again, O
Lord how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all. Psalm.
104.24.

VER. 21: My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep found wisdom and
discretion.
SOlomon having before mentioned the great effects of wisdom, now renews his
exhortation, to remember all her precepts. He would not have men to have a low
opinion of wisdom, whereof he had given so large commendations before, and
gives more afterward in this Chapter, propounding more benefits, that will
come hereby. Wisdom is a treasure inestimable, wonderful, profitable, and full
of pleasure, as we have heard, and still may hear out of this book, when we see
that Solomon is not content with the former praises, whereby he has declared
unto us the profit, and pleasure, that they have, which are possessed with
wisdom, but does admonish us in the text carefully to keep it.

For the words.

My Son. See on Chap. 1.1.8.

Let not them. Some carry it back to the words foregoing, and conceive that
Solomon charges the young man to be careful to think often of Gods wisdom
appearing in the Creation of Earth, Heaven, Water, and Air, ver. 19.20. But it
is rather to be referred to the words following in this verse, requiring him to
remember such precepts of wisdom, and discretion, as Solomon had or should
teach him in this book. His end being to bring the young man to get wisdom, he
urges this as a principal means. Thus the antecedent follows. Psa. 87.1, 2.
His foundation is in the holy Mountains. The Lord loves the gates of Zion.

Depart. Be forgotten. For things forgotten by us, are departed from our minds.

From thine eyes. From the eyes of thy mind. Let them never step out of thy
memory, no more then jewels, that hang in thy sight. ver. 3. Do not think of
them only at leisure times, but meditate of them continually. Keep wisdom once
gotten as charily, as men do things, which they affect so much, that they will
never let them go out of their fight, but watch them perpetually, as God does
Zion, Behold I have graven thee upon the Palms of my hands, thy walls are
continually before me. Isa. 49.16. Let them be as the delight of thine eyes, on
which thou can never look enough, as the Prophets wife was to him, I take
away from thee the desire of thine eyes. Ezekiel. 24.16.

For eyes, see on Chap. 1.17. on the word sight.

Keep. Constantly in thy memory, and ready for practice. For the word, see on
Chap. 2.8.

Sound wisdom. H^b. Essence, or Being. See on Chap. 2.7.

And discretion. See on Chap. 1.4.

Figures. A metaphor in Eyes, taken from the eyes of the body, and applied to
the soul. Let thy heart look upon them by meditation.

Note 1. The negative part.

2. The affirmative.

In the negative, or prohibition, observe

1. The person spoken to, My son.

2. The action forbidden, Let them not depart from thine eyes. Wisdoms
precepts must not be forgotten, as if they were out of sight, and out of mind.

In the affirmative, or injunction, note

1. The act, Keep.

2. The object. Sound wisdom, and discretion.

Doct. 1. Wisdom once gotten, must never be forgotten. This is one of the last
lessons of the old Testament, Remember the Law of Moses my servant, etc. Hos.
4.4. It is required in the new, Remember how thou have received, and heard, and
hold fast. Rev. 3.3.

Reas. 1. Because of the excellency of wisdom showed before, we do not easily
forget things excellent, either for beauty or use: Who forgets the virgin he is
in love withal? or the medicine that heals him?

2. For the profit of them: we easily forget things that bring no gain, but who
forgets his gold, or trade, though he be old? Sirs, ye know that by this craft
we have our wealth. Acts 19.25.

3. Because of the loss, that follows on the loss of wisdom, which is very
great, the loss of all those good things, which wisdom would procure for us,
temporal, spiritual, or eternal; besides, the loss of memory it self, that
when it has unburdened it self of that which is good, will easily forget
meaner things.

4. Because of the danger that follows this forgetfulness, it will bring all
those evils in the world, which wisdom retained might prevent. He that
forgets his medicine, must bear his pain. It will also bring eternal misery in
another world.

Use 1. To reprove such as have lost more knowledge, then they have left, whose
blossoms were fair, but are fallen off: they are like many witty tradsmen,
that spend money as fast as they get it.

2. To exhort us to remember the good things we have gotten.

Motives 1. Wisdoms precepts cost us much pain to get, and should not then
easily be lost; we strove against natures streams to get it.

2. We look for much good by it, which will be lost with it.

Means. 1. Think often of wise instructions, especially the principal. So
Archers think often of the mark, Pilots of the guiding star, travallers of
the marks of the way. The Jews wore Phylacteries to keep Gods commandments in
their memories, Numh. 15.38.39. The way is hard to hit, and dangerous to miss.

2. Set your affections upon them, else other things will take you off from
thinking of them. Children easily forget what they learn, play takes them off.
Men are serious in what they like. As the stone on the still waters makes
circles one after another, and so the former perish, so does business put out
wisdoms precepts.

3. Speak often of wise things. A Master learns by teaching scholars.

4. Practice them. No man forgets his trade, while he is able to work in it. To
conclude this point, think how careful worldly parents are to call upon their
children to keep transitory riches; and take notice how gently, and often
Solomon calls upon us in this book, not to forget wisdoms precepts, lest we
lose spiritual profit here, and eternal glory hereafter offered to us, and so
perish eternally, and then forget wisdom precepts if thou can.

Doct. 2. Wisdoms precepts must be dear to us. As dear as silver, and as
precious as hid treasures. Chap. 2.4. Dearer then silver, gold, rubies. Chap.
8.10, 11.

Reas. 1. Because they have been so always to Gods people, as the delight of
their eyes, without which they could not be satiated, nor satisfied. So they
were to David, O how I love thy Law! it is my meditation all the day. Psalm.
119.97. So to Paul, I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. Phil. 3.8.

2. Because they are so to them in all conditions: the pleasures of prosperity
cannot take off their affection from them, nor the crosses of adversity.

Use. To reprove those who set light by wisdoms precepts: many books will down
with them, and human histories, but Gods word is slighted by them.

Doct. 3. Wisdoms precepts must be carefully laid up by us. So did David, Thy
word have I hid in mine heart, Psalm. 119.11. So did the Virgin Mary, His Mother
kept all these sayings in her heart, Luke 2.51.

Reas. 1. For direction in time of prosperity, for then our ways have much
danger in them.

2. For consolation in time of adversity, of which we have much need.

Use. Let us do with wisdoms precepts, as worldly men do with needful
instruments, not throw them about the house, but lock them up, that they may be
ready in time of need. Keep by meditation what is got by study.

VER. 22. So shall they be life unto thy Soul, and grace to thy neck.
UNto the former exhortation are added many gracious promises of life and
honor in this Verse, and of safety, Verse 23.24. He shows hereby what good
wisdom brings to the soul, body and estate: it brings life, honor, security:
He had said as much before, verse 18. but in a similitude, She is a tree of
life: here he speaks more plainly, she is life it self, and that to the Soul
also. For the words.

So shall they. To wit, wisdom and discretion, well kept and followed. Verse
21.

Be life. Be the means to bring spiritual life into thy soul, and to keep it
there. For life, see on verse 2.

Unto thy Soul. See on Chap. 1.18. on the word lives.

And grace to thy neck. See on Chap. 1.9. Only take notice of the strange note
of the Popish English Doway Bible, which reads, Grace to thy jaws, and in the
margin thus, Merit for the words of thy mouth. So willing are Popish writers
every where to take a slight occasion to set up man's merit, and pull down Gods
grace; forgetting, that these two are contrary. If the reward be of grace, then
not of works, if of works, then not of grace. Romans 11.6. So if of grace (as in
the Text) then not of merit (as in the Popish note.) However, it is very
strange to call grace merit.

Figures. Life. The cause or means of life unto the soul, the cause for the
effect.

Note 1. What they bring to the soul.

2. What to the body.

In the former observe

1. The cause, So shall they. To wit, Wisdom, and discretion.

2. The effect. Be life.

3. The object. Unto thy Soul.

In the latter note

1. The gift. And grace.

2. The subject of it. Unto thy neck.

Doct. 1. A foolish Soul, is a dead Soul. Having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart. Ephesians. 4.18.

Reas. 1. Because there is no life in the Soul, till knowledge come into it.
There was no living creature in the world, till light was made. God clears the
understanding before he rectify the will, and affections; he keeps the same
method in the little world, that he did in the great world. We are no better by
nature then the Ephesians, of whom the Apostle speaks in the place newly cited.
As the body is dead without the soul, so the Soul is dead without wisdom,
which is the soul of the soul: Though the Soul be the life of the body, yet it
self is dead, if without knowledge, and such a man differs not from a beast,
unless it be in being subject to eternal misery. That a man then may live
spiritually, and not sensually like a beast, it is the gift of heavenly wisdom;
and thy soul has life with God if thou keep wisdoms precepts, although thy
flesh be pressed down under the discipline of correction, or of the fear of
death it self.

2. Because as the foolish soul has no life, being without justification, so
it can have no health nor strength, being without sanctification. Health is a
second life, without which, the first is a burden: Better not to live, then to
live in pain, or weakness.

3. It has no spiritual breath, and without breath, no life; It cannot breath
out prayers nor praises to God.

4 It has no spiritual motion, and all living things move in one way or
another; dead things do not. No motion to any spiritual duty, till wisdom
take possession of the soul.

Use 1. Pity those thousands of poor souls, that walk in the world, yet are
spiritually dead. Ignorant men think dead bodies walk, but we know dead souls
walk. Many are like scpulchers, that have only the names of living men written
on them.

2. See if thy soul be not one of these dead souls. If thou have not true
wisdom, thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. Rev. 3.1. It is not
thy great birth, wealth, nor strength, that can make thee alive, it must be
wisdom.

Doct. 2. Wisdom makes the soul live. Keep my commandments and live. Chap.
7.2. Hear, and your soul shall live. Isa. 55.3.

Reas. 1. From the confession of the heathen. Is proprie, vereque homo est,
cujus omnis in anima rationali substantia existit. Qua propter quicquid extra
hunc hominem sit, id ad se minime pertinet. Plato in Alcibiade. He is properly
and truly a man, all whose substance is in the reasonable soul; wherefore
whatsoever is out of this man, that belongs not to him, in his own account.

2. From the contrary. Folly is the death of the soul; sin that kills it, is
commonly called folly in Scripture.

3. From the beginning of life. Wisdom is, as it were, the seed of spiritual
life.

4. From the Progress; it maintains the life of the soul, as meat does the
life of the body.

Use 1. Take pains to get true and heavenly wisdom. What pains does the
Husbandman take, to get his seed into the ground? he plows, and sows. What
pains do poor men take for food? they work hard early and late, and all, or
almost all for the belly. So do thou for wisdom: And as the merchant runs
through pain and peril for wealth, so do thou for understanding.

2. Spare for no cost to get it. The husbandman, Tradseman, Merchant, drive on
their trades with great cost; wisdoms trade is better. It concerns eternity.
Spare then no cost to get, and keep it.

3. Doct. Wisdom is a great grace to any man. The wise shall inherit glory.
ver. 35. of this Chap. They shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and
chains about thy neck. Chap. 1.9.

Reason. 1. Because it is a sign of worth and dignity in a man. Men nobly born,
or in great place wear gold chains, and jewels. Wise men are Gods children of
the highest birth, and more honored with spiritual graces, and holy
behavior, then any other can be with gold and silver, though never so rich and
costly. They need not fear coming into Gods presence, nor disgrace from men,
for good men will reverence them, though they be never so mean, and none will
contemn them, but wicked men, which are themselves the most contemptible of all
the creatures.

2. Because it does adorn men as gold-chains do. Such as are beautiful
themselves, are more beautiful in costly dressings. A wise man is more worthy
to be looked at, then Agrippa with all his pompous train, that was but a fancy,
as the Greek text calls it, He came (...) with much fancy. Act. 25.23. A wise
man's honor is real.

Use. It discovers the blindness of worldlings, who cannot see this heavenly
wisdom, as moles and earthworms see not the Sunshine. Let us then account those
most honorable, that have most of this heavenly wisdom, though they want
worldly honor. Paul was truly honorable with God, though made as the filth of
the world, and the offscouring of all things. 1 Cor. 4.13.

VER. 23. Then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not
stumble.
NOw the wise man shows, how wisdom brings to a man security from all evils,
and that at all times, and in all places, in this verse and the next. For all a
man's time is spent either in business in the day, or rest in the night, at
home, or abroad: and wisdom secures him in all these from evil of sin and
punishment. Man's actions are waking, or sleeping. Having spoken of life before
he goes on in the same way. Thou shall neither be blind, nor carelessly stumble
in the way. Wisdom secures a man waking, or sleeping. It makes him do his
business quietly in the day, and afterward to sleep securely at night.

For the words.

Then. When thou have gotten, and while thou keep and obeyest wisdom and
discretion.

Shall thou walk. Go on constantly. For the word see on Chapter 1.15.

Safely. Confidently and boldly. Not only without hurt, but without fear of
hurt shall thou go about thine affairs. See on Chap. 1.33.

And thy foot shall not stumble. No stumbling block shall be in thy way.
Nothing to hinder thee or hurt thee. Thou shall comfortably effect all thy
business. For Foot, see on Chap. 1.15.

Figures. Walk in thy way. Do all thy business A figure of the part for the
whole. For man has many works to do besides traveling. And it is opposed to
sleeping in the night: and therefore must comprehend all the business of the
day. Else the enumeration is unperfect; and a wise man might be unsafe in some
of his lawful ways. Thy foot. Thou thy self. A figure of the part for the
whole expressed by that member, which uses to stumble. As the eye is said to
see, and the ear to hear; yet the man does it by them. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. Eccl. 1.8. Stumble, A metaphor. Thy
business shall not be hindered.

Note. 1. The safety of the way.

2. The preservation in it.

In the former observe

1. The Agent. Then shall thou.

2. The Act. Walk.

3. The Object. In thy way.

4. The Adjunct. Safely.

In the latter note

1. The Agent. And thy foot.

2. The Act. shall not stumble.

1. Doct. A godly wise man may be quiet in all conditions. I laid me down and
slept; I Awaked, for the Lord sustained me. Psalm. 3.5. God is our refuge, and
strength: a very present help in trouble. Therefore will we not fear, though the
earth be removed. and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the
Sea. Though the waves thereof roar, and be troubled, though the Mountains shake
with the s^elling thereof. Selah. Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3. And well might he put his
Selah to it, for the least of these might make an other man tremble.

Reason. 1. Because he knows the worst, that can befall him, as sickness,
poverty, death, and the like.

2. He knows how to bear all these, and to make a good use of them.

3. He knows they will have an end, and therefore is not afraid of them that
kill the body, and after that, have no more that they can do. Luke 12.4.

4. He knows much good will come after, and that his light affliction which is
but for a moment works for him a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.

Use. To show us the vast difference, that is between the condition of the wise
man, and the fool, the godly, and the ungodly. The one is like a flourishing
tree that bears fruit in summer, and keeps leaves and greenness all the
winter: the other not so, but like chafe scattered by every wind. Psalm. 1.3,
4. The one has prosperous days, and quiet nights, in this verse and the next:
the other has troublesome labor in the day, and unquiet rest in the night. It
is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows.
For he rightly gives his beloved sleep. Psalm. 127.2. So it should be
translated, as the same particle (...) is used else where. The daughters of
Zelophchad spoke right. Numb. 27.7. The one has peace of conscience to quiet
him within, and Gods protection to secure him without. Being justified by faith
he has peace with God. Romans 5.1. And he is kept by the power of God unto
salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. The other has no peace within, nor safety without. The
wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up
mire, and dirt, There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. Isa. 57.20.21.
And if he say so, it must needs be so; choose your condition. None but fools
will prefer the worser.

2. Doct. A wise man may boldly go about all his affairs. I am continually with
thee, thou have holden me by my right hand. Psalm. 73.23. Why should not Asaph
then go on boldly? Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder, the young Lion and
the Dragon shall thou trample under feet. Psalm. 91.13. Why should such an one
fear any danger?

Reas. 1. His integrity toward God and man gives him peace and comfort within,
and so makes him bold in his ways; he goes on, like the water of a clear
fountain, that has no dirt mingled with it. A foolish soul is like a pudly
stream, it finds many impediments.

2. Lest any should say, though he give men no cause, yet wicked men may do him
hurt, he has God to protect him: so he has a double guard, Gods peace within
to keep his heart and mind. Phil. 4.7. And Gods power without. 1 Pet. 1.5. And
his faith in these promises of God, confirms him against all doubtings, and
againg all fear of dangers; and by staying him, self upon this word of God, he
overcoms all lets, and rubs that the flesh, the world, or the devil can cast
in the way.

3. He has a guare of Gods Angels, and though in unknown ways men fear many
evils, yet he need not fear so much as the dashing of his foot against a
stone. Psalm. 91.11, 12. If devils and ungodly men encamp against them, they
need not fear, for the angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear
him, and delivers them. Psalm. 34.7.

4. He has a smooth way, no rubs in it, while he keeps in wisdoms way. The
way of the righteous is made plain. Chap. 15.19. The enemy lays rubs close by
the way, if he go never so little out of it, but there are none in the way: And
therefore the promise of safety in the Text is made to us, while we keep in the
right way, and if we go but out of that, it belongs not unto us.

5. He is in league with all creatures, defensive, and offensive. At
destruction and famine thou shall laugh, neither shall thou be afraid of the
beasts of the earth. For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field,
and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. Job 5.22.23. What need
he then be afraid to travail any where about his lawful business?

6. He knows nothing can hurt him; for he has such a command over all the
faculties of his soul by Gods grace, and the wisdom given him from above, that
he can make them harken unto reason.

Use. To encourage good men in troublesome times, to go about their affairs
without fear. He that has so many, and so strong guards, why should he fear?
Let Adam's children fear, who are yet in their naked condition; but let the
righteous be bold as a Lion. Chap. 28.1.

Doct. 3. Nothing can hinder a godly wise man from good success. Whatsoever he
does shall prosper. Psalm. 1.3. He shall eat the labor of his hands. Ps. 128.2.

Reas. 1. In regard of the things themselves, there is great probability of
good success; for wisdom is of more force then power to effect any great
design in peace or war. And diligence is not wanting to a godly wise man, who
studies practical divinity, as well as theoricall; and Gods blessing attends
him, which crowns every good action.

2 In respect of the person; he is he unto whom God has engaged himself to do
good in the end, though he afflict him in the way. Speed well in the end, and
speed well ever.

Use. to teach us a lesson of policy. Who would not have good success in what
he undertakes? Riches, strength, power, friends, carnal policy, may fail him,
but godly wisdom will never fail him. Strange things have been effected by
human policy, what may not be effected by heavenly wisdom? Good success in
the way may be crossed again, what is crowned with good success in the end can
never be crossed. Be therefore godly wise, and prosper to eternity.

VER. 24. When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid; yea, thou shall lie
down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
A Man awake walking, or working, can look to himself, and use means to avoid.
danger; he has most need of a guard for safety, when he is laid down to
sleep, wisdom will watch over him then also, and keep him safe. For the words.

When thou lie down. As he had promised the wise man security in motion in
the former verse, so here safety in rest. The particle (...) ordinarily
signifies If: but here it sets not out a condition, but a time, and is well
translated When. So When the Jubilee of the children of Israel shall be, Numb.
36.4. (...) Lying down here is to sleep, or take rest; it is understood
sometimes of the sleep of death, When thou shall sleep with thy Fathers. 2 Samuel
7.12. but here of natural sleep: for it is opposed to the motion and travells
of the day in the former verse; and a man need not fear trouble, nor cannot
feel sweetness, when he is dead, and laid in the grave.

Thou shall not be afraid. See on Chap. 1.26.

Yea. This word not only couples things together, but augments. Thou shall be
so far from being afraid, that thou shall sleep continually, and sweetly
without interruption, or frightings. Thou shall lie down, and none shall make
thee afraid. Job 11.19.

Thou shall lie down. See on this verse before.

And thy sleep. This shows, that the former lying down was for sleep.

Shall be sweet. Shall be very pleasing; no sudden accidents, nor dreams shall
fright thee.

Figures. Sweet. A metaphor. It shall be as pleasing to thee; as sweet meat, or
drink is to the taste.

Note 1. A promise of safe sleep.

2. Of sweet sleep. Excludit timorem, includit saporem. He excludes fear, he
includes favor. Holcot.

In the first, note 1. The adjunct of time, When thou lie down. 2. The
subject, Thou shall not be afraid.


In the second, note 1. The adjunct of time, Yea, thou shall lie down. 2. The
subject, And thy sleep. 3. The adjunct of quality Shall be sweet.


Doct. 1. God affords us rest after labor. Man goes forth unto his work, and
to his labor, until the evening. Psalm. 104.23. For so (or rightly) he gives
his beloved sleep. Psalm 127.2.

Reas. 1. Because God is not an hard Master; as he requires store of work, so
he affords sufficient time for rest, which covetous men do not to their
servants.

2. To make men the more willing to serve him, every man is willing to offer
his service to a kind Master.

3. Because he knows his service cannot be done, unless he allow his servants
competent rest. Life and strength will fail for want of rest, as for want of
food.

4. It would be uncomfortably done, and neither give content to him, nor to his
servants, as drousie work gives no content to men.

Use 1. Let us bless God, that takes care as well for our rest, as for his
work.

2. Let us do his work with the more cheerfulness in the day, being refreshed
with comfortable rest the night before, so may we the night following
comfortably betake us to our bees gain, not to fall to immoderate sleep, but
expecting good sleep from God, who allows it, and can only give it, and we
must thereby be fitted for the service of so good a Master day by day.

Doct. 2. A godly wise man may go to bed without fear. Thou shall lie down, and
none shall make thee afraid. Job 11.19. Ye shall lie down, and none shall make
thee afraid. Levit. 26.6.

Reas. 1. Because he carries himself so inoffensively when he is awake, that
he gives no just occasion to any man living to hurt him, when he is asleep.
Neminem laedens neminem timebis. Senec. Hurt no man, and fear no man. Metus cum
venit, raro lo um habet somnus. Mimus. Fear will seldom give way to sleep. He
that is quiet in his mind, by reason of the hope of a good conscience, treads
underfoot cares and vexations.

2. Because God, who is his keeper, is always awake, and watches to defend
him, when he cannot defend himself. Behold he that keeps Israel shall
neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy keeper. Psalm. 121.4, 5.

3. Because he is a member of Jesus Christ, and he will lose none of his
members. The Shepherd wakes, when others a^e asleep, that he may keep his
sheep from the woolfe. So the heathen man describes a good Prince, he is one
who wakes that others may sleep. Securus dormit, et vigilat, et quiescit, et
ambulat, qui se innocent^m ante Deum meminit. He sleeps, wakes, rests, walks
securely, who remembers that he is innocent before God. Gloss. Ordin. Every
member of Jesus Christ is so through faith in him. Obdormit in Deo, et in statu
salutis. Lyra. He sleeps in God, and in the state of salvation.

4. Because if they be hurt, Christ accounts himself hurt. Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me. Acts 9.4. So does God the Father also. He that touches
you, touches the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.8. In all their afflictions he was
afflicted. Isa. 63.8.

Use. Labor for godly wisdom. Who would not be in such a condition, that he
may, when he has done his work, go to bed without fear! Such may sleep
quietly, when the wind blows abroad, when it thunders, and all the world is
affrighted, as if the end of the world were at hand, they need not be frighted,
as others, that know not what will become of them. So Peter feared not to sleep
in prison, Acts 12.6. so Master Rogers, our first Martyr in Queen Mary's days,
could scarce be waked, when the keeper came to warn him to prepare for the
fire, which warning he could but expect being condemned to be burnt alive. This
shows the Philosophers observation to be false, that happy men differ not from
miserable men half their time, to wit, when they are asleep. For a godly wise
man is happy, when he is asleep: a foolish sinner is then miserable: wicked men
always fear that other men are laying snares for them for the evils they have
done them. They know that enemies then are most ready to lay snares for them,
and have most hope to prevail against them, when they are asleep. Also their
covetous mind runs upon their treasure, being in continual fear of losing
their riches. Hence comes terrible affrighting fancies into their minds, and
fearful dreams by reason of their ill conscience, and wickedness, whereas
godly wise men sleep quietly, being kept by wisdom which they have embraced.
Pertranscuntibus autem a vigilia, scilicet, ad somnum, meliora sunt phantasmata
virtuosorum, quam quorumcunque. Aristor. Ethic. 1.1. When men go, to wit, from
waking to sleeping, the imaginations of virtuous men are better then of any
other.

3. Doct. The sleep of a godly wise man is sweet, and pleasing. So Jacob sleeps
sweetly on the cold ground. Genesis 28.11. And had a pleasing dream. ver. 12, 13.
there. Such was David's sleep. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep: for
thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. Ps. 4.8.

Reason. 1. Because they meditate of Gods word in the day time, which is a
great comfort to them. And those things, that men muse on in the day, they
often dream of in the night.

2. They are diligent in their callings, and so being wearied in the day, they
sleep sweetly in the night. Dulce sopor fessis. Sleep is a sweet thing to weary
men.

3. Because they empty themselves before they sleep, of all that troubles them.
Pythagoras his rule to his scholars was, Non te prius somno tradideris, quam
diurna operater mente revolveris. Betake not thy self to sleep; till thou have
in thy mind gone thrice over the works of the day.

Use. See the difference between godly wise men, and foolish wicked men. The
ones sleep is sweet: the others troublesome. Richard the third after the murder
of his two nephews had fearful dreams, and would leap off his bed, take his
sword, and seek an enemy. Charles the ninth after the French Massacre was laid
to sleep every night, and wakened by Musicians. Take heed of such wicked
actions. Be wise, and fear God, and your sleep shall be sweet.

VERSE 25. Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the
wicked, when it comes.
THE wise man having showed the benefits of wisdom before, now exhorts the
young man to make such use of it, that though fearful things, such as are most
horrid to mortal men, as hostile incursions that lay all desolate and wast,
all by fire and sword, to the great consternation of men's minds, should come
suddenly, before wisdom could foresee them, yet he be not shaken thereby, and
although such things should not only come, but also prevail over wicked men,
yet he startle no^ at it, as if he thought, he should be ruined by it also.

For the words.

Be not afraid. Some read, Thou shall not be afraid. These make it a promise,
and join it to the former words, intimating that wisdom will keep such fears
away. But the common, and safest signification of (...) is imperative, not
indicative: and that is to be followed, where it will stand well. Neither does
God here attribute it directly to wisdom, but charges us to use wisdom to that
end, when we have gotten it. Nature will make a good man afraid of evils, and
troubles; but he must by wisdom so recollect his spirits, that he be not
overcome by that fear, as if it should ruin him, but expect a sure deliverance
from God. For the word, see on ver. 7.

Of sudden fear. Of troubles that come unexpectedly, and therefore affright men
the more. For the word, Fear, see on Chap. 1.26. The word (...) Sudden, comes
from a word, that signifies a fool, for such do all things suddenly without any
deliberation, as not having wit to forecast conveniences or inconveniences
arising from their actions.

Neither of the desolation. Such troubles as lay all things wast, See on Chap.
1.27.

Of the wicked. For the word, see on Chap. 2.22.

When it comes. Some understand it actively. Be not afraid, when wicked men
lay all things wast, and seek to destroy thee. So the Doway Bible reads, Dread
not at sudden terrror, and the power of the impious falling upon thee. But it
is better understood passively, when wicked men are destroyed for their sins,
fear not thou, that thou should perish with them. So the word used, is Chap.
1.2. It may be read, That it should come, to wit, on thee. So (...) is used,
what is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end, that I should
prolong my life? Job 6.11. Figures; Fear, For the thing feared. The adjunct for
the subject. Comes. A metaphor form living things, for troubles come not of
themselves, but are brought on us by others.

Note. 1. An Assertion.

2. An Explication. The desolation of the wicked is that, which a good man
should not need to fear. In the assertion note

1. The Act forbidden. Be not afraid.

2. The Object. Of fear, or terrible things.

3. The Adjunct. Sudden. That comes unexpected. In the Exposition note

1. The Adjunct of quality. Neither of the desolation.

2. The Subject. Of the wicked.

3. Another adjunct of time. When it comes. Thou need not fear the like,
not only when it is threatened, or hangs over the heads of wicked men, but when
it actually, and unexpectedly falls upon them.

1. Doct. A godly man ought not to fear ruin. Thou shall be hid from the
scourge of the tongue, neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it
comes. Job 5.21. Thou shall not be afraid of the terror by night: nor for the
arrow that flies by day. Nor for the pestilence, that walks in darkness:
nor for the destruction, that wastes at noon day. Psalm. 91.5, 6.

Reason. 1. Because those things, that ruin men, come from God. And he will so
order things, that whomsoever they undo, they shall not ruin his. A good
child fears not ruin by any thing, that comes from his father. Gods children
know, that their enemies can go no further, then God permits, and therefore
they fear nothing.

2. God will keep his children out of those troubles, that ruin others, if he
see it fit, as he did Noah, and Lot: and that oftentimes strangely, and
miraculously, as he did the three Jews out of the fiery furnace, which devoured
their enemies. Dan. 3. And Daniel himself from the Lions, which consumed his
adversaries. Dan. 6.

3. If God suffer them to come on thee, he will keep thee, that they shall not
ruin thee, though they undo wicked men. He will take away the poison of those
snakes, and then we may play with them.

4. He will bring the out of them, when thou art nearest to ruin, and when
they fall thickest upon thee. Though thou fall seven times, yet shall thou rise
up again. Prove. 24.16. And when they are gone from thee, they cannot hurt thee.

5. If thou die by them with wicked men, yet thou art not ruined with them.
Their troubles are a gulf sinking them down into Hell: thine are a ladder
mounting thy soul up to Heaven Saeviant perse quendo, nihil in me moritur, nisi
mortale: erit in me aliquid, ubi persecutor pervenire non possit, ubi Deus meus
habitat. August. in Psalm. 26. Let men be sharp in persecuting, nothing dies in
me, but what is mortal: there will be something in me, at which the persecutor
cannot come, where my God dwells.

Use. It serves to uphold the hearts of godly men in sad times. Ye may be
troubled, ye cannot be ruined. Be not then cast down in thy spirit, but stand
upright in all storms, like the Mount Zion, which cannot be removed but
abides for ever. Ps. 125.1. Sabeans rob Job, yet he fears not, but blesses
God, and God gives him more then he lost. Let a David walk through a valley of
the shadow of death, ye he will fear no evil. Psalm. 23.4. Dreadful things in
the Heavens will appear in the end of the World, yet they need not fear, whose
redemption draws nigh. Luke 21.28. Quia dum finitur mundus, cujus amici non
estis, prope sit redemptio quam quaesistis. Greg. Hom. 1. in Evang. Because
when the world is ended, whose friends ye are not, the redemption draws nigh
which ye have sought. It is not so with ungodly men, they may well fear ruin
when troubles come; for fear is due unto them which have not the fear of God:
they think themselves safe, because God forbears them for a time, but they
shall be overtaken with evils, which they cannot escape, and this is the
sudden fear that good men need not be afraid of, but will overtake wicked men,
as follows in the Text, The desolation of the wicked, when it comes.

Doct. 2. Troubles often come unexpectedly. Your destruction comes as a
whirlewind. Prove. 1.27. So shall the eternal destruction of ungodly men come
at Christ's second appearing. The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the
night, For when they shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. 1 These. 5.2.3. This appears

1. In invasions by enemies, who come before looked for, and suddenly lay wast
a whole country: and foes come often out of ambushes, and destroy stout men,
overpowring them with multitudes, before they be aware. Thus the old world, and
Sodom and Gomorrah, and Corah, Dathan, and Abiram perished.

2. In Gods judgments, as in the three former examples.

Use. In the Sunshine of your prosperity, get God to be your refuge, lest a
sudden storm destroy you, then need you not fear any storm, else every storm
will ruin you.

Doct. 3. Sudden troubles are very terrible to wicked men. So Jobs friends
speak of him, conceiving him to be a wicked man. Therefore snares are round
about thee, and sudden fear troubles thee. Job 22.10. When Nabal heard of the
mischief intended to him, his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.
1 Samuel 25.37.

Reas. 1. Because they come unexpectedly; for wicked men are fools, and
neither look nor prepare for changes, as godly men do, who are wise.

2. Because they have no sure refuge to fly to at hand, as godly men have.

Use. Wonder not that wicked men suddenly sink in troubles: they are neither
forewarned, nor fore-armed.

VER. 26. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from
being taken.
IT being a great matter, and hard for a good man to do, to expect deliverance,
when he sees wicked men ruined, in regard he has natural fear in him, as well
as they; Solomon adds a strong reason, and very sufficient, to wit, the
assistance of the great God, who, according to the hope of a wise man, resting
upon him, will keep him from falling into snares; and well may such a man be
confident, that it cannot be otherwise then well with him, as the first word of
the Text intimates, For, which carries a strong reason with it. For that word,
see on Chap. 1.9.

The Lord. See on Chap. 1.7.

Shall be thy confidence. Heb. Shall be in thy confidence. So (...) is
translated In, Chap. 1.20. In the streets. Or, For thy confidence. So it is
translated, For an inheritance: Numb. 36.2. The word (...) signifies Folly, or
Foolishness. This their way is their folly. Psalm. 49.13.2. Because they that
want wit to order their own affairs, had need to trust others, it signifies
confidence or hope of good from another. That they might set their hope in God.
Psalm. 78.7. 3. It signifies the flank. He makes collops of fat on his flanks.
Job 15.27. Some take it in the first sense, the Lord shall be with thee in thy
foolishness, when thou have brought thy self into trouble, and know not how
to escape, God will deliver thee. Others in the third sense; the Lord shall be
at thy flank, or side, as soldiers in the flank in battle, or as a guard to
secure a man. Hence latrones, anciently soldiers of a Princes guard, quasi
laterones. Sidemen. And the vulgar reads it, in latere tuo. Doway, at thy
side. But the second sense is best, and the word is frequently so, used in
scripture, The Lord shall be thy confidence. That is, one in whom thou may
safely confide in all dangers: He shall be to thee in stead of a shelter.

And shall keep. See on Chap. 2.11.

Thy foot. See on Chap. 1.16.

From being taken. He shall keep thee from the danger of the secret plots of
thine adversaries; for wicked men are fowlers, and hunters, always laying
snares in the way to catch Gods people, like birds, and beasts, by the feet.
The grin shall take him by the heel, the snare is laid for him in the ground,
and a trap for him in the way. Job 18.9.10. Which, though there spoken of
wicked men, is often true of good men. So David prays, Keep me from the snare
which they have laid for me, and from the grins of the workers of iniquity.
Psalm. 141.9. But God keeps his out of those dangers they see not.

Figures. Confidence. A figure of the adjunct for the subject. God is he on
whom thy confidence may safely repose it self.

Thy foot. A metaphor from beasts, or birds, taken by the foot in a snare.

Note 1. The ground of a godly man's safety.

2. The means of it.

In the first observe

1. The subject, For the Lord.

2. The adjunct, Shall be thy confidence.

In the second note

1. The act, And shall keep.

2. The object, Thy foot from being taken.

Doct. 1. The safety of Gods people, is not in their own power or care. The
name of the God of Jacob defend thee. Psalm. 20.1. Their own arm did not save
them, but thy right hand, etc. Psalm. 44.3.

Reas. 1. Because in some cases, no man in the world can help, as Jonah in the
whales belly.

2. Because God can cross the wisest man's cares, and the strongest man's
diligence.

Use. To teach us to acknowledge our own weakness, and insufficiency to
preserve our selves. What need the Lord be our confidence, if we had power to
keep our selves from sudden fear, and misery? But if we be left unto our
selves, we are like unto feeble beasts, which run into the net, and are taken
in the snare, out of the which they cannot escape. Let us not then, being
conscious of our own weakness, trust in our wit, strength, wealth, nor brag of
kindred, leagues, castles; all these are but castles in the air, and may fail
us. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help. Psalm 146.3.

Doct. 2. The sure confidence of a godly man is in God. The Lord sustained me.
Psalm. 3.5. Thou Lord only make me dwell in safety Ps. 4.8.

Reas. 1. Because of Gods great care of them. He bears them on eagles wings.
Exodus 19.4. The eagle carries not her young ones in her claws, as other birds
do, but on her back, that they who will kill her young ones, must shoot through
her. Perirent justi, nisi Dominus inter eos et hosts se interponeret. Shel.
Iarchi. in Exodus Just men would perish, if God did not interpose himself
betwixt them and their enemies.

2. Because of Gods infinite power: they that put their confidence in man, or
Angel, may be deceived and perish; but Gods power is infinite, He is the
Almighty, as appears in making the world out of nothing, with a world of
creatares in it. When David's father and mother could not help him against Saul's
cruelty, God could, and did so: he says, When my father and mother forsook me,
then the Lord took me up. Ps. 27.10.

3. Because of Gods infinite wisdom, who both knows the mischiefs intended
against godly men, and how to prevent them: He is a complete Physician for soul
and body; He is the Lord of hosts, and a wise General, to find out mines and
to countermine.

4. Because of the experience Gods people have had of Gods delivering them
before, as Jonah out of the whales belly, David from the Lion and the bear,
Paul from dangerous sickness, when he had the sentence of death in himself,
that he should not trust in himself, but in God, which raises the dead. 2
Cor. 1.9. Yea, that we our selves have had in many sicknesses, journeys,
troubles every one of us, more or less.

Use. 1. To comfort Gods people that have so sure a refuge: Not only Solomon
tells us so, but the holy Scriptures are full of such witnesses, and examples.
Having then so many proofs, that this help is so ready at hand, that God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Psalm. 46.1. an that this
help surmounts all heavenly, earthly, and infernal powers, we must in no wise
fear, but hold an invincible assurance against all the afflictions of the
world; otherwise we do not believe that God is on our fide, and belly the
scriptures, and do count the examples thereof to be but fables. Seeing the Lord
is thy confidence, he will keep thee, who ever trusted in him, and was
forsaken? He can keep thee from temporal and spiritual evils. Certainly this
ought to be great consolation to godly people, that they have not only Angels,
but God himself for their keeper, not far absent from them, but always
present with them, as being in every place. Therefore their heart may rejoice
with David, and say, I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved. Psalm. 16.8, 9.

2. To teach us if we be assured against sudden fear, and the miseries, that
happen unto wicked men to attribute all to God, and to confess it comes of the
only help of God, and not to give any part of the glory to men, to means, to
our selves.

3. Doct. God will prevent private plots against his people, as well as public
oppositions. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fouler, and
from the noisome pestilence. Psalm. 91.3.

Reason. 1. That it may appear to be Gods work, when no finger of man is in it,
as the lice in Egypt made the Magicians to consesse, This is the finger of
God. Exodus 8.19. So the discovery of the Powder Treason, and the discomfiture
of the Spanish Armado were Gods work: for we had no knowledge of them, nor
preparation against them.

2. That it might appear to be a work of mere mercy in God, where man could
not prevent the evil. As for a man to give to one, that never asks, or to
heal one past his senses.

Use. Here is a cure for our jealousies. We fear invasions from abroad,
insurrections at home. O that we would all fear God; and then he that has,
will still deliver us from the most secret plots of all our enemies.

VER. 27. Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thine hand to do it.
SOlomon having encouraged the young man to search for wisdom by setting out
the great benefits it brings, now returns to give him particular rules of
wisdom to direct him how he may carry himself in the course of his life. As he
had in the beginning of the Chap. instructed him how to carry himself toward
men, Verse 3. and toward God, Verse 5. etc. so now he teaches him how to
forbear injurying men.

The words are variously read. The vulgar thus. Forbid not him to do good, that
can; but if thou caust, do good also. And this way run the Popish writers,
but far from the Hebrew words.

For the words in particular. Withhold not. Keep it not unjustly in thy hands,
that belongs to another against the owners will. For the word see on Chap.
1.15. on the word Refreine.

Good. Any thing profitable, which thou owe him. For the word, see on Chap.
2.9.

From them to whom it is due. Heb. From the Masters thereof. That is, from them
that have a right to it, and power over it to dispose of it. Most interpreters
understand it of giving to the poor, and trouble themselves much to know, how
the poor are owners of other men's goods. An hard phrase, and not to be found in
Scripture in this sense, which usually calls it giving freely, and Alms, and
poor men are taught to ask for mercy, not to demand it as due. And they who
make them owners of other men's goods open a great gap to them to take it by
foul means, if they cannot have it by entreaty, and to say, May I not take mine
own goods, where I find them? what should hinder? Some say, poor men have an
interest in other men's goods, because of their goods, because of their wants;
others, that they have it by nature, being men as we are; others, because God
bids us relieve them. But these titles will hardly make them to be masters of
what is not theirs. The interpreters run this way, because the next Verse
mentions giving to the poor. But as this interpretation answers not well to the
Hebrew words, so it confounds two duties, paying debts in this verse, and
giving to the poor in the next. Neither will it serve to say, This Verse
requires giving, and the next doing it speedily, for the word, of not
withholding in this Verse requires speedy payment: especially joined to the
words following, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. I conclude
therefore, that paying of debts to creditors, or laborers is here meant, who
ought to have, what others injuriously keep from them. And this is a work of
justice, not of mercy. For the word see on Chap. 1.17. on the word Bird. Heb.
Master of a wing.

When it is in the power of thine hand to do it. When thou art able to pay it.
For if God lay losses, and poverty on a man, he cannot pay his debts then:
neither is it his sin, if his losses came not by his own negligence. Others
understand it, when thou have power to keep it away from him. Do not cosen thy
creditour, though thou could do it by force, or fraud. The hand in the Heb.
is used

1. For the member of the body so called. The one put out his hand Genesis 38.28.

2. For power, and strength, for the hand is used in strong actions. Whom God
had delivered from under the hand of the Egyptians. Exodus 18.9.

3. Help, and assistance, which is often afforded by the hand. Their hand also
is with David. 1 Samuel 22.17.

4. A blow, or plague inflicted by the hand. My stroke. Heb. hand, is heavier
then my groaning. Job. 23.2.

5. A place. Thou shall have a place also without the camp. Deuteronomy. 23.12.

6. The man himself, whose hand it is. He leans on my hand. 2 King. 5.18. So
here In the power of thine hand, that is, in thy power.

To do it. The word signifies

1. To do a thing. What have thoudone?

2. To make a thing. God saw every thing, that he had made, Genesis 1.31.

3. To bring forth. The Earth brought forth by handfulls. Genesis 41.47.

4. To prepare, or dress. He hasted to dress it. Genesis 18.7.

5. To advance, or make great, It is the Lord that advanced Moses. 1 Samuel 12.6.

6. To Get. The souls, that they had gotten in Haran. Genesis 12.

5. Here it is is taken in the first sense for doing.

Figures. Hand. For the man. A figure of the part for the whole.

Note. 1. An Act forbidden. Withhold not.

2. The Object. Good.

3. The subject. From them to whom it is due.

4. The Adjunct of time When it it in the power of thine hand to do it.

1. Doct. Outward comforts are good in themselves. It is reckoned as a great
favor for man to have dominion over the creatures, Thou madst him to have
dominion over the works of thine hands. Psalm. 8.6. Sure it is then a blessing.
And Psalns 104. begins, and ends with praising God for outward provisions. This
is best proved by particulars. Ask a hungry man if meat be a blessing? He will
tell you it is, otherwise he must die: Ask a thirsty man if drink be a
blessing? He will say, he must choke else: So for clothing, cattle, fruits of
the earth, and of trees.

Use. To blame those, that by abuse of these comforts, turn blessings into
curses; so does the glutton, and the drunkard. It is a sad thing for a man to
go to hell for those comforts, which he may have and go to heaven.

2. These outward comforts may be lent, and convayed from one man to another;
lending is a Christian duty as well as giving. The righteous man is ever
merciful, and lends. Psalm. 37.26. Do good, and lend. Luke 6.35. So is
trading, exchange, buying, and selling lawful; Abraham bought a field, and the
trees of it. Genesis 23.17. The father of the faithful thought it lawful, and
knew how to drive a bargain.

Reas. 1. Because we may have something to spare, that other (...) may need,
and they may have somewhat we may need, which may be communicated from one to
another without loss: And then, both humanity, and communion of Saints, teach
us to communicate to others.

2. Men may want that at present, which afterward they may repay, or requite,
and need not to receive of gift.

Use. It teaches us a willingness to lend to others, and to trade with
others; the time may come, we may need to borrow of them, or trade with them;
so we may help both them, and our selves.

Doct. 3. Conscience is to be made of paying debts, and restoring things to the
right owners. If a man borrow ought of his neighbor, and it be hurt, or die,
the owner thereof being not with it, he shall surely make it good. Exodus 22.14.
Render to all their dues. Owe nothing to any man, but to love one another. Romans
13.7.8.

Reas. 1. Because nature teaches, that debts must be paid. Why do we look for
duty from children or servants, but because it is a debt?

2. Because else we prejudice others, with whom we have to do, and expose them
to want, who have by trading, or lending relieved our wants, which is to do
evil for good.

Use. It serves to ery out against unconscionable men, that make no conscience
of paying debts; it will stick as a spot upon our religion; many among the
Turks are said to be more just in this particular: I have heard a Turkey
merchant of good Note say, that when he was to come away from Constantinople,
some of the Turks came to him, not sent for, to pay their debts: And a Morocco
Merchant affiming, that when the King died there, who traded much with the
English Merchants, the Queen sent for them to Court, and paid them every penny.
But especially, this should trouble their consciences, who, though rich, and
able, yet detain poor laborers wages; they would be loath to be so dealt
withal themselves, if they were in want. Behold the cry of the laborers which
have reap^d down your fields, which is of you kept back by fraud, cries, and
the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of the Lord of
Sabbath. I^me. 5.4. Conscience also is to be made of restoring things found,
committed to our trust, or borrowed; and that with speed, without delaying men:
for justice requires not only due payment, but in due season also, lest
deteriment come to the owners; and the Text requires it presently, if there be
power in thy hand to do it.

VER. 28. Say not unto thy neighbor, go, and come again, and to morrow I will
give, when thou have it by thee.
IN the former verse, Solomon had stirred up the young man to a work of
justice, to pay his debts; now he stirrs him up to a work of mercy, to do good
to the poor, if he be able, and that speedily. When men are in want, pitiless
men turn them away with the unprofitable alms of vain breath, that need speedy
succor, saying, Friend, I cannot help you now, go away and come another time:
yet they have no mind to help at any time, but only to put off at this time:
this delay is here forbidden. For the words.

Say not. See on Chap. 1.11. Put him not off with so vain an excuse.

Unto thy neighbor. The word (...) comes from feeding, and signifies such as
are known one to another, as cattle that feed together; it is sometimes
translated a friend, O friends drink. Cant. 5.1. Sometimes a neighbor, If I
have laid wait at my neighbors door. Job 31.9. Yet it is not to be restrained
to acquaintance, as if we were tied to do good to them only, but extends to all
in need, although strangers: So it is used in the ninth commandment, Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Go. Depart for the present. See on Chap. 1.11. on the word, come; it is the
same in the original.

And come again. Return another time. See on Chap. 1.23. on the word Turn, the
same word is used for turning, returning, and turning away. The Hebrews have no
compound verbs.

And. See on Chap. 2.22. on the word, But.

To morrow. Another time. But the nearest time is named to make him more
willing to go away, in hope of speedy payment. Sometimes the word (...)
signifies the next day punctually. Tomorrow get you early on your way. Judge.
19.9. Otherwise it signifies time to come, long after. When thy son asks thee
in time to come. Exodus 13.14. Here it is used in the first sense for the next
day, else were it no encouragement for the man to go away, nor no direction,
when to return.

I will give. I will relieve thy wants. For the word, see on Chap. 1.4.

When. Heb. And. But it is thus translated else where. When as yet the^e was
none of them. Psalm. 139.16.

Thou have it by thee. Heb. It is with thee. Thou have that in thy power, which
he needs and desires; for it is no sin to deny that a man has not to give.
Some make these words a part of the denyers speech, Go, and come again, and to
morrow I will give, for thou have it by thee. As if he had said, why do thou
trouble me now? thou have enough to keep thee at present; come another time
when thou want, and I will relieve thee.

Figures none. Note 1. An uncomfortable repulse. 2. A requiring of a double
labor: 3. A frivolous promise.


In the first, observe 1. The act prohibited, Say not. 2. The object, To thy
neighbor. 3. The injunction, Go.


In the second, note, a reinvitation, including a double labor, And come again.

In the third, a ready offer, and therein

1. The time. And to morrow.

2. The act, I will give.

3. His hypocrisy, When thou have it by thee. He might do it now, and should,
but will not.

Doct. 1. There is an unwillingnesse in able men to give to the poor. It
appears by this man's delaying here, and by Nabals churlish answer, Who is
David, and who is the son of Jesse? 1 Samuel 25.10. Lazarus, ready to starve,
could not get the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. Luke 16.21.

Reas. 1. Because we love the world too well, and would gladly keep as much of
it as we can, and more then we need.

2. Because we love our lusts, and they are very costly; Nature is content with
little, Grace with less, but gluttony, drunkenness, wantonness, cost much,
and hinder us from relieving others.

3. Because we think it is enough to provide for our own, especially, if we
have great families, then we think we are not tied to supply others wants.

Use. Marvail not at rich men's backwardness in relieving the poor, it is a
weed that grows in corrupted natures Garden, and will hardly be rooted out.

Doct. 2. We are ready to flatter our selves, and to excuse this our
unwillingnesse. So does he in the Text. The wicked man flattereth himself in
his own eyes. Psalm. 36.2. This is true in general of all wickedness, but in
particular, Nabal thinks he does right in denying David's suit, else he should
maintain runawaies, and fail his own laborers. 1 Samuel 25.10, 11. The excuses
of covetous men will prove the point; one, though rich, objects the weakness
of his estate, such an one worth much more then I, gives little or nothing; as
if the others greater neglect could excuse his lesser. Another says, the poor
are idle, and he will not give to maintain them in their idleness; He forgets,
that it is better to give to two that need not, then to deny to one that needs.
Another says the times are naught, trading is dead, and he may live to want
himself: as if he durst not trust God for the future, who never failed him in
all his life. These things argue self flattery.

Use. Away with fond excuses. Flatter not thy self to maintain thy
covetousness. Say with Paul, Neither at any time used we flattering words, as
ye know, nor a cloak of covetousness, God is witness. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5.

Doct. 3. We are tied to relieve others speedily, according to their wants, and
our abilities. To do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. Heb. 13.16. Christ, the great judge, at the
great day, will commend, and reward liberal givers, and condemn the contrary,
Math. 25.34. etc.

Reas. 1. We are tied to relieve them, because we are Gods stewards; He gives
us more then we need, that like conduit pipes, we might power out to others.

2. We must do it speedily, for thou may suddenly die, or they, and then
thou can not do it. Thou know not what a day may bring forth. Chap. 27.1.
Or, they may be relieved by others, and that is no thanks to thee, and thou
may perish for thy neglect. So Mordecai tells Hester, that if she neglected
to help Gods people, God would set up others to do it, and she, and her fathers
house should be destroyed for neglecting so fair an opportunity of doing good,
put into her hands by God. Est. 4.14. A gift in season is best, and double
worth to that which is long deferred. Qui cito dat, his dat. Give quickly, and
thou give twice. Gratia tarda ingrata est. Ingratum est beneficium, quod diu
inter manus dantis haefit. Seneca. Slow favor is no favor. It is an
unpleasing benefit that sticks long between the hands of the giver. As we have
opportunity, let us do good to all men. Gal. 6.10.

3. We must do it comfortably according to their wants; to give a dying man one
meal, or a naked man one hose, will not keep him alive.

4. We must do it liberally, according to our ability. Plentiful fountains,
give plenty of water. To whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required. Luke 12.48.

Use. It condemns unwilling givers: For such 1. Put off all till death, like
hogs good for nothing till they die. 2. They give sparingly, and with long
entreaty, if at all. Often drawing makes the Well fuller, and sweeter. Standing
still makes it stink. So in giving alms: Basil. Opportunity lost may be
irrecoverable. Thou may be as poor as Job to morrow, and have nothing to
give. God gives the creatures their meat in due feason. Psalm. 145.15. Job did
not withhold the poor from their desire, nor cause the eyes of the widow to
fail. Job 31.16. His alms was always ready when they needed it. They need not
wait long for it. Go thou, and do likewise. So may thou expect, that God in
mercy will not make thee wait long, but will soon answer thy prayers.

VER. 29. Devise not evil against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely
by thee.
THE wise man having persuaded before to the payment of debts, and speedy
giving to the door, now he disswades from evil offices, as from mischievous
plots in this verse, from contentious suits. ver. 30. From envy. ver. 31. Then
gives reasons both why these good offices should be done, and why the bad ones
should be avoided; and that to the end of the Chapter. The words run so, as if
a man were allowed to plot mischief against a stranger, or enemy, because it
forbids it only against a neighbor. But this is set out as a grievous sin
with its aggravations: yet the other not permitted. He does not tolerate small
sins, but set out greater, to make them the more odious. As if he had said,
Though thou must not devise evil against any man, yet especially not against
such as live near thee, and expect no ill from thee; Deceive not their
expectation.

Fore the words.

Devise not. Plot not evil against him in thy mind. The word (...) signifies
to plow, or fit the ground for the seed.

They that plow iniquity. Job 4.8. And secondarily to imagine, and plot
mischief in the mind, by thinking and studying, that so it may be ready for
execution, when occasion is offered. Sometimes, but rarely, it is used for
devising good things. Mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good. Chapter
14.22. It signifies also to be silent. O Lord keep not silence. Ps. 35.22. Here
it is taken in the second sense, for plotting and devising. Bain tells us, that
one of the Hebrew writers interprets this word of suspicion of evil in a
neighbor. But himself likes it not. The Doway Bible reads it, Practice not.
But I find not the word any where so used.

Evil. See on Chap. 1.33.

Against thy neighbor. Devise nothing, that may tend to his hurt. For the
word, see on ver, 28.

Seeing. One cause why thou should not hurt him, is, because he suspects no
harm from thee, and therefore cannot prevent it. This particle. I is
translated thus elsewhere, Seeing he judges those that are high. Job 21.22.

He dwells. The word (...) signifies

1. To sit. He that sits in the Heavens. Psalm. 2.4.

2. To abide or remain. He that abides of old, Psalm. 55.19.

3. To dwell. He that dwells in the secret place of the most high. Psalm.
91.1. So here.

Securely. Fearing no hurt from thee, but rather expecting a good, as from a
neighbor. See on Verse 23. on the word safely.

By thee. Near thy dwelling.

Figures none. Note. 1. A prohibition.

2. The reason thereof.

In the prohibition note 1. The Act forbidden. Devise not. 2. The Object of the
thing. Evil. 3. The Object of the person. Against thy neighbor.


In the reason note 1. The subject. Seeing he dwells by thee. 2. The Adjunct.
Securely.


1. Doct. Plotting to hurt others is a great sin. It is made a note of a wicked
man. He devises mischief upon his bed. Ps. 36.4. He devises wicked devices
to destroy the poor. Isa. 32.7.

Reason 1. Because it is an abuse, and ill employment of the most noble faculty
of the soul, as of reason, and affections, which should be used to do good to
others, and not to hurt men; But are often used to plot evil against men
contrary to Gods command.

2. It is a concatenation of diverse sins, as of malice, craft, voluntary
iniquity, and wilful contempt of Gods Commandment.

Use. To condemn those who think there is no sin, where there is no hurt done
to others, but place all sin in outward actions. This was the Pharisees
religion. Math. 5. yet Christ shows there; that though a man, or woman have not
hurt, yet anger, and lust are sins. If we ought to study, how to do men good,
though not desired, then is it a sin to devise evil against them, though not
executed.

2. Doct. It is a greater sin to devise evil against a neighbor. Let none of
you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbor. Zech. 8.17. He must go
to Heaven, that does not evil to his neighbor. Psalm. 15.3.

Reason. 1. Because of cohabitation. If he like thee so well, that he choose to
live by thee, do not thou devise evil against him. Continual converse should
keep thee from doing it.

2. Because thou may get good by him, more then by strangers, that are
farther off, when thou should need their help. Aliquid boni propter vicinum
bonum. Some good comes by a good neighbor. An heathen man being to sell, or
let his house, put in this commodity among the rest, that it stood among good
neighbors.

Use. Banish all ill causeless thoughts against thy neighbors good out of thy
heart. This is the way to live with comfort.

3. Doct. It is yet a greater sin to devise evil against such as take us for
their friends, expecting no hurt, but good from us It was not an enemy, that
reproached me; But it was thou a man, mine equal, mine guide, and mine
acquaintance. Psalm. 55.12.13. If I have rewarded evil to him, that was at
peace with me; Psalm. 7.3, 4.

Reason. 1. Because such suspect no evil from us; and therefore may more
easily be ruined by us. Natures Law will teach us not to imagine evil against
them that trust to us, and suspect it not. The Italian Proverb is, God keep me
from them I trust; and I will keep my self from them I trust not. Antigonus,
when he sacrificed, prayed to be kept from counterset friends, and being asked
why he did so, answered, Because I can my self take heed of known enemies. Bona
fide agendum est cum iis, qui nobis been fidunt. We must deal faithfully with
them, who faithfully put trust in us. It is a shameful thing to lay snares for
them, that suspect no evil from thee, and think thou love them. Thou do
egregiously dissemble, that under a fai: face, and countenance to them, hidest
a foul heart against them.

2. Because they deserve no evil of us, and those ill offices are worst, that
are done to such as neither deserve, nor fear ill from us.

3. Because such expect good of thee: and what can be worse, then to deceive
him, that expects good from thee?

4. Because they deserve good of thee; and therefore thou should not so much
as cherish a thought of evil against them.

Use. It condemns those that plot evil against their nearest friends. These
are traitors. 2 Timothy 3.4.

Judasses, that betray with a kiss. Such are dangerous enemies. Such we had
need take heed of, as the Prophet warnes. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not
confidence in a guide: keep the doors of thy mouth from her that lies in thy
bosom. Mic. 7.5. These are the plagues of all meetings, societies, feasts,
which are upheld by love, and faithfulness. Nulla pestis gravior ad nocendum,
quam familiaris inimicus. Lyra. There is no plague more hurtful, then a
familiar enemy.

VERSE 30. Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no harm.
IN the former verse, sinful plots against others were condemned: here sinful
words and actions are blamed. In a word, all unlawful contentions are
forbidden. Here is a prohibition of all manifest violence, and secret
deceitfulness.

For the words.

Strive not. Neither in judgment by suits of Law, nor by harsh words out of
judgment.

With a man. See on ver. 13.

Without cause. Being provoked by no injury. This forbids not complaints or
suits upon just grounds, but rash and causeless ones: For the word, see on
Chap. 1.17. on the word, In vain.

If he have done thee no harm. The word (...) signifies to do good or evil,
as well without desert, as with it. To begin, as well as to repay. Our
translators take it in the first sense, as an exposition of those words,
without cause. That is, if he have not first wronged thee. Bain a great
Hebrician, and a learned Commenter takes it in the second sense, for requiting,
and reads it thus, If he do not requite thee. And makes it the form of an
oath, understanding these words, Then say, I am a liar, or believe me no more.
Meaning, he will certainly be revenged on thee, and do like for like. Thou
pickest a quarrel with him without a cause, and must expect the like measure
from him. See the like expression, If he do not curse thee to thy face. Job
1.11. Then say, I am a liar. The meaning is, as it is well translated there,
And he will curse thee to thy face. So it may be here, Strive not with a man
without a cause: then, or, else he will do thee harm. To wit, if thou vex him
causlesly. For harm, see on Chap. 1.33. on the word Evil.

Quest. May we then strive with a man, that has done us harm?

Ans. Yes lawfully before a Magistrate, and without sharp words. The sum of
this Verse then is, Contend with no man, if thou can choose. But if necessity
or public profit require it, thou may do it, yet take heed, thou exercise
not public or private contention with any man, that has not offended thee, or
done thee wrong.

Figures none. Note. 1. The Act forbidden. Strive not.

2. The Object. With a man.

3. The Adjunct of qualification, set out

1. Generally. Without cause.

2. Particularly. If he have done thee no harm.

1. Doct. Man's nature is very apt to contend causlesly. What cause had Ahab, or
Jezebel, or the elders to contend with Naboth? 1 King. 21. What cause have
wicked men to contend with Gods people? Just as much, as Wolves have to contend
with sheep. Math. 10 16, 17.

Reason. 1. Because men are naturally proud: and pride causes contention. Yea
there is some pride and defire of victory in every contentation. Only by pride
comes contention. Chap. 13.10.

2. Because we are naturally covetous: and we know, that earthly mindedness
breeds a world of suits, and contentions.

Use. It teaches us not to wonder, that men love to go to Law without cause,
especially with simple men, whom they think they can easily overcome. Such men
are proud of their wit, and brag, that they can easily bring under others,
though their cause be never so unjust. An Abbat, being asked, why he went to
Law so often, especially knowing his cause was not always just, answers, that
he did as boys going by a nut-tree, who fling stones and sticks at it, to see
what nuts will fall. It is as natural for sinful men to contend, as for birds
to fly, or for worms to creep. And therefore it is no matter of admiration.

Doct. 2. Causeless contention is not allowed by God, or wise men. If I have
rewarded evil to him that was at peace with me, let the enemy persecute my
soul and take it. Psalm. 7.4, 5. Without cause have they hid for me their net in
a pit, which without cause they have dug for my soul. Psalm. 35.7. The
Assyrian oppressed them without cause. Isa. 52.4.

Reas. 1. Because they know the iniquity and unfitness of it, and that there
is no just ground of causeless strife.

2. They know the danger of it, and neither God nor wise men will allow that in
others, that brings them to utter ruin.

Use. To reprove those that are still in contentions, whether they have cause
or no: they are like Salamanders, that cannot live out of the fire, they forget
that Consilium malum consultori pessimum, ill counsels are worst for the
counselors. They think to ruin others, but are ruined themselves: As if a man
should throw a stone at another, and it should recoile, and wound himself; or
dig a ditch for another, and fall into it, Psalm. 7.15, 16. or hide a net for
another, and himself be caught in it Psalm. 35.8. How many have been undone by
needless lawsuits? How can they thrive, whose courses are abhorred by God, and
all wise men?

Doct. 3. Contention without just provocation is a great sin. David complains
of it, False witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew
not. They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. Psalm. 35.11,
12.

Reas. 1. Because it is against the law of charity, which requires good to be
done to others freely, much more not to hurt them by causeless contentions.

2. It is against the law of equity: for such not only do not, as they would be
done by, but do not as they are done by: they trouble others that trouble not
them.

3. It is against the law of humanity, and society, which is preserved by
concord, and destroyed by discord.

4. It is against the law of piety, which bids do good for evil, and then much
more forbids doing evil without a cause. A Christian should abhor nothing
more, then unprofitable contentions. Non contentio, sed collatio debet esse
inter christianos. There should be no contention, but communication among
Christians. Recuperus. Insont is tutor, aut vindex est judex, ant certe Deus.
The tutor, or revenger of the innocent man, is the Judge, or certainly God.
Lapide. If the Judge will not right them, surely God will.

Use. Take heed therefore for time to come of causeless contentions.
Continuance in known sins certainly damns men. The heathen man could say, Cum
pari contendere anceps est, cum superiore furiosum, cum inferiore sordidum.
Seneca. To contend with an equal is a doubtful business, to contend with a
superior a mad prank, to contend with an inferior is sordid. It is madness
for a man to delight in needless contentions. It may become Papists to do so,
as Cardinal Wolsey, when he was Lord Chancellor, paid home Sir James Paulet
without any provocation then, only because he had laid him by the heels,
when he was a schoolmaster. Cranmer would not strive with them, that gave him
cause, when he was Archbishop. It was a proverb then, Do the Bishop of
Canterbury a shrewd turn, and you shall have him your friend ever after. And
Robert Holgat Archbishop of York, though he was a Papist, being, when he was a
Priest, sued by Sir Francis Askew; when he was Lord President of the North,
showed him all lawful favor in a suit, saying, He was much beholdden to him,
for had not he been, he must have lived a poor hedge-Priest all the days of
his life: yet may a godly man by lawful means keep off injury, maintain his
right, and punish sin. This is not causeless contention.

VER. 31. Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.
THE Dehortation is not needless. It comes to pass sometimes in the world,
that many men thrive, and grow very rich by wicked plots. Then proud men envy
them. Why should not I thrive, as well as they? They were of as mean Parentage
as I, and it may be, of meaner. Covetous men imitate them. If these ways will
make them rich, they will make me rich also. I am not a fool, I can paly my
game as well as they to go beyond others. There was need therefore to warn the
young man, that he err not on the right hand out of pride, nor on the left
hand out of covetousness. This precept is fitly joined to the former. For as we
must not abuse other men's simplicity, nor innocence to do them hurt, so we
must not abuse their prosperity to envy them, nor imitate their wicked ways of
gain. For the words.

Envy thou not. The word (...) is taken sometimes in a good sense, and then it
is construed with (...) for. He was zealous for his God. Numb. 25.13. And then
it signifies to grieve, that a person, or thing dear unto one, should be abused
by another, and to seek to defend, or vindicate him, or it. Then it is
translated zealous. Sometimes it is taken in a bad sense. I the Lord thy God am
a jealous God. Exodus 20.5. And then the verb is ordinarily construed with
(...). Rachel envied her fister. Genesis 30.1. And it imports a grieving, and
envying, that another should enjoy what we desire, or think to belong to-us.
Then it is translated to be jealous, or to envy. And so it is taken here for
envying, that others are richer then we.

The oppressor. or, Be not envious against the oppressor. So (...) is
translated. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, Numb. 23.23. Heb. The
man of violence. That is, an ungodly man, that grows rich by oppressing others.
Men may dislike him for his cruelty, but they would not envy him, unless he
were rich. Invidus alterius rebus macrescit opimis. The envious man grows lean
to see other men's estates grow fat. Be not troubled, that wicked men thrive by
wicked ways. Look not on such as happy men to be envied, nor applaud the
courses they take, nor follow them to get wealth by those unlawful ways. The
word (...) is used.

1. For a man by nature, whither male, or female, as opposed to a beast. I am
God, and not Man. Hos. 11.9.

2. For any man. None shall deliver out of my hand. Heb. Not aman. That is, not
any man. Hos. 2.10.

3. For a male opposed to a female. The male, and his female. Genesis 7.2.

4. For an husband. She gave also unto her Husband. Genesis 3.6.

5. For an excellent man for strength, or nobility. Art not thou a valiant man?
1 Samuel 26.15. Heb. Art not thou a man? Here it is taken in the first sense for
a man opposed to a beast.

And choose none of his ways. Do not do wickedly, as he does, that thou may
be as rich as he. Although some of his evil ways may be fairly covered over
with vizards, that the evil of them may not be seen, or be more gainful then
other, yet show, that thou have more wisdom, then to prefer any way above good
ways, or to choose one wicked way, though thou refuse other, for they are all
to be refused. Regard not worldly wickedness joined with greatness, neither
be wicked as they are, that thou may be great as they are. Be not allured by
the ungodly man's example, however he speed in the world, to follow him in the
same steps. For as wicked men's prosperity makes other men to envy them at the
first, so it makes them to imitate them at last, that they may be rich also.
For choose, see on Chap. 1.29. For None, or Not any, see on Chap. 1.13. on the
word All. For Ways, see on Chap. 1.15.

Figures. A Metaphor in the word ways. Men that oppress, do not now and then
do an unjust action, but walk on constantly in such courses to their death, as
travelers do in their way; till they come to their journies end. Two sins are
here forbidden 1. Envying of evil rich men. 2. Imitating of them. In the
first, note 1. The Sin forbidden. Envy not. 2. The Object. The oppressor.


In the second observe 1. The Sin forbidden. And choose not. 2. The Object. Any
of his ways.


1. Doct. Many live by oppressing others. So vild beasts and great birds and
fishes live on the weaker, and smaller; By reason of the multitude of the
oppressions they make the oppressed to cry. Job. 35.9. I considered all the
oppressions, that are done under the Sun. Eccl. 4.1.

Reason. 1. Because it is an easy way of living, when men need not work
themselves, but make others to work for them, as men go easily in a Coach, or
by water, where they sit still, and others work: but it is harder, and more
wearisom to go on foot.

2. Because it is a profitable way, for many things may be gotten by indirect
ways, that cannot by lawful means. There may be cousenage in Wares, Weights,
Titles, and many other ways, that few can prevent, for ^o man is exercised in
all trades. And it is an easy thing for a skillful seller to cosen an
unskilful buyer. It is the ones trade, not the others. And trades are called
mysteries, as having many secrets in them concealed from others.

Use. Marvail not, that so many complain of injuries, and wrongs. Where there
are many suits, there is much injury. And where there are many oppressors,
there are many oppressed. There are many worshippers of Mammon in the World,
and all his worship is false worship.

2. Doct. Men may grow rich by oppression. They covet fields, and take them by
violence, and houses, and take them away: so they oppress a man, and his
house, even a man, and his heritage. Mic. 2.2. Some remove the landmarks, they
violently take away flocks, and feed thereof. Job 24.2. etc.

Reason. 1. Because they quickly get away a great part of other men's estates. A
poor man may labor long to get a little. An oppressor sweeps a way much at
once.

2. They get all away from others, and great heirs are oftentimes wiped by them
of all they have. That which is true of poor oppressors, is also true of many
rich ones, who never think themselves rich enough, Like a sweeping rain, they
leave no food Chap. 28.3.

Use. Take heed of oppression. If there were no bait, no bird, nor fish would
meddle with an hook. If no gain, no man would oppress.

3. Doct. Such as grow rich by oppression must not be envied by us. David the
Father, and Solomon the Son join in this instruction. Solomon here in the text.
David in the Psalms. Fret not thy self because of evil doer, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity. Psalm. 37.1. Asaph confesses his fault,
I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Psalm.
73.3.

Reason. 1. Because hereby we shall wrong God, and censure his proceedings, as
dealing better with bad men, then with good, whereas we should acknowledge
Gods wisdom in it, who gives the best things, as the graces of his spirit to
good men, and riches, which will perish, he gives often to bad men. Heaven he
gives to godly men, and the world to ungodly. Fathers make them fare harder
then strangers, for whom they provide an inheritance. Hereby he shows, that
grace is good, sin evil, and riches of a middle condition, good, or bad, as
they are used. Haec bona ne putentur mala, dantur and bonis, ac rursus, ne
putentur summa, dantur and malis. Item auferuntur ista bonis, ut probentur, and
malis, ut crucientur. August. Epist. 7. These good things, that they may not be
thought evil, are given to good men also, and that they may not be thought the
chiefest good things, are given to evil men also. Again, these things are
taken away from good men, that they may be proved, and from bad men, that they
may be vexed. And what art thou, that by thy envy, and discontent censurest the
deep wisdom of God?

2. We shall condemn the generation of the righteous, and think wicknesse
better then goodness. Psalm. 73.15.

3. We do not consider the end of these men, that God does set them in slippery
places, and will cast them down into destruction. Psalm. 73.17.18. Gods curse
will eat out all their substance. Male parta, male dilabuntur. Ill gotten goods
are ill spent. De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius haeres. Of ill gotten goods
the third heir never joys. If they that get them, spend them not, their
children will. The world runs upon wheels. A covetous Father begets a
prodigal Son. He that knows not with what pains it was got, knows with what
ease it may be spent. Had thou rather have riches, that will end in poverty,
or poverty, that will end in riches? No great witneedfull to choose, yet envious
persons show themselves fools in choosing the worst.

4. We look not at the great account they have to give for getting their goods
by oppression, for deteining relief from the poor, or for prodigal spending
what they have gotten by oppression.

Use. Let this pull down our spirits, that they rise not up against rich
oppressors. Nature thrusts us forward to envy. Do ye think the Scripture says
in vain, The spirit that dwells in us, lusts to envy? Jam. 4.5. We think
we are as good as they, and why should we not fare as well? The Heathen man
could see this fault in moral men: Socrates being asked, what was most
troublesome to good men? answered, The prosperity of wicked men. And grace
cannot keep this envy always out of good men, as was showed before out of
Asaphs case in Psalm. 73. who shows by his own experience, what force there is
in bad men's prosperity to trouble good men's minds; and how perilous this
trouble is to pervert their ways, as appears in that Psalm at large. It is no
easy thing then for good men to behold the prosperity of bad men without
vexation. Take heed therefore of this envy; will thou envy a Porter, or an
Ass, that carries heavy burdens of gold and silver, but is never the better
for it in the end? will thou envy a viper, or a serpent, that is full of
poison? So riches prove to wicked men through their corruption. Chrysostom. in
Romans Hom. 7.44.

4. Doct. The Devil has more ways then one to undo us. If he cannot get good
men to envy at the prosperity of rich men, he will get bad men to follow their
evil ways. He had three temptations for Christ. Math. 4. Many snares of
persecution for Paul. 2 Cor. 11.

Reason. 1. Because he works according to men's predominant affections. He draws
proud men to envy others, covetous men to imitate the ways of rich worldlings,
angry men to revenge, loose men to wantonness. So he puts fuel to the fire,
which quickly takes.

2. Because of his long experience in temptation for five thousand years. If a
soldier could live so long, he would be very skillful.

Use. Be always suspicious, and watchful. He that goes where many blocks
are, or snares, had need look to his feet. A snake may be among roses. A snare
amongst the best things.

5. Doct. Men are ready naturally to follow bad examples. So bad men do. From
the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, Jehu departed
not. 2 King. 10.29. So good men do. Peter's dissimulation carries away the other
Jews, and Barnabas also. Gal. 2.13.

Reason. 1. Because of the corruption of nature, which remains in the best.
Many dispositions not so bad as others are ruined by following others.

2. Because in those ways there is gain, pleasure, or safety. And all men look
after some of these.

Use. Let us (...) set good examples before us, even the best, and be ashamed
to follow those, that are worse then our selves.

6. Doct. None of the oppressors ways must be imitated, no not the most
cleanly, pleasurable or profitable. One would think, it were safe to follow a
multitude in evil; yet that is forbidden. Exodus 23.2. He that follows vain
persons, is void of understanding. Prove. 12.11.

Reason. 1. Because their ways, though never so pleasing to themselves, are
perverse, and cross to all men. They care not whom they wrong, so they
satisfy their own lusts.

2. Because their ways are destructive. They undo many, and will lead us
closely to hell, though men may approve of them.

Use. Regard not worldly greatness joined with wickedness, and be not wicked
as others are, that thou may be great as they are. Those ways may bring
pleasure, or gain, and be cunningly carried, so that no man can see the
iniquity of them, but God sees it, and will take pleasure to ruin them, whom
men cannot ruin.

VER. 32. For the froward is an abomination io the Lord: but his secret is with
the righteous.
THE reasons that follow to the end of the Chapter are by some writers applied
to the former precepts. ver. 27. etc. To wit, that we should not any way wrong
our neighbor, because God will revenge it. Others tie them to ver. 31. as
reasons why we should neither envy nor imitate oppressors, because God hates
them. Rather follow good men, whom God loves, and to whom he reveals his
secrets, and shows them, what misery he will bring on rich oppressors. In this
verse and those which follow there is a fourfold opposition between good men,
and bad set forth by diverse names, curses, and blessings. The names, Froward,
opposed to righteous; Wicked to just; Scornrs to lowly; Wise to fools; The
curses, and blessings. Gods abominating to reveiling his (...). His curse on
the family; to his blessing on it; Scorning, to giving grace; Inheriting glory
to shame.

For the words.

For. A reason of what went before. Envy them not, nor follow them, for theirs
is but seeming felicity, God abhors them, and will certainly punish them. Do
not thou lose thy labor. God will break them to pieces. Therefore thou had
more need to pity them, then to envy them, or choose any of their ways. For
(...) see on Chap. 1.9.

The froward. For the word, see on Chap. 2.15. Here it may well be understood
of the oppressor mentioned. ver. 31. For such are contentious persons, and
common barators.

(...). An abomination. Extremely hated, as hatred it self. Not only hated,
but abominated, as a stinking carcass, that we cannot endure near us. It
signifies a thing, which offends the senses, from which men turn away ears,
eyes, nose, etc. It shows Gods utter dislike of the ungodly. Lo, shall we
sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not
stone us? Exodus 8.26.

To the Lord. Heb. Of the Lord. For the word, see on Chap. 1.17.

But. See on Chap. 2.22.

His secret. Some understand it of that secret, that God intends to destroy the
oppressors, though he let them thrive for a time. Others of the way to Heaven,
which is a secret to the world. Others of secret consolation. Though they meet
with troubles abroad, God gives them store of comfort within. Others of Gods
protection in times of trouble. They have Gods secret place, wherein to hide
them, till the storm be over. Psalm. 91.1. But the beginning of this verse by
way of opposition, and the next verse by way of exposition shows, that it is a
description of friendship, and that God is spoken of after the manner of men,
who dislike some men so much, that they will not admit them to secret
familiarity, nor trust them with any private business: but they love others so
well, that they will often converse in private, and communicate their secret
intentions to them. So God hates and curses evil men: but loves, and blesses
good men. The word (...) signifies

A secret. A thing kept from others. The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear him. Psalm. 25.14.

2. A plot devised privily to bring mischief on others, which is commonly kept
secret, lest it should be prevented. O my soul come not thou into their secret.
Genesis 49.6.

3. An assembly of men, that lay their heads together to consult, for such
consultations use to be carried in secret. I will pour it out upon the assembly
of young men together. Ier. 6.11. Here it is taken in the first sense. He
acquaints them with what he keeps secret from others.

With the righteous. Such as fret not at the prosperity of wicked men, or
rather such as do not imitate them in oppressing others, but deal justly with
all men. For the word see on Chap. 2.21.

Figures. An abomination for an abominable thing. The adjunct for the subject.

Note. 1. The portion of the wicked.

2. Of the godly. In the former observe 1. The word of coherence. For. 2. The
Subject. The froward. 3. The Adjunct. Is an abomination. 4. The Object. To the
Lord.


In the latter note. 1. The word of opposition. But. 2. The Adjunct. His
secret. 3. The Object. Is with the righteous.


1. Doct. There is a great difference between the condition of a good man and
of a bad. This is showed at large. Psalm. 1. and Psalm. 33. all over. It is also
proved by the particulars in the text, and after it.

1. Because God loves the one, and hates the other. And this appears in that he
communicates his secrets unto the one, as to friends, but conceals them from
the other, as from enemies in this verse. And

2. Because he curses the wicked, and blasts all their endeavors, and blesses
the other in all they do enjoy. ver. 33. wicked men's comforts are cursed, and
godly men's crosses are blessed to them.

3. Because he scorns, and contemns ungodly men; but he favors all that are
godly. ver. 34. Now his favor is better then life, his anger worse then death.

4. He prefers godly men to glory, that will last for ever: but he sends the
wicked ashamed to Hell. ver. 35.

Use. Labor with Mary to choose the better part. Who would not rather be in a
low condition with his Princes favor, that can raise him, then in an high one
with his anger, that can pull him down, when he will?

2. Doct. God hates ungodly men. They that are of a froward heart, are an
abomination to the Lord. Chap. 11.20. The way of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord. Chap. 15.9.

Reason. 1. Because though men flatter, and commend them, yet God always
speaks ill of them, and their ways, and he always speaks, as he thinks. He
will not speak ill of them he likes, nor well of them he likes not. He cannot
dissemble.

2. Because he is resolved to ruin all that live and die wicked. Men prefer
and set up wicked men for their own ends: but if God do prefer them in the
world, it is but to ruin them for ever. Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore
ruant. They are lifted on high, that they may have the heavier fall.

Use. Contemn the prosperity of wicked men, for God will certainly ruin them,
notwithstanding their wealth.

3. Doct. God intimatly loves godly men. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that love him. Psalm. 103.17. The Lord
loves the righteous Psalm 106.8.

Reason. 1 Because he communicates his secrets to them; as in the text. Where
Gods secret is, there is his heart, yea himself. He makes them of his privy
counsel. I have called you friends, for all things, that I have heard of my
father, I have made known unto you. Ioh. 15.15.

2. Because he will have them with him for ever in Heaven: and we love them
well, whom we desire never to part withal.

Use. Let us be godly, that we may be great in Gods books. No matter then,
though the world count us base, afflict, and oppress us. God will make us of
his counsel here, and happy for ever. Psat. 73.24.

VERSE 33. The curse of the Lord is in the house of the wickeed: but he
blesses the habitation of the just.
IT might be objected against the former ver. that it does not appear, that God
lothes wicked men, and loves good men, for he makes evil men rich, when better
men are poor. Solomon answers in this verse, that it may so come to pass
sometimes, but yet, the plenty of evil men carries Gods curse with it, which,
like a moth, eats it up, and the want of good men carries Gods blessing with
it, which brings comfortable supply. So he confirms the former proposition by
the effects of Gods hatred, and love.

Fore the words.

The curse. His plagues, and judgments are threatened, and prepared, and in
time shall be executed on them. Some understand it of want, and the blessing,
of plenty; for the one is threatened to the wicked, the other promised to the
godly in the Law. Gods curse will bring the wicked rich man to poverty, and his
blessing will bring the poor godly man to plenty. This God often does, but not
always: therefore the former interpretation is better.

Of the Lord. Sent by the Lord. For the word, see on Chap. 1.7.

Is in the house. Though it be never so stately a Palace: yea, on all in his
house, as wife, children, goods, etc. For the word, see on Chap. 1.13.

Of the wicked. See on Chap. 2.22.

But. See on Chap. 2.22.

He blesses. His good providence watches over it for good. The word (...)
signifies

1. To bow the knee. Solomon kneeled down upon his knees. 2 Chronicles. 6.13.

2. To bless. Bless the Lord, O my soul. Psalm. 103.1.

3. To curse. It may be, that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts. Job 1.5. Here it is taken in the second sense for blessing, as it is
translated. Yet not for Verbal blessing, as we bless God; but for a real
one, as he blesses us. I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou
shall be a blessing. Genesis 12.2.

(...). The habitation. The word signifies a shepherds Cotage, and is used
also for any house. If a godly man have but a poor Cottage, yet Gods blessings
shall be on him, and on all his in it.

Of the just. See on Chap. 2.20. on the word Righteous.

Figures. House, and Habitation for the dwellers in them. As, The Lord blessed
Obed Edom, and all his household. 2. Sam. 6.11. The subject place for the
adjunct.

Note. 1. The extent of Gods curse.

2. Of his blessing.

In the first observe 1. The Author. Of the Lord. 2. The Action. The curse. 3.
The Object. Is in the house of the wicked.


In the second note 1. The Author. But he. 2. The Act. Blesses. 3. The Object.
The habitation of the just.


1. Doct. Gods curse is on wicked men, in all their ways. See Levit. 26.14.
etc. Deuteronomy. 28.15. etc.

Reason. 1. Because their poverty, losses, and crosses are not trialls as the
afflictions of Gods people are, but beginnings of sorrows, and an earnest of
Hell, assurances, that they shall have no true comfort here, nor hereafter

2. Because their wealth and outward comforts are turned in to curses; In
enjoying them they meet with many crosses in wives, children, servants; and are
forced sometimes to wish their wealth in the bottom of the Sea. In losing them
they meet with much sorrow, and cannot bear want so well as they that never
were rich. Gods curse consumes wealth, house, meat, drink, etc. Strumpets never
are rich, though they have great gifts. Deceitful tradesmen often break. The
uses may be taken out of ver. 31.

1. Use. Envy not thou their worldly prosperity. Would thou have their riches
with Gods curses? It will weigh thee down to Hell.

2. Use. Imitate not their wicked courses to get wealth. They may enrich you
before the world; but they bring with them the sting of Gods curse to ruin you
for ever.

2. Doct. Gods blessing is on godly men in all their doings. See Levit. 26.3,
etc. Deuteronomy. 28.1. etc.

Reason. 1. Because if they have but little, yet they have content with it,
which wicked rich men have not with all their wealth. And he that has content,
has enough in a journey. He may look for plenty when he comes home.

2. Because God will turn his poverty into plenty, if he see it fit for him.

Use. Embrace good ways. What can thou have more, then Gods blessing, which
brings content in the way, and happiness in the end?

3. Doct. Whole families may fare better, or worse for good, or bad Governors.
Obed-Edom was a godly man, and entertained the Ark of God, and the Lord blessed
Obed-Edom, and all his household. 2 Samuel 6.11. The Lord give mercy to the house
of Onesiphorus: for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain. 2 Timothy 1.16. David had like to have destroyed all the males of Nabals family for
their Masters churlishness. 1 Samuel 25.22.

Reason. 1. Because under good Governors they have good example to encourage
them to do well, and good instruction to show them, how to do well. Happy are
thy men, happa are these thy servants, which stand continually before thee, and
that hear thy wisdom, says the Queen of Sheba to Solomon. 1 King. 10.8. And
under bad Governors they have bad example, and counsel.

2. Because although they should not regard either the one, or the other, yet
God prospers them outwardly for their Governors sake sometimes, as Cham fared
well in the Ark for Noah's sake, and the prisoners fared well, while Joseph
guided there. So did they that lived in Abraham's, Isaacs, Jacobs, David's,
Solomon's family. And on the contrary, servants may suffer for bad Masters, as
Nabals innocent servants had done, if God in mercy to them had not pacified
David's rash anger by Abigails wise counsel.

Use. Take heed of living in bad families, and get into such, as have godly
Governors. There is a blessing in it, as in the cluster on the Vine. Isa.
65.8. (...): The Gods are within also, said the Philosoper of his poor cottage.
Much more may the servants of the true God say, in whose houses God himself
dwells, and in whose houses are Churches of God. Philem. ver. 2. Their cottages
are better to dwell in, then royal Palaces. Dwell then in such with comfort,
and expect Gods blessing.

VER. 34. Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he gives grace unto the lowly.
GODS severity against all kind of sinners was declared before. Now he shows,
that God has a special quarrel against scorners, and mockers at Gods word,
and admonitions, his promises, and threatenings, his service, and servants.
Wicked men deride those, that trust to Gods promises, or fear his threats:
therefore God scorns them. Here are many names for wicked men; Froward,
wicked, scorners, fools. Many for good men; righteous, just, lowly, wise. Many
evils threatened to the one, abomination, curse, scorn, shame. Many good things
promised to the other, as knowledge of Gods secrets, his blessing, favor,
glory.

For the words.

Surely. The word (...) signifies

1. If. If it be before. Exodus 1.16.

2. It notes a question. Am I a Sea? Job 7.12.

3. It signifies when. When he went in unto his brothers wise. Genesis 38.9.

4. Though. Though thou detain me. Judge. 13.6.

5. Seth, or, Seeing. But fith ye say. Jer. 23.38.

6. Surely. Surely your turning of things upside down. etc. Isa. 29.16. So
here. And then it may come from (...) truth, the last letter being lost. And so
our Savior says in a like word made Greek. Amen, Amen. Verily, verily Ioh.
1.51.

He scorneth the scorners. See on Chap. 16. upon the word, Interpretation. God
lightly esteems of those, that set light of his Ordinances, and scoff at
religion. And sometimes he shows them, that they are deluded by punishing them
openly, and giving them over to bescorned by others, as he pours contempt
upon Princes. Job 12.21.

But. See on Chap. 2.22.

He gives. See on Chap. 1.4.

Grace. Respect from himself, and men, as on the contrary, he scorns proud
persons, and makes men contemn them also. For the word, see on Chap. 1.19.

Unto the lowly. These are fitly opposed to scorners, who are proud. Proud and
haughty scorner is his name. etc. Chap. 21.24. Some read, to the poor. For such
are often lowly, when rich men prove proud scorners. Our soul is exceedingly
filled with the scorning of those, that are at ease, and with the contempt of
the proud. Psalm. 123.4. But the former reading is better, for poor men are not
always lowly, nor rich men proud scorners.

Figures none. Note. 1. Gods opposition to the scorners.

2. His favor to the lowly.

In the first observe 1. The word of assurance. Surely. 2. The person. He. God
scorns them. 3. The Act. Scorneth. 4. The Object. The scorners.


In the second note. 1. The word of opposition. But. 2. The Act. Gives. 3. The
Object of the thing, Grace. 4. The object of the person, Unto the lowly.


Doct. 1. Wicked men are called by diverse bad names in scripture, and good men
by diverse good. It appears in the last verses of this Chapter, where ungodly
men are called froward, wicked, scorners, fools, names of disgrace, and good
men are called righteous, just, lowly, wise, names of credit: So in other
places, ungodly men are called Goats, Math. 25.33. Dogs, Swine, 2 Pet. 2.22.
Foxes, Cant. 2.15. Good men are called Gods peculiar treasure, Psalm. 135.8. His
jewels, Mal. 3.17. His Sheep, Math. 25.33. His sons, Genesis 6.2.

Reas. 1. Because God thinks no one name bad enough to set out his dislike of
wicked men, nor good enough, to set out his delight in good men.

2. Because there are many vices in evil men, and many virtues wrought by God
in good men; yet one is predominant: we say, one man is choleric, though he
have other humors, because that prevails: So among wicked, some are froward to
men, others are impious toward God, others scorners of piety, others foolish
in their ways: Among good men, some are more righteous and just, some more
lowly or wise then others, and some of these names may fit one good man, and
some another.

Use. Seeing God declares his hatred of sinners, and love of Godly men by so
many several names, let us learn to show our dislike of the one, and love of
the other, by several ways. In our eyes let a vile person be contemned, but
let us honor them that fear the Lord. Psalm. 15.4. It becomes a Citizen of the
heavenly Jerusalem, to be affected like God. If Ahashuerosh honor Mordecas, he
expects the people should do it too, and therefore shows him in state to the
people, with a proclamation* Thus shall it be done to the man whom the King
will honor. Es^ 6.9. If he will disgrace Haman, his servants at the first word
cover his face: As the word went out of the Kings mouth, they covered Haman 's
face. Est. 7.8. So should we honor those whom God honors, and lightly esteem
of others.

Doct. 2. God sets light by proud scornful men. If thou scornest, thou alone
shall bear it Chap. 9.12. He that sits in the seat of the scornful, God
will make him like the chafe, which the wind drives away. Psalm. 1.1, 4.

Reas. 1. Because God has more reason to scorn them, then they to scorn
others: There is more difference between God, and the wisest, richest,
strongest man in the world, then is between him, and the foolishest, poorest,
weakest creature in the world.

2. Because nothing is more just, then lex talionis, the law of requital. It
was the Magistrates rule in the Law, Life for life, eye for eye, tooth for
tooth, etc. Exodus 21.22, 23. Adonibezeck acknowledges it, As I have done, so
God has requitted me. Judge. 1.7. So with the froward, thou will show thy self
froward. Psalm. 18.26. And by proportion God will scorn scorners. This is a
glass to show scorners how ill it becomes them.

Use. Take heed of scorning: If men dare not set you as light as you set them,
God will. If your height make you despise others, God will either bring you low
in this world, or take you out of it, and send you to hell, to show, that he
sets as light by you, as you do by others.

Doct. 3. God shows great respect to humble men. He gives grace unto the
humble. Jam. 4.6.1 Pet. 5.5.

Reas. 1. He gives to such grace and favor in his own sight. I will look to
him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit. Isa. 66.2. Nihil est tam Deo gratum
quam seipsum in postremis numerare. Chrysostom. Nothing is so pleasing to God, as
for a man to reckon himself among the meanest.

2. Because he makes them to find favor with men. Mansuetude reddit hominem
gratiosum non solum coram Deo. sed etiam coram hominibus. Meekness makes a man
gracious, not only before God, but also before men. Lyra.

Use. Banish all proud thoughts, and labor for true humility; such are
pleasing both to God, and good men, and therefore though evil men scorn them,
they shall be no losers. Humility is both a grace, and a vessel to receive
grace. Men let the vessel down into the water to fill it in a river: so must
he that will find favor with God, lie down in the dust, and cry, Non sum
dignus, at sum indigen^. I am not worthy, but I am needy. He shall then have
cause to say, I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks on me. Psalm. 40.17.

VER. 35. The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of
fools.
HEre is the last motive to stir us up to get wisdom, and forsake the ways of
wickedness, because the one brings glory, the other shame; and it is fitly
knit to the former: for the humble, who are the only wise ones, go from grace
to glory: and the proud scorner, who is the greatest fool, shall fall from
honor to shame. Seeing humble men are counted simple, and proud men wise, and
sin prefers many, and grace makes many contemned in the world, he therefore
raises up the dejected heart of the one, and casts down the proud spirit of the
other, by pronouncing the lowly wise, and the scorners fools, and by promising
honor to the one, like to men in a rising condition, and threatening disgrace
to the other, as to men going down the wind. Glory follows fitly after grace,
and shame after scorning; for men honor those they favor, and put them to
shame whom they scorn.

For the words.

The wise. Godly men, who are wise indeed. For the word, see on Chap. 1.5.

Shall inherit. Shall firmly enjoy it for continuance, as children enjoy their
inheritance left them by their parents: they shall not have glory for a moment
of time, but for ever, by an hereditary right. The Papists bring merit out of
this word, but it rather concludes the contrary, for no child deserves his
inheritance.

Glory. They shall be honored by God and men. Lyra tells us, that the
commentator on the first book of the Ethics (I suppose he means Aristotle's)
says, that reverence, honor, glory, exceed one another. I may reverence a man
for any cause; yea, though it be but out of fear: but if I reverence a man for
his virtue, then I give him honor, though it be in secret, and before a few:
But when I commend him, or prefer him for virtue openly before many, then I
give him glory, which is a clear acknowledgment with praise: He adds, Wisdom
makes a man honorable before a multitude, not only in earth, but also in his
heavenly country. For the word, see on verse 16. on the word Honor.

But. See on Chap. 2.22.

Shame. Contempt from God and man, which may make them hold down their heads
for shame. As the word (...) that signifies glory, comes from a word that
signifies weight, So the word (...) that signifies shame, in the original Text
comes from a word that signifies lightness: For as there is weight in true
honor, so nothing but emptiness in disgrace:

Shall be the promotion of fools. Shall be the greatest honor wicked men can
attain: They look for great honor by their wicked devices, but they shall end
in infamy. Others read, Fools carry away shame: they bear it away for their
portion. And then it is a Noun plural, with a Verb singular, intimating, that
it is the portion of every fool. Others thus, Shame takes away fools. That
is, destroys them, and all their hope of good. Others thus, The exaltation of
fools is shame. That is, their honor ruins them, because they know not how
to use it: The filthiness of their foolishness most appears when they are
exalted, as the deformity of the Apes buttocks appears most, when he climbs up
on high. For fools, see on Chap. 1.32.

Figures. Inherit. A metaphor: they shall have it as surely, as children their
inheritance. Promotion. An hard metaphor, as sperare, to hope, for timere, to
fear. Promotion for punishment. Note 1. The wise man's portion. 2. The fools.


In the first, observe 1. The heir, The wise. 2. The act, Shall inherit. 3. The
object, Glory.


In the second, note 1. The portion, But shame. 2. The bestowing of it, Shall
be the promotion. 3. The object, Of fools.


Doct. 1. God counts godly men wise, and wicked men fools. Fools because of
their transgression are afflicted. Psalm. 107.17. The righteous shall see it,
and rejoice. Who so is wise, and will observe those things, etc. Psalm. 107.42
43. A wise man will hear, and will increase learning. Chap, 1.5. Fools despise
wisdom. Chap. 1.7.

Reas. 1. Because good men walk in the right way, which is a sign of wisdom:
and wicked men miss the way to happiness, which is a sign of folly.

2. Because the former speed well in the end, and that for ever, whereas wicked
men like fools, undo themselves eternally.

Use. Let not us think our selves wiser then God. Let us esteem simple good men
righteous, or right wise men, for so the Saxons write it, and wicked men
fools, as Christ does, though never so worldly wise. Thou have bid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Matthew.
11.25.

2. Doct. Honor is the wise man's inheritance. They that be wise shall shine,
as the brightness of the Firmament. Dan. 12.3.

Reason. 1. He has a proper right to it, as the heir has to his inheritance.
Laws of men settle the one: Gods word who can perform it against all the world,
settles the other. The Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation. 2 Timothy 3.15.

2. They have a perfect, and unquestionable right given them by God, who is
possessor of Heaven, and Earth. Genesis 14.19. And Gods gift is a sure title. No
creature can question it: with this argument Jepthtah pleads against the King
of the Ammonites, Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy God gives thee
to possess? so whomsoever the Lord our God shall drive out from before us,
them will we possess. Judge. 11.24.

3. They have it by perpetual right, not for term of life only, but for
eternity in another world. Wicked men may get honor here, but they lose it for
eternity when they die.

4. They have a right to make use of all good respect from God, and men, both
here, and hereafter.

Use. Which of you would not have glory both in this world, and that which is
to come? He that would not, let him live, and die with shame, like a fool. He
that would, let him show himself wise in knowing, and coming to God, and
walking according to his will. Then will eternal glory follow him, as the
shadow does the Sun.

3. Doct. Shame is the fools preferment. My servants (who are wise) shall
rejoice, but ye (foolish sinners ( shall be ashamed. Isa. 65.13.

Reason. 1. Because if they do get promotion, it is but a shame to them,
because they know not how to use it: Stultus in gloria, simia in purpura.
Lapids. A fool in glory is an ape in purple.

2. Because their glory ends in their temporal infamy sometimes, but always
in eternal misery. There shall not be one fool in heaven.

Use. Envy not wicked fools. Shameful promotion is good enough for them,
unless they were better. Honor here is a gibbet to send them to Hell
hereafter. Fret not thy self then because of evil doers, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity. For they shall soon be cut down like
the grass: and wither as the green herb. Psalm. 37.1, 2.

Thus ends the Exposition of Solomon's Preface to his Proverbs. To God alone
be glory through Jesus Christ for ever, and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
(...)
A Table of Hebrew words expounded in this Book.
(...).
(...) Chap. 1.8. (...) chap. 1.10. (...) chap. 3.4.13. (...) chap. 1.7. (...)
chap. 1.19. (...) chap. 1.28. (...) chap. 2.2. (...) chap. 1.26. (...) chap.
2.12.3.31. (...) chap. 1.31. (...) chap. 2.5. (...) chap. 2.17. (...) c.
1.10.3.24.34. (...) chap. 1.11. (...) chap. 3.3. (...) chap. 1.11. (...) chap.
2.21. (...) chap. 2.16.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.26.3.26.31: (...) chap. 1.26. (...) chap. 1.7. (...) chap. 1.12.
(...) chap. 1.33. (...) chap. 1.13. (...) chap. 1.1. (...) chap. 1.12. (...)
chap. 1.17.19. (...) chap. 1.19. (...) chap. 3.33. (...) chap. 2.17.
(...).
(...) chap. 2.14. (...) chap. 1.14. (...) chap. 1.26. (...) chap. 3.30. (...)
chap. 1.9.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.6.23. (...) chap. 1.1. (...) chap. 1.11. (...) chap. 1.15.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.13.3.9. (...) chap. 1.11.15. (...) chap. 1.21. (...) chap. 1.23.
(...) chap. 1.14.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.^8.25.31.2.22.3.24.29.
(...).
(...) chap. 2.16.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.20. (...) chap. 3.18. (...) chap. 1.10. (...) chapter 1.12.3.18.
(...) chap. 1.2. (...) chap. 1.20: (...) chap. 1.22. (...) chap. 1.11.17. (...)
chap. 2.8. (...) chap. 2 4. (...) chap. 3.29. (...) chap. 2.13.
(...).
(...) chap. 2.9. (...) chap. 3.20.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.24.3.27. (...) chap. 1.7. (...) chap. 3.2. (...) chap. 3.12.
(...) chap. 3.16. (...) chap. 1.13. (...) chap. 1.7. (...) chap. 1.12. (...)
chap. 1.1. (...) chap. 3.29.
(...)
(...) chap. 3.9. (...) chap. 3.19. (...) chap. 1.9.17.2.3.10. (...) chap. 1.14
(...) chap. 1.13.17.3.17. (...) chap. 1.19. (...) chap. 1.17. (...) chap. 3.26.
(...) chap. 1.22. (...) chap. 2.4.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.9. (...) chap. 2.2. (...) chap. 1.3.19.2.1. (...) chap. 1.5.
(...)
(...) chap. 2.7. (...) chap. 1.16. (...) chap. 1.2. (...) chap. 1.4. (...)
chap. 3.28. (...) chap. 1.3. (...) chap. 1.13. (...) chap. 1.6. (...) chap.
1.31.2.12 (...) chap. 1.15. (...) chap. 2.9. (...) chap. 1.13. (...) chap. 1.1.
(...) chap. 1.3.2.8.
(...)
(...) chap. 1.23. (...) chap. 3.33. (...) chap. 1.24. (...) chap. 1.8. (...)
chap. 2.16. (...) chap. 2.10. (...) chap. 1.18. (...) chap. 2.12.16. (...)
chap. 1.11. (...) chap. 1.15. (...) chap. 1.14.
(...).
(...) chap. 3.32. (...) chap. 1.27. (...) chap. 3.14.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.17. (...) chap. 1.21. (...) chap. 1.28. (...) chap. 1.9. (...)
chap. 3.18. (...) chap. 1.4. (...) chap. 2.14.3.27.
(...).
(...) chap. 2.6. (...) chap. 3.13. (...) chap. 1.26. (...) chap. 1.31. (...)
chap. 1.29. (...) chap. 3.10. (...) chap. 3.25. (...) chap. 1.10. (...) chap.
1.4.22.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.3. (...) chap. 2.20. (...) chap. 1.27.
(...).
(...) chap. 3.35. (...) chap. 3.31. (...) chap. 1.5. (...) chap. 1.21. (...)
chap. 3.3.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.9. (...) chap. 1.7. (...) chap. 1.15. (...) chap. 1.23. (...)
chap. 1.16. (...) chap. 1.20: (...) chap. 1.20. (...) chap. 1.16.33. (...)
chap. 3.28. (...) chap. 3.20. (...) chap. 3.8. (...) chap. 2.18. (...) chap.
2.22. (...) chap. 1.17.
(...).
(...) chap. 1.12. (...) chap. 1.33. (...) chap. 1.31. (...) chap. 1.27. (...)
chap. 1.23. (...) chap. 1.26. (...) chap. 3.20. (...) chap. 1.28. (...) chap.
3.24. (...) chap. 1.3. (...) chap. 1.13. (...) chap. 1.32. (...) chap. 3.2.
(...) chap. 1.1. (...) chap. 3.16. (...) chap. 3.19. (...) chap. 1.5. (...)
chap. 2.8. (...) chap. 1.21.
(...).
(...) chap. 3.9. (...) chap. 3.20. (...) chap. 1.23. (...) chap. 3.32. (...)
chap. 1.8. (...) chap. 2.7. (...) chap. 1.5. (...) chap. 3.10. (...) chap.
1.12.
FINIS.
(...) A Table of the Doctrines arising from the words.
A.
ABle men are often unwilling to give to the poor. Chap. 3.28. Doct. 1. They
are ready to excuse their unwillingnesse. Doct. 1. Adulterers go downward.
Chap. 2.18. Doct. 6. Hard for them to repent. Chap. 2.19. Doct. 1. Few do it.
Doct. 2. Their destruction certain without repentance. Doct. 3. It is general
also. Doct. 4. Adultery condemned by many arguments. Chap. 2.17. Doct. 3. In a
wife it is a great wrong to the husband. Doct. 4. A sin against God as well as
against husbands. Doct. 6. It brings many miseries. Chap. 2.18. Doct. 2.
Afflictions make men seek to God, who slighted him before. Chap. 1.28. Doct. 1.
They make men earnest in prayer. Doct. 4. They come from God. Chap. 8.11. Doct.
2. They are ordinarily chastisements for sin. Doct. 3. They must not be
slighted. Doct. 4. They are for our correction, and good. Doct. 5. We must not
be weary of them Do. 6. Allurements to sin are no excuse for sin. Chap. 1.15.
Doct. 3. Arguments, or titles of love should often be repeated. Chap. 3.11.
Doct. 1.
B.
Bad examples are very prevalent by nature. Chap. 3.11. Doct. 5. Bad ways
preferred by some before good. Chap. 2.13. Doct. 4. Being of all creatures is
from God. Chap. 1.7. Doct. 2. Benefit great of living under wise rulers. Chap.
1.1. Doct. 9. Boldness in all his affairs becomes a wise man. Chap. 3.23.
Doct. 2. Book of Proverbs of excellent use. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 1. ver. 2. In the
beginning.
C.
Carriage toward men requires many things. Chap. 2.9. Doct. 6. Causeless
contention is not approved by God, or wise men. Chapter 3.30. Doct. 2. It is a
great sin. Doct. 3. Characters of wicked in Scripture. Chap. 2.12. Doct. 5.
Children must obey, and believe Parents good counsels. Chap. 1.8. Doct. 4.
They must never be drawn from them. Doct. 5. They must not slight mothers
counsels. Doct. 7. They must respect them as a law. Doct. This will bring them
public approbation. Chap. 1.9. Doct. 3. It will also bring them preferment.
Doct. 4. childdren godly best memor^all of Parents. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 5. They
should hearken to Parents good counsel, rather then to other bad. Chap. 1.15.
Doct. 1. Communion of wicked men. Chapter 1.14. Doct. 1.4. Company in sin excuses
no man. man. Chap. 1.15. Doct. 4. Condition of a good man differs much from a
bad man's. Chap. 3.32. Doct. 1. Confidence of good men is safely placed on God.
Chapter 3.26. Doct. 2. Conscience must be made of paying debts, and restoring
things lost. Chap. 3.17. Doct. 3. As also of other duties to men. Chap. 3.3.
Doct. 1. Continuance in sin is dangerous. Chap. 1.15. Doct. 5. Corrections come
from Gods love. Chap. 3.12 Doct. 3. Correction and dilection may go together.
Doct. 6. Cost for Gods service must be out of our own goods. Chap. 3.9. Doct.
3. Out of all our profit, Doct. 4. It enricheth men. Chapter 2.10. Doct. 2. It
brings abundance of good things. Doct. 3. It brings provisions of all sorts.
Doct. 4. Covetousness makes men cruel. Chap. 1.11. Doct. 4. Counsel must be
backed with reasons. Chap. 1.16. Doct. 1. If good, it is profitable to men in it
self. Chap. 1.25. Doct. 1. Some will not take it. Doct. 2. Their condition
dangerous. Doct. 3. It does such no good. Chap. 2.1. Doct. 3. Creatures have a
lawful power over their members. Chap. 1.17. Doct. 6.
D.
David Author of the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth. Chapters of
the Proverbs. Chapter 1.1. Deceitful, and covetous men will kill for gain. Chap.
1.19. Doct. 6. Delight in sin draws men from good ways to bad. Chap. 2.14.
Doct. 2. It is found in many. Doct. 4. Dependence on others a great hinderance
to teachers. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 10. Destruction of wicked men sudden, and
unexpected. Chap. 1.27. Doct. 1. Irresistible. Doct. 2. Total, and universal.
Doct. 3. Irrecoverable. Doct. 4. Miserable. Doct. 5. Lamentable. Doct. 6.
Destruction comes on such, as hearken not to good counsel. Chapter 1.32. Doct. 3.
Devils have more ways, then one to undo us. Chap. 3.31. Doct. 4. Difference
great between a wise man's course, and a fools. Chapter 1.5. Doct. 7. Discretion
must be labored for. Chap 1.4. Doct. 6. Discretion, and knowledge free me^
from many enormities. Chapter 1.2. Doct. 3. Divine truths must be enquired into.
Chap. 1.2. Doct. 5. Docible minds needful. Chap. 2.1. Doct. 2. Doing, paying,
or giving what God appoints enricheth men. Chapter 3.10. Doct. 1 Duties to men must
be performed heartily. Chap. 3.3. Doct. 6.
E.
Ears must be first employed in hearing. Chap. 2.2. Doct. 1. Without the heart
they do no good. Doct. 2. Earth strangely upheld by God. Chap. 3.19. Doct. 4.
Earth and water parted by God. Chap. 3.20. Doct. 2. End of reading Scriptures
should be always before our eyes. Chap. 1.2. Doct. 1. Entisers will set on men
well bred. Chap. 1.10. Doct. 6. They cannot hurt us, if we consent not. Doct.
7. Entrance into sinful ways dangerous. Chapter 1.15. Doct. 6. Envying rich
oppressors a sin. Chap. 3.31. Doct. 3. Evil men intend to go through with
their plots. Chap. 1.2. Doct. 3. They will invite others to their society.
Chap. 1.14. Doct. 2. Evil wa^es avoided a great blessing. Chap. 2.12. Doct. 4.
Evil women dangerous. Chap. 2.16. Doct. 2. Very dangerous. Doct. 4. Conversing
with them does much hurt. Chap. 2.18. Doct. 1. The way to escape them is to
keep out of their houses. Doct. 4. Examples of piety may draw others. Chap.
2.20. Doct. 6.
F.
Families may fare better or worse for Governors. Chap. 3.33. Doct. 3. Fear of
God cannot be without knowledge. Chap. 1.29. Doct. 3. Foolish souls are dead
souls. Chap. 3.22. Doct.
G.
Ga^n cause of much mischief. Chap. 1, 13 Doct. 1. Much got by unlawful means.
Chap. 1.14. Doct. 3. It draws many. Chap. 1.19. Doct. 3. Gods love more worth
then all the world. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 6 Gods people had need of government.
Chap. 1.1. Doct. 11. God gives reasons for his commands. Chap. 1.9. Doct. 1. He
gives rewards for obeying them: Doct. 2. He is very desirous men should get
heavenly wisdom. Chap. 1.20. Doct. 3. He calls us to repentance many ways.
Chap. 1.24. Doct. 3. He paies wicked men in their own kind. Chap. 1.26. Doct.
1. He will show himself an enemy to ungodly men. Doct. 2. He will pity them
no more, then such as laugh at men in their sorrows. Doct. 3. He will cast
their sins in their teeth, in their miseries. Doct. 4. He will not give ease to
them that never call on him, but in trouble. Chap. 1.28. Doct. 3. At sometime
he will not be found of some men that seek him earnestly. Doct. 6. He cleers
himself fully from guilt of men's destruction. Chap. 1.29. Doct. 2. He is
content to give a reason of his judgments. Chap. 1.32. Doct. 1. He must be
looked upon as the fountain of all being. Chap. 2.5. Doct. 4. He must be eyed
as most powerful. Doct. 6. He has store of wisdom. chap. 2.7. Doct. 1. He
provides wisdom for others. Doct. 2. He will keep his from dangerous errors.
Doct. 4. God will teach his how to carry themselves toward men. Chap. 2.9.
Doct. 2. He spares good men sometimes, when he cuts off bad. Chap. 2.21. Doct.
2. He oftentimes gives good men a comfortable and quiet continuance in their
habitations. Doct. 5. He many times makes good men thrive upon earth. Doct. 6.
He puts a difference here between good and bad, sometimes. Chap. 2.22. Doct. 1.
He gives rewards, though he need not. Chap. 3.2. Doct. 1. And those pleasing.
Doct. 2. and fit ones. Chap. 3.4. Doct. 2. He is the only object of safe
confidence. Chap. 3.5. Doct. 2. He must be rested upon heartily. Doct. 3.
Entirely, and universally. Doct. 4. He is the chief director of our ways for
good. Chap. 3.6. Doct. 6. He must not lose his part of our first profit. Chap.
3.9. Doct. 5. Nor of the best of our goods. Doct. 6. He gives reasons of his
proceedings. Chap. 3.12. Doct. 1. His proceedings may be seen in ours. Doct. 4.
All manner of wisdom is in him. Chap. 3.19. Doct. 6. His great wisdom appears
in parting earth and water. Chap. 3.20. Doct. 3. He made the clouds to hold
ascending vapors. Doct. 4. He makes them send down rain. Doct. 5. And that
seasonably, to show his wisdom. Doct. 6. He will prevent private plots against
his people. Chap. 3.26. Doct. 3. he hates ungodly men. Chap. 3.22. Doct. 2. He
intimately loves good men. Doct. 3. His curse is on wicked men in all their
ways. Chap. 3.33. Doct. 1. His blessing is on godly men in all their doings.
Doct. 2. He sets light by proud scornful men. Chap. 3.34. Doct. 2. He shows
great respect to humble men. Doct. 3. He counts godly men wise, and wicked men
fools. Chap. 3.35. Doct. 1. Godly life preserves health. Chap. 3.8. Doct. 1.
Godly wisemen may go to bed without fear. Chap. 3.24. Doct. 2. Good governors,
great blessings to a state. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 8. Good men need not fear any
trouble. Chap. 1.33. Doct. 5. They should seek to know their spiritual
condition. Chap. 2.7. Doct. 1. They should not think highly of themselves.
Doct. 2. But meanly. Doct. 3. They should nourish the fear of God in their
souls. Doct. 4. They should take heed of every sin. Doct. 5. Their life is a
journey. Chap. 3.6. Doct. 1. They have many good actions to do. Doct. 2. They
must look up to God for strength. Doct. 3. And that in all their actions. Doct.
4. They have many good names in Scripture. Chap. 3.34. Doct. 1. Good things
must be done, as well as evil avoided. Chap. 2.20. Doct. 2. And that to them
we owe nothing. Chap. 3.3. Doct. 3. They cannot too often be inculcated. Chap.
3.4. Doct. 1.
H
Happiness is from God. Chap. 3.5. Doct. 1. Haters of knowledge are found in
the world. Chap. 1.22. Doct. 6. Hearers should show great respect to their
teachers. Chap. 2.1. Doct. 2. Hearing divine truths without understanding, does
men no good. Chap. 1.2. Doct. 8. Heavenly wisdom despised only by ignorant
persons. Chap. 1.7. Doct. 6. It is worth the looking after. chap. 1.20. Doct.
1. It is to be found only in Jesus Christ. Doct. 2. It is offered to the
meanest. Doct. 4. It has a plain and easy way to it. Doct. 5. It is of great
price. Chap. 2.4. Doct. 1. It is far remote, and hidden from us. Doct. 2. Means
of obtaining it must be searched for. Doct. 3. They must be used. Doct. 4. And
with pains taking. Doct. 5. And that constantly. Doct. 6. Heavenly knowledge of
all sorts is from God. Chap. 2.5. Doct. 4. Men are naturally void of it. Chap.
2.10. Doct. 1. It cannot be attained by our own strength. Doct. 2. It must come
into the heart. Doct. 3. It is better then all outward riches. Doct. 4. Much
pleasure and delight in it. Doct. 5. It will raise up a drooping soul. Doct. 6.
Without it, men are subject to many dangers. Chap. 2.11. Doct. 1. Heavens, and
heavenly creatures preserved by God in their motion. Chap. 3.19. Doct. 5.
Health in our da^es is a great blessing. Chap. 3.2. Doct. 4. Chap. 3.8. Doct.
2. Honor is given to God by our cost for his service. Chap. 2.9. Doct. 2. It
is the wise man's inheritance. Chap. 3.35. Doct. 2. Houses of uncleanness, are
gate-houses of death. Chap. 2.18. Doct. 5.
I
Jewels and pearls are of great account amongst men. chap. 3.15. Doct. 1.
Ignorant persons inexcusable. chap. 1.21. Doct. 4. Imitation of good men, safer
then of bad. chap. 2.20. Doct. 5. Industry, with Gods blessing brings much
knowledge. chap. 1.5. Doct. 6. Injustice, store in the world. chap. 1.17. Doct.
3. Innocent persons are the object of bad men's wrath. chap. 1.2. Doct. 1.
subject to many snares. chap. 1.18. Doct. 5. Instruction is the means to get
wisdom. chap. 1.2. Doct. 7. Common should be public. chap. 1.21. Doct. 2.
Inticer^ to sin speak the best, and hide the worst. Chap. 1.14. Doct. 1. Inward
capacity, and outward discovery, come both from God. Chap. 2.6. Doct. 6.
Irreligious persons are in Gods account the fools of the world. Chap. 1.7.
Doct. 5. Judgment from God never comes without a cause. Chap. 1.24. Doct. 2.
K
Knowledge of trivial things is little worth. Chap. 1.2. Doct. 9. Knowledge of
divine truths will do us much good. Chap. 1.2. Doct. 10. It is ordinarily
received from others. Chap. 1.3. Doct. 2. Frequently comes in at the ear. Chap.
1.5. Doct. 2. Sufficient for one of meaner capacity is not sufficient for one
of greater. Chap. 1.6. Doct. 1. It is a matter of great excellency. Chap. 1.7.
Doct. 4. Knowledge and fear of God slighted by many. Chap. 1.29. Doct. 4.
Knowledge should be the guide of our choice. Doct. 5. It is very necessary.
Chap. 2.1. Doct. 4. Knowledge of God is worth the finding. Chap. 2.5. Doct. 5.
Knowledge of good duties must be increased daily. Chap. 2.9. Doct. 5. Knowledge
of things dangerous to the Soul is needful. Chap. 2.16. Doct. 3.
L
Long life, how a blessing. Chap. 2.21. In the exposition, it is a blessing.
Chap. 3. Doct. 2.3. Long life, health, prosperity, are sometimes the rewards of
well doing. Doct. 6. Long life is better then riches or honor. Chap. 3.16.
Doct. 5.
M
Magistrates must be kind to their subjects. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 4. Many love to
have others take notice of their sins. Chap. 2.14. Doct. 2. Means of salvation
are offered to great Towns. Chap. 1.20. Doct. 6. Members of the body, even the
meanest, may be instruments of sin. Chap. 1.16. Doct. 2. Men regard not signs
calling to repentance. Chap. 1.24. Doct. 6. They are not all in a safe
condition. Chap. 1.33. Doct. 1. Men soonest hearken to counsels, that come out
of good will. Chap. 2.1. Doct. 1. They cannot walk in good ways, unless they
leave bad. Chap. 2.20. Doct. 1. They must be at cost to maintain Gods service.
Chap. 2.9. Doct. 1. They should often think of their base beginning. Chap.
3.13. Doct. 4. Mercy and truth should always go together. Chap. 3.3. Doct. 2.
They find favor with God. chapter 3.4. ^oct. 2. And with men. Doct. 4. They teach
a man how to direct his ways before God. Doct. 5. And before men. Doct. 6.
Ministers must show the cure of spiritual diseases. Chap. 1.23. Doct. 1.
Moderation in justice requisite. Chap. 1.3. Doct. 6. Mothers must teach their
children. Chap. 1.8. Doct. 6.
N
Not rall life depends upon the presence of the Soul. chap. 1.18. Doct. 6.
Natural parts well used help much in religion. chap. 1.5. Doct. 5. Naturally
men are simple, and easily led into error. chap. 1.4. Doct. 3. We are far out
of Gods way. chap. 1.24. Doct. 5. We choose sinful ways. chap. 2.7. Doct. 6.
Naturally wisdom is hid from us. chap. 3.13. Doct. 5. Men seek still for
increase of good things gotten. chap. 3.14. Doct. 1. We are apt to contend
causelessly. chap. 3.30. Doct. 1. None of the oppressors ways must be
imitated. chap. 3.31. Doct. 6. Nothing is better then wisedom^ chap. 2.9. Doct.
3. Nothing can hinder a godly wiseman from good success. chap. 3.23. Doct. 3.
O
Obstinacy in sin, is a great height of wickedness. chap. 2.15. Doct. 4.
Opportunities of doing good must be taken. Chapter 1.28. Doct. 6. Oppression of
others is many men's livelihood. chap. 3.31. Doct. 1. Hereby men grow rich.
Doct. 2. Outward comforts are good in themselves chap. 3.27. Doct. 1. They may
be lent, or conveyed from one man to another. Doct. 2. Outward mementoes of
duties to men needful. Chap. 3.3. Doct. 5.
P.
Pains must be taken to distinguish real truths from apparent. chap. 1.2.
Doct. 6. And to know how to carry our selves toward men. chap. 2.9. Doct. 1.
Parents should give good names to children. chap. 1.1. Doct. 2. They should be
respected next after God. chapter 1.8. Doct. 1. Their instruction oftentimes begins
piety in children. Doct. 2. Their good counsels should keep others bad
counsels out of childrens hearts. chap. 1.10. Doct. 1. They correct their
dearest children. chap. ^.12. Doct. 5. Perfection is expected of such as would
be blessed chap. 2.21. Doct. 4. Places all fit to do do good in. chap. 1.21.
Doct. 3. Pleasure of wisdom should kill pleasure of sin. chapter 2.14. Doct. 3.
Plenty desired by ill men, not caring how they get it. chap. 1.13. Doct. 3.
Plotting to hurt others is a great sin. chap. 3.29. Doct. 1. Greater against a
neighbor. Doct. 2. Greater yet against a friend. Doct. 3. Practical matters
must be received. chap. 1.3. Doct. 1. Prayer is an invocation, or calling upon
God. chap. 1.28 Doct. 2. It is a seeking of God. Doct. 5. Precepts of Parents
and teachers agreeable to Gods word to be respected. chap. 2.1. Doct. 3. Never
to be forgotten. Doct. 4. Are to be put in practice. Doct. 5. To be practiced
heartily. Doct. 6. Preservation from sinful ways is a great benefit. Chap.
2.11. Doct. 5. Profit nor pleasure should not draw to sin. chap. 2.14. Doct. 1.
Propriety of goods. chap. 1.19. Doct. 4. By wicked men violated. chap. 1.19.
Doct. 5. Propriety of husbands, and wives. chap. 2.16. Doct. 5. Prosperity
hinders harkening to good counsel. chap. 1.32. Doct. 4. It is often joined
with folly. Doct. 5. It is the ruin of many. Doct. 6. It is a blessing in it
self. chap. 2.2. Doct. 5.
Q.
Quietness is the portion of Gods servants. chap. 1.33. Doct. 4. And that in
all conditions. chap. 3.23. Doct. 1.
R.
Reasons many needful to dissuade from evil. chap. 1.17. Doct. 1. Reasons
brought to confirm truth must be sol^d ones. chap. 1.17. Doct. 2. Refusers of
Knowledge must damned. chap. 1.29. Doct. 6. Relief must be given to others
speedily according to their wants, and our abilities. chap. 3.28. Doct. 3.
Repenting sinners shall not want Gods help. chap. 1.23. Doct. 5. Repetitions in
Scripture useful. chap. 1.62. Doct. 1. Reproves common should be public.
chap. 1.21. Doct. 1. They must not be sharp at first. chap. 1.21. Doct. 1. They
must be sharp after if slighted. Doct. 2. They may turn some, that meant it
not. chap. 1.23. Doct. 4. Yet not regarded by many. Doct. 5. Great danger in
the rejecting them. Doct. 6. Resolutions against solicitations to evil
necessary. chap. 1.10. Doct. 8. Rest after labor afforded by God. chap. 3.24.
Doct. 1. Resting in hea ing will keep us from complete wisdom. chap. 2.2. Doct.
3. Rich men innocent are in danger. Chap. 1.11. Doct. 8. Riches and honor are
blessings in themselves. chap. 3.16. Doct. 6. Right must be preserved to every
one. chap. 1.3. Doct. 4. Right way missed by many. chapter 2.13. Doct. 1. Quite
left by some. Doct. 2. Gods ways right ways. Doct. 3. Robbers sometimes deal
justly, and liberally among themselves. chap. 1.14. Doct. 4.
S.
Safety constant is prepared for good men, chap. 1.33. Doct. 3. Safety of Gods
people is not in their power, or care. chap. 3.26. Doct. 1. Saints have a right
way to walk in. chap. 2.8. Doct. 4. God will keep them in that way. Doct. 5.
They are merciful people. Doct. 6 Scripture books some should be more
carefully read, then other. chap. 1.1. Doct. 2. It contains store of good
matter sufficient to inform simple ones. chap. 1.4. Doct. 1. It best teaches
subtlety to prevent dangers. Doct. 2. Rightly understood it will keep from
errors. Doct. 4. It brings increase of knowledge. chap. 1.5. Doct. 3.
Scripture learning the best learning. Doct. 4. Brings no good not understood.
chap. 1.6. Doct. 2. Affords a man knowledge enough to teach others. Doct. 3.
Hardest things in it may be understood by labor. Doct. 4. Difficulties in it
need exposition. Doct 6. It cannot be understood without much pains. chap.
1.18. Doct. 4. It delights much in metaphors: chap. 2.15. Doct. 1. It sets out
the same thing by diverse similitudes. Doct. 2. It affords a medicine to every
spiritual d^sease. chap. 2.16. Doct. 1. It gives many encouragements to good
ways. chap. 2.21. Doct 1. Scripture must be understood by scripture. chap.
3.18. Doct. 1. It presses the same thing oftentimes by diverse expressions.
chap. 3.20. Doct. 1. Scoffers at goodness. chap. 1.22. Doct. 5. Secrecy is a
great bait to wickedness. chap. 1.11. Doct. 3. Seekers for Gods help may expect
Gods blessing. chap. 3.6. Doct. 5. Self-confidence cannot stand with trusting
in God. chap. 3.5. Doct. 5. It is dangerous. Doct. 6. Shame is the fools
preferment. chap. 3.35. Doct. 3. Shameless persons will give very lewd
counsel. chap. 2.12. Doct. 6. Similitudes rightly applied are of great use.
chap. 1.18. Doct. 1. Simple persons hearken not to heavenly instructions. chap.
1.32. Doct. 2. Simplicity is beloved of us by nature. chap. 1.22. Doct. 4. Sin
is truly evil, and hurtful. chap. 1.16. Doct. 4. It is readily swallowed by
wicked men, though great. Doct. 6. It brings misery upon men. chap. 1.31. Doct.
1. In matters of religion it brings heavy judgments. Doct. 2. It brings
constant, and continual evils. Doct. 3. It roots out wicked men's posterity.
chap. 2.22. Doct. 5. Men should leave sin for their childrens sake. Doct. 6.
Sinners, some remain in a sinful estate. chap. 1.10. Doct. 3. They want not
patheticall expressions to draw others to sin. chap. 1.12. Doct. 6. They are
very nimble about sinful actions. chap. 1.16. Doct 5. They admit of degrees.
Chap. 1.22. Doct. 3. Sleep to a godly man is sweet. chap. 3.24. Doct. 3.
Slighting means of knowledge, is sleighting knowledge. chap. 1.7. Doct. 7.
Snares often la^d for innocent men. chap. 1.18. Doct. 5. Solomon's works:
Number of his Proverbs, time of uttering, speakers, composing, manner of
speech, division of the book, my manner of handling it. Chap. 1.1. In the
exposition. Spirit and word must go together to guide. chap. 1.23. Doct. 6.
Spiritual wisdom is required to guide all our actions. chap. 1.3. Doct. 3.
Spiritual gifts given to bele^vers in abundance. chap. 1.23. Doct. 4. Strength
of body is a great mercy. chap. 2.8. Doct. 3. The fuller, the greater blessing.
Doct. 4. Study is needful to know how to judge of interests. chap. 1.3. Doct.
5. Strumpets are full of flattering speeches. chap. 2.16. Doct. 6.
T
Teachers must have the affection of parents. chap. 1.10. Doct. 2. They must
show great affection. chap. 2.1. Doct. 1. They must persuade. chap. 3.12. Doct.
2. Threatenings follow lost exhortations and reproves. chap. 1.24. Doct. 1.
Transgressors deal treacherously with God. chap. 2.22. Doct. 4. Triumphing in
evil deeds is found in many. chap. 2.14. Doct. 5. Trouble is evil in it
self. chap. 1.33. Doct. 6. It comes often unexpectedly. chap. 3.25. Doct. 2.
Then it is very troublesome to wicked men. Doct. 3. Trust is not to be given to
them that will fail God and their nearest friends. chap. 2.17. Doct. 1. Truth
has a certain path. chap. 2.8. Doct. 1. Good men must keep in that path. Doct.
2. To that end, God gives them heavenly wisdom. Doct. 3. Truth is required in
all our dealings. chap. 3.3. Doct. 4.
U
Visible creatures visibly distinguished. chap. 1.17. Doct. 5. Understanding
and care, needful to keep men from evil. chap. 2.11. Doct. 6. Ungodly men are
cruel men. chap. 1.12. Doct. 4. Upright men shall not want necessary wisdom.
chap. 2.7. Doct. 3. Uprightness of heart and life needful to keep men from
dangerous errors. chap. 2.7. Doct. 6. It is expected of those that would be
blessed. chap. 2.21. Doct. 3.
W
Ways of sin are ways of darkness. chap. 2.13. Doct. 6. They are crooked
ways. chap. 2.15. Doct. 3. Ways cross in the world. chap. 2.19. Doct. 6.
Wantonness will be kept in by no bridle. chap. 2.17. doct. 2. It shortens men's
days. chap. 2.18. Doct. 3. Wantons have no hope of comfort without repentance.
chap. 2.19. Doct. 5. Wicked men desire to make others as bad as themselves. chapter
1.10. Doct. 4. They have a notable insinuating faculty to deceive others. chap.
1.10. Doct. 5. They promise themselves success of their mischievous plots.
chap. 1.11. Doct. 6. And impunity. Doct. 7. Their spleen against such as wrong
them not. chap. 1.12. Doct. 2. They could wish there were no footsteps left of
their iniquity. Doct. 5. They care, not if all men be empty, so they be full.
chap. 1.13. Doct. 5. They dream of no want nor crosses in their ungodly
courses. Doct. 6. They have a great desire, affection, and proneness to
wickedness. chap. 1.16. Doct. 3. They have cunning devices to do mischief.
chap. 1.17. Doct. 4. As they persuade others to mischief, so they act it
themselves. Chap. 1.18. Doct. 2. They have heads to invent, and hands to
execute evil. Doct. 3. They have many wicked ways. Chap. 1.19. Doct. 1. Many
wicked men walk in them. Doct. 2. They live in fear. chap. 1.26. Doct. 5. That
they fear will certainly come on them. Doct. 6. They drive a trade of sinning.
chap. 1.31. Doct. 4. They bring many troubles on themselves. Doct. 5. They have
many devices to undo themselves. Doct. 6. They continue obstinate in evil
doing. chap. 2.13. Doct. 5. They are restless in evil. chap. 2.22. Doct. 2.
Their lives often cut short by wickedness. Doct. 3. They have many bad names in
scripture. chap. 3.34. Doct. 1. Wickedness will break out. chap. 1.1. Doct. 2.
It has many devices to come forth. Doct. 5. It will brag and boast. chap.
1.13. Doct. 4. Wisdom is to be gotten out of scripture. chap. 1.2. Doct. 2. It
is needful to guide the understanding, and the will. Doct. 4. It is despised
by many. chap. 1.7. Doct. 7. Her call not heard by them. chap. 1.24. Doct. 4.
Her counsels worth harkening to. chap. 1.33. Doct. 2. It is gotten more by help
from God, then from men. chap. 2.3. Doct. 1. It must be gotten by prayer. Doct.
2. Tea, and by earnest prayer. Doct. 3. Gods means conscionably used will bring
it. chap. 2.5. Doct. 1. No expectation of it otherwise. Doct. 2. It is much
needful to find out the true religion. Doct. 3. What we cannot do in search of
it, God will supply. chap. 2.6. Doct. 1. It is a free gift. Doct. 2. It comes
from the Lord alone. Doct. 3. Gods word and Ministers must be regarded in the
search of it. Doct. 5. It is a great means to preserve men from dangerous
errors. chap. 2.7. Doct. 5. It is a great antidote against evil. chap. 2.11.
Doct. 4. It shows how to do good, and avoid evil. chap. 2.20. Doct. 4. It may
be got out of corrections. chap. 3.13. Doct. It is to be admired. Doct. 2. It
must be gotten with much pains. Doct. It drives the greatest trade. chapter 3.14.
Doct. 2. It brings more profit then worldly riches. Doct. 3. It excells the
best things in the world. Chap. 3.15. Doct. 2. Yea all things imaginable. Doct.
3. It brings many good things. chap. 3.18. Doct. 1. It brings long life. Doct.
2. And riches. Doct. 3. And honor. Doct. 4. It has ways of its own. chap.
3.17. Doct. 2. It must guide all our actions. Doct. 3. It brings much true
delight. Doct 4. And peace. Doct. 5. And no trouble in it self. Doct. 6. It
affords true nourishment. chap. 3.18. Doct. 2. It makes a perfect cure. Doct.
3. It does good only to such as get it fully, and firmly. Doct. 4. It must be
retained in the heart. Doct. 5. It brings happiness to them, that retain it.
Doct. 6. Once gotten must never be forgotten. chap. 3.21. Doct. 1. Her precepts
must be dear to us. Doct. 2. They must be carefully laid up by us. Doct. 3.
Wisdom makes the soul to live. chap. 3.22. Doct. 2. It is a great grace to any
man. Doct. 3. Wise men's words words carry great weight with them. chap. 1.6.
Doct. 5. Wise men are counted happy by God. Chap. 3.13. Doct. 3. They want
nothing. Chapter 3.17. Doct. 17. Doct. 1. wise sons of godly fathers make a sweet
harmony. Chap. 1.1. Doct. 7. Wisest men may learn more. chap. 1.5. Doct. 1.
Wives should be guided by their husbands. chap. 2.17. Doct. 5. Words show what
is in men. chapter 1.21. Doct. 5. Words of truth are worth laying up. chap. 2.1.
Doct. 5. They are best in the heart. Doct. 6. Wonderful gifts are given by
Gods spirit. chap. 1.23. Doct. 3. World had a beginning. chap. 3.19. Doct. 1.
It was made by God. Doct. 2. Gods wonderful wisdom appeared in making it.
Doct. 3. Worldly things very precious to carnal eyes. chap. 1.13. Doct. 2.
Worth of things should sway our account of them. chap. 7. Doct. 3.
Y.
Young men should get wisdom to know good counsel from bad. chap. 1.15. Doct.
2. They are most in danger of allurement. chapter 2.11. Doct. 2. Also of bad
example. Doct. 2. And of bad company. chapter 2.12. Doct. 1. Youth is the time of
most danger for going astray. chap. 1.4. Doct. 5. As also for being drawn away
to sinful courses. chap. 1.11. Doct. 1. Also of bad example. Doct. 2. And of
bad counsel. Doct. 3.
FINIS.

